URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/journals/HRD/2007/15.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 15:01:25
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Lam, Holly --- "Women's rights and religion: the disconnect between belief and practice" [2007] HRightsDef 15; (2007) 16(2) Human Rights Defender 10
Women’s rightsand religion: the disconnect between belief and practice
Women’s rightsand religion: the disconnect
between belief and practice
The role organised religions have played in the development of law and
society cannot be denied. Throughout history, wars have been
fought, barbaric
rituals adhered to and atrocities committed in the name of religious beliefs. In
many societies, religion has dictated
standards of behaviour and set the
foundation for moral or legal systems with its assignment of particular roles
and responsibilities
to its followers. This is particularly evident with regards
to the establishment of gender roles. Sadly, most mainstream religions
historically considered women not only different, but indeed inferior to men,
with an underlying fanaticism associating a woman’s
worth with sexual
purity. By claiming that a religious belief stems ultimately from God, or that a
practice upholds God’s word,
clearly discriminatory practices are given a
supposed legitimacy.
Women have traditionally been viewed in a dichotomous framework of the
untrustworthy, sexually and morally questionable temptress
or the submissive,
chaste maternal figure. Nowhere is this more strikingly obvious than in the
Christian Bible with its two significant
female figures - Eve and the Virgin
Mary. Eve, the original woman, is generally associated with and interpreted as
embodying Woman’s
negative characteristics. It was her stupidity and
doubtfulness that led her to listen to the snake and eat the fruit from the Tree
of Knowledge and her sinfulness that led her to offer it to Adam. In addition,
the emphasis placed on their subsequent awareness
of their nudity is as much a
reflection of the Christian discomfort with sensuality as it is a metaphorical
description of the loss
of innocence.
By contrast, the Virgin Mary embodies the ideal woman, the woman to redeem
mankind through her role as a mother. Yet still, the preoccupation
with sexual
purity continues by maintaining Mary as a Virgin, untouched and upholding the
characteristics of paramount importance
such as chastity, receptivity and
submissiveness.
The focus on a woman’s sexual purity is also present in some Islamic
teachings, as most crudely articulated by Sheik Taj el-Din
al-Hilaly, who
likened scantily clad women to uncovered meat, implying that a man is not to be
held responsible for acting on his
sexual urges since the woman brought it on
herself by provoking him with her bare flesh.
Sadly, despite the
public outrage that greeted his comments, the concept itself is hardly
unfamiliar even to those that do not submit
Furthermore,
the practice of female circumcision for opprobrious religious reasons is also
underpinned by the value placed on virginity
and chastity, and the idea that
women are inherently and uncontrollably lascivious.
These diametrically opposed views of women as, at one extreme, sinful whores
to be feared by men and, at the other end of the spectrum,
chaste docile
maternal figures requiring male protection, lead to all kinds of sexual
discrimination and human rights violations,
frequently with no redress
available. The punishment for deviating from ideals arises on multiple fronts.
For instance, a woman viewed
as promiscuous may be greeted with significant
social derision and attacked with labels that reduce her credibility and
‘worth’. In sexual assault trials, female victims are
often as much on trial as the accused.
Particularly in the practice of Christianity and Islam, the suppression and
subjugation of women is nothing new. Exclusion from decision
making, the
confinement of roles to the domestic sphere, obedience to family (and especially
male family members) above the pursuit
of self and individuality, a supposed
mental incapacity for selfrepresentation, and dependency on men for protection
are common characteristics
of traditional Christian and Islamic approaches to
The subsequent effects of such gender based harassment occur on physical,
mental and emotional levels. On a physical level, women
may be made more
vulnerable and less likely to take action to end violence such as battery,
female genital mutilation and rape. How
can they when there is nowhere else to
go and the facts are manipulated in such a way as to place the burden of
responsibility on
the female victim who is then almost certainly cast out of
society and possibly even stoned to death, while the male attacker is
for his horrendous actions?
Choices become limited or even
nonexistent as women are punished and cast out of society for deviating from
what religion has set
as the ideal woman. There is also the possibility of
mental and emotional trauma as a result of isolation for non-conformity or the
suppression of individuality and self-worth.
The development of law has been so heavily influenced by religion that the
use of law to temper religious beliefs and protect women’s
rights is often
minimal. In societies with a separation of state and church, women’s
rights often get little more than superficial
attention and are far from
substantive. Too often laws intended to benefit women yield opposite results or
contain exclusions. For
example, even in Australia, the exclusion of women for
religious purposes is accepted as indicated by the exemption of the Church
the rules set out in the
Sex Discrimination Act 1984
Most Islamic states will ratify international instruments and in particular,
human rights laws, but only where it does not clash with
In Islamic states, Shari’a law is a branch of Islam and
is therefore not a separate body of knowledge. As such, Islam is not
religious belief, but also a strict code dictating behaviour.
Under traditional Islamic law, only mature free men enjoy full legal
capacity. Women cannot hold public office, initiate marriages,
unilateral divorce or leave the house to seek employment unless there is no
other means of support. Wives may be punished
for disobeying their husbands, and
in the case of a property inheritance, women will generally receive half what a
male would even
they have the same relationship to the deceased. Further, a woman’s
testimony in court is worth half of a man’s testimony.
was evident in the debates leading up to the
Convention on the Elimination of
All Forms of Discrimination Against Women
where it was argued
that women did not require equal rights because discriminatory Islamic practices
sufficiently protected women
and, in any case, women would not know what to do
with equal rights if they had them.
Islam can therefore be seen as
creating a vicious cycle whereby the perception of women as helpless gives rise
to the further loss
of their rights and opportunities for self-determination.
Despite the disadvantages women suffer as a result of religious practices and
the fact that religious practices arise as a response
to a religious belief, it
remains difficult to conclusively determine that gender inequality is inherent
in Christian and Islamic
beliefs. This is because the connection that exists
between the original and fundamental belief and the actual religious practices
undertaken is that of interpretation. That interpretation is formed in the
context of the society at a particular point in time with
its particular value
systems and attitudes. It is thus possible to find quotes in the Holy books to
support any position one cares
The disconnect between belief and practice arises when particular passages
are given more or less weight than they deserve, or passages
are isolated and
the context in which those passages are set in is ignored. For example, in the
Quran the supposed justification
of wife beating
is countered with
a verse that states married couples should ‘live together in kindness or
leave each other charitably’.
In Christianity, the oft quoted
passage of the Bible that forms the traditional wedding vow dictates a
wife’s complete submission
to a husband. However, if the word
‘submission’ can be regarded as a mere limitation of language, the
passage may be
reinterpreted to imply that a wife’s offer is matched and
returned by a husband’s duty to love his wife, to lead her
wisely and to
treat her as he would treat himself. A closer and complete reading of Holy books
would therefore suggest that while
these religions do indeed assign particular
and different roles and responsibilities to each sex, men and women are in fact
to be equal in worth. The relationship is thus one that is mutual and
reciprocal between equal partners, rather than one of dominance
and submission
with women inferior to men. Jesus in particular had an surprisingly liberal
attitude towards women. However, the Church
has remained steadfastly patriarchal
with an attitude upholding men as the head of the house and therefore playing a
superior role
to the women who follow.
On a very simplistic level, the application of the legal elements of mens rea
(intent) and actus reus (the act) makes it possible
to distinguish between a
religious belief and a religious practice. The belief and the freedom to believe
may be absolute, but the
practice, in the form of a positive human action, must
be regulated and its actors held accountable. This suggests that the
individual’s
right to hold their own beliefs (the mens rea component)
should be left unregulated, while the manner in which this belief is physically
manifested (the actus reus component) requires a degree of regulation.After all,
how can such an enormously influential social institution
be free from any
system of accountability?
Unfortunately, these two elements are blurred in religion where the strength
of one’s religious belief is directly reflected
in their actions. In such
a way, the belief cannot be separated from the act and the effectiveness of law,
reason or logic as an
alternate governing system to hold religious practices
accountable is undermined.
The difficulty in addressing human
rights violations and discrimination in religious practices is therefore that it
implicitly contravenes
the freedom of religion.
This is not to say that undesirable and sexist religious practices can never
be changed. They can, and in many cases they have been.
However, the power to
change religious practices must come from open debate among diverse ideological
When society pushes for change, change will occur. As part
of a global community, we each bear responsibility for determining the
between upholding women’s rights and respecting the right to religion.
Women should not, and cannot continue to suffer
like martyrs in today’s
contemporary society.
Holly Lam is a graduate student at the Faculty of Law, University of New
South Wales. She was the Managing Student Editor and Student
Intern for the
Human Rights Defender in the first half of 2007.
Kathleen A McDonald, ‘Battered Wives, Religion & Law: An
Interdisciplinary
Yale Journal of Law & Feminism
Holy Bible, Genesis III:1-24
See, eg, Lucinda J Peach, ‘From Spiritual Descriptions to Legal
Prescriptions:
Religious Imagery of Woman as “Fetal Container” in the Law’
(1993-1994) 10
Journal of Law and Religion
‘British cleric supports al Hilaly’,
Sydney Morning
(Sydney), 27 October
<http://www.smh.com.au/news/national/british-cleric-supports-al-hilaly/2006/
/27/1161749282710.html> at 31 July 2007.
Modesty and sexual purity is stressed and imposed by the Bible and
teachings. See, eg,
http://www.ladiesagainstfeminism.com
See, eg, Harvard Law Review Association, ‘What’s Culture Got to
Do With It?
Excising the Harmful Tradition of Female Circumcision’ (1992-1993) 8
Cindy Chan, ‘Ethnic Sexual Assault Raises Broader Women’s
Rights Issues:
Breaking the Silence around hidden abuses toward women in Muslim and
Canadian communities,
The Epoch Times
, 12 July 2007
<http://en.epochtimes.
com/news/7-7-12/57561.html> at 31 July 2007.
Pru Goward, ‘Women, human rights and religion’ (speech
delivered at the
Ordination of Catholic Women Annual Conference, Melbourne, 5-6 November
http://www.ocw.webcentral.com.au/papers/Pru_Goward_Nov05.doc
Donna E Arzt, ‘The Application of International Human Rights Law in
Human Rights Quarterly
Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination Against
opened for signature 18 December
1979, 1249 UNTS 13
(entered into force 3
September 1981).
Arzt, above n 10, 218.
Quran, Sura 4, Ayat 34.
Quran, Sura 2, Ayat 231.
Goward, above n 8.
See Mansoor Moaddel, ‘Religion and Women: Islamic Modernism versus
Fundamentalism’ (1998) 1
Journal for the Scientific Study of
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (30.4 KB)
PDF format (53.1 KB)
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter