URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/journals/WALawTRw/2024/7.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 15:58:18
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Brown, Natalie --- "Incorporating Visual Learning Aids in Teaching Law" [2024] WALawTRw 7; (2024) 2 The Western Australian Law Teachers' Review 67
INCORPORATING VISUAL LEARNING
AIDS IN TEACHING LAW
NATALIE BROWN *
I INTRODUCTION
Prior to teaching law as a casual tutor and later as a full-time lecturer, I
enjoyed previous career incarnations as a commercial
artist and a literacy aide
in a primary school. During my stint as a literacy aide it was natural to use my
abilities to create visual
learning aids for students who struggled with written
and oral learning, such as cartoons, diagrams or illustrated stories for
learning needs. I found that visual methods assisted breaking down
psychological barriers by building student confidence in their
own capacity to
learn. When I commenced tertiary teaching, I modified these tools and
incorporated them into my tertiary teaching
pedagogy without really considering
why or how it worked. I knew it helped me because I had used visual aids as a
law student: mind-maps
or flow-charts for legal concepts or illustrating
connections between principles in an entire unit; or what I referred to as case
illustrations, a simple picture to trigger the case facts. As a tutor my
whiteboards were filled with cartoons, illustrations, and
mind-maps because it
had helped me, and student feedback confirmed it helped others also. Encouraged
by the feedback, I continued
to refine my visual learning techniques. It was a
natural progression to incorporate this teaching style into my lecture slides as
a lecturer. Fear not, you do not need to have any artistic ability to engage
with visual learning — in fact some of my poor
attempts at illustration on
the whiteboard have injected much-needed humour into otherwise potentially dry
explanations.
II WHY VISUAL LEARNING WORKS
For me, including this methodology in my tertiary law teaching was an organic
process because it worked for me as student and during
my previous teaching
experience, rather than it being a well-researched choice to develop my teaching
pedagogy. However, I was not
surprised to find there were many teachers —
before I even thought about teaching — who had explored and written on the
I was heartened to see that not only did other teachers see the benefit, but it
was also backed up by science. The literature on
visual learning is mostly aimed
at primary and high school education but it is equally applicable at a tertiary
Visual learning is not an entirely accurate term, it is perhaps better
described as multi-sensory learning or dual-coding that engages
both sides of
the brain — for example, an image, and explanation and an example for
Our preferred learning style will depend on which side of our brain is dominant,
the left-side is the seat of language and processes
logically, and the right
side processes
intuitively.
Right side dominant thinkers are sequential, vertical, or convergent (aural or
auditory learners) and left side dominant thinkers
are spatial, non-lineal,
lateral or divergent (visual
Both sides of the brain
are engaged in nearly every human
Our dominant side is a preference not an
Developing both learning
styles can help us learn more
effectively.
Early literature
identified that law students who were poor organisers (left side dominant) were
assisted by visual representations
that provided conceptual patterns to aid
Visual tools assists
students who find aural and written material more challenging (left side
dominant), and augments auditory sequential
learners (ride side dominant) by
strengthening less-used neural pathways so they become more flexible
Visual learning develops visual thinking — ie, the capacity to retain
and understand information by association ideas, words
and concepts with images
which in turn develops our visual literacy (the ability to create visual
instruction).
Comic strips as a means of explaining contracts are gaining traction so visual
literacy may soon become not only a tool for students,
but a useful skill for
practicing lawyers.
tutorial I once set a group task of developing a mind-map to illustrate a case
principle. A majority of students appeared
to find that task very difficult,
however, exposure to visual teaching will improve students’ visual
literacy. By the end of
the semester many of my students create their own
task-specific visual aids based on the examples they see in tutorials and
One of the reasons visual learning works is because it reflects our cognitive
thinking process in the hippocampus — this is
the part of our brain that
stores memory and solves problems, and does not operate by archiving word
documents, but by recognising
and developing cognitive
Visual aids allow the
brain to do what it does best: find patterns, identify gaps, make associations
and play with the pieces of
This is demonstrated in
a study by Raiyn, which considered the development of higher-order thinking
skills necessary for problem
based learning (ie, analytical or critical thinking
skills consisting of selecting, ordering, comparing and evaluating; and creative
thinking consisting of problem finding, efficiency, flexibility, originality and
elaboration).
study found that these higher-order thinking skills were better in students who
engaged in visual learning as opposed
to traditional
A concrete visual image
is more easily remembered than an abstract word. For example, if you are
required to remember the words dog,
bike and street in sequence, it is easier to
retain the sequence for longer if we add a visual (eg, the dog got on the bike
down the street) compared to repeating the sequence ten times and then
trying to recall it a week
Why does it stick? It is not entirely about the visual representation but
also about the cue we receive with the image. For example,
without reading the
cue at footnote number 18, try to interpret the image at Figure 1.
Image to demonstrate the power of visual cues.
This image is reproduced with express permission from its
To most the image appears to be grey and black regions and it is hard to
categorise without an additional cue. Once you receive the
cue it will be hard
to see the image without your brain immediately adding the cue, even months
In the following section, I provide examples of the visual aids I commonly
use, mind-maps or flowcharts and illustrations, but visual
learning aids can
include symbols, video games, films, graphs, posters, board games or
flashcards,
the only limit is
your imagination.
III INCORPORATING VISUAL LEARNING IN THE TEACHING OF
This Part presents just a few examples of the many illustrations I use in
teaching Property Law. Illustrations are useful to demonstrate
the facts of
case, and this visual cue can be followed by the facts in writing (which is what
I usually do). It allows students to
focus on what you are saying rather than
try to read the facts, and it also allows the student to easily find the case
when reviewing
the slides. If you enjoy illustrating, you can incorporate a
cartoon, but a compilation of images can be used instead.
For example, Figure 2 is a fact illustration for a case about subsurface
rights. The cave extended from the defendant’s land
plaintiff’s land, but only had one entrance (on the defendant’s
land). The defendant was profiting from the
cave by charging an entry fee, and
the issue was whether the defendant was trespassing on the plaintiff’s
Image drawn by the author and used in lecture slides to
demonstrate the facts of the case
Edwards v Sims
(1929) 24 SW (2nd) 619
Another example I use in lecture slides relates to
Davies v Bennison
[1927] Tas LR 52, in which the defendant neighbour argued there was no trespass
because the offending bullet was not on his neighbour’s
land, it was
imbedded in the cat. In my slides I have inserted the following cartoon-like
images: a man with a firearm; a bullet;
a cat sitting on a roof; and a cat that
has fallen off the roof. I use arrows to connect these individual pictures,
showing the journey
of the bullet from the gun, to the cat on the roof, and then
to the dead cat that has fallen off the roof. It would also be possible
PowerPoint to animate the scene for extra impact — eg, by shooting the
Mind-maps are also helpful. The development of mind-maps takes time, and I
continually adjust and refine my mind-maps. Mind-maps can
be used to illustrate
case principles or broad concepts, I use both hand drawn mind-maps and those I
construct using a word processor.
The mind-maps shown at Figure 3 and Figure 4 illustrate the case principle in
a tutorial problem that discusses rights to sperm samples
(including the
different principles that apply depending on whether the sample is created while
the donor is alive, or whether the
sample is extracted from the donor
post-mortem). As shown in Figure 3, when the donor is alive they can create
property from their
body by separating the sample (eg, by cutting off their hair
and selling to a wigmaker) in this instance, on the donor’s death
property falls into their estate. But as shown in Figure 4, a post-mortem donor
cannot create property — the property is
created by the work and skill of
the doctor acting as an agent for the donor’s partner.
Mind-map showing the principles relating to a sperm sample
from a live donor.
Mind-map showing the principles relating to a sperm sample
from a dead donor.
Mind-maps like these can be illustrated on the whiteboard during tutorial
teaching or can be constructed using a word processer to
add to lecture slides
or topic outlines.
IV CONCLUSION
At first, it may seem that law as a language-based discipline is not amenable
to graphs and charts or other visual aids, which are
normally seen in science
disciplines. However, visual aids are an excellent tool to explain otherwise
difficult concepts and their
use has been successfully explored as a means of
explaining the law to
laypersons.
Seeing is a process that affects our other sensory perceptions. The old adage
says ‘we eat with our eyes’, meaning something
will taste better if
it looks appetising. For sighted people, our sense of taste is affected by what
we see — if we are blindfolded
and eat something, it is much harder to
identify what we are tasting because we are not receiving the visual cue.
Similarly, a visual
cue can help us understand better. So, when teaching,
consider providing a visual cue to the word-based explanation, or vice versa,
visual explanation with word-based cues. In doing so, it is important to ensure
that learners who are blind, have low vision, or
are otherwise vision-impaired
need to be given the same learning opportunities as their sighted peers.
Accordingly, anything shown
in images should always be explained adequately in
It is time consuming to create high quality visual
learning mind-maps, diagrams, and illustrations. However, the work is worth the
effort. I find it not only improves student learning, but it also improves my
teaching because of the thought I have had to apply
to create a visual aid that
has clarity and illustrates the principle. The research suggests that these
experiences are not merely
anecdotal or perceived, but are grounded in reality.
* Natalie Brown is a Lecturer at the UWA Law School, The University of
Western Australia.
William Wesley Patton,
‘Opening Students Eyes: Visual Learning Theory in the Socratic
(1991) 15(1)
Law and Psychology Review
Jesse Berg,
Visual Leap, A
Step-by-Step Guide to Visual Learning for Teachers and Students
Taylor and Francis) 20–1, 29–30.
Riad Asani, ‘Learning
Styles and Visual Literacy For Learning And Performance’ (2015) 176
Social and Behavioural Sciences
) 1–3, 12–13.
Jamal Raiyn, ‘The Role
of Visual Learning in Improving Students’ High Order Thinking
Skills’ (2016) 7(24)
Journal of Education and Practice
) 544; Michael D Murray, ‘Cartoon
Contracts and Proactive Visualization of Law’ (2021) 16
University of
Massachusetts Law Review
101, 112–13.
Murray (n 11) 102–114.
See example of a comic strip contract at 101 of this source.
) 115. See also Asani (n
The image is of a bearded
man. Image sourced from Mariv Ahissar and Shaul Hochstein, ‘The Reverse
Hierarchy Theory of Visual
Perceptual Learning’ (2004) 8(10)
Cognitive Sciences
457, 457–8. You can see a visual cue at
<www.cs.princeton.edu/courses/archive/spring08/cos598B/Readings/AhissarHochstein_TCS2004.pdf>.
Permission for reproduction of the image obtained from Mariv Ahissar via email
on 7 February 2024.
) 541; Raiyn (n
) 115. For an example of boardgame
designed specifically for law see Patton (n
) 8–10. For discourse on creating
different types of flowcharts and mind maps see Berg (n
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (9.95 MB)
PDF format (581 KB)
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter