URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/journals/MelbULawRw/2024/8.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 15:18:20
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Hildenbrand, Serena Syme --- "Public Sector Data Sharing: Applying State-Based Human Rights Laws to Minimise Privacy Harms" [2024] MelbULawRw 8; (2024) 47(2) Melbourne University Law Review 386
PUBLIC SECTOR DATA SHARING:
APPLYING STATE-BASED HUMAN RIGHTS LAWS TO MINIMISE PRIVACY HARMS
I Introduction
II Public Sector Data Sharing: The Need for Additional Protection
A The Importance of Data to the Public Sector
B Potential Harms to Data Subjects
C Gaps in Legal Protection
III The Victorian Legal Framework for Data Sharing
A Information Privacy Legislation
B The Victorian Charter
IV A Normative Framework: The Underlying Values
A Privacy: Theoretical and Legal Origins
B Privacy and Data Protection: Opacity and Transparency
C Social and Democratic Contribution
D The Role of ‘Social Licence’
E Digital Surveillance and Other Novel Technologies
V Applying the Victorian Charter Privacy Right
A ‘Arbitrarily’ Internal Limitation
B ‘Unlawfully’ Internal Limitation
C Applying the Privacy Right
VI Concluding Recommendations
PUBLIC SECTOR DATA SHARING:
APPLYING STATE-BASED HUMAN RIGHTS LAWS TO MINIMISE PRIVACY
Serena Syme Hildenbrand
Public sector data sharing offers public benefit but raises risks of privacy
harm. This article considers the Victorian legal framework
for such data
sharing, highlighting risks to privacy (individual and social) and describing
additional protection offered by the
Human Rights and
Responsibilities Act 2006
Victorian Charter
including by reference to the varied origins of privacy and data protection
legislation. It argues that Victorian courts
have taken a wrong turn in applying
Victorian Charter
and the principle of legality and weakening its protection. Drawing parallels
Queensland and the Australian Capital Territory, this article identifies
remedies, explaining how appropriately applied human rights
based privacy rights
could uphold social value, maximise social licence and minimise privacy
Introduction
Imagine a future world of ideal government-promoted convenience. Each
government department you approach has your personal data to
can quickly respond based on your other dealings with government. Your
location is known due to travel data, so advice is tailored. Private
companies allocate you to a demographic segment, understand each
segment deeply
using de-identified government data, and microtarget their pricing and marketing
to you. Government predicts your
future activities, nudging your behaviour and
assessing your regulatory risk profile accordingly. Law enforcement efficiently
its resourcing and intervention to each person’s likely future
actions. In reality, most people are likely to consider this
world a significant and alarming intrusion into their personal privacy and
autonomy. But new data technologies
and a drive for government efficiency are
leading Australians in this direction, with current information privacy
legislation unlikely
to provide much impediment to these developments.
Data sharing by public sector agencies offers benefits but can also generate
risks and potential harms. The 21
century has been described as the
‘era of big
demand for government data increasing.
many governments, the Victorian government is conscious of the potential social
and efficiency benefits offered by data, and
imposes a ‘clear
responsibility on Victorian government agencies to share
Data analytics offer significant
promise to public and private sectors alike, with some estimates placing the
value of public sector
data to Australia at as much as $64 billion per
techniques such as machine learning and artificial intelligence have the
potential to expand the use of public sector data
But data analytics are not benign from the point of view of individuals whose
data are being collected, used, disclosed and shared.
Those individuals may
experience harm if their data are misused such as through financial fraud,
identity theft and family violence,
and such individuals may be at risk of other
physical harm.
Public sector agencies may also experience harm if they are involved in or
contribute to such misuse, principally through reputational
damage and loss of trust.
Such harm can
spread across agencies: a significant mistake by one agency is likely to affect
trust across the government.
The harms flowing from interferences with privacy are commonly viewed through
an individualistic
necessary but insufficient; a focus on individual harms and self-protection made
sense in the 20
century context
of the misuse of individual records, but this lens is too narrow for big
Collective harms caused by data practices arguably include undermining the
social value of privacy and violating social licence.
Existing Australian legal protections are largely founded on information
collection and
use. This legislation generally protects ‘personal information’
(information which may allow identification of a data
Federal and state information privacy statutes such as the
Protection Act 2014
’) lack some of the
protections found in contemporary European data protection
continue to rely on data subjects making their own privacy decisions via the
processes of notice and
this and other reasons, statutory information privacy frameworks appear
inadequate in the face of 21
century data
challenges.
Victoria has been selected as a jurisdictional case study because its human
rights framework may provide additional protections for
data subjects. In
Victoria, information privacy regulation is complemented and enhanced
by broader human rights legislation, namely the
Charter of Human Rights
and Responsibilities Act 2006
’). Because specific human rights legislation operates at a
higher ‘principles’ level, it may have a valuable role
futureproofing more granular information privacy frameworks. Both Queensland and
the Australian Capital Territory (‘ACT’)
have similar
legislation — the
Human Rights Act 2019
Human Rights Act 2004
’) respectively — so an approach developed by
reference to Victoria’s legal framework could be applied in those
is regularly
arguments would provide strong support for the adoption of such a model in
the federal
This article argues that in a big data context it is appropriate to strike a
fine balance between data use and privacy. Consistent
with the common law
principle of legality, this requires an appropriately limited approach to
exceptions from the protection of privacy rights. This article will point out
how Victorian courts have taken a wrong turn in this
regard, disregarding
foreign jurisprudence and broadening the scope of exceptions applicable to the
Victorian Charter
Part II of this article describes some of the risks and personal,
institutional and social harms of public sector data sharing and
summarises existing gaps in the legal framework. Part III outlines the Victorian
legal framework for data sharing, including
Victorian Charter
IV sets out to develop a
normative framework for legal protection, describing ‘opaque’ and
‘transparent’ modes of protection and the
social value of privacy
and social licence. Part V explores the practical application of the relevant
human rights legislation and
identifies how Victorian courts have taken a wrong
turn. Part VI concludes with recommendations to protect data subjects.
Public Sector Data Sharing: The Need for Additional Protection
The Importance of Data to the Public Sector
century, information privacy legislation focused on
the collection and disclosure of written information, the interception of
communications and the computerised exchange of information between
century’s artificial intelligence driven big data
analytics present a new challenge to privacy law, enabling predictions and
inferences to be drawn based on vast volumes of digital data, exposing new
aspects of data subjects’ lives, attitudes, interactions
In this context, the general term ‘data analytics’ refers to
‘processes or activities which are designed to obtain
and evaluate data to
extract useful
information’,
usually by providing insights or making
predictions.
The more specific term ‘big data analytics’ refers to the use of
artificial intelligence and machine learning techniques
to process ‘big
data’ (characterised by high
volumes, velocity and variety of data)
to identify correlations and
the name suggests, big data analytics require vast volumes of data to train an
algorithm and allow it scope to locate patterns
of interest. I use the term
‘data subjects’, following the terminology used in the European
General Data Protection Regulation
to refer to individuals whose data are being shared and used, while
acknowledging that this term is imperfect given its
implication that individuals are merely passive subjects. In this article,
‘data sharing’ refers to the sharing of personal
information with a
specified recipient under legal protection (such as a data sharing agreement)
and does not cover public data release
or open data.
A 2015 Organization for Economic Co-Operation and Development
(‘OECD’) report titled
Data-Driven Innovation: Big Data for
Growth and Well-Being
assessed the economic potential of data driven
innovation, concluding that it had huge potential to address economic and
distribution
challenges.
The Australian Productivity Commission’s 2017
Data Availability and Use
Inquiry Report
Productivity Report
’) also identified a
range of benefits to individuals and governments of increased public sector data
sharing, including: improved
service delivery; assisted decision-making; better
utilisation of resources; and more effective risk
management.
Potential Harms to Data Subjects
The collection and use of data may also cause harm to data subjects. While
not specifically focused on human rights, the OECD has
highlighted the potential
infringements of privacy and human rights arising from every step in the data
value chain, including: over
collection of personal information; threats
to stored data; intrusive inferences with personal information; information
asymmetry; and real-world discrimination due to data driven
There is some evidence that Australians expect public sector data sharing to
occur but are uncomfortable with aspects of it. The Australian
Information
Commissioner’s
Australian Community Attitudes to Privacy Survey
revealed that only 36% of Australians are comfortable with intra-government
data sharing (up from 30% in 2017), while 40% are
uncomfortable.
Australians are even less
comfortable with government sharing their data with
private businesses (15% comfortable, 70%
uncomfortable).
Further, 59% of Australians
experienced ‘problems’ in the handling of their personal
information over the previous year.
problems are not exhaustively defined and range from transparency related issues
(such as missing privacy policies), through
processing of personal information
without explicit consent, to a
variety of cyber harms.
Consumer harms arising from data sharing and data use were also explored by
the Australian Competition and Consumer Commission (‘ACCC’)
Digital Platforms Inquiry
, which identified harms including the
collection of location data, online tracking and the non-transparent sharing of
personal data
with third parties, leading to decreased consumer welfare through
reduced trust and privacy, profiling, discrimination, reduced competition
impacts on vulnerable
While not all these harms will attach to public
sector data sharing, the act of sharing personal information heightens the
risk of such damage.
Importantly, privacy harm is not only triggered by unauthorised disclosure;
the use of personal data can cause harm even if data are
used as intended.
Daniel J Solove’s taxonomy of privacy problems illustrates how common
uses of personal information can cause dignitary harms
(impacting reputation or
causing angst) and architectural harms (increasing risks of harm or undesirably
shifting power), even without
any clear misuse or theft of
outlines how architectural harms in particular can harm society as well as
individuals: by ‘chilling’ behaviour,
creating power imbalances and
impeding activities that contribute to social goods such as political
participation and free expression.
uses of big data technologies can create such architectural harms. Data
integration and data matching involve augmenting
personal data with data from
other sources to create a more complete picture of an individual, and data
mining can highlight patterns
in the data which expose sensitive personal
While such practices offer considerable opportunity for businesses and public
sector agencies, they may exceed the data subject’s
intention in
sharing their data. There are examples in the literature of retailers using
correlations in purchase data to draw accurate yet intrusive conclusions
information
which shoppers had no intention or awareness of
There is no suggestion that
similar practices are currently in use in the Australian public sector, but the
drive within government
to improve customer experience and streamline customer
service resourcing may promote such
approaches.
The significant 2022 Optus data breach in Australia highlighted the public
anxiety triggered by the exposure of government identifiers
and the harm of
stress and inconvenience to individuals who were attempting to understand the
exposure and block or replace compromised
Organisations implicated in such
significant data incidents can suffer lasting reputational and financial
Public sector data activities may increase privacy risks and harms. In any
given jurisdiction, multiple public sector agencies each
hold some personal
data, but such siloed data may offer relatively low utility to agencies using
big data analytics.
Public sector data
sharing allows the incorporation of limited and discrete sources of personal
information into more comprehensive
public and private databases by means of
data integration and data matching.
generates the volumes of rich data necessary for big data analytics and may
allow levels of surveillance and intrusion that would not otherwise be
In this way, public sector data
sharing may increase the value of the data for analytics but generate new
agencies are also bound by public records
legislation,
which can require personal
customer data to be retained for long
meaning that rich and extensive
public sector data reserves also cover decades of information, increasing the
risk of misuse and
Public sector data matching is not new. Relying on the
Data-Matching
Program (Assistance and Tax) Act 1990
federal government agencies such as
the Australian Tax Office (‘ATO’) and Services Australia commonly
match customer
data among themselves and other federal agencies to ensure
compliance and prevent fraud.
The risks of
such an approach were vividly
illustrated by the Australian Government’s ‘Robodebt’
scheme, which
incorrectly matched Centrelink data against ATO records to recoup
overpayments and led to a Royal Commission, a class action and reparations
exceeding $1 billion.
It has parallels to
the Dutch System Risk Indication (‘SyRI’) program, developed to
detect welfare fraud using data linkage
decision-making.
The Hague District Court overturned the law
establishing SyRI in 2020 on the basis that it contravened human rights
obligations.
Public sector data collection developed further during the COVID-19
All Australian states and
territories required citizens to provide personal contact tracing data via
tracing apps, with assurances that it would only
be used for public health purposes.
freedom of information requests to the Victorian Department of Health revealed
that it denied multiple data requests for contact
tracing data, including two
requests by Victorian Police.
Victoria has
since amended its legislation to limit these secondary
Gaps in Legal Protection
Given such seismic developments in data technology and big data analytics,
pressure on the legal framework is to be expected. As the
Productivity
noted: ‘[t]he legal and policy frameworks under which public
and private sector data is collected, stored and used (or traded)
in Australia
are ad hoc and not contemporary’.
This dated legal framework gives rise to certain gaps in legal protection of
data subjects.
In assessing the effectiveness of Australia’s information privacy
framework in light of developments in data and technology,
the Australian Law
Reform Commission (‘ALRC’) stated in its 2014 report
Invasions of Privacy in the Digital Era
that ‘[a]lthough the existing
law provides protection against some invasions of privacy, there are significant
uncertainties’.
The gaps identified by the ALRC included piecemeal state-based protections, the
restriction of the
to information privacy and inadequate
These findings highlight the
inconsistent coverage of the Australian information privacy framework, which
consists of a patchwork
of federal, state and territory laws that do not
necessarily cohere well or cover all relevant privacy harms or data users.
In its 2021
Human Rights and Technology
report, the Australian Human
Rights Commission (‘AHRC’) described the potential for gaps in
information privacy law in the light of data-rich new technologies such as
intelligence.
Additional gaps identified by the AHRC included the pressure that big data
technologies place on the
’s reliance on
consent, de-identification of personal
information
and narrow interpretations of
‘personal information’.
ACCC also expressed concern that the legal framework in Australian jurisdictions
may be ill-equipped to protect
Australians, noting in its
Digital Platforms Inquiry
existing regulatory frameworks for the collection and use of data have not held
up well to the challenges of
digitalisation’.
In her 2020 article on the use of artificial intelligence in government,
Moira Paterson also identified numerous deficiencies in the
in the context of big data analytics, including: an overly narrow definition of
‘personal information’; a failure to
protect groups and not just
individuals;
an outdated focus on the
‘purpose’ of data use; and the need to limit legislative overrides
of privacy legislation.
Attorney-General’s Department’s recently completed review of the
appears to address only one of these identified
deficiencies,
and while it is appropriately regarded as a ‘landmark blueprint for
improvements it offers will not be immediate — the federal government
released its response to the review in September
2023, with plans for additional
consultation on proposed legislative amendments to take place in
So the gaps identified above in
Commonwealth legislation will endure, and as that framework is mirrored by state
and territory legislation,
one can expect similar gaps to be present in the
Victorian, Queensland and ACT information privacy frameworks.
The Victorian Legal Framework for Data Sharing
In Victoria, data sharing relies principally on a statutory framework of
information privacy laws. This reflects the lack of any common law right to
Victoria Park
Racing & Recreation Grounds Co Ltd v
That position endured until
2001, when Callinan J suggested in
Australian Broadcasting Corporation v
Lenah Game Meats Pty Ltd
that ‘the time is ripe for consideration
whether a tort of invasion of privacy should be recognised in this
There has been some
willingness in inferior courts to follow this approach and identify a common law
right of privacy,
‘right’ remains underdeveloped.
Accordingly, information privacy protection in Australia has tended to be a
creature of
Information Privacy Legislation
Information privacy protection was introduced at the Commonwealth level by
, implementing elements of the 1980 OECD
Guidelines on
the Protection of Privacy and Transborder Flows of Data
Guidelines on the
Protection of
now applies to any Australian private sector entity with
a turnover of more than $3 million per financial year,
including state government
contractors.
turn, Victoria enacted the
Information Privacy Act 2000
Information Privacy
’), which was replaced in 2014 by the
Following the Commonwealth’s specific
Information Privacy Act
only covered, and the
continues to only cover, the Victorian
public sector to limit regulatory burden on the private
Both Victorian statutes contained
Information Privacy Principles
designed to protect personal information, similar to the
summarise, the
allow public sector agencies to collect the data they
need by lawful and fair means, and with
transparent privacy policies and collection
Data collected should not be used
for a secondary purpose distinct from the primary purpose of
collection unless one of the specific criteria listed in cl 2.1 are
also require the data
to be accurate and complete, safely stored, transparently managed, for access to
be available for correction
and for sensitive information to be treated with
special care.
provisions regulating
information security, including by introducing the Victorian protective data
security standards.
requires an organisation to comply with the
in relation to any personal information it collects or uses and
sets out the organisations to which the
applies — essentially
Victorian public sector agencies. Many such agencies are emanations of the Crown
with no separate legal
identity, but the combined effect of
each Victorian public sector agency is viewed as a separate unit for the
purposes of compliance with the
and therefore for data
only applies to ‘personal
information’, defined as ‘information ... about an individual whose
identity is apparent,
or can reasonably be ascertained, from the
information’.
The Victorian
information privacy framework also includes other legislation such as the
Health Records Act 2001
Victorian Data Sharing Act 2017
Surveillance Devices Act 1999
(Vic), sector-specific data
various secrecy
provisions.
In practice, this gives rise to a somewhat piecemeal approach to information
sharing provided by
some combination of sector-specific legislation and the
context, overarching human rights legislation like the
Victorian Charter
and equivalent ACT and Queensland
legislation
potentially fills a valuable role by adding a layer of
‘principles-based’ protection to address gaps in the more granular
information privacy framework. Paterson notes that the
[a] human right, which arguably fills a
Victorian Charter
In 2006, Victoria was the first Australian state to introduce specific human
legislation,
comprising 20 human rights which ‘primarily derive from’ the 1966
United Nations
International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights
Importantly, the
Victorian Charter
was intended to have its greatest
impact within the public service, enshrining a culture of human
Victorian Charter
is intended to protect the rights of individuals,
it also has a broader social purpose, arising from this cultural emphasis
with a key principle in its preamble: ‘human rights are essential
in a democratic and inclusive
Section 13 of the
Victorian Charter
contains the privacy right, the most relevant right for
our purposes.
Table 1 compares the relevant privacy rights in Australia and
internationally, demonstrating that the s 13
Victorian Charter
right closely mirrors
art 17(1) of the
; the two provisions have tended to be treated
Section 13 is less similar to the equivalent European Union right, art 8 of the
Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms
which is nevertheless important due to its extensive body of jurisprudence.
Table 1 also shows strong similarities between s 13 and
relevant provisions in Queensland and the ACT. Note that the Australian
provisions are considered to have ‘internal limitations’, in that
proscribe interferences with privacy which are arbitrary or
: Privacy Protections
Victorian Charter
, Comparable State and Territory Legislation,
Victorian Charter
A person has the right—
(a) not to have that person’s privacy, family, home or correspondence
unlawfully or arbitrarily interfered with; and
(b) not to have that person’s reputation unlawfully
No one shall be subjected to arbitrary or unlawful interference with his
unlawful attacks on his honour and reputation.
(1) Everyone has the right to respect for his private and
family life, his home and his correspondence.
(2) There shall be no interference by a public authority with the exercise
of this right except such as is in accordance with the
law and is necessary in a
democratic society ...
A person has the right—
(a) not to have the person’s privacy, family, home or correspondence
unlawfully or arbitrarily interfered with; and
(b) not to have the person’s reputation unlawfully
Everyone has the right—
(a) not to have his or her privacy, family, home or
correspondence interfered with unlawfully or
arbitrarily; and
(b) not to have his or her reputation unlawfully
In addition to s 13, there are several key operative provisions of the
Victorian Charter
relevant to the application of the privacy right. This
article will now briefly explore the general limitations clause (s 7(2)),
legislative override
(s 31), the interpretive obligation (s 32), and the conduct obligation (s
The s 7(2) general limitations clause indicates that a human right may be
subject to reasonable limitations and sets out the approach
to assessing whether
a limitation is reasonable and demonstrably justified. The
such explicit clause, but similar clauses can be found in s 13 of the
and s 28 of the
. The interaction between the general
limitations clause and the
Victorian Charter
s 13 internal limitations
has made it hard for applicants to establish an unjustified limitation of
Commentators have noted that
‘[i]f an individual who claims that their rights under s 13(a) have been
breached must establish
that the interference was unlawful or arbitrary, there
would seem to be no work for s 7(2) to
the applicant is successful in establishing this, the onus will rest on the
public authority to establish that the limitation
is justified within the
meaning of s 7(2).
I will briefly touch on the s 31 legislative override, which allows the
Victorian Parliament to specifically override
Victorian Charter
‘exceptional
circumstances’,
with each such override sunsetting after five
Parliament has only used this mechanism in three scenarios, two of which were to
prevent named prisoners and ‘police-killers’
and the other was to address issues
in uniform legal practice across
Section 32 contains the interpretive obligation, which applies to anyone
interpreting the
Victorian Charter
, including public servants and
(1) So far as it is possible to do so consistently with their purpose, all
statutory provisions must be interpreted in a way that
is compatible with human
(2) International law and the judgments of domestic, foreign and
international courts and tribunals relevant to a human right may
be considered
in interpreting a statutory provision.
Similar interpretive obligations are contained in s 48 of the
ss 30–1 of the
. Note that s 32(1) of the
does not allow a provision to be interpreted so that it has no
effect; any interpretation of provisions must not ‘displace
Parliament’s
intended purpose ... in a manner which avoids achieving the
object of the legislation’.
The leading authority on s 32(1) is the High Court decision in
Momcilovic v The Queen
which resulted in six disparate judgments offering varied guidance. Chief
Justice French compared s 32(1) to the common law principle
of legality, stating
that ‘[s] 32(1) applies to the interpretation of statutes in the same way
as the principle of legality
but with a wider field of
application’.
The common law principle of legality is the presumption that
‘Parliament does not intend to interfere with common law rights
freedoms except by clear and unequivocal language for which Parliament may be
accountable to the electorate’.
Where the principle of legality applies, a court may potentially ‘read
down’ a statutory provision to prevent it from
interfering with common law
In the High Court case of
Coco v The Queen
, a majority held that to interfere with fundamental
common law rights, the principle of legality
requires ‘a clear expression of an unmistakable and unambiguous
intention’.
Their Honours referred
with approval to this concise summary of the principle of legality given by
Brennan J in
Re Bolton; Ex parte Beane
: ‘Unless the
Parliament makes unmistakably clear its intention to abrogate or suspend a
fundamental freedom, the courts will not construe a statute
that operation.’
In Australia, the rationale for the principle of legality has tended to be
based on legislative
But in a subtly different approach, the ‘quintessential statement of the
was delivered in the
United Kingdom (‘UK’) by Lord Hoffmann in
R v Secretary of State
for the Home Department; Ex parte Simms
: ‘But the principle of
legality means that Parliament must squarely
confront what it is doing and accept the political cost. Fundamental rights
cannot be overridden by general or ambiguous
, Victorian courts have tended to view s 32(1) as
a codification of the principle of
Bruce Chen notes that this
approach may not be accurate or useful, as there are good reasons to give
normative force and scope to s 32(1) than to the principle of
yet courts are currently construing it to provide ‘unjustifiably
weak’ protection.
also offered some commentary on s 32(2) of the
, with French CJ expressing caution about the application of
foreign jurisprudence:
Section 32(2) does not authorise a court to do anything which it cannot already
do. ... If such a judgment concerns a term
identical to or substantially the
that in the statutory provision being interpreted, then its
potential logical or analogical relevance is apparent. ... Nevertheless,
international and foreign
domestic judgments should be consulted with
discrimination and
Justice Gummow
expressed similar cautions, noting the importance of situating statutory human
rights within their specific constitutional
In the Victorian Court of
Appeal case of
Bare v Independent Broad-Based Anti-Corruption Commission
Warren CJ referenced this reasoning in relation to the application of s 32(2),
noting she would ‘consider some of the foreign
international jurisprudence, but ... with the caution urged by French CJ and
Gummow J in
In relation to the s 13 privacy right, it will be most defensible to apply
overseas jurisprudence if the wording of the comparative
provision is similar
(such as art 17 of the
Section 38(1) of the
Victorian Charter
imposes conduct obligations
requiring public authorities (including public servants) to act compatibly
with human rights and to give proper consideration to human
rights in making any
Similar conduct obligations
can be found in s 58 of the
and s 40B of the
Castles v Secretary,
Department of Justice
’), Emerton J indicated
that this is a practical task and not a legal one, noting that
proper consideration of human rights should not be a sophisticated legal
exercise. Proper consideration need not involve formally
identifying the
‘correct’ rights or explaining their content by reference to legal
principles or
jurisprudence.
It follows that public servants are not required to undertake a
legal exercise or apply current jurisprudence in order to fulfil their
obligations to give proper consideration.
As a matter of policy and procedure, public sector agencies usually prepare
an assessment to demonstrate giving proper consideration
to relevant human
rights in respect of a decision and acting in accordance with such
a data sharing proposal, such an analysis would usually involve identifying the
engagement of the privacy right, including by
considering whether the conduct is
unlawful or arbitrary and (if arbitrary) assessing under s 7(2) whether any
resulting limitation
is reasonable and
In Victoria, such an
assessment would ideally be prepared alongside a privacy impact assessment with
each informing the other.
For a richer analysis of the s 13 privacy right, it is helpful to turn to the
normative basis and origins of privacy rights more broadly.
A Normative Framework: The Underlying Values
This Part examines the normative and social values of privacy and data
protection. Although the recognition of both privacy and data protection
rights is not uniform across jurisdictions, the values underpinning
those rights
have relevance to all liberal democracies. This Part explores and expands on the
following values, which I consider critical to effectively applying privacy
and data sharing protection in the public sector:
1 Privacy and data sharing protection have distinct but complementary
foundations, offering versions of ‘opacity’ and
‘transparency’ protection which are arguably both needed for
adequate protection of private life.
2 Democracy depends upon such protection — citizens need private
free from both state interference and surveillance, to discover their own moral
autonomy or
personhood.
3 A liberal state and its public authorities have a strong interest in
supporting and upholding these elements of democracy, which
are essential to the
ongoing health of the
it is necessary to limit privacy to enable the use of personal data by public
authorities, democratic transparency and accountability
are required — in
reliance both on the transparency principles of data protection and also on
theories of social licence.
4 In adopting new privacy-impacting technologies, liberal states carry a
special obligation to carefully consider and provide for
the application of
century and generally developed in parallel with (or in response to)
technological advancement.
formulations of privacy were around the value of ‘private
the prevention of
‘unreasonable searches and seizures’ reflected in the Fourth
Amendment to the
United States
Constitution
‘general right of the individual to be let alone’ as highlighted by
Warren and Brandeis in their seminal 1890
article ‘The Right to
Such approaches reflected a
growing sense of the importance of the liberty of citizens from the power of
There has been considerable debate on the theoretical underpinnings of
It has been described as a ‘concept in
multidimensional, multi-faceted concept, the complexity of which is therefore
hard to grasp within a single conceptual
Theorists have focused on privacy as an essential component of
individuals’ ability to develop social
relationships,
exercise self-determination
over personal information
or sustain a
There are also critiques of privacy, ranging from the reductionist view that
is nothing morally or legally distinctive about
through to feminist
critiques that privacy can be used as a shield to cover bad or criminal
behaviour, particularly in the domestic
in relation to a variety of fields of privacy, including bodily, spatial,
communicational, proprietary,
intellectual, informational, decisional,
associational and behavioural.
The traditional concept of privacy is concerned with protection of an
intimate private life,
reflective of
the origins of privacy in the opacity,
protection and secrecy of private information. We see this thread running
through Prince Albert’s early 19
century English legal action
to protect his and Queen Victoria’s private
Warren and Brandeis’
article in the United States
and recent UK
decisions penalising a newspaper publisher for disclosure of the Duchess of
Sussex’s private
correspondence.
century, privacy developed in a legal sense as a human
under international law, such as the 1948
Universal Declaration of Human
formulation of these human rights focuses on
private life and reputation.
While privacy and data protection share some common ground, they emerge from
distinct normative foundations. Data protection laws
have tended
to be based not on opacity but on transparency; namely an understanding
that personal information can be legitimately processed and shared in
The non-binding 1980 OECD
on the Protection of
provide one of the earliest examples of such an approach, seeking to
establish a firm basis for the commercial use of data across
Justice Michael Kirby, chair of the OECD expert group that developed these
guidelines, later noted:
The concern which propelled the OECD into the issues of privacy was the fear
that its member states would introduce incompatible
and conflicting laws for the
defence of privacy in the newly established databases of the interlinked
information technologies.
In that sense, these OECD guidelines were intended to pre-empt
Drawing a contrast between the two approaches, De Hert and Gutwirth identify
transparency’,
stating ‘[o]pacity tools embody normative choices about the limits of
power; transparency tools come into play after these
normative choices have been
made in order still to channel the normatively accepted exercise of
Transparency tools are
procedural, specifying
information
may be handled, while opacity tools challenge
it should be
disclosed at all.
The relationship between opacity and transparency tools can be visualised
much like the protection of a house. A house offers opacity
protection (walls, a
roof, window coverings) essential to keep out the elements and prying eyes, but
it also offers transparency
protection (glass windows and open doors) to allow
the inhabitants to experience the outdoors and venture outside. Just as both a
transparent greenhouse and a highly protective but opaque bomb shelter
are inadequate for comfortable housing, so the balance between opacity and
transparency protection is arguably key to the design of
an effective
information privacy framework in the age of big data.
The Australian
, strongly influenced by the OECD
Guidelines on the Protection of
is reflective of the
transparent normative foundation of data protection; subsequent state-based
legislation follows a similar
approach. Consequently, so-called ‘privacy legislation’ in
Australia may be
better characterised as data protection legislation and a tool of
transparency. The legislation does contain limited opacity elements
higher degree of protection it applies to narrowly defined ‘sensitive
information’, such as
personal information about racial or ethnic origin, sexual preference,
religious beliefs, political opinions and criminal
it is instructive to apply the house analogy to this framework and consider
whether one of its
weaknesses is its excessive transparency — additional opacity
protection seems warranted.
instruments, but it can be challenging to apply because
has been described as ‘a relatively weak fundamental right’ on the
basis that ‘not a single aspect of privacy
takes absolute precedence over
other rights and interests’.
protection was recognised by the European Union as a fundamental right in
art 8 privacy
right has also been taken to encompass data
protection,
at least for ‘essentially private’
But even in the commonly more rights-protective European environment, data
protection may be treated in practice as a procedural right
rather than as an
inviolable right. Article 8 of the
arguably includes both a
transparency tool (‘in accordance with the law’) focusing on whether
an interference with rights
is appropriately authorised, and an opacity tool
(whether the use of the data is ‘necessary in a democratic
In their 2006 article, De Hert and Gutwirth argued that, in
practice, the European Court of Human Rights was overly focused on the
procedural requirement that the intervention be ‘in
accordance with the law’, turning art 8 of the
‘transparency-promoting
De Hert and Gutwirth also consider it important that any law restricting privacy
rights be authorised by a Parliament, noting that
where this is not the case
[d]emocratically there is a loss. Insisting on the content of law, rather than
on the formal basis of law, has allowed the Court
to declare certain regulations
‘in accordance with the law’ that have not even been debated and
approved by a
parliament.
The existence
of a right to data protection is less clear outside Europe, including under the
Victorian Charter
. It is broadly assumed that the
date there is little judicial precedent on this
Social and Democratic Contribution
Much of the academic discussion of privacy concerns its role as an individual
benefit, but with an emerging parallel focus on privacy’s
importance.
For example, Cohen argues
that information privacy is a ‘constitutive element of a civil
Gellert and Gutwirth characterise it as ‘the ultimate defence line of
liberty’, due to its role in filling the gaps left
by more classical human
rights in defending the boundary between citizen and
describes this boundary as follows: ‘Privacy in this context represents
“breathing room” that allows us to be ourselves,
guided by our
social interactions and value systems, and free to become engaged citizens away
from the gaze of the
An understanding of privacy’s social value is helpful because it counters
the narrowing of information privacy to the status
of individual choices and
strengthens the argument for state protection against harms.
the autonomy of
which is central to democracy.
Mokrosinksa
considers that the autonomy afforded by privacy is both social and political:
‘privacy preserves the conditions of individual
autonomy by preserving the
integrity of political
practices’.
Big data technologies and surveillance (fuelled by public sector data sharing)
arguably threaten autonomy due to the vast
reserves of personal data collected, amalgamated and analysed, and the lack
of any form of genuine informed consent from data subjects
to most of these
activities.
Social arguments have also been made for the importance of data
protection. Rodotà comments that ‘the strong protection of
personal data
continues to be a “necessary utopia” if one wishes to safeguard
the democratic nature of our political
Rouvroy and Poullet argue that both privacy and data protection rights
‘are necessary, in a democratic society, to sustain
democracy’.
Gellert and Gutwirth
go further, positing that a reliance only on transparency tools (data protection
rights) will be inadequate
‘to keep intact the political private sphere of
liberty’, and that it is essential to include opaque privacy rights,
especially as a threshold test regarding the acceptance of new data
Another strong argument for a social framing of privacy and data protection
is that increasingly, the harms posed by privacy infringements
incidents are not individual harms, but collective
This follows from the scope and
impact of big data analytics practices which carry societal
impacts exceeding the harm to any individual. As Graef and van der Sloot
note, ‘no individual can fully protect herself against
collective harms
considering the interdependent nature of privacy protection and the competitive
harm data technologies cause’.
It remains important to address individual harms, but a broader normative
framing assists in making the case for legislative protection
that extends to
collective harms.
The Role of ‘Social Licence’
‘Social licence’ is a term used to represent the basis for an
activity’s legitimacy as a form of social contract
concept of social licence first arose in relation to extractive industries, such
as forestry and mining: industries which carried
benefits and risks and where
there was a perceived need for community cooperation and
acceptance.
It is now common to see it
raised in the context of data sharing — another activity with benefits and
risks — to underpin
or challenge the legitimacy of the
A key concern of the
Productivity Report
was ‘putting at the
front and centre of any data use the requirement to maintain a social
considered of particular relevance to public sector data, given that public
sector agencies operate under social licence — essentially
a compact of
credibility with the public.
social licence can easily be broken if governments act in a way that is not
transparent and trustworthy and fail to communicate
the value of their
activities to the public. Despite the fact that data sharing may be legal,
‘legal authority does not necessarily
command social
legitimacy’.
Productivity Report
identified the following factors as important
the maintenance of social licence for data sharing: shared public value;
citizen control of participation; trust, through the use of data safeguards;
and genuine accountability.
In a recent review of the sharing of health data in the Australian public
sector, Richards and Schneiber also identified the importance of social
licence in data sharing, commenting that ‘[t]he key
to appropriate
governance in this area has consistently been identified as transparency,
creation of trust and
identification of the parameters of the social
They add: ‘If an
activity (such as data-sharing) occurs outside that licence, then the legitimacy
activity is open to challenge even if it takes place within an established
legal framework.’
Digital Surveillance and Other Novel Technologies
I have already noted that with the adoption by the public sector of big data
techniques and other new data technologies, the impacts
on privacy are
dynamic and changing.
An activity that receives special attention in the privacy literature is
surveillance, which can be defined as a systematic, focused
and routine pursuit
of a person or their data in order to manage, protect, direct or influence
Surveillance strongly engages the social value of privacy because its harms may
extend beyond the individual to have a chilling effect
Surveillance is generally presented as a security measure but depending on the
mechanism, it may interfere with the intellectual
and informational privacy of
individuals and the power of free
Given that the focus of this article is public sector data sharing,
references to surveillance include but are not limited to the
common use of the
term to describe tracking or monitoring people’s movements or
communications. As described above, public
sector data sharing can facilitate
the development of a full digital picture of an
individual.
Such data amalgamation
‘collapses the divides that all people create between different areas of
their lives ... [and]
represents a loss of control of our carefully managed
identities’.
The bringing together
of multiple public sector datasets may allow insight into a data
subject’s conduct and preferences and may facilitate predictive
analytics around future behaviour. It does not seem far-fetched
to describe this
as a form of
digital surveillance.
In adopting such new privacy-impacting technologies, states arguably have an
obligation to carefully consider and provide for the
application of privacy
rights including by appropriately balancing opacity and transparency elements.
The European Court of Human
Rights considered that a particular duty applied to
European jurisdictions in such cases: ‘any state claiming a pioneer role
in the development of new technologies bears special responsibility for striking
the right balance in this
With this normative framework in mind, I move now to consider
application of the legal framework in Victoria.
Applying the
Victorian Charter
Assessing Victorian information privacy law through the lens of transparency
and opacity tools, almost all of the legislative protection
appears closely
aligned to transparent data protection, rather than to opaque privacy
protection. Like the
is best characterised
as a transparency tool, allowing the sharing of personal information if certain
requirements are met.
Records Act 2001
Victorian Data Sharing Act 2017
sector-specific data sharing provisions have a similar
offer some opacity protection to ‘sensitive
information’, as defined.
protection can also be found in: the
Surveillance Devices Act 1999
which prevents the use of surveillance devices in private
various secrecy provisions;
potentially in
Victorian Charter
To return to the house analogy, Victorian information privacy legislation
is largely a transparent greenhouse, with some isolated opaque sections
provided by the legislative protection of sensitive information, restrictions
on the use of surveillance devices in private spaces
and secrecy
provisions.
This means that relevant
legal arguments generally concern the transparency question of
relevant information should be used or disclosed, rather than the opacity
question of
it should be used or disclosed.
In this context,
Victorian Charter
has potential to offer
considerable utility as a principles-level overlay in relation to privacy
interferences, especially those
arising from new data technologies. In essence,
it could provide an opaque roof on the greenhouse, prohibiting or significantly
certain novel uses of personal and private information, including the
burgeoning use of artificial intelligence tools and applications.
However, in the 15 years since it became fully operational,
Victorian Charter
has had a minimal impact on protecting privacy rights
in Victoria. Paterson comments that the
right is one of the most frequently
Victorian Charter
rights, but ‘it has not had a
substantial impact because of the very small number of cases where it has played
a determinative
role in relation to the outcome of
litigation’.
She explains that this is frequently because the relevant conduct is not
considered unlawful or arbitrary.
internal limitations (‘unlawfully’ and ‘arbitrarily’)
are effectively carve-outs in protection, weakening
the opacity protection of
the privacy right — if an interference is considered to be both
non-arbitrary and lawful,
has no real operation. In addition, the applicant
bears the onus of proving that the relevant conduct was arbitrary or unlawful
this is often a difficult task, especially given that pertinent evidence
may be in the sole possession of the public
The application and practical
impact of these limitations is an important element of the balance between
opacity and transparency.
‘Arbitrarily’ Internal Limitation
In relation to the ‘arbitrarily’ limitation, the
Explanatory Memorandum expressed an intention that
interpreted consistently with ‘the existing information privacy and health
records framework in Victoria to the extent that
it protects against arbitrary
interferences’.
The intention
seems to be that an interference permitted by the existing transparency-focused
data protection framework would not be considered arbitrary within the
The recent Victorian Court of Appeal case of
Thompson v Minogue
’) concerned an application brought against prison
authorities by a Victorian prisoner for urine testing and strip
The Court confirmed that
‘arbitrarily’ has a broad meaning, taken from international human
rights law, such that an arbitrary
interference is ‘one which is
capricious, or has resulted from conduct which is unpredictable, unjust or
unreasonable in the
of not being proportionate to the legitimate aim
strip searches were found to be arbitrary because even though they were not
capricious, unpredictable or unjust, they were not
proportionate to a legitimate
aim and were ultimately incompatible with the applicant’s privacy
‘Unlawfully’ Internal Limitation
In relation to the construction of ‘unlawfully’ in
United Nations
Human Rights Committee noted in its commentary on the very similar art 17 of
that a law limiting the privacy right should ideally meet
certain minimum requirements of precision and clarity: ‘relevant
legislation must specify in detail the precise circumstances in which such
interferences may be
permitted’.
However, such an
approach has not been clearly adopted by the Victorian judiciary.
Re Kracke and Mental Health Review Board
was an early Victorian Civil and Administrative Tribunal case in which Bell J
sought to apply relevant international jurisprudence
to construe
‘unlawfully’ in the
Victorian Charter
focused most heavily on the ‘under law’ requirement of the general
limitations clause in
Victorian Charter
, Bell J drew a
parallel between that requirement and the references to unlawfulness elsewhere
Victorian Charter
, indicating that the same
considerations applied in each case.
Honour summarised the applicable European cases on art 8 of the
Malone v United
Olsson v Sweden
Having regard to
, it should be noted that these cases relate
to a textually different provision and a different jurisprudential framework,
potentially
giving them lower weight in a Victorian
concerned the application of art 8 of the
wiretapping.
In considering whether the
wiretapping was ‘in accordance with the law’, the
European Court of Human Rights held that ‘the law must indicate the
scope of any such discretion conferred on the competent
authorities and the
manner of its exercise with sufficient clarity ... to give the individual
adequate protection against arbitrary
interference’
also considered art 8 of the
with approval and summarising the requirements of ‘in
accordance with the law’ as requiring precision, quality of law
clarity of scope of any discretion.
These European authorities cited in
are now relatively dated, but
their approach to lawfulness remains current. The 2021 case of
concerned a complaint about state
surveillance.
On the question of lawfulness in art 8 of the
, the European Court of
Human Rights reiterated its ‘settled’ case law, applying the same
requirements outlined
Turning to New Zealand, Bell J cited the approach to lawfulness taken by
McGrath J in applying the
New Zealand Bill of Rights Act 1990
’) in the Supreme Court of New Zealand case of
To be prescribed by law, limits must be identifiable and expressed with
sufficient precision ... The limits must be neither ad hoc
nor arbitrary and
their nature and consequences must be clear, although the consequences need not
be foreseeable with absolute
This approach
also remains settled law in New Zealand. The High Court of New Zealand case of
Borrowdale v Director-General of Health
concerned the legality of the
exercise of public health powers during the COVID-19
a joint judgment, the Court accepted that the restrictive measures imposed by
government interfered with human rights under
but inquired whether
they were ‘prescribed by law’; applying the above passage from
, the Court established the measures were not ‘prescribed by
, Bell J summarised these principles as follows: ‘the
law concerned must be adequately accessible, not uncertain or vague and
sufficiently precise to enable people to predict its application and foresee its
consequences to a reasonable
For several years, this
approach was considered by
Victorian Charter
commentators to form part of
the applicable Victorian jurisprudence around s 13
unlawfulness.
But broader judicial support for this approach is rather thin, and recent
decisions appear to have diverged from
In the 2021 case of
HJ v Independent Broad-Based Anti-Corruption
’), the Victorian Court of Appeal
addressed the construction of
‘unlawfully’ by simply stating that it means infringing an
applicable law.
The case concerned
Independent Broad-Based Anti-Corruption
Commission (‘IBAC’) under
specific legislative provisions and search
The applicants conceded that
IBAC had not acted unlawfully and the s 13 submissions turned instead on whether
the action was arbitrary.
Accordingly,
the Court’s discussion of lawfulness was
This narrow approach to unlawfulness was followed in
relation to the ‘unlawfully’ limitation in s 13, the
Court cited
and indicated that the test for whether a restriction was
unlawful was simply this: ‘An “unlawful” interference
person’s privacy for the purposes of s 13(a) of the [
] is one which infringes an applicable
was no discussion of the
approach or the international and
comparative jurisprudence around the need for a positive law of adequate
quality. The
prisoner respondent conceded that the urine testing was lawful, but argued
that the strip searching was not.
Court rejected this argument, finding that the respondent had not discharged his
onus of proof in demonstrating that the strip
The effect of this failure to engage with the international and comparative
jurisprudence around the adequacy of laws is to significantly
restrict the scope
of protection offered by s 13. The implication of
is that there
is no need for Parliament to have considered the issue and supplied a legal
of adequate quality; the mere absence of an ‘applicable law’
prohibiting the
interference is adequate. This approach greatly expands the scope of the s 13
‘unlawfully’ limitation, without any of
the usual transparency
requirements of procedural protection or parliamentary accountability. It also
increases the
difficulty of an applicant’s task in discharging the onus of proof
— to prove that the conduct is unlawful they must identify
a specific law
prohibiting it, rather than simply establishing that the respondent’s
legislative basis is of inadequate quality
to limit the right. I have already
indicated that there are relatively few legislative provisions prohibiting the
use of personal
information;
is that an applicant would most likely need to prove a
contravention of the
or an opacity law before the conduct would be
considered unlawful for the purposes of s 13. This is such a challenging task
most applicants seeking to apply s 13 would be forced to prove instead that
the conduct
is arbitrary.
It is worth mentioning that this is not about statutory vagueness. The High
Court clearly established in
Brown v Tasmania
that, unlike in the US,
there is no doctrine of vagueness in Australian law that would invalidate a law
for lack of clarity alone.
argument under s 32(1) and
is not that a
law permitting interference with privacy might be invalidated for lack of
clarity, but that it might not be adequately clear and transparent
to restrict a
statutory right. In any event,
allows a statutory right to be
restricted by the mere absence of a law prohibiting the interference, which
accords the right very
little value. This approach is difficult to square with
the principle of legality’s operation at common law (which requires
clear expression of intention to
interfere with the right) and as codified by s 32(1) of the
approach also seems inconsistent with the
well-accepted view that human rights drafting is entitled to more generous
interpretation
than other legislation, in order to give full meaning to the
Applying the Privacy Right
Given the risks posed by new data uses and the duty of the public sector and
the courts to maintain a careful balance between opacity
and transparency
approaches, Victorian courts have taken a wrong turn, greatly undermining the
opacity protection of s 13. Without serious consideration
of the consequences of
such an approach, the
Court departed from the settled
‘human rights’ approach to lawfulness taken in comparable
that Victorian courts grapple with the practical
implications of this departure, especially given the accepted approach of
human rights in the ‘broadest possible
This is also true for
Queensland and ACT courts, where there is sparse jurisprudence on the meaning of
‘unlawfully’ and
Victorian authorities are likely to be highly
persuasive.
In discharging their s 38 obligation, I have already noted that
encourages public servants to take a pragmatic approach which need not be
closely tied to the latest
jurisprudence.
So it remains open in
their assessment of lawfulness to follow
rather than
and require a clear
legislative basis of adequate clarity and parliamentary
accountability.
This would more clearly
demonstrate a proper consideration of the privacy right than following
and would assist in upholding the government’s
social licence for data sharing. Such an approach would be particularly
appropriate when considering new data technologies associated with data
sharing, such as public sector digital surveillance of various kinds and big
data technologies including artificial intelligence initiatives.
Arguably, this
higher level of care is required to discharge the normative obligations
connected with the introduction of novel data
technologies.
Concluding Recommendations
Gellert and Gutwirth argue persuasively that one cannot assume that privacy
and its associated social goods will be adequately protected
solely by data
protection legislation focused on
transparency.
This has particular
relevance for Australian information privacy laws with their strong focus on
transparency tools. For Australians
to be protected against some of the harms
associated with new data technologies, a level of opacity protection will be
In Victoria and other jurisdictions with statutory human rights
protection, including at the federal level under a future Bill of
rights, this
could be supplied by an appropriately construed and applied statutory privacy
The meaning of ‘unlawfully’ in s 13 of the
appears not
to have been fully argued in
by reference to
international jurisprudence. That meant the Court in
did not clearly weigh the consequences of its approach, which
has the practical effect of reducing s 13 privacy protection by greatly
expanding the impact of its
internal limitations. I have already noted Paterson’s comment that the
practice, partly due to the courts’ approaches
to its internal
limitations.
In this age of big data
technologies, it would be unfortunate for these internal
limitations to be construed so broadly that the privacy right cannot provide
a necessary overlay of opacity protection.
The analysis of this article confirms Paterson’s observation that
‘it is time
to impose limitations on the extent to which other laws can override’
Her useful suggestion
is to emulate art 22(2)(b) of the
, which only allows such an
override where the overriding law provides suitable
protections.
Following that model would
require legislative amendment to the
Victorian Charter
, for which there
seems to be little appetite.
without such amendment, courts have considerable latitude to apply existing
principles of interpretation and avoid expanding
the internal limitations of s
13 such that they swallow up the right itself. Courts should also be alert to
giving effect to s 32(1)
Victorian Charter
by applying a codified
principle of
legality and not allowing statutory rights to be overridden by the broader
legislative framework, except where Parliament evinces clear intent to do so,
and accordingly takes democratic accountability for
the outcome.
I have already noted that s 31 of the
Victorian Charter
specific mechanism (with in-built protections) to override
In the absence of an
art 22(2)(b)
-style amendment, a s 31 override would be a more
transparent and democratic method to enable a new public sector data technology
or pattern of data sharing than the much less transparent use of expanded
‘lawfulness’ — provided ‘exceptional
circumstances’ exist within the meaning of s 31. But wherever possible,
clear articulation of an adequate legislative basis
for data use (with
appropriate protections) is preferable to any s 31 override. While the override
power may ensure data use does
not contravene the
Victorian Charter
articulation of a coherent legislative foundation ensures any data use complies
Victorian Charter
in a substantive sense, which is surely
preferable. It is also likely to be more palatable in a political sense than an
of human rights protections.
Public servants also have a duty to uphold democratic accountability and
social licence in their assessment of data sharing proposals.
They can most
readily achieve this outcome by seeking (wherever possible) to advocate for or
identify a clear legislative basis for
public sector data practices, especially
for data sharing arising from new data technologies such as artificial
intelligence.
Given the risk of harms to data subjects, courts and public servants in
Victoria, Queensland and the ACT would be well advised to be mindful of the
balance between opacity and transparency as they construe
constrained approach to the s 13 internal limitations will better protect the
residents of those jurisdictions
in an age of big data and intrusive data
practices, require more democratic accountability from Parliament, and assist
in supporting the social value of privacy and the social
licence around data
sharing. This would allow human rights legislation to truly act as an extra
layer of protection, potentially
filling existing gaps in the information
legislative framework and futureproofing it against other deficits.
* PhD candidate at Deakin University and Head of Data Sharing at the
Department of Transport and Planning, Victoria, overseeing driver
and vehicle
data. The views expressed in this article are my own and not necessarily those
of the Department. I wish to thank my
supervisory
team of Shiri Krebs, Matthew Groves and Bruce Chen for their ongoing support
and valuable input, and Dan Meagher, Ben Saunders, Jake
Goldenfein and the
anonymous reviewers for their helpful comments.
See generally Brad Brown, Michael Chui
and James Manyika, ‘Are You Ready for the Era of “Big
Data”?’ [2011]
McKinsey Quarterly
Department of the Prime Minister and
Australian Data Strategy: The Australian
Government’s Whole-of-Economy Vision for Data
(Report, 2021) 17
<https://www.finance.gov.au/sites/default/files/2022-10/australian-data-strategy.pdf>.
Victorian Government, ‘Victorian
Public Sector Data Sharing Policy’,
(Web Page, 14 September
<https://www.data.vic.gov.au/victorian-public-sector-data-sharing-policy>,
archived at <https://perma.cc/AJS6-L3D8>.
Productivity Commission (Cth),
Availability and Use
(Inquiry Report No 82, 31 March 2017) 117–18
https://www.pc.gov.au/inquiries/completed/data-access/report/data-access.p‌df
archived at <https://perma.cc/XC3J-ZX8P>.
See Moira Paterson and Maeve McDonagh,
‘Data Protection in an Era of Big Data: The Challenges Posed by Big
Personal Data’
[2018] MonashULawRw 1
(2018) 44(1)
Monash University Law Review
Office of the Australian Information
Commissioner,
Data Breach Preparation and Response: A Guide to Managing Data
Breaches in Accordance with the
July 2019) 8 <
https://www.oaic.gov.au/__data/assets/pdf_file/0017/1691/data-breach-preparation-and-response.pdf
archived at <https://perma.cc/QQ3A-E6DR>.
See, eg, Kate Galloway, ‘Big Data,
Government, Privacy and Human Rights’ in Paula Gerber and Melissa Castan
Critical Perspectives on Human Rights Law in Australia
Reuters, 2021) vol 2, 357, 359–61.
Australian Privacy Principles
Protection Act 2014
(Vic) sch 1 (‘
Information Privacy
(definition of ‘personal information’) (‘
(definition of ‘personal information’) (‘
See Moira Paterson, ‘The Uses of
AI in Government Decision-Making: Identifying the Legal Gaps in Australia’
(2020) 89(4)
Mississippi Law Journal
, 660–1 (‘The Uses of
See Inge Graef and Bart van der Sloot,
‘Collective Data Harms at the Crossroads of Data
Protection and Competition Law: Moving beyond Individual Empowerment’
(2022) 33(4)
European Business Law Review
Paterson, ‘The Uses of AI’
) 658–61, 664–5.
See generally Australian Human Rights
Commission,
Free & Equal: A
Human Rights Act
for Australia
Paper, December 2022). In March 2023, the Commonwealth Attorney-General
initiated a parliamentary inquiry into the adequacy
of the Australian human
rights framework, to be reported by March 2024: ‘Inquiry into
Australia’s Human Rights Framework’,
Parliament of Australia
<https://www.aph.gov.au/Parliamentary_Business/Committees/Joint/Human_Rights/HumanRightsFramework>,
<http‌s:/‌‌‌/‌‌perma.‌‌‌‌‌‌cc/8K‌X9-V9KG>.
Galloway (n
) argues that a legal right to privacy is
essential to protect Australians against harms from government use of big data,
that such legislation could provide a foundational privacy standard
which would be a ‘technology-neutral approach to upholding
rights to data protection, and therefore protection of individuals
themselves’: at 378. See also at 357–8.
See Priscilla M Regan,
Legislating
(University of North
Carolina Press, 1995) 5–7 (‘
Legislating Privacy
Paterson and McDonagh (n
Office of the Australian Information
Commissioner,
Guide to Data Analytics and the Australian Privacy
(Guide, March 2018) 6 <
https://www.oaic.gov.au/privacy/guidance-and-advice?a=3086
archived at <https://perma.cc/JG4T-ALFE> (‘
Guide to Data
David Gewirtz, ‘Volume,
Velocity, and Variety: Understanding the Three V’s of Big Data’,
(Web Page, 21 March 2018)
<https://www.zdnet.com/article/volume-velocity-and-vari‌ety‌-understanding-the-three-vs-of-big-data/>,
archived at <https://perma.cc/S2MQ-XLYC>.
Paterson and McDonagh (n
Regulation (EU) 2016/679 of the
European Parliament and of the Council of 27 April 2016 on the Protection of
Natural Persons with
Regard to the Processing of Personal Data and on the
Free Movement of Such Data, and Repealing Directive 95/46/EC (General Data
Regulation)
[2016] OJ L 119/1 art 4(1) (‘
) refers to a
‘data subject’ as ‘an identified or identifiable natural
person’ to whom any information relates.
Organization for Economic Co-Operation
and Development,
Data-Driven Innovation:
Big Data for Growth and Well-Being
(Report, 2015) 17
<https://read.oecd-ilibrary.org/science-and-technology/data-driven-innovation_9789264229358-en#page1>,
https://per‌ma‌‌.cc/Y35X-5ZSS
Data-Driven Innovation
Productivity Commission (Cth) (n
) 108–14. It is worth noting that
the Australian Productivity Commission’s methodology depended heavily on
stakeholder
submissions and interviews, not original inquiry: at 393.
Data-Driven Innovation
Office of the Australian Information
Commissioner,
Australian Community Attitudes to Privacy Survey 2020
(Report, September 2020) 27–8
<https://www.oaic.gov.au/engage-with-us/research/australian-community-attitudes-to-privacy-survey-2020-landing-page>,
archived at <https:‌‌/‌‌/perma.cc/N8PU-8DMH>.
Australian Competition and Consumer
Commission,
Digital Platforms Inquiry
(Final Report, June 2019)
384–93, 442–8
<https://www.accc.gov.au/system/files/Digital%20platforms%20inquiry%20-%20final%20report.pdf>,
archived at <https://perma.cc/SM3T-AUB7>.
Daniel J Solove, ‘A Taxonomy of
(2006) 154(3)
University of Pennsylvania Law Review
Ibid 488–9.
Paterson and McDonagh (n
) 3–4. See also
) s 6 (definition of
information’ paras (a)–(b)). For definitions of ‘data
integration’, ‘data matching’ and ‘data
Guide to Data Analytics
One notorious example concerns the
chain store Target, which accurately determined that a teenage girl was pregnant
based on her
purchase of certain products and then proceeded to send her coupons
for baby products. Her father was incensed and complained, but
later discovered
that Target was aware of her condition before he was: Charles Duhigg, ‘How
Companies Learn Your Secrets’
(16 February 2012)
The New York Times
Guide to Data Analytics
See, eg, Department of the Prime
Minister and Cabinet (n 2) 8; Services Australia,
Modernising Our Services
(Report, 23 November 2022) 4 <
https://www.servicesaustralia. gov.au/sites/default/files/2022-09/modernising-our-services.pdf
In relation to the United States public sector, it is said that
‘[c]itizens are accustomed to the experiences offered
by companies from
Amazon to Zillow and now want the same from governments’: Tony
D’Emidio et al, ‘The Public Sector
Gets Serious about Customer
Experience: 8 Things You Should Know about Customer Experience in the Public
Sector’ [2019] (3)
McKinsey Quarterly
See generally Bruce Baer Arnold,
‘I’ve Given Out My Medicare Number: How Worried Should I Be about
the Latest Optus Data
The Conversation
(online, 29
September 2022)
<https://theconversation.com/ive-given-out-my-medicare-number-how-worried-sho uld-i-be-about-the-latest-optus-data-breach-191575>,
archived at <https://perma.cc/X337-GENF>.
Clancy Yeates, ‘“A Gift to
Telstra”: Cyberattack To Hit Optus’ Reputation’,
(online, 30 September 2022)
<https://www.theage.com.au/business/companies/a-gift-to-telstra-cyberattack-to-hit-optus-reputation-20220928-p5blmq.html>,
archived at <https://perma.cc/N3HS-YY7W>.
See Galloway (n 8) 372.
Galloway (n 8) discusses these risks
in the context of aggregation of government data and elimination of silos: at
Public Records Act
(definition of ‘public office’),
For example, Victorian driver licence
records are required to be retained for 85 years: Keeper of Public Records
Retention and Disposal Authority for Records of Vehicle Registration
and Driver Licensing
(PROS 09/08 VAR 3, 23 December 2009) 14.
Data-Matching Program (Assistance
and Tax) Act 1990
‘Centrelink Data Matching
Activities’,
Services Australia
(Web Page, 23 October 2023) <
https://www.servicesaustralia.gov.au/centrelink-data-matching-activities
archived at <https://perma.cc/ST3P-674Z>.
Royal Commission into the Robodebt
(Report, 7 July 2023) vol 1, v, xxiv, xxix. See also David Braue,
‘Robodebt a “Massive Failure” of Government Automation:
Federal Court Slams Shameful Chapter in Welfare Legacy’,
Information Age
(online, 15 June 2021)
<https:‌‌‌‌//ia.acs.org.au/article/2021/robodebt-a--massive-failure--of-government-automation.html>.
The letters patent establishing the Royal Commission into the Robodebt Scheme
identifies the establishment, design and implementation
of the scheme as an
appropriate subject of the inquiry: Letters Patent for the Royal Commission into
the Robodebt Scheme from Mark
Dreyfus, Attorney-General to Catherine Ena Holmes,
18 August 2022, 2
<https://robodebt.royalcommission.gov.au/publications/letters-patent>,
archived at <https://perma.cc/R‌67L-JCYL>.
Adamantia Rachovitsa and Niclas
Johann, ‘The Human Rights Implications of the Use of AI in the Digital
Welfare State: Lessons
Learned from the Dutch
Human Rights Law Review
Netherlands Juristen Comité
voor de Mensenrechten v Netherlands
(Hague District Court,
No C/09/550982 / HA ZA 18-388, 5 February 2020) [6.7] <
https://uitspraken.rechtspraak.n‌l/#!/details?id=ECLI:NL:RBDHA:2020:1878
archived at <https://perma.cc/W2ST-H7SZ>, citing
Wet structuur
uitvoeringsorganisatie werk en inkomen
[Work and Income Implementation
Organisation Structure Act] (Netherlands) 29 November 2001, art 65, as at 9
October 2013. See generally
ibid for an explanation of the case and its
consequences.
Michael K McCall, Margaret M Skutsch
and Jordi Honey-Roses, ‘Surveillance in the COVID-19 Normal: Tracking,
Tracing, and Snooping’
(2021) 10(2)
International Journal of E-Planning
See, eg, Serena Seyfort,
‘Victorian Government Assures Public COVID-19 Contact Tracing Data Can
Only Be Shared in “Life
or Death Matters”’,
(online, 28 December 2021) <
https://www.9news.com.au/national/coronavirus-victoria-update-state-government-assure‌s-public-covid-19-contact-tracing-data-can-only-be-shared-in-life-or-death-matters/ae18c5a‌5‌-25ec-42ec-abcf-ef9b21ebd027
archived at <https://perma.cc/BGW4-YTX2>. See also ‘COVID-19
Check-In Apps and Privacy’,
Office of the Australian Information
Commissioner
<https://www.oaic.gov.au/privacy/your-privacy-rights/more-privacy-rights/cov‌id-19/covid-19-check-in-apps-and-privacy>,
archived at <https://perma.cc/8MZJ-F3N8>.
Jeremy Nadel, ‘AFP, Vic Police
and Illion Requested Victorian QR Code Data’,
(online, 13
December 2021)
<https://www.itnews.com.au/news/afp-vic-police-and-illion-request-victorian-qr-code-data-573905>,
archived at <https://perma.cc/V49Y-7EX8>.
Public Health and Wellbeing Act
div 8, as inserted by
Public Health and Wellbeing
Amendment (Pandemic Management) Act 2021
This amendment was made
as part of the Victorian government’s commitment to parliamentary
cross-benchers in securing an extension
of the pandemic state of emergency:
Daniel Andrews, Premier of Victoria, ‘Laws To Enshrine Safe and Clear
Pandemic Responses’
(Media Release, 26 October 2021)
<htt‌ps://www.premier.vic.gov.au/laws-enshrine-safe-and-clear-pandemic-respon‌ses>‌,
archived at <https://perma.cc/3DZH-2TUM>.
Productivity Commission (Cth) (n
Australian Law Reform Commission,
Serious Invasions of Privacy in the Digital Era
Report No 123, June 2014) 51 [3.50]
<https://www.alrc.gov.au/wp-content/uploads/2019/08‌/final_report_123_whole_report.pdf>,
archived at <https://perma.cc/7MB8-XE2V> (‘
Serious Invasions of
Ibid 51–3 [3.50].
Australian Human Rights Commission,
Human Rights and Technology
(Final Report, 1 March 2021) 119–20
<https://humanrights.gov.au/our-work/rights-and-freedoms/publications/hum‌a‌n-rights-and-technology-final-report-2021>,
archived at <https://perma.cc/2PQN-HJW‌8>.
Ibid 121–3.
Ibid 122 n 673, quoting
Commissioner v Telstra Corporation Ltd
[2017] FCAFC 4
(2017) 249 FCR 24
36 [63] (Kenny and Edelman JJ, Dowsett J agreeing at 25 [3]).
Australian Competition and Consumer
Commission (n
Taylor argues that extending privacy
protection to groups is essential to effectively protect
people from harm within a modern information society in which data relating
to multiple persons (group data) will be the data ‘that
fundamentally
reshapes the conditions under which future generations live and work’:
Mark J Taylor, ‘“Personal
Information” and Group Data under
(2020) 94(10)
Australian Law Journal
Paterson, ‘The Uses of AI’
) 658–60, 665.
Attorney-General’s Department
(Report, 2022) <
https://www.a‌g.gov.au/sites/default/files/2023-02/privacy-act-review-report_0.pdf
’). Recommendations include a proposed
broader definition of ‘personal information’ in s 6 of the
), replacing the
restrictive ‘about an identified individual’ with the broader
‘relates to an identified individual’:
) 23–7. However, the
) appears to contain
no proposals to extend privacy protection to groups rather than individuals,
move away from the focus on ‘purpose’
of use or limit legislative
overrides of privacy protection.
Maria O’Sullivan, ‘The
Review Report 2022: A Radical Review or Just a Re-Imagining?’
(2023) 51(1)
Australian Business Law Review
Australian Government,
Review Report
(Report, 28 September 2023) 2, 4
<https://www.ag.gov.au/sites/default/files/2023-09/government-response-pr‌ivacy-act-review-report.PDF>.
See also ibid 52.
[1937] HCA 45
(1937) 58 CLR 479
, 495–6 (Latham
CJ), 508 (Dixon J), 526–7 (McTiernan J).
(2001) 208 CLR 199
, 328 [335]. See
also at 248–9 [106]–[107] (Gummow and Hayne JJ, Gaudron J agreeing
at 231 [58]).
In the County Court of Victoria, Judge
Hampel found that the publication of the complainant’s personal
information by the Australian
Broadcasting Company constituted a tortious action
of invasion of privacy:
Doe v Australian Broadcasting Corporation
, [157]. A common law right of privacy was also identified in the
Queensland District Court case
Grosse v Purvis
(2003) Aust Torts Reports 81–706, 64187
[446] (Skoien J).
Farm Transparency International Ltd
v New South Wales
(2022) 403 ALR 1, 11 [39] (Kiefel CJ and Keane J),
22–3 [90] (Gageler J), 37–8 [159] (Gordon J), 55–6
[233]–[238]
(Edelman J).
See also Warren CJ’s comment that ‘the question of whether such a
[privacy] right exists at common law, and if so, its
scope, is yet to be settled
by the High Court or a superior court of record’:
WBM v Chief
Commissioner of Police
[2012] VSCA 159
(2012) 43 VR 446
, 465 [81] (Hansen JA agreeing at 475
[133]). For a brief discussion of the common law right, see Victorian Law Reform
Commission,
Surveillance in Public Places
(Final Report No 18, May 2010)
128–30 [7.7]–[7.15]; Australian Law Reform Commission,
Information: Australian Privacy Law and
(Final Report No 108, May 2008) vol 3, 2250–2
[74.61]–[74.69] <
https://www.a‌lrc.gov.au/wp-content/uploads/2019/08/108_vol3.pdf
archived at <https://perma.cc/9D77-EQHE>.
) 37 [4.4.1] n 207; Organization for
Economic Co-Operation and Development,
Guidelines on
the Protection of
(Guidelines, 23 September 1980)
<https://www.oecd-ilibrary.org/oecd-guidelines-on-t‌he-protection-of-privacy-and-transborder-flows-of-personal-data_5lmqcr2k94s8.pdf?>,
archived at <https://perma.cc/YK2V-DAWY> (‘
Guidelines on the
Protection of Privacy
) ss 6 (definitions of ‘APP
entity’ and ‘contracted service provider’), 6A(2), 6C(1), (3),
6D(1), (4)(e),
13(1), (3), 15. If a state government contractor is operating
under an outsourcing arrangement, it will usually be covered by the
) to the extent of that
arrangement, and by the
) for its internal business activities:
) ss 3 (definitions of
‘contracted service provider’ and ‘State contract’),
Information Privacy Act 2000
Information Privacy Act
’), as repealed by
s 126. See also Victoria,
Parliamentary Debates
, Legislative Assembly,
12 June 2014, 2106–9 (Robert Clark, Attorney-General). The data security
protections were added in part
to address issues identified by the Victorian
Auditor-General in a highly critical 2009 report which found that public sector
information
in Victoria was poorly protected with inadequate data sharing
practices: Victorian Auditor-General’s Office,
Maintaining the
Integrity and Confidentiality of Personal Information
(Parliamentary Paper
No 258 of 2006–09, November 2009)
vii–viii, 22–4
<https://www.audit.vic.gov.au/sites/default/files/20091125-Data-Integrity-Full-Report.pdf?>,
at <https://perma.cc/U4QS-CPH8>.
See John Howard, Prime Minister,
‘Privacy Legislation’ (Media Release, 21 March 1997)
<https://pmtranscripts.pmc.gov.au/sites/default/files/original/00010278.pdf>.
Information Privacy Act
) ss 5, 9(1);
) ss 1(a), (d), 13.
Information Privacy Act
Information Privacy
Information Privacy Principles
Information Privacy
) sch 1 cl 1.
Information Privacy Principles
Information Privacy
) sch 1 cl 2.
Information Privacy Principles
) cls 2.1(a)(i), 3, 4, 6, 10;
Information Privacy Act
sch 1 cls 2.1(a)(i), 3, 4, 6, 10.
) ss 84(1), 86.
See Office of the Victorian
Information Commissioner,
IPP 2: Use and Disclosure
(Guidelines,
ed, 14 November 2019) 4–5 [2.11]–[2.14]
<https://ovic.vic.gov.au/wp-content/uploads/20‌19/11/IPP-2-2019.B.pdf>,
archived at <https://perma.cc/7W6R-N3TM>.
) s 3 (definition of ‘personal
information’).
Mental Health and
Wellbeing Act 2022
Road Safety Act 1986
Marine Safety Act 2010
Judicial Proceedings
Reports Act 1958
Gambling Regulation Act 2003
Health Records Act 2001
Independent Broad-Based Anti-Corruption Commission Act 2011
Human Rights Act 2004
Human Rights Act 2019
Moira Paterson, ‘Privacy Rights
and Charter Rights’ in Matthew Groves and Colin Campbell (eds),
Australian Charters of Rights a Decade on
(Federation Press, 2017) 203,
Charter of Human Rights and
Responsibilities Act 2006
Victorian Charter
commenced in 2004, provided a legislative model for human rights legislation in
Australian jurisdictions: see endnote 3.
Explanatory Memorandum,
Human Rights and Responsibilities Bill 2006
(Vic) 1, 7 (‘Charter
Explanatory Memorandum’), discussing
International Covenant on Civil
and Political Rights
, opened for signature 16 December
1966, 999 UNTS 171
(entered into force 23 March 1976) (‘
Victorian Charter
Michael Brett Young,
Commitment to Culture: The 2015 Review of the Victorian
Charter of Human
Rights and Responsibilities Act 2006 (Parliamentary Paper No 77 of
September 2015) 22–3 (‘
2015 Review of the Victorian
’). The second reading speech stated that ‘[t]his bill
seeks to achieve a rights respecting culture across government
community’: Victoria,
Parliamentary Debates
, Legislative Assembly,
4 May 2006, 1295 (Rob Hulls, Attorney-General).
Victorian Charter
) Preamble.
Re Kracke and Mental
Health Review Board
(2009) 29 VAR 1, 125 [590]–[591] (Bell J)
Convention for the Protection of
Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms
, opened for
signature 4 November
1950, 213 UNTS 221
(entered into force 3 September 1953)
Thompson v Minogue
[2021] VSCA 358
, 316 [44] (Kyrou, McLeish and Niall JJA)
’). The unlawfulness must be independent of the
Victorian Charter
merely because of s 38:
Burgess v Director of Housing
[2014] VSC 648
[219] (Macaulay J).
Paterson, ‘Privacy Rights and
Charter Rights’ (n
Alistair Pound and Kylie Evans,
Annotated Victorian Charter of Rights
(Lawbook, 2
115 [13.40].
) 321 [74] (Kyrou, McLeish and Niall
Victorian Charter
) ss 31(3)–(4).
Ibid s 31(7). See also ss 43–5
), but note
that no such override provision exists in the
Julie Debeljak, ‘Of Parole and
Public Emergencies: Why the Victorian
Override Provision Should
Be Repealed’
[2022] UNSWLawJl 19
(2022) 45(2)
University of New South Wales Law Journal
Ibid 571 n 3. It is worth noting that
the two prisoner overrides arguably did not meet the
‘exceptional circumstances’ threshold and the sunset provision
was disapplied in both cases: at 593–4, 606, 610–11.
Review of the Victorian Charter
) recommended the repeal of s 31: at
Charter Explanatory Memorandum (n
(2011) 245 CLR 1
Ibid 50 [51].
Ibid 46 [43].
Bruce Chen, ‘Revisiting
Section 32(1) of the Victorian
: Strained Constructions and
Legislative Intention’
[2020] MonashULawRw 6
(2020) 46(1)
Monash University Law Review
[1994] HCA 15
(1994) 179 CLR 427
, 437 (Mason CJ,
Brennan, Gaudron and McHugh JJ, Deane and
Dawson JJ agreeing at 446).
[1987] HCA 12
(1987) 162 CLR 514
, 523, quoted in
Bruce Chen, ‘The Principle of
Legality and s 32(1) of the Victorian Charter: Is the Latter a Codification of
the Former?’
(2020) 31(4)
Public Law Review
, 448 (‘The
Principle of
Legality’); Robert French, ‘The Principle of Legality and
Legislative Intention’
(2019) 40(1)
Statute Law Review
Dan Meagher, ‘The Common Law
Principle of Legality in the Age of Rights’ (2011) 35(2)
Melbourne University Law Review
[1999] UKHL 33
[2000] 2 AC 115
Chen, ‘The Principle of
Legality’ (n
) 445. See, eg,
Nigro v Secretary
Department of Justice
[2013] VSCA 213
(2013) 41 VR 359
[85] (Redlich, Osborn and Priest JJA).
Chen, ‘The Principle of
Legality’ (n
) 450, 453.
) 36–7 [18]–[19] (emphasis
Ibid 89–90 [155]–[159].
Justice Gummow raised particular reservations about the application in Australia
of House of
Lords decisions under the
Human Rights Act 1998
(UK), given
the UK’s distinctly different legal framework: at 84 [146], 88 [151], 90
[2015] VSCA 197
(2015) 48 VR 129
, 189 [186]
’), discussing
) 37–8 [19]–[20]
(French CJ), 83–9 [146], 90 [159] (Gummow J).
) 36–7 [18] (French CJ).
‘Public authority’ is
defined in the
Victorian Charter
) to include any Victorian public servant
and a range of other bodies encompassing the Victorian public sector: at s
Note that under s 58(1) of the
), the obligation to
proceed compatibly with human rights applies to both acts and decisions. Under
Victorian Charter
applies only to actions; the conduct obligation for decisions is to ‘give
proper consideration to a
relevant human right’: at s 38(1).
[2010] VSC 310
(2010) 28 VR 141
, 184 [185].
See Paul Barnes et al, ‘The
Victorian Charter of Human Rights and Public Policy: An Exploration of
Decision-Making Processes’
(ANZSOG Work-Based Project Reports No 2,
November 2023) 12–16
<https://anzsog.edu.au/app/uploads/2023/11/WPB2-Barnes-et-al-2022-FINA​L.pdf>,
archived at <https://perma.cc/5974-JLJU>. No particular format is required
Victorian Charter
assessment; agencies may develop it as a memo, a briefing note, or a legal
advice: see
PJB v Melbourne Health
[2011] VSC 327
(2011) 39 VR 373
, 442 [311] (Bell J)
If the conduct is unlawful, it
cannot be excused on the basis that it is reasonable; the balancing under s 7(2)
only applies if the
318–19 [58] (Kyrou, McLeish and Niall JJA).
There is a guide and template for
(Guide, April 2021)
<https://ovic.vic.gov.au/privacy/privacy-impact-assessment/>,
archived at <https://perma.cc/92L2-WKS3>.
Galloway (n
) 365, citing Julie E Cohen, ‘What
(2013) 126(7)
Harvard Law Review
Neil M Richards, ‘The Dangers
of Surveillance’
(2013) 126(7)
Harvard Law Review
1945–6; Volker Boehme-Neßler, ‘Privacy: A Matter of
Democracy’ (2016) 6(3)
International Data Privacy Law
227–8; Jeffrey H Reiman, ‘Privacy, Intimacy, and Personhood’
(1976) 6(1)
Philosophy and Public Affairs
Helen Nissenbaum,
Context: Technology, Policy, and the Integrity of Social Life
(Stanford Law Books, 2009) 86–7, citing Regan,
Legislating
). An example of state
support for privacy protection is the secret ballot, which was initially
controversial but is now accepted
as a key element of citizen participation in
democracy: Annabelle Lever,
(Routledge, 2012) 23–4.
Urs Gasser, ‘Recoding Privacy
Law: Reflections on the Future Relationship among Law, Technology, and
(2016) 130(2)
Harvard Law Review Forum
Oliver Diggelmann and Maria Nicole
Cleis, ‘How the Right to Privacy Became a Human Right’
(2014) 14(3)
Human Rights Law Review
Samuel D Warren and Louis D
Brandeis, ‘The Right to Privacy’ (1890) 4(5)
Harvard Law
As an example, the Fourth Amendment
United States
Constitution
emerged in response to the impacts of
‘general warrants’ in England and the new American colonies, which
allowed the
state to search private property without probable cause or
specificity: Priscilla H Machado Zotti,
Injustice for All: Mapp vs Ohio and
the Fourth Amendment
, ed David A Shultz (Peter Lang, 2005) 50–60.
Megan Richardson,
Introduction to Privacy Law
(Edward Elgar Publishing, 2020) 12.
Solove, ‘A Taxonomy of
Raphaël Gellert and Serge
Gutwirth, ‘Beyond Accountability, the Return to Privacy?’ in Daniel
Guagnin et al (eds),
Managing Privacy through Accountability
Macmillan, 2012) 261, 261.
James Rachels, ‘Why Privacy
Is Important’ (1975) 4(4)
Philosophy and Public Affairs
Robert S Gerstein, ‘Intimacy
and Privacy’ (1978) 89(1)
Alan F Westin,
(Atheneum, 1967) 7.
Roger Clarke, ‘Privacy and
Social Media: An Analytical Framework’ (2014) 23(1)
Journal of Law,
Information and Science
See, eg, Judith Jarvis Thomson,
‘The Right to Privacy’ (1975) 4(4)
Philosophy and Public
Catharine A MacKinnon,
Feminist Theory of the State
(Harvard University Press, 1989)
Bert-Jaap Koops et al, ‘A
Typology of Privacy’
(2017) 38(2)
University of Pennsylvania Journal of
International Law
Megan Richardson, ‘A Common
Law of Privacy?’ [2021] (March)
Singapore Journal of Legal Studies
Prince Albert v Strange
[1849] EngR 669
(1849) 1 Mac & G 25
; 41 ER 1171, 1178 (Cottenham LC).
Warren and Brandeis (n
of Sussex v Associated Newspapers Ltd
[2021] EWHC 273
[2021] 4 WLR 35
, [170] (Warby J), affd
Duchess of Sussex v Associated Newspapers Ltd
[2022] 4 WLR 81
[104]–[106] (Vos MR, Sharp P agreeing at [107], Bean LJ agreeing at
Universal Declaration of Human
, GA Res 217A (III), UN GAOR, UN Doc A/810 (10 December 1948).
Ibid art 12;
Paul De Hert and Serge Gutwirth,
‘Privacy, Data Protection and Law Enforcement: Opacity of the Individual
and Transparency
of Power’ in Erik Claes, Antony Duff and Serge Gutwirth
(Intersentia, 2006) 61,
Guidelines on the Protection of
Justice Michael Kirby,
‘Privacy Protection, a New Beginning: OECD Principles 20 Years on’
(1999) 6(3)
De Hert and Gutwirth (n
See above n
and accompanying text.
) s 6 (definition of ‘sensitive
information’);
Australian Privacy Principles
Information Privacy
) cl 10.1. The
definition of ‘sensitive information’ is set out at the beginning of
Information Privacy Principles
Serious Invasions of Privacy
) 30 [2.7];
Director, Transport Safety Victoria
[2016] VSC 285
(2016) 260 IR 327
, 345 [67] (Bell J)
De Hert and Gutwirth (n
Charter of Fundamental Rights of
the European Union
[2000] OJ C 364/1, art 8. Within the European Union, data
protection was legislated in the
Directive 95/46/EC of the European
Parliament and of the Council of 24 October 1995 on the Protection of
Individuals with Regard to the Processing of Personal Data and
on the Free
Movement of Such Data
[1995] OJ L 281/31. This was replaced by the
) for all European
Union member states effective on 25 May 2018: at art 94.
European Court of Human Rights,
Guide to the Case-Law of the European Court of
Human Rights: Data Protection
(Report, 31 August 2022) 31 [123]
<https://echr.coe.int/Docum‌e‌‌nts/‌‌‌Guide_Data_protection_ENG.pdf>,
archived at <https://perma.cc/Y4T2-4X6K>.
Gellert and Gutwirth (n
) 268. In the UK, the courts consider it
settled law that art 8
application where ‘the person in question had a reasonable
expectation of privacy’:
Catt v Commissioner of Police of the
[2012] HRLR 23
605 [24] (Gross LJ, Irwin J agreeing at 615 [68]), quoting
Campbell v MGN
[2004] UKHL 22
[2004] 2 AC 457
, 466 [21] (Lord Nicholls). See also
R v Association
of Chief Police Officers of England, Wales and Northern Ireland
[2015] UKSC 9
, 1078 [4] (Lord Sumption JSC, Lord Neuberger PSC agreeing).
De Hert and Gutwirth (n
) 86–9. It is not clear that this
critique continues to hold as strongly, given more recent cases in which the
Court has recognised
a contravention of art 8
) because a given use was not necessary
in a democratic society. For example,
Catt v United Kingdom
(2019) 69 EHRR 7
concerned the retention of footage of
the nonagenarian applicant at various peace protests: at 181–2
[5]–[6]. The Strasbourg Court
recognised the police had a legitimate aim for the collection of the footage
(though it expressed concern about the ambiguity of the
legal basis), but went
on to hold that the retention of the footage was not ‘necessary in a
democratic society’ and violated
art 8 of the
) 200 [107], 200–4
[109]–[128].
De Hert and Gutwirth (n
) may be considered to give some support
for the application of the privacy right to personal data, but this is
complicated by the
fact that neither party filed to bring the matter under the
Victorian Charter
— the case was ultimately decided by reference to the
Information Privacy Act
344 [62], 345 [65], 364 [174]
(Bell J). See also Victorian Equal Opportunity and Human Rights Commission,
The Charter of Human Rights and Responsibilities: A Guide for Victorian
Public Sector Workers
ed, June 2019) 30
<https://www.humanrights.vic.gov.au/static/e5f7d882b4ac4082403ad0f57606369c/Resource-Responsibilities-VPS_Charter_Guide.pdf>,
archived at <https://perma.cc/A97H-N8B2>. This guide for public sector
workers indicates a range of matters that would be covered
Victorian Charter
See, eg, Ferdinand David Schoeman,
, ed Douglas MacLean (Cambridge University
Press, 1992) 1–2; Regan,
Legislating Privacy
) 1–5. Schoeman and Regan were
among the first to focus specifically on the social elements of privacy:
Priscilla M Regan, ‘Privacy
and the Common Good: Revisited’ in Beate
Roessler and Dorota Mokrosinska (eds),
Social Dimensions of Privacy:
Interdisciplinary Perspectives
(Cambridge University Press, 2015) 50,
Julie E Cohen, ‘Examined
Lives: Informational Privacy and the Subject as Object’
(2000) 52(5)
Stanford Law Review
, 1427–8 (‘Examined
Gellert and Gutwirth (n
Galloway (n
) 365, citing Cohen, ‘What Privacy
) 1906. See also
comment that ‘at the heart of concerns about government use of big data
is the intrusion of government into the lives of the
individual beyond
boundaries traditionally accepted in a
liberal democracy’: Galloway (n
See Daniel J Solove,
Understanding Privacy
(Harvard University Press, 2009) 99; Nissenbaum (n
) 81–2, 176–7.
Dorota Mokrosinska, ‘Privacy
and Autonomy: On Some Misconceptions concerning the
Political Dimensions of Privacy’
(2018) 37(2)
Law and Philosophy
Paterson and McDonagh (n
) 7, 14–15.
Stefano Rodotà, ‘Data
Protection as a Fundamental Right’ in Serge Gutwirth et al (eds),
Reinventing Data Protection?
(Springer, 2009) 77, 78 (citations
Antoinette Rouvroy and Yves
Poullet, ‘The Right to Informational Self-Determination and the Value of
Self-Development: Reassessing
the Importance of Privacy for Democracy’ in
Serge Gutwirth et al (eds),
Reinventing Data Protection?
(Springer, 2009)
Gellert and Gutwirth (n
Graef and van der Sloot (n
Social contract theory has a long
history, focusing on the hypothetical agreement between citizens in a
well-ordered society around
the kind of society they wish to live in: Fred
D’Agostino, Gerald Gaus and John Thrasher, ‘Contemporary Approaches
the Social Contract’,
Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy
Page, 27 September 2021)
<https://plato.stanford.edu/entries/contractarianism-contemporary/>,
archived at <https://perma.cc/K8B4-J7PB>.
Melanie Davies,
‘Understanding the Social Licence To Operate’,
University Law Futures Centre Blog
(Blog Post, 3 August 2021)
<https://blogs.griffith.edu.au/law-futures-centre/2021/08/03/understanding-the-social-licence-to-operate/>,
archived at
<http‌s‍‍‌:/‌‍‌/‌‍per‌ma.c‌‌c/97RB-45VV>.
See, eg, Productivity Commission
) for a discussion of social
licence in connection with public sector data sharing: at 177–80.
Ibid 177–80.
Pam Carter, Graeme T Laurie and
Mary Dixon-Woods, ‘The Social Licence for Research:
Ran into Trouble’ (2015) 41(5)
Medical Ethics
Productivity Commission (Cth) (n
Bernadette Richards and James
Scheibner, ‘Health Technology and Big Data: Social Licence, Trust and the
(2022) 29(2)
Journal of Law and Medicine
Ibid 389–90.
See above Part II(B).
Melissa de Zwart, Sal Humphreys and
Beatrix van Dissel, ‘Surveillance, Big Data and Democracy: Lessons for
Australia from the
[2014] UNSWLawJl 27
(2014) 37(2)
University of New South
Wales Law Journal
, 714, quoting David Lyon,
Surveillance Studies: An
(Polity Press, 2007) 14.
Solove, ‘A Taxonomy of
) 488. See generally
Jonathon W Penney, ‘Chilling Effects: Online Surveillance and Wikipedia
(2016) 31(1)
Berkeley Technology Law Journal
Richards (n
) 1944–6; Cohen, ‘Examined
See above Part II(A).
de Zwart, Humphreys and van Dissel
S v United Kingdom
Eur Court HR 167, 205 [112]. The Court made these comments in relation to the
novel use of DNA technologies by UK law enforcement
Information Privacy
) cl 2.1(g);
Australian Privacy Principles
See above n
and accompanying text.
See above n
Surveillance Devices Act 1999
Surveillance Devices Act
See above n
Surveillance Devices Act
Secrecy provisions tend to have a
very narrow scope and apply criminal penalties to the
disclosure of specific information: see, eg,
Judicial Proceedings Reports
Gambling Regulation Act 2003
Health Records Act 2001
Independent
Broad-Based Anti-Corruption Commission Act 2011
Paterson, ‘Privacy Rights and
Charter Rights’ (n
also at 213, 222, discussing
) 395 [85] (Bell J), and
DPP (Vic) v
[2014] VSC 52
(2014) 44 VR 526
, 564 [132] (Bell J) (‘
Paterson, ‘Privacy Rights and
Charter Rights’ (n
) 318 [57] (Kyrou, McLeish and Niall
JJA). The Victorian Court of Appeal noted that the evidence necessary to
establish that an interference
is arbitrary or unlawful may be in the sole
knowledge of the public authority, in which case the applicant may discharge the
by pointing to objective circumstances which give rise to such an
inference: at 316 [47].
Charter Explanatory Memorandum (n
) 306 [1]–[5] (Kyrou, McLeish and
Niall JJA).
Ibid 318 [55]. The Court added that
an assessment of whether the conduct was arbitrary does not require
consideration of the
elements, just a ‘broad and general
assessment’ of whether the interference goes beyond what is reasonably
to achieve the legitimate purpose: at 318 [56].
Ibid 387–8 [317]–[318],
Human Rights Committee,
‘General Comment Number 16: Article 17
(Right to Privacy)’ in
Compilation of General Comments and General Recommendations Adopted by Human
Rights Treaty Bodies
, UN Doc HRI/GEN/1/Rev.9 (27 May 2008) vol 1, 192
) 154 [746].
[178]–[181].
(1984) 82 Eur Court HR (ser A)
(1988) 130 Eur Court HR (ser A)
) 36–7 [18]–[19] (French CJ),
89 [155] (Gummow J).
) 10–11 [12]–[18], 30
Ibid 33 [68].
) 30 [61], citing ibid 32 [67].
(European Court of Human Rights,
Chamber, Application No 58361/12, 20 July 2021)
2–4 [5]–[17].
30 [151]. This approach
was affirmed in
Haščák v Slovakia
(European Court of
Human Rights, Chamber, Application No
23 June 2022) 17
[87], [89].
[2007] 3 NZLR 1
62 [180], cited in
[2020] NZHC 2090
[2020] 2 NZLR 864
[5]–[7] (Thomas, Venning and Ellis JJ) (‘
Health Act 1956
) 908 [200], 912 [225]. Mr Borrowdale
was unsuccessful with several causes of action and appealed the decision, but
the Crown did
not cross-appeal on this point:
Borrowdale v Director-General of Health
[2021] NZCA 520
[2022] 2 NZLR 356
(Collins J).
) 154 [744].
Paterson observes that ‘[i]n
order to qualify as law, however, a rule must be both accessible and
sufficiently precise “to
enable an individual to regulate his or her
conduct accordingly”’:
Paterson, ‘Privacy Rights and Charter Rights’ (n
) 211, quoting Human Rights Committee,
General Comment No 34: Article 19 (Freedoms of Opinion and Expression)
sess, UN Doc CCPR/C/GC/34 (12 September 2011) 6–7 [25].
See also Pound and Evans (n
[13.40]. It is relevant to note the consistent language used in relation to the
s 13 privacy right in many statements of compatibility
submitted to Victorian
Parliament that an interference ‘will be lawful if it is permitted by a
law which is precise and appropriately
circumscribed’: see, eg, Victoria,
Parliamentary Debates
, Legislative Assembly, 6 March 2024, 716 (Lily
D’Ambrosio); Victoria,
Parliamentary Debates
, Legislative Council,
22 February 2024, 524–5 (Ingrid Stitt); Victoria,
Parliamentary
, Legislative Assembly, 8 February 2024, 224 (Anthony Carbines);
Parliamentary Debates
, Legislative Assembly, 7 February 2024,
114 (Ben Carroll).
Most citations of Bell J’s
comments on lawfulness in
) are by Bell J himself: see, eg,
Director of Housing and Sudi
[2010] VCAT 328
(2010) 33 VAR 139
[63]–[68] (Bell J);
396 [91] (Bell J);
) 570 [152] (Bell J). But see
Children v Minister for Families and Children [No 2]
[2017] VSC 251
(2017) 52 VR 441
[201] (John Dixon J).
[2021] VSCA 200
(2021) 64 VR 270
, 305 [152] (Beach,
Kyrou and Kaye JJA).
Ibid 272 [2].
Ibid 302 [139], 311 [177].
Ibid 308 [165].
) 317 [49] (Kyrou, McLeish and Niall
JJA), citing ibid 305 [152].
) 360 [214] (Kyrou, McLeish and Niall
Ibid 392 [332]–[333].
Part III(A).
(2017) 261 CLR 328, 373 [149]
(Kiefel CJ, Bell and Keane JJ).
Certain Children v Minister for
Families and Children
[2016] VSC 796
(2016) 51 VR 473
, 496 [143] (Garde J), quoting
Application under the Major Crimes (Investigative Powers) Act 2004
[2009] VSC 381
, 434 [80] (Warren CJ), and
De Bruyn v Victorian Institute of Forensic
Mental Health
[2016] VSC 111
(2016) 48 VR 647
, 691 [126] (Riordan J).
See, eg, the recent Queensland
Industrial Relations Commission case where O’Connor V-P cited only
Victorian authorities on
lawfulness and concluded there was no unlawful
interference:
Hunt v Department of Agriculture and Fisheries
[2022] QIRC 162
, [168]–[171].
See above n
and accompanying text.
It appears that some Victorian
public servants are already following this approach when drafting statements of
compatibility under
s 28 of the
Victorian Charter
), because it is
common for the wording in relation to the privacy right to reference the
adequacy of the legal basis: see above n
Gellert and Gutwirth (n
See above n
and accompanying text.
Paterson, ‘The Uses of
Ibid. Under the
), the overriding law must be one
‘to which the controller is subject and which also lays down suitable
measures to safeguard
the data subject’s rights and freedoms and
legitimate interests’: at art 22(2)(b).
Apart from some minor amendments to
definitions, notes, pronouns and process, the
Victorian Charter
) has not yet had any significant
amendment — not even to implement the recommendations of the mandated
2015 Review of the
Victorian Charter
Victorian Charter
) endnote 2.
See above nn 94–5 and
accompanying text.
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (385 KB)
PDF format (413 KB)
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter