URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/journals/UMonashLRS/2009/14.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 15:42:21
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Ludlow, K --- "The Readiness of Australian Food Regulation for the use of Nanotechnology in Food and Food Packaging" [2009] UMonashLRS 14
The Readiness of Australian Food Regulation for the use of
Nanotechnology in Food and Food Packaging
Introduction
Food regulations address a multifaceted subject
matter. Beyond whole foods, such as fruit, vegetables, meat and milk, there are
ingredients in processed foods, additives, food packaging and other
materials in contact with food. Whilst it seems that nanotechnology
has not yet
altered any whole foods, other aspects of food preparation are already the
subject of nanotechnology development, with
the so-called ‘nanofood’
market having been predicted to reach over US$20 billion dollars by
nanotechnology is predicted by some to have a major impact on consumers’
and by others
to transform the entire food
though, have questioned the effects of nanotechnology on foods and human
question arises of whether Australian food regulations are ready for
nanotechnology use by the food industry. This article considers
that issue.
The Australian food regulator, Food Standards Australia New Zealand (FSANZ), has
moved from considering that ‘[n]anotechnology
has not yet become a
assuring the public that it will monitor research developments around the world
continue to ensure the safety of food is rigorously assessed through
the application of the current provisions of the Code and will
make adjustments
to the regulatory framework should it become
these adjustments may need to be is explored in this paper. It will be seen
that in some instances the regulations will apply
because the nanomaterial is
treated as the same as its conventionally sized counterpart even though its
properties may differ. This
may result in the nanomaterial avoiding pre-market
safety assessment. In other cases though, if the nanomaterial is treated as a
new substance, this will result in the material not being limited by current
prohibitions applicable to its conventional counterpart.
The issue of whether a
nanomaterial is new or not is therefore the first important concern in food
regulation but, as discussed,
cannot be responded to simply by declaring all
nanomaterials ‘new’. Secondly, important regulatory difficulties
because many existing regulations are based on mass which may be
inappropriate for nanomaterials where mass is not the relevant metric
predicting health effects. A third important general concern is that current
safety assessment guidelines do not necessarily
assess the properties of
importance to nanomaterials or safety data is not available for such assessment.
This paper first briefly introduces the reader to
nanotechnology
the potential health risks it
reviews how nanotechnology is or may be used by the food industry so that
challenges that must be addressed by food regulations
can be better understood.
The application of current Australian food regulations to nanofoods and their
suitability for meeting
those challenges is then examined. International
responses to the problem are described before conclusions and suggested
are provided.
Nanotechnology
Nanotechnology involves the manipulation of matter
at the atomic or molecular scale, a nanomaterial being material with one or more
dimensions of 100 nanometres or
Their small
scale means all nanomaterials have a high surface to volume ratio. That
increase in relative surface area has significant
consequences. It means an
increase in the percentage of atoms at the surface and therefore more sites for
bonding or reacting with
surrounding
Therefore nanomaterials, because of their size and the effect of that size on
other properties, can possess different physical,
chemical and biological
properties compared with their equivalent bulk material, sometimes in
unpredictable
presents ‘new opportunities to increase the performance of traditional
products, and to develop unique new
Titanium dioxide, for example, has long been used in sunscreens and cosmetics
for its ultra violet (UV) light blocking properties.
It is also widely used as
a white pigment in foods (such as confectionary) and food packaging surfaces
because of its extreme whiteness
and brightness and high refractive
titanium dioxide has been found to have more surface area for UV absorption and
to be transparent. This has made it an
attractive additive to food and beverage
packaging to prevent UV light reducing the shelf life of food and beverages
contained in
transparent or semi-transparent packaging whilst still allowing
consumers to see the product
planning to sell such a plastic packaging additive, called Light Stabilizer 210,
in late 2008.
Potential health risks
There are though, some concerns accompanying the use of nanotechnology in
food and its packaging. The World Health Organisation (WHO)
has noted that
‘[a]s for all new materials used in food and food processing, the
potential health and environmental risks of
nanoscale materials need to be
assessed before they are introduced into
large surface area and increased reactivity of some nanomaterials may mean
different reactions with biological systems such
as the human body compared to
their larger scale counterparts. But there is a lack of knowledge over the
potential effects and impacts
of nanomaterials because physicochemical and
biological properties of materials at nanosize may differ from their
conventional
National Institute of Environmental Health Sciences has stated that generally
the smaller the particles, the more reactive
and toxic are their
information is needed on the bioaccumulation and potential toxic effects of
ingestion of nanoparticles. As noted by the UK
Institute of Food Science and
Technology, ingested nanoparticles are more likely than presently used larger
particles to penetrate
into tissue and cells, influencing accumulation and
storage and toxicity
relatively large surface area and the effect of that also raise concerns that
nanomaterials could be potential catalysts for
reactions that would otherwise
proceed slowly.
Bioavailability may also increase as the particles decrease in size. Little is
known about the health effects of nanomaterials
in the liver or kidney or
transfer across the
known that certain nanoparticles possess the ability to cross the blood-brain
barrier and can serve as carriers for other
Nanotechnology and Food
Nanofood is food which has been cultivated,
produced, processed or packaged using nanotechnology or to which manufactured
nanomaterials
there were over 400 companies worldwide researching, developing and producing
nanofood related
general aims of nanotechnology in this arena being largely centred on improving
the quality of food. Food industry giants like
Kraft, HJ Heinz, Cadbury
Schweppes and Unilever are all pursuing nanotechnology food and packaging
applications.
noted above, at present no whole foods incorporate manufactured
nanomaterials.
However, as discussed in this section nanotechnology is being pursued by
numerous food companies to create processed food products,
particularly food
additives and in food packaging. More than 300 nanofood products are available
on the worldwide
least one of these available on the Australian
Nanomaterials
incorporated directly into processed food may provide improved functional
properties, such as ‘low sodium food
products that taste salty due to
nanotech-induced interactions with the tongue, and functional food components
tailored to the individual
preference.’
Nanosized emulsion particles are being developed for use in spreads and ice
have traditionally been used to improve food texture and it is hoped that use of
nanosized particles in emulsions will
reduce fat content from 16% to about
Nanoparticles and nanosize carriers such as nanocapsules are being designed
to improve absorption and enhance the availability and
dispersion of added
nutrients, vitamins and minerals. Already on the overseas market is Canola
Active cooking oil fortified with
phytosterol nanocapsules claimed to reduce
cholesterol.
nanocapsules in that case are expanded micelles (hollow spheres made from fat)
and are said to allow the compounds contained
in the capsules (in this case
phytosterol) to enter the blood stream more easily from the gut and thereby
increase their
bioavailability.
A leading Australian bread manufacturer is including nanocapsules containing
tuna fish oil (as a source of Omega 3 fatty acids)
in its bread, the
nanocapsules being designed to break open when they reach the stomach to avoid
the unpleasant taste of fish
A number of
health drinks and food additives used in some margarines, soft drinks, dairy
products, sausages and other processed
foods on overseas markets are also
claimed to have some nano
international developments mean import will be a major point of entry of
nanofoods and products into the Australian food chain.
Nanotechnology is also being used to modify food packaging and
food contact materials. Nanotechnology developments are improving
properties such as durability, flexibility and mechanical and heat resistance of
food packaging materials and increasing
their barrier properties to provide
longer shelf life for the food contained in it. Two new types of food packaging
can be identified:
active packaging and smart (or intelligent) packaging.
Active packaging is packaging that actively works to preserve the food it
contains such as ‘a plastic film with dispersed clay nanoparticles that
prevents oxygen, carbon dioxide, and moisture from
example, Durethan KU2-2601 packaging film developed by Bayer Polymers includes
silicate nanoparticles which have a mazelike
arrangement in the plastic wrap,
making it difficult for unwanted substances such as oxygen which spoils food to
travel in. It does
this by increasing the distance the gas molecules need to
travel. It is claimed the nanoparticles cut the permeability of the film
half compared to conventional film
nanoparticles used in food storage containers to
reduce food spoilage. For
example, both SharperImage’s ‘FresherLonger’ plastic storage
bags and Baby Dream Co
Ltd’s silvernano baby milk bottles include silver
nanoparticles to prevent food spoilage by reducing the growth of bacteria,
and fungus.
Nanocomposite particles have also been incorporated into plastic beer bottles
‘to extend the shelf-life to six months by controlling
to make the plastic less likely to
products, such as SongSing Nano Technology Co Ltd’s Nano Plastic Wrap,
claim to combine both improved anti-UV properties
and a sterilizing and
anti-mould function through the addition of nano zinc oxide to the
there has been little published research on the risk of exposure from migration
of nanoparticles from such packaging and
food contact materials into food and
drink. For example, as a leading scientific expert has noted that there is
currently no published
research on the possible effects that foods containing
nanosilver may have on the gastrointestinal tract or on the natural gut
packaging incorporates nanosensors to monitor and respond to food condition.
For example, it can incorporate nanomaterials
that respond to environmental
conditions, engage in self-repair, or alert a consumer to the presence of
chemical or pathogen contamination.
For example, nanoparticle films and other
packaging with embedded sensors will detect food pathogens. These nanosensors
a package color change to alert consumers that the food has become
contaminated or has begun to spoil. Another type of packaging
may incorporate a
bio-switch that releases a preservative if the food within begins to
ability to detect pathogens, deliberate contamination or spoiling of food is
predicted to have enormous commercial value, with
the US Department of
Agriculture estimating the costs of illness and premature death in the US alone
from the top five food borne
pathogens to be US $6.9
the above cases, the nanomaterials included in the food packaging and food
could be made from a
range of materials including plastics and paper, both of which may have
nanomaterials incorporated in or on
them or used in their manufacture. Other
substances, such as processing aids or agricultural and veterinary chemicals may
be modified
by nanotechnology or incorporate nanomaterials and these may also be
added to or left in food.
Australian regulation
Whilst the preparation and sale of food, food
packaging and contact materials is regulated by the States, the national food
FSANZ develops and maintains a nationally uniform scheme on all these
issues. FZANZ is a bi-national agency created under the
Food Standards
Australia New Zealand Act 1991
). It is responsible
for developing and maintaining the national
Australia New Zealand Food
Standards Code
sets out quality
and labelling requirements for food and food packaging prepared and sold in
Australia and New Zealand. These requirements
are given legal effect in each
Australian jurisdiction by adoption by State / Territory
legislation.
Domestic food regulatory policy is set by the Food Regulation Ministerial
Council, including members from two national governments
(Australia and New
Zealand) and the Australian State and Territory governments.
The object of
is to ‘ensure a high standard of public health
protection throughout Australia’ by the FSANZ to achieve the following
(a) a high degree of consumer confidence in the quality and safety of
food produced, processed, sold or exported from Australia and
(b) an effective, transparent and accountable regulatory framework
within which the food industry can work efficiently;
(c) the provision of
adequate information relating to food to enable consumers to make informed
(d) the establishment of common rules for both countries and the
promotion of consistency between domestic and international food
measures without reducing the safeguards applying to public health and consumer
protection.
for the purposes of the
is defined inclusively as:
substance or thing of a kind used, capable of being used, or represented as
being for use, for human consumption (whether
it is live, raw, prepared or
partly prepared); and
(b) any substance or thing of a kind used, capable of
being used, or represented as being for use, as an ingredient or additive in
substance or thing referred to in paragraph (a); and
(c) any substance used
in preparing a substance or thing referred to in paragraph (a); and
chewing gum or an ingredient or additive in chewing gum, or any substance used
in preparing chewing gum; and
(e) any substance or thing declared to be a
food under a declaration in force under section
generality of the scope of the definition of food, the
will generally apply to nanofoods and food related
products. For example, fresh milk which can naturally contain nanosized lipids
(fats) in colloidal suspension is ‘food’ in the same way as fresh
milk that does not contain such lipids is. Therapeutic
goods within the meaning
Therapeutic Goods Act 1989
though are not
food is regulated by the
, the relevant Standards in the Code
must be complied
no Standards in the Code specifically regulating nanofoods and related products
but some regulations will nevertheless
be relevant to them. The concern though
is that such Standards will not apply to nanofoods and other nano products as
appropriately
as they should. For example, the
estimated safe and adequate daily dietary intake (ESADDI) and recommended daily
intake (RDI) levels for vitamins and minerals,
such as some metal oxides. These
are expressed by weight. The adult RDI for zinc oxide is, for example, 12 mg
zinc. Deficiencies
in current scientific knowledge of nanomaterial uptake and
utilisation in the human body may mean this requirement, set on the basis
weight, is not appropriate where the zinc oxide is in nanoform and is therefore
responded to differently by the human body.
Safety Assessment
Generally no prior regulatory approval is
required for the lawful sale of food, food packaging materials and articles in
food sold or prepared for sale in or imported into Australia unless
it is specifically required by the
. Therefore no safety
assessment of such items is required before sale. Indeed, FSANZ may not be
aware that nanomaterials were included
in the food or other item.
new substances such as food additives added to food and also novel foods require
pre-market approval. Such approval involves
a safety assessment discussed
further below and if approved, an amendment to the
. Changes to
the Code are considered a regulatory measure. FSANZ must therefore produce a
regulatory impact statement (RIS) before
of the RIS is to ‘identify and assess any social, economic and/or
environmental impacts of an application or proposal
to vary the
FSANZ is required to consider the impact of all options on all sectors of the
whether the benefits of the application outweigh the costs.
provides that any person or FSANZ itself may apply for either the
development or variation of a food regulatory measure before a specific
regulation is included / amended in the Code or a code of practice. Information
to support the application must be included with
application.
that information should include is determined by the FSANZ’s objectives in
developing such measures. The first and most
important of these objectives is
‘the protection of public health and
Standards may relate to the composition of food including the maximum amounts of
contaminants or residues that may be present in
food and the maximum or minimum
amounts of additives that may be present. Standards may also relate to methods
used to determine
food composition and the production and handling of
includes packaging and transportation and disposal of
approach must in all cases ensure that Standards are ‘based on risk
analysis using the best available scientific
However, where FSANZ considers that scientific evidence to be insufficient,
FSANZ may provisionally adopt sanitary or phytosanitary
measures. Such measures
expressly include those applied ‘to protect human or animal life or health
from risks arising from
additives, contaminants, toxins or disease-causing
organisms in foods, beverages or feedstuffs’ and ‘the packaging and
labelling requirements directly related to food
However, FSANZ must then, within a reasonable time, take all reasonable steps to
obtain the information necessary for a more objective
risk analysis and a review
of such measures.
Where a safety assessment is required, it is performed in accordance with
FSANZ’s safety assessment
guidelines.
must be established that there is a reasonable certainty that no harm to humans
will result from the intended use of the food.
The guidelines are such
that information that a nanomaterial is present would probably have to be
disclosed to FSANZ. For instance,
in relation to food additives, whilst the
nanoform of a chemical may not be distinguished by its chemical name and
Chemical Abstract
Service (CAS) registry number (for example, carbon nanotubes
currently have the same chemical name as conventional graphite) in the
application document, the guidelines expressly require information on the
manufacturing process of the
may indicate that the additive is a nanomaterial.
However, even if the
FSANZ is made aware that a nanomaterial is present, current risk assessment
methodologies may not be adequate
for determining potential risks of food and
food contact materials containing nanomaterials to human health. For example,
not known whether current toxicology testing techniques are suitable for
nanomaterials. It is not clear that current testing methods
and techniques for
measuring nanomaterials are adequate for detecting nanomaterials in food and
food contact
is also no safety assessment of the environmental consequences of the ultimate
disposal of foods and associated products under
the food regulations.
Safe for human consumption
In addition to imposing a requirement
that the provisions of the
be complied with, State / Territory
legislation imposes a general obligation that food be safe for human
consumption. For example,
under the Victorian legislation a person who handles
food intended for sale in a manner that will or is likely to render the food
unsafe is guilty of an
Packaging or labelling material or equipment must also not be sold if its use
for its intended purposes would render or is likely
to render food
unsafe if it is likely to cause physical harm to a consumer who uses it as
requirement of likelihood means that on the basis of scientific knowledge at
this time, a successful prosecution regarding nanofoods
would be difficult.
It is also an offence to sell unsuitable food or handle food intended for
sale in a manner that renders or is likely to render it
unsuitable.
is unsuitable if, inter alia, it ‘contains a biological or chemical agent,
or other matter or substance, that is foreign
to the nature of the
Prima facie it could be argued that nanomaterials meet this description.
However, the definition of unsuitable food goes on to
provide that if the agent
is permitted by the
, its presence does not make food
unsuitable.
the uncertainty as to whether and when nanofood is permitted under the Code
discussed below, prosecution under this provision
regarding nanofoods also seems
Even if these offences may be relevant in the case of some
nanofoods, the Victorian legislation provides for a defence of due diligence
that will cause further problems for successful prosecution for harms caused by
Section 17E(1) provides that it is a defence if it is proved that the person
took all reasonable precautions and exercised all due
diligence to prevent the
commission of the
a question of fact whether the defence is made out. However, because it must be
shown that ‘all’ reasonable precautions
were taken rather than
simply ‘reasonable precautions’ the statutory defence probably
requires a higher standard than
the common law. Nevertheless it has been
suggested in relation to the predecessor of the current section which had
included the
same phrase that the courts would imply a ‘commercial
reality’ qualification into the Victorian section so that the court
take into account only feasible steps consistent with commercial reality and a
proper consideration for the mischief at which
the statute was
Manufacturers of nanofoods may be able to rely on this defence where the current
lack of scientific data on the health risks of
nanomaterials probably means that
there is no foreseeable injury requiring precautions to be taken and where the
discussed below is complied with.
Novel foods
Nanofoods may be considered to be new or
‘novel’ foods that should go through a safety assessment prior to
sale or import
and FSANZ refers to this standard in its fact sheet on nanofoods
regulation.
Standard 1.5.1 – Novel Foods
is intended to ensure that novel foods
undergo a mandatory pre-market safety assessment by FSANZ by making it a
criminal offence to
sell a novel food unless it is listed in the
is compliance with any specified conditions of
reflects the public’s insistence
on pre-market review of
health-sensitive products, such as food ingredients ... that involve substances
having no prior history of
exposure to human beings and no widely accepted and
scientifically established demonstration of
safety assessment is performed in accordance with the FSANZ’s safety
assessment guidelines discussed above and it must be
established that there is a
reasonable certainty that no harm will result from the intended use of the
determination of novelty is made by FSANZ with the advice of the Advisory
Committee on Novel Foods (ACNF).
A ‘novel food’ is defined
a non-traditional food and the food requires an assessment of the public
health and safety considerations having regard to –
(a) the potential
for adverse effects in humans; or
(b) the composition or structure of the
(c) the process by which the food has been prepared; or
source from which it is derived; or
(e) patterns and levels of consumption
of the food; or
(f) any other relevant
definition of novel food specifically refers to the process by which a food was
prepared, but to be a novel food a food or food
ingredient must be a
non-traditional food. A ‘non-traditional food’ is:
which does not have a history of human consumption in Australia and New Zealand;
(b) a substance derived from a food, where that substance does not have a
history of human consumption in Australia or New Zealand
other than as a
component of that food; or
(c) any other substance, where that substance, or
the source from which it is derived, does not have a history of human
consumption
as a food in Australia or New
Guidance Tool prepared by FSANZ to assist the ACNF and manufacturers in
interpreting the Novel Foods Standard expressly requires
consideration of
whether the food or ingredient is produced by a process not previously applied
to food and whether the structure
or composition of the final food or ingredient
is altered because of the process of preparation in interpreting the term
consumption’.
non-traditional food must also raise safety concerns to be a novel
of this issue is separate from the safety assessment referred to above which is
undertaken once it is determined that
a food is a novel food. Once again,
whether the structure of the substance is completely new is a relevant matter.
However, the
issue arises at both steps of the determination of whether a food
is a novel food as to whether food manufacturers would consider
nanoforms of
previously used ingredients or foods to be altered or new and therefore
compliance with the Standard as being necessary.
Nanoform is not expressly
referred to in the Guidance Tool or the Novel Foods Standard as being an issue
relevant to the determination
of novelty. Enforcement of the Code is the
responsibility of the State and Territory Governments and therefore
interpretation of
the Standard and whether a food is novel is ultimately a
decision of the States and their courts. Whether jurisdictions would even
aware of the use of nanotechnology in food is an important issue to be
addressed. Further, unless and until a food or food ingredient
is recorded in
the Standard as a novel food, successful prosecutions for offences under the
Standard (such as placing a novel food
on the market without legal authority)
are difficult.
Nevertheless, it is possible that the differences in ‘composition and
structure’ of nanofoods could mean such foods are
treated as novel.
However, the involvement of nanotechnology in the process of production alone
will not trigger the Standard.
The use of nanotechnology will need to
significantly alter the properties of the final
EU Novel Foods Regulation which is under revision has recently had
nanotechnology aspects added to the proposal for
review of the Australian Novel Foods Standard only one submission supported the
introduction of specific standards for different
technologies.
Food additives
The intentional incorporation of nanomaterials into
food or food packaging or contact materials from where it intentionally migrates
into food, where these materials have a technological function in the food, will
be regulated as food
example, where active or smart packaging results in a nanomaterial being
released to migrate into the food, this would be regulated
as an additive. A
‘food additive’ is:
Any substance not normally consumed as a food
in itself and not normally used as an ingredient of food, but which is
intentionally
added to a food to achieve one or more of the technological
functions specified in Schedule 5. It or its by-products may remain
food. Food additives are distinguishable from processing aids and vitamins and
minerals added to food for nutritional
expressly permitted food additives may be added to
regulations regarding approval of additives apply regardless of whether the
additive is or incorporates nanomaterials, and all
permitted additives undergo a
safety assessment prior to approval. However, whilst permitted additives must
comply with specified
identity and purity requirements, and specified maximum
levels of use and can only be used in the listed foods set out in the
specifications do not refer to particle size. Therefore substances meeting the
specifications are permitted for use, whether
or not they are in nanoform. The
listing of the larger scale counterpart of the nanomaterial may therefore mean
that if a currently
permitted additive is produced in a nanoform, it is unlikely
to require a separate listing and therefore will not need to be assessed
to introduction to the market. Further, FSANZ would not even have to be
notified of the change in form. More specific regulations
may therefore be
required for the regulations to appropriately respond to nanofoods used as
further difficulty is that the maximum level of use for some additives, namely
some colours, is set by weight. This is likely not
to be an appropriate trigger
if that additive is in a nanoform and therefore less material can be included to
produce the same or
changed outcomes. The European Parliament has said that
‘the permitted limits for an additive in nanoparticle form should
the same as when it is in traditional
Australian regulation may also need updating to deal with this issue.
Food contaminants
Nanomaterials
unintentionally
included in
food or that migrate into food from food packaging or contact materials will not
be regulated as food additives but could
be regulated as
contaminants.
Maximum limits (ML) for some contaminants and natural toxicants have been set in
and these apply regardless of whether the contaminant is a
nanomaterial or not. However, the trigger levels may need to be reviewed
nanoforms of the specifically referenced contaminants begin being used and the
nanoform of the contaminant means the weight threshold
is inappropriate.
Conversely to the issue for nanoforms of additives, this means that if a
nanoform of a substance is treated as
a ‘new’ substance as compared
to its conventional counterpart, any listing of the conventional counterpart as
or only permitted at specified levels would be irrelevant to the
nanoform. Whilst for those nanomaterial contaminants not listed
manufacturer / importer must still comply with the general obligation to ensure
the food is safe imposed under State / Territory
legislation, prosecutions would
encounter the important difficulties discussed above. They must also comply
Standard 1.4.3 – Articles and Materials in Contact with Food
discussed below.
Food contact materials
Permission for articles and materials to be
in contact with food is given by Standard 1.4.3. Such contact is forbidden if
to cause bodily
Deficiencies in current knowledge regarding the effects of nanomaterials mean
this provision is unlikely to prevent the use of nanomaterials
at this time
because it could not be shown to be ‘likely’ to harm. For example,
it is unknown whether reducing the size
of additives in food packaging, such as
titanium dioxide, affects the migration of the nano-additive from the film to
Australian Standard developed by Standards Australia,
AS 2070-1999 Australian
Standard. Plastics materials for food contact use
, gives guidance as to what
can be used in food contact materials by specifying the ‘materials and
procedures for use’
in producing ‘plastics materials, coating and
printing of plastics items for food contact and subsequent
includes ‘packages, domestic containers, wrapping materials, utensils or
any other plastics items intended for food contact
application’. Pursuant
Plastics Standard
, plastics materials used in the manufacture of
plastics items for food contact use must comply with either the referenced US
regulations
(US, Code of Federal Regulations 21CFR Parts 170 to 199 and
amendments) or EC Directives 89/107/EEC and 90/128/EEC and
amendments.
Plastics Standard
therefore ‘applies’ regardless of whether
nanomaterials are used or not but it is unclear whether plastics with
nanoparticles
in it are being retested or whether the previous classification of
plastics with the larger scale equivalents is still being relied
on. It should
also be noted that the referenced international instruments have been the
subject of review by others in the context
of suitability for
nanotechnology.
In all cases, some gaps in the regulatory schemes or knowledge base on which
they are based have been identified.
Classification difficulties
Difficulties may also arise in
classifying the nanomaterials concerned for the purposes of food regulation. For
example, as discussed
above, different requirements apply depending upon whether
a substance is classified as an additive or a contaminant. Even nanomaterials
intentionally added to food or packaging should not all be classified as
additives. If, for example, silver nanoparticles were incorporated
packaging to provide anti-fungal properties, the function of those particles
must be determined. For a food additive to
be allowed to be added to food, it
must perform one of the approved technological functions in Schedule 5 of
Standard 1.3.1. Silver
nanoparticles could be viewed as acting as a
preservative, an approved function and, subject to approval, could be an allowed
additive. However, if the nanoparticles are instead regarded as acting as
a catalyst they cannot be an approved additive. Some
catalysts are approved for
use in food but this is on the basis that they are processing aids. Silver is
not currently an approved
an additive to food or packaging is not an ‘approved’ additive, then
whilst its addition to food is illegal, a legally
specified, quantitative
migration limit needs to be crossed before an offence is
levels may need review to take into account the use of nanomaterials if the
migration levels of such particles and levels
at which they can cause harm are
different to their larger scale counterparts.
Dietary supplements
Dietary supplements incorporating
nanomaterials, such as nanoscale calcium, magnesium and silver, are being
developed for incorporation
Standard 1.3.2 – Vitamins and Mineral
s regulates the addition of
vitamins and minerals to food. Regulation is on the basis of weight,
recommended daily intake (RDI) and
estimated safe and adequate daily dietary
intake (ESADDI). Whilst the regulations apply to nanoforms of vitamins and
minerals, whether
the regulation is triggered and the thresholds are appropriate
depends on the ability to accurately measure levels of nanoforms of
and scientific knowledge of the effects of these things being in nanoform.
Similarly, the maximum residue limits (MRL)
set for the presence of agricultural
and veterinary chemicals in
apply equally to nanoforms of such chemicals are also dependent on these same
issues. Neither Standard considers how the
substance / chemical was
manufactured.
Food hygiene
Pursuant to Chapter 3 of the
and Territories are to require food businesses to implement food safety programs
based on the Hazard Analysis and Critical
Control Point (HACCP) System adopted
by the joint WHO/FAO Codex Alimentarius Commission. The meanings of
‘hazard’ and
‘contaminant’, both of which are to be
avoided using the food safety programs, apply to nanomaterials and products
incorporating
nanomaterials in the same way as they apply to conventional
materials. Industrial end-users of construction materials, electrical
appliances and other implements and containers incorporating nanomaterials and
used in food premises would also be regulated by virtue
of this part of the Code
because the Standard provides that food businesses can only use equipment,
fixtures or fittings that comply
suitability of these provisions for nanotechnology though, once again depends
upon it being appropriate that nanoforms of materials
are treated as equivalent
to their larger scale counterparts. Inter alia, food contact surfaces of
fixtures, fittings and equipment
are required to be ‘made of material that
will not contaminate
‘Contaminant’ means ‘any biological or chemical agent, foreign
matter, or other substances that may compromise
food safety or
suitability’.
Food is not safe if ‘it would be likely to cause physical harm to a person
who might later consume
is not suitable if, inter alia, it ‘contains a biological or chemical
agent, or other matter or substance, that is foreign
to the nature of the
If a nanomaterial is considered different to its larger scale counterpart
and is able to migrate into food that comes into contact
with it, then its
presence may make such food not suitable or even unsafe and therefore
contaminated meaning the nanomaterial should
not be used. Further, industrial
end users using nanomaterials in such articles in the transport, display or
packaging of food would
fail to comply with the requirements under Standard
3.2.2 to ensure that food does not become unsafe or not suitable through, for
example, how it is displayed or transported or the use of packaging material.
Whether this is the case though, depends on it being
known that the presence of
the nanomaterial makes the food unsafe or unsuitable and is subject to the same
difficulties as discussed
above in relation to prosecutions under State
legislation.
Labelling and consumer choice
It is possible some consumers may
have concerns with nanofoods particularly regarding the safety of such foods and
products. A 2007
survey found that about 73% of Australian consumers supported
the use of nanotechnology in smart packaging and 54% in boosting nutrients
vitamins in foods. Nevertheless the survey also found that specific knowledge
of what nanotechnology is and the nanotechnology
such as Friends of the Earth Australia, Europe and United States have called for
a moratorium on the further commercial
release of food products, food packaging
and food contact materials that contain manufactured nanomaterials until
nanotechnology-specific
safety laws are established and the public is involved
in decision
The UK Royal Society and the UK Institute of Food Science and Technology
have both recommended that nanomaterials be stated on food
labels for consumer
information.
Although the primary objective of the Australian food regulatory scheme is the
protection of public health, some non-scientific
issues such as consumer
information are also addressed. The
requires the provision of
adequate information relating to food, to enable consumers to make informed
choices and to prevent misleading
or deceptive
Nevertheless, it is unlikely that the food regulatory scheme would respond
to concerns of consumers who do not want to eat nanofoods
because the generally
applicable labelling provisions of the
require labelling simply so consumers would have the choice to avoid a
technology they are opposed to. FSANZ is to ‘ensure
that consumers have
access to sufficient information to enable informed and healthy food
This does not include choices on the basis of ethical beliefs or personal views
regarding possible safety risks. Only if there is
a difference in the nutrition
or function of nanofood is this provision likely to be applicable. For example,
Food Regulation Ministerial Council Policy Guidelines
specifically
regarding the
Novel Foods Standard
provide that FSANZ is to ‘ensure
consumers are not misled by novel foods ... which appear similar to existing
may differ in terms of nutrition or function
’ (emphasis
nanofood does not differ in this regard, there would be no misleading for the
purposes of this Guideline.
The labelling provisions of the
may also not alert consumers of the presence of nanomaterials even where there
are deficiencies in scientific knowledge concerning
the nutritional value of
foods or the technological function of substances in food due to the presence of
nanomaterials. The
requires that, subject to exceptions
irrelevant to this paper, every ingredient and food additive in the food be
declared on the
Ingredients generally should be declared using their common name or a name that
describes their true nature. Additives should be
declared by the specific name
or number provided in the Schedule to Standard 1.2.4. Once again uncertainty as
to whether the name
(for example, titanium oxide as listed in the Schedule)
would include that additive in a nanoform, means there is a possible gap
this regulation is relied on as a means to alert consumers to the presence of
nanomaterials for the purposes of protecting
their health and safety. Whilst
manufacturers could voluntarily include such information, this is unlikely
because of the tendency
in the commercial sector ‘to keep product
development under
labelling issues also arise. For example, as noted by the Northern Ireland Food
Advisory Committee ‘if nanolabs or nanosensors
indicate shelf stability
certain labelling practices may not be
necessary.’
Label requirements, such as use by or best before dates may become unnecessary
if nanotechnology developments render them redundant.
Other label components
such as lists of ingredients may also no longer be needed. ‘Advances in
labelling technology, are
also expected to offer new ways to store, display and
interrogate information on packaging. For example, these types of advances
might allow individuals to access more information on the source, history and
storage of specific foods their nutritional characteristics
suitability to the genetic makeup and lifestyle of individual
consumers’.
Post-Market Monitoring
The power referred to above for FSANZ to
begin the process of development or variation of a Standard is not limited to
the initial
introduction of a food to the market. It can be used at anytime and
therefore provides FSANZ with power to respond to new information
nanomaterials or products incorporating nanomaterials. However, because any
Standard amendment is so resource intensive, it
is likely only to occur if
evidence of new public health and safety considerations
is expressly given responsibility, together with the States and Territories, for
monitoring and conducting research and surveys
in relation to any of the matters
that may be included in a Standard. As noted above, FSANZ also has the
obligation to take all
reasonable steps to obtain the information necessary for
objective risk analysis and a review of any sanitary or phytosanitary measures
that it introduces. It is unknown what research is being done as part of its
‘watching brief’ referred to in the Introduction
International scene
At present there are no internationally
relevant regulations specifically for nanotechnology in food although various
have begun reviewing their laws with respect to nanotechnology.
For example, the WHO/FAO Codex Alimentarius Standards do not deal
issue and no official definition of the technology has yet been established.
As noted by the WHO, most jurisdictions that have undertaken regulatory
reviews for nanotechnology in food have concluded that ‘while
are likely to benefit from this technology, new data and new measurement
approaches may be needed to ensure that the safety
of products using
nanotechnology are properly
A review by the UK Food Standards Agency to ‘identify potential gaps in
regulation or risk assessment relating to the use of
nanotechnologies and the
potential deliberate or adventitious presence of manufactured nanomaterials in
not identify ‘any major gaps in
regulations’.
However, it concluded that ‘there is uncertainty in some areas whether
applications of nanotechnologies would be picked up
consistently’.
The UK Advisory Committees on Toxicity, on Carcinogenicity and on Mutagenicity
of Chemicals in Food, Consumer Products and the Environment
concluded that
‘the existing model for risk assessment is applicable to nanomaterials
although there are major gaps in information
identification’.
The European Parliament’s Committee on the Environment, Public Health
and Food Safety has also recognised that certain existing
EU food safety
standards may be inadequate for
EU has asked the European Food Safety Authority (EFSA) to provide an initial
scientific opinion on potential risks arising from
the use of nanotechnology in
US has also undertaken a review of its food
regulations.
The Review recognises that the lack of awareness of the presence of nanoscale
materials by the US food regulator, the Food and Drug
Administration (FDA), is
not appropriate. Recommendations have been made to improve the sharing of this
knowledge with the FDA and
its’ incorporation in the safety evaluation
A review of Australian food regulations was completed in 2007 for
the National Nanotechnology Strategy Taskforce within the now Australian
Department of Innovation, Industry, Science and
Department is also leading an inter-departmental committee to coordinate a
national approach to
nanotechnology.
Conclusions
The Australian food regulatory scheme makes no mention
of nanotechnology, and was created in the absence of any consideration thereof.
However, it may nevertheless be applied to nanofoods and related products. It
may be though, that the small size of nanomaterials
means it can slip through
some regulatory gaps. Possibly the most important gap is the lack of a decision
on whether existing substances
reformulated at the nanoscale are different to
their pre-existing large scale counterparts for the purposes of the
. This is important for at least two reasons. First, many regulations
revolve around lists of named substances. A clear understanding
of whether a
nanoform is the same as its larger scale counterpart is essential for these
lists to effectively operate. The use of
both permitted and prohibited
substance lists and the existence of natural nanofoods means though that the
response should not be
a simple declaration that nanofoods are or are not
‘new’. Secondly, if manufacturers consider that the use of
of previously used substances is simply the use of the same ingredient
or substance, new toxicological information for the product
Related to that, whilst FSANZ has assessment protocols for the evaluation of
risks to human health, current risk assessment methodologies
may not be adequate
for determining potential risks of food and food contact materials containing
nanomaterials to human health.
The outcome of these two deficiencies in the
generation and application of scientific risk assessment could mean proper steps
not taken to find out if nanofoods are actually a safety risk.
gap in the food regulatory scheme is the maximum limits for some
‘food’ on the basis of its weight, including
contaminants, natural toxicants and dietary supplements. Some of these may be
inappropriate for nanoforms of these foods.
Thirdly, where international
documents are referenced in Australian regulations these need to be reviewed to
see if they take into
account the potential safety implications of nanomaterials
or products containing nanomaterials. Finally, it is also unclear whether
current methods and techniques for measuring nanomaterials are adequate for
detecting nanomaterials in food and food contact materials.
Whether the
above gaps are of concern is not yet clear because the safety of such materials
is not sufficiently understood. FSANZ’s
approach of monitoring the
situation is therefore an important first step to addressing the problem.
Depending upon consumers’
attitude to risk and if a precautionary approach
is to be taken the known gaps in the regulations should be responded to by
The lengthy process required to amend Food Standards means that work
should commence sooner rather than later on this. In particular,
should be made on whether and which nanoscale substances are different to their
pre-existing large scale counterparts.
Caution in addressing this issue is
particularly needed because some foods may naturally contain nanomaterials. For
example, the
boiling of starch to make custard relies on the melting of
nanosized 3-D crystalline structures and the recrystallisation of nanostructures
formed by starch
polysaccharides.
Unless safety concerns arise, such nanomaterials should not now be regulated any
differently to past regulation because of concerns
over new uses of
nanotechnology. Maximum limits for relevant ‘foods’ should also be
reassessed and there should be a
review of international documents referred to
in Australian regulations. The adequacy of current measuring methods and
should also be investigated.
A final more general step in
preparing Australian food regulations for nanotechnology is to reflect on what
the Australian public
expects from its end product regulatory schemes and to
compare current regulations with international best practice. Risk assessments
under the food regulations are concerned only with human health and safety and
FSANZ is not required to consider broader environmental
risks associated with
nanomaterials from food or food contact materials that will inevitably enter
waterways and landfill. This
is not a great concern if environmental protection
regulations satisfactorily deal with the issue but whether that is the case
to be investigated. Other interfaces between regulatory schemes seem
satisfactory although there is potential for confusion as to
which is the
relevant scheme in some cases. For example, an increasing number of products
which contain nanomaterials will sit on
the FSANZ-Therapeutic Goods
Administration regulatory
a product is a therapeutic good, it will be regulated under the therapeutic
goods regulatory scheme; if it is a food, it is regulated
under the food
regulations discussed above. Furthermore, there is the issue of how much
consumers wish to know about nanotechnology
in their food and whether the food
regulatory scheme should accommodate that choice. If members of the public do
not want to participate,
the current labelling provisions are unlikely to
require labelling such that consumers could chose to avoid nanotechnology used
connection with their food. This means manufacturers will be truly able to
keep the use of this new technology ‘under wraps’.
LLB(Hons), PhD, Senior Lecturer,
Centre for Regulatory Studies, Faculty
of Law, Monash University, Clayton, Australia.
Helmut Kaiser
Consultancy, ‘Strong increase in nanofood and molecular food markets in
2007 worldwide’ (undated)
http://www.hkc22.com/Nanofoodconference.html
(at 6 May 2008).
World Health
Organisation, International Food Safety Authorities Network (INFOSAN),
INFOSAN Information Note No 01/2008 – Nanotechnology
, 7 February
Tiju Joseph and
Mark Morrison, Nanoforum.org, European Nanotechnology Gateway,
Report: Nanotechnology in Agriculture and Food
, May 2006, 2. See also
Jennifer Kuzma and Peter VerHage, Woodrow Wilson International Center for
Scholars - Project on Emerging
Technologies,
Nanotechnology in Agriculture
and Food Production
, September 2006
http://www.nanotechproject.org/74
(at 6 May 2008); Naomi Salmon, ‘Size really does matter’ 19 June
The Ecologist
http://www.theecologist.org/pages/archive_detail.asp?open=y&content_id=1883#36618
(as at 4 November 2008); VJ Morris, ‘Is nanotechnology going to change the
future of food technology?’ (2005)
Int Rev Food Sci Technol
16-18; Vic Morris, International Union of Food Science & Technology
(IUFoST), Scientific Information Bulletin,
Nanotechnology and Food
http://www.iufost.org/reports_resources/bulletins/documents/IUF.SIB.Nanotechnology.pdf
(as at 4 November 2008).
Georgia Miller
and Rye Senjen, Friends of the Earth Australia, Europe, and USA,
Laboratory and on to our Plates. Nanotechnology in Food & Agriculture
ed, April 2008)
http://nano.foe.org.au
(at 6 May 2008).
Jim Gruber and
Christina Belperlo, ‘Nanotechnology – Regulatory Aspects’,
Food Standards Australia New Zealand,
http://www.foodstandards.gov.au/_srcfiles/AIFST_Nanotech.pdf
(at 6 May 2008).
‘Small particles, nanotechnology and food’, 2008
http://www.foodstandards.gov.au/newsroom/factsheets/factsheets2008
(at 2 September 2008).
For further
information on nanotechnology see section on ‘Potential Health
Risks’ below and The Royal Society and Royal
Academy of Engineering,
Nanoscience and Nanotechnologies: opportunities and uncertainties
http://www.nanotec.org.uk/finalreport.htm
(at 6 May 2008), chap 2.
For further
information on the potential health risks of nanotechnology generally see The
Royal Society and Royal Academy of Engineering,
Nanoscience and
Nanotechnologies: opportunities and uncertainties
http://www.nanotec.org.uk/finalreport.htm
(at 6 May 2008).
Available Specification on the Vocabulary for Nanoparticles of the British
Standards Institution (BSI PAS 71:2005). One
nanometre (nm) is one billionth of
a metre (10
). So, for example, a human hair is about
80,000 nm wide and a sheet of paper about 100,000 nm thick.
Hampton, ‘Researchers Size Up Nanotechnology Risks’
(2005) 294(15)
Journal of the American Medical Association
Canadian Academies,
Report in Focus. Small is Different: A Science
Perspective on the Regulatory Challenges of the Nanoscale
(July 2008), p
Oberdörster et al, ‘Principles for characterizing the potential human
health effects from exposure to nanomaterials:
elements of a screening
strategy’ (2005) 2
Particle and Fibre Toxicology
UK, Institute
of Food Science and Technology Trust Fund,
Information Sheet –
Nanotechnology
February 2006
http://www.ifst.org/uploadedfiles/cms/store/ATTACHMENTS/Nanotechnology.pdf
(at 6 May 2008) 6.
Ahmed ElAmin,
‘Nanoscale particles designed to block UV light’, Food production
daily.com, 18 October 2007
http://foodproductiondaily.com/news/printNewsBis.asp?id=80676
(at 6 May 2008).
WHO, above n
Chaudhry, ‘Project A03063. Assessment of Current and Projected
Applications of Nanotechnology for Food Contact Materials
in Relation to
Consumer Safety and Regulatory Implications’, UK Food Standards Agency,
http://www.food.gov.uk/science/research/researchinfo/contaminantsresearch/contactmaterials/a03prog/a03projlist/a030637
(at 6 May 2008) 7.
Knowles III, ‘Nanotechnology. Evolving occupational safety, health
and environmental issues’ [March 2006]
Professional Safety
UK, Institute
of Food Science and Technology Trust Fund, above n 13, 7.
UK, Health and
Safety Executive (HSE),
Nanotechnology – Horizons Scanning Information
Note No HSIN1
Knowles, above
WHO, above n
Morrison, above n 3, 7.
Helmut Kaiser
Consultancy, above n 1.
and Senjen, above n 4, 11. For further, see Andrew Maynard and Evan Michelson,
The Nanotechnology Consumer Products Inventory
, Woodrow Wilson
International Center for Scholars - Project on Emerging Nanotechnologies, March
http://www.nanotechproject.org/reports
(at 6 May 2008).
foods such as milk may naturally contain nanomaterials.
Helmut Kaiser
Consultancy, above n 1.
http://www.foodscience.csiro.au/foodfacts/foodfacts11-fishoil.htm
(at 6 May 2008).
Jones, ‘A nanotech revolution in agriculture and the food industry’
ISB News Report, 1 June 2006
http://archives.foodsafety.ksu.edu/fsnet/2006/6-2006?fsnet_june_7.htm
(at 6 May 2008). For example, the interactive nature of nanofoods will provide
on-demand delivery by the addition of nanocapsules
which burst at different
microwave frequencies. Chau Chi-Fai, Wu Shiuan-Huei, Yen Gow-Chin, ‘The
development of regulations
for food nanotechnology’ (2007) 18
Food Science & Technology
European Food
Safety Authority, ‘EFSA to analyse food safety of nanotechnology’
http://www.eas.be/NewsItem.aspx?newsid=617
(at 6 May 2008).
Morrison, above n 3, 11.
Paradise et al, ‘Developing Oversight Frameworks for
Nanobiotechnology’
Minnesota Journal of Law, Science &
http://ssm.com/abstract=1103114
Morrison, above n 3, 10.
CSIRO, above n
28 reporting award given to researchers involved in the work.
Senjen, above n 4, 9 and 55. For a comprehensive summary of the use of
nanotechnology in the food industry, see Kuzma
and VerHage, above n 3; USDA,
Nanoscale Science and Engineering for Agriculture and Food. A Report of a US
Workshop outlining a roadmap for possible nanotech applications
in food and
agriculture
, September 2003
http:// www.nseafs.cornell.edu/web.roadmap.pdf
(at 6 May 2008); Chau, Wu and Yen, above n 29. See also IUFoST, above n 3.
Jones, above n
‘Securely wrapped: Nanoparticles make Durethan films airtight and
glossy’ undated 15
Bayer Research
http://www.research.bayer.com/edition_15/15_polyamides.pdfx
(at 6 May 2008) 35.
Products Inventory
, above n 25.
Belperlo, above n 5.
bottle plastics’ at
Consumer Products Inventory
, above n 25.
Plastic Wrap’ at
Consumer Products Inventory
, above n 25.
above n 17, 9.
Jones, above n
29. See further, Ahmed ElAmin, ‘Nano ink indicates safety breach in food
packaging’ Food Navigator. Com.Europe,
14 November 2006
http://www.foodnavigator.com/news/printNewsBis.asp?id=72022
(at 6 May 2008).
pSivida Ltd,
pSivida launches pSiNutria in the Food Industry
, ASX/Media Release (1
December 2005)
http://www.psivida.com/News/download/ASX/ASX%20Release-pSiNutria%20Dec%202005.pdf
(at 6 May 2008).
Food Act 2003
Food Act 2006
Food Act 2003
Health Act 1911
Health (ANZ Food Standards Code Adoption) Regulations 2001
respect to imported food, see
Imported Food Control Act 1992
Standards Australia New Zealand Act 1991
Standards Australia New Zealand Act 1991
(Cth) s 3A(1).
Standards Australia New Zealand Act 1991
(Cth) s 3A(2).
Food Standards
Australia New Zealand,
Australia New Zealand Food Standards Code
Standard 1.1.1 cl 3.
Food Standards
Australia New Zealand,
Annual Report 2004–2005,
2005, 26–7.
The relevant practice is set out in the Council of Australian Governments,
Principles and Guidelines for National Standard Setting and Regulatory Action
by Ministerial Councils and Standard-Setting Bodies
, April 1995 as amended
by COAG June 2004
http://www.coag.gov.au/meetings/250604/coagpg
(at 6 May 2008).
Food Standards
Australia New Zealand, ‘Format for applying to amend the Australia New
Zealand Food Standards Code food produced
using gene technology’
Food Standards
Australia New Zealand,
Initial assessment report. Application A580 food
derived from amylase-modified corn line 3272
, 31 May 2006.
Standards Australia New Zealand Act 1991
Standards Australia New Zealand Regulations 1994
Standards Australia New Zealand Act 1991
s 10(1)(a).
Standards Australia New Zealand Act 1991
Standards Australia New Zealand Act 1991
Standards Australia New Zealand Act 1991
Standards Australia New Zealand Act 1991
Standards Australia New Zealand Act 1991
Standards Australia New Zealand Act 1991
Standards Australia New Zealand,
Food Standards Australia New Zealand
Application Handbook
, 1 October 2007.
Food Standards
Australia New Zealand,
Food Standards Australia New Zealand Application
, 1 October 2007,
Nanotechnology. A Report of the US Food and Drug Administration
Nanotechnology Task Force
, 25 July 2007, pp 17-18.
. See also definition of
‘handling’ and unsafe food’ in
respectively.
s 4E(1)(d).
Cf defence in
other States:
Food Act 2001
Food Act 2003
Food Act 2004
Food Act 2006
Food Act 2001
Food Act 2003
Gerkens, Randell J Gerkens and Audrey Cleeve,
Food Legislation –
(looseleaf) (1990 - Law Book Company Ltd), 634 [16.390]. See also
Carrick DC v Taunton Vale Meat Traders
(1994) 158 JP 347
with respect to
Food Safety Act 1990
21(1) where it was held that the express
requirement that the defendant ‘took all reasonable precautions’ did
all precautions.
FSANZ, above n
Food Standards
Australia New Zealand,
Australia New Zealand Food Standards Code
Standard 1.5.2 cl 2. In particular such foods are listed in column 1 of Table to
conditions would be specified in Food Standards Australia New Zealand,
Australia New Zealand Food Standards Code
, column 2 of Table to cl 2.
Taylor, Woodrow Wilson International Center for Scholars – Project on
Emerging Nanotechnologies,
Regulating the Products of Nanotechnology: Does
FDA Have the Tools it Needs?
Food Standards
Australia New Zealand,
Final Assessment Report Proposal P291 Review of Novel
Food Standard
, 3 October 2007, 34.
Food Standards
Australia New Zealand,
Australia New Zealand Food Standards Code
Standard 1.5.1 cl 1.
Food Standards
Australia New Zealand,
Australia New Zealand Food Standards Code
Standard 1.5.1 cl 1.
Food Standards
Australia New Zealand,
Final Assessment Report Proposal P291 Review of Novel
Food Standard
, 3 October 2007, 54, Questions 4.12 and 4.13.
See Part 2 of
Guidance Tool for Determining whether a Food is Novel or Not
Attachment 4 of Food Standards Australia New Zealand,
Final Assessment Report
Proposal P291 Review of Novel Food Standard
, 3 October 2007.
Food Standards
Australia New Zealand,
Final Assessment Report Proposal P291 Review of Novel
Food Standard
, 3 October 2007, Attachment 9 Summary of Submissions, 86.
Standards Australia New Zealand,
Australia New Zealand Food Standards
, amended Editorial Note to cl 1 in Standard 1.5.1 which now expressly
refers to foods produced by a process not previously applied
to food. See also
UK, Food Standards Agency,
Draft Report of FSA Regulatory Review
March 2006, [20].
‘Nanotechnology use in food applications: a scientific and regulatory
http://www.eas.be/NewsItem.aspx?newsid=127
(at 6 May 2008).
Food Standards
Australia New Zealand, above n 81, 78.
Food Standards
Australia New Zealand,
Australia New Zealand Food Standards Code
Standard 1.3.1.
Food Standards
Australia New Zealand,
Australia New Zealand Food Standards Code
Standard 1.3.1.
Food Standards
Australia New Zealand,
Australia New Zealand Food Standards Code
Standard 1.3.1.
Food Standards
Australia New Zealand,
Australia New Zealand Food Standards Code
Standard 1.3.4.
See further
FAO/WHO Sixty-seventh report of the Joint FAO/WHO Expert Committee on Food
Additives, WHO Technical Report Series 940,
WHO, Geneva, 2007.
Jess Halliday,
‘EU Parliament votes for tougher additives regulation’ Food
Navigator.com, 12 July 2007
http://www.foodnavigator.com/news/ng.asp?n=78139-additives-regulation-enzymes-flavourings
(at 6 May 2008).
Food Standards
Australia New Zealand,
Australia New Zealand Food Standards Code
Standard 1.4.1.
Food Standards
Australia New Zealand,
Australia New Zealand Food Standards Code
Standard 1.4.3 cl 2.
UK, Institute
of Food Science and Technology Trust Fund, above n 13, 7.
AS 2070-1999 Australian Standard. Plastics materials for food
AS 2070-1999 Australian Standard. Plastics materials for food
Qasim Chaudhry
et al, (2006),
Final Report: A scoping study to identify gaps in
environmental regulation for the products and applications of
nanotechnologies
, London, Defra; UK Food Standards Agency,
Draft report
of FSA Regulatory Review. A review of potential implications of
nanotechnologies for regulations and risk assessment
in relation to food
Food Standards Agency, 2006,
http:// www.food.gov.uk/multimedia/pdfs/nanotech.pdf
(at 6 May 2008); Taylor, above n 75; FDA,
Nanotechnology. A Report of the US
Food and Drug Administration Nanotechnology Task Force
, 25 July 2007.
Food Standards
Australia New Zealand,
Australia New Zealand Food Standards Code
Standard 1.3.3 cl 5.
UK, Institute
of Food Science and Technology Trust Fund, above n 13, 8.
Products Inventory
, above n 25.
Standards Australia New Zealand,
Australia New Zealand Food Standards
, Standard 1.4.2.
Standards Australia New Zealand,
Australia New Zealand Food Standards
, Standard 3.2.3 cl 2(3).
Standards Australia New Zealand,
Australia New Zealand Food Standards
, Standard 3.2.3 cl 12(3)(c).
Standards Australia New Zealand,
Australia New Zealand Food Standards
, Standard 3.1.1 cl 1.
Standards Australia New Zealand,
Australia New Zealand Food Standards
, Standard 3.1.1 cl 2(1).
Standards Australia New Zealand,
Australia New Zealand Food Standards
, Standard 3.1.1 cl 2(5).
Department of Industry, Tourism and Resources,
Australian Community Attitudes
Held About Nanotechnology – Trends 2005 to 2007
, Market Attitude
Research Services Pty Ltd, 12 June 2007, 3-4.
Senjen, above n 4, 3.
Society and Royal Academy of Engineering,
Nanoscience and Nanotechnologies:
opportunities and uncertainties
http://www.nanotec.org.uk/finalreport.htm
(at 6 May 2008) section 8.3.3 [26] rec 11; UK Institute of Food Science and
Technology Trust Fund, above n 13, 16 and 18.
Standards Australia New Zealand Act 1991
Standards Australia New Zealand,
Australia New Zealand Food Standards
Ministerial
Council Policy Guidelines, endorsed 12 December 2003, High Order Principles, 2nd
Specific Principles, 3rd dot point.
Standards Australia New Zealand,
Australia New Zealand Food Standards
, Standard 1.2.4 cls 3 and 8(1).
VerHage, above n 3, 17.
Report from
the Chair of the Northern Ireland Food Advisory Committee INFO 06/09/04, 21
September 2006 to the UK Food Standards Agency,
‘Nanotechnology’.
Standards Australia New Zealand,
Final Assessment Report Proposal P291 Review
of Novel Food Standard
3 October 2007, 15.
Standards Agency,
Draft Report of FSA Regulatory Review
above n 90.
EFSA, above
‘Nanotechnology. A Report of the US Food and Drug Administration
Nanotechnology Task Force’, 25 July 2007
http://www.fda.gov/nanotechnology/taskforce/report2007.html
(at 6 May 2008).
Ludlow, Diana Bowman and Graeme Hodge,
A Review of Possible Impacts of
Nanotechnology on Australia’s Regulatory Framework. Final Report
September 2007,
http://www.innovation.gov.au/Section/Innovation/Documents/MonashReport.pdf
(at 10 November 2008).
Institute of Food Science and Technology Trust Fund, above n 13, 9.
Institute of Food Science and Technology Trust Fund, above n 13, 4.
For general
information on this, see Food Standards Australia New Zealand,
Assessment Report Proposal P291 Review of Novel Food Standard
October 2007, 12.
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (275 KB)
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter