URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/journals/MqLawJl/2019/5.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 15:21:23
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Metzger, James --- "The Current Landscape of Blockchain-Based, Crowdsourced Arbitration" [2019] MqLawJl 5; (2019) 18 Macquarie Law Journal 81
THE CURRENT LANDSCAPE OF BLOCKCHAIN-BASED, CROWDSOURCED
ARBITRATION
JAMES METZGER
Online dispute resolution (‘ODR’) is in a state of rapid
change and development. ODR platforms, such as British Columbia’s
Resolution Tribunal, have been granted expanding mandates and the types of
disputes that are being referred to these platforms
has been increasing. To
date, the existing platforms have been largely centralised; that is, either
associated with the court system
or organised by a centralised authority or
administrator. More recently, however, many platforms have begun to emerge that
to use blockchain technology to decentralise dispute resolution by
crowdsourcing the adjudication of disputes to a worldwide pool
juror-arbitrators.
This article seeks to survey the current landscape of these
blockchain-based, crowdsourced arbitration platforms, in order to explain
each intends to operate, the similarities and differences amongst them and the
conception of ‘justice’ that each
one promotes. The goal of this
overview is to achieve a better understanding of the promises of dispute
resolution that each platform
aims to produce. This kind of understanding is
necessary to advance further discussion and consideration of the likely
including the normative limitations, of using these
technologically-based solutions for the resolution of disputes.
I INTRODUCTION
Online dispute resolution (‘ODR’) has been a significant and
growing part of legal and dispute resolution systems for
almost twenty
Broadly considered, ODR
describes an ever- widening ‘array of online procedures and technological
tools that disputants and
neutrals use to resolve
Some of the
earliest ODR platforms were developed by private companies in order to address
small-scale consumer disputes in the e-commerce
space. One of the best known of
these platforms is the eBay Resolution Centre, which is generally cited as
resolving at least 60
million disputes per
Other private forms of ODR
can be found on platforms such as net-arb.com, SettleToday.com and from the
e-commerce website Alibaba.
More recently, ODR has begun to be integrated to work more directly with
state and national court systems, with platforms such as
the developing United
Kingdom Online Solutions Court,
the now defunct Rechtwijzer, which facilitated separation and divorce
arrangements in the Netherlands.
Probably the most developed of these court-integrated ODR platforms is British
Columbia’s Civil Resolution Tribunal
which has been
in operation since 2016.
has mandatory jurisdiction over small claims up to CAD $5,000, strata property
and, as of 1 April 2019,
motor vehicle accident injury disputes for damages claims up to CAD
The intention of the
British Columbia Parliament is for the CRT to increase the monetary threshold
until it becomes the mandatory
forum for all small claims disputes, the current
Amongst the factors that these private ODR and court-integrated ODR platforms
have in common is that both are centralised; in other
words, established and
operated by a singular, central authority. In the case of the eBay Resolution
System or Alibaba’s e-commerce
resolution platform, it is the company
itself that provides the service and issues the decision, with the courts as a
potential backup
source of dispute resolution if there is a reason to escalate
the dispute beyond the ODR
court-integrated platforms, the centralised authority is the State, the laws of
which establish the system of justice that
the ODR platforms facilitate.
More recently, private developers have begun to create ODR platforms that
seek to use blockchain technology to decentralise the delivery
resolution to disputing parties in any location through a worldwide network of
self-selecting juror-arbitrators, all of
whom interact through decentralised
apps (‘dApps’) built on top of the blockchain. The ostensible goal
of these emerging
platforms is to provide a new kind of access to justice, which
is necessary because, as the founders of one of these platforms put
‘[e]xisting dispute resolution technologies are too slow, too expensive
and too unreliable for an online real-time world.
A fast, inexpensive,
transparent and decentralised claim adjudication system will be a key
institution for the Internet
Each of these
platforms, in some way, seek to remove dispute resolution from centralised
authorities and organisations by creating
a streamlined, technologically-based
solution that, in the eyes of the creators, will dramatically reduce costs and
delays whilst
still providing disputing parties with a fair and considered
The ability of these platforms to provide this kind of result leads to many
normative questions relating to conceptions of justice
and fairness and whether
decentralised dispute resolution platforms are genuinely capable of providing
These questions revolve
around such issues as to the integrity of the platforms generally and, more
specifically, the integrity of
the juror recruitment and selection process; the
sufficiency of game theory and crypto-economic principles to provide a system of
fairness that can underpin the platforms’ design and operation; and
whether the incentives and penalties that are designed
to ensure honest juror
participation are likely to be effective. Before these normative issues can be
sorted out, however, it is
both useful and necessary to obtain a more
comprehensive picture of the basic landscape of these decentralised,
blockchain-based
platforms to understand better how many currently exist in
various stages of implementation and development and how each intends
justice for disputants once they are actually operating. This article aims to
provide just this picture.
Part II of the article will set out an overview of the blockchain and
decentralised justice mechanisms in general. Part III will then
describe the
current state of the dApp development by identifying the platforms that
currently exist, explaining what stage of development
each seems to be at, and
how each intends to deliver justice to the disputants through the platform
design. It should be noted that
it is reasonably easy to post a plan for
starting work on a dApp, so the list may not be entirely complete as new
platforms emerge
with a great deal of speed. Part IV will offer some concluding
remarks and will look ahead at some of the challenges and normative
that will (or should) likely face the purported providers of this new form of
II DECENTRALISED JUSTICE ON THE BLOCKCHAIN
Central to these platforms being able to provide the kind of dispute
resolution promised is the existence of blockchain technology,
which in turns
allows for the creation of smart contracts, and finally the ability for
programmers to develop the dApps that work
on top of and in conjunction with the
blockchain. The aim of this Part of the article is to explain each of these
concepts with an
eye toward understanding how each is necessary for the
operation of the platforms that will be discussed in the next Part.
‘A blockchain is, in the simplest of terms, a time-stamped series of
immutable record [
] of data that is managed by cluster computers not
owned by any single entity. Each of these blocks of data (i.e. block) are
and bound to each other using cryptographic principles (i.e.
These records,
especially when a cryptocurrency like Bitcoin or Ethereum is involved, may
consist of information such as credits
and debits, or might record the ownership
of property by providing a record of the
One way that blockchains
are often described is as a distributed ledger that contains all of these
records in ways that are independently
verifiable.
One method for verifying the information contained on the blockchain is that
– so far as the blockchains that will power the
dispute resolution dApps
discussed below are concerned – all of the information recorded is
publicly available.
As explained
by Vitalik Buterin, the founder of the Ethereum blockchain:
[A] public blockchain is a blockchain that anyone in the world can read,
anyone in the world can send transactions to and expect to
see them included if
they are valid, and anyone in the world can participate in the
– the process for determining what blocks get added to the
chain and what the current state is. As a substitute for centralized
quasi-centralized trust, public blockchains are secured by cryptoeconomics
– the combination of economic incentives and
cryptographic verification
using mechanisms such as proof of work or proof of stake, following a general
principle that the degree
to which someone can have an influence in the
consensus process is proportional to the quantity of economic resources that
bring to bear
Thus, all that is required to view the transactions that have taken place
across the entirety of the blockchain in an internet
connection.
Although the digital records listed and stored on the blockchain are public,
the identities of the parties that are engaging in those
transactions remain
private and, at least in theory, impossible to trace to an identifiable person.
Instead, blockchain transactions
are recorded using public keys –
essentially random strings of numbers and letters – that correspond with a
public account. The user will also have a private key – a
separate string of numbers and letters – that allows account
access their own cryptocurrency from their own digital
The other method of verifying the recorded information, as well as ensuring
that the information is safe and reliable, is related
to the decentralised
nature of the blockchain. Each block of information passes through a series of
networked computers, called ‘nodes’,
each of which is verifying the
transaction that has been made on the blockchain.
Blockchain technology removes fraudulent transactions. Compared with existing
methods of verifying and validating transactions by
third-party intermediaries,
blockchains’ security measures make blockchain validation technologies
more transparent and less
prone to error and corruption. While
blockchains’ use of digital signatures helps establish the identity and
authenticity of
the parties involved in the transaction, the completely
decentralized network connectivity via the Internet allows the most protection
against fraud. Network connectivity allows multiple copies of the blockchain to
be available to all participants across the distributed
decentralized, fully distributed nature of the blockchain makes it practically
impossible to reverse, alter, or erase information
contained in
Put another way, the decentralised network uses a set of shared rules to
verify each piece of information that is recorded in the
‘Information already contained in a verified blockchain cannot be
overwritten without reaching consensus with the entire
network to propagate the
altered information. So, while this is not to say that . . . invalid data cannot
be posted, a strong effort
is needed to do
Because the blockchain has these independent, but interrelated, verification
mechanisms – public view and decentralisation –
the promise is that
transactions carried out on the blockchain will be safe and reliable because
they can be easily and definitively
verified, with very little ability for bad
actors to manipulate, falsify or change the records. Of course, the reality of
and trust on the blockchain is still being determined, especially in
light of high-profile cryptocurrency
such as the hack of
cryptocurrency exchanges Mt Gox,
as well as the hacking
of mobile phones that allowed for access to user’s cryptocurrency
Blockchain technology has also facilitated the creation of ‘smart
contracts’ that allow for peer-to-peer agreements to
be arranged over the
blockchain. In essence, a smart contract is a piece of code that is embedded in
the blockchain infrastructure.
The code allows for the translation of ‘legal prose into an executable
The result is
the creation of an algorithm that ‘carr[ies] out one or several
pre-established operations, according to the
’ principle. In other words, as soon as the necessary execution
conditions are met, the operation is automatically carried
Examples of smart
contracts are Apple’s iTunes built in agreement that purchased songs can
only be played on a limited number
an automated banking
transfer that is set to occur following a defined
or the payout of a sports
wager that occurs immediately following the outcome of the
Each of these examples
demonstrates how the programming of a smart contract can have ‘control
over the physical and digital
objects needed to effect
execution.’
This automatic execution is key to the operation of smart contracts as it
allows for the smart contract to be decentralised. Rather
than requiring human
intervention to execute, the contract executes itself following the occurrence
of some defined, possibly real-world,
‘A smart contract
does not rely on the state for enforcement, but is a way for contracting parties
to ensure performance.’
The contents of the smart contract, like all other information recorded on a
public blockchain, is available to be viewed by anyone
with an internet
connection.
However, even though
the terms of the contract are publicly accessible, the identities of the
contracting parties are still represented
by the random string of numbers and
letters that comprise the user’s public key. This means that parties could
enter into a
smart contract on the blockchain without ever knowing who is on the
other side of that contract.
Because the contract is self-executing, there is not necessarily a need to know
the identity of the counterparty because performance
and execution is guaranteed
through the automation built into the code.
What is still largely undetermined is how parties, particularly when those
parties are unknown to one another, are to settle disputes
that arise following
the automatic execution of a smart contract. It is possible that parties can
still rely on traditional and existing
courts and ADR processes such as
mediation and arbitration to address smart contract
But, reliance on these
institutions may not be so simple. In the first instance, there may be
complications regarding whether and
how a court has jurisdiction over the
dispute or over one or all of the parties to the smart
Even if a court had
especially because the contract
is not written in plain language, but rather in
the language of executable computer
The code may not be
capable of straightforward interpretation, even by other computer
programmers,
and may not be
flexible enough as a language to represent the parties’ intent in forming
the contract or defining their relationship
that is to be governed by
A further issue with respect to contract terms is that courts will
necessarily be addressing issues that have arisen after the self-execution
the smart contract. In other words, rather than the likely usual circumstance
where a party to a contract does not perform some
obligation, whether taking
action or making payment, and the court can address the issues of breach prior
to the execution of the
performative terms of the contract, a court addressing
issues on smart contracts will be looking at the circumstances after the
has already executed
It is unclear how a
court would be able to unwind, much less stop, smart contract execution since
that step is built into the code
and cannot, easily or altogether, be
Further, however, it is
unclear how a court is to deal with circumstances that were not obviously
contemplated by the parties because
the specific circumstance is not written
into the code and the contract has already executed itself. An example of this
is if a traveler entered into a smart contract with a travel insurer
for a payment to be made in the event that the traveler’s
flight arrived
The smart contract would
execute itself and make payment to the traveler even if the flight was late
because the traveler was solely
responsible for the flight delay.
The use of voluntary ADR could be one method of working around these
complications, but traditional ADR may not be an ideal solution
for at least a
couple of reasons. First, the problem of anonymity remains an issue. A party
wishing to engage in mediation or arbitration
offline would have to know with
whom they have been dealing in order to arrange the
proceedings.
Compounding the
problem is that even if the identity of the party is known, or can be
discovered, all parties would have to agree
to participate in the process in
order for it to work.
More fundamental to the use of the blockchain, however, is that any of these
resolution mechanisms, whether the courts or traditional
ADR, are centralised
procedures that defeat the proffered benefits of transacting on an entirely
decentralised system within a decentralised
network. Those that are using the
blockchain may want to ensure that they are never forced to interact with the
centralised world
once they have engaged with the decentralised blockchain.
Thus, it may be preferable to have an online, on-blockchain protocol of
resolution that can be written into the smart contract that would avoid the
issues associated with identification, jurisdiction
and centralisation of the
dispute resolution process.
III DISPUTE RESOLUTION ON THE BLOCKCHAIN
The platforms discussed below are offered by their developers as the solution
to the problems just described. Each platform promises
to provide a method of
resolving disputes that gives parties to a smart contract an option to include
an automatically available
dispute resolution mechanism that can be encoded
directly into the contract. The smart contract itself would still ultimately be
self-executing, but the dispute resolution mechanism would allow for the
automation of the execution to be suspended pending the
outcome of the dispute.
How that outcome is determined is one of the factors that differentiate these
platforms from one another.
Understanding the similarities and differences
amongst the platforms may help to determine if one or another contains elements
might be more desirable to support, on either a practical or normative
analysis. Understanding the platforms may also assist in identifying
normative questions that should be further considered in terms of the procedural
fairness that can be offered by decentralising
dispute resolution in the way
that these platforms propose.
At the most basic end of the spectrum are platforms that merely facilitate
the drafting and implementation of a smart contract, without
also providing a
dispute resolution protocol. One example of this is
OpenLaw presents itself
as primarily a resource for the legal industry as it is pitched toward lawyers
who are engaged in advising
clients on smart contracts. As explained on its
website, ‘Using OpenLaw, lawyers can more efficiently engage in
transactional
work and digitally sign and store legal agreements in a highly
secure manner, all while leveraging next generation blockchain-based
contracts.’
OpenLaw is an
open source repository for smart contract templates, with more than 500
currently available.
also provides what it calls ‘Legal Markup’ language, which allows
drafters to modify the existing templates with
plug-in code to enable features
such as ‘if → then logic, aliasing, multi-variable expressions,
hidden variables, and
. . . basic
calculations.’
This is hardly the only source for smart contract
but does demonstrate
a still reasonably early effort to disseminate smart contract drafting
principles to the greater legal community.
The issue of resolving disputes
related to those contracts is, however, not addressed.
Mattereum Protocol
A further step toward blockchain-based dispute resolution has been made by
the developers of the Mattereum Protocol (‘Mattereum’),
describes itself as a way of ‘turning law into
The foundation for
the Mattereum is the use of what is known as a Ricardian contract, which was
invented in 1995 by Mattereum’s
Chief Scientist, Ian
A Ricardian contract is a
method of converting a plain-language document, including a natural language
contract, into a digital,
computer-readable format that can also be
electronically signed by the parties and recorded on the
blockchain.
The advantage of the
Ricardian contract is that even after it is digitised, it still retains its
natural language format, so it can
still be read by people without needing
expertise in programming languages and computer
This goes some way toward
alleviating the issue referred to above of misunderstanding and complexity of
interpretation that come
from the rigidity and limitations of using code to
express basic contract and relational terms.
Mattereum’s focus is on using these Ricardian contracts as the basis
for creating an infrastructure within which property ownership,
tokenisation of
property and eventually full transfer and sale of property can occur entirely on
the blockchain. As explained in
late 2018 in its Summary White Paper, Mattereum
has taken the initial concept of using Ricardian contracts and has begun to
it to an actual piece of owned property – a Stradivarius violin
worth USD $9,000,000.
the infrastructure that allows for asset management and governance and to bridge
the gap between the blockchain and the
real-world (in which the physical violin
actually exists), Mattereum has instituted what it calls a ‘governing
that will have ‘legal decision-making powers over the
instrument, protecting and curating it on behalf of the token holders
posterity, in accordance with a written
constitution.’
concept of the ‘governing committee’ seems (though it is unclear
exactly how since the governing committee is never
mentioned again in the
Mattereum White Paper) to intersect with the related concept of the
custodian’,
which is to be
created for each asset managed by the smart
The automated
custodian is the term given to the entity that is designated the ‘legal
, maintaining the authoritative register of interests
in the asset.’
owner at least for the duration of the smart contract, the registrar is able to
enter into sub-contracts, including licenses,
or subdivide ownership of the
asset through the use of shares or digital tokens, so long as such
sub-agreements are in accordance
with the governing
constitution.
To use the example of the violin, the constitution might provide that the
violin cannot merely remain in a vault appreciating in value,
but instead has to
be played publicly.
constitution might specify that the violin must be played in no fewer than six
concerts per year in no fewer than three
The registrar of the
asset would then be obligated to ensure that no subsidiary agreements were made
that would defeat this governance
requirement.
The governance
structure could also establish a ‘curatorial board’ to make
decisions such as which violinists should
have priority to play the instrument,
which concerts and countries are to be preferred and when and how the instrument
serviced and
maintained.
The conditions that are placed on the violin can be administered through the
use of digital ‘tokens’, the creation of
which is available on
blockchains such as Ethereum.
Mattereum envisions the use of two separate kinds of tokens related to the
assets – financial benefit (or security) tokens
and right of use (or
utility) tokens.
The financial
benefit tokens would essentially represent an investment interest in the asset
and grant the holder a right to be paid
a portion of the asset’s value
upon sale or to receive a portion of the income generated through licensing. The
right to use
token could be granted to give a token holder the right to
‘access, possess, play, remix, display, or otherwise interact with
As with all public
blockchain records, all contract and governance terms, the register of assets
and the list of holders of tokens
would be publicly available, though the
identities of any individuals would not be.
The Mattereum White Paper claims that the focus as it has been developing
this infrastructure has been on dispute avoidance rather
than on dispute
resolution,
which may explain
why very little mention is made about the actual plan to resolve disputes.
Interestingly, the Mattereum Working
Paper does address initial ideas about
resolving disputes that may arise regarding the assets, but these ideas are all
terms of a vaguely defined arbitration
The Mattereum Working
Paper makes several references to the decentralised nature of the
enterprise,
yet the introduction
of arbitration as the means to resolve disputes first refers to the necessity of
a ‘body of law’
as well as a reference
Convention on the Recognition and Enforcement of Foreign Arbitral
The main reference to
arbitration then refers to the use of ‘arbitration
associations’,
described in terms that suggest that the authors are contemplating centralised,
existing arbitration providers (though
the ultimate meaning is unclear and never
fully defined).
This does not necessarily mean that there is a failure in not providing fully
decentralised dispute resolution, and as the normative
questions around
decentralised dispute resolution continue to evolve, it may be that
decentralised dispute resolution is not a good
but it does point to a lack
of clarity as to where Mattereum’s priorities lie. The Working Paper does
provide a clue as to
Mattereum’s priorities as an investment vehicle and
property management business rather than as a developer interested in advancing
blockchain-based dispute resolution. In the Business Model section, the
Mattereum Working Paper states:
We believe that the correct approach to this space is not to directly
intermediate any of the value flows (this is, after all, meant
decentralization exercise!) but rather for Mattereum to have a dual nature:
setting up the infrastructure, and then acting
as a (lead) investor in the
companies that are coming into the space to build businesses in the ecosystem
If Mattereum is intended to be more of an investment and property management
platform, rather than a dispute resolution oriented one,
it should not be that
much of a surprise that its approach to resolving blockchain-based disputes is
fairly rudimentary. Still, it
is a step forward in attempting to use the
technology to address disputes that arise on the blockchain.
Rhubarb Fund
Many of the remaining platforms to be discussed use some form of
crowdsourcing of decision-making by putting disputes to a public
vote. One of
the simpler of these kinds of platforms is Rhubarb Fund (‘Rhubarb’)
which presents itself as a kind of hybrid
dispute resolution and investment
vehicle. As described in its White Paper, ‘Rhubarb . . . is changing the
way disputes are
resolved by developing, funding, and promoting rapid
distributed consensus mechanisms (RDCM’s) that make faster, cheaper, and
more democratic forms of civil justice
To provide this
consensus-based dispute resolution, Rhubarb is going to be issuing its own
proprietary digital token, the
Holders of RHUCoin, or
at least those that obtain RHUCoins through the Initial Coin Offering
(‘ICO’), are described as
investors in Rhubarb, who will
‘share in future appreciation derived from expanding usage of, and demand
for, new forms of
distributed dispute resolution, legal settlement
administration, and other evolutions in decentralised law that Rhubarb develops
and/or invests in.’
Rhubarb is positioning itself not just as a contract administrator or provider
or as a dispute resolution platform, but rather states
that it will serve
‘both as an investor in legal tech and a developer and promoter of
‘new law’ innovations using
blockchain, cryptocurrency, and other
distributed
processes.’
The RCDM method of dispute resolution being provided and facilitated by
Rhubarb takes the form of a ‘poll verdict’ which
is simply the
result of a poll of all RHUCoin holders who submit votes as
The mechanism for
resolution of disputes through Rhubarb is relatively straightforward: the party
raising the dispute posts it on
Rhubarb’s dispute portal, along with
proposed resolution options. The example provided by Rhubarb is that an insured
dispute with her insurer over an auto insurance
The insured posts the
dispute and proposes three solutions on which jurors can vote: the insurance
company pays the full amount of
the claim; the insurance company pays half the
amount of the claim; or the insurance company pays nothing. Jurors may also be
an option to suggest further resolution options. The party registering the
dispute can then decide the maximum number of jurors that
can register votes and
the distribution of the background and experience of those jurors. For example,
if the insured was a New South
Wales resident, she could designate that the
matter be decided by a maximum of 1000 jurors, with 400 of them to be consumer
250 insurance professionals and 350 NSW consumers. The parties can
then agree as to the effect of the decision reached by the jury
outcome can be treated as arbitrative and binding; mediative and non-binding; or
as a form of expert opinion for the
In order to register a vote, the jurors deposit one of their RHUCoins and
submit their decision. It is unclear whether or how Rhubarb
intends to prevent
the parties from holding RHUCoins and deciding their own cases or whether and
how jurors will be restricted from
voting more than once. This lack of clarity
speaks to the necessity of further inquiry into normative questions related to
the integrity
of the platforms and the integrity of juror voting.
The end result of the voting is a set of consensus decisions – the
overall consensus of all jurors and the consensus decision
of each designated
group of jurors, each of which may provide the parties with useful information,
particularly where the overall
non-binding.
Jurors who do not
vote with the overall consensus will forfeit their deposited RHUCoins, which
will be redistributed pro-rata to
the jurors in the consensus
Incentives are also
provided for jurors who suggest resolution options that become the consensus.
Those jurors must deposit more
than the standard 1 RHUCoin in order to suggest
an option but will receive a five-times bonus return if their suggested option
overall consensus.
this way, the RDCM process is described by Rhubarb as
‘self-funding.’
As of this writing, Rhubarb has 22 cases open for
each of which allow
voters to earn RHUCoins, which are not yet generally available either through
the ICO or direct purchase on a
In addition, three
cases are listed as closed and one as having been settled by the parties. The
ICO is scheduled to take place sometime
in the first half of
Jury.Online
Jury.Online, which has been in operation since September
is another hybrid
platform, combining the ability for consumers to invest in ICO projects with a
dispute resolution mechanism for
issues associated with those
investments.
Jury.Online
contains fairly specific requirements for deal offerors who are posting deals,
in the form of smart contracts, to the
platform. Primarily, any deal offered
through Jury.Online must include a set of ‘Milestones’ that are
intended to give
investors guidance as to whether the terms of the deal are
being fulfilled and to serve as the basis for any disputes that may
The smart contract must
also include a method for dispute resolution, which may include identifiers for
the pool of judges that will
be used to resolve the
The actual dispute resolution process is not entirely clearly described at
present. The process is referred to both as arbitration
(in text under the
heading ‘Refund’)
and as mediation (in the heading ‘Mediation Decision-Making
Procedure’),
there may be some confusion about the effect of process and terminology. The
intent from the description seems to be that
Jury.Online will be providing a
binding resolution, but this is not clear either, pointing again to questions
surrounding the integrity
of the platform and the decision-making process that
is being utilised. A party that wishes to initiate a dispute will have to do
within the parameters, including time-frame, established by the terms of the
smart contract (e.g. within three days of a
Milestone).
Initiating the
dispute will then automatically trigger the process for appointing the judges
who will decide the outcome. The judges
will come from a ‘pool’,
also recorded on the blockchain, that is a constantly-updating list of active
judges, any of
which may be selected to resolve the
It appears that the
current mediator/judge pool can be viewed on Jury.Online’s
The pool of judges could come from this set of ‘mediators’ who
are registered by Jury.Online, but the smart contract could
also designate that
the judges be selected from a third-party service
The judges remain
anonymous from the parties and anonymous from each other. Though the parties do
not know the identities of the
judges, the competence of the judges is revealed
to the parties, though the Jury.Online White Paper does not specifically state
this is to be
communicated.
The parties
could also agree to appoint a known judge, rather than anonymous random
though it is not
clear if this choice would have to be designated in the smart contract or could
be addressed when the dispute arises.
Judges are incentivised to participate in
the process, and to render reasoned decisions, because they are rated based on
the judgments
they make and receive compensation for rendering decisions.
According to the Jury.Online White Paper, these incentives should cause
to resolve disputes ‘fairly and correctly, rather than to randomly pass
their verdicts,’
nothing is provided to indicate how the developers of the platform are
conceiving of gauging or measuring either fairness or
correctness. These issues
point to further normative concerns regarding the effectiveness of incentives
being provided to decision
Aragon Network
Aragon Network (‘Aragon’) describes itself as ‘the
world’s first digital
purports to provide dispute resolution solutions for decentralised autonomous
organisations (‘DAOs’), which can be
defined as ‘a set of
smart contracts
that encode the bylaws of the entire
organisation’ and that are ‘designed to run autonomously on a
blockchain and ...
solely controlled by code, without any need for human
involvement.’
side of DAO operation is, of course, that these organisation have real-world
utility and facilitate transactions between
people, possibly resulting in
disputes. Aragon proposes to offer a means to resolve these disputes through its
First, Aragon states that agreements entered into between a person and the
DAO will be in some kind of human-readable, natural language
form, as well as a
computer-readable one.
human-readable agreement appears as if it will differ in some respect from the
Ricardian contract promoted by Mattereum, since
Aragon is not adopting
Mattereum’s protocol, which it describes as not suitable for
‘blockchain-native’ entities
that do not have a physical, real-world
analogue, such as a piece of
The parties to each
side of the agreement will have to deposit collateral in the form of an Aragon
Network Token (‘ANT’)
that will remain deposited for the life of the
contract in case a dispute
The disputes related
to these agreements will then be adjudicated in Aragon’s network courts,
which operate as arbitral
Following the
initiation of the dispute, Aragon’s system will randomly select five
jurors who have ‘activated’
their reputation, which is earned by
having previously been in the majority of deciding judges in prior
Aragon’s courts operate on two related game-theory principles. The
first, which is used by other platforms discussed below,
is the Schelling
A Schelling Point
assumes that there will be a consensus result that independent actors would
arrive at because it is a logical
For example, a
simple Schelling Point would be that if a person was to be meeting a stranger in
Sydney and neither party had previously
suggested a meeting time and place, both
parties might independently suggest meeting at noon at Town Hall because that
natural and common time and place. The assumption that jurors will
arrive at a Schelling Point, and that that Schelling Point will
necessarily be
the ‘correct’ outcome for the dispute, is further established
through the system of reputation debits
and credits that are associated with the
jurors’ decisions. Any juror that is part of the Schelling Point consensus
reputation, whilst any juror who is outside of the consensus will be
penalised with a deduction of reputation. The ability of the
Schelling Point to
provide for a normatively justified ‘correct’ result is another
issue related to platforms such as
Aragon that requires further
consideration.
Aragon adds another layer of game theory meant to deter or eliminate the
possibility of juror bribery by requiring that all jurors
agree to a code of
conduct that defines their responsibilities as
The sample code
provided in the Aragon White Paper includes terms such as that a juror will flag
their case for review if either
party attempts to bribe the jury, and will vote
for the non-bribing side, or that the juror will dismiss any case in which both
seek to bribe the
This mechanism is
described as a ‘metagame with a Nash equilibrium that favours honest
jurors over malicious agents and dishonest
jurors attempting to influence court
decisions.’
to be staked by the parties to the dispute, which are distributed to the
This again raises
issues regarding the ability of incentives, particularly game theory-based
incentives, to moderate juror behaviour.
Appeals are available following the adjudication of a dispute, but judges
will be limited to those with the highest reputation and
the fees that the
parties will have to stake will also
hierarchical court structure also includes a supreme court, which
‘enforces and encodes the community values
of the Aragon
The supreme
court will have final appellate review over any disputes that escalate to that
level and the supreme court jury will
be composed of the top nine judges who
received the most payouts based on their prior decisions within the
Jur similarly promises to provide a solution for parties to create and enter
into smart contracts that can include a built-in dispute
resolution mechanism
via Jur’s platform.
also uses a system of game theory incentives, supported by its token also called
‘Jur’ to encourage participation
and honest, considered
decision-making. In Jur’s system, the parties to a contract can designate
the dispute resolution mechanism
as either open or
If open is selected,
then any Jur token holder may serve as a juror. If a ‘Closed Hub’ is
chosen, only a subset of vetted
jurors who meet designated conditions may decide
No fee is charged
to either party in the dispute and the jurors are compensated solely by the
redistribution of tokens from non-majority
jurors to the majority
The parties are
required to propose a resolution option, which the jurors will consider when
Jur’s redistribution of tokens to the majority is unique amongst the
existing platforms. Rather than distributing tokens pro-rata
to all jurors in
the majority, Jur will only redistribute tokens to those jurors that were
to comprise the majority, in other words the first votes cast
on what ends up as the majority
For example, if 15
tokens were voted in a dispute of A v B, 10 for A and five for B, the five
tokens that were voted for B would
be forfeit as B lost the dispute. However,
only 5.1 votes were needed to establish the majority for A. So, the five tokens
by the B voters will be redistributed pro-rata only to those 5.1 voting
jurors who voted for A first. The number of votes on each
side will also always
be visible to all jurors.
According to the Jur White Paper, this system should incentivise jurors to
vote for the minority at the time of vote-casting if they
believe the minority
has the right position and will ultimately prevail (rather than simply voting
with the then-majority to ensure
retention of tokens), since a juror will only
be rewarded with more tokens if enough of the other jurors side with the
minority to
make that juror’s majority vote
Jur’s system will also restrict voting for the majority when the majority
votes exceed that of the minority vote by 200%, so
as not to allow for an
insurmountable advantage for the then-majority. These innovations may address
some of the issues associated
with platform design and operational integrity.
The effectiveness of any incentives in this area, however, still requires
consideration.
OATH Protocol
OATH Protocol (‘OATH’) seeks to provide a dispute resolution
mechanism that can be incorporated into any smart
rather than seeking
to provide smart contract drafting as
OATH assumes that any
community user with blockchain experience has both common sense and sufficient
knowledge to be able to evaluate
evidence and make reasoned decisions to decide
This seems to be
another way of expressing reliance on consensus decision-making to support the
claims of fairness in resolving these
blockchain disputes.
OATH makes specific reference to the selection of common law juries as a
point of comparison for its eventual jury pool, since juries
are an initially
random collection of community members who come together to resolve disputes in
court. OATH claims, without providing
additional proof of the claim, that where
a jury makes a decision ‘[a]ll community members share the consensus that
the verdict
OATH, therefore,
describes its model as essentially transporting the jury system onto the
blockchain. The blockchain technology,
in turn, is described as being able to
‘ensure the authentication of smart contract agreements and immutability
of the evidence
provided by the
proof is offered to support the claim that evidence should be considered
‘immutable’ merely because it is
related to an agreement that is on
the blockchain, since that evidence is likely to relate to real-world activities
and real-world
actions rather than existing entirely on the network.
OATH’s most unique feature seems to be its commitment to a diverse set
of jurors that will be selected from its pool by its
algorithm. OATH states that
whilst the identity of all jurors will remain anonymous, any juror that
registers will have to provide
information such as ‘age, gender,
nationality, occupation and education
algorithm will then select most of the jurors to decide a particular dispute
based on those categories. Rather than
redistributing tokens, OATH will assign
each juror a credit level, with increased credit given to jurors who vote in a
majority decision
and credit being deducted from those who render ‘serial
wrong judgments.’
higher credit rating results in higher rewards and increased odds of being
selected for future disputes. Jurors will also earn
arbitration fees, to be paid
out of tokens deposited by the disputing parties. This system seems to be an
attempt to address some
issues of the integrity of the juror recruitment
process, though questions surrounding the effectiveness of incentive structures
once those jurors are chosen to determine a matter still remain.
The parties to a smart contract that designates OATH as the dispute
resolution protocol will include a resolution plan in the smart
contract code.
This plan can consist of specifics such as the number of jurors, the percentage
of votes needed to prevail, and the
category requirements of the jurors to be
Once a dispute is
initiated, OATH sends out notifications to the prospective juror pool, with
information including the arbitration
fees and other ‘key details of the
Jurors can then
decide whether they wish to participate in the decision. It is possible that not
enough jurors will elect to decide
the case, in which case OATH will
‘reject’ the parties’ resolution plan and require that they
amend it to further
incentivise juror participation, such as by increasing the
award to jurors or decreasing the number
This suggests that
market forces may be dictating, at least to some degree, the dispute resolution
processes available to the parties.
OATH, however, states that the revision of
the resolution plan ‘allows the parties to control and manage the cost of
Jurors are incentivised to participate in the process actively by taking part
in deliberation discussions about the evidence submitted
by the parties. Jurors
may earn bonus payouts and additional credit if they address ‘critical
points’ and participate
discussion.
Just who is to
identify a critical point and how it is to be assessed is not disclosed or
otherwise explained. Appeals may be initiated
for additional fees to the parties
and the smart contracts are programmed to accept up to two
Juris is the most structured of the current set of blockchain-based, dispute
resolution options.
also uses its own token, the ‘JRS’, to incentivise juror behaviour,
but before jurors are even necessary, the mechanism
for resolving disputes is
based more on a staged ADR strategy than an immediate referral to resolution by
Juris refers to this
staged approach as the ‘Juris Protocol Mediation and Arbitration
incorporates what it describes as a ‘novel reputation system based on
prior certification, ongoing community activity,
machine learning, and graph
Juris’ materials include a mission statement with three goals:
‘(1) To make smart contracts on any blockchain safe, robust,
legally enforceable, and open source; (2) To make access to civil justice and
legal help as widely and publicly available
as The Internet; (3) To bring
effective, peaceful, fair and balanced dispute resolution to the billions
underserved and overcharged
by established legal
infrastructure.’
accomplish this mission, Juris has devised its Protocol, which consists of three
dispute resolution steps.
The first is named ‘SELF Mediation’ which occurs on an embedded
layer of Self-Enforced Library Functions
SELF Mediation provides the parties with a ‘range of popular mediation
tools and techniques intended to facilitate resolution
conflicts.’
These tools
are available on Juris’ platform through its user dashboard. Use of the
SELF Mediation tools does not require the
deposit of any JRS, so there is
effectively no additional cost to the parties.
Should the parties not be able to resolve their dispute using these mediation
tools, the dispute moves to the next stage: SNAP, or
Simple Neutral Arbitrator
Poll, judgment.
Proceeding to
a SNAP judgment will require that the parties stake JRS as a fee to be paid to
the poll participant voters. The Juris
platform will provide all
‘Jurists’, or those people who are registered with Juris, the
opportunity to view information
regarding the dispute and to register their
opinion. The parties will receive the result of the poll, as well as a
‘brief opinion
from the [voting]
The parties may
then use this polling information to return to the SELF Mediation layer and
resolve the dispute without further cost.
If the parties still fail to resolve their dispute, the final stage is a
binding PANEL, or Peremptory Agreement for Neutral Expert
Litigation,
This determination,
which Juris states will be enforceable according to United Nations treaty, will
be made by a panel consisting
only of Jurists with the highest reputation level,
known as ‘High
As explained
in the Juris White Paper, ‘This panel will be selected by UN mandated
rules, and convene virtually through the
Juris Platform. They will have a
pre-determined amount of time to hear additional arguments from the parties,
request, collect, and
review additional evidence, consider arguments,
The panel can ask
questions of either party and may seek to hold video-based
A presiding High
Jurist will render a decision on behalf of the panel, which will be binding on
the parties.
The initial pool of Jurists is to consist of ‘existing, certified,
arbitrators and legal
professionals.’
Jurist pool grows, Jurists will be classified in one of three tiers. High
Jurists are those with the highest reputation and
can make PANEL judgments. Good
Standing Jurists are experienced with the platform and have contributed to prior
decisions, and therefore
are able to fully participate in SNAP poll judgments.
Finally, Novice Jurists are those that are new to sign up and are able to
to discussions during the SNAP poll period and register a vote, but
that vote will not be included in the vote tallies communicated
There is also a structure for Jurists to increase their reputation (or have
it decreased).
Reputation can
be enhanced by contributing to discussions during the SNAP polls. The usefulness
of a participant’s contributions
can be measured by soliciting ratings
from other participants, similar to GitHub or Reddit. Juris also anticipates a
system of peer
review amongst the High Jurists that take part in PANEL
judgments, which can produce a set of endorsements that can be fed back into
Juris reputation platform. These endorsements can then be used as ‘the raw
data for a directed weighted graph’, which
in turn will produce a
‘trust metric’ for each
Here, again, some
issues of juror integrity seem to be implicated by Juris’ reputation-based
structure, but the broader issues
require further analysis.
The final platform to discuss is the most developed, and perhaps the most
ambitious, of the dispute resolution providers to emerge
Kleros is thus far
the only dispute resolution platform to have a functioning dApp, which is
currently in operation for an actual,
ongoing use case. The current dApp follows
from an earlier beta test of the platform that commenced in July
Kleros uses its own token, the Pinakion (‘PNK’) as the game
theory mechanism to incentivise jurors to act reputably. As
with Aragon, OATH
and other platforms, Kleros relies on the Schelling Point to prevent jurors from
making random, arbitrary
determinations.
The Schelling
Point is administered by requiring that jurors put some of their holdings of PNK
into escrow whilst the dispute is
being determined. As with the other platforms,
jurors who are in the decision majority will have their escrowed tokens returned
any jurors who are in the minority will forfeit their tokens for pro-rata
redistribution to the majority jurors. The expectation
is that jurors will make
reasoned, informed decisions and will ‘vote the true answer, because they
expect others to vote for
the true answer. . . In this simple case, the
Schelling Point is
Kleros operates through a system of hierarchically arranged sub-courts, with
the deeper levels of court requiring more expertise of
the members who elect to
serve as jurors in that
More general
levels of court likely require less knowledge and expertise. People who want to
serve as jurors in any Kleros court
must hold PNK. This is because staking PNK
is the means by which jurors will be selected to be part of a jury panel. The
will designate in their smart contract the sub-court in which a dispute
will be decided and how many jurors are to comprise the initial
jury panel for a
first-level dispute. In a simple example, the parties might provide that the
initial jury is to be a panel of three.
The jurors will then be chosen based on
how many jurors have staked how many tokens in the sub-court. For example, if
Person A stakes
500 tokens and Person B stakes 1000 tokens and Person C stakes
2000 tokens, then the odds of B being selected as a juror are twice
as great as
A and the odds of C being chosen are four times as great as A (and twice as
great as B). PNK could initially be obtained
by receiving an
‘airdrop’ of tokens, available only to those who registered an early
interest in Kleros, or by participating
in Kleros’ Interactive Initial
Coin Offering. Currently, PNK may be purchased directly on token exchanges, such
as Bitfinex,
This system is currently in operation with the ongoing use case, which is a
curated list of trusted tokens listed on the Bitfinex
Anyone can submit a
token for inclusion on the list, though it is likely that the token developers
or backers will be the ones to
Once submitted,
anyone in the community may challenge the inclusion of a token on the list for
failure to meet specified
A challenge
requires depositing Ethereum currency (‘ETH’) as an arbitration fee,
which will have to be matched by the
submitter for the matter to proceed (and
not be forfeited by the
submitter).
Following a
challenge, the Kleros dispute resolution protocol is activated and PNK holders
who have staked tokens in the curated
list sub-court and been chosen to serve as
jurors can access the court dashboard to view evidence uploaded by the parties
and register
their determination on whether the inclusion criteria are or are
not satisfied.
Appeals can be
brought following a decision, but an appeal will always require double the
number of jurors plus one (i.e. an initial
panel of three will have an appeal
panel of seven) with a proportionate increase in the arbitration
Theoretically, there
could be an unlimited number of appeals (unless limited by contract terms), but
appeals may become too expensive
for the parties to continue. As of this
writing, 45 tokens have been submitted with 36 tokens having been accepted onto
IV CONCLUSION
It should be apparent that the ongoing development of these blockchain-based
dispute resolution platforms open up a host of normative
questions that deserve
consideration before we should feel comfortable that the parties in dispute can
actually receive the kind
of ‘justice the platforms promise. As raised
above, a primary issue for consideration is whether the Schelling Point is a
satisfactory
mechanism on which to base the assumption that a group of
unidentifiable, dispersed people who may have different legal and cultural
understandings of a particular dispute will be able to coalesce around a
‘correct outcome.’ Related to these fundamental
issues of game
theory and crypto-economics are issues about the likely effectiveness of
particular incentive structures to protect
against jurors making arbitrary
determinations or trying to game the system solely to avoid penalties. There are
further issues associated
with the juror pool, since the prospective jurors are
initially a self-selecting group who are comfortable using blockchain
technology,
potentially limiting the general availability of jurors, which in
turn reflects on the integrity of the jury system and the integrity
platform. Beyond the limitation of juror participation that is dictated by the
familiarity with technology, juror participation
may be further limited as there
may also be an economic barrier to entry. For example, the Kleros curated token
list court currently
requires that prospective jurors stake 80,000 PNK, with a
value as of this writing of over $600
for the possibility of
being selected as a juror.
Even though the majority of that stake is likely to be returned to any juror
(whether in the majority or minority of a decision),
it is still a large
investment in tokens that must precede participation.
The landscape of blockchain-based dispute resolution is new and rapidly
changing. Some of the platforms described in this article
may not succeed, but
others may point the way forward not only for disputes that arise on the
blockchain, but perhaps for some that
begin in the physical world. The
descriptions provided and questions raised in this article are intended to give
a sense of the current
state of the landscape and to set the stage for further
exploration and research into the new world of resolving disputes that these
platforms are creating.
FAMILY LAW, ACCESS TO JUSTICE, AND AUTOMATION
FELICITY BELL*
Family law has historically been an area that many people end up
traversing with only limited legal assistance. With increasing interest
artificial intelligence in legal services has come an expanding range of family
law applications. Many of these applications have
potential to assist clients,
lawyers and courts. However, clients will continue to need, and seek out, human
lawyers to assist them
in family law matters. Especially in the case of
vulnerable parties and children, technology may not be an appropriate substitute
for human family lawyers.
I INTRODUCTION
Several years ago, artificial intelligence (AI) was foretold – often in
gleeful headlines
spell the demise of the legal profession. This initial dramatic prognosis has
given way to a more nuanced and qualified
understanding of how AI is impacting
the provision of legal services and how it may affect legal
professionalism.
Scholarship examining the impact of automation on governmental and
administrative decision-making, the rule of law, and legal values,
developing.
At the same time reports, media releases, and other industry and professional
literature propound the many uses of AI in law, among
The idea of applying
AI to legal problems is not new, having been investigated since the
Yet the rapid developments of recent years have propelled its applications
further and, in so doing, generated new and immediate
concerns as well as
opportunities.
In its loosest sense, artificial intelligence refers to software processes
which can carry out tasks that, if performed by a person,
would be considered
evidence of intelligence.
Distinction is made between ‘general’ AI and ‘narrow’
AI. In precisely defined tasks, such as playing the
ancient board game of
narrow AI processes can
outperform humans. However, the AI
‘robolawyer’
the broad range of skills which humans possess, is still some time
As discussed in Part II,
‘AI’ is a loose term to describe a collection of tools and
functions. In this article it is
used to denote a range of different automated
systems and processes which have in common their capacity to mimic aspects of
services, in this case with particular reference to family law.
In relation to the justice system, Professor Tania Sourdin has categorised
technological effects as coalescing around three impacts:
supporting those
involved in the system; replacing elements of the system that were previously
conducted by humans; and disrupting
or fundamentally transforming the
She notes that, to date, most reforms have involved the first two categories
(supporting and
supplementing).
differentiate, for example, between supporting a decision-maker to make their
decision (such as by guiding them through a
series of steps) as opposed to
actually automating the decision
However, the
expansion of AI into administrative
decision-making,
growth in online dispute resolution options – including under the auspices
of the court system – suggests that
the third category is developing
Meanwhile, some North American scholars have suggested that lawyers
practising in family law will continue to enjoy greater job security
compared to their colleagues in other areas of law, given the importance of
human interaction for family law
Yet the imperatives of financial strain and the difficulty of obtaining legal
aid already raise access to justice concerns and compel
many in the direction of
less than full legal representation, whether they are partially represented,
self-represented and/or accessing
other kinds of legal information, advice and
support systems.
justice in family law matters has been identified as a serious problem in
Australia (and indeed in other common law jurisdictions,
such as Canada and
England and Wales).
key reason why developments in the categories described by Sourdin have already
impacted and have the potential to further
impact the way that family law legal
services are delivered.
Automated systems hold out many possibilities for improving information
provision and supporting decision-makers; for replacing some
elements of legal
work; and even, as Sourdin notes, ‘where predictive analytics may reshape
the adjudicative
Many of its applications can be of use to family law clients and to family
lawyers themselves. At the same time, it is important
to be wary of seeing
automated systems as too ready a solution in the face of constraints on the
family law system and what Professor
John Dewar termed ‘the normal chaos
of family law’.
Part III discusses some of the reasons that family lawyers may be seen as
necessary in family law disputes but also constraints on
access to justice and
problems with the family law system. Part IV describes some examples of
automation in family law, while Part
V examines specific issues associated with
increasing use of automated systems, and Part VI concludes.
‘LEGALTECH’ AND OTHER UMBRELLA TERMS
Artificial intelligence is an umbrella term which may encapsulate many
different methods and lacks an agreed or consensus
As someone joked on Twitter, ‘If it is written in Python, it’s
probably machine learning. If it is written in PowerPoint,
it’s probably
AI might also be
referred to generically as automated
Despite the
reference to ‘intelligence’, ‘[a]n AI system is not really
“reasoning” or “thinking”
but is following a set of
pre-programmed or computational steps... or mathematically analysing a huge
amount of data to infer a
probability’.
AI has developed considerably since its early iterations, though progress has
not been linear but rather marked by a series of cycles
development and generous funding punctuated by ‘AI
The current surge in interest has been fuelled by the greatly increased
processing power (at considerably less relative cost) of
computers, including
personal computers and devices, and the massively increased volumes of
electronic information or data that are
The history of AI and law, a discipline established decades ago, is
illustrative. From this period onwards academics investigated
systems’, using decision trees, to solve legal
These types of system are representative of existing knowledge and are
pre-programmed with logical rules and definitions. They may
also employ
mathematical formulae and weightings of different variables. Their outputs might
be an assessment of a legal situation,
or the automatic completion of a
During the 1990s, there was interest in the AI and law community not only in
expert systems based on explicit rules but in ‘case
based reasoning
systems’, which attempted to derive those rules from an existing body of
The limitations of
these approaches led to investigation of neural nets as a means of overcoming
them. Neural nets are systems structured
in a way that mimics the (projected)
architecture of the human brain as a network of interconnected nodes.
Exploration of the possibilities
of neural nets has occurred, as explained in
Part IV, in the development of systems for family law
Professor Kevin Ashley has noted that ‘legal expert systems are still
widespread in use’,
some of their applications are discussed below. However, Ashley considers that
they will not revolutionise the delivery of legal
Rather, it is
advances in cognitive computing, or machine learning, that are galvanising
interest, and massive investment,
Neural networks are
one subset of methods which fall under the umbrella of ‘machine
learning’. In particular, ‘deep’
neural networks (with
multiple ‘hidden’ layers), used for ‘deep learning’, are
behind many publicised AI
developments.
Sometimes referred to as ‘data-driven systems’, machine learning
programs ‘infer formal relations... from unstructured
Rather than
being pre-programmed with rules, the program itself identifies patterns and
correlations in training data and creates
a mathematical or statistical model
which is then applied to new data. Supervised machine learning refers to
providing the program
with labelled training data – in other words,
indicating the outputs which are sought. An image recognition program could be
trained with photos already labelled as to what they depict (or more precisely,
what a human has determined they
for example, an
apple or an orange. The goal then might be for the program to correctly classify
a new image as one or the other,
or as something else. Using all the data
available – in this case, every pixel of every image – the program
uses inductive
reasoning to deduce the ‘rules’ which match the data
to the correct labels. The program can then itself ‘learn’
relationships between inputs and outputs. Importantly, it can continue to adjust
its model as it is provided with new data. Unsupervised
learning, on the other
hand, is where the software is provided with data (such as many images of fruit)
and left to identify patterns
Supervised learning is
more common in legal
applications.
It would be a mistake, however, to think that humans do not have control or
input over how systems are created. Rather, as David Lehr
and Professor Paul Ohm
explain, at every step in what may be a complex process, human input is
The question to be
addressed, the data, the choice of algorithm or ‘the software code that
explores the relationships between
the input information and the
and weighting
mechanisms, are all crucially important factors. Essentially, the programs are
doing statistical analysis, but with
the potential for millions of data points
to be input, and billions of relationships modelled – in other words on a
complex scale.
An application of machine learning which is important to legal applications
is natural language processing (NLP), ‘a collective
term referring to
automatic computational processing of human
languages’.
includes both algorithms that take human-produced text as input, and algorithms
that produce natural looking text as
The natural
language of humans is complex because it is contextual
order is important and words have multiple meanings.
Developments in machine learning and NLP have generated renewed interest in
the legal applications of AI,
and in ‘LegalTech’ (technology and software with legal applications)
more generally. It can be difficult to discern technology
that makes use of AI
(even broadly defined) and that which does not. The latter might include more
conventional software for billing
or document storage, for example. As explained
above, an expansive definition of AI is adopted here to refer to automated
which, unlike more general ‘LegalTech’, are capable of
substituting for lawyers or elements of legal work in relation
Supervised machine learning is very useful in certain legal contexts –
for example, where a huge number of documents must be
reviewed in discovery.
Provided that the documents are electronically readable (or can be converted to
a readable format), the software
can review and learn to classify them as either
discoverable, or not.
AI legal tools may use some form of simple expert system where an internet bot,
or question and answer tree, guides the user
through a series of steps.
By blending expert systems with machine learning, it is also possible to
design tools which also learn from the examples with which
they are provided,
increasing their sophistication. There are many such programs available,
particularly in the United
The Law Society of
England and Wales predicts that as these types of system become ever more
sophisticated and fluent in natural
language processing, they will increasingly
be manned ‘by robots with the ability to test queries against a vast
past information in seconds – as IBM Watson demonstrates for
the more they are used, the more such programs learn, and therefore they
continue to improve as they address more
Substantial claims have been made generally about the capacity of legal AI or
automated systems (and indeed, technology in general)
to improve access to
This may occur through clients being able to do their legal work themselves;
through clients doing some elements of their own legal
(unbundling);
lawyers using technology to themselves work more efficiently and pass costs
savings on to their clients. The US Legal
Services Corporation, in its
‘vision’ for improving access to justice through the use of
technology, described a strategy
with five components, including the development
of expert systems ‘to assist lawyers and other services
providers’.
III FAMILY LAWYERING
Family law is often seen as necessitating skills which are not strictly
technical or legal, and indeed might fall into the category
skills’ which are attained through experience rather than formal training.
The idea that family law is qualitatively
different to other areas of practice
has been largely embraced by family lawyers, possibly in part as a reaction to
the traditional
view of family law as a ‘low status’ branch of legal
characterisation of family law as a separate, specialist area of law is also
sometimes connected to the espousal of non-litigiousness
by lawyers. Family law
involves clients who are likely to be traversing one of the most difficult
periods in their lives (and hence,
not be in an optimal position to make
important decisions) and, importantly, where the interests of vulnerable
non-parties, namely
children, often require consideration. One former judge has
described family law as involving value judgments about deeply personal
All these factors,
which are explicated in greater detail below, indicate some of the complexities
involved in automating family
Nevertheless, non-lawyer or ‘self-help’ options are not at all
new to family law. For example, with the introduction of
divorce in many states of the United States in the 1970s, divorce
‘kits’ and self-help books
proliferated.
In the 1990s,
as well as printed materials, software (available for purchase on CD-ROM, for
example) could be used to simplify the
completion of
Information about
family law has been around on the internet for a long time, and has already
produced a cultural change toward
Generally, people
are more likely to seek information on the internet, including in areas which
would once have been considered to
require professional
One Canadian study suggested that
this is a factor driving self-representation, more so than a general dislike or
mistrust of
The arguments that were made about these kinds of materials at the time are
essentially the same as those raised about the considerably
more sophisticated
options now available. These concern whether they might violate prohibitions on
unauthorised practice of law,
by crossing over from being mere provision of
legal information to constituting legal
More generally, there is a debate as to whether providing people with such
self-help options fulfils an important social good (enabling
access to legal
services for those who would otherwise not be able to access it affordably), or
leaves people vulnerable to poor
quality information or advice. This is
discussed in Part V.
In terms of quality, there is another relatively long-standing debate
concerning the degree to which family lawyers are, and should
be, specialists.
American researchers Lynn Mather and Craig McEwen distinguished between family
law ‘specialists and generalists’,
identifying these groups as
constituting separate ‘communities of
Other studies have reported that family lawyers ‘have claimed for
themselves special
characteristics’
setting them apart from other legal
practitioners.
Australian family lawyers
largely seem to identify as a separate,
distinct and unique group of legal practitioners. They have been described as
knit and relatively
homogenous’
and sharing a ‘cohesive legal
Legislation to merge the Family Court and Federal Circuit Court, introduced to
the Senate in late 2018,
criticised by lawyers concerned about the impact of a loss of family law
specialisation within the
The appointment to
the family law courts of judges lacking in family law expertise has also been a
source of complaint.
Reporting on its recent inquiry into the family law system, the Australian Law
Reform Commission (ALRC), while recommending significant
structural reforms in
order to close the ‘jurisdictional gap’ between State matters (such
as child protection and family
violence intervention orders) and Federal family
law matters, emphasised the continuing importance of
specialisation.
This is significant because family law specialisation is associated with
non-litigiousness, according priority to the wellbeing of
clients and their
children, and interpersonal skills including management of conflict. Studies
indicate that rather than increasing
discord, specialist family law solicitors
tend to be resolution
While solicitors adopt different styles as
‘ideal’ family lawyer type has shifted in the last few decades to
Mather and McEwen identified the norm of the ‘reasonable lawyer’
acting in divorce matters who ‘should anticipate
likely case outcomes,
argue only for “realistic” positions (not whatever the client
wants), show respect for other lawyers,
and avoid unnecessary conflict in
settling cases’.
England and Wales, the ‘new breed’ of family lawyer was described as
conciliatory rather than
adversarial,
possibly the
result of legal and mediation practice
converging.
Dr Jill Howieson’s Australian study found that ‘the family lawyers
tended towards a more conciliatory approach to family
lawyering and used a blend
of lawyering approaches in their work to achieve constructive
Family lawyers have ethical duties not only to the administration of justice
and to their clients, but also to ensure that children’s
interests are
considered.
In Australia, there has also been a concerted effort over many years to divert
people away from engaging in adversarial litigation
in family law and toward
agreed resolutions.
in dispute over the parenting of children are intended to attend Family Dispute
Resolution (FDR), a form of family mediation,
prior to commencing court
proceedings.
At the time that this became mandatory, the federal Government set up
‘Family Relationship Centres’ around the country
to provide (among
other services) FDR. There are not currently any similar mandatory processes for
property disputes; however, the
ALRC has recommended their
introduction.
One group of
academics has commented that it is part of a family lawyer’s obligation to
encourage clients to resolve disputes
outside of court and ‘clients need
to be reminded that “divorce is not a zero sum game;” they may both
off with a fair, nuanced settlement that takes account of their
circumstances than a regime imposed by a
Professor Barbara Glesner Fines has argued that, despite massive changes to
family structures – notably that fewer people marry,
and more marriages
end in divorce – ‘the core of family law practice has remained
unchanged’.
Specifically, Glesner Fines claims that what she characterises as the dual
challenge and reward of family law – assisting those
in personally
difficult circumstances – remains at the heart of family law
professionalism.
The corollary to Glesner Fines’ argument is that human lawyers are
essential to family law matters, which is explained by Canadian
academic Noel
Semple as follows:
A client who is divorcing from a co-parent, or contesting the care of an
older relative, is often best served by a settlement that
creatively identifies
options that work well for everyone involved, within the framework of the law.
Cost-effectively securing such
an outcome may require an advocate with a
personal reputation within a local community of practice and a working knowledge
outcomes are considered reasonable by other lawyers and judges within
the local legal
Here, Semple emphasises the human aspects of professionalism which cannot be
replaced, even by sophisticated software, to suggest
that family law is
relatively more ‘sheltered’ from the incursion of technology into
legal services. The benefits of
automated options must, however, be considered
by reference to the current family law system, which, as reflected in
Law for the Future
, is widely regarded as a broken
Human family lawyers
also come in for their share of criticism – whether for charging
exorbitant fees, increasing discord among
separated families, or generally
lacking competence.
Accordingly, despite claims about the importance of human family lawyers,
certain aspects of family law make it susceptible to automation
first being affordability and accessibility, and the second, larger-scale
problems with the efficiency of the family
law system.
Firstly, unaffordability of legal services is a fundamental issue in family
law. Litigants are individuals, rather than corporations,
and separation
typically generates enormous financial pressures as parties face disentangling
financial affairs and financing the
running of two households instead of
Moreover, family problems generate significant emotional stress which can lead
The Law and Justice Foundation’s survey of legal need in Australia found
that ‘[r]elationship breakdown was one of several
problem types that acted
as a trigger and appeared to trigger debt, legal action and other family
Australia, as in many other common law jurisdictions, government funding of
legal aid continues to decline, and a large proportion
of people do not qualify
for legal aid yet are unable to afford the cost of engaging a
‘missing middle’ of the legal services
In many discussions
of family law and technological advances, including the use of automated
systems, it is this missing middle who
are the expected or intended
beneficiaries. Professor Ben Barton has argued that lawyers in the US initially
ignored or underestimated
automated options (typically low-cost online providers
of legal services and forms) to their
This was because,
initially, these services were directed toward people who would otherwise have
accessed no legal advice at all.
With time, however, these services became
attractive to the missing
That is, as they have become more established, online providers have begun to
compete with lawyers as their rates are greatly discounted
when compared with
Another benefit to automation might be to increase access to accurate family law
information and services. Ease of access might include
avoiding courts but could
also extend to avoiding formal dispute resolution procedures, or face-to-face
interactions with lawyers
and/or the other party.
The second issue relates to the first, and concerns problems of delay and
inefficiencies in the court
For years the Australian family law system has been plagued by claims about
In 2017, the House of Representatives Standing Committee on Social Policy and
Legal Affairs reported that
delays from court filing to the commencement of a trial can be as high as 36
months in both the Family Court and the Federal Circuit
Court of Australia
(Federal Circuit Court) ... [which] can increase the risk of harm to families...
[I]n remote or regional areas,
delays can be even
Certainly, within family law, delays have severe impact, not just on parties
but upon their children. For victims of domestic violence,
for example, risk of
homicidal violence from their former partner is at its highest post-separation,
and children may be left in
inappropriate or unsafe
situations.
Family Law for
referred to ‘multi-year delays in reaching final
hearing’ in the Family
unsurprisingly, the ALRC’s espousal of non-court options for dispute
resolution, such as arbitration, is clearly directed
to alleviating the
courts’ workload and providing parties with faster access to
resolution.
Issues of delay and court overwork are real and substantial, and require
As discussed in Part
V, however, automation does not necessarily present a complete or
straightforward solution to these issues,
which are long-standing, cultural and
structural. While there are individual applications which may be very useful, it
is important
to scrutinise each in its particular context.
IV EXAMPLES OF AUTOMATION IN FAMILY
Information Provision and Automated Drafting
The most long-standing application of automated systems to family law is for
tailoring information and in some cases generating drafts
of documents or forms.
The US Legal Services Corporation recommended the use of document assembly
applications to facilitate the
drafting of legal documents, including ‘by
litigants themselves’.
Another group of US authors have explained the benefits of such tools in terms
of access to justice:
Instead of finding static court forms online to download, print, and complete
by hand, litigants can now use interactive A2J Guided
Interviews, created with
A2J Author, which walks the user through the litigation process step-by-step. As
litigants answer a series
of questions, a form is assembled in the background
using HotDocs document assembly
software...
The Networked Society Institute (NSI), in its review of automated legal
advice tools, noted that they cover a spectrum of uses, including
those designed
for consumers to use themselves, exclusively for lawyer use, or something in
between (such as preparing an initial
draft of a document for a lawyer to
The NSI noted that the tools available are becoming more sophisticated, can
provide more precise information to clients, and in some
cases, can generate
documents based on responses
In the United
States and United Kingdom, family law document automation seems to presently
encompass only simple and non-contentious
items such as prenuptial agreements,
uncontested divorces and name
There is already a significant volume of family law information available
online and for free. Aside from legislation and case law,
organisations provide
factsheets on different issues. Professor Jonathan Crowe et al noted a
proliferation of legislation, case law,
‘websites, factsheets, self-help
guides and other material’, authored variously by government services,
non-government
organisations or
individuals.
For some years
the Family Court itself has provided ‘do-it-yourself’ kits for
different forms.
also some interactive types of online tools for family law matters in Australia,
for example to obtain a
One recent suggestion has been to implement an online questionnaire to be
completed at the time of filing an application, in which
each party could
explain the steps they have taken to resolve or narrow the
Despite the volume of information, non-lawyers seeking family law information
in the online environment reportedly find it difficult
traverse its
complexities, and hard to evaluate the credibility of different
The potential
benefit, then, of using automated tools is to more precisely direct non-lawyers
to relevant information. Chatbots or
more complex expert systems can walk a user
through a series of steps to answer simple legal queries or be directed to
curated information.
example, an Australian family law client intake system is Settify, an online
portal whereby potential clients can provide their
instructions online prior to
their first face-to-face meeting with a lawyer, by answering a series of
This is intended
to save clients’ and lawyers’ time by generating a set of
comprehensive instructions prior to the first
‘Predictive’ Analytics
The technology discussed above can be seen as promoting easier and more
affordable access to justice (via information and in assisting
complete forms and documents in simple and uncontentious matters). The use of
‘predictive’ analytics is geared
more toward finding efficiencies by
indicating a range of likely outcomes, thereby enabling people to better
understand their legal
position or options.
Many have observed the importance of prediction to what lawyers
Big data analytics or
predictive analytics is a way of analysing a massive quantity of data to reveal
meaningful patterns. ‘Big
data’ refers to the vast quantities of
electronic data existing in the world, which continue to grow at an incredible
Large quantities of data, extremely powerful computers, and advances in machine
learning all mean that extracting patterns from data
is much easier, and the
results more accurate.
Through different types of analysis, it is also possible to make predictions
from this data. Predictive analytics does not (and cannot)
something is so – it just identifies the existence of a pattern.
As explained in Part II, statistical and computational modelling of legal
cases is not
Initial models worked on information retrieval – locating or retrieving
similar cases in order to analyse whether the case
in question was sufficiently
similar to those cases to match the outcome. Ashley has explained that by
connecting ‘features’
of cases with particular outcomes, a program
can discern a pattern and use that to make predictions about the outcome of
similar features.
Features might include any number of things: those we might term
‘external’ (and which are likely technically irrelevant
merits of the case) such as who the judge was, who the lawyers were, whether the
plaintiff/applicant was a natural person
or a company, where the application was
filed, and so on. They might also include those ‘internal’ or
case-specific features
more readily recognised as going to the merits, such as
factual information about the events which have generated the claim.
A differentiator of programs is the extent to which the program must be told
by humans about which features to
Early programs required
the relevant features to be identified, which involved humans determining those
features which seemed to
be important, either based on analysis of key cases, or
Describing the ‘Split-Up’ system, Professor John Zeleznikow has
explained how relevant features were identified:
In developing Split-Up, Australian Family Law experts were used to identify
factors pertinent to a property distribution following
divorce. A data set of
past cases was then fed to machine-learning programs. Thus, Split-Up learned the
way in which judges weighed
factors in past cases... The way the factors combine
was not elicited from experts as rules or complex formulas. Rather, values on
the 94 variables were extracted from cases previously decided, so that a neural
network could learn to mimic the way in which judges
had combined
The program would then determine the weight that should be given to different
features and could use this information to reach conclusions
future cases.
More recently, the hope is that by using capabilities in reading text, a
program will be able to analyse a mass or corpus of documents
identify (and weigh) the relevant
Instead of relying
on a human to manually program the features needed, they are extracted
automatically from the textual data (such
as the text of judgments) using
machine learning. A recent example is the study of Nikolaos Aletras et al, who
analysed certain judgments
of the European Court of Human Rights (ECHR).
Reportedly, these researchers were able to infer the outcome of cases with 79
their study has been
criticised.
Among its limitations was the use of judgments in substitute for the materials
filed by the parties in each case. In other words,
an analysis of the text of a
judgment which had already been written, was used to ‘predict’ the
outcome of the case.
Pasquale and Cashwell argue, ‘[a] truly predictive system would use the
filings of the parties, or data outside the filings,
that was in existence
before the judgement
The method of
Aletras et al disregards the ways that judges draft their judgment so as to
support their final conclusions, including
the ways that facts are
interpreted,
undermining the
apparently impressive accuracy of the results.
Within subject-specific domains, commercial providers now offer forms of
legal predictive analytics.
For example, Lex Machina,
among the first of its kind to offer such a service, analyses patent decisions.
From its repository of thousands of decisions, it
extracts information such as
whether a certain lawyer has a good track record with a particular type of case,
or whether a certain
judge is likely to be amenable to a certain type of motion.
Proponents of this type of analytics argue that this is empowering to
of legal services, who can judge a lawyer’s track record on objective
The difficulties in applying data analytics to judgments are that judgments
tend to have no set format in terms of structure; factual
disputes are not
accounted for; and there may be insufficient data available to make reliable
predictions, especially in a small
commentator has noted that
under the strong influence of the current AI hype, people try to plug in data
that is dirty and full of gaps, that spans years while
changing in format and
meaning, that’s not understood yet, that’s structured in ways that
don’t make sense, and
expect those [data] tools to magically handle
Further, the effectiveness of some machine learning algorithms may mean that
there is a tendency towards ‘over-fitting’
– finding patterns
in training data which are not present in the real
There are likely to
also be biases present in family law data related to gendered patterns of
labour, and so
If data is historic, it is questionable how social changes occurring since the
1970s could be accounted for. On the other hand, if
only more recent judgments
are used, the smaller sample size may present problems. There have also been
numerous legislative changes
Family Law Act 1975
(Cth) itself
– a key issue would be the changes to the treatment of superannuation in
the early 2000s,
which would
have significantly impacted property division. Finally, if the data comprised
only of judgments and excluded settled
or non-litigated cases, this would
represent essentially a collection of ‘outlier’ data, as the
majority of separations
do not proceed to final hearing and judgment. While this
is arguably how a system based on precedents (judgments) works, the benefit
lawyer’s input is that person’s experience of settled as well as
litigated cases.
In their extensive critique of the study by Aletras et al, Pasquale and
Cashwell commented that
there is a danger that the model could be deployed by bureaucrats at the
[Court] to prioritize certain petitions, given that the Court
is deluged with
thousands of petitions each year and can only decide a fraction of those cases.
Without a clear understanding of
how the model is predicting the success of a
claim, [this] would be irresponsible
In the family law setting, for example, suppose that gender is highly
significant in determining property division – which is
likely, given the
differences in earnings of men and women over time. Should this be built into an
algorithmic model which ‘predicts’
what property division should be?
Or should it be excluded? If it is to be excluded, will it be possible to do
this, as there may
be any number of other data points from which gender could be
It is worth bearing Pasquale and Cashwell’s caution in mind, and the
limitations discussed above, when considering the application
of predictive
analytics to family law decisions. The Federal Court has publicised its
development of an AI system, using IBM software,
with the goal of identifying
factors which are correlated to judicial (or negotiated, if consent orders are
included) distribution
While this might be
possible – and the Court has indicated that such a system would be used
for the assistance of parties –
it has potentially concerning implications
for justice and fairness,
some of which are discussed below in
Online Dispute Resolution
The methods described in the preceding two sections may be combined for use
in online dispute resolution (ODR). ODR is a broad term
encompassing both
alternative dispute resolution (ADR) which is conducted online, and systems of
Broadly speaking, it might include online portals (as recommended in the United
States Legal Services Corporation (LSC) plan for
access to justice). Via such
portals, people can be triaged and directed to appropriate assistance. The LSC
also envisaged self-represented
parties being guided ‘through the entire
legal process.’
established Civil Resolution Tribunal in British Colombia provides such a portal
for people looking to resolve some civil
including family
Generally, it has been suggested that ODR is especially suitable for family
law disputes.
The complete
physical (and possibly temporal) separation of the parties in particular lends
itself to family mediation or family
dispute resolution (FDR), especially in
cases involving allegations of violence. It is argued that another benefit is
that the technology
creates a record of
interactions,
(though given
that what transpires in FDR is inadmissible, this may not be especially useful),
and may reduce the effect of power
imbalances in
relationships.
In 2011, Mark
Thomson reported on a project piloted in Queensland to delivery FDR services
Thomson noted that
the resulting web-based platform included video communication, and also:
• screen features including small windows (pods) which can be scaled,
resized and repositioned and hold a variety of information;
• visual sharing of information, including document sharing, online
demonstration and whiteboard feature;
• ability to record notes which can subsequently be emailed to [FDR
Practitioner]; and
• secure access to functionalities via [FDR Practitioner]
authorisation.
As this example shows, ODR may just involve traditional ADR processes which
are conducted online or through electronic means. It is
promoted as being
cheaper, faster, more flexible, and offering more convenience than traditional
Importantly though, humans may have a smaller role to play – it is
possible for AI to ‘become the third party that performs
the mediation or
decision making’.
well-known model for such services is eBay’s ODR system, created by
which deals with
millions of disputes each year and settles 90 per cent of them with no input
Modria is also
involved in systems that are and have been used for family disputes, such as
Rechtwijzer (discussed below) and the
Civil Resolution Tribunal.
Zeleznikow has reported on several ‘intelligent negotiation support
systems’ with application to family law, including
Split-Up and
Family_Winner.
writings, he has suggested that a system such as Split-Up could be used to
inform parties about the probable outcome of
their case (dependent, of course,
on how facts would be determined) and therefore support
negotiations.
Zeleznikow has
maintained, however, that ODR systems should incorporate advice about likely
outcome, support the parties to make
‘trade-offs’, and also
facilitate communication.
Moreover, he commented that ODR ‘should not be fully
systems Zeleznikow described are to support decision-making rather than to take
over this function.
ODR has not ‘taken off’ to the degree which might perhaps be
expected considering the pervasive issues of cost and delay
in traditional
litigation.
One reason for this may be an existing under-utilisation of mediation and
arbitration options.
in dispute over the care of children are notionally required to attend FDR prior
to filing in court.
the high number of exemptions granted – at least as reported in one
– suggests that
FDR attendance is still the exception rather than the norm. There is no
requirement to attend any out of court
dispute resolution process in property
Family Law for the Future
has recommended
that this be changed.
barriers to adoption may include the lack of a unifying representative
organisation of family law
a reluctance on
the part of lawyers to encourage their clients to take up external mediation
options, and seemingly a continuing
preference for barristers as mediators. A
final issue is that at present, FDR can only be performed by a Family Dispute
Practitioner accredited by the federal Attorney-General’s
Department.
This means that
while people are free to use an ODR process to attempt to resolve their family
law parenting issues, they would not
be able to obtain a
certificate to
later enable court filing. For people approaching FDR as simply a hurdle to be
overcome prior to filing, there would
be little incentive to use an ODR process.
As Professor Patrick Parkinson and former judge Brian Knox SC have observed,
channelling
parties into alternative dispute resolution options will require,
above all, ‘cultural
regardless of
whether that process is online or not. Semple has said that the primary task of
‘good family law professionals’
is not to litigate but to
‘[keep] separating people out of family court by securing their legal
rights through settlement negotiation
and other forms of alternative dispute
resolution’.
This is premised, however, on lawyers’ continuing involvement in ADR
Overseas there have been well-publicised attempts to increase the use of ODR
in family law matters. An ODR platform for separating
couples called Rechtwijzer
(‘Signposts to Justice’) operated in the Netherlands from 2014 to
2017. Although the platform
had been available since 2007, its newer iteration
resulted from a partnership between the Dutch Legal Aid Board, the Hague
for the Internationalization of Law (HiiL), and Modria. Separating
couples paid €100 for access to the program, which guided
them through
various aspects of their lives and preferences upon separation. Dutch Judge Dory
Reiling explained that it included
‘online forms, chat functionality,
calculation tools, and the ability to get help from an
identifying points of agreement, the program would offer a solution, which the
former partners could accept or reject. An evaluation
of Rechtwijzer found that
users found their experience satisfactory but many nevertheless wanted a third
party to review their
This feature was
later included, and reportedly nearly 60 per cent of those who used the platform
proceeded through to finalising
an agreement and registering
Rechtwijzer was said to be used in around 700 Dutch divorces a
though as Professor
Richard Moorhead has pointed out, this approximates to only one per cent of all
divorces in the
Netherlands.
Financial difficulties reportedly caused the cessation of the ODR
sub-titled ‘Why online supported dispute resolution is hard to
implement’, Maurits Barendrecht of HiiL speculated
reasons Rechtwijzer had not succeeded but reached no definite
conclusions.
Barendrecht did
note lessons from traditional voluntary mediation – that there are
multiple and complex reasons for people
to wish to avoid such
Rechtwijzer has
now been succeeded by a new platform, Uitelkaar.nl, which assists ex-partners to
design their own separation
agreements.
Citing Rechtwijzer, various Australian organisations announced their
intention to pursue a similar form of ODR. In 2016, Rechtwijzer
representatives
were in Australia promoting their efforts at increasing access to
and in 2017 the
Australian federal government provided ‘seed funding’ to National
Legal Aid (NLA) to create an ODR
It is unclear whether the proposed platform would be only for parenting matters
or would encompass property disputes as
Though NLA’s
chairman claimed at the time that up to 20 per cent of family law disputes could
be resolved online, no basis
for this estimate was
Given that Rechtwijzer
captured only a very small percentage of Dutch divorces after its years of
operation, the 20 per cent projection
seems highly optimistic. It is also
possible that a family law ODR system would capture people who would have
attended some form
of family mediation or dispute resolution regardless, rather
than attracting people who would otherwise
have attended and
proceeded to file in court. Clearly, a shift from face-to-face family mediation
or FDR to an online or partially
automated process, while it may be
cost-effective for government funded FDR services, does not carry the same
benefits as diverting
more people away from litigation.
V ASSISTING AND
‘RESPONSIBILISING’
Family Law for the Future
, the ALRC noted that those litigating
family law disputes represent only a very small proportion of all people who go
through separation.
Most people (70 per cent) resolve parenting disputes without
recourse to the family law
Forty per cent of
parents resolve their property disputes via discussion, and it is projected that
this rate is higher for separating
couples without
Of matters which do
enter the system, the ‘vast majority’
This includes those
which proceed as far as a trial, with over 40 per cent of these settling during
trial or prior to judgment being
Those matters which do enter the family law system, however, frequently
involve families and individuals with multiple complex needs.
In the Australian
Institute of Family Studies’ (AIFS)
Evaluation of the 2006 Family Law
co-occurrence of complex problems, such as family violence,
addictions and mental health problems, was noted to feature in family
These findings were confirmed in AIFS’ 2014
Such findings are not
confined to Australia. For example, Professor Janet Johnston et al, when writing
of the United States, have
observed that ‘conflict-ridden divorcing
families’ are likely to be beset by multiple serious
The legal problems
of individuals generally tend to cluster and are interconnected and
interdependent.
In the case
of groups who are already socially marginalised, the prevalence of multiple
interconnected problems is
Academics in the United Kingdom have identified within family law a renewed
focus on individual autonomy and a corresponding narrowing
of the concept of
vulnerability.
It has been argued that the privileging of individual autonomy permits a
corresponding reduction in State responsibilities for welfare
including family law legal
By shrinking the
boundaries of vulnerability, and repositioning all those outside it as capable
‘responsibilised’,
legal aid has been significantly reduced. Constraining the category of people
who may be identified as vulnerable is, however, to
overlook the significant
issues facing many of those who now fall outside the definition of vulnerability
and are therefore rendered
ineligible for legal aid.
The construction of fewer individuals as vulnerable and in need of
assistance, and of more as able to independently manage their own
legal matters,
is occurring against a backdrop of enormous growth in ‘informal’
sources of legal support.
Scholars note that, as in Australia, a ‘plethora of informal, self-help
resources ... can be accessed
people will struggle to use these resources effectively:
The scalar shift here is political, intending the majority to take personal
responsibility for managing their own disputes. But, many
people living in
circumstances that require specific and holistic advice or formal intervention
will inevitably experience significant
difficulty both in locating these sources
of help and making use of any information or guidance they are able to
In other words, despite comparative ease of access and low cost, there are
many reasons why some people will not be able to access
automated options; the
most disadvantaged, who may also be most in need of legal help, may face too
many complex and interconnected
difficulties and have too few
In her Canadian
study of self-represented parties, Macfarlane noted that: ‘Many ...
expressed the need for more than on-line
resources, however good – a need
for human contact and support as they navigate the justice system and prepare
their case to
the best of their
For these reasons, despite problems of affordability, access, and efficiency
in the family law system, automated options must be critically
examined in their
context. In the United States, facilitating access to justice has long been the
counter-argument to concerns voiced
legally-unqualified entities, and lawyers and their representative organisations
are accused
of protectionism when unauthorised practice issues are
However, some
academics have queried whether automation is really a panacea for access to
Nick Robinson, for example, has pointed out that in the case of will-writing,
affordable options not involving lawyers have been
widely available for many
years – firstly as paper forms, then as computer software, and now online
– yet this has not
changed the proportion of Americans dying
In other words, though more people may use the non-lawyer option, there has been
no overall increase in people making wills. This
example illustrates the
complexity of access to justice, or the reasons why people do not access justice
options, which include not
knowing there is a legal issue, personal stress or
distress, inconvenience, fear or mistrust of the legal system, or lacking faith
in the system’s effectiveness – it is more than just affordability,
though this clearly plays a key
In family law matters, it seems likely that cost is a significant
especially to people wishing to consult a lawyer or litigate. The ALRC noted
that litigation involves ‘prohibitive’ costs
Those most likely to
benefit from low-cost automated options, however, are not those most in need,
but rather people whose affairs
are uncomplicated, relationships are not
characterised by coercion, control or fear, and who are able to afford the costs
service. Robinson essentially makes this point when he observes that
online document drafting providers such as LegalZoom are marketed
squarely to
the middle classes.
Affordability and Access to Legal Options
Some of the possibilities and limitations of automation for access to justice
can be illustrated by a recent Australian example. ‘Ailira’,
‘Artificially Intelligent Legal Information Research Assistant’, can
provide tailored advice and help to victims
of domestic violence, including
drafting applications for civil protective
Its website explains:
‘Ailira can log incidents of domestic violence so as to create a
time-stamped paper-trail. She can generate
Intervention Orders, accompanying
affidavits and background letters based on those
This is a worthy
goal and there is nothing to suggest that Ailira’s developers are not
making a serious attempt to create a
product which will be helpful to persons in
need of protection (PINOPs). Ailira may not, however, be well-suited to PINOPs,
for reasons
detailed below.
The first issue is whether Ailira is addressing a presently existing legal
It is not clear that
the drafting of the application is the major hurdle facing a PINOP when it comes
to seeking protection. There
is extensive literature on the barriers faced by
complainants in reporting family violence, which are both psychological
the experience of being subjected to coercion and
rather than procedural. In addition, in Australia it is generally the police who
play ‘a major role... in applying for protection
orders’ and have
specialised units focused on domestic
In some jurisdictions police have compelling obligations to investigate family
violence, and to apply for protective
In New South Wales,
where police must apply for protective orders if they suspect that a family
violence offence has been, is being,
or is likely to be committed against a
PINOP, the vast majority of applications are made by
In some instances a PINOP may make a private application. This generally
happens if the police have refused to make an application,
the person is
mistrustful of police and hence prefers to proceed independently, or if two
parties are making cross-applications.
Ailira might, therefore, enable more
people to effectively apply themselves, though there are differing views as to
whether it is
preferable for police, or PINOPs, to make the
application.
The second issue is whether Ailira is capable of drafting Intervention Orders
effectively. Translating a narrative of a person’s
experience of violence
into a legally relevant account is a challenging task, as Dr Jane
Wangmann’s research in NSW
There is the challenge of knowing what is legally relevant, and what is not. A
PINOP might unwittingly self-incriminate by disclosing
incidences of his or her
own criminal acts or other issues such as migration status
statements such as these would be difficult for an automated system to identify.
Professor Richard Moorhead has also noted the ethical
complexity of constructing
a legal narrative in a more mundane example
He utilised DoNotPay,
globally touted as the world’s first ‘legal
By answering
a series of questions, the app generated a letter for Moorhead challenging his
(fictitious) parking fine. Moorhead noted
that the resulting missive contained
an untruth which had not formed part of his
instructions.
Among other
things, this illustrates the ethical challenge of translating a person’s
narrative into a legal complaint via an
AI system. Wangmann has explained
further that the focus of the complaints which she reviewed tended to be on a
specific incident
or incidents, thereby disregarding the ongoing pattern of
behaviour constituting coercion and control (notwithstanding the intent
legislation to capture such patterns). While Ailira might enable
incidents to be described, it still appears to retain this structure. It is
not clear whether Ailira will be able to advise users
on brevity, or if it will
encourage or discourage lengthy complaints.
The third issue is whether the infrastructure of the justice system can
follow through on the application process. This is not a fault
of Ailira but
rather reflects the reality that ultimately, seeking to increase the use of
Intervention Orders will require increased
resourcing of police and courts.
Wangmann’s research in NSW and that of Rosemary Hunter conducted in
Victoria found that the
average time for civil protective order applications to
be dealt with in court was around three
If Ailira enabled
considerably more PINOPs to apply for protective orders, there would need to be
additional resourcing of courts
to hear and determine such applications and of
police to be capable of enforcing the orders once made.
The concept of Ailira as a means of increasing access to justice for PINOPs
has some salient points for family law. There is the question
of unmet legal
needs, and whether they will actually be addressed by a given program. At times,
it also seems to be assumed that
the use of technology, and automated systems in
particular, will always be cost-saving. Yet, even aside from the cost of
developing,
building, training and testing a program, if the technology achieves
its goal of increasing access, the opposite may be true.
Finally, increasing affordable options should not be a substitute for
adequate funding of courts, Legal Aid, or community legal services.
example of family violence, Professor Paul Gowder has commented that:
[T]he victim of domestic violence who needs help from the legal system to
protect herself ... does not merely need an analysis of
the relationship between
the facts of her situation and the legal standards for a restraining order. She
often needs the human and
interpersonal assistance provided by lawyers –
someone to listen to those facts and take her account of them seriously, who
credible to police and to courts, and who has the social capital as well as the
As well as ensuring that a complaint is not self-incriminating and does not
contain untruths or other inappropriate material, a lawyer
can assess if the
PINOP has other legal issues associated with the abusive situation, such as
family law, employment, migration or
debt matters, which, in the absence of
specific questions, an automated system would not be able to do. In the case of
would be supposing the PINOP has a potential victim’s
compensation claim that she is not advised about. This raises in turn
spectre of professional negligence and liability, and who might bear that
responsibility.
Documenting
some of the online sources that offer family law assistance to Australians,
Tahlia Gordon has noted that non-lawyer providers
have professional looking
websites, and that information about the provider’s non-lawyer status is
often difficult to locate,
Justice and Fairness
Civil justice regimes involve, inter alia, a trade-off between efficiency and
Justice Perry of the Federal Court has commented that ‘the efficiencies
which automated systems can achieve, and the increasing
demand for such
efficiencies, may overwhelm an appreciation of the value of achieving
substantive justice for the
individual’.
application of automated systems in family law raises a number of fairness and
justice concerns, both at a structural and an
individual level.
At the individual level, Zeleznikow’s example of the
‘Family_Winner’ system for family dispute resolution is
illustrative.
[S]olicitors at Victoria Legal Aid and mediators at Relationships Australia
were very impressed with the manner in which Family_Winner
suggested trade-offs
and compromises. However, they had one major concern: that by focusing upon
interest-based negotiation, the
system had ignored issues of
Of course, this problem arises in any form of privatised dispute resolution
and is especially pertinent in family law, as Professors
John Eekelaar and Mavis
Maclean discuss comprehensively in their book,
well-illustrated in Australia by the strict approach initially taken by the
court in determining whether a financial agreement
would be binding on the
A key issue is the
potential vulnerability of one party, especially in the context where family
violence is alleged.
are many positives to privatised dispute resolution in family law – time
and cost savings, control and ownership of the
outcome, preservation of
relationships – yet the combination of automation and privatisation raises
additional concerns. In
family law matters, perhaps more so than any other area
of law, personal and social concerns are germane – the pursuit or
non-pursuit
of legal options may be driven by a multitude of factors which are
not susceptible to quantification or cost-benefit analysis. For
person may forgo their property entitlement in order to avoid a dispute, for
many personal reasons – care for the
other party, fear of the other party,
concern for children, and so on. Moreover, family law decisions are highly
discretionary. As
Parkinson has noted, there are no principles of quantification
which can guide the resolution of property
Thus, applying a
mathematical approach to family law matters should be pursued with caution, as
it has the potential to result in
unjust outcomes.
It has been argued that ‘in divorce hearings, algorithms can
automatically assess the individuals’ property, financial
background, and
calculate the amount of time spent together to create a fair
agreement’.
This assertion, however, rests on the assumption that what a particular subset
of other separating couples (since no system will
have access to the decisions
of every separated couple) decided was fair is necessarily fair for the
individuals in question. The
assumption that the experience of a population
provides the ‘fairest’ outcome for everyone cannot be made
The problems with transposing fairness to an individual and the experience of
a broader group is brought into stark relief by the
use of algorithmic risk
assessments, such as
which is used in the United States criminal justice system. Lehr and Ohm have
noted the many places in the machine learning process
where decisions must be
made – about the questions to be asked, the choice of algorithms, and so
There is little consensus
on how ‘fairness’ might be defined, let alone reproduced in a
machine learning system.
Further, the training data itself may be the product of biased human thinking or
historic discrimination – such as the over-policing
and over-incarceration
of certain communities.
In common with decisions about bail, parole, and sentencing, family law
decisions are largely ‘predictive’. Rather than
being a decision
adjudicated on past events (as most judicial decisions are), knowledge of past
events is used to determine what
is in children’s best interests, or (to a
lesser extent) what a person’s financial needs will be, going into the
In family law, however, there is no data
as to whether the
decision – whether made by the parties themselves, or judicial
determination – actually did represent
the best or fairest outcome. The
only possible measure of this (which is a poor one) is whether the parties
returned to litigate
When it comes to analysing past cases in order to try and predict future
outcomes, there are normative concerns about a rigid or isolated
interpretation.
In other words, just because past decisions on a certain issue tend one way,
this does not mean that they
have tended that way, or that the
immediate case in point should have that same outcome. AI lacks what is referred
to as ‘common
sense’ – generalised knowledge of social context
and the human world.
this includes an understanding of the idiosyncratic way that the common law has
developed and continues to develop, but also
more nebulous policy concerns and
the importance of the rule of law. Pasquale and Cashwell question ‘the
social utility of
prediction models as applied to the judicial system’,
fearing ‘that their deployment may endanger core rule-of-law
While the common law is based on precedent, appellate courts frequently
develop the law. Lyria Bennett Moses and Janet Chan have noted
‘[r]elying on past data, including past settlements, when making
settlement decisions creates a feedback loop so that
an initial bias ... is
perpetuated’.
would be problematic in family law where social norms have changed, leading to
legal change; where laws themselves have changed;
or simply where past decisions
available are not reflective of present circumstances. This has ramifications
for the use of data
analytics of decisions and consent orders, especially if
AI-generated predictions were used to make determinations about Legal Aid
funding or otherwise hinder a person accessing the court. In a worst-case
scenario, people might settle based on the prediction of
software even though a
court would not have found the same
or be denied Legal Aid
when they should have received assistance. Thus, while it might be argued that
the ready availability of data
is empowering for individual consumers –
they can more rationally assess their case’s chances of success, for
– it might also have a chilling effect, further entrenching
pronounced disparities of access.
There are many potentially useful access-to-justice applications for
automated systems. Access to better quality and more reliable
information about
the family law system would be beneficial, for instance. Access to justice need
not mean access to lawyers or courts.
In family law matters, it might simply be
people understanding their legal options and being able to choose the resolution
they prefer, without excessive wait times or cost, and in circumstances
Research into human decision-making also suggests that technology can be
highly useful as an organisational, corrective, and supplemental
Ailira, for instance,
may produce a useful first draft of a complaint which a lawyer, domestic
violence support worker, or police
officer could review. Yet interest in
efficiencies and self-help options should not lead to financial efficacy being
prioritised
above all, nor should it result in a ‘two-tiered’
where those who cannot afford ‘real’ lawyers are reduced to making
do with automated options.
VI CONCLUSION
Some commentators have claimed, ambitiously, that ‘most’ disputes
can be solved by artificial intelligence and that family
lawyers are not immune
from the impact of
In contrast, Semple, as noted above, suggests that ‘personal plight
lawyers’ will continue to be needed and sought out,
even in the face of
increasing automation of legal services, due to the importance for individuals
of connecting with a human lawyer
when confronting family law or other personal
Family lawyers are frequently gatekeepers to the family law system and their
influence on clients is
substantial.
Yet, family law
also involves emotional work on the part of the lawyer as clients usually seek,
and require, more than ‘pure’
or mechanistic legal advice. The
difficulties that clients may have – as Gowder’s
quoted in the
previous Part illustrates – tend to be vastly more substantial than
needing to know the steps of a legal process,
though clearly this is also
important. Some argue that this limits opportunities for automation in family
but the opposite is also
claimed. One former family law judge suggests that the majority of matters
brought to United States family
courts are ‘non-legal’ disputes over
where people are more in need of sensible advice about managing time and
communicating (which apps may be able to provide) than legal
It is these
non-legal elements, however, which are important for
‘problem-solving’ lawyers, as this necessarily involves
which are relational and contextual. Carrie Menkel-Meadow has summarised the
steps which lawyers need to consider when advising
clients, which include the
client’s goals, ‘underlying needs or interests’, and what is
important to them and requires
resolution. Menkel-Meadow suggests that lawyers
must consider ‘the legal, social, economic, political, psychological,
ethical and organizational issues, benefits, and risks implicated in the
This holistic
picture of a lawyer’s task demonstrates the importance of situating the
client and the problem in order to discern
the specific legal questions
involved; and considering the ramifications of any action in a broad way. Yet,
unbundling has been used
in family law matters for some time, demonstrating that
a disaggregation of tasks is
In terms of AI’s impact on the profession of law, Remus and Levy
predict that the least impact will be felt on ‘unstructured’
of practice and those where personal interaction is
In a good example
for family law, they explain ‘legal prediction software programs address
only courts and case law, but lawyers
must routinely predict many other things,
such as how an opponent will react to a settlement
In family law,
lawyers must also have regard to the best interests of the child.
AI innovations in family law can thus far only supplement the work of
lawyers. Yet there are undoubtedly potential benefits, such
as reducing the cost
to consumers and increasing access to justice, in some circumstances. Both
family lawyers and litigants may
benefit from such increased efficiencies.
Professor Rebecca Aviel has discussed the importance of differentiated case
in family law, which she describes as ‘a multistream system
that endeavors to tailor the level of procedural intricacy to the
conflict and complexity presented by their particular
circumstances’.
refers to the value of triaging or ‘sorting’ to accord appropriate
priority to family law matters, using intake
procedures, and also leveraging
metrics to gain a more accurate picture of how case management is working. In
other words, she describes
processes at which AI is likely to excel. Lawyers may
use AI technology themselves to increase the efficiency of what they do, clients
may already have made use of technology themselves, or lawyers may wish to refer
their clients to technological assistance. It will
be important, though, that
family lawyers have a clear understanding of the limitations and pitfalls of
automated systems as well
as their potential benefits and uses. This is
particularly so in relation to the use of automation by courts and governments
of efficiency. Especially in the case of vulnerable clients and
children, self-help automated options may be useful tools, but will
appropriate substitutes for professional family lawyers.
Lecturer, University of New
South Wales.
See Orna Rabinovich-Einy and
Ethan Katsh, ‘The New New Courts’
(2017) 67(1)
University Law Review
Ayelet Sela, ‘The Effect
of Online Technologies on Dispute Resolution System Design: Antecedents, Current
Trends, and Future
Directions’
(2017) 21(3)
Lewis & Clark Law
See, eg, Colin Rule and Chittu
Nagarajan, ‘Leveraging the Wisdom of Crowds: The eBay Community Court and
the Future of Online
Dispute Resolution’ (Winter 2010)
ACResolution
4, 5; See also Sela (n 2) 636.
See Sela (n 2)
See Dorcas Anderson,
‘The Convergence of ADR and ODR Within the Courts: The Impact on Access to
(2019) 38(1)
Civil Justice Quarterly
See generally Michael Legg,
‘The Future of Dispute Resolution: Online ADR and Online Courts’
(2016) 27(4)
Australasian Dispute Resolution Journal
government and court-supported Rechtwijzer platform has now been privatised and
is being operated as Justice42. See
‘Welcome to
the Civil Resolution Tribunal’
Civil Resolution Tribunal
<https://civilresolutionbc.ca>.
Shannon Salter, ‘Online
Dispute Resolution and Justice System Integration: British Columbia’s
Civil Resolution Tribunal’
(2017) 34(1)
Windsor Yearbook of Access to
Civil Resolution
Tribunal Act
, SBC 2012, c 25, pt 10.
See ‘Motor Vehicle
Accidents and Injuries’
Civil Resolution Tribunal
<https://civilresolutionbc.ca/how-the-crt-works/getting-started/motor-vehicle-accidents-and-injuries>.
Citing to then current
maximum small claim of $25,000: Salter (n 8) 122; See BC Reg 120/2017, sch 1.
Increasing the jurisdiction
of the Small Claims Court to CAD $35,000.
Centralised alternative
dispute resolution (‘ADR’) is also a possibility for these disputes
which might involve the
use of a mediator or arbitrator operating within an
acknowledged common framework.
Federico Ast and
Clément Lesaege, ‘Kleros: A Protocol for Decentralized
Justice’ in
Dispute Revolution: The Kleros Handbook of Decentralized
For an introduction to some
of these normative questions see James Metzger, ‘Decentralized Justice in
the Era of Blockchain’
(2018) 5(2)
International Journal of Online
Dispute Resolution
See Ameer Rosic,
‘What is Blockchain Technology: A Step-By-Step Guide for Beginners’
(Website, 1 March 2019)
<https://blockgeeks.com/guides/what-is-blockchain-technology/>; See also
Max Raskin, ‘The Law
and Legality of Smart Contracts’ (2017) 1(2)
Georgetown Technology Law Review
Raskin (n 15) 318.
See Wulf Kaal and Craig
Calcaterra, ‘Crypto Transaction Dispute Resolution’
(2017) 73(1)
Business Lawyer
Vitalik Buterin, ‘On
Public and Private Blockchains’,
Ethereum Blog
(Blog Post, 6 August
<https://ethereum.github.io/blog/2015/08/07/on-public-and-private-blockchains/>.
Also explaining
that private blockchains are possible.
Kaal and Calcaterra (n 17)
See ibid 111 stating that
blockchain users enjoy ‘absolute privacy’ within the blockchain
Kaal and Calcaterra (n 17)
115 (citations omitted).
Raskin (n 15) 318 (citation
See generally Mike Orcutt,
‘Once Hailed as Unhackable, Blockchains Are Now Getting Hacked’,
MIT Technology Review
(News Article, 19 February 2019)
<https://www.technologyreview.com/s/612974/once-hailed-as-unhackable-blockchains-are-now-getting-hacked/>.
See Robert McMillan,
‘The Inside Story of Mt. Gox: Bitcoin’s $460 Million
(News Article, 3 March 2014)
<https://www.wired.com/2014/03/bitcoin-exchange/>.
Pete Rizzo, ‘Poloniex
Loses 12.3% of its Bitcoins in Latest Bitcoin Exchange Hack’,
(News Article, 5 March 2014)
<https://www.coindesk.com/poloniex-loses-12-3-bitcoins-latest-bitcoin-exchange-hack>.
Reuters, ‘Bitcoin
Worth $72M Was Stolen in Bitfinex Hack in Hong Kong’,
Article, 3 August 2016)
http://fortune.com/2016/08/03/bitcoin-stolen-bitfinex-hack-hong-kong/
Kate Rooney, ‘Hacker
Lifts $1 Million in Cryptocurrency Using San Francisco Man’s Phone Number
Prosecutors Say’,
(News Article, 21 November 2018)
<https://www.cnbc.com/2018/11/21/hacker-lifts-1-million-in-cryptocurrency-using-mans-phone-number.html>.
See, eg, Primavera De
Filippi and Aaron Wright,
Blockchain and the Law: The Rule of Code
(Harvard University Press, 2018) 74; Laila Metjahic, ‘Deconstructing the
DAO: The Need for Legal Recognition and the Application
of Securities Laws to
Decentralized Organizations’
(2018) 39(4)
Cardozo Law Review
1538–39; Olivier Hari and Ulysse Pasquier, ‘Blockchain and
Distributed Ledger Technology (DLT): Academic Overview of
the Technical and
Legal Framework and Challenges for Lawyers’
International
Business Law Journal
, 434; Raskin (n 15) 309–10; Kaal and
Calcaterra (n 17) 116.
Raskin (n 15) 309.
Hari and Pasquier (n 28)
434 (emphasis in original).
Wulf and Calcaterra (n 17)
Raskin (n 15) 310.
Metjahic (n 28) 1539.
Raskin (n 15)
The information about
real-world events can be imported into the contract code through the use of
‘oracles’, or external,
possibly centralised sources (eg,
information from the New York Stock Exchange): See Metjahic (n 28) 1540.
Raskin (n 15) 310.
See Metjahic (n 28)
See Filippi and Wright (n
28) 74; Wulf and Calcaterra (n 17) 136.
Calcaterra (n 17) 135–36 (citing sources on jurisdictional issues).
See Filippi and Wright (n
28) 84; Wulf & Calcaterra (n 17) 136.
Calcaterra (n 17) 136.
See Filippi and Wright (n
28) 84–85; Hari and Pasquier (n 28) 444.
See Raskin (n 15) 311.
Hari and Pasquier (n 28)
See Filippi and Wright (n
<https://openlaw.io>.
<https://openlaw.io/faq>.
<https://app.openlaw.io/templates>.
(Website) <https://www.contractvault.io>;
(Website) <https://github.com/topics/smart-contract-template>; Arjuna Kok,
‘Write a Simple Contract On Top of Eretheum’
Post, 2 May 2018)
<https://medium.com/coinmonks/write-a-simple-contract-on-top-of-ethereum-92b543594e84>.
(Website) <https://mattereum.com>.
See Vinay Gupta et al,
‘Smart Contracts Real Property’ (Working Paper, Matereum) 2, 2
<https://mattereum.com/upload/iblock/af8/mattereum_workingpaper.pdf>
(‘Mattereum Working Paper’); Iftikhar Alam, ‘What Are
Ricardian Contracts? A Complete Guide’
101 Blockchains
(Website, 28
Oct 2018) <https://101blockchains.com/ricardian-contracts/>.
Gupta et al (n 54) 9; Alam
Gupta et al (n 54) 9.
The Mattereum Team,
‘Mattereum Protocol: Turning Code into Law’ (Summary White Paper,
Mattereum) 1, 1
<https://cms.mattereum.io/upload/iblock/784/mattereum-summary_white_paper.pdf>
(‘Mattereum White Paper’).
Ibid (emphasis in
ibid 3, 11.
See, eg, Daniel Frumkin,
‘What Are Ethereum Tokens? ERC-20, ERC-223, ERC-721, and ERC-777 Tokens
Invest in Blockchain
(Blog Post, 30 July 2018)
<https://www.investinblockchain.com/what-are-ethereum-tokens/>.
Mattereum White Paper (n
See Gupta et al (n 54)
Ibid 8, 18, 45.
See Metzger (n 14).
Gupta et al (n 54) 18.
‘Rhubarb Fund ICO:
Pre-Sale White Paper’ (White Paper, RHUbarb Fund, 1 November 2018) 2, 2
(‘Rhubarb White Paper’).
Verdicts Work’
<https://www.rhucoin.com/how-rhu-works.aspx>; See also
White Paper (n 79) 8–9.
Rhubarb White Paper (n 79)
<https://www.rhucoin.com/active-polls/>.
‘Professional Trading Now Open to Everyone’
(Website) <
https://www.bitfinex.com/
(‘Bitfinex’).
(Website) <https://www.rhucoin.com/our-story.aspx>.
Jury.Online
(Website) <https://jury.online>.
See ‘Jury.Online
White Paper’
(White Paper, No 2.5, Jury.Online, 15 March 2019)
<https://about.jury.online/images/Jury_Online_V2_5_Whitepaper.pdf>
(‘Jury.Online
White Paper’) 5.
Jury.Online
(Website) <https://about.jury.online/mediators>.
Jury.Online White Paper
(Website) <https://aragon.org/network>.
Metjahic (n 28)
See ‘Aragon
Network’ (White Paper, Aragon Network, 29 August 2018)
<https://github.com/aragon/whitepaper> (‘Aragon
Ibid 2–3; See also
Tatu Karki and Aragon, ‘Aragon Network Jurisdiction Part 1: Decenatralized
Aragon Network
(Website, 18 July 2017)
<https://blog.aragon.org/aragon-network-jurisdiction-part-1-decentralized-court-c8ab2a675e82/>.
See generally Aragon
White Paper (n 108).
See Thomas Schelling,
The Strategy of Conflict
(Harvard University Press, Cambridge, 1960).
Aragon White Paper (n
See Karki and Aragon (n
< https://jur.io>.
‘Decentralized Dispute Resolution Infrastructure’ (White Paper,
V.0.3, Jur) 8, 15
<https://jur.io/content/uploads/2018/07/JUR-WhitePaper-v0.3-eng.pdf>
(‘Jur White Paper’).
Ibid 21, 44.
Oath Protocol
(Website) <https://oaths.io/en/>.
‘OATH Protocol: Blockchain Alternative Dispute Resolution Protocol’
(White Paper, No 2.5.0, Oath Protocol) 2
<https://oaths.io/files/OATH-Whitepaper-EN.pdf>.
(Website) <https://jurisproject.io>.
See Adam Kerpelman et
al, ‘Justice Everywhere, From Nowhere’ (White Paper, No 2, Juris, 18
September 2018) 3, 3
<https://drive.google.com/file/d/1318klGEYL4g02VudL-C-BCnvpKujTnbF/view>
(‘Juris White Paper’).
(Website) <https://kleros.io>.
For a description of the
beta test, see Metzger (n 14) 72–3.
See Clément
Lesaege and Federico Ast, ‘Kleros’ (Short Paper, No 1.0.6, Kleros,
November 2018) 1, 2 <https://kleros.io/assets/whitepaper.pdf>.
Ibid (emphasis in
See generally ibid
See Bitfinex (n 91).
<https://www.ethfinex.com>.
(Website) <https://idex.market/eth/pnk>.
Viewing the dApp
requires use of a Web3 browser, such as Metamask, so links will not be provided
since the page is not immediately
publicly accessible. More information can be
found at ‘The Blockchain Dispute Resolution Layer’
(Website) <https://kleros.io>.
See Stuart James,
‘Kleros x Ethfinex TCR: A Deep Dive Explainer’
7 March 2019)
<https://blog.kleros.io/kleros-ethfinex-tcr-an-explainer/>.
See Stuart James,
‘The Ethfinex Listing Guide’
(13 March 2019)
<https://blog.kleros.io/the-ethfinex-listing-guide/>.
Lesaege and Ast (n 163)
James (n 171).
Lesaege and Ast (n 163)
See Bitfinex (n 91).
James (n 171).
* Research Fellow, UNSW Law School.
See Gary E Marchant, ‘Artificial Intelligence and the
Future of Legal Practice’ (2017) 14(1)
SciTech Lawyer
See, eg, Dana Remus and
Frank Levy, ‘Can Robots Be Lawyers: Computers, Lawyers, and the Practice
(2017) 30(3)
Georgetown Journal of Legal Ethics
Rostain, ‘Robots versus Lawyers: A User-Centered Approach’
Georgetown Journal of Legal Ethics
; Benjamin Alarie, Anthony
Niblett and Albert H Yoon, ‘How Artificial Intelligence Will Affect the
Practice of Law’ (2018)
68 (Supplement
University of Toronto Law
; Sergio David Becerra, ‘The Rise of Artificial
Intelligence in the Legal Field: Where We Are and Where We Are Going’
Journal of Business, Entrepreneurship & Law
Semmler and Zeeve Rose, ‘Artificial Intelligence: Application Today and
Implications Tomorrow’
(2017-18) 16
Duke Law & Technology
See especially Monika
Zalnieriute, Lyria Bennett Moses and George Williams, ‘The Rule of Law and
Automation of Government
Decision‐Making’
(2019) 82(3)
TechIndeX: Stanford Law School
<https://techindex.law.stanford.edu/>; Michael Mills, ‘Artificial
Intelligence in Law: The State of Play 2016’
(Discussion Paper, Thomson
Reuters Legal Executive Institute, 23 February 2016).
Whilst there is a
recently found interest in this topic amongst the legal community, academic
discussions and research in this discipline
first occurred upon the birth of the
internet two decades ago: see John Zeleznikow, ‘Can Artificial
Intelligence and Online
Dispute Resolution Enhance Efficiency and Effectiveness
in Courts’ (2017) 8(2)
International Journal for Court Administration
30, 35 (‘Efficiency and Effectiveness in Courts’).
Jerry Kaplan,
Artificial Intelligence: What Everyone Needs to Know
(Oxford University
Press, 2016) 1.
https://deepmind.com/research/alphago/>
Jason Koebler,
‘Rise of the Robolawyers: How Legal Representation Could Come to Resemble
TurboTax’ (April 2017)
The Atlantic
<https://www.theatlantic.com/magazine/archive/2017/04/rise-of-the-robolawyers/517794/>.
Though some predict that
this will be achieved by 2050: Seth D Baum, Ben Goertzel and Ted G Goertzel,
‘How Long Until Human-Level
AI? Results from an Expert Assessment’
(2011) 78(1)
Technological Forecasting & Social Change
Tania Sourdin,
‘Justice and Technological Innovation’
(2015) 25(2)
Judicial Administration
, 96 (‘Justice and Technological
Innovation’).
Zeleznikow,
‘Efficiency and Effectiveness in Courts’ (n 5) 37.
See, eg, Zalnieriute,
Bennett Moses and Williams (n 3); Dominique Hogan-Doran, ‘Computer Says
“No”: Automation,
Algorithms and Artificial Intelligence in
Government Decision-Making’
(2017) 13(3)
The Judicial Review
Noel Semple,
‘Personal Plight Legal Practice and Tomorrow’s Lawyers’
Journal of the Legal Profession
(‘Personal Plight Legal
Practice’); Samuel V Schoonmaker IV, ‘Withstanding Disruptive
Innovation: How Attorneys
Will Adapt and Survive Impending Challenges from
Automation and Nontraditional Legal Services Providers’
(2017) 51(2-3)
Family Law Quarterly
John Dewar, Barry W
Smith and Cate Banks, ‘Litigants in Person in the Family Court of
Australia’ (Research Report No
20, Family Court of Australia, 2000) 16,
use the term ‘partially represented’ to denote litigants who may
have lawyers
come and go. The authors observe that although a person may appear
in court without legal representation does not mean that the person
accessed some form of legal advice or information beforehand. Differing
definitions of ‘self-represented’ exacerbate
problems for
evidence-based decision-making: see Elizabeth Richardson and Tania Sourdin,
‘Mind the Gap: Making Evidence-Based
Decisions about Self-Represented
(2013) 22(4)
Journal of Judicial Administration
See, eg, Michael Saini,
Rachel Birnbaum and Nicholas Bala, ‘Access to Justice in Ontario’s
Family Courts: The Parents’
Perspective’
(2016) 37(1)
Review of Legal and Social Issues
, 1-2 n 2; Asher Flynn and Jacqueline
Hodgson (eds),
Access to Justice and Legal Aid: Comparative Perspectives on
Unmet Legal Need
(Hart Publishing, 2019); John Eekelaar and Mavis Maclean,
Family Justice: The Work of Family Judges in Uncertain Times
Publishing, 2013) (‘Family Justice’).
Note that Sourdin
discusses some of the many issues around technology supplanting the judicial
role but this is not the focus here:
Tania Sourdin, ‘Judge v Robot:
Artificial Intelligence and Judicial Decision-Making’
[2018] UNSWLawJl 38
(2018) 41(4)
University of New South Wales Law Journal
, 1117 (‘Judge v
John Dewar, ‘The
Normal Chaos of Family Law’
(1998) 61(4)
The Modern Law Review
Ellen Broad,
Humans: The AI Condition
(Melbourne University Press, 2018) xix.
@matvelloso (Mat
Velloso) (Twitter, 22 November 2018, 5:25PM AEST)
<https://twitter.com/matvelloso/status/1065778379612282885?lang=en>;
Python is a programming language:
Welcome to Python.org
<https://www.python.org/>.
Broad (n 19) xx.
Michael Legg and
Felicity Bell, ‘Artificial Intelligence and the Legal Profession: A
Primer’ (Law Society of NSW and
UNSW Law, 2019) 2, available at FLIP
Stream (Web Page)
<https://www.allenshub.unsw.edu.au/news/artificial-intelligence-and-legal-profession-primer>.
Toby Walsh,
It’s Alive! Artificial Intelligence from the Logic Piano to Killer
(La Trobe University Press and Black Inc, 2017) 49–50.
Kevin D Ashley
Artificial Intelligence and Legal Analytics: New Tools for Law Practice in the
Digital Age
(Cambridge University Press, 2017) 8–9.
See Michael Aikenhead,
‘The Uses and Abuses of Neural Networks in Law’
Clara Computer & High Technology Law Journal
John Zeleznikow and
Andrew Stranieri, ‘The Split-Up System: Integrating Neural Networks
Reasoning in the Legal Domain’
(Conference Paper, International Conference
on Artificial Intelligence and Law, 21–24 May 1995) 185; John Zeleznikow,
Split-Up Project: Induction, Context and Knowledge Discovery in
(2004) 3(2)
Law, Probability and Risk
See, eg, Anthony Elliott
and Julie Hare, ‘The Revolution Will Not Be Televised – The AI
Challenge’,
The Australian
(Sydney, 18 April 2019) 27.
Rostain (n 2) 561.
For the difficulties
that this may generate: see Broad (n 19).
John Markoff, ‘How
Many Computers to Identify a Cat? 16,000’,
New York Times
25 June 2012)
<https://www.nytimes.com/2012/06/26/technology/in-a-big-network-of-computers-evidence-of-machine-learning.html>.
David Lehr and Paul Ohm,
‘Playing with the Data: What Legal Scholars Should Learn about Machine
Learning’ (2017) 51(2)
University of California, Davis Law Review
Warren E Agin, ‘A
Simple Guide to Machine Learning’ (2017) 14(1)
SciTech Lawyer
Jason Brownlee,
‘What is Natural Language Processing?’, Machine Learning Mastery,
(Web Page, 22 September 2017)
<https://machinelearningmastery.com/natural-language-processing/>.
Yoav Goldberg,
Network Methods in Natural Language Processing
(Morgan & Claypool
Publishers, 2017) xvii.
Michael Mills and Julian
Uebergang, ‘Artificial Intelligence in Law: An Overview’
Thomas Davey and Michael
Legg, ‘Machine Learning Disrupts Discovery’
[2017] (32)
Society Journal
Stanford University,
CodeX Techindex, ‘Document Automation’,
http://techindex.law.stanford.edu/companies?category=2
Tara Chittenden,
‘Capturing Technological Innovation in Legal Services’ (Research
Report, The Law Society of England
and Wales, 25 January 2017) 12.
See, eg, Christopher
Knaus, ‘NDIA denies Cate Blanchett-voiced 'Nadia' virtual assistant is in
The Guardian
(online, 22 September 2017)
www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2017/sep/22/ndia-denies-cate-blanchett-voiced-nadia-virtual-assistant-is-in-doubt>.
See generally Lois R
Lupica, Tobias A Franklin and Sage M Friedman, ‘The Apps for Justice
Project: Employing Design Thinking
to Narrow the Access to Justice Gap’
(2017) 44(5)
Fordham Urban Law Journal
; Jessica Frank, ‘A2J
Author, Legal Aid Organizations, and Courts: Bridging the Civil Justice Gap
Using Document Assembly’
(2017) 39(2)
Western New England Law
; David Luban, ‘Optimism, Skepticism and Access to
Justice’ (2016) 3(3)
Texas A&M Law Review
Sourdin, ‘Judge v
) 1118; Michael Legg and
John Corker, ‘Unbundling for Access to Justice and for Commercial
Presentation to Future of Law and Innovation in the Profession
(FLIP) Conference
, Sydney, 14 September 2018.
LSC: Legal Services
Corporation,
Report of the Summit on the Use of Technology to Expand Access
(Report, December 2013) 2.
Martha Minow,
‘“Forming Underneath Everything That Grows”: Toward a History
of Family Law’
Wisconsin Law Review
, 819; John H
Wade, ‘The Professional Status of Family Law Practice in Australia’
[1985] UNSWLawJl 10
(1985) 8(1)
University of New South Wales Law Journal
Nahum Mushin,
‘Ethics in Family Law – Beyond Legal Principles and into Value
Judgments’ (2018) 30 (Special Issue)
Singapore Academy of Law
See, eg, Warren H Resh,
‘More on Do-It-Yourself Divorce Kits and Services’ (1973) 37(2)
Unauthorized Practice News
Unauthorized Practice
of Law Commission v Parsons Technology Inc
, 1999 WL 47235 (ND Tex, 1999),
[1999] USCA5 1055
179 F 3d 956
Cir, 1999); In Australia: see
Attorney-General (WA) v Quill Wills Ltd
(1990) 3 WAR 500
, 503-4 (Ipp
See, eg, Rosemary
Hunter, Jeff Giddings and April Chrzanowski, ‘Legal Aid and
Self-Representation in the Family Court of Australia
Paper, Griffith University Socio-Legal Research Centre, May 2003).
Jonathan Crowe et al, ‘Understanding the Legal Information Experience of
Non-Lawyers: Lessons from the Family Law Context’
(2018) 27(4)
of Judicial Administration
Julie Macfarlane,
National Self-Represented Litigants Project: Identifying and Meeting the Needs
of Self-Represented Litigants
(Final Report, May 2013) 35.
See generally Emma
Beames, ‘Technology-Based Legal Document Generation Services and the
Regulation of Legal Practice in Australia’
(2017) 42(4)
Alternative Law
Lynn Mather and Craig A
McEwen, ‘Client Grievances and Lawyer Conduct: The Challenges of Divorce
Practice’ in Leslie
C Levin and Lynn Mather (eds),
Lawyers in Practice:
Ethical Decision Making in Context
(University of Chicago Press, 2012) 63,
Cf Christine Piper,
‘How Do You Define a Family Lawyer?’
(1999) 19(1)
Legal Studies
Bren Neale and Carol
Smart, ‘“Good” and “Bad” Lawyers? Struggling in
the Shadow of the New Law’
(1997) 19(4)
Journal of Social Welfare and
; Katherine Wright, ‘The Role of Solicitors in Divorce:
A Note of Caution’
(2007) 19(4)
Child and Family Law Quarterly
(‘A Note of Caution’).
Rosemary Hunter et al,
‘Legal Services in Family Law’
(Research Report, Law
Foundation of New South Wales, December 2000) xii, 340–3 (‘Legal
Services’).
Jill Howieson,
‘The Professional Culture of Australian Family Lawyers: Pathways to
Constructive Change’
(2011) 25(1)
International Journal of Law, Policy
and the Family
, 81 (‘Professional Culture’).
Federal Circuit and
Family Court of Australia Bill 2018
Federal Circuit and Family Court of
Australia (Consequential Amendments and Transitional Provisions) Bill 2018
See, eg, Law Council of
Australia, Submission No 2 to the Australian Law Reform Commission,
the Family Law System
(16 November 2018); Nicola Berkovic, ‘Lawyers
fight for Family Court’,
The Australian
(Sydney, 29 November 2018)
‘What Can be Done
to Fix the Family Law System?’,
ABC Radio AM
(Thomas Oriti, 6
October 2018)
https://www.abc.net.au/radio/programs/am/what-can-be-done-to-fix-the-family-law-system/10346244>
Australian Law Reform
Commission,
Family Law for the Future: An Inquiry into the Family Law System
Final Report
(Report No 135, March 2019) ch 4 (‘Family
Law for the Future’).
Neale and Smart (n 58);
Piper (n 57); referring to a new ‘hybrid profession’: Wright,
‘A Note of Caution’
(n 58); Craig A McEwen, Lynn Mather and
Richard J Maiman, ‘Lawyers, Mediators and the Management of Divorce’
(1994) 28(1)
Law and Society Review
; Janet Walker, ‘Is There a
Future for Lawyers in Divorce?’
(1996) 10(1)
International Journal of
Law, Policy and the Family
; John Eekelaar, Mavis Maclean and Sarah
Family Lawyers: The Divorce Work of Solicitors
(Hart Publishing,
2000) ch 1; Hunter, ‘Legal Services’ (n 57); Rosemary Hunter,
‘Adversarial Mythologies: Policy
Assumptions and Research Evidence in
Family Law’
(2003) 30(1)
Journal of Law and Society
See Howieson,
‘Professional Culture’ (n 60) 81.
See, eg, Michael King,
‘“Being Sensible”: Images and Practices of the New Family
Lawyers’ (1999) 28(2)
Journal of Social Policy
Mather and McEwen (n 56)
King (n 67); Neale and
Smart (n 58); Katherine Wright, ‘The Divorce Process: A View from the
Other Side of the Desk’
(2006) 18(1)
Child and Family Law Quarterly
; Wright, ‘A Note of Caution’ (n 58).
See generally Eekelaar
and Maclean (n 16) 32–8; Howieson, ‘Professional Culture’ (n
58) 93; Neale and Smart (n
58) 383; Lisa Webley, ‘Gate-Keeper, Supervisor
or Mentor? The Role of Professional Bodies in the Regulation and Professional
Development of Solicitors and Family Mediators Undertaking Divorce Matters in
England and Wales’
(2010) 32(2)
Journal of Social Welfare and Family
; Wright, ‘A Note of Caution’ (n 58).
‘Professional Culture’ (n 60) 80; see also Jill Howieson,
‘Family Law Dispute Resolution: Procedural
Justice and the Lawyer-Client
Interaction’ (PhD Thesis, University of Western Australia, 2008).
Nicholas Bala, Patricia
Hebert and Rachel Birnbaum, ‘Ethical Duties of Lawyers for Parents
Regarding Children of Clients:
Being a Child-Focused Family Lawyer’
Canadian Bar Review
See, eg, Margaret
Finding a Better Way: A Bold Departure from the Traditional Common
Law Approach to the Conduct of Legal Proceedings
(Family Court of Australia
Report, April 2007).
Family Law Act 1975
’); Joe Harman, ‘Should
Mediation be the First Step in all
Family Law Act
Proceedings?’
Australasian Dispute Resolution Journal
Australian Law Reform
Commission, ‘Family Law for the Future’ (n 64) 261–2.
Bala, Herbert and
Birnbaum (n 72) 580, quoting Robert H Mnookin,
Bargaining with the Devil:
When to Negotiate and When to Fight
(Simon & Schuster, 1
ed, 2010) 217.
Barbara Glesner Fines,
‘Fifty Years of Family Law Practice - The Evolving Role of the Family Law
(2012) 24(2)
Journal of the American Academy of Matrimonial
Semple, ‘Personal
Plight Legal Practice’ (n
See, eg, Australian Law
Reform Commission, ‘Family Law for the Future’ (n 64) 123
See, eg, Zoë
Inside Family Law: Conversations from the Coalface
(Longueville
Media, 2018); Michaela Whitbourn, ‘Family Court Judge Blasts
“Bitter, Aggressive” Litigation Culture
in Sydney’,
Morning Herald
(online, 13 December 2017)
<https://www.smh.com.au/national/nsw/family-court-judge-blasts-bitter-aggressive-litigation-culture-in-sydney-20171213-h03nv5.html>.
Patrick Parkinson and
Brian Knox, ‘Can There Ever Be Affordable Family Law?’
(2018) 92(6)
Australian Law Journal
Christine Coumarelos et
Legal Australia-Wide Survey: Legal Need in Australia
(Law and Justice
Foundation of New South Wales, August 2012) vol 7, xvi.
Ibid 38; see also Andrew
Higgins, ‘The Costs of Civil Justice and Who Pays’
(2017) 37(3)
Oxford Journal of Legal Studies
Productivity Commission,
Access to Justice Arrangements
(Inquiry Report No 72, 2014) vol 2, 875;
Margaret Castles, ‘Expanding Justice Access in Australia: The Provision of
Scope Legal Services by the Private Profession’
(2016) 41(2)
Alternative Law Journal
Benjamin Barton,
‘The Lawyer’s Monopoly: What Goes and What Stays’
(2014) 82(6)
Fordham Law Review
Samuel V Schoonmaker
IV, ‘Withstanding Disruptive Innovation: How Attorneys Will Adapt and
Survive Impending Challenges from
Automation and Nontraditional Legal Services
(2017) 51(2)
Family Law Quarterly
Gerard J Clark,
‘Internet Wars: The Bar against the Websites’
(2013) 13(2)
Journal of High Technology Law
See Zeleznikow,
‘Efficiency and Effectiveness in Courts’ (n
See, eg, Chief Justice
Alastair Nicholson, ‘Legal Aid and a Fair Family Law System’
(Speech, Legal Aid Forum Towards
2010, 1999); Nicola Berkovic, Inquirer,
‘Break-Up So Hard to Do’,
November 2018) 17; Opinion, ‘Expedite Family Law Reforms’,
(Sydney, 28 August 2018) 15.
House of Representatives
Standing Committee on Social Policy and Legal Affairs, Parliament of Australia,
A Better Family Law System to Support and Protect Those Affected by Family
(Report, 2017) 56 nn 32, 34; see also Pricewaterhouse Coopers,
Submission to the Attorney-General’s Department,
Review of Efficiency
of the Operation of the Federal Courts: Final Report
(April 2018)
<https://www.ag.gov.au/LegalSystem/Courts/Documents/pwc-report.pdf>.
Australian Law Reform
Commission, ‘Family Law for the Future’ (n 64) 298 [10.10].
Ibid 332 [10.135].
See, eg, ibid 279
Greg Howe, ‘The
Family/Federal Circuit Court Restructure: What’s all the fuss
(2018) 40(10)
The Bulletin
; Australian Law Reform
Commission, ‘Family Law for the Future’ (n 62) 223 [5.160].
LSC: Legal Services
Corporation (n
James E Cabral et al,
‘Using Technology to Enhance Access to Justice’
(2012) 26(1)
Harvard Journal of Law and Technology
Judith Bennett et al,
‘Current State of Automated Legal Advice Tools’
(Discussion
Paper No 1, Networked Society Institute, University of Melbourne, April 2018)
See, eg, ‘Products
for Your Big Life Changes’
https://www.legalzoom.com/personal/marriage-and-divorce/>
‘Find the Right Amicable Service’
<https://amicable.io/services> self-describes as ‘the UK’s
only divorce service that works with couples
to help you reach fairer
agreements’.
Crowe et al (n
‘Do It Yourself
Family Court of Australia
(Web Page, 14 February 2019)
http://www.familycourt.gov.au/wps/wcm/connect/fcoaweb/forms-and-fees/court-forms/diy-kits/
Divorce Applications
<www.onlinedivorceapplications.com.au
Parkinson and Knox (n
Crowe et al (n
Ambrogi, ‘This Week in Legal Tech: Everyone’s Talking About
Above the La
w (Web Page, 17 April 2017)
<https://abovethelaw.com/2017/04/this-week-in-legal-tech-everyones-talking-about-chatbots/?rf=1>.
See Settify (Web Page)
www.settify.com.au>
Mark K Osbeck and
Michael Gilliland, ‘Outcome Prediction in the Practice of Law’
[2018] (50)
Foresight: The International Journal of Applied Forecasting
Mayer-Schönberger and Kenneth Cukier,
Big Data: A Revolution That Will
Transform How We Live, Work and Think
(First Mariner Books, 2014) 8.
See Ashley (n
); Zeleznikow, ‘Efficiency and
Effectiveness in Courts’ (n 5) 35.
Ejan Mackaay and Pierre
Robillard, ‘Predicting Judicial Decisions: The Nearest Neighbour Rule and
Visual Representation of
Case Patterns’ (1974) 3(3-4)
Datenverarbeitung
302, 306, cited by Kevin D Ashley and
Stefanie Brüninghaus, ‘Automatically Classifying Case Texts and
Predicting Outcomes’
(2009) 17(2)
Artificial Intelligence and Law
125, 129; Ashley (n
Zeleznikow,
‘Efficiency and Effectiveness in Courts’ (n 5); see also Sourdin,
‘Justice and Technological Innovation’
Nikolaos Aletras et al,
‘Predicting Judicial Decisions of the European Court of Human Rights: A
Natural Language Processing
Perspective’ [2016] (2)
PeerJ Computer
Frank Pasquale and Glyn
Cashwell, ‘Prediction, Persuasion, and the Jurisprudence of
Behaviourism’ (2018) 68 (Supplement
University of Toronto Law
Some examples include
Fastcase, Ravel Law (including Judge Analytics), Lex Machina and CARA.
Originally the Stanford
IP Litigation Clearinghouse. It was subsequently acquired by LexisAdvance:
‘LexisNexis Acquires Premier
Legal Analytics Provider Lex Machina’,
Lex Machina
(Web Page, 23 November 2015)
<https://lexmachina.com/media/press/lexisnexis-acquires-lex-machina/>.
See, eg, Robert Ambrogi,
‘Rating Lawyers by their Wins and Losses’,
Above the Law
Page, 13 February 2017)
<https://abovethelaw.com/2017/02/this-week-in-legal-tech-rating-lawyers-by-their-wins-and-losses/>.
Monica Rogati,
‘The AI Hierarchy of Needs’,
(Blog Post, 1 August
2017) <https://hackernoon.com/the-ai-hierarchy-of-needs-18f111fcc007>,
cited by Philip Segal, ‘Legal
Jobs in the Age of Artificial Intelligence:
Moving from Today’s Limited Universe of Data Towards the Great
Beyond’ (2018)
Savannah Law Review
211, 219–20.
See Sourdin,
‘Judge v Robot’ (n
Lyria Bennett Moses and
Noam Peleg, ‘Why have a lawyer when you can have a robot?’
(Presentation to National Family
Law Conference Brisbane, 5 October 2018).
Legislation Amendment (Superannuation) Act 2001
Pasquale and Cashwell (n
Bennett Moses and Peleg
‘Federal Court
Registrar Jessica Der Matossian on FLIP Inquiry Series: Behind the Buzzwords
– AI’ Law Society
FLIP Inquiry Series: Podcasts
December 2018)
<https://www.lawsociety.com.au/advocacy-and-resources/advocacy/flip/flip-inquiry-series-behind-buzz-words/podcasts>;
see also ‘Mr Warwick Soden – Biography’,
Future Justice
http://www.futurejustice2018.com/1584
See, eg, Emilia Bellucci
and John Zeleznikow, ‘Developing Negotiation Decision Support Systems that
Support Mediators: A Case
Study of the Family_Winner System’ (2006) 13(2)
Journal of Artificial Intelligence and Law
Michael Legg, “The
Future of Dispute Resolution: Online ADR and Online Courts”
(2016) 27(4)
Australasian Dispute Resolution Journal
; Dory Reiling, ‘Beyond
Court Digitalization with Online Dispute Resolution’ (2017) 8(2)
International Journal for Court Administration
Later, the launch of
portals in Alaska and Hawaii was announced: LSC: Legal Services Corporation (n
Civil Resolution
Tribunal, ‘Civil Resolution Tribunal’ (2018)
<https://civilresolutionbc.ca/>; and MyLawBC, Separation,
Family Matters, <https://mylawbc.com/paths/family/>.
Tania Sourdin and
Chinthaka Liyanage, ‘The Promise and Reality of Online Dispute Resolution
in Australia’ in Mohamed
S Abdel Wahab, Ethan Katsh and Daniel Rainey
Online Dispute Resolution: Theory and Practice – A Treatise on
Technology and Dispute Resolution
(Eleven International Publishing, 2012)
Noam Ebner,
‘E-Mediation’ in Mohamed S Abdel Wahab, Ethan Katsh and Daniel
Rainey (eds),
Online Dispute Resolution: Theory and Practice – A
Treatise on Technology and Dispute Resolution
(Elven International
Publishing, 2012) 357, 377.
Mark Thomson,
‘Alternative Modes of Delivery for Family Dispute Resolution: The
Telephone Dispute Resolution Service and the
Online FDR Project’ (2011)
Journal of Family Studies
253; see also Relationships Australia,
‘Development and Evaluation of Online Family Dispute Resolution
Capabilities’
(Final Report, 30 March 2011).
Thomson (n 140) 256.
John Zeleznikow,
‘Methods for Incorporating Fairness into the Development of an Online
Family Dispute Resolution Environment’
(2011) 22(1)
Australasian
Journal of Dispute Resolution
16, 16 (‘Methods for Incorporating
Fairness’).
), citing Scott Shackelford and Anjanette
Raymond, ‘Building the Virtual Courthouse: Ethical Considerations for
Design, Implementation,
and Regulation in the World of ODR’
Wisconsin Law Review
, 628; Suzanne Van Arsdale, ‘User
Protections in Online Dispute Resolution’
(2015) 21(1)
Negotiation Law Review
Colin Rule,
‘Making Peace on eBay: Resolving Disputes in the World’s Largest
Marketplace’ (Fall 2008)
AC Resolution
Ben Barton,
‘Modria and the Future of Dispute Resolution’,
Bloomberg Law
(Web Page, 1 October 2015)
https://biglawbusiness.com/modria-and-the-future-of-dispute-resolution/>.
Split-Up, Family_Winner,
AssetDivider; Zeleznikow, ‘Methods for Incorporating Fairness’ (n
Zeleznikow,
‘Efficiency and Effectiveness in Courts’ (n 5) 39–41.
Ibid; see also
Australian Law Reform Commission,
Review of the Family Law System
(Discussion Paper 86, October 2018) (‘Review of the Family Law
System’); Opinion (n 91); Berkovic (n 91).
See Parkinson and Knox
Australian Law Reform
Commission, ‘Review of the Family Law System’ (n
Joe Harman, ‘The
Field of Dreams’
(2018) 29(1)
Australasian Dispute Resolution
Parkinson and Knox (n
Noel Semple, ‘A
Third Revolution in Family Dispute Resolution: Accessible Legal
Professionalism’ (2017) 34(1)
Windsor Yearbook of Access to Justice
130 (‘A Third Revolution’).
Esmee A Bickel, Marian A
J van Dijk and Ellen Giebels, ‘Online Legal Advice and Conflict Support: A
Dutch Experience’
(Report, University of Twente, March 2015) 31, cited by
Sourdin, ‘Judge v Robot’ (n 17) 1122.
Maurits Barendrecht,
‘Rechtwijzer: Why Online Supported Dispute Resolution is Hard to
Implement’,
Law Technology and Access to Justice
(Blog Post, 20
<https://law-tech-a2j.org/odr/rechtwijzer-why-online-supported-dispute-resolution-is-hard-to-implement/>.
Carol Matlack,
‘Robots are Taking Divorce Lawyers’ Jobs, Too’,
(Web Page, 30 June 2016)
https://www.bloomberg.com/news/articles/2016-06-30/robots-are-taking-divorce-lawyers-jobs-too>
Barendrecht (n 159)
estimated ‘a market share of 2-3 per cent of the separation market’;
see also Richard Moorhead,
‘After the Rechtwijzer Energizer’,
Lawyer Watch
(Blog Post, 31 March 2017)
<https://lawyerwatch.blog/2017/03/31/after-the-rechtwijzer-energizer/>.
Roger Smith,
‘Goodbye Rechtwijzer: hello Justice42’,
Law Technology and Access
(Blog Post, 31 March 2017)
<https://law-tech-a2j.org/advice/goodbye-rechtwijzer-hello-justice42/
Barendrecht (n
Ibid; see further Part V
Uitelkaar (Web Page)
https://uitelkaar.nl/
(‘An independent lawyer checks whether the agreements are legally correct
and balanced for both parties’). As Barendrecht
) notes, it is too early to know how this
new platform is performing.
‘Negotiating Your Divorce Online’,
The Law Report
National, 12 July 2016)
http://www.abc.net.au/radionational/programs/lawreport/resolving-disputes-online/7585364
Matthew Denholm,
‘Quick E-Divorce to Save Couples Time and Money’,
The Australian
(Sydney, 8 August 2017), 5.
The reporting of the
story, which references ‘e-Divorce’ in its headline, is also quite
misleading given that obtaining
a divorce online has been possible in Australia
since 2009: Federal Magistrates Court,
Annual Report 2009/10
since January 2018 paper copies of divorce orders are no longer posted, with the
divorce order being electronic only: see
http://www.federalcircuitcourt.gov.au/wps/wcm/connect/fccweb/how-doi/divorce/apply-for-a-divorce/apply-for-divorce
Australian Law Reform
Commission, ‘Family Law for the Future’ (n
) 79, citing Lixia Qu et al,
‘Post-Separation Parenting, Property and Relationship Dynamics after Five
Years’ (Report,
Attorney-General’s Department, Commonwealth, 2014)
Australian Law Reform
Commission, ‘Family Law for the Future’ (n
Ibid 80 [3.3].
Rae Kaspiew et al,
Evaluation of the 2006 Family Law Reforms
(Report, Australian Institute
of Family Studies, December 2009) 29–30; In the United States, it has been
observed that ‘intransigent
conflict-ridden divorcing families’ are
likely to be beset by multiple serious problems: Janet Johnston et al,
‘Allegations
and Substantiations of Abuse in Custody-Disputing
(2005) 43(2)
Family Court Review
Rae Kaspiew et al,
Evaluation of the 2012 Family Violence Amendments: Synthesis Report
(Report, Australian Institute of Family Studies, October 2015) 16; see also
Family Law Council,
Families with Complex Needs and the Intersection of the
Family Law and Child Protection Systems: Terms 1 & 2
(Interim Report,
June 2015).
Johnston et al (n
Rosemary Hunter,
‘Doing Violence to Family Law’
(2011) 33(4)
Journal of Social
Welfare and Family Law
, 354; Pascoe Pleasence et al,
Action: Civil Law and Social Justice
(Legal Services Commissioner,
Jess Mant and Julie
Wallbank, ‘The Mysterious Case of Disappearing Family Law and the
Shrinking Vulnerable Subject: The Shifting
Sands of Family Law’s
(2017) 26(5)
Social and Legal Studies
639–42 (‘The Mysterious Case’).
Ibid; Alison Diduck,
‘Autonomy and Family Justice’
(2016) 28(2)
Child & Family Law
; Alison Diduck, ‘Autonomy and Vulnerability in Family
Law: The Missing Link’ in Julie Wallbank and Jonathan Herring (eds)
Vulnerabilities, Care and Family Law
(Routledge, 2013) 95.
Mant and Wallbank,
‘The Mysterious Case’ (n
Coumarelos (n
) xv; Geoff Mulherin, ‘Law and
Disadvantage’ in Michael Legg (ed)
Resolving Civil Disputes
(LexisNexis, 2016) 225, 249 [16.79].
Macfarlane (n
Cody Blades,
‘Crying Over Spilt Milk: Why the Legal Community is Ethically Obligated to
Ensure LegalZoom’s Survival
in the Legal Services Marketplace’
(2015) 38(1)
Hamline Law Review
; Lauren Moxley, ‘Zooming Past
the Monopoly: A Consumer Rights Approach to Reforming the Lawyer's Monopoly and
Improving Access
to Justice’
(2015) 9(2)
Harvard Law and Policy
; Ben Barton, ‘Lessons from the Rise of LegalZoom’,
Bloomberg Law
(Web Page, 18 June 2015)
<https://biglawbusiness.com/lessons-from-the-rise-of-legalzoom>.
Catherine J Lanctot,
‘Regulating Legal Advice in Cyberspace’
(2002) 16(3)
Journal of Legal Commentary
; Nick Robinson, ‘When Lawyers
Don’t Get All the Profits: Non-Lawyer Ownership, Access, and
Professionalism’
(2016) 29(1)
Georgetown Journal of Legal Ethics
Francesca Bartlett, ‘An Uncomfortable Place for Technology
in the Australian Community Legal Sector’ (Presentation to
International
Legal Ethics Conference VIII, University of Melbourne Law School, Melbourne, 7
December 2018).
Robinson (n
Rebecca L Sandefur,
‘What We Know and Need to Know About the Legal Needs of the Public’
(2016) 67(2)
South Carolina Law Review
, 445, 449-50; see also
Schoonmaker (n
Semple, ‘A Third
Revolution’ (n
Australian Law Reform
Commission, ‘Family Law for the Future’ (n
) 196 [6.5], 248 [8.8].
Robinson (n
Domestic Violence Assistant Beta Testing Now Open’,
Cartland Law
<https://www.cartlandlaw.com/ailira-domestic-violence-assistant-beta-testing-now-open/>.
The program was initially
funded by the D3 Digital Challenge “Keeping
Women Safe” program in South Australia: see ‘Ailira wins Government
Grant to Help Victims of Domestic Violence’,
Cartland Law
<www.cartlandlaw.com/ailira-wins-government-grant-to-help-victims-of-domestic-violence/
The concept of
‘legal need’ is to capture problems which individuals may not
themselves identify as legal issues: see
generally Hazel Genn,
Justice: What People Do and Think About Getting to Law
(Hart Publishing,
See, eg, Special
Taskforce on Domestic and Family Violence in Queensland,
Not Now, Not Ever:
Putting an End to Domestic and Family Violence in Queensland
(Report, 28
February 2015) 301.
See, eg, Australian Law
Reform Commission,
Family Violence and Commonwealth Laws – Improving
Legal Frameworks: Final Report
(Report No 117, November 2011)
54 [1.18]-[1.26] (‘
Family Violence: Improving Legal
’); Australian Law Reform Commission,
Family Violence:
Improving Legal Frameworks – Consultation Paper
(Consultation Paper No
9, June 2010) 214 [4.224].
Australian Law Reform
Commission,
Family Violence: Improving Legal Frameworks
) 958–59 [20.16].
Ibid 244–45
[5.72]-[5.77].
Crimes (Domestic and
Personal Violence) Act 2007
; Jane Wangmann, ‘Incidents v
Context: How Does the NSW Protection Order System Understand Intimate Partner
[2012] SydLawRw 32
(2012) 34(4)
Sydney Law Review
This was recommended by
the Victorian Law Reform Commission,
Review of Family Violence Laws
(Report, February 2006) [5.80]-[5.93]; on the other hand, the NSW Law Reform
Commission had previously stressed the importance of
police making complaints on
behalf of PINOPs: New South Wales Law Reform Commission,
Apprehended Violence
(Report No 103, October 2003) [3.8]; see also Heather Douglas,
‘Do We Need a Specific Domestic Violence Offence?’
[2015] MelbULawRw 26
(2015) 39(2)
Melbourne University Law Review
The debate about mandatory arrest
policies in the domestic violence context also illustrates this complexity: see,
eg, Rachel Camp,
‘Pursuing Accountability for Perpetrators of Intimate
Partner Violence: The Peril and Utility of Shame’
(2018) 98(6)
University Law Review
, 1703–4, n 132.
research was focused on cross-applications: she reviewed 156 such applications,
as well as conducting court observation:
Wangmann (n
Richard Moorhead,
‘DoNotLie – A quick post on ChatBot ethics’,
LawyerWatch
(Blog Post, 1 February 2018)
<https://lawyerwatch.blog/2018/02/01/donotlie-a-quick-post-on-chatbot-ethics/>.
Wangmann (n
) 712–13, citing
Crimes (Domestic
and Personal Violence) Act 2007
; Rosemary Hunter,
Violence Law Reform and Women’s Experience in Court: The Implementation of
Feminist Reforms in Civil Proceedings
(Cambria Press, 2008) 81-82.
Paul Gowder,
‘Transformative Legal Technology and the Rule of Law’ (2018) 68
(Supplement
University of Toronto Law Journal
See generally Beames (n
Tahlia Gordon,
‘The Unregulated Cowboys that May be “Engaging in legal
practice”’ (Presentation
FLIP Regulatory Subcommittee,
Law Society of NSW, 9 April 2019), referring to Online Divorce Applications
<https://www.audivorce.com.au/>.
Eekelaar and Maclean,
Family Justice
(n 16) ch 9.
Melissa Perry,
‘iDecide: Administrative Decision-Making in the Digital World’
(2017) 91(1)
Australian Law Journal
Zeleznikow,
‘Methods for Incorporating Fairness’ (n
Eekelaar and Maclean,
Family Justice
(n 16); see also Penelope E Bryan, ‘Reclaiming
Professionalism: The Lawyer’s Role in Divorce Mediation’
Family Law Quarterly
Black v Black
[2008] FamCAFC 7
(2008) 216 FLR 422
, 430 [45], which adopted a strict approach to compliance with
the legislation before a financial agreement would be binding; Patrick
Parkinson, ‘Setting Aside Financial Agreements’
(2001) 15(1)
Australian Journal of Family Law
Estimates as to
prevalence vary, but see, eg, Lawrie Moloney et al,
Allegations of Family
Violence and Child Abuse in Family Law Children’s Proceedings: A
Pre-Reform Exploratory Study
(Research Report No 15, Australian Institute of
Family Studies, May 2007) which suggested that over half of family law cases
allegations of violence and/or child abuse.
Patrick Parkinson,
‘Why are Decisions on Family Property So Inconsistent?’
(2016) 90(7)
Australian Law Journal
Daniel Ben-Ari et al,
‘“Danger, Will Robinson?” Artificial Intelligence in the
Practice of Law: An Analysis and
Proof of Concept Experiment’
(2017) 23(2)
Richmond Journal of Law & Technology
The Correctional
Offender Management Profiling for Alternative Sanctions: see Julia Angwin et al,
‘Machine Bias’,
(Web Page, 23 May 2016)
https://www.propublica.org/article/machine-bias-risk-assessments-in-criminal-sentencing>.
Lehr and Ohm (n
For a discussion of
differing approaches to fairness: see Sam Corbett-Davies et al, ‘A
computer program used for bail and
sentencing decisions was labeled biased
against blacks. It’s actually not that clear’,
The Washington
17 October 2016)
<https://www.washingtonpost.com/news/monkey-cage/wp/2016/10/17/can-an-algorithm-be-racist-our-analysis-is-more-cautious-than-propublicas/?noredirect=on&utm_term=.a245872bbe95>;
Gillian K Hadfield,
Rules for a Flat World
(Oxford University Press, 2017) 25.
Pasquale and Cashwell (n
Lyria Bennett Moses and
Janet Chan, ‘Using Big Data for Legal and Law Enforcement Decisions:
Testing the New Tools’
[2014] UNSWLawJl 25
(2014) 37(2)
University of New South Wales Law
Frank Pasquale and Glynn
Cashwell, ‘Four Futures of Legal Automation’ [2015] (63)
Review Discourse
See National Research
Complex Operational Decision Making in Networked Systems of Humans
and Machines: A Multidisciplinary Approach
(National Academies Press,
Remus and Levy (n 2)
Ben-Ari et al (n
Semple, ‘Personal
Plight Legal Practice’ (n 14).
Patrick Parkinson,
Atlanta Webster and Judy Cashmore, ‘Lawyers’ Interviews with Clients
[2010] UNSWLawJl 41
(2010) 33(3)
University of New South Wales Law
Semple, ‘Personal
Plight Legal Practice’ (n 14); Schoonmaker (n
Lydia Dishman,
‘This App Helps Divorced Parents Stop Fighting Over Custody and Save
Fast Company
(Web Page, 17 January 2019)
<https://www.fastcompany.com/90290963/this-app-helps-divorced-parents-stop-fighting-over-custody-and-save-money>.
Adieu is one example of
a startup using artificial intelligence to help humans resolve conflict,
starting with separation and divorce:
<https://www.adieu.ai/>.
Carrie Menkel-Meadow,
‘When Winning isn’t Everything: The Lawyer as Problem Solver’
(2000) 28(4)
Hofstra Law Review
Semple, ‘A Third
Revolution’ (n
Remus and Levy (n 2).
Rebecca Aviel,
‘Family Law and the New Access to Justice’
(2018) 86(5)
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (811 KB)
PDF format (914 KB)
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter