URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/journals/UNSWLawSocCConsc/2024/10.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 15:47:13
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Garay, Mahlia; Kelley, Lucy-Ann; Gielingh, Annaliese --- "Recognising the Harms of Removal: Considerations of Culture in the Courtroom" [2024] UNSWLawSocCConsc 10; (2024) 18 UNSW Law Society Court of Conscience 63
RECOGNISING THE HARMS OF REMOVAL: CONSIDERATIONS OF CULTURE
IN THE COURTROOM
Mahlia Garay,
Lucy-Ann Kelley,
Annaliese Gielingh
I Introduction
More than 25 years ago, the
Bringing them Home Report
documented the
egregious and irreversible harms caused by the forcible removal of Aboriginal
and Torres Strait Islander children
into care by state, territory and federal governments. The BTH Report paid
homage to decades of lived experience and advocacy by
survivors of the
formally-recognised Stolen Generations era and made 54 recommendations for
Recommendation 46A was for
a nationally-binding legislative presumption that the ‘best
interest’ of an Aboriginal child
is for them to remain with their family,
community and culture.
Two decades later, the
Family Is Culture Review Report
Review Report’)
ongoing advocacy in the New South Wales (‘NSW’) context and again
the intergenerational and cultural harms caused by the removal of
Aboriginal children from their families and communities. The FIC
Review Report
made 126 recommendations for systemic
Recommendation 64 was to
Children and Young Persons (Care and Protection) Act 1998
’) to require judicial
hearing child protection
matters to consider the known risks of harm to an Aboriginal child of being
removed from their parents or
This recommendation remains
unimplemented.
In this article, we argue that implementing Recommendation 64 would help to
dismantle the biased definitions of ‘harm’,
‘best interests of the child’ in the
, which have
been historically determined and acted upon by the State as part of a
risk-oriented logic that favours removal and ignores
cultural connection as a
source of strength and safety. We begin by providing the background to
Recommendation 64 of the FIC Review
Report and critically evaluating the
Department of Communities and Justice’s (‘DCJ’) claim that
current provisions
are sufficient to enable
Children’s Court magistrates to consider the known harms of removal. We
then turn to examine culture
as a protective factor that supports Aboriginal
children to thrive. Our final section considers the potential, process and
of implementing Recommendation 64. Our intention is that, by being
legally obliged to take into account evidence of the known harms
of removal,
magistrates will reach more culturally appropriate decisions in child protection
proceedings, and recognise the right
of Aboriginal children to grow up safe and
cared for at home and on Country, where they belong.
We focus our discussion on the known harms caused by removal from culture,
because to remove an Aboriginal child from their family
is to remove them from
their culture, as the title of the FIC Review Report suggests. We understand the
harms of removal from culture
to be best known by families who have been
impacted by state child protection systems, and it is their authority and
expertise that
should inform judicial consideration of the known harms of
removal pursuant to Recommendation 64. Our discussion of the issues is
informed by our roles as
non-Indigenous
advocates working
towards system transformation, guided by the communities we serve. We adopt an
anti-colonial stance which actively
‘[pushes] back against colonial
institutions, structures, practices, [and]
mentalities’
practices of child removal perpetrated against Aboriginal families and
communities as an integral part of Australia's ongoing
settler colonial
We affirm the
truth-telling of survivors and of the families still fighting for their
children, echoing their call that the Stolen
Generations
II Background To Recommendation 64
The landmark FIC Review was the first Aboriginal-led, independent review of
Aboriginal children and young people in out-of-home care
(‘OOHC’) in
NSW. The FIC Review Report revealed a child protection system in crisis and made
numerous findings including:
widespread non-compliance with legislation and
policy among caseworkers; lack of transparency and effective oversight within
NSW child protection system; and enduring intergenerational and cultural
harms as a direct legacy of past policies of protectionism
and assimilation
perpetrated against Aboriginal
The resulting FIC
Review Report provided a roadmap for transformation to a child protection system
grounded in pillars of self-determination
and public accountability and
oversight. The FIC Review Report made over 3,000 recommendations for individual
cases as well as 126
recommendations for systemic reform, including 24
recommendations which called explicitly for legislative change. Recommendation
64 proposed an amendment to the
to require judicial officers to
consider the known risks of harm to an Aboriginal child of being removed from
their parents or carer
in child protection
These known risks of
harm were detailed extensively in the FIC Review Report, which suggested that
Recommendation 64 would also serve
as a ‘legislative reminder’ of
the need for magistrates to closely scrutinise the quality of the evidence
presented to
justify removal or
non-restoration.
remains as relevant as ever amidst recent public admissions by the NSW
Government that ‘about 100 per cent’
of the information provided to
DCJ by non-government OOHC providers is inaccurate, and ‘close to 90 per
cent [is] significantly
information’.
importantly, the FIC Review team posited that Recommendation 64 would
‘unambiguously signal to all Magistrates that removal
is often a harmful
practice that must be undertaken with due
Implementing Recommendation 64 was, and remains, a priority for Aboriginal
communities and Aboriginal Community-Controlled
Organisations.
However, despite
this clear directive and the Government’s obligations under binding
national frameworks including
Closing the
DCJ has made
numerous attempts to abandon Recommendation 64 – including as recently as
February 2024
to progress its implementation on the basis that current provisions of the
are sufficient to enable the courts to consider the potential
harms of removal.
The Department
has failed to substantiate this claim and is yet to specify which provisions of
it considers sufficient to render Recommendation 64
unnecessary. Presumably, the Department would seek to rely on principles of
application set out in Chapter 2 of the
, as well as the
particular legislative provisions which govern care application proceedings in
the Children’s Court, contained
in Chapter 5, Part 2 of the Act.
The Chapter 2 principles enshrine notions of removal as a last resort, the
importance of connection to culture and community, and
restoration as the
preferred policy outcome for children placed in OOHC. They include, for
● The requirement that, in deciding what action it is necessary to take
to protect a child from harm, the course to be followed
must be the least
intrusive intervention (s 9(2)(c));
● The requirement that DCJ make ‘active efforts’ to prevent
entry into OOHC and, for children who have been removed,
make active efforts to
restore that child to their parents or otherwise place them with family, kin or
community (s 9A);
● Restoration as the first preference for permanent placement for a
child who has been removed (s 10A(3)(a));
● Prevention as an element of the Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander
Children and Young Persons Principle (‘ATSICYPP’),
and recognition
that Aboriginal children have a right to be brought up within their own family,
community and culture (s 12A(2)(a));
● The general order for placement prescribed by the Aboriginal and
Torres Strait Islander Child and Young Person Placement Principles
(‘ATSICYPPPs’), pursuant to which placement with a member of a
child’s extended family or kinship group is the
preferred option (s
The Chapter 2 principles are intended to give guidance and direction in the
administration of the substantive provisions of the
including the Chapter
5, Part 2 provisions, which govern care application proceedings in the
Children’s Court. These provisions
impose additional requirements for care
applications involving Aboriginal children and, most notably, provide that the
Court must not make a final care order in relation to an
Aboriginal child unless it expressly finds that the plan for permanent placement
of the child:
● Complies with the permanent placement principles, the ATSICYPP and
the ATSICYPPPs (s 83A(3)(a));
● Includes a cultural plan that sets out how the child’s
connection with their Aboriginal family and community, and their
identity, will be maintained and developed (s 83A(3)(b)); and
● Has been developed, to the greatest extent practicable, in
consultation with the child, their parents, family and kin, and
Aboriginal organisations or entities for the child (s 83A(3)(c)).
There are several reasons why the above-mentioned provisions cannot be relied
upon as an alternative to implementation of Recommendation
64 of the FIC Review
Report, and therefore why DCJ’s attempt to abandon implementation on this
basis is misguided. Firstly,
the existing provisions of the
not amount to, and are no substitute for, a specific and express requirement for
Children’s Court magistrates to consider
the known risks of harm of
removing Aboriginal children. A broadly-founded and peripheral ability to
consider the potential harms
of removal when presiding over care application
proceedings is vastly different from a legal obligation to take into account the
known harms of removal when balancing the risk of harm of supporting a child to
remain safely at home with the risk of harm of removal.
Secondly, the FIC Review Report recommendations were designed as an
interconnected framework to transform child protection systems
in NSW. The
recommendations of the FIC Review Report must not be watered down by reliance on
existing provisions and must not be
implemented in an ad hoc or piecemeal
fashion. Recommendations within the FIC Review Report including those
implemented via the
Children and Young Persons (Care and Protection)
Amendment (Family is Culture) Act 2022
(NSW) were intended to work alongside
Recommendation 64 to improve practice and increase public accountability and
oversight throughout
the continuum of care. Whilst existing provisions may
require decision-makers within the Department to consider alternatives to
in practice, Recommendation 64 is formally enshrining, in law, a
recognition at the highest level that removal actively causes harm.
Thirdly, as noted in the FIC Review Report, Children’s Court
magistrates have varying degrees of experience and specialisation,
they are not equally equipped to balance the risk of harm of removal against the
risk of harm of supporting a child to
remain safely at
Part of the intent of
Recommendation 64 was to promote consistency and fairness in judicial
decision-making by requiring all magistrates
to be abreast of the evidence of
the known risks of harm of removal.
Finally, DCJ’s claim that current provisions of the
sufficient does not address the fact that the current system is failing
Aboriginal families. A recent performance audit by the
NSW Auditor General found
that DCJ ‘has not established governance and accountability mechanisms to
ensure compliance with
statutory safeguards for Aboriginal children and their
families’ and ‘has not operationalised safeguards afforded to
Aboriginal children, which has led to system wide
non-compliance’.
Aboriginal children are being removed at rates higher than
and children’s
accounts of high-cost emergency care arrangements have been recently described
by the NSW Minister for Families
and Communities as ‘confronting’
and ‘harrowing’.
Indeed, in a recent judgment regarding an Aboriginal sibling group where the
eldest child had spent more than half of their life
in OOHC in NSW, and the
youngest almost all of their life, Children’s Court Magistrate Nicole Ford
took judicial notice of
matters raised in the FIC Review Report and found that
DCJ had ‘not only failed to protect the children from harm but ... [had]
caused harm to the
III Rethinking Removal: Culture As A Protective Factor
The current child protection system employs a logic centred around
‘risk of significant harm’ as defined by the NSW Government
The concepts of
‘risk’, ‘harm’ and ‘best interests of the
child’ are used commonly throughout
Australian and international
colonial systems including
Australia, are weaponised by the state against First
Nations families. This is part of a deficit-based logic which favours removal
and ignores cultural connection as a source of strength and safety. As the name
of the FIC Review implies, to remove an Aboriginal
child from their family is to
remove them from their culture, and therefore from the innate strength and
protection it provides.
We propose that a system which effectively meets the
needs of Aboriginal families must be Aboriginal-designed and led, and begin
an understanding of culture as a protective factor.
Aboriginal communities, advocates and academics have long recognised that
connection to culture is a foundational protective factor
that supports
Aboriginal children to thrive.
Culture is central to the formation of our individual and collective
and is a source of
pride, resilience, belonging and wellbeing in the face of systemic injustices
and racism.
As Aboriginal
scholars have asserted, connection to culture increases agency for Aboriginal
children and young people by allowing
them to explore their complex
socio-political environment whilst being grounded in their distinct cultural
ways of knowing, being
Through this cultural
grounding, children develop a sense of belonging, cultural attachment and
Connection to culture as
a protective factor also extends beyond the individual child to the collective
right of Aboriginal communities
to raise children at home and on Country:
‘Aboriginal bubs belong to Aboriginal communities, and the right to raise
shape our own futures is a critical aspect of sovereignty and
self-determination’.
IV Recommendation 64: Potential, Process And Practice
The implementation of Recommendation 64 of the FIC Review Report could help
to ‘flip the script’ of the NSW child protection
system as we
continue to advocate for self-determination. A legal requirement for
Children’s Court magistrates to consider
the known harms of removing
Aboriginal children from their families and communities would assist in
dismantling the current definitions
of ‘risk’, ‘harm’
and ‘best interests of the child’ which favour removal and ignore
connection as a source of strength and safety.
Evidence about the cultural harms of removal would enable a more balanced
assessment of a child’s circumstances and promote
more holistic
decision-making by magistrates in child protection proceedings. A recognition in
legislation that removal is harmful
could in some cases lead to a finding that
the risk of harm of removal outweighs the risk of harm of supporting a child to
safely at home.
We propose that evidence of the known harms of removal could be given in a
format and setting similar to that of the Winha-nga-nha
List at Dubbo’s
Children’s Court.
List was designed to meaningfully explore cultural
considerations in the court process and, amongst other things, focuses
improving the engagement of families, Aboriginal Elders and respected community
members in care and protection
proceedings.
The NSW model could
also take inspiration from the model used in the United States in proceedings
involving Native American
children, pursuant to which the child’s tribe can designate a
‘qualified expert witness’ to testify as to ‘the
social and cultural standards of the Indian child’s
We recognise that the above-mentioned examples still operate within settler
colonial legal systems. We advocate for the implementation
of Recommendation 64
purely as an interim measure which would better recognise the authority and
expertise of Aboriginal families
and respected community members as we continue
to demand system transformation and self-determination. It is critical that the
implementation
and governance of Recommendation 64 be led by Aboriginal
communities.
V Conclusion
Aboriginal children have been raised since time immemorial, cradled by their
families and their culture, and deeply connected to their
Country. Aboriginal
families and communities have long asserted that family
culture, such
that to be removed from family is to be removed from culture. The landmark FIC
Review Report amplified that claim and
recommended that Children’s Court
magistrates be required to take into account the known harms of removing
Aboriginal children
from their families when hearing child protection matters.
Whilst implementation of Recommendation 64 would not be a substitute for
transformation and self-determination, it would be a positive interim measure to
better recognise the authority and expertise
of Aboriginal families in the
courtroom and ensure that more children grow up in culture and on Country, where
they belong.
Mahlia Garay is a Ngarigo and Darkinjung woman (she/her) and
social worker. Mahlia is a research fellow for the Child Protection Advocacy
at Jumbunna Institute for Indigenous Education and Research (UTS). She is
passionate about system transformation that empowers
Aboriginal children, young
people and their communities.
Lucy-Ann Kelley (she/her) is a Policy Lawyer at the Justice and
Equity Centre (formerly the Public Interest Advocacy Centre). She
takes pride in
supporting Aboriginal families to stay together and continue their connection to
culture and Country through community-led
campaigns and collaborative
partnerships.
Annaliese Gielingh (she/her) is a social worker of South
Asian and Dutch descent. She has a special interest in human rights and global
decolonisation. Annie works in the Policy and Advocacy team at AbSec, the NSW
peak body for Aboriginal children, families and communities.
We express our deep thanks to Associate Professor Paul Gray and Zoe De Re for
their guidance throughout this process and are grateful
for their insight and
Australian Human Rights Commission,
Bringing Them Home: Report
of the National Inquiry into the Separation of Aboriginal and Torres Strait
Islander Children from Their
(Report, April 1997)
Bringing Them Home Report
Hereafter, respectfully,
‘Aboriginal children’.
Bringing Them Home
(n 1) app 9: Recommendations [46a]; see Australian Human Rights
Commission,
Bringing them Home – Appendix 9 Recommendations
(online, April 1997) [46a]
<https://humanrights.gov.au/our-work/projects/bringing-them-home-appendix-9-recommendations>.
Bringing Them Home
(n 1) app 9 (Recommendations [46a]).
Megan Davis,
Culture Review Report 2019: Independent Review of Aboriginal Children and Young
People in OOHC
(Final Report, October 2019).
Ibid XXXIX–LV.
We use the terms
‘judicial officers’ and ‘Children’s Court
magistrates’ interchangeably in this article
whilst recognising that
judges of the District Court of NSW and the Supreme Court of NSW can also
exercise powers under the
Children and Young Persons (Care and Protection)
Davis (n 5) XLVII
(Recommendation 64).
AbSec – NSW Child, Family
and Community Peak Aboriginal Corporation and Aboriginal Legal Service
Family Is Culture Community Report Card: July 2024
July 2024) 15 (‘
Family is Culture Report Card
Mahlia Garay.
Lucy-Ann Kelley and
Annaliese Gielingh. Personal pronouns throughout this article shift from first
person to third person when talking
reflective of the authors’ respective relationships with those
communities.
Elizabeth Carlson,
‘Anti-colonial Methodologies and Practices for Settler Colonial
Studies’ (2016) 7(4)
Settler Colonial Studies
See generally Ingrid
Matthews and Lynda Holden, ‘The Colonial Logic of Child Removal’
Australian Journal of Human Rights
See, eg, Grandmothers
Against Removals, Submission No 48 to the Australian Human Rights Commission,
Australian Human Rights Commission,
Children’s Rights Report 2019
(28 October 2019); Vanessa Turnbull-Roberts, Michael Salter and BJ Newton,
‘Trauma Then and Now: Implications of Adoption Reform
for First Nations
Children’ (2021) 27(2)
Child & Family Social Work
Davis (n 5)
XXX–XXXVIII. For a discussion of the enduring harms of past policies in
the child protection system, see, eg, Turnbull-Roberts,
Salter and Newton (n 14)
163; BJ Newton, ‘Aboriginal Parents’ Experiences of Having Their
Children Removed by Statutory
Child Protection Services’ (2020)
Child & Family Social Work
See Davis (n 5)
Evidence to Portfolio
Committee No. 5 – Justice and Communities, Legislative Council, Parliament
of NSW, Sydney, 4 March 2024,
8 (Kate Washington, Minister for Families and
Communities and Minister for Disability Inclusion) (‘Evidence to Portfolio
Davis (n 5) 233.
See, eg, AbSec – NSW
Child, Family and Community Peak Aboriginal Corporation and Aboriginal Legal
Service (NSW/ACT),
Family Is Culture Recommendations for Immediate
Legislative Reform
(Briefing Paper, May 2022) 12–13. See also Davis (n
5) 230–4; AbSec – NSW Child, Family and Community Peak Aboriginal
Corporation and Aboriginal Legal Service (NSW/ACT),
Family Is Culture
Community Report Card: September 2023
(Report, September 2023) 7.
Department of the Prime
Minister and Cabinet (Cth),
National Agreement on Closing the Gap
Department of Social
Services (Cth),
Safe & Supported: The National Framework for Protecting
Australia’s Children 2021-2031
(National Framework, 2021).
Family is Culture Report
See, eg, New South Wales
Government, Department of Communities and Justice,
Family Is Culture
Legislative Recommendations
(Discussion Paper, April 2022) 43. More
recently, see Evidence to Portfolio Committee No. 5 (n 18) 49 (Simone Czech,
Deputy Secretary,
Child Protection and Permanency, District and Youth Justice
Davis (n 5) 233.
See generally Davis (n 5)
Audit Office of New South
Safeguarding the Rights of Aboriginal Children in the Child Protection
(Performance Audit, 6 June 2024) 2–3.
Australian Institute of
Health and Welfare,
Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander Health Performance
(Summary Report, 21 May 2024) 68.
Minister for Disability
Inclusion, Minister for Families and Communities (NSW), ‘NSW Government
Announces Urgent Action to
Repair Broken Foster Care System’ (Media
Release, 2 May 2024). The Minister’s media release was in response to the
publication
of an interim report on the lived experiences of children and young
people in alternative care arrangements by the Advocate for Children
People (NSW), Zoë Robinson: See Advocate for Children and Young People
Moving Cage to Cage: An Interim Report of the Special Inquiry into
Children and Young People in Alternative Care Arrangements
(Special Inquiry
Interim Report, May 2024). The authors note the announcement by the Minister on
3 September 2024, recent at the time
of writing, that NSW will ban alternative
care arrangements within the next six months. Whilst we welcome this reform, we
the Minister’s announcement was purely reactive and
unjustifiably late, traumatising our children and young people in the
Department of Communities
and Justice (DCJ) and the Yarran Taylor Children
[2024] NSWChC 3, [90]. See
also, [18], [243], [272], [299]–[301].
pt 2: see especially s 23.
See, eg, Sue-Anne Hunter,
Helen Skouteris and Heather Morris, ‘A Conceptual Model of Protective
Factors Within Aboriginal and
Torres Strait Islander Culture that Build
Strength’ (2021) 52(8–9)
Journal of Cross-Cultural Psychology
726; Catherine Liddle, ‘Culture is an Anchor for the Social and Emotional
Health and Wellbeing of Our Children’ (Media
Release, 13 October
See generally Graham Gee et
al, ‘Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander Social and Emotional
Wellbeing’ in Pat Dudgeon,
Helen Milroy and Roz Walker (eds),
Together: Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander Mental Health and Wellbeing
Principles and Practice
(Commonwealth of Australia, 2014) ch 4.
See, eg, Jacynta Krakouer,
Sarah Wise and Marie Connolly, ‘“We Live and Breathe Through
Culture”: Conceptualising
Cultural Connection for Indigenous Australian
Children in Out-Of-Home Care’ (2018) 71(3)
Australian Social Work
265; Jacynta Krakouer et al, ‘Resistance to Assimilation: Expanding
Understandings of First Nations Cultural Connection in Child
protection and
Out-Of-Home Care’ (2023) 76(3)
Australian Social Work
(‘Resistance to Assimilation’); Hunter, Skouteris and Morris (n 33);
Catherine Chamberlain et al, ‘Supporting
Aboriginal and Torres Strait
Islander Families to Stay Together from the Start (SAFeST Start): Urgent Call to
Action to Address Crisis
in Infant Removals’ (2022)
Australian Journal of Social Issues
252; Kylie Cripps and
Julian Laurens, ‘The Protection of Cultural Identity in Aboriginal and
Torres Strait Islander Children
Exiting from Statutory Out Of Home Care via
Permanent Care Orders: Further Observations On the Risk of Cultural
Disconnection to
Inform a Policy and Legislative Reform Framework’
(2015–16) 19(1)
Australian Indigenous Law Review
70; Vanessa
Edwige and Paul Gray,
Significance of Culture to Wellbeing, Healing and
Rehabilitation
(Report, 2021)
See, eg, Cammi
Murrup-Stewart et al, ‘“Connection to Culture is Like a Massive
Lifeline”: Yarning with Aboriginal
Young People about Culture and Social
and Emotional Wellbeing’ (2021) 31(10)
Qualitative Health Research
1833; Ash Wright et al, ‘Attachment and the (mis)Apprehension of
Aboriginal children: Epistemic Violence in Child Welfare Interventions’
Psychiatry, Psychology and Law
1. See also, Resistance to
Assimilation (n 35); Gee et al (n 34).
See, eg, Wright et al (n
36); Murrup-Stewart et al (n 36); Krakouer, Wise and Connolly (n 35); Hunter,
Skouteris and Morris (n 33).
Wright et al (n 36) 13.
Winha-nga-nha (pronounced
Wi-nun-ga-na) is a Wiradjuri word meaning to ‘know, think,
Children’s Court of
New South Wales,
Winha-nga-nha List: Factsheet
(Fact Sheet, 12 September
2023). The Winha-nga-nha List is an attempt to implement Recommendation 125 of
the FIC Review Report. The
authors note that the Dubbo community were consulted
during the design stages and expressed the need for reforms which prevent their
families from coming before the Children’s Court entirely, rather than
reforms which seek to improve their experiences of courts
as a site of settler
colonial intervention. We echo these concerns and include the Winha-nga-nha List
only as an example of an interim
measure to centre culture in the courtroom as
we pursue more ambitious aims of system transformation and
self-determination.
We recognise the diversity
of tribes and nations across North America and acknowledge that this terminology
is not universally preferred.
We use this term respectfully.
Indian Child Welfare Act
, 25 USC § 23.122(a) (1988).
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (85.7 KB)
PDF format (310 KB)
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter