URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/journals/SocSecRpr/2014/4.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 15:37:12
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Editors --- "Disability support pension: qualification; whether condition diagnosed and fully treated and stablised" [2014] SocSecRpr 4; (2014) 16(1) Social Security Reporter, Article 4
GRAHAM and SECRETARY to the DFHCSIA
Legislation
Consideration of the issues
Formal decision
Disability support pension: qualification; whether condition diagnosed and
fully treated and stablised
GRAHAM and SECRETARY to the DFHCSIA
Decided: 12th September 2013 by R.P Hadnley
Graham was receiving newstart allowance. On 21 March 2012, he lodged a claim
for a disability support pension (DSP) in respect of
a back injury, panic
attacks, anxiety, bipolar disorder, schizophrenia, and confusion. On 5 April
2012 a Job Capacity Assessment
Report was completed. His psychiatric condition
was assessed as being permanent and fully diagnosed but not fully treated or
stabilised.
No medical information had been provided about the back condition.
The Assessor found that Graham had a temporary work capacity for
0 to 7 hours
per week for the following year and a capacity for work with intervention of 15-
22 hours per week within two years.
The application for DSP was rejected on 12
April 2012. Graham requested a review of the decision and lodged a further
medical certificate.
On 28 May 2012, an Authorised Review Officer affirmed the
decision and Graham sought a review by the SSAT and provided a further
report. On 29 August 2012, the SSAT affirmed the decision. On 19 September 2012,
Graham lodged an application for a review
of the SSAT decision by the
On 6 May 2013, another Job Capacity Assessment Report was prepared which
identified two conditions: a psychiatric disorder and a spinal
disorder. The
spinal condition was found to be fully diagnosed but not fully treated or
stabilised. The psychiatric condition was
found to be neither fully diagnosed
nor fully treated and stabilised. The Report found that Graham’s capacity
for work within
two years with intervention was only 8 to 14 hours per week.
Legislation
Social Security Act 1991
(Cth) (the Act) provides:
(1) A person is qualified for disability support pension if:
(a) the person has a physical, intellectual or psychiatric impairment;
(b) the person’s impairment is of 20 points or more under the
Impairment Tables;
(c) one of the following applies:
(i) the person has a continuing inability to work;
(2) A person has a continuing inability to work because of and if the
Secretary is satisfied that: (aa) in a case where the person’s
is not a severe impairment within the meaning of subsection (3B)--the person has
actively participated in a program of
support within the meaning of subsection
(a) in all cases--the impairment is of itself sufficient to prevent the
person from doing any work independently of a program of support
within the next
2 years; and
(b) in all cases--either:
(i) the impairment is of itself sufficient to prevent the person from
undertaking a training activity during the next 2 years; or
(ii) if the impairment does not prevent the person from undertaking a
training activity--such activity is unlikely (because of the
impairment) to
enable the person to do any work independently of a program of support within
the next 2 years. ...
(3B) A person’s impairment is a severe impairment if the person’s
impairment is of 20 points or more under the Impairment
Tables, of which 20
points or more are under a single Impairment Table.
The relevant Impairment Tables are set out in the Social Security (Tables for
the Assessment of Work-related Impairment for Disability
Support Pension)
Determination 2011 (the Impairment Tables).
Paragraph 6 states relevantly:
Impairment ratings
(3) An impairment rating can only be assigned to an impairment if:
(a) the person’s condition causing that impairment is permanent; and
Note: For permanent see
subsection 6(4).
(b) the impairment that results from that condition is more likely than not,
in light of available evidence, to persist for more than
Permanency of conditions
(4) For the purposes of paragraph 6(3)(a) a condition is permanent if:
(a) the condition has been fully diagnosed by an appropriately qualified
medical practitioner;
(b) the condition has been fully treated; and
Note: For fully diagnosed and fully treated see
subsection 6(5).
(c) the condition has been fully stabilised; and
Note: For fully stabilised see
subsection 6(6).
(d) the condition is more likely than not, in light of available evidence, to
persist for more than 2 years.
Fully diagnosed and fully treated
(5) In determining whether a condition has been fully diagnosed by an
appropriately qualified medical practitioner and whether it
has been fully
treated for the
purposes of paragraphs 6(4)(a) and (b), the following is to be
considered:
(a) whether there is corroborating evidence of the condition; and
(b) what treatment or rehabilitation has occurred in relation to the
(c) whether trearment is continuing or is planned in the next 2 years.
Fully stabilised
(6) For the purposes of paragraph 6(4)(c) and
subsection 11(4)
a condition is
fully stabilised if:
(a) either the person has undertaken reasonable treatment for the condition
and any further reasonable treatment is unlikely to result
in significant
functional improvement to a level enabling the person to undertake work in the
next 2 years; or (b) the person has
not undertaken reasonable treatment for the
condition and:
(i) significant functional improvement to a level enabling the person to
undertake work in the next 2 years is not expected to result,
even if the person
undertakes reasonable treatment; or
(ii) there is a medical or other compelling reason for the person not to
undertake reasonable treatment.
The introductory notes to Table 5 – Mental Health Function include the
The diagnosis of the condition must be made by an appropriately qualified
medical practitioner (this includes a psychiatrist) with
evidence from a
clinical psychologist (if the diagnosis had not been made by a
psychiatrist).
Schedule 2, clause 4(1) of the
Social Security (Administration) Act 1999
(Cth) (the Administration Act) required that Graham’s qualification for
DSP be assessed as at the date he made his claim for
DSP (21 March 2012) or in
the 13 week period following the claim (ending 20 June 2012).
The issue was whether Graham’s impairments should attract an impairment
rating of 20 points or more under the Impairment Tables
(s.94(1)(b)). The
Secretary stated that if the Tribunal found that his psychiatric condition was
fully diagnosed, treated and stabilised
and was given an impairment rating of at
least 20 points under Table 5, then the Secretary accepted that he had a
continuing inability
Graham told the Tribunal he had his first psychotic episode in 2007. He was
hospitalised and treated. He had another episode in mid-2011
which was much
worse. He was hospitalised and then
released under the care of the Community Mental Health Service. At the time
of the hearing Graham said he was waiting to get another
appointment with the
Mental Health Service and was taking medication prescribed by his GP. He still
suffered panic attacks, anxiety
and got very emotional. He had difficulty
concentrating because of the noise in his head. Graham said there had been no
his psychiatric state over the past two years and his psychological
state was ‘unbearable’.
Graham said his back had been troubling him since 2003. He had an L4/5 disc
protrusion which was pressing on his nerve. He took Panadeine
Graham’s partner gave evidence that Graham could barely get dressed in
the morning without her making a decision for him and
had great difficulty
leaving the house. The Secretary contended that:
• Graham’s psychiatric condition had not been fully diagnosed,
treated or stabilised as he had not been diagnosed by a
psychiatrist;
• the medical evidence suggested that he had not been compliant with
some recommended treatments and some further improvement
in his condition was
• his back condition was not fully treated or stabilised as a report
from his GP suggested that he might benefit from physiotherapy.
Consideration of the issues
The Tribunal considered Graham’s psychiatric condition. The Tribunal
noted the content of medical reports lodged by Graham and
concluded that he had
had at least two psychotic episodes: in April 2008 and July 2011. He had been
treated with Risperidone from
July 2011 and had remained under the care of the
Community Mental Health Service and his GP following the second psychotic
The Tribunal noted that in the case of some mental conditions, including
those involving a psychotic episode, it can be difficult
to identify the
appropriate diagnosis and this might only be possible after reviewing a
person’s response to treatment over
a period of time. The Tribunal
rejected the Secretary’s submission that during the relevant period there
was no diagnosis by
an appropriately qualified person. The clinical notes for
the Community Mental Health Service showed that between July 2011 and June
he was under the care of, in turn, two psychiatric registrars whose professional
work would have been supervised by an experienced
psychiatrist. His condition
was also monitored by his GP.
The Tribunal was satisfied that:
• by the end of the 13 week period from the time of Graham’s
claim there had been a diagnosis by an appropriately qualified
practitioner that he was suffering from a psychotic illness and
schizophrenia;
• his condition had been fully treated by the end of the 13 week period
as he was under the care of the local Mental Health
Service and his GP, was
taking prescribed medication and the treatment was planned to continue;
• his condition was fully stabilised and given the nature of his
condition and its past history, any further reasonable treatment
was unlikely to
result in any significant functional improvement in the next two years.
• The Tribunal found that his mental health condition should have been
regarded as ‘permanent’. Having considered
Table 5 – Mental
Health Function the Tribunal was satisfied that, at the relevant time,
Graham’s psychiatric condition
was having ‘a severe functional
impact on activities involving mental health function’ and should have
been assigned
an impairment rating of 20 points. This meant that his condition
was classified as a ‘severe impairment’ pursuant to
s.94(3B) of the
Act and so the program of support requirement did not apply.
The Tribunal noted that the Secretary had conceded that Graham’s
capacity for work within two years, with intervention, was
less than 15 hours a
week and the Tribunal was satisfied that, at the relevant time, Graham also
satisfied s.94(1)(c) and so subject
to meeting any other eligibility and
payability requirements, was qualified for a DSP. The Tribunal considered the
limited evidence
relating to the back condition but as it was not necessary to
do so, did not make any findings about it.
Formal decision
The decision was set aside and in substitution a decision was made that
Graham satisfied s.94(1)(a)(b) and (c) of the Act and subject
to meeting other
eligibility and payability requirements
was qualified for a DSP.
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
No downloadable files available
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter