URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/journals/WALawTRw/2025/5.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 15:58:10
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Techera, Erika --- "Building Foundations for Success: Comprehensive Skill-Building for Higher Degree Research Students in Law" [2025] WALawTRw 5; (2025) 3 The Western Australian Law Teachers' Review 61
BUILDING FOUNDATIONS FOR
SUCCESS: COMPREHENSIVE SKILL-BUILDING FOR HIGHER DEGREE RESEARCH STUDENTS IN
ERIKA J E TECHERA
Growth in Higher Degree Research (HDR) programs and student enrolments has
led to the development of university research training
programs. Such training
is frequently delivered by central university areas and designed for HDR
students across multiple fields
of education. Comprehensive legal research
training programs in Australian Law Schools are uncommon and therefore examples
of programs
that do exist may provide valuable models. In 2023, UWA Law School
piloted a training program aimed at building skills and improving
the student
experience to meet the specific needs of its students in the fields of law and
criminology. The comprehensive HDR training
package includes a suite of modules,
resources and practical workshops to accommodate a range of candidates and
projects. The program
harnesses the wealth of knowledge, expertise and
experience in the Law School by engaging research leaders through recorded
and live sessions. The training program also brings all law and
criminology HDR students together to facilitate a cohort experience
and exposes
students to a wider range of Law School academics beyond their supervisory team.
This paper outlines the design, development
and delivery of the training
program, and highlights some early lessons learned that may be of benefit to
other Law Schools.
I INTRODUCTION
Higher Degrees by Research (HDR) programs and
enrolments have grown significantly since the
The majority of Australian
universities offered some form of HDR programs, commonly a Doctorate in
Philosophy (PhD), but also shorter
Masters by Research and professional
doctorates involving a thesis
HDR students come from
various backgrounds (professional and cultural), study in different modes
(part-time, full-time and offshore),
and explore research topics across many
fields of education.
Commonly, HDR
programs are administered through a central graduate research school or
department, although students are usually physically
located and supervised in
subject-specific schools.
Undoubtedly, the supervisory team for any given HDR student is vitally
important, but so too are institutional
Indeed, Australian
education standards require that research training is guided by an institutional
policy that covers matters such
as rights and responsibilities, induction,
monitoring progress and examination and that on completion specific and generic
outcomes related to research can be
demonstrated.
well-recognised in the literature that HDR skills-based training is
and central graduate
research schools frequently offer such research training
Although the scope and
delivery of each program differs, the common elements include an induction for
new students, and sessions
on conducting research, research integrity and
ethics, the student-supervisor relationship and co-authorship, as well as
presenting,
writing and publishing.
Necessarily, because these central programs provide training for HDR students
across all fields, the skills and expertise are general
in nature and not
discipline specific. Science, health and technology fields have offered
specialised skills-based compulsory training,
lectures and lab workshops for
some time, yet comprehensive and effective legal research training programs
(particularly involving
research methods) are less
Often it is left to
individual supervisors to provide specific theoretical and methodological
knowledge and expertise, as well as
training and development in legal research,
critical analysis and writing. The above two matters raise several concerns.
places a considerable burden on these academic supervisors and
increases their workloads in circumstances where administrative requirements
known to have grown
academics are experiencing burnout due to their levels of
Secondly, it relies upon
academics having broad knowledge beyond their own narrow research areas and
specific methodologies. Furthermore,
supervisors are often selected because of
their content knowledge and supervision experience rather than their ability to
build skills. These academics may not be experts in theories and
methodologies and/or multi-disciplinary or mixed methods relevant
student’s project. In addition, new digital research and support tools are
constantly emerging and supervisors may not
be fully equipped to assist HDR
students in their use. This can result in mixed experiences for students
depending on their supervisory
team and highlights the need for comprehensive
programs that ‘level the playing field’ for all students.
The lack of tailored research training leaves a gap for HDR students in law
schools. Furthermore, lack of adequate training and support
can exacerbate the
stress of undertaking HDR studies and impact on student well-being. It is
acknowledged that HDR studies can be
challenging with a negative effect on
student well-being.
research training program cannot remove all stressors, such as family
relationships, employment and finance strains and
ill-health, it can have a
positive effect on academic confidence, reduce feelings of isolation and
facilitate supportive networks
and connections with fellow
In this sense a
training program can improve student well-being. This is evidenced by
scholarship indicating that student experiences
are improved where appropriate
skill-building and support programs are in
and that HDR students
value supervision that balances both ‘academic and emotional
This latter
aspect adds to literature indicating that students do not believe quality
supervision depends purely on scholarly
and that students
value personal qualities in their supervisors more than specific content
knowledge and research
Further valuable
insights into students’ perspectives are provided by Ryan et al who
identify a number of matters that HDR
students themselves want universities to
address to support their
well-being.
The analysis divided
student responses into nine categories with a total of 23
Relevantly, the
suggestions made by students included the following themes:
1. Fostering an inclusive and supportive departmental research culture;
2. Recognising diverse backgrounds and life pressures;
3. Promoting integration between academics and students;
4. Creating opportunities for peer engagement; and importantly
5. Integrating workshops on research skills, methods and thesis
These findings are complemented by literature exploring the perceptions of
PhD students in 16 Australian law schools supporting the
need for law-specific
methodological training.
Students identified the most helpful aspects of their law school’s PhD
program as training that enhances academic skills, opportunities
for informal
academic mentoring and peer bonding, and activities to improve connectedness and
the overall cohort experience.
The least helpful aspects of these law school PhD programs included the generic
university-wide training programs, negative law school
culture and poor online
It is against the backdrop of the need for law-specific HDR training that the
UWA Law School developed, in house, a comprehensive
tailored research program in
2023 to respond to the need for Law discipline-specific training, and to
rehumanise HDR studies to enhance
the student experience. This paper outlines
the design and delivery of the program as a case study of how one Australian law
has sought to address student needs aligned with the literature outlined
above. Both the content and scope, as well as the process
of creating the
training package, provides a useful case study for other law schools who might
wish to build such a program. This
article outlines the context and design
principles for the UWA Law School program. It then explains the content and
delivery of the
UWA program. The final section highlights some feedback from
staff and students and revisions and expansions following the first
II UWA CONTEXT AND DESIGN PRINCIPLES
UWA offers a PhD and MPhil program whereby candidates are centrally enrolled
in the Graduate Research School which then offers students
a range of generic
training workshops and well-being support services. The UWA Law School program
was intended to supplement and
complement, not replace or duplicate, these
centralised offerings. In addition, UWA offers a Doctorate in Juridical Science
program which combines coursework units and a thesis. Students in this
program are enrolled directly through the Law School as the
administered at the school level, with the added obligation to provide a
dedicated research training coursework unit for
credit. This unit provided a
useful vehicle through which to develop the broader HDR training program.
In keeping with other universities, the UWA Law School student cohort
includes domestic and international, full time and part time,
students as well
as distance students located offshore. The training program had to meet the
needs of this diverse group in terms
of its design and delivery. In addition,
UWA Law School comprises study in both law and criminology with staff and
students drawn
from both fields. Many of the HDR students in the Law School are
not legally (or criminologically) qualified and may have backgrounds
social sciences or engineering, science, health or technology. Although they may
be undertaking legal research their projects
frequently incorporate elements of
related areas such as international relations, public policy, and environmental
studies, for example.
Therefore, the Law School attracts a greater diversity of
HDR students than might otherwise be expected, exploring a variety of topics
utilising various theories and methodologies, and sometimes involving
multi-disciplinary and mixed methods research.
UWA requires HDR research projects to be supervised by at least one level 3
supervisor, being a staff member who has supervised other
students to
completion.
For any given
student area there might be only one or two suitable supervisors with a
necessarily limited range of content knowledge
and methodological expertise.
Therefore, the pool of supervisors, and particularly senior supervisors, is
relatively small with the
likelihood that the supervisory team may not have
expertise in all of the theories and methodologies any given student intends to
consider in their project.
Not only did the training needs of these students need to be met in terms of
legal theory and law/criminological methodology, the
program also had to provide
opportunities to build a cohort experience across the diverse and distributed
group of students. A key
aim was to overcome feelings of detachment from
supervisors, schools, research communities and fellow students noted generally
PhD students and which could potentially be exacerbated by such
So the design of the
training program took these factors into account and also responded to the need
to expose HDR students to other
staff beyond their supervisory team, and to
promote engagement and connectedness between staff and students.
In summary, the project aimed to support students (1) by complementing and
building upon the training program run by the central university
Research School to raise the skills of all HDR students in the Law School, and
(2) by enhancing well-being through whole-of-cohort
engagement opportunities and
stronger student-staff networks and research culture. A secondary goal was to
reduce the workload for
individual supervisors by providing a School-centred,
training program that utilised the knowledge and expertise of all relevant
academics to provide a pool of resources that could be used on an ongoing basis
from year to year.
III THE UWA PROGRAM
As noted above, UWA Law School attracts students from around the world,
researching part time and full time, locally and remotely,
disciplines of law and criminology. These characteristics necessarily affected
the design of the program which had to
be flexible, accessible, and relevant to
students in both fields and indeed those engaged in multi-disciplinary projects.
The decision
was made to provide a series of modules comprising fully online
pre-recorded materials, and live (virtual and in-person) workshop
sessions. The
pre-recorded modules are self-paced with mini-lectures, readings, and self-test
exercises, designed to build knowledge
and expertise. This mode has the
advantage of being accessible from anywhere and in any time zone. The modules
can also be revisited
multiple times throughout the students’ HDR journey
towards thesis submission. The live classes focus on building skills by
knowledge learnt in the online modules. In addition, these classes bring all
students together and sharing challenges and
reflecting on draft work with
fellow HDR students helps to strengthen the cohort experience. The majority of
these live sessions
were held in-person with virtual participation an option for
distance students.
The central UWA Graduate Research School provides an induction for all HDR
students and training sessions focused on various stages
of the journey
(preparing a research proposal, Confirmation of Candidature and preparing for
examination etc). In addition, skill-building
seminars are provided on reading,
note taking and academic writing, research ethics, research integrity and
intellectual property.
As noted above, these sessions are designed for student
participation across all fields of research and are not intended to be
specific. Only one gap was identified in these more generic
offerings. Time management has become increasingly important given growing
demands for timely completion, and competing commitments, which can add to HDR
student stress.
Therefore time
management was identified as a focus for a generic skills module.
The Law School therefore developed tailored training to include (1) some
generic skills not already provided for centrally; (2) specific
theoretical and
methodological knowledge and expertise; and (3) opportunities to apply and
practice research, writing and analysis
in a cohort context. The generic and
theory/methodology materials were developed as pre-recorded online modules, and
application
workshops were delivered as live sessions.
To ensure a uniform level of skill-building, the generic modules were
designed to be completed by all students engaged in the program.
skill-building modules were designed and recorded by various staff from across
the Law School and cover:
• Time management;
• Advanced legal research;
• Designing your research project and research question;
• An introduction to methods and methodologies;
• Preparing research proposals;
• Preparing a literature review;
• Referencing and referencing software;
• Progressing and presenting your HDR research;
• Writing up your work – traditional and by-publication
• Reviewing, editing and finalising your thesis;
• Publishing your legal and criminological research;
• Beyond the PhD – further research and study; and
• Beyond the PhD – peer reviewing journal articles.
In addition to these more general skill-building modules, specialist modules
on legal and criminological theory and methodologies
were developed, again
drawing on the expertise of key Law School staff. It was recognised that not all
of the modules would be relevant
to every HDR project, and so students were
encouraged to discuss with their supervisors which of these to focus upon.
Nevertheless,
all modules remain available to all students throughout their HDR
journey, allowing flexibility for students to explore options at
early stages of
their research design and to learn about areas beyond their immediate project.
The theory and methodology modules
• Research ethics in law and criminology;
• Traditions of legal theory;
• Feminist legal theory;
• Doctrinal Australian legal research;
• Empirical research methods;
• Socio-legal methods;
• Criminological methods;
• International law research methods; and
• Comparative legal methods.
The live sessions were designed to complement those delivered by the central
Graduate Research School. For example, early modules
extend the central
induction program and whole-of-university policies by covering, for example,
School-specific student-supervisor
relationship and co-authorship guidelines.
Later sessions focus on discussing and reflecting on research design and
methodological
choices. All of the sessions bring students together as a group
and therefore also provide opportunities for candidates to engage
with fellow
HDR students. The workshops also allow for feedback beyond the student’s
supervisory team, and for peer learning
and support in a safe and collegial
environment through sharing and discussing draft work. The sessions later in the
year are more
heavily focused on substantive writing and engage HDR students in
various stages of their research projects. The live session element
• Introduction to HDR;
• Skill building needs and resources;
• Commencing your HDR project;
• Designing a research question and methodology as part of research
• What are the necessary ingredients of an HDR research proposal?;
• How do you move from a research proposal to writing?;
• UWA Law School mini-conference;
• Work-in-progress conference;
• 3-day writing workshop; and
• End of year reflection and planning for the next year.
As noted above, a goal was to utilise the full range of knowledge and
expertise across the Law School, engaging staff as ‘owners’
distributing the workload of developing the training program. The creation of
the program therefore involved three key steps:
(1) engaging relevant staff to
pre-record mini-lectures; (2) curating written readings and resources; and (3)
designing an inclusive
student interface and scheduling the live element of the
By far the most challenging task was the first. Given existing teaching,
research and service obligations, many staff were reluctant
to assist beyond
their allocated workload. However, by demonstrating the need for the training
program, explaining how sharing the
load was fair and equitable, and recognising
the different knowledge and expertise of individual academics, three quarters of
Law School staff agreed to participate. An additional ‘carrot’
was the benefit to HDR supervisors as the training program
sought to reduce the
time taken to facilitate skill-building for their own students.
The second task of collating resources was relatively easy. There are many
excellent books on legal research and
as well as those
specifically focused volumes on legal
methodologies,
and undertaking a
PhD including in law.
materials that aligned with the pre-recorded materials largely involved scanning
the existing resources and providing a
range of readings to expose students to
different books and resources from which they could choose the style that they
This task fell to the program coordinator in combination with
academic staff developing various modules – again it was a collaborative
In terms of delivery, it was important to ensure that students had access to
the pre-recorded materials throughout their candidature,
so all recordings and
readings were uploaded onto the UWA learning management system. The vehicle
chosen was the coursework research
training unit that SJD students are required
to complete, and access to the unit was then made more widely available to all
HDR students.
In addition to providing a familiar interface and simple access
arrangement for students, this approach meant that the materials
were centrally
located and backed up in university systems and allowing them to be
‘rolled over’ and made available in
subsequent years. The live
workshop schedule spread sessions over a year, with the intention of repeating
them annually so that students
could join whichever workshops suited them at any
particular stage in their HDR journey. New students, for example, gain most
from the sessions in the first half of the program and those more
advanced in their studies are likely to be ready to participate
in the writing
workshops. Students were encouraged to attend workshops of relevance to them in
multiple years.
IV FEEDBACK, RESPONSES AND FUTURE PLANS
Independent feedback is essential evidence of the success or failure of a new
program such as this, and it also provides valuable
ideas about ways to refine
and improve the program. Staff in the Law School were asked to provide informal
at the end of the pilot year (ie, 2023). Staff
supervising high numbers of research students noted improved academic rigour of
students and in particular the benefit of support the program had given to
HDR students to develop as researchers. Similarly, those
students who had
engaged in the program were asked for their feedback. Comments fell into two
categories: (1) the new knowledge and
skills that the program had provided; and
(2) the confidence and support that it had given to them. Thus, this anecdotal
suggested the program had served multiple purposes of building relevant
skills and expertise as well as engaging a wide range of
staff and students to
positive effect. The decision was made to refine the program and deliver it
again the next year.
A secondary benefit of engaging staff across the Law School was that several
members came forward and suggested new modules and offered
to prepare them. This
was important as the program moved from a pilot stage to a more permanent
offering, and for continual improvement
and to ensure a ‘living
program’. In addition, it helped to broaden the shared ownership of the
program. Some additional
skill-building modules that were suggested included the
use (and abuse) of Artificial Intelligence (AI), advanced database and software
use, and how to peer review journal articles. The first two of these relate to
research and writing tools, whilst the last considers
a skill that students
might wish to build for future use as an academic but which also improves
understanding of how their own work
will be treated when submitted for
publication. All of these ideas are being taken forward.
No systematic feedback was sought at the end of the pilot year, and this is
another matter for consideration. When informal feedback
is sought, negative
comments are not often provided, and not all staff were involved and engaged in
the pilot program. A whole of
Law School call out for contributions –
whether ideas or offers to develop and deliver modules – was suggested. In
it was proposed that a survey should be delivered to gather formal
An issue that remains unresolved is whether the program should be compulsory.
Law School administered SJD students are required to
enrol in and complete a
training unit. Some HDR students enrolled centrally are also admitted
conditionally with a requirement to
complete research training. For both of
these groups, the UWA Law School training program is compulsory. For PhD
students, however,
the program is optional, and these students are not required
to complete any formal training beyond that offered by the central Graduate
Research School. No consensus has yet been reached on whether these students
should be required to complete the program. Adding to
student workload is not to
be considered lightly, however, given the anecdotal evidence from staff and
students involved, it would
seem that the benefits outweigh the time and effort
that engagement in the program involves. The results of a more formal survey
to be analysed before a decision is made on whether to make the program
compulsory for all Law School HDR students.
Finally, there is the issue of further revisions to the program. It is
evident that the focus is on supporting the student in their
HDR journey and
facilitating successful and timely completion of a thesis. The more generic
skill-building sessions will need to
constantly be revised as HDR requirements,
systems and tools evolve. In addition, the list of theoretical and
methodological modules
is by no means complete and could be expanded much
further. Yet the program does not fully equip students beyond the HDR journey,
particularly as many graduates wish to become academics. Whilst some modules
were suggested after the first pilot year – including
how to peer review
journal articles – consideration could be given to other topics that
build, for example, teaching skills
and awareness of university administrative
processes. This additional skill-building could be completed, where relevant,
the end of candidature.
V CONCLUSION
The literature relating to HDR programs and student perceptions highlights
the importance of training programs that build skills and
also support student
well-being. The UWA Law School responded to the need for tailored research
training for HDR students in law
and criminology. A comprehensive program was
developed that built on matters raised by existing staff and students in
addition to
scholarship on HDR research training. The result is an accessible,
multi-modal, and comprehensive training program that draws on
the wealth of
expertise in the UWA Law School.
The UWA Law School HDR training program was introduced in 2023. Students at
early stages in their candidature, and commencing students,
enrolled in the
inaugural program. As those students are now still progressing through their
degrees, it remains to be seen how they
have benefited (or not) from the
program. In the meantime, it was decided to continue the training program going
forward, with refinements
made in 2024. Further work – including empirical
research and systematic analysis of student and staff experiences –
needed to explore the benefits of the program developed by the UWA Law School
and how it can continue to be refined and improved.
Yet even at this early
stage, given the dearth of literature on legal research training for law-related
HDR students, this case study
may be of value to other universities seeking to
design similar programs.
* Professor Erika J E Techera is a Professor at the UWA Law School, The
University of Western Australia.
Tracii Ryan et al, ‘How Can Universities Better Support
The Mental Wellbeing Of Higher Degree Research Students? A Study Of
Students’ Suggestions’ (2021) 41(3)
Higher Education
Research & Development
A search of online databases
demonstrates multiple programs across most Australian universities: see, eg,
<https://www.phdportal.com/search/phd/australia>;
<https://www.findaphd.com/guides/phd-study-in-australia/>.
Charlotte Brownlow et al,
‘The Higher Degree Research Student Experience In Australian Universities:
A Systematic Literature
Review’ (2023) 42(7)
Higher Education Research
and Development
Scholarship drawn from student
experiences of HDR candidature supports this, see Kelsey Halbert,
‘Students’ Perceptions
Of A ‘Quality’ Advisory
Relationship’ (2015) 21(1)
Quality in Higher Education
Higher Education
Standards Framework (Threshold Standards) 2021
made under the
Education Quality and Standards Agency Act 2011
Philip G Altbach,
‘Doctoral Education: Present Realities And Future Trends’ in James
JF Forest and Philip G Altbach (eds)
International Handbook of Higher
(Springer, 2007) 65, 66.
See, eg, the University of
Sydney <https://www.sydney.edu.au/students/hdr-training-modules.html>; and
University of Queensland
<https://cdf.graduate-school.uq.edu.au/sessions>.
Some universities require
enrolment in Graduate Certificate programs, although not without some criticism:
Kim Beasy et al, ‘Drowning
In The Shallows: An Australian Study Of The PhD
Experience Of Wellbeing’ (2021) 26(4)
Teaching in Higher Education
This is supported by anecdotal
evidence from colleagues across various law schools. Research by Lindley, Skead
and Montalto highlighted
that students want more training on law-specific
methodologies given that these are not widely taught prior to PhD studies: Jade
Lindley, Natalie Skead and Michael Montalto, ‘Enhancing Institutional
Support To Ensure Timely PhD Completions In Law’
Education Review
Hutchinson also noted that opportunities for methodology
training are limited within law curriculum at the undergraduate and postgraduate
levels: Terry Hutchison, ‘Developing Legal Research Skills: Expanding The
Paradigm’ (2008) 32
Melbourne Law Review
Academy of the Social
Sciences in Australia (2021),
State of the Social Sciences 2021
Gillian Vesty et al,
‘Burnout Among University Accounting Educators In Australia And New
Zealand: Determinants And Implications’
(2018) 58(1)
Accounting &
Brownlow et al (n 3)
See Halbert (n 4)
Carolyn Dickie,
‘Winning The PhD Game: Evocative Playing Of Snakes And Ladders’
(2011) 16(5)
Qualitative
1230. See also Kirsti Lonka et al, ‘Doctoral
Students’ Writing Profiles And Their Relations To Well-Being And
Perceptions
Of The Academic Environment’ (2019) 77
Higher Education
Halbert (n 4) 31.
Although scholarship
suggests Brownlow et al (n 3) 1613 citing Diana F Davis, ‘Students’
Perceptions Of Supervisory Qualities:
What Do Students Want? What Do They
Believe They Receive?’ (2019) 14
International Journal of Doctoral
Ryan et al (n 1).
Lindley, Skead and Montalto
(n 9) 23–4.
UWA, Register of Supervisors
Procedures: Supervisor Levels
<https://static.weboffice.uwa.edu.au/archive/www.postgraduate.uwa.edu.au/staff/supervisors/supervisor-register.html#levels>.
Halbert (n 4)
See Halbert (n 4). High
workload and time pressures can lead to well-being issues where work-life
balance becomes distorted, see
Els van Rooij et al, ‘Factors That
Influence PhD Candidates’ Success: The Importance Of PhD Project
Characteristics’
(2021) 43(1)
Studies in Continuing Education
Legal specific texts include
Terri Hutchinson,
Researching and Writing in Law
(Thomson Reuters,
ed, 2018). Other relevant books include Barbara Kamler and Pat
(Routledge, 2014); Loraine Blaxter et al,
How to Research
(McGraw-Hill
Education, 2010).
Jurisprudence:
Theory and Context
(Sweet & Maxwell, 8
ed, 2019); Martin P
Golding and William A Edmundson,
The Blackwell Guide to the Philosophy of Law
and Legal Theory
(Wiley-Blackwell, 2008).
Dawn Watkins (ed),
Research Methods in Law
(Routledge, 2
Caroline Morrise and Cian
Getting a PhD in Law
(Bloomsbury, 2011).
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (95.4 KB)
PDF format (488 KB)
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter