URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/journals/AUJlMOA/2009/4.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 14:34:49
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Jit, Joytishna --- "Commentary: Australia's National Framework for Marine Research and Innovation" [2009] AUJlMOA 4; (2009) 1(1) Australian Journal of Maritime and Ocean Affairs 29
COMMENTARY: Australia’s National Framework for Marine Research and Innovation
Introduction
Framework rationale
The key elements
Critical requirements
COMMENTARY: Australia’s National Framework for
Marine Research and Innovation
Introduction
The Australian government launched its first strategy on marine research and
innovation in March 2009.
A Marine Nation: National Framework for Marine
Research and Innovation
provides ‘the rationale for, key elements of
and critical requirements for a national framework for marine research and
innovation’.
The framework
represents the basis for collaboration among marine science providers,
government, industry, and community stakeholders.
The framework was prepared under the Marine Science Steering Committee under
the umbrella of Australia’s Ocean Policy and Science
Advisory Group
(OPSAG), and in response to the development needs within the marine sector.
OPSAG comprises government marine science
and related agencies, State research
institutions and non-government marine science
This commentary
highlights and analyses the main issues described in the framework.
Framework rationale
The authors of the framework envisage that it will increase the efficiency of
research and innovation at the national level ensuring
that benefits derived
from Australia’s marine assets are
The national innovation system involves the process of knowledge production,
entrepreneurial application of this knowledge and the
diffusion and adoption of
the applied
A review of the Australian innovation system recommends a reappraisal of the
system and a review of its policies, consistent with
Innovation and research are
essential for Australia’s prosperity and its ability to compete in world
markets, particularly
during and following periods of uncertainty in the global
financial and economic markets.
Improved coordination and greater investments in marine science, industry
engagement, education and training and infrastructure are
priorities for
enhanced research and innovation within the marine
In particular, marine industry innovation is vital for significant
advancements in the private
Australia’s marine environment, in which marine industries such as
tourism, maritime transport and fisheries are engaged, is
the third largest in
the world. It is 13.6 million square kilometres, including the significant
extension of its territorial jurisdiction
through a submission that was
confirmed by the United Nations Commission on the Limits of the Continental
Shelf in 2008.
Although the entire
area is socially, environmentally and economically invaluable, it lacks adequate
Australian investment.
In this context, the framework is an appropriate and timely initial approach
for developing marine industries.
The framework identifies and addresses five major areas of opportunities and
challenges currently facing Australia: economic and energy
security, marine
conservation, protection of the coastal environment, climate change, and
national security and
For instance, a vast majority of the oil and gas fields in Australia’s
exclusive economic zone (EEZ) and extended continental
shelf are yet to be fully
explored. Innovative technology is required to increase oil and gas recovery
rates. There is also a need
for more onshore processing plants and new shipping
facilities. Other examples include challenges in dealing with complexities in
the management of the multiplicity of coastal uses and impacts, and the
development of operational ocean forecasting capabilities
to improve defence
operations, navy patrols and border
The key elements
The framework consists of four interlinked core elements that include the
five areas of opportunities and challenges. These elements
are referred to in
the framework as programs.
Firstly, the exploration, discovery and sustainability program will be based
on integration and collaboration, and serve as the foundation
for improved
knowledge-based management of marine resources and maritime boundaries,
including the seabed. Specific areas within
this broad program have been
highlighted and include intensive mapping, new discoveries and long term studies
to ensure that economic
uses of the marine resources remain environmentally and
socially sustainable.
Secondly, the observations, modelling and prediction program will be directed
at understanding the ocean processes and dynamics through
integrated marine and
coastal observations and studies to enable the development of predictive models.
Three hierarchies within the
program include the global approach, coastal and
regional approach, and the local approach. Jointly these approaches will enable
researchers to represent complex behaviour through models and applications
useful for ‘adaptive and sustainable management’
resources, protected areas and coastal zones, and for predicting climate change
Thirdly, the marine industries development program will involve the
development of innovative technology, solutions and partnerships.
technology development is to provide ‘competitive advantage and
environmental
effectiveness’.
solutions include the development of new and improved applications for surveying
and mapping, ocean forecasting applications
for maritime transport and safety,
and the development of materials for use in applications. Innovative
partnerships are to build
and formalise strong relationships between innovation
providers and industry and government end users.
Fourthly, the engagement and knowledge transfer program will facilitate
effective engagement for knowledge transfer between research
providers and
stakeholders. This will occur when stakeholders specify their requirements, and
research and innovation providers use
this information to target the
requirements to meet stakeholder demand. Three key groups of stakeholders
identified in the framework
are industry, government and the community.
Industries include fisheries, aquaculture, seabed and subsea resources, tourism,
maritime transport, infrastructure and safety. The government, as a
stakeholder, is concerned with priority-setting and policies
at Commonwealth,
State, Territory and local levels for matters relating to biodiversity, coastal
zone management, climate prediction,
climate change and maritime safety and
security. Communities are linked to the level of public interest and support for
marine programs
and, in particular, indigenous engagement in marine
management.
The four programs are interlinked. For example, the development of potential
investment strategies to fund technology innovation for
exploration depends on
government engagement. Technology innovation also requires partnerships with
research providers and the marine
industry. In addition, ocean modelling and
prediction tools will be advantageous in the successful design and trial of
exploration technology.
Critical requirements
The framework describes substantial limitations relating to skills,
infrastructure, networking and collaboration that impede research
innovation.
The marine sector needs specialised skilled graduates. The education and
training challenges are to attract the brightest and most
innovative students
into the marine sector, counteract acute graduate shortages in specialist areas
including taxonomy, economics
and engineering, increase education and training
courses on hydrographical surveying, and construct career pathways among early
researchers
with a view to retaining them within the marine sector. Capabilities
in education and training may be developed through partnership
with national and
state agencies because this would allow a closer relationship among educators,
students and the industry.
Advanced infrastructure is essential for research and innovation. A number of
major elements have been identified in the framework.
For example, access to
multi-discipline equipped research vessels and marine observing systems for wide
ranging scientific work,
within and beyond the EEZ. Furthermore, novel
technologies for monitoring, surveying, mapping and sampling underwater
are required to expand current research efforts in biodiversity
measurement and environmental marine data collection and interpretation.
areas requiring infrastructural and capability investments are remote sensing,
ocean monitoring equipment for examining trends
in climate change and other long
term coastal variations, localised research stations Australia-wide, high
performance supercomputing,
electronic infrastructure to allow open access to
biocontainment
facilities for pest and disease control.
Networking and collaboration is at the core of this research and innovation
framework. Networking and collaboration needs to be efficient
at the national
and international level. OPSAG exists as the only formal network of marine
science providers in Australia. Opportunities
for high-level networking are
required to ensure that national policies adequately reflect marine sector
priorities. A ‘broad,
integrated approach’ to marine research and
innovation funding is recommended in the
A strategy for investment is recommended by the authors to overcome
limitations such as skill, infrastructure and networking. It is
impossible to
decipher a value for the amount of investment required to overcome limitations
from the framework. The framework states
that a whole of government policy
interface with a national steering committee for marine research and innovation
is critical for
directional setting, coordination and investments in the marine
sector. This is because, under current arrangements, responsibilities
marine domain are shared by a number of government departments and all levels of
government. Annual reporting and accountability
for investments is also
imperative. The national steering committee for marine research and innovation
would be high-level and responsible
for developing, managing and implementing
the framework.
Research and innovation is a long term investment for any country and will
potentially provide significant financial, economic and
social returns. A
renewed and strong national direction for research and innovation on the marine
environment has the potential to
strengthen development, generate highly
qualified workers, improve industry relations and diversify the national economy
of sustainable advantage. The importance of collaboration among
government, industry and community has been identified early in the
development
of this new framework. Effective implementation of the framework will depend on
such collaboration.
There are examples of strategies on research and innovation in other
countries, but only a few of these are specifically focused on
sector. In 2007, Ireland’s strategy for marine research and innovation,
, was commended during a stakeholders’ conference on the
European Unions Maritime Green
on market-led opportunities in sustainable energy, food production, transport,
technology and environment. Apart from Ireland’s
competitiveness, there is
also a focus on sustainability of coastal communities. An investment of
€365 million was estimated
over the seven year duration of the
There are no fixed time-scale or investment estimates provided within
Australia’s current research and innovation framework.
A Marine Nation:
National Framework for Marine Research and Innovation
is therefore expected
to basically provide the initial momentum for a more detailed approach towards
increasing the marine sector’s
social, economic and environmental
In its current form, the Australian framework does not provide a strategic
itemisation of short, medium and long-term targets required
to effectively
administer the extensive changes it necessitates. Any risks during
implementation of the framework should also be
assessed, accepted and
incorporated in innovation
initiatives.
Furthermore, the basis on which the core programs have been selected is not
evident. For example, there may also be value in expanding
core research
programs to include Australia’s unique and lucrative seafood industry. A
detailed analysis of the key elements,
with specific research and innovation
needs and priorities, could provide a systematic way forward.
The framework is timely and appropriate in the current global climate,
although its reliance on large investments makes it vital to
consider associated
risks, structured costs and timelines.
PhD Candidate, Australian
National Centre for Ocean Resources and Security, University of Wollongong.
OPSAG/ Marine Science Steering
A Marine Nation: National Framework for Research and
(2009), 2, Australian Government’s Ocean Policy and Science
Advisory Group website <http://www.opsag.org/pdf/
opsag-marine-nation-01.pdf>
at 26 March 2009.
Department of the Environment,
Water, Heritage and the Arts, ‘Australia’s Oceans Policy’
(2008), Australian Government’s
Department of the Environment, Water,
Heritage and the Arts website <http://www.environment.gov.
au/coasts/oceans-policy/index.html>
at 26 March 2009.
OPSAG, above n 1.
Cutler and Company Ltd,
Venturous Australia Report
(2008), 11, Australian Government’s
Department of Innovation, Industry, Science and Research website <http://
www.innovation.gov.au/innovationreview/Pages/home.aspx>
at 26 March 2009.
OPSAG, above n 1, 5.
Ibid 4, 11. Other priority
areas for innovation in the private sector include resource industries, space
and astronomy, finance and
risk management. In the public sector, climate
change, food and agricultural security and population health were among those
See United Nations Commission
on the Limits of the Continental Shelf,
Summary of the Recommendations of the
Commission on the Limits of the Continental Shelf (CLCS) in Regard to the
Submission made by
Australia on the 15 November 2004
(Recommendations
adopted by CLCS on 9 April 2008).
Cutler and Company Ltd,
above n 4, 115.
OPSAG, above n 1, 8.
Sea Change; A Marine
Knowledge, Research and Innovation Strategy for Ireland 2007-2013
Available at http://www.marine.ie/home/SeaChange.htm; See also: John Brown,
‘National Stakeholder Conference on the
EU Maritime Green Paper’,
(2007) Speeches by Minister of State, Irish Government’s Department of
Communications, Energy
and Natural Resources website <http://www.
dcenr.gov.ie/Corporate+Units/Virtual+Press+Room/Speeches/2007/National+Stakeholder+Conference+on+the+EU+Maritime+Green+Paper.htm>
at 26 March 2009.
See Cutler and Company Ltd,
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
No downloadable files available
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter