URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/journals/ALRS/2009/20.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 14:13:02
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Greenleaf, Graham --- "Making Hong Kong's data protection law effective" [2009] ALRS 20
Making Hong Kong’s data protection law effective
A submission to the Hong Kong
Constitutional and Mainland Affairs Bureau
Professor Graham Greenleaf
Co-Director, Cyberspace Law & Policy
Faculty of Law, University of New South Wales
Distinguished Visiting Professor (2001-2)
Faculty of Law, University of Hong
30 November 2009
The Hong Kong Constitutional and Mainland Affairs Bureau has released a
Consultation Document on Review of the Personal Data (Privacy) Ordinance
(August 2009), calling for submissions. The following submissions address only
the proposals raised in the Consultation Document,
not other issues under the
Ordinance that need reform, such as the question of data exports and the need to
bring s33 into force.
Proposal No 1 – Biometric information
The Consultation Document says ‘Given the
challenges posed by the development of biometric technology on an
individual’s
data (such as iris characteristics, hand contour reading and fingerprints)
sensitive personal data’. It is not clear whether they propose to consider
other categories, but since they do not mention
any, it seems unlikely.
The approach suggested is only to limit the collection of what is deemed
‘sensitive’, not to impose more stringent requirements
disclosure once collected, so it is a very limited proposal.
Submission 1(a): Other categories of information should be included under
‘sensitive information’, not only biometric
data, as is common in
the data protection legislation of other jurisdictions. This should at least
include medical data, and information
orientation, race and ethnicity.
Submission 1(b): More stringent requirements
on use and disclosure should be imposed on sensitive information once it is
Proposal No. 2: Data Processors
Discussion Paper says that ‘at present, the [Ordinance] does not regulate
processors which process personal data for data
users’, and therefore
proposes that
... a data user who transfers personal data to a data processor for holding,
processing or use, would be required to use contractual
or other means to ensure
that his data processor and any sub-contractors will take all practicable steps
to ensure the security and
safekeeping of the personal data, and to ensure that
the data are not misused and are deleted when no longer required for
processing.
This would be valuable, but only of limited use in Hong Kong because it
retains the doctrine of privity of contract, and the data
subject will not be
able to sue to enforce the contract or obtain remedies for its breach,
particularly if the processor is outside
A more robust option under consideration is
... we can consider directly regulating data processors by imposing
obligations on them. They would be required to exercise the same
level of due
diligence as the data user with regard to security, retention and use of the
personal data thus entrusted.
Imposing obligations directly on the processor is a much more direct
solution, and much more valuable to data subjects if they can
simply enforce the
data protection Principles against the processor, but that is subject to the
processor being within the territorial
or extra-territorial scope of the
Ordinance. A further strengthening would be to make the principal vicariously
liable for the actions
of the processor.
Submission 2(a): Data subjects should be able to enforce the data protection
Principles directly against the processor.
Submission 2(b): In order to
deal with the problem of processors located outside the jurisdiction of the
Ordinance, it should make
the principal (data user) vicariously liable for the
actions of the processor.
Proposal No. 3: Personal Data Security Breach Notification
Consultation Paper merely says ‘we consider it more prudent to start with
a voluntary breach notification system’,
a conclusion which seems at odds
with the very high levels of large scale data breaches in both the public and
private sectors that
have taken place in Hong Kong over the last three
Submission 3: Data breach notification should be made compulsory.
Proposal No. 4: A role in criminal offences for the Commissioner
The Consultation Document
does ‘not see a strong case to give the PCPD the power to investigate into
and prosecute criminal
offence cases’ and this seems correct.
Submission 4: The PCPD should not be given the power to investigate into and
prosecute criminal offence cases.
Proposal No. 5: Legal Assistance to Data Subjects under s66
Consultation Document invites views ‘on whether the PCPD should be
conferred the power to provide legal assistance to an
aggrieved data
subject’. The New Zealand Commissioner can recommend that legal aid be
provided to complainants. However, the
main issue in Hong Kong is the provision
of some alternative forum in which compensation can be obtained without
complainants having
to go to a Court.
Submission 5: The PCPD should be conferred the power to provide legal assistance
to an aggrieved data subject.
Proposal No. 6: Award Compensation to Aggrieved Data Subjects
The Consultation Document
invites views on ‘whether it is appropriate to introduce an additional
redress avenue by empowering
the PCPD to award compensation to aggrieved data
subjects’ while being clearly of the opinion that this is not
appropriate.
Although allowing the PCPD to award compensation would be better than the
current non-functioning system via the Courts, there are
good reasons not to
combine the mediating function and the adjudicative function. The real problem,
which the Constitutional and
Mainland Affairs Bureau does not seem to
appreciate, is that the Hong Kong Commissioner does not mediate in complaints,
particularly
not to obtain compensation, in contrast to Commissioners in most
other jurisdictions. The Ordinance needs to be changed to give the
Commissioner
a specific function of mediating in this way.
An alternative to allowing the Commissioner to award compensation, one which
works best in New Zealand with its Human Rights Review
Tribunal (HRRT), is to
have a low-cost quasi-judicial tribunal that can make compensation payments,
with the Commissioner referring
matters to it that cannot be mediated, and
preferably with some agreed statement of facts etc so that the matter does not
. A similar approach operates in New South
Wales and Victoria with their administrative tribunals (NSWADT and VCAT). One
quasi-judicial
tribunal in Hong Kong that could be empowered to award damages
may be the Administrative Appeals Board. This would involve giving
a body which
normally deals with appeals a ‘first instance’ function of deciding
damages, but there is no obvious alternative
in Hong Kong if the Commissioner is
not considered appropriate, and the existing provision before a Court under s66
has failed.
Submission 6(a): Consideration should be given to whether the Administrative
Appeals Board or another low-cost tribunal in Hong Kong
could be given the
function of deciding compensation claims for breaches of Principles in the
Submission 6(b): If the proposal in Submission 5(a) cannot be met,
the Commissioner should be empowered to award compensation.
Proposal No. 8: Unauthorized dealings in Personal Data
Consultation Document says that ‘to curb irresponsible dissemination of
leaked personal data, we may consider making it
an offence if a person obtains
personal data without the consent of the data user and discloses the personal
data so obtained for
profits or malicious purposes’. A reform such as this
should not be very contentious. The PRC and Vietnam have already passed
laws during 2009.
Submission 8(a): It should be an offence if a person obtains personal data
without the consent of the data user and (i) discloses
the personal data so
obtained for profits or malicious purposes; or (ii) holds the data with such
Submission 8(b): It should be presumed that a person who obtains
personal data without the consent of the data user did so with the
intent, so the onus is on the defendant to rebut such a
presumption.
Submission 8(c): It should also be an offence for anyone to sell
such personal data for profit whether or not they obtained it from
the data user
(if this is not already implied in the proposal).
Proposal No. 9: Repeated Contravention of DPPs
Consultation Document proposes the hypothetical problem of a data user who
breaches a DPP but then complies with subsequent enforcement
notice, but then
subsequently breaches the DPP again in the same way. It would seem reasonable
that such a subsequent breach of a
DPP could be an offence.
Submission 9: Subsequent breach of a DPP could be an offence, as proposed.
Proposal No. 10: Monetary Penalty for Serious Contravention
it is not common for non-judicial bodies to have the statutory power to impose
monetary penalties, the Consultation Document
proposes consideration being given
to empowering the PCPD to require data users to pay monetary penalty for serious
contravention
of DPPs. Again, this type of ‘administrative penalty’
is not uncommon in other jurisdictions, and is found in Macao and
in the current
proposals by the Australian government.
Submission 10: The PCPD should be empowered to require data users to pay
monetary penalty for serious contravention of DPPs.
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (57.6 KB)
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter