URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/journals/SydUPLawBk/2011/15.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 15:39:28
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
O'Neill, Nick; Peisah, Carmelle --- "Chapter 13 - Advance Directives" [2011] SydUPLawBk 15; in O'Neill, Nick; Peisah, Carmelle (eds), "Capacity and the Law" (Sydney University Press, 2011)
13. 1. Introduction
13. 2. What are advance directives?
13. 2. 1. Written advance directives
13. 2. 2. Proxy directives
13. 2. 3. Oral advance directives
13. 3. Arguments for and against advance directives
13. 4. Early attempts at statutory advance directives in Australia
13. 4. 1. Victoria
13. 4. 2. Northern Territory
13. 4. 3. South Australia
13. 4. 4. Australian Capital Territory
13. 4. 5. Queensland
13. 4. 6. Western Australia
13. 5. Statutory advance directives/ right to refuse treatment in Australia
13. 5. 1. Victoria –
Medical Treatment Act 1988
13. 5. 2. Northern Territory – Natural Death Act 1988
13. 5. 3. South Australia –
Consent to Medical Treatment and Palliative Care Act 1995
13. 5. 4. Australian Capital Territory –
Medical Treatment (Health Directions) Act 2006
13. 5. 5. Queensland –
Powers of Attorney Act 1998
Guardianship and Administration Act 2000
13. 5. 6. Western Australia –
Guardianship and Administration Act 1990
13. 6. Advance directives under the common law
13. 6. 1. What does the common law require for an effective advance directive?
13. 6. 2. Capacity to make an advance directive
13. 6. 3. Assessing capacity to make an advance directive
13. 6. 4. Requirements to be met before an advance directive will be given effect to
13. 6. 5. If an advance directive requests certain treatment, must doctors carry out that treatment?
Chapter 13 - Advance Directives
13. 1. Introduction
As was discussed in Chapter 11, with the development of the concept of
patient autonomy and, in particular, the right to refuse medical
treatment came
the development of the advance directive. This chapter will concentrate on the
development of advance directives in
There is legislation about a limited form of advance directive in Victoria,
South Australia, Queensland, Western Australia the Australian
Capital Territory
and the Northern Territory. In essence it does no more than provide a statutory
right to refuse treatment which
is then circumscribed with procedural
requirements. This chapter describes the struggle to get this legislation
enacted and then
the scope and effect of the legislation itself.
Before that the chapter discusses what the different kinds of advance
directives are and the arguments for and against advance directives.
Currently in Australia, it is becoming part of both State and Commonwealth
health policy to encourage people to consider making advance
directives, at
least about the health care and treatment they want if they lose capacity to
make their own decisions, and to put
in place mechanisms to help them do
New South Wales and Tasmania
have not gone down the path of introducing statutory advance directives and so
can rely on the common
law development of not only the right to refuse
treatment, but also the expectation that appropriately drafted advance
will be recognised and given effect to.
The refusal of treatment legislation everywhere except South Australia states
that it does not affect:
1. the right of a person to refuse medical or surgical treatment - (NT);
2. a right to refuse treatment under any other law - (Vic and ACT);
3. the common law recognition of instructions about health care given but not
included in an advance health directive - (Qld);
4. the common law relating to a person’s entitlement to make treatment
decisions in respect of the person’s future treatment
It is suggested that these statements preserve the common law and that the
South Australian provisions are so limited in operation
that there is no
necessary implication that they intended to replace the common
Consequently, after dealing with the refusal of treatment, the chapter deals
with the requirements for advance directives based on
the developing common
13. 2. What are advance directives?
Advance directives are also known as living wills, advance care directives,
advance health directives and advance statements. There
is no real distinction
between them based on these names, although it could be argued that advance
health directives and advance
statements are particular, narrower forms of
advance directives.
13. 2. 1. Written advance directives
The Alzheimer’s Society in the United Kingdom describes advance
directives as written documents intended to be binding refusals
of treatment,
and that in this form they are often called living wills.
This fits in with the tendency in the
USA to describe written directives as living wills and to see them as limited to
medical treatment
at the end of
The NSW Department of Health
defines an advanced care directive as a document that prescribes a
person’s future preferences
for medical treatment in anticipation of a
time when they are unable to express those preferences due to illness or
In addition to living
wills or “instructional directives”, which usually document specific
choices regarding medical
interventions in hypothetical situations in the
future, there are several other types of advance directives which are less
in their documentation, including:
1. Statements of general values or “a values history” to inform
later treatment decisions, by ranking certain states as
“worse than
death” e.g. particular condition or states the person would find
unacceptable should these be result of
providing life-sustaining treatment
2. Statements of goals which may provide a bridge between values and wishes
3. Statements of specific treatment measures or a “treatment
directive” which include medical treatment preferences and
limitations.
These are usually relevant to an existing illness e.g. use of ventilation in
someone with respiratory failure.
The British Medical Association distinguishes six types of advance
directives, as follows:
1. a requesting statement reflecting an individual’s aspirations;
2. a statement of general beliefs and aspects of life which an individual
3. a statement that names another person who should be consulted at the time
a decision has to be made;
4. a clear instruction refusing some or all medical procedures;
5. a statement which, rather than refusing any particular treatment,
specifies a degree of irreversible deterioration after which
no life sustaining
treatment should be given; or
6. a combination of the above, including requests, refusals and the
nomination of a representative.
In most cases, written advance directives take one of two forms,
instructional directives or proxy directives. The United States
President’s
Commission for the Study of Ethical Problems in Medicine and
Biomedical and Behavioural Research noted that instruction directives
necessarily limited to terminal illnesses or to refusal of treatment, but could
act as “standing orders” about
aspects of the person’s
While written advance
directives are usually limited to medical decision-making after the person has
lost capacity to make their
own decisions, it is possible that they can relate
to other kinds of decisions such as those about where the person is to live or
who they want to see or other kinds of personal decisions. This is certainly
open in relation to directions, conditions, limitations
or exclusions that may
be given by their appointors to enduring guardians appointed under the
Guardianship Act 1987
Guardianship and Administration
Guardianship and Administration Act
13. 2. 2. Proxy directives
The other usual kind of written advance directive is the proxy directive
where the person chooses who they want to make substitute
health (and other)
decisions for them should they lose decision-making capacity. In New South
Wales, South Australia, Tasmania, Victoria
and Western Australia this can be
done by appointing an enduring guardian and giving them directions, in the form
of or amounting
to, an advance directive. This matter is discussed in Chapter 9
and below at 13. 6.
Queensland and the Australian Capital Territory attorneys can be appointed under
enduring powers of attorney for personal matters
including health
13. 2. 3. Oral advance directives
However, the most common form of advance directive is the advance oral
statement. An advance statement is one in which a mentally
competent person
makes arrangements about their future health care should they become unable to
make such arrangements in the future.
Sommerville describes them as oral
statements which can be of two types and continues:
On the one hand they can be called formal, although unwritten, when they arise
in discussion with health, legal or care professionals,
are witnessed by someone
able to attest to the person’s competence and knowledge, and are likely to
be noted in some form by
the witness. On the other hand, what can be termed
conversational statements, …, rely solely on the memories of friends and
are unlikely to be recorded elsewhere. In either case most decisions about
relevance and applicability will be made in hospitals
rather than courts and
without necessarily raising problems for doctors or patients. Arguably, oral
statements are and always have
been an integral part of medical
Non-resuscitation decisions, for example, often reflect patient’s
non-written views. Terminal care may entail discussion in
advance with patients
unconscious.
An appreciation of these matters appears to be behind the following statement
of O’Connor J of the US Supreme Court in
Cruzan v Director, Missouri
Department of Health
when she noted that the Court did not have to decide in
that case whether a State must give effect to the decisions of a surrogate
decision-maker but, nevertheless, continued:
In my view such a duty may be constitutionally required to protect the
patient’s liberty interest in refusing treatment. Few
individuals provide
explicit oral or written instructions regarding their intent to refuse medical
treatment should they become incompetent.
States which decline to consider any
evidence other than such instructions may frequently fail to honour a
patient’s intent.
13. 3. Arguments for and against advance
While advance directives have been discussed, and various kinds have come
into existence in the second half of the 20
century, their
popularity has only begun to increase in Australia in the 21
century. There have been discussions of the arguments for and against them by
ethicists and others and research on a number of matters
relevant to their
effectiveness has been carried out.
Advance directives, whether written, formal verbal or conversational, give
people the dignity of making their own decisions. Most
people like the idea of
making arrangements so that they can die with greater dignity than they
otherwise would if life sustaining
treatment was continued until the medical
decision that further treatment was futile was made. Advance directives have
many advantages,
not the least of which involves a reflective discussion in a
non-crisis situation which can prepare all involved and can diminish
guilt and conflict over later decisions and which can offer a sense of control
for people in the dying process.
Decision-making at the end of life is an activity often overlaid with high
emotion. Accordingly, it often provides a focal point
for conflict within and
between patients, families and treating staff. The significant variation in the
way health care professionals
approach situations involving the use of
life-sustaining treatment has resulted in accusations of over zealous treatment
hand and neglect on the
Furthermore, while proxy decision-making in regards to advance care planning
can offer a viable alternative for those who lack capacity,
overcome the epistemic problem of imagining future scenarios (capacity to
imagine the person with different abilities,
needs and preferences in radically
different circumstances).
“substituted judgment” and “best interest” decisions
have their problems. Studies have shown that proxy
decision makers are often
inaccurate in approximating the wishes of the person (substituted judgment), and
in using a best interest
standard to make decisions on behalf of another
dismisses the preferences of the formerly competent person.
Advance directives rely on the concept of patient autonomy – the
authority of the former competent self to govern the welfare
of their later,
non-competent selves.
of advance directives have highlighted metaphysical (change in personal identity
through physical or mental changes) and
epistemic constraints on projecting
decisions to future states of
Detailed instructional directives are the most controversial due to concerns
that people may underestimate their future desire for
medical treatment in the
face of death, or be unable to predict every potential condition and
circumstance.
In countries such
as Holland where legislation regarding instructional directives has been in
place for over ten years, the use
of instructional directives has
engendered several complex ethical problems when physicians try to balance
respect for the wishes
and opinions of the formerly competent person against the
respect that is equally owed the now incompetent person
Degrazia has argued that people
sometimes cannot grasp in detail the circumstances in which advance directives
will apply and goes
on to argue that there can be major changes in a
person’s values and preferences between when they complete their directive
and when it comes into effect.
This led Degrazia to argue that the pre-dementia person and the same person with
dementia were literally two different people and
that any advance directive made
by the pre-dementia person was effectively directed to someone
If the directive is one by
which a proxy is chosen, this can result in the proxy projecting their own
values into various possible
future circumstances when they have to make
decisions for the person making the advance
Healthy patients do not make the same choices as sick
It is known that patients
suffering from chronic diseases gradually shift their values and change their
priorities in life, a phenomenon
known as response shift, resulting in a so
called “disability paradox” - patients often overestimate the
impact that chronic illnesses and disability will have on their
The disability paradox"
is also seen among hospice patients who value preservation of quality of life
despite physical ailments and
psychosocial
Ryan makes an argument that people are likely to under-estimate their desire
to have medical interventions when they become ill because
they are very poor at
determining their attitude to treatment for some hypothetical future terminal
illness and very frequently grossly
under-estimate their future desire to go on
A study of patients
receiving dialysis showed that strictly following all advance directives may not
truly reflect patients’
preferences and recommended that to improve
advance directives, doctors should specifically ask patients how strictly they
advance directives
Cancer patients and
healthy persons widely disregard instructions laid down in advance directives
and consider them less binding
than physicians and nursing staff.
Another study which involved a
review of the decisions actually made by the advance directive maker or their
proxy or surrogate decision-maker
showed that, when they made decisions
inconsistent with the advance directive, they favoured treatment that had been
rejected in
the advance
Yet another study
suggested that greater subtlety was needed in advance directives, because when
faced with a number of scenarios
involving cognitive versus physical impairment,
no chance of recovery against a slight chance of recovery or improvement and the
presence of pain against no pain, the preferences in relation to life-sustaining
treatment by elderly adults
It is also important to note that not all patients prioritize autonomy. Some
wish to delegate their decisions to physicians while
others do not wish to
discuss their preferences at all and yet others adopt a one-day-at-a time
perspective. Some still prefer that
their loved ones or physicians have
complete leeway to override their previously expressed wishes and some are
influenced by ethno-culturally
based beliefs about who should make such
decisions and the consequences of discussing future possible illnesses.
Importantly, Treloar has argued that the original Beauchamp and Childless
criteria of autonomy, beneficence and non-maleficence have
been used at times by
overstretched and poorly resourced health systems to justify poor care and
Some argue that the expanded use of advance directives can produce unintended
results. Sometimes “active treatment” is
palliative. Sometime
patients might inadvertently refuse active treatments such as antidepressants,
antipsychotics or antibiotics
which might have alleviated suffering putting the
advanced directive in conflict with good clinical care. In this way, misapplied
advance directives can cause patients to suffer a: “lengthy, painful
degrading and bed- ridden existence” because withholding
treatment does
not always shorten life.
Biegler and others cite the example of a patient with HIV who signs a directive
refusing resuscitation or admission to an intensive
care unit. The patient has a
life-threatening allergic reaction to a drug early in the course of the disease,
when the prognosis
suggests many good years of life:
If the patient did not intend the advance directive to apply in this
circumstance, then to allow this patient to die would be to
to respect his or her
Treloar has outlined a number of principles to guide the practitioner in such
circumstances:
1. Was the advance directive made at a time of mental capacity?
2. Did the advance directive specifically envisage this situation?
3. Did the advance directive envisage death (if this is likely to occur) as
an acceptable result of the refusal?
4. Did the advance directive envisage prolonged suffering (if this is likely
to occur) as a result of refusal of treatment.
5. Will the proposed treatments be of benefit to the patient and reduce
6. Does the distress of administering the treatment outweigh any gains that
may benefit from it?
The use of advance directives in anticipation of developing dementia has been
seen as particularly
problematic.
Many people who
previously would have preferred death to dementia because of the fear of
dementia become happy to live and express
a desire for treatment when demented.
The case of “Margo” has been used as an exemplar of such a situation
a focus for debate.
Margo issued an advance directive before she developed dementia which
prohibited the use of any medical procedures, whether invasive
or not, aimed at
prolonging her life while in a demented state. When severely demented she
contracted pneumonia and needed antibiotics
in order to survive. However, at
this stage Margo was pleasurably demented. She thoroughly enjoyed basking in the
sun, eating peanut
butter and jelly sandwiches randomly thumbing through books
and painting circles on paper.
The issue under debate has been whether or not Margo’s current pleasurable
positive “experiential interests” were
trumped by the authority of
her previous autonomous choices. The “harm argument” suggests that
acting on an advance directive
in such circumstances would harm the severely but
pleasurably demented Margo.
proffered solution to this debate has been to insist on an extremely rigorous
standard of informed consent for advance directives
which insists that the
issuer must have demonstrated that he or she realized that dementia was a
progressive disease differing from
person to person and to consider the course
of dementia and what life might be like at the various stages of dementia and
the approach to care according to the
As an alternative to
what has been described as an overly rigorous standard which “threatens to
transform the consent process
into an exercise in physician paternalism”,
Harvey has suggested employing a short values history and engaging the patient
at the earliest stages of dementia in as series of discussions about their
long–term care.
The enforcement of advance care directives clearly poses a number of ethical
and legal challenges to health care professionals, as
suggested by the 2006
position statement of the Australian Medical Association (AMA).
As a consequence it recommended
[A]ll States and Territories enact legislation that establishes advance
directives as legally enforceable, whilst ensuring that the
same legislation
provides statutory protection for doctors who comply with an [advance
directive], or who do not comply if they have
reasonable grounds to believe it
is inconsistent with good medical practice or advances in medical science,
thereby preserving doctors'
clinical judgment and
discretion.
Willmott and others put the matter into its full context when they noted
The presumption when dealing with a valid advance directive refusing
life-sustaining medical treatment must be that such a directive
is binding on
health professionals. The right to self-determination or autonomy requires that
the wishes of a competent adult be
respected and that treatment not be given
contrary to that directive. However, it is also appropriate for the law to
recognise that
there are circumstances in which a health professional should be
excused from following an advance directive. The state's interest
preservation of life reasonably requires that a directive be disregarded, for
example, in cases where the directive was based
on a misunderstanding of the
existence of alternative treatments, or where circumstances have changed
significantly since the directive
was completed and the adult now has different
extent to which doctors can use these discretionary exceptions to the
enforcement of advance care directives has been called to
question. Parker,
Stewart, Willmott and Cartwright criticised the AMA for its approach to advance
care planning and advance care
directives and concluded with the following:
The AMA should be congratulated for engaging in the discussion of [advance care
planning]. Australia needs to continue that discussion.
The addition of the
AMA’s voice will strengthen the call for a uniform legislative scheme.
Nevertheless, the AMA has failed
to take the rights of patients to refuse
treatment in advance seriously enough. Health professionals do not and should
not have the
right to ignore their patients’ competent and clearly
expressed wishes, merely because they feel uncomfortable with the choices
their patients make. It is a fundamental pillar of the doctor/patient
relationship that it is the patient who ultimately holds
the power to consent to
or refuse treatment. Patients will not always be wise or intelligent, but
competent patients always have
the last say over what happens to their
The AMA’s suggestion of a national legislative regime establishing
[advance directives] as legally enforceable is to be commended,
recommendations for discretionary exceptions are inconsistent with their
established legal enforceability. Doctors should
therefore be concerned by the
advice provided by the position statement. If our analysis is accurate, doctors
who use their discretion
against the wishes of the patient, beyond those
exceptions with which we have agreed, may well be relinquishing the protection
the existing statutes
13. 4. Early attempts at statutory advance
directives in Australia
The first attempt at a statutory advance directive in Australia was made in
South Australia in the form of the
Natural Death Act
has been repealed and replaced by the
Consent to Medical Treatment and
Palliative Care Act 1995
; however the
Natural Death Act
is essentially identical to the now repealed
Natural Death Act
seen at 13. 4. 2, in its Northern Territory manifestation, it was really the
enactment of a statutory right to refuse
medical treatment.
13. 4. 1. Victoria
Victoria made the next move towards a statutory advance directive commencing
with an inquiry by the Social Development Committee of
the Victorian Parliament.
In December 1985 the Committee was given terms of reference to seek public
submissions and to report to
Parliament on whether it was desirable or
practicable for the Government to take legislative or other action establishing
to die and on other related matters. The Committee made its first report
in March 1986 and its second and final report in April
The Committee recommended
that it was neither desirable nor practicable for legislative action to be taken
to establish a right to
die, but it recommended legislative action to clarify
and protect the existing common law right to refuse medical treatment. It made
range of other related
recommendations.
This in turn led to the introduction of the
Medical Treatment Bill
into the Victorian Parliament in 1987 and a modified version of that bill as the
Medical Treatment Bill (No.2)
opposed by the Liberal and National Parties, then in opposition, on a range of
grounds including that the existing common law
rights were sufficient to protect
the rights of patients and medical practitioners, if coupled with a suitable
educational program
and that it was a passive euthanasia
The “thin end
of the wedge” argument leading to active euthanasia was put and reference
was made Nazi Germany’s
extermination
These claims were made despite the statement made by the then Catholic
Archbishop of Melbourne, Sir Frank Little in support of the
In particular I am advised that the legislation is consistent with the
church’s constant affirmation that one may not impose
on anyone the
obligation to have recourse to medical treatment which carries a risk or is
burdensome, even if readily available.
Such a refusal “is not the
equivalent of suicide; on the contrary, it should be considered as an acceptance
of the human condition,
or a wish to avoid the application of a medical
procedure disproportionate to the results to be expected, or a desire not to
excessive expense on the family or the community” –
Declaration of the Congregation of the Doctrine of the Faith on Euthanasia,
The legislation that was enacted as the
Medical Treatment Act
is of very limited operation It is described later in this chapter at
13. 4. 2. Northern Territory
The next piece of legislation came from the Northern Territory, the
Natural Death Act 1988 (NT)
. It was introduced by the Country Liberal
Party Government and supported by the Labor opposition and all members of the
Legislative
Assembly who spoke in the debate on the
Apparently it
attracted little public debate in the Territory at the
described later in this chapter at 13. 5. 2.
13. 4. 3. South Australia
In South Australia the House of Assembly established a Select Committee into
the Law and Practice Relating to Death and Dying in 1990.
The Select Committee
made three reports to parliament. In May 1992 its second report and a draft
were tabled. In November 1992 the Committee’s final report was
tabled incorporating responses to the draft
Consent to Medical
Treatment and Palliative Care Bill
was introduced to the parliament and
enacted by the House of Assembly with an overwhelming majority on a conscience
was not passed by the Legislative Council before an
election was called in late
The legislation was
reintroduced into the parliament after the election and enacted as the
Consent to Medical Treatment and Palliative Care Act
The 1994 second reading speech for the
noted that the Select
Committee “found virtually no support in the health professions, among
theologians, ethicists and carers,
or indeed the wider community, for highly
invasive procedures to keep the patient alive, come what may and at any cost to
human dignity”.
The speech also noted that the Select Committee firmly
rejected the proposition that the law should be changed to allow medical
in dying or “voluntary euthanasia”. The fundamental
principle underlying the
was patient
The legislation was enacted on a conscience vote after another open debate.
It is described later in this chapter at 13. 5. 3.
13. 4. 4. Australian Capital
In the Australian Capital Territory a
Medical Treatment Bill
introduced into the House of Assembly 1994 as a result of a recommendation of
the Assembly’s Select Committee on
Euthanasia.
Although the
legislation was introduced into the Assembly as a private member’s bill,
it was supported by the Government, while
the Liberal Party opposition allowed a
conscience vote on it. The
provided mechanisms for adults with
capacity to be able to make it clear that they did not wish to have intensive
interventional
treatment and it provided that doctors and other health
professionals who obeyed those instructions and gave effect to the stated
of the person would not face legal
Because the member proposing the legislation was a strong supporter of
legislation allowing active euthanasia, his
was criticized as
allowing euthanasia by stealth, something that it did not
criticized on the grounds that there was no ground swell of opinion in favour of
it and for allowing oral as well as written
directions to be
Concerns were also raised
withholding or withdrawal
of medical treatment from the person who made the
power of attorney.
The legislation was enacted with overwhelming support after a substantial
debate as the
Medical Treatment Act
was replaced by the
Medical Treatment (Health Directions) Act
which was introduced as a rewrite of the 1994
consequential upon the
enactment of the
Powers of Attorney Act
which provided
for the appointment of enduring attorneys for health care
It was agreed to
without a division.
is described later in this chapter at 13. 5. 4.
13. 4. 5. Queensland
Statutory advance directives, known as advance health directives, were
introduced into Queensland in 1998 as a result of the enactment
and coming into
force of the
Powers of Attorney Act
. Their introduction
was recommended by the Queensland Law Reform Commission, but in the context of
being carried out by an attorney
acting under an enduring power of attorney for
health care.
Attorney Act
provides for them as “stand
alone” advance health directives but people are encouraged to appoint an
attorney for personal
matters as well under the
Advance health directives and
their relationship with powers of attorney for personal matters are described
later in this chapter
at 13. 5. 5. Even though some of the amendments to the
legislation were hard fought, because it was introduced by the National-Liberal
coalition Government, there was little criticism of the main thrusts of the
legislation. The Labor Opposition’s major criticisms
were about the
process of reform being too slow and the provisions in the
little too late.
13. 4. 6. Western Australia
In 2006 the Western Australian Government introduced legislation to amend the
Guardianship and Administration Act
to provide for
advance health directives.
legislation followed, at considerable distance, the 1991 report of the Law
Reform Commission of Western Australia, “Medical
Treatment for the
Dying”. That report suggested that under Western Australian law,
“there is no means by which people
can give legally binding directions as
to withdrawing or withholding treatment should they become incompetent, though
as a matter
of principle if a patient has expressed clear wishes before becoming
in competent those wishes should be
respected”.
The Commission
considered the fears of doctors that they might be prosecuted if they withdrew
or withheld treatment at the request
of competent patients were more apparent
than real, but thought the case for legislation to clarify the rights of
patients was strong.
The Commission recommended an approach closely following
Medical Treatment Act
In May 2005 a discussion paper “Medical Treatment for the Dying”
was released and attracted considerable interest and
comment. A draft bill was
circulated and its overall approach was well
Nevertheless, that
bill was replaced by the
Acts Amendment (Consent to Medical Treatment) Bill
was the subject of debate over an 18 month
period during which it was noted a number of times that the common law
recognised advance
directives which raised the question of the need for Part 9B
headed “Advance health
directives”.
was enacted and assented to in 2008. Some, but not all of it, came
into force 15 February 2010. Those amendments it makes to the
Guardianship
and Administration Act
(WA) relevant to advance health
directives are described later in this chapter at 13. 5. 6.
13. 5. Statutory advance directives/ right to refuse
treatment in Australia
This section of the chapter deals with the narrow statutory forms of advance
directive that have been introduced into Victoria, South
Australia, Western
Australia, the Australian Capital Territory and the Northern Territory as well
as the broader form in Queensland.
Advance directives made under the common law
in Australia are discussed in the next section of the chapter. The giving of
and the imposing of conditions, limitations or exclusions in
appointments of enduring guardianship as a form of advance directive
discussed further in Chapter 9 dealing with enduring guardianship.
13. 5. 1. Victoria – Medical Treatment Act
originally established was no more than a very limited
statutory right to refuse
Under it, a patient
may refuse either medical treatment generally or medical treatment of a
particular kind, but only for a current
condition. Both a doctor and another
person have to be satisfied, presumably by the patient, that the patient has
expressed, again
presumably either verbally or in writing or indicated through
some other means of communication, that they refuse the treatment,
that this is
being done voluntarily and without inducement or coercion when the patient is of
sound mind and has reached 18 years
of age. They also have to be satisfied that
the patient has been informed of the nature of their condition sufficiently to
decision and that the patient appears to understand that information.
If so satisfied, the doctor and the other person may then witness
a refusal of
treatment certificate which operates as evidence that the patient has refused
medical treatment.
In 1990 the
was amended. It now allows attorneys appointed by way
of an enduring power of attorney (medical treatment), called
, or guardians appointed by VCAT and
authorised by it to make decisions about medical treatment, to refuse medical
treatment generally
or particular treatment in relation to a patient they were
the attorney or guardian for.
Again, if the attorney or guardian refuse consent to proposed medical, both a
doctor and another person have to be satisfied that
the attorney or guardian has
been informed of the nature of the condition sufficiently to make that decision
and that they appear
to understand that
information.
However, the
attorney or guardian may refuse medical treatment on behalf of the patient only
if the medical treatment would cause
unreasonable distress to the patient or if
there are reasonable grounds for believing that the patient, if competent, and
after giving
serious consideration to their health and well-being, would
consider the medical treatment is
unwarranted.
Note that the
attorney or guardian must apply substituted judgment in this matter. They cannot
use their own discretion, but must
come to the conclusion, on objectively
reasonable grounds, that the patient would have considered the medical treatment
unwarranted.
When they make a
refusal, they must complete a refusal of treatment
The 1990 amendments also gave what is now the Guardianship List of VCAT
treatment) and to make consequential
VCAT may suspend the
power for a period if it is satisfied that the refusal of the treatment was not
in the patient’s best
interests. It may revoke the power if it is
satisfied that it is not in the best interests of the patient for the attorney
to continue
to exercise the power of attorney (medical
treatment).
Any refusal of
treatment certificate made by an attorney or a guardian whose appointment is
revoked is also revoked, immediately
revocation.
Hospitals and nursing homes are required to take reasonable steps to ensure
that copies of any refusal of treatment certificates are
placed on the
patient’s record and given to the chief executive officer of the hospital
or home and to the principal registrar
A doctor who treats a person contrary to a refusal of treatment certificate
commits an offence of criminal trespass, but doctors or
persons acting under
their direction – most commonly nurses - who refuse treatment in reliance
on a certificate are protected
against disciplinary, civil or criminal charges
for doing so.
a patient cannot refuse or be refused palliative care
namely, reasonable medical procedures for the relief of pain, suffering and
discomfort or reasonable provision of food and
However, Morris J has
held that providing food and water by artificial means is medical treatment not
palliative care. In his opinion
the intent of parliament in excluding the
provision of food and water from the concept of medical treatment was to ensure
dying person would have food and water available for oral consumption, if
the person wished to consume such food or
There are provisions in the
for the cancellation of refusal of
treatment certificates and for the consequences arising from such
cancellations.
has been criticized for its failure to uphold the right to
self-determination in Article 1 of both the International Covenant on
Political Rights and the International Covenant on Economic, Social and Cultural
Rights and to give sufficient weight to
the dignity of the patient, and for a
range of other defects. The need for a mechanism to provide for the recognition
directives rather than the present limited statutory right to refuse
treatment has also been raised.
13. 5. 2. Northern Territory – Natural
Death Act 1988
The Northern Territory
provides that anyone who is 18 years or
over and who desires not to be subjected medical or surgical measures that
prolong or are
intended to prolong life in the event of them suffering from a
terminal illness may make a direction, but in the prescribed form.
The prescribed form requires the
direction to be witnessed by two
Any such direction
becomes operational only if its maker has a terminal illness. The circumstances
in which the direction can apply
are further limited by the definition of
“terminal illness”. It is defined as an illness, injury or
degeneration of mental
or physical faculties in relation to which death would be
imminent if extraordinary measures were not undertaken and that even if
extraordinary measures were taken there was no reasonable prospect of either a
temporary or permanent recovery.
If all these requirements are met then it is the duty of the doctor treating the
person to act in accordance with the
Doctors are protected from liability if they refuse to act in accordance with
the direction on the grounds that the person is or is
not suffering from a
terminal illness, that the person had revoked or intended to revoke the
direction or that the person was not
capable of understanding the nature and
consequences of the direction at the time they made
The withholding or
withdrawal of extraordinary measures in accordance with a direction does not
constitute a cause of death.
Natural Death Act
is also considered in Chapter
12. 10. 1. 3 and Chapter 14.
13. 5. 3. South Australia – Consent to
Medical Treatment and Palliative Care Act 1995
Like the Victorian
, the South Australian
provides for
an adult of sound mind to give a direction about the medical treatment they want
when they have a condition or illness
which is likely to result in death or if
they were in a persistent vegetative state and if they are incapable of making
The direction must
be in the form set out in the regulation and witnessed in accordance with the
requirements of the
regulation.
Consent to Medical Treatment and Palliative Care Act
also allows adults of sound mind to appoint attorneys (called an agent
) under medical powers of attorney which give the attorney the
power to make decisions about the person’s medical treatment.
appointments must be made on the prescribed
Attorneys must exercise
the powers to make decisions about medical treatment in accordance with any
lawful conditions or directions
contained in the power of attorney or in
accordance with any anticipatory direction given by the person appointing
However, the attorney
may not refuse the “natural” provision of food and water. This could
be taken as to provision of
food and water to be taken by mouth by the person if
they wished to, as suggested by Morris
Attorneys may not refuse
the administration of drugs to relieve pain or distress or medical treatment
that would result in the person
regaining the capacity to make decisions unless
the person is in the terminal stages of an illness or condition that is likely
cause their death.
imposes a duty on doctors to explain to a patient, or their
representative, including their attorney appointed under a medical power
attorney, as far as may be practicable and reasonable in the circumstances, the
nature, consequences and risks of proposed medical
treatment, the consequences
of not undertaking the treatment and any alternative treatment or courses of
treatment that might be
reasonably be considered in the circumstances of the
particular case.
Doctors who
are treating patients in the terminal stages of illnesses or conditions that are
likely to result in death will not be
civilly or criminally liable for giving
medical treatment with the intention of relieving pain or distress, even though
an incidental
effect of that treatment is to hasten death. However, the doctor
must administer the treatment with the consent of the patient or
representative, in good faith, without negligence and in accordance with the
proper professional standards of palliative
There is another provision in the
that could cause difficulties
for doctors treating patients who are dying. While the
require doctors to continue life sustaining measures merely to prolong the life
of a person already in a moribund state
without any real prospect of recovery or
in a persistent vegetative state, the
makes this provision apply
“in the absence of an express direction by the patient or the
representative”.
this apparently implied power to patients, their attorneys under medical powers
of attorney, their guardians and possibly relatives
who are the “proper
authority” to give or refuse substitute consent to medical treatment, to
direct the continuation
of treatment even when it is futile? Such a power would
cut across the established common law position that doctors should not be
required to provide treatment that, objectively viewed, is
also gives statutory jurisdiction to the Supreme Court of
South Australia to review decisions made by attorneys under medical powers
attorney to ensure that their decisions are in accordance with the lawful
conditions or directions in the power of attorney or
the anticipatory direction
given by the person.
the Court may not review such a decision if the person is in the terminal stage
of their illness or condition and the treatment
would merely prolong life in a
moribund state without any real prospect of
Does this statutory
review power place a limit on the scope of the parens patriae power of the
Supreme Court of South Australia?
13. 5. 4. Australian Capital Territory –
Medical Treatment (Health Directions) Act 2006
In the Australian Capital Territory any person 18 years or above who does not
have impaired decision-making capacity may make a health
direction. This is a
direction made in writing, orally or some other way refusing or requiring the
withdrawal of either all medical
treatment or medical treatment of a particular
Any such direction may
be revoked at any time by the person giving it. They may do this in writing,
orally or in any other way, clearly
expressing to a health professional or
another person their decision to revoke the
Written directions must be in the approved form and must be signed by the
person making the directions or on their behalf by someone
else in their
presence and at their
Two witnesses must
sign the direction in the presence of the person making the direction and in the
presence of each other.
Directions not in writing have to be witnessed by a doctor and another health
professional, both present at the same
If the person who has given the direction is still competent when the issue
of either not commencing or withdrawing the treatment
referred to in the
direction arises, the doctor or nurse must follow a process of checking whether
the person still does not want
the treatment commenced or wants it withdrawn.
The doctor or nurse must take all reasonable steps to tell the person about the
of their illness, the alternative forms of treatment that are available,
the consequences of those forms of treatment and the consequences
of the illness
not being treated.
Furthermore, the
precludes the doctor or nurse from giving effect to
the direction unless the person understood the information given about these
matters, weighs the various options and confirms their decision (in the
direction) to refuse the treatment or to have it
This provision is somewhat absurd. It requires a doctor or nurse to check
whether the person wants to continue with their refusal
of treatment direction,
which is reasonable. It then goes onto apply what has been adopted in England as
the test for capacity to
give consent to medical treatment. If the person fails
that test, then their refusal of treatment direction is not to be acted upon.
However, what the test actually does is show whether or not the person is
competent to give a valid refusal (or consent) to the medical
treatment at the
time the test was given.
Failure of the test shows that the original opinion that the person was still
competent was incorrect. Consequently, the direction
previously given by a now
incompetent person should be followed.
then goes on to impose on a doctor or nurse the obligation not
to withhold or withdraw treatment in accordance with a person’s
unless they believe on reasonable grounds that the direction complies with the
– something which is readily ascertainable – and that the
person has not revoked the direction – something which
is more difficult
to ascertain, particularly as it involves proving a negative – and that
the person has not changed their
decision since making their direction –
something which is impossible to ascertain given that the person now has
impaired decision-making
If a person who had previously made a health direction has a guardian with
power to make medical decisions on their behalf appointed
for them by the ACAT
Guardianship and Management of Property Act
and a doctor declares that that person has become a person with impaired
decision-making capacity – a matter the ACAT has
to be satisfied about
before it makes a guardianship order, the guardian is to exercise their
decision-making powers consistently
If a person who had previously made a health direction makes an enduring
power of attorney for health care matters, the making of
the enduring power of
attorney revokes the health
However, an
attorney under an enduring power of attorney for health care matters can be
appointed to do anything in relation to health
care matters which include the
withholding or withdrawal of medical treatment from the maker of the power of
Such an attorney
must abide by the principles of the
Powers of Attorney Act
and in relation to health care these principles require the attorney
to exercise their power only when, after taking into account
the maker’s
wishes in relation to health care matters, they consider it necessary and
appropriate to do so in order to promote
the maker’s health and well-being
and is, in all the circumstances, in the maker’s best
It is suggested
that if the maker has given the attorney directions in the form of an advance
directive in the enduring power of
attorney appointing them, the attorney is
bound by those directions under the established common
Medical Treatment (Health Directions) Act
specifically states that it does not apply to palliative care and does not
affect any right, power or duty held by a doctor, nurse
or other person in
relation to palliative care. Palliative care is defined in the
include the provision of reasonable medical and nursing procedures for the
relief of pain, suffering and discomfort and the reasonable
provision of food
This means that a
health direction made under the
refusing palliative care would have
no effect if the person’s treating doctor considered palliative care
appropriate in the
circumstances. It should also be noted that the
provides that a person who has given a health direction that medical treatment
be withheld or withdrawn from them “has a right
to receive relief from
pain and suffering to the maximum extent that is reasonable in the
circumstances.
encourages health professionals and others aware of any health
direction made under the
by a person now in a hospital, hospice or
nursing home to be brought to the attention of the person responsible for the
running of the hospital, hospice or nursing home for them to put it
on the person’s file.
provides a number of protections for doctors, nurses and
others. Doctors, nurses or others who, in good faith and in reliance on
direction or a decision of an attorney under a power of attorney made under the
, withhold or withdraw medical treatment. They are protected against
disciplinary, civil or criminal charges if they do
Doctors and nurses are
also protected from liability if they make a decision in good faith and without
negligence that a person revoked
or intended to revoke the a direction or power
of attorney they had made or that at the time the person made the direction or
of attorney they were or were not capable of understanding the
consequences of that direction or power of
13. 5. 5. Queensland – Powers of Attorney
Act 1998 and Guardianship and Administration Act 2000
The limited form of advance directive created by legislation in Queensland is
called an advance health directive. Many of the provisions
relating to advance
health directives are found in the
Powers of Attorney Act
but some are found in the
Guardianship and Administration Act
In Queensland, adults who have the capacity to make an advance health
directive may give directions in that directive about what in
common parlance
would be their medical care and treatment, and about their future health
They can also give
directions about their special health care, but, because of the kinds of matters
included in the definition of
“special health care” this kind of
health care is likely to be relevant to the matters being covered in this
only very rarely.
However, the directive may include directions about the withholding or
withdrawal of life sustaining measures if the commencement
or continuation of
such measures would be inconsistent with good medical practice in the case of
the person who made the advance
Such a directive
can also include a direction requiring that life-sustaining measures be withheld
or withdrawn in specified
circumstances.
The term “life-sustaining measure” is defined as health care
intended to sustain or prolong life and that supplants or
maintains the
operation of vital bodily functions that are temporarily or permanently
incapable of independent operation and includes
in particular, cardiopulmonary
resuscitation, assisted ventilation and artificial nutrition and hydration, but
not blood transfusions.
The makers of advance health directives may give information about their
directions. They may also appoint attorneys to exercise power
for health matters
in the event of the directions proving inadequate. They may also provide terms
or information about exercising
such powers of attorney for health
The approved form
for an advance health directive has 22 printed
Nevertheless, there are substantial limitations on the operation of advance
health directives in Queensland. They can operate only
when their makers have
lost capacity which is defined to mean that they have lost the capacity to
understand the nature and effect
of the decisions covered by the direction and
to freely and voluntarily make those decisions and communicate them in some
If the directive contains a direction to withhold or withdraw a
life-sustaining measure, that direction cannot operate unless one
following four situations applies. The person has a terminal illness which is
incurable or irreversible and as a result of
which, in the opinion of both the
person’s treating doctor and another doctor, the person may reasonably be
expected to die
within a year, the person is in a persistent vegetative state or
is permanently unconscious, that is with brain damage so severe
that there is no
reasonable prospect that the person will regain consciousness or has an illness
or injury so severe that there is
no reasonable prospect that the person will
recover to the extent that their life could be sustained without the
continuation of
life-sustaining
If one (or more) of
those situations applies and the directive contains a direction to withhold or
withdraw artificial nutrition
or hydration, that direction may be carried out,
but only if the commencement or continuation of the artificial nutrition or
would be inconsistent with good medical practice and there is no
reasonable prospect of the person regaining capacity to make decisions
health matters.
While a person may make an advance health directive without also appointing
an attorney for personal or just health matters, those
administering the
and the structure of the legislation encourage people also to appoint
such an attorney when making an advance health directive. Subject
to the terms
of the directive, the attorney can make decisions about health matters that the
person could have made if they had capacity
and, if authorised by the person
appointing them, can make decisions about health matters not covered by the
It should be
noted that there are two statutory tests for capacity that are relevant here;
the test for a person’s capacity
to make an advance health directive and
a separate and different test for the capacity to make an enduring power of
The test for
capacity to make an advance health directive is discussed below at 13. 6. 2. The
test for capacity to make an enduring
power of attorney is discussed in Chapter
Guardianship and Administration Act
(Qld), when dealing with
substitute consent for medical treatment, provides that if a person has given a
direction in an advance
health directive that deals with the treatment in
question, the matter is to be dealt with only under the
However, the same
also provides that, in a situation where decisions have to be made
quickly, a life-sustaining measure can be withdrawn from an adult
consent if the person’s health provider - a term which covers the
person’s treating doctors and associated health
professionals, but may
reach further – reasonably considers that the person has lost the capacity
to make decisions about their
medical treatment, that the commencement or
continuation of the life-sustaining measure would be inconsistent with good
medical practice
and that, consistent with good medical practice, the decision
to withhold or withdraw the life-sustaining measure must be taken
immediately.
This cannot be
done if person’s health provider knows that the person objects to the
withholding or withdrawal of the
If it is done,
the health provider must certify in the person’s clinical record the
various matters that enabled the withholding
or withdrawal of the
life-sustaining measure.
If life-sustaining treatment is withheld or withdrawn from a person other
than in the urgent circumstances just referred to, the person’s
provider must certify in the person’s medical records as to the various
matters that allowed the withholding or withdrawal
to occur, for example it was
done under a direction in the person’s advance health directive and the
conditions precedent for
doing so were
The Queensland legislation makes it an offence to carry out health care,
which includes medical treatment, on a person unable to give
a valid consent to
their own health care, unless it is health care that has been consented to under
legislation or health care that
may be carried out without
There is no specific
provision protecting health professionals from civil or criminal liability for
withholding or withdrawing medical
treatment from a person as a result of that
person’s advance health directive or some other legislative provision, but
would not be either civilly or criminally liable for carrying out any
actions authorised by law.
13. 5. 6. Western Australia – Part 9B of
the Guardianship and Administration Act 1990
Guardianship and Administration Act
applies to documents called “advance health directives”
made under the detailed provisions of that Part. It does not
apply to advance
directives made under the common law. The common law in this respect is
specifically preserved by
13. 5. 6. 1. Advance health directives in Western Australia
commences with the statement that a person who has reached 18 years
of age and has full legal capacity may make an advance health
containing treatment decisions about their future
decisions are decisions to consent or refuse consent to the commencement or
continuation of any treatment. Treatment means
medical or surgical treatment or
dental treatment or other health care. Medical and surgical treatment includes
life sustaining measures
which are medical, surgical or nursing procedures
directed at supplanting or maintaining a vital bodily function that is
temporarily
or permanently incapable of independent operation, and includes
assisted ventilation and cardiopulmonary resuscitation. Medical and
treatment also includes palliative care which is medical, surgical or nursing
procedures directed at relieving a person’s
pain, discomfort or distress.
However, the definition of palliative care excludes life sustaining
13. 5. 6. 2. Making an health directive
Advance health directives made under
must be either in the form set
Guardianship and Administration Regulations
or substantially in that
They may be made by
anyone who is 18 years or older who has full legal capacity and who understands
the nature and consequences
of the treatment decisions in their advance health
Advance health
directives must be signed by the maker and two witnesses in the presence of each
A register may be
established so that advance health directives may be
registered.
13. 5. 6. 3. Giving effect to advance health directives
Doctors and other health professionals may rely on treatment decisions in
advance health directives only when the maker is unable
to make reasonable
judgments about that treatment and only in circumstances specified in the
Guardianship and Administration Act
specifically provides that a treatment decision set out in an advance health
directive does not operate if circumstances exist or
have arisen that:
1. the maker of that directive would not have reasonably anticipated at the
time they made the directive; and
2. those circumstances would have caused a reasonable person in the
maker’s position to have changed their mind about the treatment
In determining whether to ignore a treatment decision in an advance health
directive on the grounds just set out, whoever proposes
to consider making such
a decision must take account of:
1. the maker’s age at the time the made the directive and their age
2. the time between the making of the directive and now,
3. whether the maker reviewed the treatment decision and, if so, how long
4. the nature of the maker’s condition, the nature of the treatment and
the consequences of providing or not providing the
When someone, usually a health professional, is seeking to decide whether a
now incapable person’s a treatment decision in an
advance health directive
still applies, they may consult the person’s enduring or appointed
guardian if they have either, or
both, of them or anyone who qualifies under the
to be the person’s “person responsible” or anyone
else considered appropriate in the
circumstances.
seen below, WASAT has jurisdiction to decide whether a treatment decision in an
advance health directive is valid or not.
It would be able to make use of this
ability to consult in coming to its
If the maker of the advance health directive has changed their mind about a
treatment decision in their directive, that treatment
decision is to be taken as
having been revoked.
suggested that this provision applies only where there is evidence that the
maker has changed their mind. It is not a matter
that doctors or other health
professionals have to investigate unless they are made or become aware of the
maker’s change of
This approach is suggested for three reasons. First, as already noted, Part
9B commences with the statement that a person who has
reached 18 years of age
and has full legal capacity may make an advance health directive containing
treatment decisions about their
That is the policy
and should be both respected and given full effect to. Second,
specifically provides that where a person has made an advance
health directive that contains a treatment decision that has now become
operative, the question of whether or not treatment is to be provided to the
person must be decided in accordance with that treatment
As is apparent from
, as discussed in Chapter 12. 7. 4, the treatment decisions of the
person set out in their advance health are to be given effect to
before their
guardian or person responsible is to be called upon to give or refuse substitute
consent to their treatment. Third,
specifically provides that, if
the maker of the advance health directive subsequently makes an enduring power
of guardianship, it
does not follow that they have either revoked their advance
health care directive or changed their mind about a treatment decision
advance health directive.
13. 5. 6. 1. The role of WASAT in relation to advance health directives
WASAT may make a range of decisions about advance health directives, on the
application of anyone WASAT thinks has a proper interest
When exercising its
powers WASAT may:
1. make a declaration that the maker of an advance health directive is unable
to make reasonable judgments about treatment to which
a treatment decision in
their directive applies,
2. give directions about giving effect to a treatment decision in a directive
or the construction of the terms of a
3. make a declaration that a treatment decision in a directive is to be taken
to have been revoked,
4. make an order recognising an advance health directive from another
effect of Part 9B
to warrant recognition.
5. Revoke any declaration that it makes in relation to the matters set out in
1 to 4 above.
13. 6. Advance directives under the common
There is growing interest in making advance directives in Australia, although
there is no way of knowing just how many people have
made them. Educating the
public about the importance of advance directives has been a priority of public
health community and state
health departments in many
growing consensus that the more general concept of advanced care planning, of
which advance directives are a part, should
be encouraged. Advanced care
planning refers to the process of preparing for likely scenarios near the end of
life and the assessment
of and dialogue about a person’s understanding of
their medical history and condition, values preferences and personal and
In Australia, the
Respecting Patient Choices Program, which began in 2002 as a pilot program to
promote and implement advance care
planning in Victoria has since been extended
to other states and settings.
It can be argued that the four States and two Territories that have enacted
advance directive legislation have preserved the common
law in such a way that
it can be relied upon to allow for the making of advance directives outside the
limits of the narrow statutory
advance directive regimes created by legislation
in those States and Territories. As noted at the commencement of this chapter,
relevant Queensland legislation specifically states that it “does not
affect common law recognition of instructions about health
care given by an
adult that are not given in an advance health
directive”.
legislation in Victoria, the Australian Capital Territory and the Northern
Territory specifically states that it does not affect
the right of a person
under any other law to refuse medical
Australian legislation does not refer to this matter while in Western Australia
the common law relating to a person’s
entitlement to make treatment
decision relating to their future treatment is specifically
The judges do not
rush to hold that legislation covers the field and replaces the common law
unless the legislation makes that clear
by express words or by necessary
implication.
In pursuit of the policy of encouraging adults to make advance directives,
New South Wales has adopted a common law /best practice
recommendation approach
to advance directives. The New South Wales Department of Health has published a
booklet “Using Advance
Care Directives” for the purpose of providing
health professionals with information on the best practice use of advance care
directives. While the booklet concentrates advance directives that relate to
treatment and care in a medical setting, its advice
is relevant to advance
directives that may go beyond health care issues.
The booklet suggests that advance care directives that comply with the
requirements set out in it are legally binding in NSW and that
they function as
an extension of the common law right of an adult to determine their own medical
The booklet also
notes that failure to comply with an advance care directive that meets the
requirements set out in the booklet may
result in health professional involved
incurring civil liability for providing the treatment.
However, the main thrusts of the
booklet are to show health professionals how to deal with advance directives in
the processes of
planning for and providing treatment and care to patients, what
the requirements for an advance directive are and to answer their
booklet is consistent with other expositions
as to what, in the absence of cases
decided in Australia, is the Australian common law in relation to advance
directives.
While the booklet concentrates on written advance care directives, it also
deals with advance care directives made orally stating:
[A]nyone can make an oral directive by making their wishes known through
discussion with their family or health care team. This may
arise where physical
disability, illness or illiteracy means that writing is not possible but may
also be the person’s preferred
approach. These wishes should be clearly
documented in the person’s medical history, even if a specific advance
care directive
‘form’ is not used, and made known through liaison
between treating health
professionals.
As noted earlier in this chapter at 13. 2. 2, in New South Wales, South
Australia, Tasmania, Victoria and Western Australia an adult
can make an advance
directive by “proxy” by appointing an enduring guardian and giving
them directions, in the form of
or amounting to, an advance
In Queensland this
can be achieved by appointing an attorney under an enduring power of attorney
either for, or including for, personal
matters including health
In New South Wales
such appointors can include, in the appointment, binding lawful directions to
the enduring guardian.
Tasmania they can impose conditions as well as include binding lawful
directions.
Australia, the appointor can impose or include conditions, limitations or
prohibitions.
Australia appointors may include directions as to how enduring guardians are to
perform their functions.
Victoria and Queensland the appointors are not specifically empowered to do any
of these things, but may be able to impose effective
limits on the enduring
guardian’s or attorney’s powers by careful drafting of their
document of appointment. By these
means forms of advance directives that may
meet the needs of those who prefer to have substitute decision-makers operating
instructions, rather than seeking to predict the future themselves in a
binding advance directive could be developed.
As already noted at Chapters 9. 4. 5, 11. 4 and 12, 4. 11, in the 2009 case,
Hunter and New England Area Health Service v A
, McDougall J held that and
advance directive set out in an appointment of enduring guardianship was binding
on doctors treating the
appointor when the appointor was incapable of giving a
valid consent to treatment.
Consequently, by implication, the advance directive is also binding on the
enduring guardian, the appointor’s carers and the
appointor’s other
health service-providers.
13. 6. 1. What does the common law require for an
effective advance directive?
In order to make an advance directive that will be given effect to by a
person’s treating health professionals, their substitute
decision-makers
and others when they have lost capacity, the following requirements have to be
1. The person must have had capacity to make the advance directive when they
2. The advance directive must clearly apply to the clinical circumstances
that now exist;
3. The advance directive must have currency; and
4. The advance directive must have been made free from undue influence.
Each of these requirements will be taken up separately below.
It should be noted however that there are no formal requirements for advance
directives. They may be oral or in
There can be difficulties establishing the existence of
a binding oral advance directive. There is first the need to establish its
existence to the appropriate standard of proof by convincing and inherently
reliable evidence and, second, the need to show that
the person’s
expressed views represent “a firm and settled commitment and not merely an
offhand remark or informally
expressed reaction to other people's
Because there are no formal requirements for advance directives, they do not
have to be witnessed by another person. Nevertheless,
it is preferable that they
are. If the document is witnessed, then the witness or witnesses can assist on
the questions of whether
or not the person had capacity when they made it,
whether the document was a forgery or whether there was any undue influence on
the maker of the advance directive when they made it, should any of these or
other issues arise subsequently and after the maker
has lost capacity. In New
South Wales and Tasmania if the advance directive is part of a document
appointing an enduring guardian,
it must be witnessed according to the
requirements for witnessing appointments of enduring
If the advance
directive is not part of a document appointing an enduring guardian, there are
no requirements as to witnesses.
As there are no formal requirements for a valid advance
directive, there can equally be no formal requirements for the revocation
advance directive. It has been suggested that both a written advance directive
and an advance directive executed under seal
can be revoked
13. 6. 2. Capacity to make an advance
The person who made the advance directive must have been competent at the
time they made it. At this stage in the history of advance
directives, many of
them are drawn up by the maker. Some are developed as a series of answers to
questions posed in booklets designed
to present people with the relevant issues,
encourage them to consider then express their views and values and then decide
they wish to complete an advance directive. Some advance directives are
drawn up by those interested in the issue for the maker to
consider and adopt.
Also, advance care directives are being drawn up increasingly by health care
professionals in hospital and residential
care settings. Over time, more advance
directives may be drawn up by lawyers.
If an advance directive is drawn up by someone other than the maker, then the
maker must have had capacity both at the time they gave
instructions for the
drafting of the advance directive and at the time they adopted it as their
document either by signing it or
by some other means. The capacity of people
living independently in the community who educate themselves about advance
and who initiate discussions about them with a health care
professional will seldom be in doubt. However, it is wise for the health
professional involved in such a process to carry out at least the basic checks
regarding capacity, particularly with those who
are ageing or in residential
care facilities. Where a person’s capacity to make an advance directive is
in doubt, the opinion
of their treating doctor or a specialist with expertise in
assessing competence might be sought if such resources are available.
of those from whom assessments might be sought are; old age psychiatrists,
geriatricians, neuropsychologists and neurologists.
If the person has a known
psychiatric illness an opinion regarding their capacity should be sought from
the person treating the patient
for that illness.
In New South Wales and Tasmania if the advance directive is part of a
document appointing an enduring guardian, the test for capacity
of the maker
will be the same as the test for capacity to make an appointment of enduring
guardianship. That test is set out in Chapter
9. 3. 2 but see also 9. 3. 3.
While there has been no decided case in Australia on the test for capacity to
make an advance directive, the test adopted must honour
the right established in
the common law to make advance
directives.
The test must
also allow for those who draw up their own advance directives. The usual staring
point for capacity to make enduring
documents in Australia is the statement by
Dixon CJ, Kitto and Taylor JJ in the High Court case,
The mental capacity required by law in respect of any instrument is relative to
the particular transaction which is being effected
by means of the instrument,
and may be described as the capacity to understand the nature of the transaction
This test is more relevant to situations in which someone else drafts the
advance directive for the maker and explains it to them,
but it requires that
the person understands the nature and the effect of making an advance directive.
This means that the maker would
need to understand that their advance
1. was a binding statement of their wishes in relation to medical treatment
they wish to receive in relation to certain illnesses
or when they had reached
certain levels of functioning or when their likelihood of recovery was only to
certain levels of functioning
if actively interventionist treatment was carried
out on them. (This statement may contain other personal matters.);
2. would become irrevocable when they lost the mental capacity to revoke or
change it; and
3. would, in its unchangeable form, be acted upon by health professionals,
carers, family members and others as it would be treated
by them as binding upon
them unless it did not, on a fair reading, apply to the circumstances they were
dealing with.
The question of how much makers of advance directives need to know,
understand and decide about their future treatment is a complex
suggested that the answer lies in the nature of the advance directive. If the
advance directive is about the medical treatments
the maker wishes to receive in
relation to a certain illness or certain illnesses, then their knowledge and
understanding of the
condition or conditions they have and of the nature and
effect of the treatments available for such conditions may have to be
substantial.
If however the advance directive is about the kinds of treatment
the maker wants when they have reached certain levels of functioning,
is only to certain levels of functioning, then
their understanding of the
conditions that brought them to these positions and the treatments for those
conditions may not need to
be very sophisticated. It should be noted that
advance directives about medical treatment will usually be a sophisticated form
anticipatory refusal of medical treatment, which is well established in the
common law as part of a competent adult’s right
self-determination.
Consequently, it is not appropriate to impose requirements that render it
impossible to give effect to this
In England it has been suggested that the test for capacity to make an
advance statement about medical treatment is similar to that
for capacity to
make a contemporaneous medical
This approach, if
adopted in Australia, would have the effect of making it difficult for an
advance directive about medical treatment
not made in the light of the
maker’s current medical situation to be given effect to. First it would
invoke Thorpe J’s
test for capacity to give consent to treatment which, in
broad terms, requires that the person be able to comprehend, retain and
relevant information and then make a
However, it could
also be seen as requiring the maker to understand the nature of current
conditions and of treatment options not
only for those current conditions but
also for future conditions that the maker may develop. This leads to the view
that advance
directives about medical treatment may require a higher level of
cognitive ability, at least of frontal executive functions such
as planning, at
the time they were made than that required for making current medical decisions.
As pointed out by Fazel and others,
it is difficult enough for healthy people to
imagine the
whole range of situations that might befall
13. 6. 3. Assessing capacity to make an advance
13. 6. 3. 1. Relevant conditions
Before assessing the person’s understanding of an advance directive, a
number of conditions such as delirium, significant depression
or advanced
dementia, which might preclude capacity either temporarily or permanently, must
be excluded. In contrast to an outpatient
or community setting, one would expect
a high prevalence of incapacity amongst elderly hospital inpatients and
residents of care
facilities who might be approached to consider the issue of
advance directives.
in intensive care units are often approached early on in their admission to make
advance directives. In a study of levels
of care in the intensive care unit, of
the 11% of patients who had resuscitation directives, 65% were established in
the ICU during
the first 24 hours.
Given the increased risk of
cognitive impairment (i.e. due to delirium) and potentially reversible
conditions such as pain and depression
which might hinder the person’s
ability to be involved in such a process, it is incumbent upon treatment teams
to exclude delirium
at such times prior to considering the use of advance
directives. Many medical conditions can affect cognitive function, often in
subtle ways, leaving the validity of advance directives written during times of
serious illness open for
Pain particularly
makes decisions about end of life extremely difficult and effective pain
management is essential prior to undertaking
such discussions.
In addition to being free of delirium and pain, the maker should be free from
any major disturbance of mood, suicidal ideation or
psychosis that may interfere
with their ability to decide on future treatment. Symptoms often associated with
depression such as
hopelessness, delusions of sin, guilt and punishment; and
nihilistic or somatic delusions (e.g. a conviction that the person has
is dying) will preclude capacity to make an advance
Notwithstanding
this, decisions regarding end of life and death don’t always reverse with
treatment of depression. This was
highlighted in a study by Hooper and
which showed that
of 22 patients (mean age of 77) with major depression, five (42%) wanted
voluntary euthanasia when depressed, while
only one (8%) still wanted euthanasia
after recovery. When considering a hypothetical life threatening illness with
uncertain prognosis,
83% of patients in the depressed state opted for future
voluntary euthanasia while 58% still opted for future voluntary euthanasia
recovery from their depression.
Dementia is not an absolute contraindication to making an advance directive.
For example, one study showed that a fifth of patients
at referral with
dementia, particularly those with a higher premorbid IQ, were competent to make
an advance directive.
dementia might compromise a person’s ability to make a complex advance
directive, many people with dementia still retain
the ability to make simple
advance directives, particularly those who have made their wishes known prior to
developing dementia so
that there can be some way of checking the consistency of
their wishes. The complexity of the decision made will determine the amount
cognitive reserve (or brain function) required to make the decision. Darzins and
others refer to a spectrum of decisions from
simple (e.g. deciding whether or
not to have a blood test) to moderate (e.g. deciding where or not to have a
course of antibiotics)
to difficult (e.g. deciding whether or not to have a
carotid endarterectomy).
Accordingly, some patients with dementia may be competent to make an advance
directive about resuscitation but not about chemotherapy.
It is helpful to use a checklist to consider and address any of the
potentially reversible or relevant irreversible conditions discussed
might impact on capacity to make advance directives. For such a checklist see
Box 2 below. If the person has conditions
that impact on their decision-making
that need investigation or treatment, this should be done and their capacity to
make an advance
directive should be reviewed when those conditions have
stabilised.
13. 6. 3. 2. Maximising involvement
In addition to excluding and addressing such conditions, a number of
conditions must be attended to maximize the person’s involvement
process. Barriers to communication (e.g. background noise, poor lighting, flat
hearing-aid batteries) should be dealt with
so that the person can be at their
best and if possible, free of distractors.
A checklist is provided in
Box 1 below. The person must be offered sufficient accurate information to make
an informed decision.
Providing education is a crucial part of assessing
capacity: “capable people have been deemed incapable because no one
to explain the situation properly to
usually needs information to understand the meaning of the types of clinical
scenarios that may arise in their situation,
and the benefits and burdens,
consequences of various treatment options. Key medical terms should be explained
in words that can
understood.
Someone who is identified as significantly involved in the active care of the
person and can discuss prognostic information in clear
terms should carry out
this discussion. It is recognised that pastoral care workers or clergy also
frequently conduct these discussions
but, in order for it to be useful, such
information needs to be communicated to the treatment team; therefore a
multidisciplinary
approach is
Questions to assist clinicians in
assessing capacity to make an advance directive
1. Does the person have a history of depression or other psychiatric
2. Is there evidence that they have a disorder now (e.g. evidence of sad
mood, delusions, suicidal ideation)? Have they got a sustained,
sad mood and are
unable to be cheered up by anything? Do they feel they deserve to die?
3. Does person understand what an advance care directive is?
4. What does the maker want to decide about? (For example their goals or
values about what is tolerable at end of life? What specific
treatments they
either want or don’t want? Do they want cardio-pulmonary
resuscitation?)
5. Is the person aware of the alternatives to the choice they are making?
6. Can the person nominate consequences of the choices they are making?
7. Can the person repeat what they have chosen to do at the end of the
discussion?
Potentially reversible or relevant irreversible
conditions which might impact on capacity to make AD
Intrinsic: ie
Delirium (e.g. caused by constipation, hypoxia, infection, drug
Sleep Deprivation
Depression (particularly important to exclude before taking an
advance directive)
Dementia (maximize participation with cues, simple language etc)
History of Psychiatric illness? Discuss with treating doctor
Extrinsic: ie
Environment (e.g. noise, flat hearing aid battery )
Are family pressuring patient or overruling opportunity for
discussion by indicating either:
that discussing such issues is too upsetting; or
that the patient’s existence is a burden (Patient
perception that they are burden may be a family issue or a sign of depression)
Investigate/Treat conditions that impact on decision-making
and review capacity for making advance directive when stable.
13. 6. 3. 3 Tools and instruments for assessing capacity to make an
advance directive
As with other areas of capacity assessment, the assessment of capacity to
make an advance directive should include the use of standardized
screens or more
comprehensive measures of general cognitive abilities, together with assessment
of the task-specific functions involved
in making an advance directive.
Screening measures such as the Mini Mental State Examination (MMSE) do not
measure capacity to complete an advance directive, but
may give a guide to
overall cognitive function which might help distinguish between those who are
clearly unable to participate in
the process and those who are able. One study
showed that those who scored less than 16 out of 30 on the MMSE lacked capacity
complete an advance
neuropsychological testing does not measure capacity to complete an advance
directive; but it may provide information
regarding cognitive functions such as
judgment, problem solving, reasoning and planning, crucial to the
There is no gold standard instrument for assessing capacity to make an
advance directive, although there are structured measures available.
Decisional Aid for Scoring Capacity to Complete an Advance directive has six
domains. These are:
1. Understand the directive
2. Directive use (does the person understand how and when the directive can
be used to influence their future health care)
3. Levels of care (is the person able to define what they consider
intolerable conditions and treatments)
4. Ability to state a choice
5. Appreciation of consequences of choice
6. Consistency of choice
Fazel and others used a vignette approach for assessing
to complete advance directives in 50 elderly volunteers living in the community
(mean MMSE = 27.4) and 50 patients with
dementia (mean MMSE = 15.5) on
first referral from primary
The two vignettes
included first, a situation post-stroke where swallowing difficulties existed
and a decision had to be made whether
or not to accept a naso-gastric feeding
tube; and second, a situation in which the person had to decide whether or not
to investigate
bleeding from the bowel and possibly surgery if they had
Alzheimer’s disease and were living in a nursing home. Each vignette
read to each participant after which a
short semi-structured
interview of nine questions was conducted, asking the participant to give a
summary of the situation, treatment
choice (repeated at the end to check
consistency), other options available, reasons for the treatment and problems,
short and long
term effects of the treatment choice and consequences for the
person and their family. Acceptable answers which might indicate ability
discriminate between the intervention and non-intervention choices include: "to
live," "in order to keep me alive". A score
6 (out of a possible score of 10)
was considered to distinguish those who were competent using validation by
clinical judgment of
competence by two old age psychiatrists. This structured
interview approach is but one way of distinguishing who might be capable
making an advance directive and who might not. The kinds of questions posed by
Fazel and others to assess competence provide
a useful structure for clinicians
assessing patients who wish to make advance directives. Regardless of whether a
structured or non-structured
method is used, the process of assessment must be
individualized, using open ended loosely structured interviews and checking for
consistency as indicated in Box 1 above.
If there is doubt about capacity to make an advance directive, the
person’s wishes should still be sought as it is useful in
circumstances to take a values statement and check with family if this is
consistent with the person’s prior personality
or expressed wishes.
Language should be kept simple, with one idea communicated at time and, if
necessary, reminders, lists, cues
or pictures should be used to facilitate
understanding.
13. 6. 3. 4. Retrospective assessment of capacity to make an advance
When a patient presents with a written advance directive their treating team
should treat it as a properly made and effective document
unless or until there
is some proper basis for believing that it was not properly made or is no longer
in operation.
There is a presumption in law that an adult has capacity. That presumption
can be rebutted by evidence to the contrary. However, it
is not up to the
treating team to go hunting for it unless their suspicions have been aroused by
their own observations or by credible
information. Nevertheless, doubt can
arise because of information coming to hand to indicate that the maker did not
have capacity
at the time the advance directive was made or to indicate that for
some other reason it is no longer in operation. In this situation
it is prudent
not to continue to comply with the advance directive, if it requires the giving
of treatments that will not slow the
dying process, in cases where more active
life-sustaining treatments are medically indicated. The basis for doubt about
the advance
directive must then be investigated quickly and a decision made as
to whether or not the advance directive will be complied with.
The advance
directive cannot be set aside because there are doubts about it on the part of
the treating team, the question of its
status must be resolved.
If there is doubt about the continuing operation of the advance directive, it
is up to those promoting its continuing operation to
show that it remains
If there is no one
who wishes to do this, those proposing treatment contrary to the requirements of
the advance directive must make
honest attempts to resolve the matter and
continue to depart from the requirements of the advance directive only when
their enquiries
show that there are proper grounds for doubting that the person
had capacity when they made the advance directive, or that there
grounds for doubting that the advance directive is still in operation for other
reasons, such as that the person has probably
changed their mind and revoked the
advance directive or that it was made when the maker was under undue influence
and did not reflect
their wishes. As noted earlier, this is where the benefits
of having the making of an advance directive witnessed come into play.
advance directive is in writing and witnessed, particularly if it has been
drafted by a solicitor and signed in their presence,
then there are likely to be
witnesses available to provide information. In any event evidence of such facts
makes it easy to infer
that the advance care directive was made correctly
and the issue of capacity addressed if indeed it arose.
Other information may come from the maker’s general
practitioner’s records or from the nursing notes, medical reports,
family and, if relevant, residential care facilities or other material that the
now treating team has available to them as
to the person’s cognitive or
emotional state around the time the advance directive was made or in relation to
any other reason
why the advance directive should not be acted upon.
If the advance directive is one that is limited to a certain illness or
certain illnesses, doubt may be cast on its validity due to
lack of specificity
or currency because the maker did not anticipate the specific situation that has
now arisen. Concerns can also
arise because fear that following the advance
directive may result in suffering by the patient. These concerns were outlined
in this chapter.
In such cases, commentators have advised doctors to treat according to the best
interests standard while maximizing consensus with
the person’s family.
Others have suggested that withholding treatment in accordance with a legally
invalid advance directive
risks substantial harm to the patient and may
constitute breach of the duty of care and
negligence.
Now back to the requirements to be met before an advance directive will be
given effect to.
13. 6. 4. Requirements to be met before an
advance directive will be given effect to
13. 6. 4. 1. Advance directive applies to the current clinical
circumstances
For an advance directive to be binding it must, on a fair reading, apply to
the clinical circumstances that have arisen. This requirement
can be met by
advance directives which refer specifically to the current condition the person
has and set out how it is to be treated.
It can also be met by advance
directives that are stated in terms of the person’s level of functioning
and what kinds of treatment
they want to have if they have reached certain,
stated levels of functioning. For example, a person may want active and
interventionist
treatment if they are at a certain level of functioning but not
want if their level of functioning has fallen to a lower level. Similarly
person may state in their advance directive that they would not want
resuscitating treatment if such treatment would return them
to a low level of
functioning where they were incapable of looking after themselves or would have
limited cognitive capacities.
It is wise for the makers of advance directives, while they still have
capacity, to discuss them with their general practitioners
or other treating
13. 6. 4. 2. Who has the burden of proving the maker had the capacity to
make the advance directive?
If the maker’s capacity to make the advance directive that has been
produced to be acted upon has not been challenged, and there
are no grounds for
suspicion about its validity, the advance directive should be acted upon without
further ado. However, if it has
been challenged or there are grounds for concern
claiming its validity. Further, as Munby J has pointed out, the burden of
proof is on those who seek to establish the existence,
the continuing validity
or the applicability of an advance
13. 6. 4. 3. The standard of proof
Stewart suggests that in the United States of America the courts have
required a higher standard of proof than the balance of probabilities
“satisfying themselves of the veracity of anticipatory decisions to refuse
treatment”. These standards have been
stated as the “clear and
convincing” standard or the “clear, strong and cogent”
In relation to the
standard of proof in England that applies not only to the maker’s capacity
at the time they made their advance
directive but also to establish the
existence, the continuing validity or the applicability of that advance
directive, Munby J has
Clear and convincing proof is required. I do not suggest
that anything more than the usual civil standard of proof on a balance of
probability is required. But the more extreme the gravity of the matter in issue
so, as it seems to me, the stronger and more cogent
must the evidence
In Australia the issue of the standard of proof required in civil matters was
settled in 1938 and is encapsulated in Dixon J’s
often quoted statement
The truth is that, when the law requires the proof of any fact, the tribunal
must feel an actual persuasion of its occurrence or
existence before it can be
found. It cannot be found as a result of a mere mechanical comparison of
probabilities independently of
any belief in its reality. No doubt an opinion
that a state of facts exists may be held according to indefinite gradations of
and this has led to attempts to define exactly the certainty required
by the law for various purposes. Fortunately, however, at common
law no third
standard of persuasion was definitely developed. Except upon criminal issues to
be proved by the prosecution, it is
enough that the affirmative of an allegation
is made out to the reasonable satisfaction of the tribunal. But reasonable
satisfaction
is not a state of mind that is attained or established
independently of the nature and consequence of the fact or facts to be proved.
The seriousness of an allegation made, the inherent unlikelihood of an
occurrence of a given description, or the gravity of the consequences
from a particular finding are considerations which must affect the answer to the
question whether the issue has been proved
to the reasonable satisfaction of the
tribunal. In such matters "reasonable satisfaction" should not be produced by
inexact proofs,
indefinite testimony, or indirect
inferences.
HE v Hospital NHS Trust
, Munby J summarised the relevant English
law into a series of propositions two of which were:
Where life is at stake the evidence must be scrutinised with especial care.
Clear and convincing proof is required. The continuing
validity and
applicability of the advance directive must be clearly established by convincing
and inherently reliable evidence.
If there is doubt that doubt falls to be resolved in favour of the preservation
This perspective on the civil standard of proof opens up the
possibility that the requirement of reasonable satisfaction in relation
advance directive dealing with treatment and care at the end of life may require
a greater degree of cogent and reliable evidence
than an advance directive
dealing only with other personal decisions.
13. 6. 4. 4. Advance directive must have currency
While advance directives prepared a long time before they are used are
binding if they were made when the maker was competent, it
is nevertheless wise
for makers to review and reconfirm (or change) their advance directives,
particularly if the circumstances of
their health and cognitive and physical
capacities have changed.
While the principle that current advance directives are binding appears
clear, the question of whether an advance directive remains
current can be a
difficult one in practice. In May 2003 Munby J dealt with an urgent application
relating to a 24 year old woman,
AE, who had been brought up as a Muslim, but
who had become a Jehovah’s Witness when her mother had become one. In
2001 AE signed an advance directive clearly indicating that she did not
want to be treated with blood or blood products. In April
2003 she was rushed to
hospital seriously ill and stated that she did not want to die. By early May a
blood transfusion was seen
as essential to prolong her life. Her mother and
brother opposed the blood transfusion while her father pressed for it to be
as soon as possible. Munby J held that AE’s advance directive was no
longer current because, on the evidence before him, AE
had abandoned her faith
as a Jehovah’s Witness, given up its practice and reverted to being a
He then made a
declaration allowing the blood transfusion to take place, at the discretion of
AE’s treating doctors, on best
In a 2004 a man’s treating doctors and the Guardianship Tribunal of New
South Wales were faced with a similar question, but
different facts. The
Tribunal decided to consent to an application for a blood transfusion to be
given to AF, who was the only member
of his family who was a Jehovah’s
Witness. The Tribunal accepted that he had signed an advance directive in the
form of a “no
transfusion card” or “blood card” in 2003
and may have signed others as well. There was no current card signed
Also, there was evidence that recently, when he had been asked, he had indicated
that he wanted a blood transfusion. In addition,
there was conflicting evidence
Stewart has
criticized the Tribunal’s
This question of advance directives and blood transfusions is also discussed
in Chapter 12. 13. 1.
For a case in which a person’s advance directive was held not to have
become operative for statutory reasons see,
Wright v Johns Hopkins Health
Systems Corporation
13. 6. 4. 5. Advance directive must have been made free from undue
The English Court of Appeal case,
, is seen as the leading case
on undue influence and advance
directives.
involved a finding that a pregnant woman admitted to hospital after a motor
vehicle accident had refused blood products
as a result of undue influence
exerted by her mother who was a Jehovah’s Witness. Lord Donaldson MR noted
that patients in
hospitals were entitled seek and receive advice and assistance
from others, particularly family members when making a decision. It
acceptable that a patient be persuaded by others of the merits of a particular
decision, even by strong persuasion. The key thing
is that the decision is the
patient’s decision and not the result of them being overborne. Lord
Donaldson MR then noted matters
that were relevant when considering the effect
of outside influences. These were:
1. The strength of will of the patient. A patient who is very tired, in pain
or depressed will be less able to resist being overborne
than one who is rested,
free from pain and cheerful;
2. The relationship of the “persuader” to the patient – the
influence of parents on their children or of one spouse
on another can be
stronger than in the case of other relationships;
3. Persuasion based on religious beliefs can be compelling particularly if
the arguments based on those beliefs are being used by
someone in a very close
relationship with the
These matters should alert doctors to the possibility that the
patient’s capacity to decide is being overborne and that the
patient may
not mean what they say. But the existence of any of these matters does not
necessarily mean that the person is being
influenced unduly.
Nevertheless, as Darzins and others warn, some older persons who feel they
are an emotional or financial burden to their families
or society might make
choices to accommodate the expectations of others. Some may feel they have an
obligation to agree with choices
family members or other authority figures such
as doctors may make for them and may feel uncomfortable making their wishes
Darzins and others
also caution that when advance directives are offered in institutional settings
or appear to be prepared primarily
at the request of interested third parties
there is a possibility that they are being made because of coercion rather than
In such settings the whole exercise, not just the willingness of the people to
have their capacity assessed, must be
questioned.
13. 6. 5. If an advance directive requests
certain treatment, must doctors carry out that treatment?
In 2004 in the English Queens Bench Division a Mr Burke obtained a set of
declarations, the first of which was:
Any decision by (Mr Burke) while competent, or contained in a valid advance
directive, that he requires to be provided with artificial
nutrition and
hydration is determinative that such provision is in the best interests of the
claimant at least in circumstances where
death is not imminent and the claimant
is not comatose.
The Court of Appeal unanimously set aside these declarations and then went on
to note that the common law did not require a doctor
to provide treatment to a
patient that the patient demanded or requested, or to procure another doctor to
provide such treatment,
when the doctor believed that the treatment was not
clinically indicated. The Court of Appeal then endorsed the following
propositions
submitted to it by the General Medical Council, the organisation
which registers doctors to practice in the United Kingdom:
1. The doctor, exercising his professional clinical
judgment, decides what treatment options are clinically indicated (i.e. will
overall clinical benefit) for his patient.
2. He then offers those treatment options to the patient in the course of
which he explains to him/her the risks, benefits, side effects,
etc involved in
each of the treatment options.
3. The patient then decides whether he wishes to accept any of those
treatment options and, if so, which one. In the vast majority
of cases he will,
of course, decide which treatment option he considers to be in his best
interests and, in doing so, he will or
may take into account other, non
clinical, factors. However, he can, if he wishes, decide to accept (or refuse)
the treatment option
on the basis of reasons which are irrational or for no
reasons at all.
4. If he chooses one of the treatment options offered to him, the doctor will
then proceed to provide it.
If, however, he refuses all of the treatment options offered to him and instead
informs the doctor that he wants a form of treatment
which the doctor has not
offered him, the doctor will, no doubt, discuss that form of treatment with him
(assuming that it is a form
of treatment known to him) but if the doctor
concludes that this treatment is not clinically indicated he is not required
is under no legal obligation) to provide it to the patient although he
should offer to arrange a second
The final proposition, namely that if the doctor concludes that treatment
demanded or requested by a patient is not clinically indicated,
the doctor is
not required to provide it to the patient although the doctor should offer to
arrange a second opinion, is consistent
with the established law in Australia.
In 2000 O’Keefe J has noted that there is undoubted jurisdiction in the
Supreme Court
of New South Wales to act to protect the right of an unconscious
person to receive ordinary reasonable and appropriate - as opposed
extra-ordinary, excessively burdensome, intrusive or futile - medical treatment,
sustenance and support.
2004 Howie J of the same court applied the same approach and allowed medical
treatment that a person’s family wanted continued
to be withdrawn by the
doctors because the treatment was futile, burdensome and, to a degree, intrusive
and it could not be said
the withdrawal of the treatment was not in the best
interests of the person.
Using Advance Care
Directives (NSW)
, NSW Dept of Health, 2005,
www.health.nsw.gov
. Doc GL2005_056 and
Guidelines for end of life care & decision-making Doc GL2005_057. See also
Respecting Patient Choices Program,
www.respectingpatientchoices.org.au.
Natural Death Act
Medical Treatment Act
Medical Treatment (Health Directions) Act
Powers of Attorney Act
Guardianship and
Administration Act
Consent to Medical Treatment
and Palliative Care Act 1995
Alzheimer’s Society
Future medical treatment: advance statements and advance directives
or living wills
www.alzheimers.org.uk
Alzheimer’s Australia Position Paper No.5
Legal Planning and
www.alzheimers.org.au
See for example, Liang, B A,
Health Law and Policy
, Boston, Butterworth Heinemann, 2000, 273;
Urofsky, op cit (footnote 5) 134.
NSW Department of Health
Using advance care directives (NSW)
(2005), GL2005- 056.NSW Department
of Health: North Sydney: 1.
Ibid. pp 7 and 8. See also,
. “The use of advance care planning to guide decisions about
artificial nutrition and hydration”.
Clin Pract.
(2006) 21(2):126-33.
BMA Consent tool kit, card 9
– Advance statements. See,
http//www.bma.org.uk/ap.nsf/Content/Simple+Search+Results+Page?OpenDocument&FreeText=advance%20statements.
United States President’s
Commission for the Study of Ethical Problems in Medicine and Biomedical and
Behavioural Research
, Making Health Care Decisions
, Washington, US
Government Printing Office, 1982, 156-157. See also Alzheimer’s Australia
Discussion Paper 8
Decision making in advance: Reducing barriers and
improving access to advance directives for people with dementia
, May 2006,
www.alzheimers.org.au.
Guardianship Act
Guardianship and Administration Act
s 25(5) and
Guardianship and Administration Act
Guardianship Act
Guardianship and Administration Act
Guardianship and Administration Act
Guardianship
and Administration Act
Guardianship and
Administration Act
(s 110G(4).
Powers of Attorney
Attorney Act 2006
Sommerville, A
“Rememberence of conversations past: oral advance statements about medical
1995; 310: 1663-1665, p 1664.
[1990] USSC 122
110 S.Ct. 2841
, 2857 (1990).
See also Sommerville, op cit (footnote 8) 1665.
NSW Department of Health op
B.”Collective moral imagination: making decisions for person with
J Med Philosophy
(2004) 29,4, p 436
“Family decision making at end of life”.
Support Care.
2005 3(2):131-42.
Garrett-Mayer
. “The accuracy of surrogate decision makers: a systematic
Intern Med.
(2006) 13;166(5):493-7.
, “Families' and physicians' predictions of dialysis patients'
preferences regarding life-sustaining treatments in Japan.”
J Kidney Dis.
2006 Jan; 47(1):122-30.
. “Concordance of preferences for end-of-life care between
terminally ill cancer patients and their family caregivers in Taiwan”.
Pain Symptom Manage.
(2005) 30(6):510-8.
Davis, J.K. (2002)
“The concept of precedent autonomy”
16:114-133.
Gedge E. B.
“Collective moral imagination: making decisions for person with
J Med Philosophy
(2004) 29,4, :435-450.
Ambrose M. Capacity
Assessment for making and Advance Health Directive: the Role of a
Neuropsychologist In : Collier B., Coyne C.,
Sullivan K., (Ed)
Capacity: Powers of Attorney and Advance Health Directives
Federation Press, 146-7.
Hertogh CMPM. End-of-life
care and medical decision making in patients with dementia. In: Burns A (ed)
Standards in dementia care – European Dementia Consensus Network
, London/New York, Taylor & Francis, 2005, 339-54.
Degrazia, D. “Advance
directives, dementia, and the ‘someone else problem’.”, (1999)
Vol 13 no 5, 373, 375.
Treloar A “Advance
directives: Limitations upon their applicability in elderly care”
International Journal Geriatric Psychiatry
(1999) 14, 1039-1043. p
Rapkin BD, Schwartz CE.
Toward a theoretical model of quality-of-life appraisal: implications of
findings from studies of response
Health and quality of life outrcomes
; 2: 14. Hertogh CMPM. End-of-life care and medical decision making in
patients with dementia. In: Burns A (ed)
Standards in dementia care –
European Dementia Consensus Network (EDCON)
, London/New York, Taylor &
Francis, 2005, 339-54.
Loewenstein G
.”Misimagining the unimaginable: the disability paradox and health
care decision making”
(2005) 24 (4 Suppl):S57-62.
“Confirmation of the "disability paradox" among hospice patients:
preservation of quality of life despite physical ailments
and psychosocial
Support Care.
(2003) 1(3):231-7.
Ryan, C J. “Betting on
your life: An argument against certain advance directives”, (1996)
Journal of Medical Ethics
Vol 22 no 2, 95, 96. See also Hope, T.
“Advance directives”, (1996)
Journal of Medical Ethics
Sehgal, A, Galbraith, A,
Chesney, M, Schoenfeld, P, Charles, G and Lo, Bernard. “How strictly do
dialysis patients want their
advance directives followed?”, (1992)
Vol 267 no 1, 59.
Sahm S, Will R Hommel G.
Would they follow what has been laid down? Cancer patients’ and healthy
controls’ views on adherence
to advance directives compared to medical
staff Medical Health Care Philosophy 2005 8, 297-305, p 297.
Lee, M A, Smith, D M, Fenn,
D S and Ganzini, L. “Do patients’ treatment decisions match advance
statements of their preferences”,
The Journal of Clinical
Vol 9 no 3 258, 262.,
Coppola, K M, Bookwala, J,
Ditto, P H, Lockhart, L K, Danks, J H and Smucker, W D. “Elderly
adults’ preferences for life-sustaining
treatments: the role of
impairment, prognosis and pain”, (1999)
Death Studies
Vol 23 no 7,
617. See also, Thompson, T, Barbour, R and Schwartz, L. “Adherence to
advance directives in critical care decision-making:
vignette study”,
Vol 327, 1011.
Winzelberg GS, Hanson L,
Tulsky JA. “Beyond autonomy: diversifying end-of-life decision-making
approaches to serve patients
and families”
J Am Geriatr Soc
53, 1046-150.
Treloar, A Paradigms of
Treloar A “Advance
directives: Limitations upon their applicability in elderly care”
International Journal Geriatric Psychiatry
(1999) 14, 1039-1043. p
Paul Biegler, Cameron
Stewart, Julian Savulescu and Loane Skene “Determining the validity of
advance directives.”
2000; 172: 545-548, p546
Ibid., p 1041.
Hertogh CMPM. End-of-life
care and medical decision making in patients with dementia. In: Burns A (ed)
Standards in dementia care – European Dementia Consensus Network
, London/New York, Taylor & Francis, 2005, 339-54.
Woods B Pratt R.
“Awareness in dementia Ethical and legal issues in relation to people with
Aging and mental health
(2005) 9, 423-429.. p 425.
(1993) New York Alfred AKnopf. p 218-237.
Harvey M. “Advance
directives and the severely demented”
Journal of Medicine and
(2006) 31, 47-64., p52
Dresser R. “Dworkin on
dementia. Elegant theory questionable practice”
Hastings Centre
(1995) 32-38, p 34
Harvey M “Advance
directives and the severely demented”
Journal of Medicine and
(2006) 31, 47-64., p 61
The Role of the Medical
Practitioner in Advance Care Planning – 2006;
http://www.ama.com.au/node/2428
The Role of the Medical
Practitioner in Advance Care Planning – 2006,
http://www.ama.com.au/node/2428
Willmott, L, White, B,
Howard, M, “Refusing Advance Refusals: Advance Directives and
Life-Sustaining Medical Treatment”
[2006] MelbULawRw 7
Parker, M, Stewart,C,
Willmott,L and Cartwright, C, “Two steps forward, one step back: advance
care planning, Australian regulatory
frameworks and the Australian Medical
Association”,
Internal Medicine Journal
37 (2007) 637, 642.
See Sch. 3 Item 1, the
Consent to Medical Treatment and Palliative Care Act 1995
Report upon the Inquiry
into Options for Dying with Dignity
, Social Development Committee, Victorian
Parliament, 1987.
Ibid. (v) – (ix).
Victoria Parliament,
Parliamentary Debates, Legislative Council, 23 March 1988, 296 and 332.
Victoria Parliament,
Parliamentary Debates, Legislative Assembly, 6 May 1988, 2243-2244.
Ibid. 2249. As to these
arguments see, Magnusson, R,
Angels of Death Exploring the Euthanasia
Underground
, Melbourne, Melbourne University Press, 2002, at p 47 and
surrounding pages.
Ibid. 2168. The Government
also claimed the support of the Synod of the Anglican Church, the Salvation Army
and the Catholic Health
Services for its
Bill (No.2)
; see, Victoria
Parliament, Parliamentary Debates, Legislative Council, 23 March 1988, 335-336.
Note also the
Report upon the Inquiry into Options for Dying with
, Social Development Committee, Victorian Parliament, 1987, 91.
For other descriptions of
the history of the
Medical Treatment Act 1988
[2003] VSC 173
, [45]-[71] and Porter, D “Advance directives and
the persistent vegetative state in Victoria: A human rights perspective”
Northern Territory
Legislative Assembly Parliamentary Record, 5
Session,, 17 August 1988, 3537 and 11October 1988 4404-4420.
Ibid. 11 October 1988,
South Australia, Parliament,
Parliamentary Debates, House of Assembly, Wed. 30 November 1994, 1350.
ACT Legislative Assembly
Debates (Hansard), 21 April 1994, 1124.
Ibid. 14 September 1994,
Ibid. 2878.
Ibid. 2878 and 2879.
Powers of Attorney Act
Hansard of the ACT
Legislative Assembly, 21 Sept. 2006, p 3010 and 21 Nov 2006, p 3672.
Queensland Law Reform
Commission,
Assisted and Substituted Decisions
, Report No 49, June
and Appendix B.
Powers of Attorney Act
See also, the Queensland Department of
Justice’s website,
www.justice.qld.gov.au/guardian
and search for advance health directive.
Queensland Parliamentary
Debates , seriatim, 8 October 1997 to 12 May 1998.
Acts Amendment (Advance
Health Care Planning) Bill
Law Reform Commission of
Western Australia, “Medical Treatment for the Dying”, Report of
Project No 84, 1991, 6.
Legislative Assembly of
Western Australia Hansard for 21 June 2006.
See for example, Legislative
Council of Western Australia Hansard for 15 August 2008, pp 4069-4088.
Medical Treatment Act
Ibid. s 5(1).
Ibid. s 3. The power of
attorney must be in the form set out in Schedule 2 of the
Medical Treatment
Ibid. s 5B(1).
Ibid. s 5B(2).
For a different view of the
operation of s 5B(2) of the
Medical Treatment Act
Porter D, op. Cit. (footnote 56), 264-266.
Ibid. s 5B(2) and Schedule
Ibid. s 5C.
Ibid s 5C(3) and (4).
Ibid. s 5D(1).
Ibid. ss 6 and 9.
Re BWV; Ex parte
[2003] VSC 173
, 7 VR 487, [84]-[87] and [91].
Medical Treatment
generally. For another description of the
and how it operates see, Porter, D. op. cit. (footnote 56).
Porter, D. op. cit.
(footnote 56) 259-260. For the
Medical Treatment Act
action, see Brown, m and others, “Advance directives in action in regional
palliative care service: “Road testing”
the provisions of the
Medical Treatment Act 1988
Natural Death Act
Schedule of the
Death Regulations
Natural Death Act
Ibid. s 4(3).
Ibid. s 5(3).
Consent to Medical
Treatment and Palliative Care Act
Ibid. See also
Medical Treatment and Palliative Care Regulations
The Office of the Public Advocate in South Australia provides information on
mental capacity and advance directives; see
www.opa.sa.gov.au.
Consent to Medical
Treatment and Palliative Care Regulations 2004
Consent to Medical
Treatment and Palliative Care Act
Re BWV; Ex parte
[2003] VSC 173
, 7 VR 487, [82]-[91]..
Consent to Medical
Treatment and Palliative Care Act
Guardianship
and Administration Act
(SA) s59. See for example,
Isaac Messiha (by
his tutor Magdy Messiha) v South East Health
[2004] NSWSC 1061.
Ibid. s 10(1) and
Ibid. s 10(2).
Medical Treatment
(Health Directions) Act
Minister has approved a form under s 21 of the
and this form has been
published in the ACT legislation register, www.legislation.act.gov.au.
Ibid. s 7(b) and (c).
Ibid. s 11(1)and(2).
Ibid. s 11(3).
See Thorpe J’s test
[1994] 1 All ER 819
Medical Treatment
(Health Directions) Act
Powers of Attorney
Ibid. Schedule 1.11.
The Margaret
(1858) 166 ER 1174
Dynayski v Grant
[2004] NSWSC 1187.
Hunter and New England Area Health Service v A
[2009] NSWSC
Medical Treatment
(Health Directions) Act
and Dictionary. As to the
meaning of “the reasonable provision of food and water”, see
BWV; Ex parte Gardner
[2003] VSC 173
, 7 VR 487, [82]-[91].
Powers of Attorney
, Chapter 3 Parts 3 and 4 and the
Guardianship and
Administration Act 2000
and Schedules 1, 2 and
Powers of Attorney
s 35(1)(a).
Ibid. Sch 2
Ibid. Sch 2
s 35(2)(b).
Ibid. Sch 2 s 5A.
The approved
form was published in the Queensland Government Gazette 9 January 2004, p 65. It
can be found through the Queensland
Department of Justice website,
www.justice.qld.gov.au.
s 36(2)(a).
and Sch 3..
For the test for capacity
to make an advance health directive see,
Powers of Attorney Act
and for the test for capacity to make an enduring power of
attorney see,
Guardianship and
Administration Act
provision may be intended to overcome some of the difficulties encountered in
NSW that led to the Supreme Court cases
Northridge v Central Sydney Area
Health Service
[2000] NSWSC 1241
50 NSWLR 549
Isaac Messiha (by his
tutor Magdy Messiha) v South East Health
[2004] NSWSC 1061.
question of objection is dealt with in s 67 of the
Ibid. s 63A(3).
Guardianship and Administration Act
Powers of Attorney Act
Guardianship and
Administration Act
Guardianship and
Administration Act
s 110Q(1)(a).
the advance health directive form, see
Guardianship and Administration
Regulations
(WA) Schedule 2.
Ibid ss 100P and
Ibid. s 110Q.
Ibid. s 110RA which was
not in force 4-8-2011.
Ibid. s 110S(1) and
Ibid. s 110S(3).
Ibid. s 110S(4).
Ibid. s 110S(5). Note
that who qualifies as a person’s “person responsible” is set
out at Chapter 12. 8. 4.
Ibid. s 110W.
Ibid. s 110S(6).
Ibid. s 110P.
Ibid. s 110ZJ.
Ibid. s 110T. Enduring
powers of guardianship are dealt with in
Guardianship and
Administration Act
. See Chapter 9.
provision does not appear to be limited to the other Australian States and the
Territories.
. “Development of public health priorities for end-of-life
initiatives”
(2005) 29, 5:453-60.
Respecting Patient
Choices Program,
www.respecting
patientchoices.org.au.
Powers of Attorney
Medical Treatment
Medical Treatment Act
Natural Death Act
Guardianship and
Administration Act
NSW Department of Health,
“Using Advance Care Directives” www.health.nsw.gov.au, p 5.
See for example, Stewart,
C “Advance directives: Disputes and dilemmas” in Freckelton, I and
Petersen, K,
Disputes & Dilemmas
, Sydney, Federation Press, 2006.
NSW Department of Health
op cit (footnote 170) p 10
Guardianship Act
Guardianship and Administration Act
Guardianship and Administration Act
Guardianship
and Administration Act
Guardianship and
Administration Act
Powers of Attorney Act
Guardianship Act
Guardianship and
Administration Act
Guardianship and
Administration Act
Guardianship and
Administration Act
[2009] NSWSC 761
HE v Hospital NHA
[2003] EWHC 1017 (Fam)
Ibid. [34].
In NSW solicitors,
barristers, registrars of Local Courts, overseas-registered foreign lawyers and
persons employed, in a Division
of the Government Service, to enable the NSW
Trustee and Guardian or the Office of the Public Guardian to exercise its
who has completed an approved course of study, and have been approved
by the Chief Executive Officer of the NSW Trustee and Guardian
as eligible
witnesses may witness the signing appointments of enduring guardians, see
Guardianship Act
Guardianship Regulation
cl 4. In Tasmania any adult who is neither a party nor a relative
of a party may witness the signing of such appointments, see
Guardianship and
Administration Act
ss 32(2)(c)
and Sch. 3.
HE v Hospital NHA
[2003] EWHC 1017 (Fam)
Hunter and New England
Area Health Service v A
[2009] NSWSC 761
[1992] EWCA Civ 18
[1993] Fam 95.
Airedale NHS Trust v Bland
[1993] AC 789, 864; Re C
[1994] 1 All ER
R (Burke) v General Medical Council
[2005] EWCA Civ 1003
[2005] EWCA Civ 1003
[2006] QB 273.
(1954) 91 CLR 432
All ER 819.
HE v Hospital NHS Trust
[2003] EWHC
[20] Munby J noted that some propositions are now so well established
in (English) law as no longer to require either justification
or elaborate
citation of authority. The first of these was that a competent adult patient has
an absolute right to refuse consent
to any medical treatment or invasive
procedure, whether the reasons are rational, irrational, unknown or
non-existent, and even if
the result of refusal is the certainty of death.
This matter is
specifically dealt with by McDougall J in
Hunter and New England Area Health
Service v A
[2009] NSWSC 761
British Medical
Association,
Assessment of mental capacity: guidance for doctors and
, (2004) BMJ Books London. P 128-129.
, 822 and 824.
. “Assessment of competence to complete advance directives:
validation of a patient centred approach”.
20;318(7182):493-7.
Cook D, Rocker G,
Marshall J, Griffith L, McDonald E, Guyatt G; “Level of Care Study
Investigators; Canadian Critical Care
Trials Group Levels of care in the
intensive care unit: a research program”
Am Journal Critical Care
2006; 15(3):269-279
Ambrose M., Capacity
Assessment for making and Advance Health Directive: the Role of a
Neuropsychologist In : Collier B., Coyne C.,
Sullivan K., (Ed) “Mental
Capacity: Powers of Attorney and Advance Health Directives ” (2005)
Federation Press p147
See Box 1 below.
Hooper SC Vaughan KJ,
Tennant CC, Perz JM. “Preferences for voluntary euthanasia during major
depression and following improvement
in an elderly population”
. 1997 Feb;16(1):3-7.
., “Dementia, intelligence, and the competence to complete advance
directives”
Jul 3;354(9172):48
Darzins, P, Molloy DW,
Who can decide? The six step capacity assessment process
Adelaide, Memory Australia Press, 2000, p6.
Ibid. 93 and 98.
NSW Health, op. cit.
(footnote 170) p 6.
. “Measuring capacity to complete an advance directive”
Am Geriatr Soc.
1996 June 44(6):660-4.
Ambrose M., Capacity
Assessment for making and Advance Health Directive: the Role of a
Neuropsychologist In : Collier B., Coyne C.,
Sullivan K., (Ed)
Capacity: Powers of Attorney and Advance Health Directives
Federation Press, 2005, p xxx
Darzins, P, and others,
op. cit. (footnote 202) 94-97.
Fazel et al, op cit., pp
HE v Hospital NHS
[2003] EWHC 1017 (Fam)
Treloar A, “Advance
directives: Limitations upon their applicability in elderly care
International”,
Journal Geriatric Psychiatry
(1999) 14, 1039-1043.
Paul Biegler, Cameron
Stewart, Julian Savulescu and Loane Skene, “Determining the validity of
advance directives”
2000; 172: 545-548
HE v Hospital NHA
[2003] EWHC 1017 (Fam)
Stewart, C “Advance
directives: Disputes and dilemmas” in Freckelton, I and Petersen, K, op
cit (footnote 176) pp 42-43.
Cruzan v Director, Missouri Health
[1990] USSC 122
HE v Hospital NHA
[2003] EWHC 1017 (Fam)
Briginshaw v
[1938] HCA 34
HE v A Hospital NHS
[2003] EWHC 1017 (Fam)
Ibid. [47]-[49].
(unreported,
NSW Guardianship Tribunal, matter no 2004/1867, 6 April 2004).
Stewart, C “Advance
directives: Disputes and dilemmas” in Freckelton, I and Petersen, K,
op.cit. (footnote 176) pp 49-50.
For a case in which the former Guardianship and
Administration Board of Victoria did not, in an emergency situation, pursue the
that a person refusing a blood transfusion may have been a
Jehovah’s Witness and may have had an advance directive in the form
“blood card” see,
Qumsieh v Guardianship and Administration
(1998) 14 VAR 46.
See also Stewart’s discussion of that case,
and related matters, in Stewart, C, “Qumsieh’s Case, Civil Liability
and the Right to Refuse Medical Treatment”,
728 A. 2d 166
This case has been overturned by a subsequent Maryland statute, see
Department of Labor
800 A. 2d 757
, 765 (2002).
[1992] EWCA Civ 18
[1993] Fam 95.
Ibid. 113-114.
Darzins, P,et al op. cit.
(footnote 202), 94-97.
Ibid., p 91
R (on the application
of Burke) v General Medical Council
[2004] EWHC 1879
(admin). For the actual
declarations see,
R (on the application of Burke) v General Medical
[2005] EWCA Civ 1003
R (on the application
of Burke) v General Medical Council
[2005] EWCA Civ 1003
Northridge v Central
Sydney Area Health Service
[2000] NSWSC 1241
[2000] NSWSC 1241
50 NSWLR 549.
Isaac Messiha (by his
tutor Magdy Messiha) v South East Health
[2004] NSWSC 1061
[28]. For another
discussion this matter see, Stewart, C “Advance directives: Disputes and
dilemmas” in Freckelton, I
and Petersen, K, op cit (footnote 176) pp
51-52. See also Skene, L, “The Schiavo and Korp cases: Conceptualising
end-of-life
decision-making” (2005) 13
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (666 KB)
PDF format (258 KB)
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter