URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/journals/CICrimJust/2017/18.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 14:50:19
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Colvin, Emma --- "Bail Justices in Victoria: Perceptions and Experiences" [2017] CICrimJust 18; (2017) 29(2) Current Issues in Criminal Justice 123
Bail Justices in Victoria:
Perceptions and Experiences
Emma Colvin
On 20 January 2017 a man drove his car into a crowded pedestrian mall in
Bourke St, Melbourne, Victoria, killing six people and injuring
dozens more. The
alleged perpetrator had been granted bail by a bail justice only hours earlier.
In the wake of this violent event
the state government announced a review of the
bail justice role. Historically, bail justices have been criticised for being
to grant bail, yet there is relatively little written or researched on
bail justices from their perspective. This article is derived
from empirical
research conducted on the bail support system in Victoria from 2010–14,
which included interviews with bail
justices. The research provided bail
justices with an opportunity to discuss their experiences and respond to
criticisms of their
role and raised issues in relation to diversity, training,
decision-making, integrity and specific procedural issues. It concludes
continuing with the role has benefit to Victorians, particularly vulnerable
defendants by offering a therapeutic, pastoral care
approach, although issues
raised in this article need addressing to maintain the integrity of the
bail – bail justice – decision-making –
Victoria – Australia
Introduction
A bail justice, a role exclusive to Victoria, involves a volunteer lay person
who is empowered to grant or refuse bail. The role has
been criticised by key
players in the criminal justice system, such as police, defence lawyers, and
community organisations (Victorian
Law Reform Commission (‘VLRC’)
2007). Key criticisms include doubts about their capacity and suitability to
make decisions,
a reputation for refusing bail, concerns over integrity and
independence of decision-making, inconsistent procedural issues and a
diversity (VLRC 2007). Some critics had gone as far as to seek the removal of
the bail justice role from the bail decision-making
process, arguing the role is
superfluous and bail justices are merely ‘rubberstamping’ police
decisions (VLRC 2007).
Recently, bail justices have come under intense public
scrutiny following the grant of bail on non-related matters to a person
subsequently
charged with causing multiple deaths in Melbourne’s Bourke
Street Mall in January 2017 (Schipp 2017; Willingham & Mills
Following the events in Bourke Street and the subsequent proposed overhaul of
the bail system, the role of bail justices is
under review (Andrews 2017).
Converse to prior criticism, bail justices’ leniency in decision-making is
now a query of this
In April and May 2017, the Hon Paul Coghlan QC delivered advice in two parts
from his government-commissioned review of bail in Victoria
(Coghlan 2017a,
2017b). The State Government accepted all the recommendations made in the first
advice and is conducting a more extensive
review prior to responding to the
second advice. Notably, Coghlan (2017a) advised that Victoria already had an
onerous bail system,
that bail justice decisions were uncontroversial and
conservative, and recommended that the bail justice role remain, although in
more restricted manner. Subsequently, new legislation was passed in June 2017
Bail Amendment (Stage One) Act 2017
(Vic). From June 2018, both
police and bail justices will be restricted from making decisions relating to
offences that fall into
the ‘exceptional circumstances’ category,
which comprise more serious offences, and specifically murder and treason.
State Government intends to introduce a second raft of changes later in 2017. At
the time of writing no further legislative amendments
had been introduced.
There is relatively little research on bail justices generally, and minimal
qualitative data on their role and decision-making processes.
This article
presents the findings of research conducted with bail justices prior to the
Bourke Street incident. Considering the
significance of recent events and the
current ongoing review, this article seeks to provide a measured assessment of
the role and
an understanding of the contribution that bail justices have played
in Victoria’s bail justice system. The article draws on
the experiences
and reflections of bail justices themselves, and observations of a small number
of a bail justice’s decisions.
It concludes by presenting some of the
benefits and limitations of bail justices that should be considered when
reviewing the role.
Who is a bail justice?
The position of bail justice is unique to Victoria (VLRC 2005, p. 37). The
bail justice role emerged from the powers allocated to
Justices of the Peace,
which include the ability to grant bail with or without conditions and remand a
person until the next available
court date under
’). The role is legislated through
Honorary Justices Act 2014
Honorary Justices
’). It creates an out-of-sessions court and essentially adds
another step in the decision-making process between police and
(Sarre, King & Bamford 2006). Bail justices have the power to remand a
person into custody until the next working
day from the application (
In the event a person is arrested on a weekend or public holiday,
the person can appear before an out-of-sessions court for a hearing,
rather than
waiting until the court is in session again. In a climate where remand rates
have been increasing (Australian Bureau
of Statistics 2016; Sentencing Advisory
Council of Victoria 2016) alongside the imperative to uphold the principle of
remand as a
last resort, this additional step in the bail process is designed to
reduce short-term remand imprisonment while awaiting a court
decision. It may
potentially reduce pressure on courts by enabling some people to be bailed
rather than needing a court bail hearing
(VLRC 2005).
The pool of bail justices is comprised of citizen volunteers who have
completed the Bail Justice Training Program (State Government
of Victoria 2016).
Bail justices have no formal legal qualifications yet are expected to understand
and implement complex legislation
(VLRC 2007, p. 24). Volunteers must undertake
regular refresher courses and extracurricular training to keep updated with any
in legislation or practice (Department of Justice 2014; State Government
of Victoria 2016). The position is voluntary and each bail
justice is given
on-call shift work, where he or she must be available to attend police stations
outside court hours (Fox & Deltondo
2015; VLRC 2007).
Demographically, bail
justices are likely to be older males (Coghlan
2017a; VLRC 2005).
As of 2017,
there were 220 registered bail justices, with more than 80 per cent over the age
of 50 and more than three-quarters male
(Coghlan 2017a, pp. 81–2). It is
not known how many of these 220 are active. A second reading speech from the
Honorary Justices
Bill indicated that there were approximately 7000 decisions
made by bail justices each year (State of Victoria 2014, p. 373).
The bail justice position creates a level of accountability for police bail
decision-making and provides a review of decisions before
they advance to a
court hearing (King, Bamford & Sarre 2009). If a defendant is remanded, or
if there is a dispute over the bail
conditions imposed, the matter is then
brought before a court at the earliest opportunity. At court, the defendant has
the opportunity
make a new application for bail and the bail justice’s
decision is reviewed by a magistrate (
application has been made, the magistrate may find the bail justice decision to
remand into custody was appropriate or may
release the defendant on bail. The
magistrate may apply or alter bail conditions in these instances.
Research overview on bail and bail justices
Despite offering a unique perspective, there has been relatively little
research conducted specifically with bail justices. The Criminology
Council funded a significant study of bail in several Australian states, which
canvassed the role of bail justices (Bamford,
King & Sarre 1999; King et al.
2009; Sarre et al. 2006) and in the mid-2000s a comprehensive review of the
was undertaken by the VLRC (VLRC 2005, 2007). As part of this
process the bail justice role was examined and bail justices participated
qualitative research. Outside of this, the voices of bail justices have remained
quiet, despite significant criticism and speculation
on the importance of their
role (VLRC 2007).
King et al. (2009, p. 30) were positive about the bail justice system in that
they saw it added another level of accountability in
the process and provided
more opportunities to grant bail and more accountability of police decisions.
They saw it as promoting a
system that ‘reflects a culture’ of
granting bail (Sarre et al. 2006, p. 4). King et al.’s (2009, p. 31)
demonstrated that a bail justice can be useful in questioning police
decisions and ensuring police have followed legislative guidelines
Despite these positive findings, the bail justice system has been criticised for
many reasons. The VLRC consultation paper
(2005) and final report (2007) into
the review of the
covered these criticisms and made
recommendations.
A key criticism rested with the lack of diversity of bail justices (VLRC
2005). Indeed, the data provided by the VLRC (2005) consultation
demonstrates that bail justices are overwhelmingly older, white men. In 2005,
the Victorian Aboriginal Legal Service called
for specific training relating to
Indigenous defendants, but at the consultation stage of the 2007 bail review
this subject matter
was only dealt with in a general context (VLRC 2005, p. 44).
Indigenous people are significantly over-represented in remand custody
(Australian Bureau of Statistics 2016); therefore, it is particularly important
that there are mechanisms in place to address the
intersection of disadvantage
and bail refusal. There has been an introduction of an Aboriginal Bail Justices
training program as
part of the Aboriginal Justice Agreement (Auty & Briggs
2004, p. 6). Prior to this there had been no Aboriginal bail justices.
Twenty-one Indigenous people undertook the training in the first two intakes.
However, the VLRC consultation paper (2005, p. 42)
noted that, because of
Victoria’s small Indigenous community, an Indigenous bail justice’s
impartiality might be compromised.
The final report of the
VLRC (2007) presents heavy criticism of the
role of bail justices and states they have a reputation for refusing bail at a
rate than magistrates. There was a perception, particularly among defence
counsel, that they do not grant bail (VLRC 2005, p. 39).
Data provided in
the VLRC consultation paper (2005, p. 40) indicates that bail justices refuse
bail in more than 80 per cent of adult
cases and almost 70 per cent of
Children’s Court cases. The VLRC (2007) report also noted a drop in the
granting of bail on
the first application by bail justices during this time,
from 41.6 per cent to 16.13 per cent. In interviews with bail justices it
found that many erred on the side of refusing bail in the knowledge that the
applicant would be brought before the court (VLRC
2005, p. 40). This risk-averse
approach was corroborated by Richards & Renshaw’s research on young
people, bail and remand
(2013, p. 72). Data collated by the VLRC over five years
indicated that in almost 35 per cent of adult applications, and 45 per cent
Children’s Court bail applications, magistrates make alternate decisions
to bail justices (VLRC 2005, pp. 47–8). More
recently, the Coghlan (2017a,
p. 21) review found that bail justices granted bail in less than 15 per cent of
Bail justice decision-making was further criticised by Richards and Renshaw
(2013, pp. 33, 58, 70), whose Australia-wide study found
that bail justices were
influenced by ‘punitive community views’, and that there was
disparity in decisions made by bail
justices and those made by magistrates. This
is an interesting finding and may be understood in conjunction with Booth and
(2009) finding that there is concern from victims of crime that
applicants may be released on bail. This may lead to populist opinions
negative towards the release of applicants on bail (Quilter & Brown 2014).
Participants in the bail review also voiced concerns over procedural issues
(VLRC 2005, p. 46). There is no set process for bail justices
and in effect they
can make up their own way of running an application. Guidelines at the time of
consultation did not include prompts
to check on the welfare of the applicant,
e.g. the presence of suicide risk factors, evidence of drug or alcohol
intoxication (VLRC
2007, p. 95). It was recommended that bail justices have
access to the Magistrates’ Court’s custody management check
The recommendations also note that there should be guidelines in place for bail
justices to report potential police mistreatment
of an applicant.
The VLRC consultation also revealed that submissions from community
organisations, community consultations and defence lawyers raised
concerns that
bail justices’ decision-making may be swayed by police, highlighting that
integrity and independence is an issue
(VLRC 2005). The issue of open justice
was also addressed by the VLRC report (2007, p. 97), which favoured access
to out-of-sessions
hearings but recognised that it might not always be possible
due to the applicant’s demeanour or the layout of the police station.
was not considered a significant issue by the VLRC (2007) because remanded
applicants are seen in court within a relatively
short timeframe.
The 2011 amendments to the
addressed some of these
criticisms, including further clarification on the role of bail justices. This
was a result of concerns highlighted
by the VLRC that 95 per cent of bail
decisions were made by lay people and police rather than trained legal
practitioners (Bamford
1999; VLRC 2007).
McDonnell and Farrell (2012)
advised that the new ‘framework for bail justice system’ was updated
on 1 January 2011 by
amendments to the legislation. Changes stemmed from the
VLRC (2007) report to ensure better efficiency and accountability of the
justice system (VLRC 2007, p. 8). The VLRC (2007) recommendations addressed many
of the above criticisms and suggested additional
training and access to further
support should be provided to strengthen confidence in bail justice
decision-making. Indeed, bail
justices themselves revealed during the VLRC
consultation process that they felt they needed more training, particularly in
to issues of drug and alcohol use, homelessness and cultural diversity
(2007, p. 88).
Therapeutic additions to the range of conditions applied to bail in Victoria
have changed the landscape of magistrates’ bail
decision-making in the
last two decades. These therapeutic bail conditions are recognised as part of
the wave of therapeutic initiatives
implemented in justice systems globally
under the banner of therapeutic jurisprudence (Freiberg 2003; Wexler 2013).
The therapeutic conditions include the implementation of bail support
programs in the Magistrates’ Court of Victoria. These
programs, such as
the Court Integrated Services Programme (‘CISP’) operating in
Melbourne, Sunshine and Morwell and the
CREDIT Bail Support Programme
established at eight other locations (Magistrates Court of Victoria 2015),
provide referral and a case
management support pre-trial to mitigate a
defendant’s risk, such as drug or alcohol use, that may otherwise have
in the defendant being remanded. Therapeutic bail conditions may be set
by the police or magistrates to address perceived needs of
the defendant, in
addition to the traditional collection of conditions, such as surrendering a
passport or regular reporting to a
police station. These conditions range from
ordering a defendant to see a doctor or counsellor to arranging long-term
intensive rehabilitation
programs. The 2013 changes to the
included the addition of ‘attendance and participation in a bail
support service’
(s 5(2A)(g))
that formalised this process in legislation.
While police and magistrates use these therapeutic conditions, it is not known
justices are aware of these services, or if they consider them when
deciding bail applications. This research explores this, as well
experiences of bail justices.
Methodology
This article is derived from data collected as part of a three-year study
into bail support programs in Victoria. Data was collected
during 2011–12.
The research involved observation of 117 bail hearings, including observations
of out-of-sessions hearings
with a bail justice (
=4) and interviews with
key players in the bail/remand process (
=34). The interview participants
=34) consisted of defence lawyers, magistrates and judiciary, and bail
=4). Three of the bail justices participated in a group
interview. Ethics approval was obtained through Monash University Human Research
Ethics Committee. The scope of the research was limited to Victorian bail
support programs. To ensure the privacy and confidentiality
of the research
participants, each person was assigned a pseudonym. Pseudonyms were assigned
based on the role the person played
in the bail support process followed by a
number representing the order in which they were interviewed: for example,
Justice 1’. The data was analysed through Nvivo software and
coded by thematic analysis (Sandelowski 2000).
This article is based on a subset of the data collected through the wider
study: the four interviews with bail justices and the four
out-of-sessions
hearings. Although data collection occurred in 2011–14, the findings are
of use given the current review of
bail justices and recommendations made by the
Coghlan review to the State Government (Coghlan 2017a, 2017b). The small sample
is noted and the study does not claim to make general representations on
the role of bail justices. However, the input from these
interview participants
coupled with the out-of-sessions observations still provides a valuable
perspective from the inside (Crouch
& McKenzie 2006).
Prior to the Bourke Street incident, one of the more significant criticisms
made against bail justices was their reputation for denying
bail (VLRC 2007).
Although this argument was turned around after the Bourke Street incident, with
implications that leniency was
a concern, the Coghlan (2017a) review supports
prior evidence that indicates bail justices are conservative in their
decision-making.
Other criticisms detailed above essentially relate back to this
overarching criticism of bail justices’ decision-making, bringing
question whether their role is necessary or relevant. First, this analysis will
discuss the way the bail justices addressed
their decision-making. Next it will
examine some of the issues raised by the bail justices that address these
criticisms, including
diversity, training, therapeutic bail conditions,
integrity and independence. This discussion demonstrates that a deeper
understanding
of the bail justice role may alleviate some concerns and shows
pathways for improvement of the existing system, rather than abolishing
system altogether.
Bail justices reflect on decision-making
The VLRC consultation (2005) revealed that bail justices are criticised for
being conservative in their decision-making and as such
have a reputation for
denying bail. Bail Justice 3 indicated that not only are they aware of this
reputation but they are made accountable
for their decision-making and feel
pressure to do so, ‘mind you we get beaten over the head if it is seen
that we are remanding
too much’. As bail justices are making decisions
where police have already refused bail (VLRC 2005, p. 39), it is arguable
they are only seeing applications that are high risk. The applications for which
police have denied bail naturally involve applicants
who will have less chance
of being granting bail. Bail Justice 3 corroborated this, saying, ‘The
police have bailed the easy
Bail Justice 4 was surprised by
how many applications he saw where he was not able to grant bail:
I was under the impression when I first started that there would be an equal
amount (of) bails and remands. And I found increasingly
in the last 12 months
that 90% of them are remands. There is only a small percentage of bail, I looked
at every bail option possible
under the sun to grant on bail.
There was a sense of gravity for their role and their comments did not
indicate an inappropriate desire to remand applicants. Bail
Justice 2 commented,
‘The reality of it is it doesn’t matter whether it is one minute or
one day or 100 years, taking
someone’s liberty away is the most serious
thing that you can do in our society,’ He went on to acknowledge his
of the potential for bias in decision-making, stressing the importance
of knowledge and training to be able to overcome bias, saying
understand the police and the various agencies it is too easy to have a
one-sided view of the system’.
Here, the context of the situation
is important, implying that this bail justice may have been harsher in his
decision making until
he became aware of the facts. This contextual
decision-making is redolent of prior research that demonstrated that context
does impact
judicial decision-making (Doerner & Demuth 2012; Kim, Cano, Kim
&Spohn 2014; Leiber & Jamieson 1995).
Bail Justice 1 demonstrated his vested interest in applicants to whom he has
denied bail by attending court to see the person to whom
he had denied bail
appear before the magistrate. The following comment indicates he also believes
that magistrates appear to value
the bail justice stage in the process, as he
has seen them draw on the notes he made during the out of session hearing at the
hearing: ‘Sometimes I even go into court the next day out of concern
for that person and their family. And I listen to how
the magistrate deals with
it and every time I have done that, the magistrate had taken my notes and dealt
with it in a very clever
This comment illustrates his concern for the applicant beyond merely
‘rubberstamping’ a police decision. While the applicant
denied bail, this bail justice is still invested in the applicant’s
wellbeing. This suggests that the bail justice role
is more than just deciding
on bail but provides evidence for a pastoral care aspect to the role. When
looking at this pastoral care
aspect in conjunction with the views of Bail
Justice 2 on the gravity of the decisions facing bail justices, and the fact
that decisions
are made in cases where police bail has already been refused, it
is apparent that for these bail justices the decision to remand
a person is not
taken lightly and therefore their reputation for refusing bail may be
oversimplified.
In all four of the out-of-sessions hearings observed as part of this research
the applicants were refused bail. In case 114, the bail
justice was not able to
grant bail because the applicant had an arrest warrant out and only a magistrate
could grant bail. However,
in the three other cases the bail justice did examine
avenues for bail but was not convinced in any of these cases that the risks
could be minimised through the granting of bail. In case 115 the application
took almost two hours to complete because the applicant
was under 18 years of
age. The bail justice ensured that a representative from Department of Justice
was there to assist and also
looked at overnight placement in a youth bail
hostel as an option before deciding to deny bail. This indicates that the bail
did not merely rubberstamp the police decision and actively try to find
a means to bail the applicant while addressing the presenting
multiple risk
Diversity: Am I the token Sheila?
The issue of gender diversity became immediately apparent during the group
interview. The only female bail justice at the interview
arrived and immediately
said, ‘Am I the token Sheila?’ (Bail Justice 3). This sparked a
conversation about gender diversity,
and lack thereof, among bail justices. Bail
Justice 2 noted that there has always been significant under-representation of
as bail justices. Bail Justice 3 countered that, although there had been
efforts to increase recruitment of women, their ability
to make themselves
available out of hours was impractical for some: ‘The ones with young
families tend to find it difficult,
which is fair enough.’
The average age of bail justices is much higher than the general population.
Many retirees undertake this work; however, the Department
of Justice has a
mandatory retirement age of 70. Bail Justice 1 felt strongly about this:
‘I think it is disappointing that
we have lost so many very good bail
justices because they have reached retirement age and then some considerable
time after a lot
of them retired they were asked to come back.’ Although a
mandatory retirement age exists, because of the large proportion
of retirees
among the bail justice pool, retirements may lead to short staffing and result
in recalling older people, making the
70 retirement age impractical as the
Department of Justice appears unable to attract younger people to the role.
Age and life experience was also discussed as an important part of the bail
justice role. Bail Justice 1 believed that perhaps younger
people might not be
appropriate for this sort of decision-making: ‘The Department has made the
general comment that the demographics
of bail justices should be the same as in
the public. So in other words, if your average age is 23 or something we should
year old [bail justices]. It’s not a kid’s game.’
It is apparent from the comments of these bail justices and the existing data
that many are older, primarily retired, men. While a
lack of diversity may have
been signalled as a problem for the bail justice system, the comments presented
here indicate that the
role itself may be impractical or unappealing to younger
people in the workforce or those caring for young families. The call to
contribute to the community by being available at antisocial hours, unpaid and
highly criticised may not appeal to many people. There
may only be a small pool
of people who have the availability and inclination to undertake this sort of
work. Hence, efforts to increase
diversity may be limited by these barriers. In
reviewing the continuation of the role, there should be a focus on how a broad
of people can be supported to do this sort of work.
The bail justices demonstrated their awareness of the Aboriginal Bail Justice
program and also advised that there were opportunities
to hear from Indigenous
people on relevant issues as part of the ad hoc training programs run by the
Department of Justice:
We have a number of Aboriginal bail justices who are trained under a push
from this association to make the system more representative.
Or have someone to
address us on some of the major cultural awareness parts that we need to take
into consideration when dealing
with Aboriginal accused (Bail Justice 2).
However, the scope of the discussion was limited to this brief
acknowledgement. Consideration of the outcomes of the Aboriginal Bail
training program and cultural competency of bail justices should be a priority
given the significant proportion of Indigenous
people being refused bail in
comparison to non-Indigenous people (Australian Bureau of Statistics 2016;
Denning-Cotter 2008).
This research found that once bail justices had completed their initial
training, further training was piecemeal and inconsistent.
The VLRC (2007)
recommended that bail justices be provided with further training and support,
echoed in submissions to the Coghlan
Review (2017a). The bail justices discussed
the training they had gone through to become a bail justice and also the ongoing
they received to ensure they were updated. Bail Justice 1 believed that
bail justices were well trained in the core elements of the
role: ‘They
[magistrates and judges conducting training with bail justices] actually admit
that their knowledge of the
is minimal compared to many of the
bail justices.’ In addition to initial training, support is offered to
bail justices through
an after-hours phone facility. However, this facility was
not always helpful: ‘There is the after-hours number with the register
that it is hit or miss whether they know the answer. It is the second time I had
to use it the other night on some technicalities
and he didn’t know the
answer’ (Bail Justice 4).
The participants’ comments indicated that potentially not all bail
justices accessed all the training on offer. Apart from the
initial training
undertaken prior to commencing as a bail justice, the participants advised
further training was voluntary and available
on an ad hoc basis, meaning that
not all bail justices received the same training and updates. The Royal
Victorian Association of
Honorary Justices (‘RVAHJ’) provides
ancillary training on special issues, such as young people, Indigenous culture,
and new initiatives by the Department of Justice. Yet not all bail justices are
members of the RVAHJ, and those who are do not necessarily
attend additional
training. From the participants’ comments it appears there is a core group
of bail justices who regularly
engaged with the training, and each other,
contrary to some who appeared to operate in silos. The bail justices interviewed
that those who did not engage with these training sessions missed out
on informal support networks and that they were not necessarily
latest developments.
The participants believed that access to other bail justices through training
sessions addressed feelings of isolation and invisibility.
At times they felt
underappreciated and forgotten, citing exclusion from briefings on new policies
and programs:
Bail Justice 3: ‘Absolutely, we are often forgotten so, aren’t
Bail Justice 4: ‘Don’t get me started.’
Bail Justice 2: ‘We are forgotten because we are the people who turn
Bail Justice 2’s comment here illustrates a current of frustration that
ran throughout the interviews. The participants felt
that being a bail justice
requires commitment and dedication that is not recognised. Being forgotten in
briefings on new policies
and programs is seen as just another measure of the
general underappreciation for the role.
While the bail justices did feel that they were ‘operating in
vacuum’ (Bail Justice 4), they believed more opportunities
to undertake
training and engage with others in the bail system, such as magistrates and
lawyers, would address this feeling of being
left out. Bail Justice 2 thought
there would be particular benefit to increased opportunities to talk to
magistrates as other decision-makers,
to see how they would tackle difficult
decisions or what conditions they would use to target particular risks:
just a matter of if you talk to those people you get to
know about it and what is proper and what isn’t, what does or
In 2014, the
Honorary Justices Act
legislated the training
requirements for bail justices, including some mandatory ongoing training. Given
these participants’
concerns about training, evaluating the impact of
these legislative provisions should be central to review of the role. Given the
potential for providing pastoral care, ongoing training should focus on these
aspects, including cultural competency and therapeutic
initiatives.
Therapeutic bail conditions
The participants were asked about their use of therapeutic conditions such as
attendance at bail support services like CREDIT and
CISP. They displayed
little-to-no knowledge of bail support services and their operation within the
bail system. Those who were aware
of these services did not believe they were
able to consider them in bail decisions.
Bail Justices 2 and 3 expressed a desire to draw upon these services. They
believed they were often criticised for making harsher
decisions than
magistrates and referenced their reputation for never granting bail, which is
mirrored in bail literature (Richards
2013; VLRC 2007).
refusal was also evident during the four observations of out-of-session court
hearings that were conducted for this research.
In these cases (114, 115, 116
and 117), the bail justice, while looking at all options available to him to
grant bail, did not believe
that the risks presented by the applicants could be
addressed and thus was reluctant to grant bail. He did not grant bail in any
the cases witnessed. In case 115, where a young person was remanded, the bail
justice had tried to find more suitable housing
to alleviate his concerns that
the applicant might offend on bail, while negating the need to remand him;
however, the Central After
Hours Assessment and Bail Placement Service
(‘CAHABPS’) was unable to provide a bed for the night and so the
was remanded. In cases 116 and 117 the applicants had histories of
drug use. In Case 117 the police informant believed the applicant
was under the
influence of drugs but was not part of a drug program. The bail justice was
reluctant to grant bail but in the absence
of a means to deal with the
intoxication and strength of evidence against the applicant he was denied bail.
This may have been a
situation where a bail justice could have referred the
applicant to a drug program.
Initially, during the group discussion, two of the bail justices were dubious
a person’s needs
and appropriateness of services; however, after discussing what services and
referrals were available they
did believe that there was potential use for them.
Bail Justice 3 believed that enabling them to draw on services would be
‘I would think that would make the whole [system], not just the
CISP programme there are many others that would benefit to
across-the-board.’
Bail Justice 4 saw the potential usefulness of
bail support service conditions but was cautious about whether it was practical.
believed that it would only work if all bail justices were kept up to date
with service information and completed adequate training.
Young people who experience homelessness and inappropriate housing are often
refused bail (Boyle 2009; Stubbs 2010). Support services,
such as the CAHABPS,
may provide advice to bail justices on bail support for young people making bail
applications, including housing
assistance (Department of Human Services 2013).
The bail justices had mixed opinions as to how useful this service was to them.
Justice 2 was negative towards the useful impact of this service, but Bail
Justices 3 and 4 remained optimistic about it. In Case
115, mentioned above,
CAHABPS were present at the 15-year-old boy’s application but were unable
to assist with providing appropriate
accommodation. When refusing bail, the bail
justice asked, ‘What is the guarantee that he won’t go out tonight
further offending?’ In his opinion, the ability to draw on
CAHABPS was not particularly useful as they often could not provide
assistance needed to remove the need to refuse bail.
This discussion reveals another potential benefit of the bail justice role.
The use of therapeutic bail conditions may divert more
people away from remand
imprisonment by reducing bail refusal rates. However, arguably, only a very
small proportion of bail decisions
may have been influenced by the availability
of support services. Yet if there are some people who may be diverted from
remand imprisonment
through these therapeutic mechanisms then not only does
remand imprisonment reduce, but it also removes the need for that person
attend court. This further alleviates the burden on the courts.
The addition of
in 2013 implies that bail
justices are able to draw on bail support services as a bail condition. These
interviews took place before
this addition; however, given the concerns raised
by the participants, coupled with their comments on training, further review of
the role should consider whether bail justices have used bail support service
attendance conditions since that time and what training
they have received
relating to these services. The increase in remand rates in recent years and the
high bail refusal rates of bail
justices indicate that ability to draw on
therapeutic conditions may not be diverting people from remand imprisonment.
Integrity and independence
The bail justices made some interesting observations on the issue of their
integrity and independence of their decision-making. It
was clear from the
interviews that the bail justices felt they added a valuable step in the bail
process by acting as independent
observers of the police treatment of the
applicant. Bail Justice 3 said:
I figure it is a really great system in that, I’m not putting the
police down, but it kind of keeps the police honest. And that
person in custody
has someone other than the police make a decision about their bail. And I think
they are often quite happy to see
someone other than the police and that you are
an independent person.
Bail Justice 2 added: ‘[T]he system itself has failings but it is
actually overall a good system.
It works to make sure that the police aren’t the accuser and the jailer
which is the basis of our society’.
While it is commendable that the bail justices exercised a keen awareness of
the importance of integrity and independence in their
decision-making, it was
important to unpack this further by asking how they managed their independence.
Bail Justice 1 exercised
care in his dealings with the police and illuminated
some more dubious practices that had occurred in the past:
It was something that we were told to be very careful about. Instructions are
that we don’t have deep and meaningful conversations
with the police
before the hearing ... So there are some bail justices that open invitations and
they were getting picked up by the
police and brought to the court. These days
that is regarded as inappropriate. And that is one of the reasons for it. So
they don’t,
if the informant comes and picks you up in a car and takes you
to the court then he chews your ear about how bad this person is or
But no-one ever tries that on me. I don’t know about anyone else. But I
suspect it is not an issue.
This bail justice is keenly aware of the problematic nature of becoming too
close to the police and, although he implies these practices
are relegated to
history, it does not mean that this is not still occurring. It would not be
appropriate for police and bail justices
to appear to be on the same
‘side’ and it is important that all parties are aware and reminded
of the importance of the
independence of the bail justice decision.
During the out-of-sessions observations the bail justice reiterated that he
did not like to talk to the police before a hearing a
case because he did not
want to be influenced by the police case as it has not yet been heard in a
court. However, in one of the
out-of-sessions hearings the bail justice was
reluctant to remand the applicant, but was concerned about the risk he posed to
community. In this case he asked the police for more details on the case and
the strength of evidence against the applicant. Based
on this he did refuse
bail. He did stress that this was not common practice for him and that he only
took this action once he had
exhausted other avenues.
It is clear the bail justices feel they add integrity and accountability to
the process and indeed felt that they had achieved this
in many cases. Some of
the bail justices, such as Bail Justice 1, demonstrated an acute awareness of
the importance of their independence.
This does counter criticisms that bail
justices just do what the police say to some extent.
Despite VLRC (2007, p. 96) recommendations that there should be guidelines in
place for bail justices to report potential police mistreatment
of an applicant,
there is not much information about how bail justices might maintain integrity
or the problematic nature of the
situation of being an independent
decision-maker while in the police station environment, surrounded and observed
by police. Bail
Justice 3 alluded to the difficulty of this when she said,
‘Some interesting things happen in the bail hearing, the way the
stand, whether they are holding the capsicum spray behind
Out-of-sessions bail hearings are supposed to be an open court (except in
specific cases where the court would ordinarily be closed
such as the
Children’s Court). The VLRC report did flag that this might be an issue
because police stations may not be set
up in a way that enables observations by
the public or media. While architecturally this may still be an issue, the bail
did not appear to experience any problems with access to observers.
Bail Justice 4 said, ‘I have taken a law student with me
didn’t see anything wrong with that as an observer.’ Bail Justice 2
had also brought observers in to see the process
without obstruction of access:
‘I’ve had a friend in the car and I have been called and I’ve
said to come in. As
I said it’s an open court.’
As a researcher, I could access out-of-sessions hearings easily once I got an
introduction to the bail justices. I accompanied the
bail justice and my
presence was not questioned. We took care to explain up front who I was and why
I was there. In each case we
asked permission of the police and the applicant
and it was given without hesitation. Each of the hearings was held in a
access area of the station in an interview room, but this did not
pose a problem in terms of giving me access. Perhaps my status
as a researcher
legitimised my presence or perhaps being accompanied by a bail justice was
enough legitimacy that was needed for
those involved. It is not clear whether
members of public or the media would have such easy access.
Overall it appears that bail justices are keenly aware of the need to be
independent and their role may add a level of accountability
to the police
treatment of bail applicants. However, there have been less acceptable practices
in the past, where police may not
have respected the independence of the bail
justice, and the bail justice has allowed themselves to become partial to the
point of view. While it is not clear if these practices persist, it is
imperative that they do not occur. All parties should be mindful
of this and it
should be reinforced frequently. While there was no evidence that police exerted
pressure on bail justices, the intimidation
of the situation, as alluded to by
Bail Justice 3, is something for the police to be educated about. Bail justices
should be provided
with support and training on how to handle these situations.
Contrary to some criticism, this research finds that the bail justice role is
more complex than just ‘rubber stamping’.
This research provided the
opportunity to examine criticisms of the bail justice role from the perspective
of bail justices and gave
them the chance to contextualise their role. Although
the role persists, its long-term future is not guaranteed.
This article finds that the bail justice role has the potential to deliver
pastoral care to defendants under police arrest and provides
an independent
observer to those in police custody. As such, bail justices play a therapeutic
role. There is benefit to continuing
with bail justices in Victoria.
The bail justices who participated in this research, in line with Sarre et
al.’s (2006) research, did believe that they performed
an important
function in the bail system, particularly by adding accountability and scrutiny
of the police role. They were aware
of the criticism for bail refusal but did
not believe they were overly conservative in their decision-making, instead
believing they
were unfairly judged as they had the ‘hard cases’.
Once the new legislative provisions are in force and the bail justice
restricted to exclude more serious offending, bail justice refusal rates may
change, as arguably the cases less likely to
result in bail will no longer be
part of a bail justices’ remit. This will provide a renewed opportunity to
assess whether
bail justices are overly conservative, by excluding these
‘hard cases’. Ongoing monitoring and evaluation will be imperative
Bail Amendment (Stage One) Act 2017
takes effect.
This article demonstrates that there is value in keeping the bail justice
role. Bail justices add a pastoral care role to the process
and, as such,
practice therapeutic jurisprudence. They have the potential to deliver fair and
just outcomes to Victorians, particularly
to vulnerable defendants. The ongoing
inquiry should consider the issues raised in this discussion when assessing the
continuation
of the role. In particular, if the role is to continue, then
addressing issues of diversity, training, use of bail support service
conditions, integrity and independence of bail justices is imperative to
improving the role and ensuring its benefit is
realised to its maximum
potential. As such, the findings presented here are of value to the Victorian
Government as it considers
the recommendations of the Coghlan Review, and also
to other jurisdictions who may look to the Victorian experience when considering
their own bail systems.
Legislation
Bail Act 1977
Bail Amendment Act (Stage One) Act 2017
Honorary Justices Act
Andrews, D 2017,
Major shake up of Victoria’s bail system
release, 23 January 2017.
Australian Bureau of Statistics 2016,
Prisoners in Australia
Australian Bureau of Statistics, Canberra.
Auty, K & Briggs, D 2004, ‘Koori Court Victoria — Magistrates
Court (Koori Court) Act 2002’,
Law, Text, Culture
Bamford, D, King, S, & Sarre, R 1999,
Factors affecting remand in
custody: a study of bail practices in Victoria, South Australia and Western
, Criminology Research Council.
Booth, T & Townsley, L 2009, ‘The process is the punishment: the
case of bail in New South Wales’,
Current Issues in Criminal
vol. 21, no. 1, pp. 41–58.
Boyle, K 2009, ‘“The more things change ...”: bail and the
incarceration of homeless young people’,
Current Issues in Criminal
vol. 21, no. 1, pp. 60–78.
Coghlan, P 2017a,
Bail review: first advice to the Victorian
State Government of Victoria, Melbourne.
Coghlan, P 2017b,
Bail review: second advice to the Victorian
State Government of Victoria, Melbourne.
Crouch, M & McKenzie, H 2006, ‘The logic of small samples in
interview-based qualitative research’,
Social Science Information
vol. 45, no. 4, pp. 483–99.
Denning-Cotter, G 2008,
Bail support in Australia
, Indigenous Justice
Clearinghouse,
Department of Human Services, Victoria 2013,
Central After Hours
Assessment and Bail Placement Service (CAHABPS)
viewed 14 May 13,
http://www.dhs.vic.gov.au/__data/assets/pdf_file/0004/
582160/Revised-CAHABPS-factsheet-Jul-2010.pdf.
Department of Justice, Victoria 2014,
Code of conduct for bail justice and
acting bail justices in Victoria
, viewed 2 December 2017,
http://assets.justice.vic.gov.au/justice/resources/94fdc4fb-d815-4f62-b889-444d92bd63cb/code-of-conduct2014.pdf.
Doerner, J & Demuth, S 2012, ‘Gender and sentencing in the Federal
Criminal Justice Policy Review
vol. 25, no. 2, pp.
Fox, R & Deltondo, N 2015,
Victorian criminal procedure: state and
federal law
, 14th edn, Monash University Law Book Co-operative, Clayton,
Freiberg, A 2003, ‘Therapeutic jurisprudence in Australia: paradigm
shift or pragmatic incrementalism?’,
Law in Context
, vol. 20, no.
2, pp. 6–23.
Kim, B, Cano, M, Kim, K, & Spohn, C 2014, ‘The impact of
States v. Booker
Gall/Kimbrough v. United States
on Sentence
Crime and Delinquency
vol. 62, no. 8,
pp. 1072–94.
King, S, Bamford, D, & Sarre, R 2009, ‘Discretionary
decision-making in a dynamic context: the influences on remand decision-makers
in two Australian jurisdictions’,
Current Issues in Criminal
vol 21, no. 1, pp. 24–40.
Leiber, M & Jamieson, K 1995, ‘Race and decision making within
juvenile justice: the importance of context’,
Journal of Quantitative
Criminology
vol 11, no. 4, pp. 363–84.
McDonnell, M & Farrell, J 2012, ‘Tough, tougher, toughest? A new
government’s approach to sentencing laws in Victoria’,
Alternative Law Journal
vol 37, pp. 238–43.
Magistrates’ Court of Victoria 2015,
Annual Report
, Magistrates’ Court of Victoria, Melbourne.
Quilter, J & Brown, D 2014, ‘Speaking too soon: the sabotage of
bail reform in New South Wales’,
International Journal for Crime,
Justice and Social Democracy
vol 3, no. 1, pp. 73–97.
Richards, K & Renshaw, L 2013,
Bail and remand for young people in
Australia: a national research project
, Australian Instutite of Criminology,
Sandelowski, M 2000, ‘Whatever happened to qualitative
description?’,
Research in Nursing and Health
vol 23, pp.
Sarre, R, King, S & Bamford, D 2006, ‘Remand in custody: critical
factors and key issues’,
Trends and Issues in Crime and Criminal
vol. 310, no. 1, pp. 1–6.
Schipp, D 2017, ‘No minimal formal qualifications, apply online:
Victoria’s bail justice system’,
(online), viewed 2
November 2017,
http://www.news.com.au/national/crime/no-minimal-formal-qualifications-apply-online-victorias-bail-justice-system/news-story/b240851538d3e443e91e16ad4ac0e390.
Sentencing Advisory Council of Victoria 2016,
Victoria’s prison
population 2005 to 2016
, Sentencing Advisory Council of Victoria,
State Government of Victoria 2016, ‘Become a justice of the peace or
bail justice’, viewed 2 November 2017,
http://www.justice.vic.gov.au/utility/volunteering/become+a+justice+of+the+peace+or+bail+justice.
State of Victoria 2014,
Parliamentary debates: Legislative Assembly
Book 2, p. 373.
Stubbs, J 2010, ‘Re-examining bail and remand for young people in
The Australian and New Zealand Journal of Criminology
vol 43, no. 3, pp. 485–505.
Victorian Law Reform Commission 2005,
Review of the
: consultation
Victorian Law Reform Commission, Melbourne.
Victorian Law Reform Commission 2007,
Review of the
report summary
Victorian Law Reform Commission, Melbourne.
Wexler, D 2013, ‘New wine in new bottles: the need to sketch a
therapeutic jurisprudence “code” of proposed criminal
processes and
practices’,
Arizona Summit Law Review
, vol 7, pp. 463–81.
Willingham, R & Mills, T 2017, ‘Bourke Street tragedy: bail laws
will change if needed, says Daniel Andrews’,
viewed 2 November 2017,
http://www.theage.com.au/victoria/bourke-street-tragedy-bail-justice-system-must-be-scrapped-says-police-associations-ron-iddles-20170122-gtw7ih.html.
Lecturer, Centre for Law and
Justice, Charles Sturt University, Panorama Avenue, Bathurst NSW 2795,
Australia. Email: ecolvin@csu.edu.au.
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (408 KB)
PDF format (679 KB)
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter