URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/journals/MqJlBLaw/2008/9.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 15:20:59
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Overland, Juliette --- "Towards Better Deterrence of Securities Fraud: Promoting Consistency in Sentencing Insider Traders" [2008] MqJlBLaw 9; (2008) 5 Macquarie Journal of Business Law 191
Towards Better Deterrence of Securities Fraud: Promoting Consistency in Sentencing Insider Traders
I INTRODUCTION
II What is Insider Trading?
In essence, insider trading occurs when a person trades in financial products whilst in possession of price-sensitive information
which is not publicly available. The elements of the insider trading offence, which are set out in detail in
sections 1042A
Corporations Act 2001
(Cth),4 can broadly be summarised as follows:
III The Need for Consistency
IV Prescribed Sentencing Criteria for Convicted Insider Traders
V Criteria Actually Considered when Sentencing Convicted Insider Traders
A The Amount of Profit Made, or the Amount of Money Wagered
B The Manner in which the Inside Information was Acquired
C The Extent to which there was a Breach of Confidence by the Offender
D The Relationship the Offender had with the Relevant Company
E The Relationship the Offender had with the Securities Industry
F The Character of the Offender
G Personal Circumstances of the Offender
H Resulting Hardship that might be caused to the Family of the Offender
I The Manner in which the Trial was Conducted, including whether the Offender Pleaded Guilty
J Expressions of Remorse or Contrition by the Offender
K Whether the Offender Accepted a Pecuniary Penalty Order Application
L Any Delay of the Prosecution by the Relevant Authorities
M Any Extra-Curial Punishment
N The Prospects of Rehabilitation of the Offender
O The Need for Specific and General Deterrence
VI Judicial Comparisons and Inconsistencies
VII Imprisonment
VIII Sentencing Guidelines
A “Benchmark” Sentence for Convicted Insider Traders
B Mitigating Factors to be taken into Consideration
C Aggravating Factors to be taken into Consideration
D Factors to be Given Limited Consideration
E Is the Sentence Consistent and Appropriate for the Purposes of Specific and General Deterrence?
IX Conclusions
Towards Better Deterrence of Securities Fraud:
Promoting Consistency in Sentencing Insider Traders
JULIETTE OVERLAND
With relatively few successful prosecutions and convictions for insider
trading in Australia, the effectiveness and appropriateness
of insider trading
laws continue to be questioned. Insider trading is widely recognised as a factor
which reduces investor confidence
and undermines the integrity of securities
markets. Consistent sentences for convicted insider traders could assist in
other potential offenders, and help to protect against this type of
securities fraud. However, there are demonstrable inconsistencies
sentences imposed – sentences vary from small fines, to three years
imprisonment, with many variations in between. Some
convicted insider traders
are sentenced to full-time imprisonment, whilst others receive periodic
detention or suspended sentences.
Little explanation is available for such
variation and inconsistency. This paper reviews all sentences imposed on
convicted insider
traders in Australia, and considers the wide range of
penalties imposed. The factors considered most relevant to sentencing convicted
insider traders are identified and analysed. Action is recommended to ensure
greater consistency of sentences in the future, and
thus assist in providing a
greater deterrent and protective effect against insider trading.
INTRODUCTION
Insider trading has a reputation as an offence which is extremely difficult
to successfully prosecute. Various reasons are proffered
for this difficulty
– obstacles to detection of insider trading; the complexity of insider
trading laws and interpretational
difficulties; limited judicial consideration
of the insider trading laws and inconsistent judicial interpretation; and in
particular,
the difficulty in proving the knowledge elements of the offence and
satisfying the burden of proof.
Since insider trading was first prohibited under statute in Australia, there
have been only thirteen successful
convictions.
For the offenders who
have been convicted of insider trading, a wide variety of penalties have been
imposed with notable inconsistencies.
These inconsistencies arguably undermine
attempts to deter other potential offenders in the future, with a resulting loss
of confidence
in the integrity of Australian securities markets. In this
article, all available cases in which a conviction for insider trading
obtained are examined, and the resulting sentences compared and
The factors considered to
be most relevant in the determination of the appropriate sentence will be
identified and compared. The
level of consistency between the sentences will be
described, and the inconsistencies analysed in detail. This article will
with recommendations for a suggested set of sentencing guidelines for
insider trading cases, aimed at improving consistency in sentencing
resulting deterrent value of such sentences.
II What is Insider
In essence, insider trading
occurs when a person trades in financial products whilst in possession of
price-sensitive information
which is not publicly available. The elements of the
insider trading offence, which are set out in detail in sections 1042A and 1043A
Corporations Act
can broadly be
summarised as follows:
(a) a person possesses certain information;
(b) the information is not generally available;
(c) the person knows (or ought reasonably to know) that the information is not
generally available;
(d) if the information were generally available, a reasonable person would
expect it to have a material effect on the price or value
of certain financial
(e) the person knows (or ought reasonably to know) that if the information were
generally available, a reasonable person would expect
it to have a material
effect on the price or value of those financial products; and
(f) whilst in possession of the information, the person trades in those
financial products (that is, buys or sells those financial
products) or procures
another person to do so.
III The Need for Consistency
A general sentencing principle is that similar cases should have similar
Consistency in sentencing
is considered to be important in order to maintain public trust and confidence
in the judicial process,
as well as to deter potential offenders in the
However, there is clearly a
distinction to be made between consistency in approach and consistency in
outcome. Consistency in approach
- where the same factors are considered and
given similar weight – is the High Court of Australia’s preferred
interpretation
of the “consistency” which must be aimed for when
passing sentence.
Notwithstanding
this interpretation, it is accepted that a consistency in approach should also
lead to more consistency in
Of the thirteen people convicted for insider trading in Australia, a notable
variety of sentences have been imposed, as set out in
the table below. In this
paper, it will be shown that the large discrepancies in the various sentences
for these convicted insider
traders are not always reflective of circumstances
that were subjectively very different but are, on occasion, evidence of
inconsistent
judicial approaches to sentencing in these difficult cases.
Sentence imposed
Imprisonment for 3 months, plus imposition of a pecuniary penalty order of
Imprisonment for 18 months, to be served periodically, plus a fine of
A fine of $20,000.
Imprisonment for 14 months, with release on recognizance after 8 months,
plus a pecuniary penalty order of $29,356.02 accepted.
Imprisonment for 26 months, with release on recognizance after 18 months,
plus a fine of $100,000.
Imprisonment for 26 months, with release on recognizance after 20 months,
plus a fine of $100,000.
Imprisonment for 9 months, to be served periodically, plus a fine of
Imprisonment for 18 months, suspended, plus a fine of $20,000.
Imprisonment for 18 months, with release on recognizance after 3 months,
plus a pecuniary penalty of $280,349.54 accepted.
Community service for 350 hours, a fine of $30,000, plus a pecuniary
penalty order of $37,225.75 accepted.
Imprisonment for 30 months, to be served periodically, with release on
recognizance after 12 months, plus a pecuniary penalty order
of $586,000.77
Imprisonment for 23 months, to be released on recognizance after 12 months.
Imprisonment for 15 months, to be served periodically.
A fine of $8,000, plus a pecuniary penalty order of $4,086.80 accepted.
IV Prescribed Sentencing Criteria for Convicted
Insider Traders
Section 16A(1)
Crimes Act 1914
provides that, when
sentencing federal offenders,
the Court must make an order that is appropriate in all the circumstances.
Section 16A(2)
then sets out specific criteria of which
take account:
(a) the nature and circumstances of the offence;
(b) any other offences that are required or permitted to be taken into account;
(c) any course of conduct of which the offence forms part;
(d) the personal circumstances of any victim of the offence;
(e) any injury, loss or damage resulting from the offence;
(f) the degree to which the offender has shown contrition;
(g) whether the offender pleaded guilty to the offence;
(h) the degree to which the offender co‑operated with law enforcement
(j) the deterrent effect that any sentence may have on the offender;
(k) the need to ensure that the offender is adequately punished;
(m) the character, antecedents, age, means and physical or mental condition of
the offender;
(n) the prospect of rehabilitation of the offender; and
(p) the probable effect that any sentence being considered would have on any of
the offender's family or dependants.
The extent to which these criteria are considered in cases concerning the
sentencing of convicted insider traders, and the weight
attached to these
criteria, will be considered later in this article.
V Criteria Actually Considered when Sentencing
Convicted Insider Traders
Notwithstanding the contents of
, a detailed
review of all sentences given to convicted insider traders in Australia reveals
that the following are the criteria that
have most commonly been taken into
account in the various cases:
(a) the amount of the profit made;
(b) the amount of money wagered;
(c) the manner in which the inside information was acquired;
(d) the extent to which there was a breach of confidence by the offender;
(e) the relationship the offender had with the company in whose financial
products the unlawful trading occurred;
(f) the relationship the offender had with the securities industry;
(g) the character of the offender;
(h) personal circumstances of the offender;
(i) resulting hardship which might be caused to the offender’s family;
(j) the manner in which the trial was conducted, including whether the offender
pleaded guilty;
(k) expressions of remorse or contrition by the offender;
(l) whether the offender had accepted a pecuniary penalty order
application;
(m) any delay in the prosecution by the relevant authorities;
(n) any extra-curial punishment;
(o) the offender’s prospects of rehabilitation;
(p) the need for specific deterrence; and
(q) the need for general deterrence.
The following table provides an overview of the cases which took each of
these various criteria into account. The more detailed table
set out in Appendix
A to this article provides more information about the extent to which the
various criteria were considered.
Relevant Criteria
Amount of profit made
Amount of money wagered
Manner in which the information was acquired
Any breach of confidence
Relationship with the relevant company
Relationship with the securities industry
Character of the offender
Personal circumstances of the offender
Any hardship to the offender’s family
Manner in which the trial was conducted and guilty plea
Any expression of remorse or contrition
Acceptance of pecuniary penalty order
Any delay in prosecution
Any extra-curial punishment
Prospects of rehabilitation
Specific deterrence
General deterrence
Each of these criteria will now be reviewed in turn, to consider the
relevance and weight placed on them judicially when determining
a sentence, and
to consider any inconsistencies which may exist between the cases.
A The Amount of Profit Made, or the Amount of Money
Amount of money wagered
Amount of profit made
$2,000,000.
$139,226.42.
No money wagered - shares sold.
No money wagered – shares sold.
$280,349.54 loss avoided.
$458,580.24.
No money wagered – shares sold.
$215,000 loss avoided.
No money wagered – shares sold for $41,108.40.
Sale of shares to avoid loss of $7,352.40.
The amount of money wagered or profit made by a convicted insider trader can
properly be characterized as being part of the nature
or circumstances of the
offence – criteria specifically to be considered by the Court when passing
sentence, pursuant to
Some of the cases have tended to emphasize the amount of money actually
whilst others focused
more on the amount of profit which was made or the loss
In a general sense, it
can be suggested that the larger the amount of money involved, the greater the
penalty imposed.
The cases with three of the heaviest sentences of imprisonment handed down
Hannes’ case
- 26 months’ imprisonment;
– 30 months’ periodic imprisonment; and
– 23 months’ imprisonment) are also the three cases with
the greatest overall profits made or losses avoided. In the
context of the
amount wagered, all offenders who wagered more than $60,000 have received some
form of custodial sentence.
Hannes’ case,
the profit of $2,000,000 was not actually
received by the offender due to the intervention of the authorities, but it was
such a profit would put this case into the worst category of such
By contrast, in
Rivkin’s case
, the fact that the offender made only a relatively
modest profit of less than $3,000 was considered to be a mitigating factor in
determining sentence.
Doff’s case
, the trial judge expressed the view that the
amount of money wagered was a more important indicator of criminality than the
profit made.
comparison was made with
Rivkin’s case
the trial considered Mr
Doff’s criminality to be less than that of Mr Rivkin because he ventured
less than Rivkin, even though
he made a larger overall
However, this concept
has not been considered in any of the other cases examined.
B The Manner in which the Inside Information was
Manner in which the inside information was acquired
Gained access through employment at NCSC to compulsorily acquired company
information.
Gained access from father, a director of the relevant company.
Gained access through employment, as senior employee of merchant bank.
Informed incidentally by CEO of relevant company, while acting in a private
capacity and without actively seeking out information.
Gained access through position as managing director of relevant
Gained access through employment as finance director of relevant
Was informed incidentally by CEO of relevant company, while acting in
professional capacity, but without actively seeking out information.
Gained access through employment by company in negotiations with relevant
Gained access through employment as director of relevant company.
Gained access through engagement as media relations consultant to relevant
Gained access through employment as research analyst with stock-broking
The manner in which the relevant inside information was acquired by the
offender was considered to be relevant in six of the cases
Firns’ case
Doff’s case
Frawley’s case
Hannes’ case
McKay’s case.
In particular, in
Hannes’ case
fact that the information was acquired in the course of their employment, where
they regularly dealt with confidential information,
was considered an
aggravating factor. Similarly in
, the fact that the offender sought
to take advantage of information acquired due to his family relationship with a
director of the
relevant company was viewed
negatively.
By contrast, in
Doff’s case,
it was considered to be a factor in
mitigation that the offender came across the information incidentally, without
seeking it out
– even though Mr Doff was acting in a professional capacity
at the time. However, in many of the other cases, offenders did
not actively
seek out information, but merely came across it in the course of their
employment.
, Barr J even stated that the circumstances by which Mr Doff came by the
information were less serious than they were for Mr Rivkin,
even though they
both came across the information at the same time as a result of a conversation
with a prospective buyer of Mr Rivkin’s
house, and Mr Rivkin was not
acting in a professional role.
Rivkin’s case
is the only one in which the offender can
truly be said to have obtained the information in a purely private capacity.
C The Extent to which there was a Breach of
Confidence by the Offender
Any breach of confidence?
Yes – beach of employment contract and use of confidential
compulsorily acquired company information.
No – but prepared to take advantage of breach of confidence by his
Yes – serious breach of trust and confidence of employer and
No - told explicitly not to use information, but no duty of confidence
Yes – use of confidential company information.
Yes – use of confidential company information.
Yes – told explicitly not to use information, which although acquired
incidentally, came to him during the course of conducting
his business.
Yes – use of confidential information of business partner.
Yes – use of confidential company information.
Yes – use of confidential company information.
Yes – use of confidential information.
In most cases where the information was acquired in an employment or
professional capacity, there was necessarily a resulting breach
of confidence
where that information was used for personal gain. It was noted in
Firns’ case
that, as a general sentencing principle, any breach of
confidence is regarded as a feature of
aggravation.
Notwithstanding
that the majority of cases involved some form of breach of
confidence,
this issue was
rarely addressed when determining an appropriate sentence - in only four of the
reviewed cases was the breach of confidence
specifically referred to as a
consideration relevant to the sentence to be imposed:
Doff’s case.
Teh’s case -
the first recorded conviction for
insider trading - the trial judge commented that it was the breach of trust and
misuse of compulsorily
acquired information by a public servant which
necessitated a custodial sentence, rather than the offence of insider trading
D The Relationship the Offender had with the
Relevant Company
Relationship with the relevant company
No direct relationship with the relevant company, but was a public servant
with access to compulsorily acquired company information.
No direct relationship with the relevant company.
No direct relationship, but his father was a director of the relevant
Executive in merchant bank providing advice to the relevant company on a
proposed takeover (although not personally involved in acting
transaction).
No relationship – proposed sale of his house to CEO of relevant
Managing director of the relevant company.
Finance director of the relevant company.
No relationship – real estate agent to Mr Rivkin on the proposed sale
of his house to CEO of relevant company.
Employee of a company proposing to enter into a transaction with the
relevant company.
Finance director of the relevant company.
Media relations consultant to the relevant company.
No particular relationship - equity research analyst with stock-broking
The majority of the offenders had a relationship with the relevant company of
a professional or employment nature. Of those who had
such a relationship, all
received some form of custodial sentence.
The nature of the offender’s relationship with the relevant company was
emphasised in five of the cases –
Doff’s case
it was considered to be a mitigating factor that he had
no prior relationship with the company, where it was stated that because neither
Mr Doff nor Mr Rivkin were “intimately concerned with the affairs”
of the company, the offence fell “towards the
less serious end of the
range of criminality.”
contrast, in
McKay’s case
Whealy J noted that because the
offender was able to gain access to the information due to her relationship with
the company, she
was a “true insider”, unlike Mr Doff or Mr
Considering the issues of whether there is a relationship with the relevant
company, whether there was a breach of trust, and the
circumstances in which the
offender gained access to the information, will often involve
“overlapping” considerations
– a senior employee of the
relevant company who uses their position to gain inside information for
will be viewed
negatively in relation to all three criteria – they will be an existing
relationship with the company, there
will be access to information through
employment, and there will be a resulting breach of trust. For this reason, it
will later be
suggested that these criteria be addressed together in sentencing,
to avoid over-emphasis of what is essentially the same
It is interesting to consider that, whilst the
Corporations Act
longer distinguishes between primary and secondary insiders for the purposes of
liability, weight appears to be placed on whether
a person is a “true
insider” when a sentence is being
determined.
E The Relationship the Offender had with the
Securities Industry
Relationship with the securities industry
Public servant employed by the National Companies and Securities
Commission.
Media advisor experienced in dealing with securities industry.
Stockbroker.
None, and limited experience in share trading.
Experienced merchant banker.
Experienced stockbroker.
None, but experienced businessman.
None, but long career in business.
None, but had a share portfolio.
None, but director of public listed company with experience in securities
None, but experienced as purchaser of shares.
Research analyst for stock-broking firm.
An existing relationship with the securities industry has generally been
viewed by the courts as a key indicator of serious criminality
evidence that the offender knew that their conduct was wrong, but did it
regardless. Thus it appears to be viewed as an
aggravating factor for sentencing
In particular, in
Rivkin’s case
Whealy J stated
“…it is especially important... [to]… provide a firm
disincentive… [to]… those who are engaged in
the securities
industry. There is a need to… discourage illegal and unethical behaviour
among company, directors, company officers,
brokers, traders, advisors and those
who have a close connection through… merchant banking, to the stock
Thus, Mr Rivkin’s position as an experienced stock broker was viewed
particularly seriously. In
Doff’s case
, even though the case arose
from a similar set of circumstances, it was considered that Mr Doff had engaged
in a less serious crime
than Mr Rivkin, because Mr Doff had no particular
connection with the securities
Although the offender in
McKay’s case
had no particular
relationship with the securities industry, it was noted that her position as a
media consultant to the relevant
company meant that she was responsible for
preparing the company’s annual report, which contained its policy against
trading. It was also noted that she was an experienced
“purchaser” of
securities.
Accordingly, it appears that a significant relationship with the securities
industry may be appropriately considered an aggravating
factor when determining
the culpability of the offender.
F The Character of the Offender
Consideration of character
No prior convictions, educated public servant of mature age.
No prior convictions.
Unblemished good character at time of offence.
No prior convictions, long successful business career, generous
philanthropist and unblemished record.
Family man, outstanding sportsman of good character.
Unblemished character, hardworking with distinguished work history and
community work.
Prior good character and well regarded in the community.
No previous convictions, and engaged in charitable activities, hardworking
with commitment to his family.
No criminal convictions, but civil proceedings brought against him in the
No prior convictions, unblemished professional and personal life.
Excellent character with no prior convictions.
As is noted above,
specifically requires
the Court to consider the character of the offender when passing sentencing.
Almost all the cases reviewed
expressly considered the offender’s
character in some form. However, the weight that should be given to evidence of
in relation to insider trading offences has been the subject of
Hall’s case
, Kirby J held that evidence of prior good
character would be of limited influence in sentencing “white collar”
primarily due to recognition that, in cases such as this, it is a person’s
good character which enables them to obtain
a position which gives them access
to the inside information which is used to commit the offence – without
pre-existing good
character, they most likely would not have been able to commit
the offence in the first place.
A similar view was taken in
Teh’s case,
Doff’s case,
Hannes’ case
Rivkin’s case
issue has arisen in many cases concerning other forms of white collar crime,
R v El-Rashid,
DPP v Bulfin
Whealy J stated that although character was not to be considered as a
significant mitigating factor in such cases, it was still of
G Personal Circumstances of the Offender
Personal circumstances
34 years of age, psychological difficulties, foreign extraction.
50 years of age, with previous instances of depression.
39 years of age.
58 years of age, history of psychiatric illness and depression.
59 years of age.
66 years of age, health problems requiring physiotherapy, under stress,
financial difficulties.
Not addressed.
47 years of age, suffered depression.
66 years of age, retired from the workforce.
56 years of age, suffering chronic fatigue syndrome, bursitis, and
Meniere’s disease.
Under stress, suffering depression.
Section 16A(2)(d)
requires the Court to consider the
personal circumstances of any victim of the offence. However, in relation to
insider trading,
this is a difficult criterion to address, as the true victim of
the offence (that is, the person who bought securities from, or sold
the insider trader) is rarely identified.
Section 16A(2)(m)
requires the Court to consider the
antecedents, age, means and
physical or mental condition of the offender. Generally, the personal
characteristics and circumstances
of an offender are relevant considerations for
sentencing in order to facilitative individualized justice, and to ensure
deterrence.
commonly considered circumstances amongst the reviewed cases were the age and
health of the offender.
The age of the offender was mentioned in many of the cases, although it was
Hall’s case
where the offender’s age of 66 was noted
as a factor which would make prison life more difficult, and which should
be taken into account.
Interestingly, Mr Sweetman was also 66, and no such consideration was made for
his age - although he was ultimately sentenced to
imprisonment for 18 months, in
comparison to 25 months for Mr Hall.
Rivkin’s case
, the offender’s history of psychiatric
illness and risk of depression was a factor in the selection of periodic
detention rather
than full-time
imprisonment.
Similarly in
McKay’s case
periodic detention was imposed in recognition of her
health problems.
Interestingly,
the trial judge noted that whilst the state of an offender’s health is a
relevant consideration in imposing
sentence, it does not necessarily mean that a
prison sentence should not be imposed, depending on the nature and level of
Kelly J stated that imprisonment would bear more
heavily on the offender, having regarded to his “education and foreign
extraction”
only case to consider such issues.
H Resulting Hardship that might be caused to the
Family of the Offender
Hardship to the family of the offender
Not addressed.
Married with two children aged 14 and 12.
Not addressed.
Not addressed.
Impact on wife and five children noted.
Not addressed.
Not addressed.
Not addressed.
Married for twenty-three years, with two children aged 17 and 14, and
supporting his widowed mother.
Wife has serious health problems and would ordinarily look to the offender
for support.
Widow with two children aged 24 and 22, and an elderly mother aged 88 and
in poor health requiring care.
Despite being a criterion required to be considered under
when passing sentence, very few of the cases reviewed
considered the probable effect of any proposed sentence on the offender's family
or dependants, although several trial judges took the opportunity to refer to
the offender’s family
relationships.
The cases which
did address this issue –
McKay’s case
appeared to
place little emphasis on it when passing sentence.
Hall’s case,
Kirby J stated that hardship to the
offender’s family can only be taken into account if it is
“sufficiently extreme”
and goes beyond the sort of hardship which
results from the deprivation of the family
“bread-winner”.
that case, the health problems of the offender’s wife were not considered
“exceptional” enough to warrant consideration,
nor were, presumably,
the family circumstances and potential hardship for the other offenders.
I The Manner in which the Trial was Conducted,
including whether the Offender Pleaded Guilty
Manner in which the trial was conducted
Pleaded guilty.
Pleaded guilty.
Pleaded guilty.
Pleaded not guilty.
Pleaded not guilty.
Pleaded not guilty, and trial conducted in an unhelpful manner.
Pleaded not guilty.
Pleaded guilty.
Pleaded not guilty, and trial conducted in an exemplary manner.
Pleaded guilty.
Pleaded guilty.
Pleaded guilty.
Pleaded guilty.
As is noted above,
specifically requires
the Court to consider whether the offender pleaded guilty to the offence when
passing sentencing. The manner
in which the offender conducted the trial,
including whether there was a plea of guilty, was considered in almost all the
cases. It is interesting to note that of the thirteen cases in which an
offender has been convicted of insider trading, there have
been only four trials
in which there has been a plea of not guilty.
it was noted that the plea of guilty saved the
community the expense of a trial, and should be regarded as a significant matter
mitigation.
The fact that the
offender pleaded guilty was also taken into account in
Hall’s case
it was noted that a sentencing discount of 10% to
25% is usually given for a plea of guilty, with the timing of the plea being the
determining factor.
case, Mr Hall had initially pleaded not guilty, but later changed his plea to
guilty on the eve of the trial and received
a sentencing discount of
, where the offender pleaded guilty at the earliest possible
opportunity, a sentencing discount of 25% was
Doff’s case
it was noted that although the offender had
pleaded not guilty, he had engaged in exemplary conduct by conducting the
defence in an
efficient manner. Barr J considered it appropriate to reward and
encourage this type of conduct, by taking this into account as a
factor when sentencing.
contrast, in
Rivkin’s case
, Whealy J commented on the
offender’s “…
attitude of rather contemptuous arrogance for
the processes which had brought him to
However, it
was noted that an offender is always entitled to plead “not guilty”
and conduct a vigorous defence, and that
this cannot lead to an increase in the
sentence to be imposed.
It is interesting to contrast this issue with that of delay by the
prosecution, and its resulting effect on sentencing considerations,
be considered later in this article.
J Expressions of Remorse or Contrition by the
Expressions of remorse or contrition
Plea of guilty one of inevitability, not indication of remorse.
Contrition demonstrated through early disgorgement of profit, and accepted
No indication of remorse in evidence or demeanour in witness box, and no
compensation paid or offered.
No contrition, expression of regret or apology.
No contrition.
Not expressly addressed.
Plea of guilty, and borrowed to repay money owed.
Not expressly addressed.
Plea of guilty was very late, and did not indicate contrition.
Early plea of guilty is some evidence of contrition, but no acceptance of
responsibility indicating very little remorse.
Expressed genuine remorse and contrition.
Found to be genuinely remorseful.
As is noted above,
requires the Court to
consider the degree to which the offender has shown contrition. This was
expressly taken into account where
the offender was found to have exhibited
contrition -
Reddell’s case
and where contrition was found to be lacking -
There has been debate generally as to the weight to be given to expressions
of contrition,
in particular
where it is evidenced mainly through a plea of guilty, which is considered
separately.
Frawley’s case,
Bell J noted that a very late plea of guilty is not
evidence of contrition,
Hall’s case
Kirby J considered a plea of guilty to be
“some” evidence of contrition, but noted that there must also be
other evidence
of remorse and acceptance of responsibility, which was found to
be missing in that case.
Contrition may be demonstrated in other ways – such as through action
taken for reparation,
disgorgement of profits earned.
A lack of contrition may be inferred from the evidence, the offender’s
demeanour in witness box, and the absence of any compensation
As noted in
Rivkin’s case
, the absence of contrition does not warrant the
imposition of a greater penalty than otherwise appropriate, but the offender is
entitled to the leniency arising out of the presence of
contrition.”
K Whether the Offender Accepted a Pecuniary Penalty
Order Application
Whether Pecuniary Penalty Order Accepted
Pecuniary penalty order of $36,594 imposed.
No pecuniary penalty order.
No pecuniary penalty order.
Pecuniary penalty order of $29,356.02 accepted.
No pecuniary penalty order - proceeds already repaid.
No pecuniary penalty order.
No pecuniary penalty order.
Pecuniary penalty order of $280,349.54 accepted.
Pecuniary penalty order of $37,225.75 accepted.
Pecuniary penalty order of $586,000.77 accepted.
No pecuniary penalty order.
No pecuniary penalty order.
Pecuniary penalty order of $4,086.80 accepted.
Section 16A(2)(h)
requires the Court to consider the
degree to which the offender co‑operated with law enforcement agencies
when passing sentence,
and this has occurred in several of the reviewed
The Court has the power under the
Proceeds of Crime Act 2002
order that pecuniary penalties be paid to the Commonwealth, of amounts based on
benefits that a person derives from offences
and illegal
– that is, to
repay the proceeds of crime. An order can be made with the consent of all
interested parties, which necessarily
includes the
As an illegal
activity prohibited by federal legislation, which generally results in the
offender making a profit, insider trading
is an offence to which this
legislation has particular application. Interestingly,
of Crime Act
provides that a Court passing sentence may have regard to any
co-operation by the person in resolving any action against the person
Act, but must not otherwise have regard to any forfeiture order or pecuniary
penalty order.
As it will depend on the circumstances of each case whether it is appropriate
for there to be a pecuniary penalty order made, an adverse
finding cannot be
made against an offender merely because they have not agreed to enter into a
pecuniary penalty consent order. However,
agreeing to enter into these
arrangements in advance of the sentence may also be evidence of contrition and
remorse by the offender,
as well as a willingness to facilitate the
administration of justice.
L Any Delay of the Prosecution by the Relevant
Authorities
Delay of the Prosecution
Not addressed.
Three year delay.
Four and a half year delay, primarily due to ill health of trial judge.
Two and half year delay until first trial, with six years passing until
second trial.
Not addressed.
Not addressed.
Not addressed.
Four and half years delay, largely due to trial in
Three and half year delay
Four year delay
Not addressed.
Not addressed.
Delay was a factor considered in almost half the reviewed cases –
Cribb’s case
Firns’ case
Hannes’ case
Doff’s case
Frawley’s case
Hall’s case
Where there had been a delay by the prosecution in bringing the proceedings to
trial, it was viewed as a factor mitigating the sentence
to be imposed, due to
the length of time the offender had to endure uncertainty. The reasons for the
delay varied from the ill health
of the trial
to the ordinary delays
in the criminal justice
the delay occurred because the prosecution wished Mr Rivkin’s
case to be resolved first, since the two cases arose from the
same set of
circumstances – this was considered to be unfair to Mr Doff due to the
resulting deferral of his own
In all these cases,
the delay was taken into account as a factor entitling the offender to some
leniency. Delays caused by the offender’s
own conduct of the trial in
circumstances which caused it to be conducted in a protracted manner, did not
receive this consideration.
M Any Extra-Curial Punishment
Extra-curial punishment
Loss of employment, dismissed from professional association, shame and
financial hardship.
Damage to career.
Not addressed.
Very high legal fees, media attention, disgrace, humiliation, damage to
career and livelihood, anxiety and stress.
Disgrace and humiliation, damage to career and livelihood, disqualification
from managing a corporation, revocation of security dealer’s
licence, and
loss of community standing.
Humiliation, distress and substantial financial losses.
Damage to status and reputation, disqualification from managing a
corporation, effect on career and livelihood, resulting restrictions
on overseas
travel (with grandchildren living in the USA).
Effects on business, private life and reputation, disqualification from
managing a corporation, and potential loss of real estate
Shame and embarrassment, high legal fees.
Shame and humiliation, and disqualification from managing a corporation.
Disgrace and adverse publicity, damage to career and stress.
Guilt and shame, and damage to career.
Extra-curial punishment has frequently been taken into account when passing
sentence on convicted insider traders. Indeed, in most
of the reviewed cases
extra-curial punishment suffered by the offender was considered a mitigating
The forms of
extra-curial punishment most commonly taken into account were humiliation, loss
of employment and damage to a career.
This last consideration appears to be
peculiar to “white collar” criminals – some studies even
suggest that such
offenders suffer more from detection and prosecution than
other criminals.
that is to be given to such considerations is not clear.
N The Prospects of Rehabilitation of the
Prospects of Rehabilitation
Considered unlikely to offend again.
Not addressed.
Considered unlikely to offend again.
Prospects of rehabilitation considered.
Considered unlikely to offend again, but lack of contrition or admission of
wrongdoing.
Not addressed.
Not addressed.
Considered unlikely to offend again.
Considered to have good prospects of rehabilitation.
Considered to have excellent prospects of rehabilitation
Considered to be fully rehabilitated.
Not addressed.
Section 16A(2)(n)
requires the Court to take into
account the prospect of rehabilitation of the offender. In the majority of
the cases concerning convicted
insider traders, the prospect of rehabilitation
was not a significant issue, because of the general view in each case that it
unlikely the offender would
In several cases,
reference was made to the fact that the offenders were already thought to be
rehabilitated.
Despite many cases referring to this issue, it was rarely clear how it was
weighted when determining the appropriate sentence. Rehabilitative
generally seek to address underlying psychological and social problems beyond
the control of an offender that are thought
to perpetuate a cycle of
However, in relation
to white-collar crimes such as insider trading, which are generally considered
to be rationally motivated and
committed by educated professional people, the
concept of rehabilitation naturally has less relevance.
O The Need for Specific and General
Focus on Specific Deterrence
Focus on General Deterrence
Not expressly addressed.
Not expressly addressed.
Not expressly addressed.
Not expressly addressed.
Not expressly addressed.
Not expressly addressed.
Not expressly addressed.
Section 16A(2)(i)
provides that the Court should
take into account the deterrent effect that any sentence may have on the
particular offender –
this is commonly known as specific deterrence.
General deterrence is the deterrent effect a sentence will have as a
disincentive
to other potential offenders – general deterrence is not
specifically referred to in the
, but is commonly considered
when passing sentence. The omission of general deterrence as a factor to be
considered under
has been the subject of much
judicial criticism, and Courts continue to uphold general deterrence as a valid
aim in connection with
sentencing.
Specific deterrence was given some consideration in several of the cases
McKay’s case
but the view is often taken that specific deterrence is not a
significant issue for insider trading, as offenders are generally considered
be unlikely to re-offend. This may occur for several reasons: such offenders
commonly suffer significant public humiliation, disgrace
and unwanted media
attention upon detection and prosecution sufficient to deter them from
attempting similar conduct in the
but they may also
have limited opportunity to engage in such conduct as a result of their
conviction. As insider traders rely on
their good character to be placed in a
position where it is possible for them to engage in insider trading, detection
and conviction
serves as a “blemish” on that character, which
disables them from future such
opportunities.
General deterrence of other potential offenders is actually the most
consistently applied factor in all cases concerning the sentencing
traders. Whilst there is significant emphasis placed on this issue, some
inconsistent approaches have been adopted in
the reviewed cases.
Rivkin’s case,
Whealy J repeatedly stressed the importance of
sending a strong message to the community that insider trading was unacceptable
would not be tolerated, because of the difficulty in detecting insider
trading and because of the damage it does to the integrity
of the securities
These considerations
of general deterrence were confirmed in
Frawley’s case
the trial judge stated that whilst specific
personal deterrence was not of particular concern, general deterrence must be
given weight
due to the seriousness of the
Similarly, in
McKay’s case
the trial judge remarked that the rehabilitation of an
offender did not obviate the need to provide a strong incentive to deter others
from offending.
In that case,
Whealy J stated that general deterrence occurs only where an actual custodial
sentence is imposed.
very interesting when considering that in several cases which occurred prior to
that time, and in one since, no custodial
sentence was imposed.
Kelly J commented that it is wrong to make an
offender a “scapegoat” for community anger at this type of
but confirmed that
his primary purpose was to fix a “salutary but just sentence to deter
Cribb’s case
, where the only penalty imposed was a fine of
Hammond CDJC stated that, in relation to both specific and
general deterrence:
“A truly effective deterrent to insider trading must strike at the
objective of that trading, that is the profit realised or
General deterrence was emphasised in
Hannes’ case
comments of Woods J in
referred to:
“Those involved in serious white collar crime must expect condign
sentences. The commercial world expects executives and employees
in positions of
trust…to conform to exacting standards of honesty. It is important to be
mindful of the difficulty in detecting
sophisticated crimes of the kind here
involved and of the possibility for substantial loss by the public…the
element of general
deterrence is an important element of sentencing for such
Importantly, in
MacDermott’s case
Kennedy DCJ specifically
stated that whilst personal circumstances must be considered, they are not more
important then general
deterrence.
VI Judicial Comparisons and
Inconsistencies
Some inconsistencies in judicial approaches concerning the consideration and
weight given to the various criteria are discussed above.
It is useful to review
which of the cases contain consideration of sentences imposed in previous cases,
and the reasoning underlying
the imposition of those sentences, as well as the
weight placed on those earlier judicial pronouncements:
Hammond CJDC in
Cribb’s case
considered comments made by
Kinchington J and compared some aspects of the two
Firns’ case
considered the sentence imposed in
Williams’ case
Hannes’ case
and some of the subjective features of
those cases;
Backhouse J in
Hannes’ case 1
made no reference to any previous
insider trading cases;
Hannes’ case 2
made no reference to any previous insider
trading cases;
Whealy J in
Rivkin’s case
made no reference to any previous insider
trading cases;
Kennedy DCJ
in MacDermott’s case
made no reference to any previous
insider trading cases;
Shanahan J in
Sweetman’s case
made a brief comparison of the case
MacDermott’s
Doff’s case
drew extensive comparisons with
Rivkin’s case
, which will be discussed below, but did not make
reference to any other insider trading cases;
Frawley’s case
referred to
Rivkin’s case
Doff’s case
Hannes’ case
Cribb’s case
Williams’ case
, and determined this case to be of less objective seriousness than
Hannes’ case
and of greater seriousness than
Rivkin’s case
Hall’s case
made reference to
Hannes’ case
Rivkin’s case
Doff’s case
Whealy J in
McKay’s case
drew comparisons with
Doff’s case
Martin J in
Reddell’s case
made no reference to any previous
insider trading cases.
In this context, it is interesting to focus on judicial comments made about
the utility of considering other insider trading cases:
Frawley’s case
Bell J stated that a schedule provided by the
Crown which detailed the sentences imposed in other insider trading cases was
but that ultimately each case must be considered on its own
Hall’s case
Kirby J stated that he viewed the other insider
trading cases as of limited assistance except in collectively giving some
of the sentencing
(c) In the appeal against the conviction from
the New South Wales Court of Criminal Appeal stated that “
not… the case that much benefit is ever gained by an attempt to draw a
comparison with other sentences, having
regard to the differences in the
objective and subjective circumstances involved, and to the need for any such
exercise to assume
that the other decisions were correct, or are such as to
provide effective guidance for later
Whilst these comments are naturally accorded the respect which they are due,
it is respectfully submitted that a detailed review of
the sentences imposed in
other insider trading cases has significantly more value than just to consider a
range for sentencing possibilities
– the review of sentences enables
consistency to be maintained in the sentencing process is order to achieve the
highest possible
degree of deterrence whilst still ensuring a sentence
appropriate for the individual offender can be ascertained.
It is also worthwhile conducting a close examination of
Rivkin’s case
due to the fact both cases arose from
the same set of circumstances, and because of the direct comparisons made
between the two cases
by Barr J when sentencing Mr Doff. The most apparent
inconsistency is the difference in the sentences imposed for a very similar
crime: 9 months of period detention and a $30,000 fine for Mr Rivkin; 350 hours
of community service, a $30,000 fine and a $37,000
pecuniary penalty order for
Both cases arose from an unusual set of circumstances: Mr Rivkin wished to
sell his house and engaged Mr Doff as his real estate agent.
Mr Gerard McGowan,
the executive chairperson of Impulse Airlines informed Mr Rivkin that he was
interested in buying the house, but
that he wished to make a conditional offer.
When pressed for further details Mr McGowan informed Mr Rivkin, whilst in Mr
presence, that he was trying to do some form of deal between
Impulse Airlines and Qantas and was awaiting approval from the Australian
Competition and Consumer Commission. Later that same day, Mr Rivkin purchased
50,000 Qantas shares through an investment company
for approximately $139,000
and Mr Doff purchased 20,000 Qantas shares in the name of his family company for
a total price of approximately
$56,000. Mr Rivkin arranged for the sale of those
shares for a profit of $2,664.94, prior to the announcement by Impulse Airlines
and Qantas made a joint announcement that they had entered into a “virtual
or contractual merger.” After the announcement
there was a significant
rise in the Qantas share price, and Mr Doff sold his Qantas shares at a net
profit of approximately $11,800.
Both were convicted of insider trading.
When imposing a sentence on Mr Doff, Barr J made a very detailed comparison
of the circumstances with those in
Rivkin’s case
. The primary
differences found to exist between the two cases were:
(a) Barr J considered that as neither Mr Rivkin nor Mr Doff were true
“insiders”,
offences “…
fell towards the less serious end of the range of
criminality
…” for insider
As it was Mr Rivkin,
not Mr Doff, who pushed for the inside information to be revealed, Mr
Doff’s conduct was considered to
a little closer to
the bottom of the range
(b) Barr J took the view that, although Mr Rivkin made a smaller profit, his
criminality was worse, because of the greater amount
of money ventured and
stated that “…
the amount of money invested is a more important
indicator of criminality than the amount ultimately realised from the criminal
(c) Mr Rivkin was an experienced stockbroker, share trader and investment
adviser. Whilst Mr Doff had experience trading shares in
a private capacity, he
had no such connection with the stockmarket. Justice Barr considered that this
made Mr Doff’s offence
less serious than Mr
(d) Mr Rivkin’s trial was lengthy and protracted, with many objections and
technical points taken by counsel. By contrast,
Mr Doff’s trial was
conducted in an efficient manner with a greater degree of co-operation and
agreement. Mr Doff’s jury
trial lasted only seven working days, whereas Mr
Rivkin’s was conducted over many months. Barr J considered it appropriate
to encourage such “exemplary” conduct by giving it consideration in
sentencing.
The Crown appealed to the New South Wales Court of Criminal Appeal with a
request that Mr Doff’s sentence be increased, and
the judgment makes
interesting reading.
Court appeared at pains to state that it is not appropriate for a higher court
to interfere in a sentence given at trial, unless
it is “manifestly
inadequate” or where the sentence is outside the appropriate range for
such an offence,
determined this sentence was not. However, the Court acknowledged that the given
sentence was “light”
and stated that an insider
trader in a position of trust would normally expect to receive a custodial
VII Imprisonment
Given the emphasis on imprisonment as a deterrent, particularly in relation
to white-collar crime, it is interesting to consider whether
there are any
factors most likely to lead to a sentence of imprisonment being imposed.
However, no single factor appears to be determinative
of custodial sentence
being imposed in the reviewed cases, although all but one offender who was
convicted at trial received a custodial
sentence, the exception being Mr Doff.
Indeed, as is noted above, in
McKay’s case
it was stated by Whealy
J that general deterrence could only occur where an actual custodial sentence
was imposed.
Periodic detention is only available in New South Wales and the Australian
Capital Territory,
seven offenders who received custodial sentences in
four were sentenced to
periodic detention.
the offenders who received periodic detention had poor physical or mental
health: Mr Rivkin, Mr Frawley and Ms McKay.
As noted above, three convicted insider traders did not receive a custodial
sentence at all: Mr Cribb, Mr Doff and Mr Reddell.
VIII Sentencing Guidelines
In order to avoid inconsistency in sentencing, and to try to ensure that
sentences imposed have the greatest possible deterrent effect
whilst remaining
appropriate in the circumstances, it is respectfully suggested that the
following sentencing guidelines could be
utilized when convicted insider traders
are to be sentenced.
A “Benchmark” Sentence for Convicted
Insider Traders
The maximum custodial sentence which can be imposed on a convicted insider
trader is imprisonment for five
However, the longest
sentence of imprisonment actually imposed was 26 months’ full time
imprisonment (with release on recognizance
after 20 months) in
The shortest sentences of imprisonment imposed were 3 months’
full time imprisonment in
and 9 months’ periodic
detention in
Rivkin’s case.
In the related civil penalty case of
ASIC v Petsas and
Finkelstein
J stated that even a first-time offender who pleaded guilty to insider trading
would be expect to receive a custodial
sentence of between three to six months.
Indeed, six months imprisonment would be considered the average sentence imposed
reviewed cases. For these reasons, it is suggested that a full-time
sentence of approximately 6 months’ imprisonment could
be considered a
“benchmark” for convicted insider traders – with appropriate
adjustments to be made according to
the relevant mitigating and aggravating
B Mitigating Factors to be taken into
Consideration
The following criteria should be considered as mitigating factors, which if
appropriate in the circumstances, may be taken into account
to reduce the
sentence to be imposed on a convicted insider trader:
Was the information obtained or used in circumstances amounting to a
breach of confidence?
The absence of a breach of confidence in either the obtaining of the inside
information, or its use, reduces the seriousness of the
insider trading offence
and should be viewed as a mitigating factor in
sentencing.
Is the offender elderly or in poor health?
An offender who is elderly or in poor health may suffer more greatly whilst
imprisoned.
Accordingly, this
may be viewed as a mitigating factor in sentencing, or as one which may indicate
that periodic detention is an
appropriate alternative to full-time imprisonment.
Would the offender’s family by caused undue hardship by the
proposed sentence?
Any undue hardship which might be caused to an offender’s family by a
proposed sentence should be taken into account, and viewed
as a mitigating
factor in sentencing – however, such hardship must be
“exceptional” to warrant such
consideration.
Did the offender assist the administration of justice by:
(i) entering a plea of guilty;
(ii) conducting the trial in an efficient, co-operative manner; or
(iii) accepting a pecuniary penalty order under the
Proceeds of Crime
prior to the trial?
As a general rule, it appears that the only convicted insider traders who
have not received a custodial sentence are those who have
either pleaded
or conducted their
trial in an efficient, co-operative
However, some insider
traders who did plead guilty have still received custodial
Whilst a plea of
guilty may just be an acceptance of the inevitable, especially if it occurs very
late in proceedings,
plea of guilty assists significantly in the administration of
and thus should be
encouraged by being viewed as a mitigating factor in sentencing. As was noted in
Hall’s case
plea of guilty usually entitles an offender to a discount of 10% to 25% off the
sentence, depending on the timing of the plea.
Acceptance of a pecuniary penalty order, rather than merely having it imposed
as part of a sentence once convicted, also assists in
the administration of
justice and should also be viewed as a mitigating factor in sentencing.
Has the conduct of the offender demonstrated remorse or
contrition?
Conduct which demonstrates true remorse or contrition for the offence should
be viewed as a mitigating factor in sentencing. An example
of such conduct might
include performing acts of reparation, borrowing money to repay amounts owing or
disgorging profits early.
Whilst a plea of guilty, the efficient conduct of the trial, or the acceptance
of a pecuniary penalty order might otherwise be viewed
as evidence of remorse or
contrition, such actions should not be given further weight if they have already
been taken into account
under paragraph (a) above.
Has the offender suffered extra-curial punishment, to such an extent
that it should be taken into account as part of his or her sentence?
Extra-curial punishment might take the form of public humiliation, damage to
a person’s career or livelihood or loss of
reputation.
A delay by the
Crown in prosecuting an offence may also be considered to be extra-curial
punishment where it causes unfair hardship
Where appropriate,
such extra-curial punishment which an offender has suffered or is likely to
suffer can be viewed as a mitigating
factor when sentencing.
Are there any other mitigating factors which the Court considers
Having taken into account the primary mitigating factors described above, the
Court should then consider if the circumstances give
rise to any further
mitigating factors which should be given weight when determining the appropriate
C Aggravating Factors to be taken into
Consideration
The following criteria should be considered as aggravating factors, which if
appropriate in the circumstances, may be taken into account
to increase the
sentence to be imposed on a convicted insider trader:
Was a large amount of money wagered or a large profit made?
Generally, the larger the amount of money wagered, or the larger the profit
made, the more serious the offence is considered to be.
The largest amount of
money wagered was $459,000 in
Frawley’s case
, and the largest
profit made was over $2,000,000 in
Hannes’ case
(which was more
than ten times the amount wagered)
Whilst it has been suggested that the
amount wagered is more significant than the amount of profit made (with a larger
amount wagered
suggesting a greater degree of
criminality),
both criteria
should be viewed as aggravating factors in sentencing if the amounts are
significant.
Was the information obtained or used by the offender either:
(i) in the course of his or her employment or professional
(ii) due to his or her relationship with the company in whose securities
the trading occurred?
(iii) in breach of a duty of confidence which he or she owed?
It should be viewed as an aggravating factor in sentencing if an offender
breached a contract or duty owed to their employer, principal
or the company in
whose securities the trading occurred, or breached a duty of confidence, in
their acquisition or use of the relevant
inside information. The offence should
be considered more serious where such breaches occur, compared to circumstances
where a person
comes across inside information fortuitously or accidentally in a
private capacity.
Did the offender have a relationship with the securities
An insider trader who has a relationship of some sort to the securities
industry is considered to have committed a more serious offence
relationship may take the form of professional activity as a
stockbroker,
or experienced
purchaser of securities.
persons are expected to have a greater understanding of the seriousness of
insider trading and its effects, and thus are to
be regarded more harshly, and
this should be viewed as an aggravating factor in sentencing.
Are the any other aggravating factors which the Court considers
Having taken into account the primary aggravating factors described above,
the Court should then consider if the circumstances give
rise to any further
aggravating factors which should be given weight when determining the
appropriate sentence.
D Factors to be Given Limited
Consideration
The following criteria should be given limited consideration when determining
the appropriate sentence for a convicted insider trader,
although it should
remain within the Court’s discretion to give some weight to these factors
if appropriate in all the circumstances:
The character of the offender
Whilst ordinarily of great relevance in criminal trials, prior good character
and behaviour is a factor which should be given limited
weight when sentencing
insider traders. It must be recognized that, in respect of these types of
crimes, it is a person’s good
character which enables them to obtain a
position which gives them access to the information which is used to commit the
– without a good character and previous good behaviour, he or she
most likely would not have been able to commit the offence
in the first
The prospects of rehabilitation of the offender
It is generally considered that, once detected and prosecuted, an insider
trader is unlikely to ever offend
Additionally, as
rehabilitative policies generally seek to address underlying psychological and
social problems which perpetuate
a cycle of crimes, this issue is of limited
relevance in relation to “white collar” crimes such as insider
E Is the Sentence Consistent and Appropriate for
the Purposes of Specific and General Deterrence?
Having taken each of the applicable factors into account, it is suggested
that when weighing up the relevance of each factor and determining
sentence for the convicted insider trader, the Court should consider if:
(a) the sentence is consistent with other sentences imposed on convicted insider
traders, or if it is not consistent, that appropriate
circumstances exist for
the lack of consistency;
(b) the sentence is appropriate for the purposes of specific deterrence of the
convicted insider trader, as well as general deterrence
of any potential insider
traders in the future; and
(c) the sentence is appropriate for the particular offender, in all the
circumstances of the case.
Having taken all the relevant factors into consideration, the Court should
then consider the extent to which the “benchmark”
sentence should be
varied in order that an appropriate sentence, in all the circumstances of the
case, can be determined.
IX Conclusions
The review of all available sentences and sentencing remarks for convicted
insider traders has revealed a wide range of sentences
imposed, and varying
degrees of consistency between the sentences and accompanying judicial remarks.
In order to better promote consistency and the resulting deterrence of
potential insider traders, the sentencing guidelines set out
in this article
have been developed. Whilst there is appropriate recognition that each case must
be determined on its merits and
that an appropriate sentence for the individual
offender must be arrived at, there is still significant utility in drawing
between sentences and attempting to ensure consistency. It is hoped
that this will promote greater consideration of these issues
and lead to a
greater resulting deterrent factor in the sentences which are imposed, in order
to better protect Australia’s
securities markets from insider trading.
* Lecturer, Department of Business Law, Division of Law, Macquarie
University; Honorary Research Fellow, Department of Business Law
and Taxation,
Faculty of Business and Economics, Monash University. The author would like to
thank Ms Kate McLoughlin for research
assistance provided on the research
project which lead to the production of this article.
See, for example, Roman Tomasic and Brendan Pentony, “The
Prosecution of Insider Trading: Obstacles to Enforcement”
Australian and New Zealand Journal of Criminology
; Roman Tomasic,
Capitalism?: Insider Trading in Australia
(1991) 115-126;
Explanatory Memorandum,
Financial Services Bill 2001
(Cth), [2.78] to
[2.79]; Lyon and du Plessis,
The Law of Insider Trading in Australia
(2005) 163-168; Simon Rubenstein “The Regulation and Prosecution of
Insider Trading in Australia: Towards Civil Penalty Sanctions
for Insider
Company and Securities Law Journal
(unreported,
District Court of Victoria, Kelly DCJ, 2 September 1991), to be referred to from
now on as “
R v Williams
(unreported, District Court of NSW, Kinchington DCJ, 4 October 1996), to be
referred to from now on as “
Williams’ case
(unreported, District Court of Western Australia, Hammond CJDC, 9 June
1998), to be referred to from now on as “
Cribb’s case
(unreported, District Court of New South Wales, Criminal
Firns’ case
” – the conviction was later
overturned on appeal:
[2001] NSWCCA 191
, 21 May 2001;
(unreported, District Court of NSW, Backhouse J, 17 September 1999),
to be referred to as
Hannes’ case 1
– a retrial was
subsequently ordered:
[2002] New South Wales Supreme Court
1182, to be referred to from now on as “
Hannes’ case
[2003] NSWSC 447
, to be referred to from now on
Rivkin’s case
R v MacDermott
(unreported,
District Court of Western Australia, Kennedy DCJ, 1 August 2003), to be referred
to from now on as “
MacDermott’s case
(unreported, District Court of Queensland, Criminal Division,
Shanahan DCJ, 17 December 2004), to be referred to from now on as
Sweetman’s case
[2005] NSWSC 50
be referred to from now on as “
Doff’s case
(unreported, Supreme Court of New South Wales, Criminal Division,
Bell J, 24 June 2005), to be referred to from now on as
Frawley’s case
[2005] NSWSC 890
be referred to from now on as “
Hall’s case
[2007] NSWSC 275
(unreported, Whealy J, 30 March 2007), to be referred
to from now on as “
McKay’s case
R v Reddell
(unreported, District Court of Queensland, Martin DCJ, 26 July 2007) to be
referred to from now on as “
Reddell’s case
, a full transcript of the sentencing remarks could not be obtained from
the NSW District Court, so full information is not available
for that case
– details have been included where they are available from other sources.
Firns’ case
has been included in the cases reviewed, even though
the conviction was later overturned on appeal, because the original sentence
sentencing remarks are still worthy of consideration in this context.
Hannes’ case 1
was subject to an appeal after the original
conviction, after which a retrial was ordered, resulting in a second conviction
Hannes’ case 2
– thus Mr Hannes was the subject of two
separate but similar sentences, for which both sets of sentencing remarks are
in this paper.
To be referred to from now on
Corporations Act
New South Wales Sentencing
Council, “How Best to Promote Consistency in Sentencing in the Local
Law Court NSW Annual Review
Griffiths v R
[1977] HCA 44
137 CLR 293
, 327 per Jacobs J.
Johnson v The Queen
[2004] HCA 15
(2004) 205 ALR 346
; New South Wales Sentencing Council, above n5, 12.
Australian Law Reform
Commission,
Same Crime, Same Time: Sentencing of Federal Offenders
Sentence imposed by
Backhouse J in
Hannes’ case 1.
Sentence imposed by James
Hannes’ case 2.
To be referred to from now
on as the “
offence” is defined as an offence against a law of the Commonwealth:
. As insider trading is prohibited under the
Corporations Act
it is clearly a federal offence, and convicted insider
traders are therefore federal offenders.
Proceeds of
Crime Act 2002
(Cth) and the preceding legislation.
See, for example,
Doff’s case
McKay’s case
See, for example,
Hannes' case 1
Rivkin’s case
at [37] and [46].
This pattern of sentencing
reflects the position in the United States of America, where the amount of money
involved has been found
to have a significant impact on whether a custodial
sentence is imposed: David Weisburd, Stanton Wheeler, Elin Waring and Nancy
Crimes of the Middle Classes: White Collar Offenders in the Federal
ed, 1991) 137.
Hannes’ case 2
Rivkin’s case
Doff’s case
Doff’s case
Per Kelly J in
Per Sides J in
Firns’ case
at [31] to [32].
Per Barr J in
Doff’s case
Per Bell J in
Frawley’s case
Per Backhouse J in
Hannes’ case 1
at 33; per James J
Hannes’ case 2
Per Whealy J in
McKay’s case
Firns’ case
See, for example,
McKay’s case
Frawley’s case
MacDermott’s case.
[2003] NSWSC 447
Firns’ case
[31], citing
R v Glennister
[1980] 2 NSWLR 579
R v Pantorno
(1990) 49 A Cr R 328; and
R v Challinor
(1990) 49 A Cr R 370.
Primarily because most of
the cases arose where the offender had a relationship of employee, director or
other professional engagement
with the relevant company in which the securities
were traded.
McKay’s case
Hannes’ case 1
Hannes case 2
Doff’s case
Rivkin’s case
Doff’s case
Hannes’ case 1
Hannes’ case 2
Hall’s case
McKay’s case
Doff’s case
McKay’s case
Such as occurred in
Williams’ case
Hannes’ case
MacDermott’s
Sweetman’s case
Frawley’s case
Hall’s case
McKay’s case
article below.
See, for example,
Firns’ case
McKay’s case
Doff’s case
Rivkin’s case
Doff’s case
McKay’s case
Hall’s case
Doff’s case
Hannes’ case 2
Rivkin’s case
R v El-Rashid
unreported, NSW Court of Criminal Appeal, 7 April 1995)
per Gleeson
DPP v Bulfin
per Charles JA at 131.
ASIC v Vizard
[2005] FCA 1037
per Finkelstein J at [36] to [37].
McKay’s case
Australian Law Reform
Commission, above n8 at [6.89].
Hall’s case
McKay’s case
McKay’s case
See, for example,
Cribb’s case
Frawley’s case
Rivkin’s case
Frawley’s case
Hall’s case
McKay’s case
Hall’s case
[114], citing Hunt CJ in
R v Maslen & Shaw
(1995) 79 A Crim R 199
Sweetman’s case
Frawley’s case
McKay’s case
Reddell’s case
Hall’s case
[103], citing
R v Atholwood
(1999) 109 A Crim R 465
, per Ipp J at
Kirby J noted that the
discount of 15% for the plea of guilty was generous in the circumstances:
Hall’s case
McKay’s case
Doff’s case
Rivkin’s case
Rivkin’s case
Cribb’s case
McKay’s case
Reddell’s case
Firns’ case
Hannes’ case 1
Hannes’ case 2
Rivkin’s case
Frawley’s case
Hall’s case
Australian Law Reform
Commission, above n8, at [6.49].
section 5.9
Frawley’s case
Hall’s case
Hannes’ case 1
Cribb’s case
Firns’ case
Rivkin’s case
of Crime Act 2002
Section 316
Proceeds of Crime Act 2002
Frawley’s case
Cribb’s case
Firns’ case
Hannes’ case
Hannes’ case 2
Doff’s case
Frawley’s case
Hall’s case
Firns’ case
Frawley’s case
Hannes’ case 1
Hannes’ case 2
Hall’s case
Doff’s case
See, for example,
Rivkin’s case
Doff’s case
Cribb’s case
Hannes’ case 1
Rivkin’s case
MacDermott’s case
Sweetman’s case
Doff’s case
Frawley’s case
Hall’s case
[116] –[118];
McKay’s case
Hazel Croall,
Understanding White Collar Crime
ed, 2001) 131.
See, for example,
Doff’s case
Rivkin’s case
Frawley’s case
Hall’s case
McKay’s case
See, for example,
Firns’ case
McKay’s case
Hazel Croall, above
Australian Law Reform
Commission, above n8, [6.132];
DPP v El Karhani
(1990) 21 NSWLR 370
Richard Edney and Mirko Bagaric,
Australian Sentencing: Principles and
ed, 2007) 55.
Firns’ case
Rivkin’s case
Frawley’s case
Hall’s case
McKay’s case
at [61]-[62].
As noted in
Rivkin’s case
The relationship between
good character and insider trading is discussed at
section 5.6
Rivkin’s case
at [44] and [64].
Sweetman’s case
Hall’s case
McKay’s case
at [60] – [61].
Frawley’s case
at [39]-[40].
McKay’s case
R v Pantorno
(1990) 49 A Crim R 328
Hannes’ case 1
Hannes case 2
MacDermott’s
Cribb’s case
Firns’ case
at [51] - [53].
Frawley’s case
Hall’s case
at [121]-[123].
McKay’s case
at [54]-[56], [60] and [84].
Hall’s case
[2004] NSWCCA 7
59 NSWLR 284
, to be referred to from now on as “Rivkin’s appeal.
Rivkin’s appeal
That is, neither of them
intimately concerned with the affairs of Impulse or
Doff’s case
Doff’s case
Doff’s case
Doff’s case
Doff’s case
Doff’s case
NSW CCA 119
, 8 April 2005, to be referred to from now on as
Doff’s appeal
Doff’s appeal
Doff’s appeal
Doff’s appeal
McKay’s case
Richard Edney and Mirko
Bagaric, above n117, 293.
Mr Williams, Mr Firns,
Mr Hannes, Mr Rivkin, Mr Frawley, Mr Hall and Ms McKay.
Mr Williams, Mr Rivkin,
Mr Frawley and Ms McKay.
Schedule 3 to the
Corporations Act
[2005] FCA 88.
Firns’ case
Hall’s case
McKay’s case
Rivkin’s case
Hall’s case
Cribb’s case;
Reddell’s case.
Mr Teh, Mr Williams, Mr
Firns, Mr Sweetman, Mr Frawley, Mr Hall and Ms McKay.
As considered in
Hall’s case
See, for example,
Cribb’s case
McKay’s case
Reddell’s case
Cribb’s case
Hannes’ case
Rivkin’s case
MacDermott’s case
Sweetman’s case
Doff’s case
Frawley’s case
Hall’s case
[116] –[118];
Reddell’s case
Firns’ case
Hannes’ case
Hannes’ case 2
Doff’s case
Frawley’s case
Hall’s case
Doff’s case
Doff’s case
; Rivkin’s case
Rivkin’s case
Doff’s case
McKay’s case
See, for example,
Rivkin’s case.
See, for example,
Teh’s case.
See, for example,
McKay’s case.
Hall’s case
Hannes’ case 2
Doff’s case
McKay’s case
Rivkin’s case
Cribb’s case
Hannes’ case 1
Rivkin’s case
MacDermott’s case
Sweetman’s case
Doff’s case
Frawley’s case
Hall’s case
[116] –[118];
Reddell’s case
Hazel Croall, above
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (893 KB)
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter