URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/journals/UMelbLRS/2017/2.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 15:41:33
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Levy, I --- "Simplifying Legal Decisions: Factor Overload in Civil Procedure Rule" [2017] UMelbLRS 2
SIMPLIFYING LEGAL DECISIONS: FACTOR OVERLOAD IN CIVIL
PROCEDURE RULES
INBAR LEV Y
This contribution examines the need to simplify legal decisions. More
specifically, this article tackles a situation I refer to as
Factor Overload
Legal rules are sometimes set in
the form of ‘Laundry Lists’; that is, long sets of stipulated
considerations that the
judge must weigh. However, judges may encounter
difficulty when trying to implement these checklist clauses. This difficulty is
to our human cognitive limitations. Behavioural studies demonstrate that
people struggle with the task of integrating a large number
of factors. In order
to test this phenomenon in the legal context, the article presents an
investigation based on theoretical discussion,
doctrinal analysis and the
findings of an original experiment — a preliminary vignette study
performed using the factual framework
of a real case in which judges had to
implement a Laundry List rule. The study uses
r 3.9 in England and
Wales to demonstrate the unproductive complexity of checklist rules by comparing
decisions that have been made
when taking into account nine factors, three
factors and no factors at all.
CONT E NT S
ntroduction 728
he Importance of Simple Procedural Rules 731
rocedural Rules Are Addressed to Judges 731
rocedure and Substance 733
ules v Standards 734
ervasive Application of Procedural Rules 738
octrinal Analysis:
Rule 3.9 738
mpirical Study 743
ackground 743
LLB (Hons), LLM (Hons) (Hebrew University of
Jerusalem), DPhil (Oxon); Lecturer, Melbourne Law School. I would like to thank
Zuckerman, Andrew Higgins, Hazel Genn, Issi Rosen-Zvi, Raymond Duch, Eyal
Zamir, Nigel Balmer, Avishalom Tor and Maya Bar-Hillel
for their very helpful
comments on earlier drafts of this project. I am also grateful to the
participants of the Oxford Procedural
Justice Discussion Group, the members of
the Harvard Law School Visiting Scholars Program, and the participants of the
Annual Conference on Empirical Legal Studies, for their
comments on this project.
BBBEExperiment Description 746
iscussion 751
onclusion 757
I INTRODUCTION
Procedural rules are sometimes set in the form of ‘Laundry
Lists’; that is, long sets of stipulated considerations that
a judge must
weigh. This article will argue that judges may encounter difficulty when trying
to implement these checklist exercises.
This difficulty is directly related to a
psychological aspect of the human mind. Human behaviour experiments show that
too much information,
too much choice or too many decision factors might do more
harm than good. Product-marketing experiments demonstrate that limited
facilitate the consumer’s purchase decisions: studies showed that people
were more likely to purchase jam or chocolate
when offered a limited array of
choices; for example, when they were presented with a display of only 6 flavours
of jam rather than
24. People were also more willing to undertake optional class
essay assignments with a limited range of choice and were more likely
an essay for extra credit when they were provided with a list of only 6
potential essay topics, rather than 30.
Clearly, there is a difference between choosing a jam or essay topic and
integrating relevant considerations in legal decision-making.
But, it has also
been shown that even people who are established experts in their field are only
the relevant considerations to reach a decision, and are
quite poor at then
integrating
the relevant considerations; that is,
giving the most appropriate weight to each factor in the decision-making
heena S Iyengar and Mark R Lepper, ‘When Choice Is Demotivating: Can
One Desire Too Much of a Good Thing?’ (2000) 79
Journal of Personality
and Social Psychology
995, 997–9. In another study, subjects were
asked to make a decision ‘concern[ing] the selection of a candi- date for
a job opening of an associate professor’ where the complexity of the
problem ‘was manipulated in terms of the number
of alternatives and
attributes’: Danielle Timmermans, ‘The Impact of Task Complexity on
Information Use in Multi-Attribute
Decision Making’ (1993) 6
Behavioral Decision Making
obyn M Dawes, ‘The Robust Beauty of Improper Linear Models in Decision
Making’ (1979) 34
American Psychologist
571, 573. See also Donald A
Redelmeier and Eldar Shafir, ‘Medical Decision Making in Situations That
Offer Multiple Alternatives’
Journal of the American Medical
Association
According to human behaviour theories a judge will recognise the relevant
factors in the Laundry List but having done so will fail
to give the optimal
weight to each factor in the integration process. The more considerations, the
more confusion caused. This problem
exists in the instance of long checklist
rules in civil procedure, where the considerations in a rule might be relevant
but are simply
too numerous for a non-rational decision maker to weigh and
integrate. I will use the term ‘Factor Overload’ to describe
situations where procedural rules include too many considerations, which leads
to cognitive overload.
More generally, this article deals with the question of rule complexity and
calls for the simplification of procedural rules. Indeed,
sometimes the
complexity in the rules is unavoidable since certain life situations require a
more complex legal treatment. However,
in other situations there are proce-
dural rules that are unnecessarily complex. In those situations, the complexity
leads to an
unhelpful exercise that does not contribute to the goal of reaching
the best result in a certain legal case, nor does it contribute
to reducing the
administrative costs of the legal system as a whole. When the complexity is
counterproductive, there are ways to
simplify the rule or the decision-making
process in order to reach a better and a more efficient result.
Not only that, it could be argued that simple procedure should be promot- ed,
even at the price of having less sophisticated rules,
since judges may be
limited in implementing complex rules due to their human cognitive architec-
ture, as will be shown in the case
of Laundry List rules.
The article will examine cases from England and Wales in which r 3.9 of the
Civil Procedure Rules 1998
(UK) SI 1998/3132 (‘
was implemented.
r 3.9 is a good example of a potential situation of
information overload since before it was amended it included a non-exhaustive
list of nine different factors that the judge had to weigh in order to reach a
decision. The analysis of the amendment of r 3.9 is
important since the rule is
an example of a more general phenomenon of legal rules that include many
factors. To illustrate the general
phenomenon, an experiment I performed will be
presented in order to demonstrate the cognitive outcomes of Factor Overload. The
will simulate a case that utilises r 3.9 and will then compare
decisions made under three different possible forms of the rule structure:
list that consists of nine factors, a list that consists of a limited number of
factors (three), and a form with no factors at
all, namely full judicial
discretion.
urther elaboration on this argument can be found in the following paper:
Inbar Levy, ‘Lightening the Overload of CPR Rule 3.9’
Civil Justice Quarterly
Since the phenomenon described in this article is general in terms of hu- man
behaviour, the assumption will be that the analysis
is relevant for other rules
that are structured in a similar form, including rules that belong to other
legal systems. As observed
by Cass Sunstein, the ‘open-ended multifactor
test’ is a common phenomenon in the American legal system.
There are other instances of legal rules that include many factors, while
the effects of cognitive overload are derived from general
insights about the
human mind. Rule 3.9 is therefore used here merely as one example out of a whole
range of rules in order to demonstrate
a wide psychological phenomenon. In other
words, my argument is not limited to a specific rule or a certain legal system;
it is universal.
In his book
Simple Rules for a Complex World
, Richard Epstein observes
that the world has become more complex, and that there has been a vast
‘increase in the frequency
and complexity of the legal rules that govern
Epstein presents the crucial but often overlooked
point that the proper response to a more complex world ‘should be an ever
greater reliance on simple legal rules’.
This idea could not
be emphasised enough.
Interestingly, Epstein specifically mentions rules that are structured in the
form of a Laundry List while discussing the nature of
legal complexity. He
explains that the simplest rules by the test of
uncertainty
(one of the
variables of complexity) are those in which the answer to a single question of
fact determines the legal outcome.
On the other side of the spectrum
are ‘those rules that are ever so much more common today: in order to
decide whether a given
product has a defective design, it is necessary to review
a list of 6, 10, or 15 factors, all of which are relevant to the decision
none of which is decisive’.
Epstein criticises the form of
inquiry that results from these multi- factor rules and calls it
‘massive’ and ‘costly’.
This article will
confirm this insight and will present an analysis in support of the thesis that
legal policy makers should avoid
Laundry List rules when possible, as well as
present a preliminary experiment that demonstrates the effect of these types of
It should be mentioned that one of the reasons that complexity occurs is the
commitment to treating like cases alike, which
increasingly
ass R Sunstein, ‘Problems with Rules’ (1995) 83
California Law
w 953, 998.
ichard A Epstein,
Simple Rules for a Complex World
(Harvard University
Press, 1995) 21.
nuanced rules or to a growing body of precedent or both. And indeed, Epstein
does not argue that simplicity is the most important
thing. As explained by
Epstein, the objective of a sound system of legal rules is to maximise social
utility. In establishing ideal
legal rules there is a trade-off between social
incentives and administrative costs. Administrative costs include all costs
to run the legal system, and the more complicated the legal rules, the
greater the administrative costs are likely to be. The administrative
should be balanced against the beneficial effects of the rule on human action.
For that reason, simplicity cannot be the sole
goal — ‘[s]imple
legal rules should ... [be] a presumption that can be overcome for [a] good
Lastly, it is interesting that the need to simplify procedural rules has
arisen recently in relation to the issue of litigants
in person. Recent changes
to legal aid and litigation funding in England and Wales have resulted in many
people no longer being in
a position to secure legal representation.
Self-representation is therefore likely to increase over time and to present
significant
challenges to the litigants in person and to the courts. One
of the proposals made to enable litigants in person to litigate
effectively con-
cerned the simplification of procedure and litigation.
This recent
debate demonstrates the importance of the simplicity discussion in relation to
the law and to procedural rules in particular.
Even though complexity is some-
times inevitable, simplifying Laundry List rules may be a step towards the
desired simplicity.
II THE IMPORTA NCE OF SIMPLE PRO C E DU R A L RULES
Procedural Rules Are Addressed to Judges
Historically, rules of procedure were considered to be rules by which courts
or other adjudicatory bodies resolved legal disputes.
Procedural rules were
distinguished from substantive rules, which directed how citizens were supposed
to conduct themselves outside
of the court room.
This traditional
distinction places the emphasis of procedure on helping the judges to reach
decisions while the substantive law is
targeted to influence the behaviour of
all citizens. According to this classification, the procedural law and the
Litigants in Person: What Can Courts Do?’ (Background Papers,
University College London Judicial Institute and the University
London Centre for Access to Justice Special Event, 18 June 2014).
ay Tidmarsh, ‘Procedure, Substance, and
Vanderbilt Law Review
tive law address different recipients. Therefore, when phrasing procedural
rules, one should put the emphasis on setting rules that
will ‘talk’
to judges and help them make the best possible decisions. Psychological
scholarship could provide useful
information on how to phrase rules of procedure
that will enable judges to best perform their judicial roles.
Today, it is clear that procedural rules are not only addressed to judges but
to the litigants as well. As explained by Crifò:
Of the various functions that the rules of court as formalities addressed to
liti- gants and litigants’ behaviour could have,
the most important in
this context is the standardizing function, or ‘channelling’
function in Fuller’s words.
The rules provide a channel that facilitates
the identification, investigation and reso- lution of a dispute or of law-given
Even after the ‘recipients’ classification of procedural law for
judges and substantive law for everyone had faded, procedural
law was considered
to be a tool to enforce the substantive law and was described as ‘the
handmaid of justice’.
The purpose of procedure as perceived
today is to enforce substan- tive rights ‘with as little friction as
possible’ and
to ensure that the rights of individuals are respected in
fair process.
This purpose is represented in
that explicitly states: ‘These Rules are a new procedural code with the
overriding objective of enabling the court
to deal with cases justly and at
appropriate cost.’ In this respect, procedural rules that are set in a way
that does not allow
their implementation by judges undermine the very goal
sing psychological research in order to improve the communication between
judges and the procedural rules under which they operate
should not be an alien
idea for the judiciary, since psychology has long been a natural part of the
judicial work: Jerome Frank,
Courts on Trial: Myth and Reality in American
(Princeton University Press, 1950) 157.
arla Crifò, ‘Enforcement of Process Requirements: A Search for
Solid Grounds’
Oxford Journal of Legal Studies
(citations omitted). Crifò’s explanation is even more prominent
considering the fact that most civil cases end
without trial (and without the
involvement of a judge). For statistics relating to civil cases, see generally
Ministry of Justice,
‘Civil Justice Statistics Quarterly’,
(Web Page, 1 September 2016)
government/collections/civil-justice-statistics-quarterly>, archived at
<https://perma.cc/ D9FL-XXMR>.
idmarsh (n 12) 882, citing
Re Coles and Ravenshear
[1906] UKLawRpKQB 137
[1907] 1 KB 1
See also Thomas O Main, ‘The Procedural Foundation of Substantive
Washington University Law Review
, 810, citing
Sir John Salmond and JL Parker,
Jurisprudence
ed, 1937) 648 § 172: ‘Substantive law is
concerned with the ends which the administration of justice seeks; procedural
law deals with the means and instruments by which those ends are to be
idmarsh (n 12) 883.
procedure: to be a helpful tool in enforcing the substantive law and to
provide a mechanism for redress.
Procedure and Substance
Historically, rules of civil procedure were treated as a pure mechanism to
facilitate the application of substantive rules; procedural
considered to be ‘secondary, ancillary and devoid of any interest beyond
the merely instrumental’.
However, although ‘[r]ules of
procedure represent the
of evaluating entitlements and valuing
the claims that implicate them’,
in fact procedure
‘changes entitlements and the values of the claims’,
and directly ‘affects the nature and structure’ of the
substantive law.
In reality, procedural rules have a significant
impact on the result of the litigation.
Moreover, since procedure generally imposes costs and affects the proba-
bility or amount of recovery,
a rule of procedure used in
adjudication affects the value of the claim on which it operates and ‘also
exercises a prospective
effect on the expected values of future
Even a typical procedural requirement that
applications be submitted on a certain type of paper could change the substance
parties’ entitlements if, for example, this type of paper were too
costly for normal litigants to obtain.
Not only that, there are legal scholars who argue that the distinction be-
tween procedural law and substantive law is context dependant.
These scholars emphasise that procedures can interfere with important
human rights. Therefore, they conclude that ‘[w]here procedure
important as substance, procedural change requires the same degree of political
accounta- bility and economic and social foresight
as reform of an equivalent
Crifò (n 14) 327.
idmarsh (n 12) 884 (emphasis added).
s explained by Crifò (n 14) 328, ‘[t]he violation of mere
procedural rules can effectively put substantive rights out
of the reach of one
or the other litigant’.
or example, a system that permits broad discovery might change the amount of
recovery, as it ‘might lead to the uncovering of
information that allows a
litigant to pursue a new theory of recovery’: Tidmarsh (n 12) 889.
Ibid 891–2.
bid 904; see especially at 904 n 112. See also Adrian Zuckerman,
on Civil Procedure: Principles of Practice
ed, 2013) 53–4 [2.7]–[2.9].
substantive law’.
Considering the possible negative
effects of complex procedural rules on substantive rights, it is necessary to
aspire to simplify
the rules as much as possible.
Other legal scholars take a more extreme approach and argue that the classic
distinction between substantive law and procedural law
should be abandoned
Either way, under any of the current common percep- tions
of the relationship between substantive law and procedural law, there is
doubt that civil procedure rules are inherently and intrinsically significant.
It is therefore important to pay attention to the
way rules of procedure are
designed and applied. For example, Crifò objects to the idea that judges
should be given almost
unlimited discretion to decide when to apply rules of
procedure (while they have very little leeway to diverge from substantive
and suggests ‘a formalist approach to civil procedure ... whereby
the rules [of procedure] bind’ the judge in the same
manner as any other
state regulation.
This criticism is directly related to our debate
discretion,
which may be counterproductive in the context of procedure, as will
be explained in the following discussion.
Rules v Standards
In the field of procedure, the common perception is that certainty and
predictability are even more important than in substantive
law, since proce-
dural rules ought to bring the parties to the realisation of their substantive
rights. This role of procedure has
led to the common view that procedure should
usually be promulgated in the form of rules, while standards in procedure should
used only in special cases.
According to the definition adopted by Kaplow, the ‘distinction between
rules and standards is the extent to which efforts to
give content to the law
are undertaken before or after’ the action occurs that is the subject of
the legal case.
That is to say, rules are
example prohibiting driving in
S Dockray, ‘The Inherent Jurisdiction to Regulate Civil
Proceedings’
Law Quarterly Review
or a critique of this approach, see Jennifer S Hendricks, ‘In Defense
of the Substance– Procedure Dichotomy’
University Law Review
Crifò (n 14) 326.
ssachar Rosen-Zvi,
The Civil Process
(Nevo Publishing, 2015) 59.
ouis Kaplow, ‘Rules versus Standards: An Economic Analysis’
Duke Law Journal
excess of 100 km/h on a highway), and standards are
example prohibiting driving at excessive speed on highways).
Julia Black explains the distinction between rules and standards as a repre-
sentation of competing models of bureaucratic rationality.
According to Black, while rules are ‘associated with
“formalism” ... and rigidity on the one hand, ... [and] certainty
and uniformity on the other’, standards allow flexibility in their
application and greater discretion.
By allowing individual- ised
decisions, standards also entail uncertainty and risk of
partiality.
There is an intuitive connection between the ‘Factor Overload’
debate and the ‘Rules v Standards’ debate,
since the structure of
Laundry List legal commands is presumably more similar to the usual structure of
standards than to the usual
structure of rules: intuitively, rules are perceived
to be more simple and straightforward than standards. However, according to
Kaplow, a rule could be structured as a long list of factors as well since there
is no necessary connection between the number of
factors and the classification
of the legal command as a ‘rule’ or a ‘standard’.
That is to say, the question of ‘Rules v Standards’ is
separate from the question of the complexity of the legal command.
A rule could
be structured in a way that includes an extensive number of factors, and so
could a standard.
It is also important to stress that a short rule is not necessarily a simple
rule. Consider Epstein’s following example: ‘A
legal rule that
allows an employer to fire a worker only for “just cause” is not a
simple rule, because ... the list
of relevant considerations that helps
determine which firings are for cause and which are not is almost
The distinction between the complexity of the law
and whether it is
has practi- cal
importance.
The choice between rules and standards depends on the environment in which
the law is applied. Rules are considered to be ‘more
costly to promul-
Ibid 559–60.
ulia Black,
Rules and Regulators
(Oxford University Press, 1997)
Kaplow (n 30) 568.
pstein (n 5) 28.
aplow (n 30) 566. ‘[A] standard (implicitly complex) that one dispose
of toxic substances “appropriately” may be
preferable to a rule that
simply prohibits the dumping of petroleum byproducts into bodies of water. But,
at least for substances
frequently used in common settings — such as dry
cleaning and automotive fluids — a complex rule detailing the appro-
priate manner of disposal for different substances may be even better’: at
gate than standards because rules involve advance determinations of the
law’s content’.
Respectively, standards are considered
to be more costly to predict or apply since they ‘require later
determinations of the
law’s content’.
preferable in settings with common characteristics and frequent behaviour,
because, as explained by Kaplow, it is more efficient.
The reason a rule is more
efficient in an environment with common characteristics and frequent behaviour
is that if there were to
be many enforcement actions, it would cost less to
resolve the issue on a wholesale basis at the rule promulgation stage than to
repeatedly give content to a standard on a retail basis. In contrast, a standard
is preferable in less frequent and less predictable
environments.
This is because ‘[d]esigning a rule that accounts for every relevant
[situation is] wasteful, as most [situations] would never
The ‘Rules v Standards’ debate relates to a more general debate
formation. Rules are
generalisa- tions: that is, ‘simplifications of complex
It is impossible to make rules that address the
contingencies of all specific cases.
The process of making rules
involves several dimensions other than the ‘Rules v Standards’
distinction, including what
Black identifies as the ‘linguistic structure
of the rule’.
The rule’s linguistic structure
‘has three aspects: precision or vague- ness, simplicity or complexity,
and clarity or
Precision or vagueness ‘refers to the degree to which the operative
facts of the rule are specified’;
for example, the meaning of
a word could be ‘vague in that it is evaluative
(“reasonable”, “fair”,
“suitable”)’.
The simplicity of a rule’s
structure ‘refers to the number of factual situations or assessments
involved in a determination
of the rule’s applicability’ and
‘the clarity of a rule ... refers to the extent to which the rule is
by those applying the rule’.
The issue of Laundry
List rules discussed in this article is located mainly within the linguistic
structure of rules debate. My argument
Ibid 562–3.
lack (n 32) 7.
bid (citations omitted).
example for a case in which greater precision in a rule may lead to
complexity and, as a result, to uncertainty in the application
Even though the common perception with regards to procedure is that procedure
should, generally, be promulgated in the form of rules
rather than
it is possible to adopt a more nuanced approach. The
differentia- tion between rules that apply to frequent situations and standards
that are desirable for rare situations could be made in the procedural context
as well. For example, in the context of
r 3.9, a rule may be
preferable assuming there are many delays and a problem of noncompliance. In its
previous form, r 3.9 was a standard,
not a rule, because judges did not treat
the list of factors as a checklist; they were required to consider ‘all
the circumstances’
and, more generally, r 3.9 gave judges wide
discretion.
Lastly, while it is said that ‘detailed rules lead to more predictable
and more just outcomes’ than broad principles,
this assumption has hardly
been empirically examined.
In an experiment conducted by Fred
Ellinghaus and Ted Wright, law students and non-law students were given the
facts of contract disputes
and a statement of the relevant law, either in the
form of a broad principle or a detailed rule, and were asked to decide the
Predictability was measured according to the level of
agreement between participants.
It was found that decisions
applying a detailed ruled are no more predictable than decisions applying broad
principles — on
the contrary, ‘decisions applying broad principles
were ... more predictable in easier cases’ used in the
According to the argument presented in this article, rules of procedure
should usually be formed as simple rules rather than complex
standards (let
alone principles), due to the unique purpose of procedure. While Ellinghaus and
Wright assume rules are detailed,
as previously explained the
or explanation and critique, see, eg, Duncan Kennedy, ‘Form and
Substance in Private Law Adjudication’
Harvard Law Review
, 1697–1701.
red Ellinghaus and Ted Wright, ‘The Common Law of Contracts: Are Broad
Principles Better than Detailed Ones? An Empirical
Investigation’
(Legal Studies Research Paper No 122, Melbourne Law School) 3.
Ibid 3, 14–15, 18, 28.
bid 28. Ellinghaus and Wright also found that broad principles are more
likely to lead to just outcomes (based on the researchers’
assessment of
how accurately participants applied the relevant statement of law), are more
efficient (based on the time taken to
arrive a decision) and are more accessible
(less technical): at 21–2, 26–8.
detail of the legal command and whether it is a rule, a standard or a
principle (principles are even less constraining than standards)
separate characteristics. However, the results of their study go along with the
argument presented here, as these results
demonstrate that a simple principle is
prefera- ble to a complex rule. Ellinghaus and Wright’s data show that
princi- ples make it easier to agree on the outcome, while detailed
rules have a tendency to complicate even easier cases’.
To conclude, Laundry List rules such as r 3.9 unfold two problems in the
context of procedure. Firstly, their complexity makes the
application of these
rules unpredictable and unjust. Secondly, the fact that they are standards and
not rules creates uncertainty
and undermines important goals of procedure.
Pervasive Application of Procedural Rules
Another important point in relation to civil procedure is that procedural
rules control and affect the majority of civil disputes.
This is significant
because complex rules are considered to be more undesirable when they affect a
wide range of social activities.
According to Epstein,
‘[l]egal complexity is not merely a simple measure of the inherent or
formal properties of legal rules.
It is also a function of how deeply [rules]
cut into the fabric of ordinary life.’
For example, while the
legal rules that regulate homicide are directed to the destructive activities of
a very small portion of the
population, ‘the rules regulating the use of
property or the hiring and firing of workers ... routinely intrude into the
lives of ordinary ... people’.
Epstein’s definition, it is especially vital to regulate simple procedural
rules and to avoid Laundry List civil procedure
rules when possible, as
procedural rules control many different civil disputes.
III DOC TR I NA L ANA LYSI S :
Prior to April 2013,
r 3.9 ‘listed nine factors that the
court must to take into consideration [when adjudicating] an application for
relief from
sanc- tions’.
Judges struggled to apply r
3.9, as it required scrutinising all the
bid 21 (citations omitted).
pstein (n 5) 28–9.
bid. Epstein gives the rules that regulate homicide as an example for complex
rules that are unavoidable and not necessarily undesirable:
Levy (n 3) 139.
factors on the list and ‘demanded examination of all the circumstances
of a particular case’.
Therefore, r 3.9 ‘did not offer
sufficient protection against the problem of delays and noncompliance with
procedural requirements
in the civil justice system’.
Under the old r 3.9 the judge was obligated to consider ‘all the
circum- stances’ in order to decide whether to grant
‘relief from
any sanction imposed for a failure to comply with any rule, practice direction
or court order’, including
the factors explicitly mentioned in r
he interests of the administration of justice;
hether the application for relief has been made promptly;
hether the failure to comply was intentional;
hether there is a good explanation for the failure;
he extent to which the party in default has complied with other rules,
practice directions, court orders and any relevant pre-action
whether the failure to comply was caused by the party or his legal
representa- tive;
hether the trial date or the likely trial date can still be met if relief is
he effect which the failure to comply had on each party; and
he effect which the granting of relief would have on each party.
In response to Lord Justice Jackson’s
Review of Civil Litigation
, the Civil Procedure Rules Committee approved an amendment to r
n an application for relief from any sanction imposed for a failure to comply
with any rule, practice direction or court order, the
court will consider all
the circumstances of the case, so as to enable it to deal justly with the
application, including the need
or litigation to be conducted efficiently and at proportionate cost; and
o enforce compliance with rules, practice directions and
bid. See also Rupert Jackson,
Review of Civil Litigation Costs
Report, December 2009) 386–7 [2.1], 397 [6.5].
ivil Procedure Rule Committee, Ministry of Justice, ‘Amendment of CPR
3.9’ (CPR Paper No 11(23), 8 July 2011) 2. The amendment
was explored in
greater detail in Levy (n 3).
I will begin by discussing a few cases in which the court implemented
r 3.9 and will then move on to describe my experiment. In regard to the old
r 3.9, which required the court to consider all of the
circumstances including
nine factors, the court adopted the ‘stand back’ approach, whereby
the application of r 3.9 is
not performed using a ‘checklist’
exercise but rather by an estimation of the weight of all the factors overall.
case, Mance LJ said: ‘Indeed, at the end of the day,
the right approach is to stand back and assess the significance and weight
all relevant circumstances overall, rather than to engage in some form of
“head-counting” of circum- stances.’
3.9 gave judges expansive discretion, as explained by Zuckerman: ‘the
longer the list of considerations that must
be taken into account, the less each
of them is likely to count and the more open ended the court’s freedom of
choice is likely
Just before the new r 3.9 came into force, the Court of Appeal articulated
its strong approach towards changing the culture of delays
and noncompli- ance
by noting that the amended r 3.9 includes fewer factors than its prede-
case, Jackson LJ stated that after the
new rule came into force ‘litigants who substantially disregard court
orders or the requirements
would] receive significantly
less’ tolerance than before.
Shortly after the new rule became effective (in April 2013) the Court of
Appeal gave another decision, in the
case, in which it gave
guidance about the correct approach towards the revised version of
In the context of the Jackson reforms and the general
requirement that courts adopt a more robust approach to granting relief to
who default on court rules, practice directions and court orders, the
Court of Appeal ruled that relief from sanctions would not
be granted where
deadlines were over- looked, so solicitors should not take on so much work that
they were unable to meet them.
The Court of Appeal in the
case acknowledged that the new
ver- sion of
r 3.9, which includes ‘the need (i) for litigation
to be conducted efficiently and at proportionate cost and (ii) to enforce
compliance with rules,
ansom v E Rex Makin
[2003] EWCA Civ 1801
, [20]. See also
[2013] 2 Costs LO 364, 369 [18].
Zuckerman on Civil Procedure
(n 25) 576.
red Perry (Holdings) Ltd v Brands Plaza Trading Ltd
[2012] EWCA Civ 224
[2012] 6 Costs LR
, 1021 [49] (‘
Ibid 1022 [50].
Mitchell v News Group Newspapers Ltd
[2013] EWCA Civ 1537
[2013] 6 Costs LR
Ibid 1023 [41], 1025–6 [46].
practice directions and court orders, ... reflect[s] a deliberate shift of
empha- sis’.
The Court determined that the new
3.9 considerations ‘should ... be regarded as of paramount importance and
be given great weight’ and that it was ‘significant
that they [were]
the only considerations which [were] singled out for specific mention in the
The Court of Appeal also recognised the requirement to consider ‘all
the circumstances of the case, so as to enable it to deal
justly with the
application’ that is mentioned in the new
It stressed that the two considera- tions specifically mentioned in the
r 3.9 should be given more weight than the other circumstances:
‘The reference to “all the circumstances of the case”
3.9 might suggest that a broad approach should be adopted ... But ...
the other circumstances should be given less weight than the
two considerations
which are specifically mentioned.’
But is the change of approach in the
case a result of the new
rule? Is the rule indeed clearer now that it does not include nine factors?
Regretta- bly, the answer is
no. In itself, the new rule does not add much to
the current rules of procedure.
The interpretation of r 3.9 in the
case seems to be a result of a change in the Court of
Appeal’s approach at the time, one that possessed the potential to lead
a change in the general judicial culture towards noncompliance. Furthermore, in
case the Court of Appeal mentioned that the considerations
listed in the old rule could still be relevant but that now the primary
consideration is enforcement.
This means the Court of Appeal
defined a dominant consideration and in that way avoided the complex
multi-factor calculation that
existed before. Singling out enforcement as the
prominent consideration could have been accomplished in the wording of the rule
but because the rule does not say that, it was left for the Court of
Appeal to set the tone of the new rule. Overall, the Court’s
interpretation in the
case was desirable, as enforcing
compliance was the purpose of the amendment to r 3.9 to begin with.
However, the guidance that was given by the Court of Appeal in the
case in relation to the new r 3.9 did not survive very long. Only eight
months after the
decision, the Court of Appeal revised its
Ibid 1021 [36].
Ibid 1021 [37].
drian Zuckerman, ‘The Revised CPR 3.9: A Coded Message Demanding
Articulation’
Civil Justice Quarterly
(n 68) 1027 [49].
towards the new r 3.9 in the
giving more
leeway to litigants, against the purpose of preventing noncompliance with
process require- ments.
As Higgins argues, this experience
demonstrates the failure of the drafters of the amended
It shows that the rule itself needs to give clear guidance to courts
exercising their discretion. The ‘revised rule is virtually
content free,
doing little more than repeating the overriding objec- tive, and yet it is still
as open ended as the previous (heavily
criticised) rule it was designed to
Unfortunately, the current legal state is unlikely
to lead to clarity:
The nine factors have been replaced by two factors but all of them and more
may find their way back into the frame when the court
considers ‘all the
cir- cumstances’ of the case during the ‘third stage’ of the
guidance. The purpose of the reforms to
r 3.9 was not
to save words, but to provide better guidance to the courts in how to exercise
their discretion. However, the
guidance provides only limited
assistance to lower courts.
Higgins explains that, while the courts now know to normally grant relief if
the breach was not significant or if there was a good
reason for it, ‘if
the breach is significant, and there is no good reason for it, they still have
to weigh up all the circumstances’.
This means the courts are
provided with consider- able discretion and little guidance.
As mentioned previously, certainty and simplicity are two important vir- tues
when it comes to procedure. Even though the revised
r 3.9 is shorter in length
it is not necessarily simpler, as the court still has to consider ‘all the
circumstances’.
In addition, the revised r 3.9 is still closer to a
standard than to a rule, despite the common perception that procedure
should usually be
Denton v TH White Ltd
[2014] EWCA Civ 906
[2014] 1 WLR 3926.
See also Andrew
Higgins, ‘CPR 3.9: The
Guidance, the
Revision, and Why Coded Messages Don’t Make for Good Case Man-
Civil Justice Quarterly
Higgins (n 76) 388–91.
bid. See generally Stuart Sime, ‘Sanctions after Mitchell’
Civil Justice Quarterly
; Jack R Williams, ‘“Well,
That’s a Relief (from Sanctions)!” Time to Pause and Take Stock of
CPR r 3.9 Developments
within a General Theory of Case Management’
Civil Justice Quarterly
promulgated in the form of rules rather than standards. It is therefore not
surprising that legal academics criticised the revised
rule and its
application.
Another interesting point in relation to the
application of r 3.9 is that standards can be transformed into rules once they
are applied,
through the creation of precedents.
It may be the
case that ‘the first enforcement pro-
ceeding essentially transforms the standard into a rule’: that is,
in subsequent enforcement proceedings, courts simply apply the precedent
rather than engaging in an inquiry concerning appropriate
legal treatment
— an access to this precedent costs no more than if the law had been
promulgat- ed as a rule in the first place.
It seems that this is exactly what the Court of Appeal tried to do in
, as Jackson LJ’s opinion draws attention to the amendment of
r 3.9 and to the concern that ‘relief against sanctions
is being granted
too readily’.
Jackson LJ then moves on to emphasise that,
after the amendment, the Court will be less tolerant towards litigants who did
with any rule, practice direction or court order.
is to say, the Court was declaring that it will use its discretion in order to
enforce compliance, and in that respect it made
the legal command closer to a
rule than to a standard. This classification of r 3.9 depends on how later
decisions interpreted the
new r 3.9 and, as mentioned above, the Court does not
seem to be continuing this development.
IV EMPIR IC AL STUDY
As mentioned above, I use the term Factor Overload to describe a cognitive
phenomenon that occurs when judges attempt to implement
legal rules that include
more than a few factors. In order to demonstrate the effects of Factor
ee, eg, Higgins (n 76) 391.
aplow (n 30) 577–9. See also Frederick Schauer, ‘The Convergence
of Rules and Standards’
New Zealand Law Review
Kaplow (n 30) 577.
(n 66) 1021 [49].
bid 1021–2 [49]–[50]. The Court here refers to a previous version
of the rule amendment: ‘On an application for
relief from any sanction
imposed for a failure to comply with any rule, practice direction or court
order, the court will consider
the circumstances of the case, so as to enable it
to deal justly with the application including the need — (a) for
to be conducted efficiently and at proportionate cost; and (b) to
enforce compliance with rules, practice directions and court orders’:
Overload, I performed a preliminary experiment using a real case in which
the court applied the old r 3.9 of the
. The previous
exemplifies information overload since it included at least nine different
factors that the judge must weigh in order to reach
a decision. And, as formerly
explained, despite the amendment of the rule the nine factors may find their way
back into the assessment
when the court considers ‘all the
circumstances’. It is therefore a suitable case study to examine the
phenomenon of
cognitive overload due to a large number of considerations in the
legal context. The purpose of the experiment was to show that having
large number of factors is detrimental to the decision-making process by
creating difficulties in applying legal rules.
Previous studies demonstrated that, while certain decision makers claim to
consider a large number of factors, their decisions can
be predicted from only a
few of those considerations, making the rest practically irrelevant to the final
For example, in a study performed by Barton Beebe which
examined multi-factor tests for the likelihood of consumer confusion in
infringement cases, it was found that when judges use the multi-
factor test, usually only two or three factors are sufficient to
determine the
Therefore, the study concludes that ‘judges tend to
short-circuit the multifactor test’.
The study examined ‘all reported federal district court opinions [in
the United States] for [a] five-year period ... in which
a multifactor test for
the likelihood of consumer confusion was used’.
results showed that only ‘[a] few factors prove to be decisive’ and
that the rest of the factors are redundant or
even irrelevant:
‘in practice, a limited number of core factors determine the outcome
of the test’.
Not only that, but Beebe found that
‘[j]udges tend to “stampede” these remaining factors to
conform to the test
ee, eg, Barton Beebe, ‘An Empirical Study of the Multifactor Tests for
Trademark Infringe- ment’
California Law Review
Ibid 1581, 1600.
bid 1582. Beebe also found significant variation among the district court
circuits in the application and outcome of their respective
tests. Each circuit
has developed its own formula- tion of the test, and the different tests consist
of either 6, 7, 8, 10 or 13
factors: at 1581–4.
The results of this study match the results of previous studies.
However, Beebe goes a step further and asks the question: ‘But in
relying only on certain leading factors, are judges making
decisions?’
His answer to this question is as follows:
If recent research in human decision making is any guide, then the answer is
very likely no. Like any human decision makers, district
judges attempt to de-
cide both efficiently and accurately. In pursuit of efficiency, they consider
only a few factors. In pursuit
of accuracy, they consider the most decisive
Not only that, but Beebe refers to this judicial decision-making process as
successful and even rational:
In essence, as consummate pragmatists, they ‘take the best’, a
strategy which empirical work suggests is an altogether
successful — and
rational — approach to decision making.
Thus, Beebe argues that the heuristic that judges employ when taking into
account only a few factors ‘is evidence ... of human
ingenuity rather than
human fallibility’.
As will be shown later, Beebe’s
conclusion may be too simplistic considering the wide range of psychological
theories regarding
the nature of heuristics and human decision-making.
Beebe’s optimistic approach is consistent with the ‘fast and
school of thought, whose scholars believe that people have adopted
strategies that work well for them;
scholars from the
‘heuristics and biases’ school would be more concerned with errors
caused by the use of heuristics.
Beebe assumes that the judges’ tendency to consider only two or three
factors is an indicator of their efficient behaviour.
But in order to make this
statement he presumes that the factors the judges have chosen to consider are
indeed the most relevant
and important ones.
However, the mere
ee, eg, Monica Shapira and Rami Benbenishty, ‘Modeling Judgments and
Decisions in Cases of Alleged Child Abuse and Neglect’
(1993) 29(2)
Social Work Research and Abstracts
14, 18; Theodore Eisenberg and
Geoffrey P Miller, ‘Attorney Fees in Class Action Settlements: An
Empirical Study’
Journal of Empirical Legal Studies
Beebe (n 88) 1614.
bid (citations omitted).
bid (citations omitted).
Ibid 1586 n 25, 1602, 1649.
See, eg, Mark Kelman,
The Heuristics Debate
University Press, 2011) 6–7.
Beebe (n 88) 1614.
the judges in this case study chose two or three specific considerations out
of a long list of factors does not necessarily mean that
they made the right
choices; for example, they might have chosen these considerations because they
were the easiest to take into
account. Beebe assumes that the remaining
considera- tions are irrelevant, but he may be wrong. The question becomes: Who
which considerations are relevant and which are not?
Simply assuming that decisions made under multi-factor tests are not flawed
is not enough. Therefore, this article presents a different
methodology, the
purpose of which is to address the quality of decisions made under multi- factor
rules and not to merely address
the question of whether judges ignore some of
the considerations on the list. I do this by comparing decisions made under
rule structures and examining which of these rule structures leads to
an optimum decision. More specifically, I identified a case
in which there is
wide legal agreement regarding the correct result, and I examined whether there
is a deviation from this desirable
result when a long list of factors is used.
This provided means by which I could evaluate whether the decisions made under a
multi-factor
rule are indeed accurate.
Experiment Description
My hypothesis was that given the same case facts, judicial decisions would be
similar both when participants used a large number of
factors and when they used
no factors at all to decide a case. Once there became too many factors to
consider the judge would encounter
cognitive difficulty processing all of the
information and would unconsciously omit some of the factors during the
decision-making
process. Due to the cognitive effects of information overload
and the human tendency to simplify complex decisions, the list of factors
become practically meaningless when it was too long to implement. Therefore,
instituting a rule with a long list of considerations
would result in decisions
that are not derived from the rules; rather, they would be closer to decisions
made under maximal judicial
discretion, without any clear direc- tion.
Thus, I anticipated that the decisions would be more consistent under the
limited-number-of-factors scenario than under the long-list-of-factors
Multi-factor rules could intentionally be standards that give
the judge wide discretion (in fact, this is usually the case). The point
that using a long list of factors, even if the purpose were to give the judge a
wide discretion, does not add anything to
the decision, since, in cases in
which the list is too long, judges cannot use it as a helpful tool in their
decision-making process.
Moreover, at least in the context of procedural rules
such as r 3.9, I argue that limiting judicial discretion or using a rule instead
of a standard is preferable.
scenario. I also expected that applying the rule to the facts of the case
would be easier under the limited-number-of-factors case.
As previously mentioned, in order to support my theory I chose a real case
that both utilised
r 3.9 and had wide legal agreement regarding the
correct result. In the case I chose (
), the Court of Appeal decided
unanimously that relief from sanctions should not be granted and that the case
provided an example
of situations in which the court should enforce compliance
and not grant relief.
Not only that, Jackson LJ, who gave one of
the opinions (the appeal was heard before Maurice Kay, Jackson and Lew- ison
involved in the amendment of r 3.9 as part of his review of civil
litigation costs in England and Wales.
He is therefore an expert
on the subject.
Lastly, the decision received positive treatment
in later cases and in the legal literature. The method I chose examines the
from the optimum. I expected that when using the long list of factors
participants would be more willing to grant relief from sanctions
even though
the correct decision should be not to grant relief.
In the experiment, 148 subjects read a vignette describing the
case. I took the basic description of the factual chronology of the case
from the decision given by the Court of Appeal. I then slightly
modified the
presenta- tion of the case in order to ensure that other factors would not
influence the premise which the experiment
was attempting to examine. Firstly, I
tried to keep the description of the facts as simple as possible without
omitting any relevant
details in order to make sure the facts of the case were
clear to the participants who took part in the survey.
(n 66) 1021–2 [48]–[50].
ee Jackson (n 62).
he following quote from Jackson LJ’s opinion shows that the Court was
convinced that in this case the relief from sanctions
should not be granted.
‘Non-compliance with the Civil Procedure Rules and orders of the court on
the scale that has occurred
in this case cannot possibly be tolerated. Any
further grant of indulgence to the defendants in this case would be a denial of
to the claimants and a denial of justice to other litigants whose cases
await resolution by the court’:
(n 66) 1021 [48].
t could be argued that, although in the
case the Court was
dealing with the unre- formed r 3.9, it was in essence deciding as if r 3.9 had
already been reformed, meaning
that the decision would not have gone that way
had it not already been decided that r 3.9 must be amended. However, this is not
reasoning given by the Court at
(n 66) 1022 [50]: ‘It is
currently anticipated that this revised rule will come into force on 1 April
2013. After that date
litigants who substantially disregard court orders or the
requirements of the Civil Proce- dure Rules will receive significantly
indulgence than hitherto. As I say, that rule amend- ment lies in the future. In
the present case, on the rules as they stand,
relief from sanction must be
Secondly, I presented both the plaintiff and defendant as companies, and I
avoided presenting the plaintiff as a big company versus
the defendant as a
‘weak’ small company, since I did not want the participants to rule
in favour of the defendant simply
because they felt more empathetic towards it.
In fact, r 3.9 already touches on the sensitive issue of the right to present a
(since the result of not granting relief from sanctions is that the
defendant cannot submit a defence), and I suspected that even
modifications participants would tend to give relief from sanctions despite the
fact that in the case used in the survey
the defendant did not comply with six
court orders. Being too lenient with violations of process requirements was part
of the problem
of the old r 3.9, which did not put enough emphasis on enforcing
compliance.
For that reason, although I used a real case, I
presented the facts of the case in a balanced way and avoided placing the
on specific aspects of r 3.9. I am interested in examining the
influence of the number of factors and not the specific goal of the
therefore presented the parties as approximately equal entities.
Because the optimum decision in the case is to
grant relief in
favour of the defendant, presenting the defendant as equal to the plaintiff (as
opposed to a ‘weak’ litigant)
should only encourage more optimum
decisions. In any event, the case was presented in an identical way between all
groups, the only
difference being the number of considerations, which is the
variable I wanted to investigate.
The experiment was performed on Amazon’s Mechanical Turk
(‘MTurk’) using ‘Qualtrics’ online survey
Participants were given a descrip-
See, eg, ibid 1021 [49].
Turk is an online crowdsourcing system that allows easy access to online
research participants. MTurk workers were mostly from the
United States and
India. For more about the demographics of the participants at the relevant time,
see Joel Ross et al, ‘Who
Are the Crowdworkers? Shifting Demographics in
Mechanical Turk’ (Conference Paper, CHI 2010: ACM Conference on Human
in Computing Systems, 10–15 April 2010) 2863. De- spite
differences between MTurk participants and traditional samples, it
that generally ‘MTurk participants produce reliable results’ and
that ‘MTurk offers a highly valua- ble
opportunity for data
collection’: Joseph K Goodman, Cynthia E Cryder and Amar Chee- ma,
‘Data Collection in a Flat World:
The Strengths and Weaknesses of
Mechanical Turk Samples’ (2013) 26
Journal of Behavioral Decision
213, 213. The participants were given the following instructions:
‘We are conducting an academic survey about legal decision
making. We need
you to perform as the judge in a legal case that will be presented to you and
then answer a few questions. Select
the link below to complete the survey. At
tion of the modified
case, as mentioned above, and were divided
into three groups (a between-subjects design).
The first group was
given the full list of factors in the former
r 3.9 and was asked to
reach a decision according to these factors; the second group was asked to reach
a decision without any factors
at all, according to their discretion, and given
only the following quote from r 3.9: ‘On an application for relief from
sanction imposed for a failure to comply with any rule, practice direction
or court order the court will consider all the circumstances’;
third group was asked to reach a decision given only three of the factors from r
3.9. To avoid a state in which specific
factors affect the results, I randomised
the factors so that different subjects in this group received different factors.
The results
of the three different conditions (a long list of nine factors, a
short list of three factors and full judicial discretion) were
The experiment was followed by a questionnaire in which participants were
asked to provide some information about themselves and to
explain how they had
reached their decisions, as a tool to understanding their decision- making
process. Participants were required
to provide the following infor- mation: age,
gender, native language, occupation, legal background, reason for granting or
the application, explanation of how they applied the legal rule that
was mentioned in the survey, level of confidence in their decision,
and level of
difficulty in performing the task. I then used the answers to these questions to
check whether any other factors influenced
the participants’ decisions and
to make sure that the participants indeed read the case and understood it. I
also measured
the time it took each subject to answer the survey as another tool
to ensure that the case was read by the participant.
The results showed that under the 3-factors condition subjects were more
likely to make the optimal decision; that is, not to grant
relief from
sanctions, more than in any of the other groups. This difference was
shown to be
the survey, you will receive a code to paste into the box below to receive
credit for taking our survey.’
Turk participants do not possess a legal background. I chose to perform the
experiment on MTurk for the following reason: I performed
a pilot of this
experiment with law students and they were influenced by their previous
familiarity with the case and by their specific
legal education (for example,
students of Professor Zuckerman, who had influenced the amend- ment of r 3.9,
tended not to grant relief
in comparison to other students). By using MTurk, I
could ensure that the participants were not familiar with the case or the
of r 3.9 and that they were only affected by the number of
statistically significant. The Chi Square test showed a significant result in
relation to groups A (9 factors) and B (3 factors):
P=0.035, as well as in
relation to groups B (3 factors) and C (0 factors): P=0.02. The results are
shown in Table 1.
Table 1: Results
TTCC11,,11
9 factors (n=SO)
3 factors (n=48)
O factors (n=SO)
TTCC,,11
Refuse relief from sanctions (optimum result)
50% 71% 48%
TTCC11,,11
These preliminary results demonstrate not only that the long list of factors
(group A) did not change the participants’ decisions
in comparison to the
condition of no factors at all (group C), but also that in this case having a
long list of factors actually
prevented participants from reaching the optimal
result. As mentioned above, I identified the optimal result by using the
decision of the Court of Appeal in this case, accompanied by a wide
acceptance of the Court’s decision in following legal cases
legal scholarship.
As shown in the table, when given only three randomised factors to con- sider
from r 3.9 (group B), 71% of the participants decided
to grant relief
from sanctions (n=48), the same decision given by the Court of Appeal (the
optimal result). In contrast, when given
nine factors, only 50% of the partici-
pants decided not to grant relief from sanctions (n=50). This result is despite
the fact that
the Court of Appeal ruled that the case presented in the survey is
an example of a case in which the relief from sanctions should
granted. As anticipated, the results of group A (the 9-factors condition) were
similar to the results of group C (0-factors), as
48% of the participants in
group C decided not to grant relief from sanctions (n=50).
The results of the experiment show that when subjects
experienced Factor Overload they defaulted to a coin flip. In contrast, when
they were led gently, they moved towards the optimal decision. Previous studies
with real judges in real cases
showed that judges ignore the majority of the considerations when presented with
a long list.
Not only that, earlier findings have shown that other
experts do not manage the exercise of integrating factors well.
This article therefore argues that it should not be assumed that judges
perform optimally in Factor Overload situations. In order
to show that judges
differ from other experts by being able to identify the most relevant
considerations on a long list, it would
be necessary to conduct further
empirical examination and to test whether judges use helpful intuition in Factor
Overload situations
or merely experi- ence decision fatigue due to cognitive
More generally, it has already been demonstrated that
judges, like everyone else, use their intuition and that this use of intuition
may lead to erroneous and unjust outcomes. It was therefore suggested that the
justice system take steps to increase more deliberate
and systematic judicial
decision-making.
The purpose of the current analysis was to show that, as
opposed to previ- ous claims, a long list of factors might have detrimental
effects in legal decision-making. As mentioned previously, it has been suggested
that in relying only on certain factors out of a
large number of factors, judges
ee, eg, Beebe (n 88).
ee, eg, Dawes (n 2) 573. For example, in the context of a
medical decision, it was shown that physicians were less likely to prescribe
medication when deciding between two medications than when deciding about only
one medication, meaning the difficulty in deciding
between the two medications
led some physicians to recommend not starting either. This study shows that the
introduction of additional
options can increase decision-making difficulty even
in the case of experts. Adding new options can increase the probability of
a previously available alternative or maintaining the status quo:
Redelmeier and Shafir (n 2). This is not to say that judicial expertise
exist: Daniel Kahneman,
Thinking, Fast and Slow
(Farrar, Straus and
Giroux, 2011) 240–1; Doron Teichman and Eyal Zamir, ‘Judicial
Decision- Making: A Behavioral Perspective’
in Eyal Zamir and Doron
Teichman (eds),
The Oxford Handbook of Behavioral Economics and the Law
(Oxford University Press, 2014) 664, 690.
or empirical findings in the field of sentencing in England
and Wales, see generally Julian V Roberts and Mike Hough, ‘Empirical
Sentencing Research: Options and Opportunities’ in Julian V Roberts (ed),
Exploring Sentencing Practice in England and Wales
(Palgrave Macmil- lan,
ee Chris Guthrie, Jeffrey J Rachlinski and Andrew J Wistrich,
‘Blinking on the Bench: How Judges Decide Cases’
Cornell Law Review
making flawed decisions.
The results of the current experiment
suggest that simply assuming that decisions made under multi-factor tests are
not flawed is
not enough and that a long list of factors may prevent judges from
reaching the optimal result.
As for the definition of the ‘optimal’ decision, it was
determined here ac- cording to the wide agreement of legal experts
correct result in the case study used in the experiment. The method of
determining the optimal result according to consensus
between experts was
previously suggested in the psychological literature.
were unable to identify the ‘optimal’ result in this case, the mere
finding that a long list of factors does
not add anything to the decision-making
process is in itself significant. As the results showed, decisions were similar
9-factors condition and under the 0- factors condition, where subjects
were equally divided. Subjects produced decisions that were
closer to the
decision of the Court of Appeal only under the 3-factors condition. Meaning, the
only environment that led subjects
decision was the limited
number of factors environment.
This should be taken into
consideration by drafters of rules of procedure in order to promote the desired
implementation of these
Lastly, this article calls for the simplification of procedural rules. But,
as was stressed at the very beginning, complexity is sometimes
required in order
to allow adjustment for different, or more complicated, legal cases. The
argument made in this article is
that procedure should always be
simpli- fied, but that sometimes rules are complex without merit. This ought to
be a concern of policymakers
who are responsible for phrasing the rules.
Drafters of procedural rules must take into account not only the content of the
but also the way the human decision-maker would apply them.
What are the practical conclusions from here onwards? Generally, there is a
consensus that ‘it is often easier or preferable
to change the environment
in which decision makers function or to delegate decisions from a badly
positioned to a well-positioned
decision maker than to try to change how
Beebe (n 88) 1614.
or a more detailed account and critique, see David J Weiss and James
Shanteau, ‘Empirical Assessment of Expertise’ (2003)
n additional possible explanation for these results, other than
‘cognitive overload’, could be the ‘coherence effect’.
The coherence effect is manifested in a cognitive process in which the decision
maker perceives the chosen alternative to be supported
by strong considerations,
despite high levels of ambiguity. It is possible that under the 3-factors
condition, the reason for the
decision was made clearer and therefore it was
easier for the subjects to determine the result, see Dan Simon, ‘A Third
of the Black Box: Cognitive Coherence in Legal Deci- sion Making’
University of Chicago Law Review
each individual processes’ information.
In the legal
environment, it could be argued that improving judges’ decision-making
processes (by, for example, using ‘debiasing’
techniques) should be
a part of their professional training, as judges are required to make complex
decisions on a regular basis.
In any event, changing the environment in which
judges make their decisions can certainly be helpful, and therefore the
possible solutions could be considered alongside judicial
Firstly, linear models could be used in order to help judges implement
Laundry List rules. Generally speaking, a linear model is a
statistical predic-
tion based on input variables. Linear models are needed since ‘experts ...
are much better at selecting
and coding information than they are at integrating
People are good at choosing the ‘right
predictor variables’, but they ‘are bad at integrating
information’,
especially information ‘from diverse and
incomparable sources’.
The purpose of the linear model
is therefore to integrate the information in an optimal manner, using a
computation- al
There are several possible formulae for a linear model in the context of
Laundry List rules. For instance, it is possible to build
a model that requires
the judge to rate each factor on a scale of 0–10. Taking the old
r 3.9 as an example, each consideration in r 3.9 with regards to granting
relief from sanctions would receive a number: if ‘the
failure to comply
was intentional’ (r 3.9(c)), the judge would rate it ‘0’ (the
lowest rating possible), but if
‘the application for relief has been made
promptly’ (r 3.9(b)), the judge would rate it ‘10’ (the
rating). If the answer was somewhere in the middle, the judge would rate
it ‘5’, and so on. The model would set a numerical
threshold for
granting relief from sanctions that should be in accordance with the rules of
evidence and the balance of probabilities.
In the latter example, 51% of the
90-points rating range is 45.9 points and therefore any sum beyond this number
would suggest that
the judge should grant relief from sanctions. This
calculation would of course only serve the judges as a tool, and they could
from the result as long as they gave reasons for doing so.
elman (n 101) 4. For example, if patients are more likely to understand
medical information when it is ‘presented in one form
rather than another,
it might be better to present it in the fashion that most people typically
understand rather than to attempt
to train them’ to under- stand the other
form: at 4 (citations omitted).
awes (n 2) 573. See also Paul E Meehl,
Clinical versus Statistical
Prediction: A Theoretical Analysis and a Review of the Evidence
(University
of Minnesota Press, 1954) ch 4; William M Grove et al, ‘Clinical versus
Mechanical Prediction: A Meta-Analysis’
Psychological
Dawes (n 2) 574.
It should be stressed that ‘linear model[s] cannot replace the
expert[s]’.
It is the expert who chooses the variables and
determines what to look for, while the linear model is merely aimed towards
integrating
the information.
The advantage of linear models over
intuitive clinical judgment was shown in a variety of contexts, such as faculty
rating of graduate
the diagnosis of psychosis versus
neurosis by clinical psychologists,
bank loan officials’
prediction of bankruptcies,
and even decisions about what type of
bullet should be used by the police.
One possible way of building a linear model is to use an expert’s
judgment, a court judge’s for instance, about an outcome
criterion and
then to use the model in place of the expert.
Even though the
models make use of the weights derived from the judges, they consistently
perform better than the judges from whom
they were derived. The models perform
better in the sense of better correlation between predicted and actual values.
Linear models
work because they catch the essence of the judge’s valid
expertise while eliminating unreliability. That is to say, ‘a
model distills underlying policy ... from ... otherwise variable behaviour
(eg, judgements affected by context effects
or extraneous
variables)’.
For example, if a statistical examination of
cases that apply r 3.9 shows that applications for relief from sanctions that
were submitted
more than 10 days after the failure to comply were considered to
be applications that were not made ‘promptly’ according
to r 3.9(b),
then the linear model would imitate the judges and grant a low score to that
particular element and consequently a lower
success rate to applications that
were submitted after ten days from the failure to comply. The linear models
therefore attempt to
separate the human unreliability from the valid judgmen-
tal strategy.
It should be emphasised that the mathematical models are not aimed to- wards
dehumanising legal decisions but rather at serving as
a helpful tool in
Ibid 576–7.
Lewis R Goldberg, ‘Man versus Model of Man: A Rationale,
Plus Some Evidence, for a Method of Improving on Clinical Inferences’
Psychological Bulletin
Dawes (n 2) 579.
Ibid 577–8.
Goldberg (n 124) 422, 423.
the complicated decision-making process.
individuals tend to have great difficulty incorporating quantified
variables’; they tend to ‘base their
decisions on less information
... than do mathematical models, and apply their decision policies
inconsistently’.
Mathematical models recognise the
limitations of human information processing and are merely used as additional
tools for decision-making
and not as a substitute for human beings.
Unlike the option of diminishing the number of considerations in Laundry
List rules, the possible use of mathematical models would
enable preservation of
a relatively high number of considerations in a certain legal rule, while the
integration would be accomplished
with the assistance of a computerised
mathematical model.
A second possible solution is to simply limit the number of factors. Ac-
cording to the psychological studies mentioned above, decision
makers have
difficulty managing a large number of considerations. The most obvious solution
for this problem is to simply reduce
the number of factors in legal rules. By
limiting the number of factors, judges would be able to weigh the factors in an
way: that is, fully taking into account every factor.
However, limiting the number of factors could raise a serious difficulty,
since it could be argued that there is a large number of
relevant factors that
be taken into account by the court. If indeed it were the case
that there are more than a few important considerations, simply ignoring
them seems to be unjust. The court should take into account relevant
considerations and not take into account irrelevant
considerations. Reducing the
number of factors might have the effect of changing the legal question by
removing important considerations
that a court should be asking itself.
This may be true in a perfect world. But what if judges were not able to take
into account all the relevant considerations? Should
we still include all the
relevant considerations in the legal rule even though we know the rule is
impossible to implement? It could
be argued that the number of factors should be
reduced even with the price of relinquishing some of the relevant
considerations,
because this way judges at least would consider
n addition, the use of linear models could encourage judges to use a more
deliberate attitude instead of relying on their intuition,
by requiring them to
engage in a methodological deci- sion-making process. According to Guthrie,
Rachlinski and Wistrich, ‘[a]
judge who must review a script or checklist
at each step in the decision-making process is less likely to rely on intuition
doing so is inadvisable’: Guthrie, Rachlinski and Wistrich (n 114)
ichael J Saks and Robert F Kidd, ‘Human Information Processing and
Adjudication: Trial by Heuristics’
Law and Society Review
, 147, citing Robyn M Dawes and Ber- nard Corrigan, ‘Linear Models
in Decision Making’ (1974) 81
Psychological Bulletin
aks and Kidd (n 131) 147–8.
relevant considerations (when the alternative is ignoring the long list of
and making an intuitive decision).
One of the enemies of simplicity is the wish to achieve perfect justice in an
individual case. Simple rules (such as rules with one
or two determinate
factors) do not meet this aspiration since they are tests that work most of the
time but are known to fail some
of the time. However, as Epstein explains,
‘the gains from seeking perfection [through complex rules] are an
Therefore, the comparison between simple rules
and complex rules should be conducted in the ‘language of realizable
achievement[s]’
and not in the ‘language of aspiration’, and
in the ‘language of realizable achievements’, simple rules have
advantage over complex rules.
This approach would support
reduction of the number of factors in legal rules for the sake of
simplicity.
A third solution would be to use ‘chunks’ (factors sorted into
groups) to help judges process the large number of considerations.
well-known paper, George A Miller proposed that the capacity of short-term
memory is limited to a ‘magical number’
of seven (plus or minus two)
This limit is usually expressed in terms of
‘chunks’, namely groups of items that have been collected together
and treated
as a single unit. For example, the following sequences of single
letters may serve as three individual chunks, rather than as nine
separate items
(these combinations would help people memorise the letters): USA, YYY, BBQ. The
limit of the number of chunks a person
can process ‘appears to be about 3
or 4 distinct chunks, consistent with many modern studies, but also equivalent
7 uncompressed items of typical compressibility, [which is] consistent
with Miller’s famous magical number’.
psychological studies regarding chunking offer another solution for the Laundry
List problem other than simply reducing the number
of factors. This solution is
to arrange the factors in chunks so they will be easier for a human decision
maker to process. For example,
in the case of the old
following considerations could be expressed in one chunk: r 3.9(h) (‘the
effect which the failure to comply had on
each party’) and r 3.9(i)
(‘the effect which the granting of relief would have on each party’)
as they both refer
to the effect on the parties. In addition, r 3.9(c)
(‘whether the failure to
pstein (n 5) 38.
eorge A Miller, ‘The Magical Number Seven, Plus or Minus Two: Some
Limits on Our Capacity for Processing Information’
Psychological Review
abien Mathy and Jacob Feldman, ‘What’s Magic about Magic Numbers?
Chunking and Data Compression in Short-Term Memory’
comply was intentional’), r 3.9(d) (‘whether there is a good
explanation for the failure’) and r 3.9(f ) (‘whether
the failure to
comply was caused by the party or his legal representative’) could become
one chunk as they all refer to the
reason of the failure to comply.
Theoretically, the advantage of the chunking technique is that it could allow
judges to ‘have their cake and eat it too’
— expressing a
large number of factors in chunks lets them keep all of the considerations with
a simpler decision-making mechanism.
Lastly, another similar, helpful solution would be to provide clear guidance
on how to implement the long list of factors. For example,
improvements could
include identifying factors as primary or secondary, suggesting judges apply the
rule in several stages, setting
a unique threshold (for instance, granting
relief from sanctions only when the party was not responsible for the delay),
the weight that should be given to each factor, highlighting the most
important factor on the list and so on.
ONC LU SION
Complex procedural rules such as Laundry List rules impose a heavy cost on
the civil legal process, while the benefit of these rules
is questionable. This
article has suggested applying cognitive psychological research to the debate
regarding Laundry List procedural
rules and examined the need to improve the
structure of certain legal commands. People, including judges, have difficulty
manipulating
a large number of factors. This cognitive phenomenon referred to as
Factor Overload raises a unique problem in the context of civil
procedure. Even
though simplicity is not always desirable, legal policymakers should consider
not only the substance of procedural
rules, but also how human decision makers
would implement these rules. In situations of Factor Overload, a long list of
factors might
disrupt the judicial decision-making process. A detailed account
of the possible solutions is beyond the scope of this article. However,
following options could be considered: (a) limiting the number of considerations
in legal rules to a maximum of three to four
factors; (b) chunking factors into
groups so that they are easier for a decision maker to process; and (c) using
computerised mathematical
models to help judges give the appropriate weight to
CFGESMIIIIIDKAFSSDIISIIISIKSIIIIIFZHItfOttw)twwwtIIEIIIIFFIIIIIIIBIIIKEIIJLIFMIIFAIITTTIIIIRCSCDRMDPRPPTI
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (449 KB)
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter