URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/journals/UNSWLawJlF/2021/3.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 15:46:10
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
White, Ben P; Willmott, Lindy; Close, Eliana; Downie, Jocelyn --- "Legislative Options To Address Institutional Objections To Voluntary Assisted Dying In Australia" [2021] UNSWLawJlF 3; (2021) UNSW Law Journal Forum No 3
I INTRODUCTION
II THE CONCEPT OF INSTITUTIONAL CONSCIENTIOUS OBJECTION14
III EXISTING EVIDENCE ABOUT LAW AND POLICY RESPONSES
B Other Australian Jurisdictions
C Some Illustrative Canadian Examples
IV THREE POSSIBLE MODELS OF LEGAL REGULATION
A ‘Conscience Absolutism’
B ‘Compromise or Reasonable Accommodation’ of Institutional Objection
1 Nature of Provision: No New Rights for Institutions; Creates Process Only
2 Would the Patient’s Interests Be Unduly Compromised by Requiring Access to VAD Outside the Facility?
3 Obligations Where Access to VAD Will Occur Outside the Objecting Institution
4 Obligations Where Access to VAD Will Occur Inside the Objecting Institution
C ‘Non-Toleration’ of Institutional Objection
V CONCLUSION
LEGISLATIVE OPTIONS TO ADDRESS INSTITUTIONAL OBJECTIONS TO
VOLUNTARY ASSISTED DYING IN AUSTRALIA
BEN P WHITE,
LINDY WILLMOTT,
AND JOCELYN
Voluntary assisted dying is being considered by parliaments and law reform
bodies across Australia. Although individual conscientious
objection is
routinely considered in these deliberations, an institution’s desire to
object to providing voluntary assisted
dying has received very little attention.
After briefly considering the concept of institutional objection in voluntary
dying, this article examines the available (albeit limited) Australian
evidence on this practice. Institutional objection is happening
in Victoria
(where voluntary assisted dying is lawful) and is likely to occur in other
Australian states. The article proposes that
regulation is needed and presents
three models for parliaments and law reformers to consider. The first is
‘conscientious absolutism’,
which grants institutions unrestricted
ability to object to voluntary assisted dying. The second is a ‘compromise
or reasonable
accommodation’ model, which aims to accommodate both
institutional objection and a person’s wish to access voluntary
dying. Different balances can be struck; we propose a model that prioritises a
patient’s interests. The third model
is ‘non-toleration’,
which would refuse to allow an institution to object at all. While there can be
debate about the
optimal model, the issue of institutional objection to
voluntary assisted dying must be addressed.
I INTRODUCTION
After decades of unsuccessful attempts to legalise voluntary assisted dying
the past few
years have witnessed a flurry of reform activity in Australia. In Victoria, the
Voluntary Assisted Dying Act 2017
Victorian VAD
’) commenced operation in June 2019. Western Australia largely
followed the Victorian model and its
Voluntary Assisted Dying Act 2019
(WA) is due to commence operation on 1 July 2021. As this article was being
published, Tasmania also passed its
End-of-Life Choices (Voluntary Assisted
Dying) Act 2021
(Tas) which is anticipated to commence in 2022. A VAD Bill
has been introduced in South
one will be considered in Queensland in May
and New South Wales is likely
to see such a Bill tabled in 2021 as
Reflecting the contested nature of VAD legislation, such laws almost
universally contain provisions to respect conscientious objections
by individual
health professionals. Both the Victorian and Western Australian laws state that
a health professional has a right to
refuse involvement with any aspect of the
VAD process.
A more controversial
issue, which has received limited consideration in Australia, is whether an
institution
should be able to prohibit access to VAD or any VAD-related
activities (which include eligibility assessments and providing information
The Victorian and Western Australian Acts are silent on this issue. However,
this is important because institutions that object have
the power to
significantly curtail individuals’ ability to access what is a lawful
medical service.
When this occurs
for reasons of conscience, this is problematic, particularly when these
institutions are the sole providers of specialist
end-of-life care in a
particular geographic
This effectively creates barriers to access and the impact on patients can be
extreme; those who are eligible for VAD are already
experiencing intolerable
suffering and such institutional objections can compound this.
Although the Victorian and Western Australian Acts do not address
institutional objection, it is possible for legislation to regulate
Voluntary Assisted Dying Bill 2019
, a model Bill that was recommended by the
Queensland parliamentary inquiry considering VAD as the proposed basis for
contains such a provision.
proposed amendment to regulate institutional objections was also debated, though
ultimately not passed, in the Legislative Council
of Tasmania during debate on
End-of-Life Choices (Voluntary Assisted Dying) Act 2021
During the debates in Tasmania, many parliamentarians expressed grave concern
that institutions (particularly residential aged care
facilities) would create
unjustified barriers for individuals who were approaching the end of their
lives, suffering intolerably,
and seeking VAD. For example, Ms Forrest stated:
‘I am really struggling with why we would require someone to be moved from
their home because an organisation’s policy was that they did not want to
be involved in the
Indeed, several
politicians expressed surprise that institutions could legally prevent health
professionals from entering facilities
This article explores how institutional objections to VAD in Australia are
currently regulated, the potential consequences of such
objections, and possible
legislative responses. We commence by examining the concept of institutional
objection, including a comparison
with conscientious objection by individuals.
We then outline how institutional objection is regulated in Victoria (by
policy), evidence
of the impact of such objection on individuals in Victoria,
and likely outcomes in other parts of Australia if VAD is enacted. We
consider the recent Canadian experience to identify potential outcomes of
institutional objections. We conclude by offering
some regulatory options to
govern institutional objection for parliaments and other bodies deliberating on
VAD reform.
II THE CONCEPT OF INSTITUTIONAL CONSCIENTIOUS
Conscientious objection in medicine can refer to a desire not to participate
in providing a healthcare service based on concerns to
‘preserve or
maintain moral
integrity’.
It is conceptually distinct from non-participation based on clinical judgment
– that to provide a particular treatment would
not be in accordance with
good medical practice.
also to be distinguished from pragmatic reasons for non-participation, based on
lack of expertise, financial or technological
While an individual’s right to conscientiously object is traditionally
recognised in law and policies,
it is more contentious whether an institution itself can have a
‘conscientious objection’. Individuals are self-evidently
agents, and possess human rights, including the right to freedom of religion,
thought and conscience.
status of institutions is less clear. Some argue there is no basis for an
institution to have such an objection, as ‘bricks
and mortar’ cannot
have moral beliefs as people
Others consider a healthcare institution to be more than just a building, and
view it as ‘a group of people organized according
to a series of roles and
relationships designed to deliver the social good of
healthcare’.
According to
this view, institutions may have a distinctive mission, ethos and moral values,
and should be recognised as having a
conscience.
A middle ground, advanced by Wicclair, is to argue that while hospitals do not
possess a conscience like individuals do, they could
still justify claims to
refuse a service on the basis of their identity and integrity. Nevertheless,
they have obligations to prevent
harm to patients, promote health and respect
autonomy, which can outweigh identity or integrity-based
Institutional objections to VAD may be made by a range of different
institutions, including hospitals, residential aged care facilities
long-term care facilities, and hospices or other short-term care
facilities.
Institutions may
object to participating in VAD on at least three levels: 1) VAD administration;
2) eligibility assessments; and
3) providing information or referring
individuals to facilitate
Firstly, an institution may not wish to have administration of VAD occur in its
It may achieve this by forbidding its staff or outside health professionals from
administering or prescribing VAD medication to patients,
and/or it may prohibit
individuals themselves from taking it in the facility. Secondly, an institution
may prohibit consultations
or eligibility assessments for VAD occurring within
the facility, whether conducted by staff or outside health
professionals.
Thirdly, an
institution may refuse to refer a patient to other institutions or health
professionals who provide VAD services or object
to providing information about
A common basis for institutional objection is religious belief. The Catholic
Church has made prominent statements on VAD, with its
most recent pronouncement
concluding that ‘euthanasia ... is an intrinsically evil
and that complicity by ‘[a]ny formal or immediate material cooperation in
such an act is a grave sin against human
This is significant
as Catholic hospitals and institutions (eg, hospices and long-term care
facilities) provide a significant proportion
of end-of-life care in
Other religions,
including Judaism and Islam, have expressed the same
This has led some religious organisations to refuse to permit VAD assessments or
administration in their
facilities.
They may, however, be willing to provide information about VAD, refer to an
external source of information,
or facilitate a transfer of
Institutional objections need not be grounded in
An example of this is
an objection based on an institution’s philosophy of palliative care,
which for some
warrants a strict
separation from VAD. For other institutions, objections to VAD may be grounded
in their view about the purpose
of medicine; namely, to promote health and
preserve life, rather than to take life.
III EXISTING EVIDENCE ABOUT LAW AND POLICY
Victorian VAD Act
is silent on institutional
Instead, the
Department of Health and Human Services (‘DHHS’) has addressed this
issue using a series of policy documents
aimed directly at
institutions.
The DHHS instructs health services to assess their capacity to provide VAD, and
determine whether it is congruent with their ‘staff
or service mix’
and the health service’s
The guidance indicates
that ‘most health services will fall into one of three high-level
• Pathway A: Single service – Health services that are willing
and able to provide VAD within their facilities;
• Pathway B: Partnership service – Institutions that can provide
access to some elements of VAD but require assistance
from existing external
partnerships and referral
• Pathway C: Information and support service – Health services
that either choose or are not able to provide VAD, including
those that do not
provide end-of-life care. The DHHS guidance indicates that organisations who
adopt Pathway C ‘will be able
to provide’ support and information
requests for
information about, or access to, voluntary assisted
The DHHS guidance characterises institutional objection both as a matter of
conscience and as a matter of
self-governance.
It suggests an
institution that objects to VAD will typically fall under Pathway
A health service is not
obliged to refer the patient to a VAD provider, but must not ‘inhibit a
person’s access to
treatment’.
Additionally,
health services should inform the patient ‘as soon as practicable that
they will not assist them’
and health professionals (in accordance with professional codes of conduct) must
not use their objection to ‘impede access
to treatments that are
The policies
strongly suggest (but do not require) that organisations nominate a VAD contact,
but if no one is designated, organisations
may direct patients to the Statewide
Care Navigator Service (‘VAD Navigators’), which can provide
information, support
On its face, the DHHS policy position suggests, at a minimum, that objecting
institutions should provide information and support to
those seeking VAD, and
should consider how to provide ‘compassionate person-centred care’
to those who request information
or access to
However, the policies allow
latitude for institutions to depart from this, with the DHHS indicating that
‘[h]ealth services
may adapt the care
Some organisations have created specific policies stating that they will not
permit access to VAD. For example, Catholic Health Australia
(‘CHA’), the largest non-governmental grouping of hospitals and aged
care providers in Australia, will not provide VAD
facilities.
Their taskforce
document in response to the
Victorian VAD Act
does not explicitly mention
referral, but indicates that organisations under the CHA umbrella ‘will
not facilitate or participate
in assessments’ for the purpose of
To date, evidence of how VAD is operating in practice is limited. Waran and
William describe a transfer of care due to an institutional
objection to
A 53-year-old woman sought
VAD for metastatic breast cancer, but after she was assessed as eligible, she
required admission to a
palliative care unit to manage her worsening symptoms.
Since the woman could not return home, she sought to take the VAD substance
the unit but was refused because of the organisation’s policy against
providing VAD.
She was then
referred to another site within the same health service, which also objected.
She was eventually transferred to a third
venue in the service and was able to
take the VAD substance on her preferred date. In describing the case, the
authors emphasise
the position taken by the DHHS: there is no duty for a health
service to refer a patient, but health services must not actively inhibit
patient’s access. It is not clear from the article whether the original
palliative care unit facilitated the referral or
used the VAD Navigators.
There has also been a media report of institutional objection where a patient
in a Catholic hospice was not permitted to take delivery
of their VAD substance
after pharmacists were refused entry to the
As a result, the
patient needed to be transported out of the hospice and to a hospital where they
were then able to receive their
VAD substance. In addition, although not an
institutional objection of the type discussed in this article, that media report
described a decision by a large palliative care service to decline to
certify deaths of patients who had died at home from VAD. Although
at this early
stage there is only anecdotal evidence that institutional objection is occurring
in Victoria, given that there is no
legislative requirement for institutions to
permit access or make a referral, and that the government policy confirms this,
we anticipate
that institutions will continue to object to VAD.
B Other Australian Jurisdictions
There is no reason to believe the situation in relation to institutional
objections will be different in other Australian states if
and when VAD
legislation is enacted. Some religious institutions have adopted a position at a
national level, so institutions affiliated
with these entities can reasonably be
expected to have similar
objections.
As mentioned, the VAD legislation in Western Australia is silent on whether a
non-participating institution must refer or facilitate
transfer of a patient who
wishes to access VAD. The Catholic Church is committed to ensuring Catholic
hospitals, aged care facilities
and palliative care facilities in Western
Australia remain ‘VAD free
suggesting they
will permit neither VAD assessment nor administration. Anglican, Jewish and
Muslim leaders in Western Australia have
also expressed opposition to
It is anticipated that
healthcare and aged care facilities run by these religious institutions may well
prohibit the assessment or
administration of VAD, or provision of information
In Queensland, members of the Presbyterian Church, the Anglican Church, the
Baptist Church and the Catholic Church all expressed their
opposition to VAD
before the parliamentary
Similarly, in Tasmania,
CHA has stated that Catholic hospitals and aged care facilities will not provide
VAD prescriptions nor administer
They will also not
allow external providers to enter the facility to conduct VAD consultations, and
will not be making specific referrals
to non-objecting
institutions.
It seems, however, that some institutions which object to VAD on the ground
of conscience will refer individuals to a central government
coordination and
referral agency, rather than provide a direct referral to a known VAD
C Some Illustrative Canadian Examples
Allowing institutional objections to VAD can sometimes result in patients
being transferred seamlessly and painlessly to another institution,
space, or home for assessments and provision of VAD. However, as the longer
Canadian experience with VAD has
it can also result in
indignity, extreme pain, and loss of access. There is insufficient scope here to
report all such reported cases,
but those described below are
illustrative.
Two cases that resulted in indignity were Doreen Nowicki and Bob Hergott.
Doreen Nowicki was a woman in her late 60s with advanced
motor neurone
She was living in a
continuing care facility run by a Catholic provider. She was taken from her bed
with a mechanical lift, put in
a wheelchair, and brought out of the facility to
benches situated across the street (off the property) for her VAD eligibility
assessment.
This was intensely distressing for her. Bob Hergott,
72-year-old man also with motor neurone disease, had to leave the hospital where
he had been an in-patient for five years, cross
the street in the rain to a bus
shelter, and meet the two witnesses required as he signed his form requesting
An institutional objection can also result in extreme pain to the patient.
Ian Shearer was an 87-year-old man with spinal
His pain medications
were reduced to ensure he would have decision-making capacity following the
transfer. The ambulance was more
than three hours late. The time waiting for the
ambulance was increasingly painful and the trip across the streets of Vancouver
Institutional objections have also resulted in limitations or removal of
access. Gerald Wallace was an 80-year-old man with pancreatic
cancer in a rural
hospital run by a Catholic
organisation.
He was prevented
from accessing VAD and died in pain. Additionally, Horst Saffarek, an elderly
man whose lungs were failing, was admitted
to a Catholic
He was found eligible
for VAD but the hospital refused to allow it to be provided on their premises.
He had to be transferred to
a city more than an hour away, but he died before he
was able to access VAD.
IV THREE POSSIBLE MODELS OF LEGAL REGULATION
The limited evidence in Australia about institutional objection, as discussed
in Part III(A) and (B), reveals that some institutions
in Victoria are currently
objecting to VAD in various ways and this is likely to occur in other states
that legalise VAD. These objections,
as also shown in the longer Canadian
experience, can adversely affect individuals who are eligible for VAD but cannot
access it in
such institutions. Governments exploring VAD reform must consider
this issue and the appropriate regulatory response, whether that
is prohibiting
institutions from conscientiously objecting, not restricting this ability in any
way, or a compromise of these two
extremes. Ultimately, a government’s
position will depend on how it balances institutional and individual interests.
heart of this decision is how best to weigh an individual’s ability
to access VAD against an institution’s desire not
to permit access to VAD
within its facility.
This balancing exercise has been subject to extensive
and there is not scope in
this article to engage further with those arguments. Instead, our goal is to
describe possible regulatory
models that chart three broad options, and briefly
observe the implications of each model for institutional and individual
The three regulatory responses proffered draw on Wicclair’s terminology
in relation to conscientious objection by
individuals,
and are framed
• ‘conscience absolutism’ – permitting institutional
objections without limit;
• ‘compromise or reasonable accommodation’ –
permitting institutional objections but imposing limits on them;
• ‘non-toleration’ – institutional objections are not
But before considering these three options, we raise two threshold issues.
The first is whether a regulatory response should comprise of legislation or
policy. We propose that legislation is optimal (which
would allow for
accompanying policy), and regulatory responses in Part IV(B) and (C) below are
framed accordingly. Policy alone is
a weaker form of regulation with less
coercive force. While a policy approach is often appropriate to regulate aspects
of healthcare,
we consider this is not the case where the proposed policy
response conflicts with deeply-held views of the target of regulation
institutions). The stronger normative and coercive force of law is more likely
to be needed here, particularly if an individual
citizen is seeking to rely on
it to compel an institution (often large and well-resourced) to comply with
regulation.
legislative approach ensures any changes occur only with the transparency and
public accountability of parliamentary consideration.
The second threshold point we make is that, regardless of which regulatory
response is adopted, it should require organisations to
disclose their
objections publicly.
A ‘Conscience Absolutism’
The first regulatory option is for legislation to enshrine the ability of an
institution to object. The model gives all weight to
an institution’s
position on VAD and no weight at all to the patient’s interests, and
enables institutions that effectively
have a monopoly on the provision of
specialist services to bar individuals from accessing legally-available health
Such an approach would bestow greater powers on institutions to object than
individuals, upon whom law and ethics in medicine traditionally
impose at least
some compromise or accommodation duties – eg, providing information or
effective referral.
absolutism for institutions could effectively deprive eligible people of access
to VAD, even more so than objections by
individual health professionals. While
changing doctors is not straightforward, it generally remains possible, whereas
for a person
unable to move from an institution, absolutism is a veto on that
person’s ability to access
Even if a person was able
to move, they may require the cooperation or assistance of the institution to
facilitate the transfer,
which absolutism would allow them to withhold.
B ‘Compromise or Reasonable
Accommodation’ of Institutional Objection
This section outlines how legislation could present a ‘compromise or
reasonable accommodation’ model for institutional
objection to VAD. Such
an approach recognises that institutional objections to VAD will occur and
allows them, but aims to regulate
them to ensure as little impact on the person
seeking VAD as possible, while still permitting some degree of institutional
This need not imply legislative endorsement of these objections; the
focus is instead on creating processes to facilitate a person’s
VAD where objections occur. Two of the authors included a clause in their model
VAD Bill which aimed to address this by
requiring the objecting institution to
arrange a transfer if requested.
However, in light of the impacts of institutional objections on patients in
practice, as described earlier in the article, more may
be needed to better
support access to VAD when institutions object.
While there are various compromise models that could be designed, in our
view, all compromise models should, at a minimum, require
institutions to
provide information about VAD and facilitate effective referral to a VAD
provider. This obligation does not require
an objecting institution to endorse
VAD, or to be involved with its assessment or administration. Although some
organisations may
consider that providing information or directly referring to a
VAD provider makes them complicit in the activity to which they
a workable alternative
is to connect individuals with a central coordination service (such as the VAD
Navigators in Victoria).
Therefore, our discussion below focuses on the two other aspects of VAD
provision that institutions may object to: conducting VAD
assessments and
administration.
A final general point is that this compromise or reasonable accommodation
category is very broad: legislation could be drawn to require
either very little
compromise or a great deal of compromise from objecting institutions. The below
approach is one put forward for
consideration which weighs the balance between
individual and institution in favour of the person seeking access to VAD. As
below, we have struck the balance in favour of the patient when the
institutional objection will unduly compromise the patient’s
This is because the patient, who is close to death and intolerably suffering, is
in a vulnerable position.
1 Nature of Provision: No New Rights for
Institutions; Creates Process Only
Under this model, legislation should provide that ‘nothing in this
section creates a right for an institution to refuse to provide
VAD’. This addresses concerns raised in the Tasmanian
that legislatively
regulating this issue might be seen as implicit recognition of institutional
objections and conscience
Further, the provision
should be framed as establishing a process to ensure a person’s access to
VAD is not unreasonably denied.
For example, it could state: ‘An
institution wishing to refuse a person’s request to access VAD within a
facility must
follow the process outlined in this section’.
2 Would the Patient’s Interests Be Unduly
Compromised by Requiring Access to VAD Outside the Facility?
One way to accommodate both an institution’s objection and a
person’s desire to access VAD is for VAD assessments and
administration to
occur outside the facility. This could occur by transferring a person’s
care or residence to another, non-objecting,
institution. However, it is also
possible for VAD to occur without a formal transfer. For instance, a person in a
residential aged
care facility may remain living there but, if well enough to do
so, may leave the facility for VAD assessments and then again attend
to take the VAD medication at a time of their choosing. Determining when this
should be required would depend both on establishing
criteria to assess the
impact on the patient’s interests, and identifying who would decide
whether these criteria were met.
To address the undesirable consequences for persons seeking VAD outlined
above, this criteria could include that it is not appropriate
for an institution
to refuse access to VAD where:
• that would cause harm to the person (eg, this could be pain or a
deterioration of their condition from the required transfer);
• that would prejudice a person’s access to VAD (eg, the transfer
logistics to another institution mean a person is likely
to lose capacity or die
first; or pain medication required to manage the transfer means they are likely
to lose capacity);
• that would cause undue delay (and thereby extended intolerable
suffering) in accessing VAD; or
• access to VAD is not reasonably possible at another institution (eg,
another institution will not accept a transfer or the
institution is the only
facility in the district that could manage the patient in their condition).
Given the criteria (which are medical in nature or at least involve
navigating the health system), we consider it appropriate that
whether they are
met is decided by a doctor. We would propose a doctor who is chosen by or
acceptable to the patient. A doctor employed
by an objecting institution may not
be free to adopt a position contrary to the institution, although we note that a
patient might
choose to nominate a doctor working in an objecting institution if
they considered that doctor was independent.
This may raise issues if the objecting institution considers that granting
permission for this doctor to meet with the person is facilitating
access to VAD
and so is inconsistent with the institutional objection. However, failing to
allow this access to the facility by the
doctor could preclude a person’s
access to VAD altogether, so this is required to appropriately balance
institutional and individual
3 Obligations Where Access to VAD Will Occur
the Objecting Institution
Where the criteria above mean that access to VAD will occur outside the
objecting institution, the institution must offer and take
reasonable steps to
facilitate this access. For instance, this may require supporting a transfer of
the care or residence of the
person to a place at which VAD can be assessed or
provided by a doctor who does not have a conscientious objection to VAD.
Further, a person must not experience financial detriment because of such a
transfer, which could in some instances have financial
implications for a person
so serious as to create an unconscionable or insurmountable barrier. This
detriment could range from the
cost of transport between institutions through to
costs due to complex financial arrangements associated with entry into and exit
from a residential aged care facility. Because the need for a transfer arises
from the institution’s objection, the legislation
should provide that no
financial detriment will occur as a result.
4 Obligations Where Access to VAD Will Occur
the Objecting Institution
Where the criteria above mean that access to VAD will occur inside the
objecting institution, the legislation should provide that
access must be
permitted by the institution. This is based on a person’s claim to access
VAD outweighing an institution’s
objection, when both outcomes cannot be
achieved. Not taking this approach would effectively mean that a person who is
be reasonably transferred or leave the institution for periods to
access VAD would be prevented from accessing VAD by an institution
The legislation should state that an objecting institution will be required
to permit a person to access VAD within the institution
and will take reasonable
steps to allow this where transfer is not possible or unduly harms the
person’s interests. This may
include permitting existing staff (who are
willing) to be involved in conducting VAD assessments or administering the VAD
to this person, or allowing other doctors to visit the person onsite
and provide the assistance required. The institution would also
not be allowed
to impede a person self-administering VAD medication onsite.
C ‘Non-Toleration’ of Institutional
Under this model, legislation would prohibit an institution from preventing
access to VAD on the basis of an objection. The provision
could be framed
broadly and prohibit an institution from impeding access of a person seeking
For clarity, it may be
desirable for the legislation to specify that the institution could not prohibit
entry to its facility of
any health professional for the purpose of discussing
VAD with a patient, assessing eligibility for VAD, or providing VAD. The
institution
also could not prohibit a patient from self-administering a VAD
Under this approach, VAD would be available to all eligible individuals who
wish to access it, not just for those for whom transfer
would be problematic (as
canvassed above). This model gives the strongest recognition of the three
approaches to the right of an
individual to access VAD despite an
institution’s objection.
V CONCLUSION
This article aims to highlight an important, but largely neglected, aspect of
the VAD debate in Australia: objections by institutions
when a person seeks
lawful access to VAD. Patients and residents being cared for or residing in such
institutions may effectively
be denied access to VAD or have to overcome
significant barriers to access it. There is evidence of institutional objection
in Australia,
and experience in Canada demonstrates the impact these objections
can have on individuals who wish to access VAD and are experiencing
intolerable
This article proposes three possible legislative models to regulate
institutional objection. One is conscientious absolutism: legislation
enshrines the ability of an institution to object and imposes no limitation on
that right. This model will have adverse outcomes
for some individuals,
particularly those who are unable to transfer from that facility, as they are
effectively deprived of choice,
unable to move, and without access to VAD. This
prioritises the institutional position at the expense of the individual. At the
end of the spectrum, non-toleration, where an institution is prohibited
from exercising an objection in any circumstances, the individual
is prioritised
even if the institution may be in a position and willing to transfer their
The middle ground, the ‘compromise or reasonable accommodation’
model, is a legislative option worthy of consideration.
It does not grant
absolute priority to either the institution or the individual seeking VAD, but
seeks to accommodate both. The specific
compromise model proposed in this
article, however, does prioritise the individual if both positions cannot be
reasonably accommodated.
Parliaments and law reform bodies considering VAD reform must consider the
issue of institutional objection, and select a policy position
on how to balance
the desire of an institution to determine what practices are permitted within
their facilities and the interests
of an individual seeking access to VAD, a
lawful medical service. As argued above, this should not be left to policy alone
an issue that should be explicitly addressed in VAD legislation.
Ben P White, LLB (Hons) (QUT), DPhil (Oxford), Professor of
End-of-Life Law and Regulation, Australian Centre for Health Law Research,
Faculty of Business and Law, Queensland University of Technology.
Lindy Willmott, BCom (UQ), LLB (Hons) (UQ), LLM (Cambridge),
PhD (QUT), Professor, Australian Centre for Health Law Research, Faculty
Business and Law, Queensland University of Technology.
Eliana Close, BSc (Hons) (Calgary), MA (Oxford), PhD (QUT),
Lecturer and Postdoctoral Research Fellow, Australian Centre for Health
Research, Faculty of Business and Law, Queensland University of Technology.
Jocelyn Downie, CM, FRSC, FCAHS, BA (Hons)
s), MA (Queen’s), MLitt
(Cambridge), LLB (U of T), LLM (Michigan), SJD (Michigan), University Research
Professor, Dalhousie
University, Adjunct Professor, Australian Centre for Health
Law Research, Faculty of Law, Queensland University of Technology. The
would like to acknowledge the research of Katrine Del Villar for this article
and the many collegial discussions with her
We disclose that Ben White and Lindy Willmott were engaged by the Victorian
and Western Australian Governments to design and provide
legislatively-mandated training for doctors involved in voluntary assisted dying
in those States. Both have also developed a
model Bill for voluntary assisted
dying for parliaments to consider. Eliana Close was employed on both voluntary
assisted dying training
projects. Jocelyn Downie was a member of the Royal
Society of Canada Expert Panel on End of Life Decision-Making, a member of the
plaintiffs’ legal team in
Carter v Canada (A-G)
[2015] 1 SCR 331
member of the Provincial-Territorial Expert Advisory Group on Physician-Assisted
Dying and a member of the Council of Canadian
Academies Expert Panel on Medical
Assistance in Dying. Ben White is a recipient of an Australian Research Council
Future Fellowship
(project number FT190100410: Enhancing End-of-Life
Decision-Making: Optimal Regulation of Voluntary Assisted Dying) funded by the
Australian Government.
A detailed discussion of attempts at law
reform in Australia is available in: Lindy Willmott et al, ‘(Failed)
Voluntary Euthanasia
Law Reform in Australia: Two Decades of Trends, Models and
[2016] UNSWLawJl 1
(2016) 39(1)
University of New South Wales Law Journal
See also further Bills in Ben White and Lindy Willmott, ‘Future of
Assisted Dying Reform in Australia’ (2018) 42(6)
Australian Health
Voluntary Assisted Dying Bill 2020
The Queensland Premier referred the issue
to the Queensland Law Reform Commission to draft a Bill for the
Government’s consideration:
Queensland Law Reform Commission,
Queensland’s Laws Relating to Voluntary Assisted Dying
Reference, 2020)
<https://www.qlrc.qld.gov.au/__data/assets/pdf_file/0004/651379/vad-tor.pdf>.
See also Queensland Law Reform Commission,
A Legal Framework for Voluntary
Assisted Dying
(Consultation Paper No 79, October 2020)
<https://www.qlrc.qld.gov.au/__data/assets/pdf_file/0003/658506/qlrc-wp-79-2020.pdf>.
Michael Koziol, ‘Fresh Bid to
Legalise Assisted Dying Set to Test NSW Government’,
The Sydney Morning
(online, 13 December 2020)
<https://www.smh.com.au/politics/nsw/fresh-bid-to-legalise-assisted-dying-set-to-test-nsw-government-20201209-p56m2t.html>.
Voluntary Assisted Dying Act 2017
Victorian VAD Act
Voluntary Assisted Dying
See, eg, Philip Shadd and Joshua Shadd,
‘Institutional Non-Participation in Assisted Dying: Changing the
Conversation’
(2019) 33(1)
207; LW Sumner,
‘Institutional Refusal to Offer Assisted Dying: A Response to Shadd and
Shadd’ (2019) 33(8)
See, eg, Sumner (n 6) 971.
See, eg, Udo Schuklenk,
‘Conscience-Based Refusal of Patient Care in Medicine: A Consequentialist
Analysis’ (2019) 40(6)
Theoretical Medicine and Bioethics
Sumner (n 6) 971.
Health, Communities, Disability
Services and Domestic and Family Violence Prevention Committee, Parliament of
Queensland,
Inquiry into Aged Care, End-of-Life and Palliative Care and
Voluntary Assisted Dying
(Report No 34, 31 March 2020)
<https://www.parliament.qld.gov.au/Documents/TableOffice/TabledPapers/2020/5620T490.pdf>
(‘Queensland Parliamentary Report’). In Recommendation 1, the
Committee recommended the Queensland Government use a draft
voluntary assisted
dying (‘VAD’) Bill written by two of the authors as the basis for
legalising VAD in Queensland. For
the model Bill, see: Ben White and Lindy
Willmott, ‘A Model
Voluntary Assisted Dying Bill
’ (2019) 7(2)
Griffith Journal of Law and Human Dignity
White and Willmott (n 9) 36.
The amendment proposed by Dr Bastian
Seidel would require institutions that object to VAD to transfer a patient to a
facility that does not object: Tasmania,
Parliamentary
, Legislative Council, 30 October 2020, 2 (Bastian Seidel). Note also
that clause 19(3) in the (defeated) Death with Dignity Bill
2016 (SA) addressed
institutional objection to VAD. This clause indicated that an institution could
refuse to provide VAD, but if
it did so it must ensure the refusal is brought to
the attention of individuals before being admitted, and if the person had
entered the institution without being aware of the objection, arrange a
Parliamentary
, Legislative Council, 30 October 2020, 5 (Ruth Forrest).
See, eg, Tasmania,
Parliamentary
, Legislative Council, 30 October 2020, 5–6 (Ruth Forrest), 10
(Meg Webb), 15–16 (Bastian Seidel).
This article does not consider
institutional objections made on the basis of institutional capacity (eg, not
having the required
human resources or equipment). We do briefly note here,
though, that such objections may be difficult to sustain as VAD does not
specialised equipment or human resources that cannot be brought into a
Mark R Wicclair, ‘Conscientious
Objection in Medicine’ (2000) 14(3)
205, 213. See
generally Morten Magelssen, ‘When Should Conscientious Objection Be
Accepted?’ (2012) 38(1)
Journal of Medical Ethics
18; Sara Fovargue
and Mary Neal, ‘“In Good Conscience”: Conscience-Based
Exemptions and Proper Medical Treatment’
(2015) 23(2)
Medical Law
, 222. See also Stephen Smith, who defines conscience from an
individual perspective as ‘an internal mental process focused
inward-looking choice to engage in particular behaviour on the basis of a moral
value’: Stephen W Smith, ‘The Responsibilities
of Conscience in
Healthcare Decisions: Moving Towards a Collaborative Framework’
Cambridge Law Journal
, 124. While these authors defend the
right to conscientiously object on the basis of preserving moral integrity,
others frame the
issue in terms of harm to the doctor and the health service:
see, eg, Julian Savulescu, ‘Conscientious Objection in Medicine’
(2006) 332(7536)
British Medical Journal
See Fovargue and Neal (n 15)
224–5; Smith (n 15) 129; Nadia N Sawicki, ‘Mandating Disclosure of
Conscience-Based Limitations
on Medical Practice’
(2016) 42(1)
Journal of Law and Medicine
Shadd and Shadd (n 6) 208, 211.
Wicclair, ‘Conscientious
Objection in Medicine’ (n 15). For the contrary view, that an individual
health practitioner
should not be able to object on conscientious grounds, see
Savulescu (n 15) 294; Julian Savulescu and Udo Schuklenk, ‘Doctors
Right to Refuse Medical Assistance in Dying, Abortion or Contraception’
(2017) 31(3)
International Covenant on Civil and
Political Rights
, opened for signature 16 December
1966, 999 UNTS 171
(entered into force 23 March 1976) art 18. See also Sumner (n 6) 972.
Daphne Gilbert, ‘Faith and/in
Medicine: Religious and Conscientious Objections to MAiD’
(2020) 43(2)
Dalhousie Law Journal
, 38. Gilbert argues that under Canadian law,
religious institutions do not have the right to refuse to offer medical
assistance in
dying (‘MAiD’: the Canadian term for VAD), a
publicly-funded and legal health service. See also George J Annas, ‘At
Law: Transferring the Ethical Hot Potato’ (1987) 17(1)
The Hastings
Center Report
20, 21: ‘Hospitals are corporations that have no natural
personhood, and hence are incapable of having either “moral”
“ethical objections” to actions. ... [H]ospitals don't practice
medicine, physicians do’. Sumner (n 6) says
it is ‘debatable’
whether institutions can have conscience rights: at 972 n 14.
Shadd and Shadd (n 6) 208.
See Cameron Flynn and Robin Fretwell
Wilson, ‘Institutional Conscience and Access to Services: Can We Have
Both?’ (2013)
American Medical Association Journal of Ethics
226, 227; Daniel P Sulmasy, ‘What Is Conscience and Why Is Respect for It
So Important?’ (2008) 29(3)
Theoretical Medicine and Bioethics
Kevin W Wildes, ‘Institutional Identity, Integrity, and Conscience’
(1997) 7(4)
Kennedy Institute of Ethics Journal
413, 416. In New Zealand,
a court has held that institutions may have ‘an entrenched moral ethos
through which it operates’
and have a right to freedom of conscience:
Hospice New Zealand v A-G
[2020] NZHC 1356
, [103] (Mallon J). Mallon J
held that there is nothing in the
End of Life Choice Act 2019
requires institutions to offer VAD: at [103]–[117], [214].
Mark R Wicclair, ‘Conscientious
Refusals by Hospitals and Emergency Contraception’ (2011) 20(1)
Cambridge Quarterly of Healthcare Ethics
See Shadd and Shadd (n 6) 208.
Carpenter and Vivas note three types
of individual objection to VAD: objection to administration, objection to
participation in
consultation and assessment, and, less commonly, objection to
providing a direct referral: Travis Carpenter and Lucas Vivas, ‘Ethical
Arguments Against Coercing Provider Participation in MAiD (Medical Assistance in
Dying) in Ontario, Canada’ (2020) 21
BMC Medical Ethics
46:1–5, 1–2. Institutional objections may also extend to a refusal
to allow individuals to complete paperwork relating
to VAD onsite: see, eg,
Jennie Russell, ‘Paralyzed, Terminally Ill Man Had to Sign Assisted-Dying
Papers in Bus Shelter’,
(online, 2 November 2018)
<https://www.cbc.ca/news/canada/edmonton/convenant-health-assisted-dying-edmonton-1.4888114>
(‘CBC Coverage of Bob Hergott’);
Jennie Russell, ‘Unassisted
<https://newsinteractives.cbc.ca/longform/unassisted-death> (‘CBC
Coverage of Doreen Nowicki’).
See, eg, the case of a Victorian
patient discussed below: Eswaran Waran and Leeroy William, ‘Navigating the
Complexities of
Voluntary Assisted Dying in Palliative Care’
(2020) 213(5)
Medical Journal of Australia
In Victoria, some institutions (such
as facilities run by Catholic Health Australia, discussed below) have indicated
that they will
refuse to participate in assessment or administration of VAD.
Congregation for the Doctrine of the
Samaritanus Bonus
: On the Care of Persons in the Critical
and Terminal Phases of Life’ (Letter, 22 September 2020) 8
http://www.vatican.va/roman_curia/congregations/cfaith/documents/rc_con_cfaith_doc_20200714_samaritanus-bonus_en.html
This position is also reflected in Catholic Health Australia,
Code of Ethical
Standards for Catholic Health and Aged Care Services in Australia
The Code states in its section on euthanasia: ‘It is never permissible to
end a person’s life (whether that decision
is made to relieve a
patient’s suffering by euthanasia, to comply with the wishes of the
family, to assist suicide, or to vacate
a bed)’: at 46 [5.20].
Congregation for the Doctrine of the
Faith (n 28) 9 (emphasis omitted).
The South Australia End of Life
Choices Report notes that approximately 13% of palliative care in Australia is
provided in Catholic
hospitals, and in South Australia the Catholic Church is
the largest provider of private palliative care beds: Joint Committee on
Life Choices, Parliament of South Australia,
Report of the Joint Committee on
End of Life Choices
(Report, 13 October 2020) 12.
Rhiannon Shine, ‘Voluntary
Euthanasia Legislation Leaves WA’s Religious Communities Debating Doctrine
and Death’,
(online, 10 August 2019)
<https://www.abc.net.au/news/2019-08-10/where-do-different-religions-stand-on-voluntary-euthanasia/11399138>;
Jewish Care, ‘Voluntary Assisted Dying’ (Position Statement, April
Catholic Health Australia, ‘Our
Enduring Commitment to End of Life Care: Catholic Health and Aged Care Services
in Australia’
(Report, February 2019) (‘CHA Taskforce
Document’); Catholic Health Australia, ‘CHA VAD Response Taskforce:
Governance Recommendations’ (Report, February 2019)
(‘CHA Clinical Governance Recommendations’)
Health Australia, ‘Catholic Health and Aged Care Services Response to the
Voluntary Assisted Dying Act
”’ (Media Statement, 19 June
2019) (‘CHA Media Statement’); Jewish Care (n 31).
Jewish Care (n 31).
CHA Media Statement (n 32) 1.
Andrew McGee, ‘Voluntary
Assisted Dying: Should Conscientious Objection Be Unconditional?’ (2020)
Journal of Pharmacy Practice and Research
Australian and New Zealand Society of
Palliative Medicine, ‘The Practice of Euthanasia and Physician-Assisted
(Position Statement, September 2020); Waran and William (n
26) 205. This position was also advanced by Hospice New Zealand in
New Zealand v A-G
[2020] NZHC 1356
, [18] (Mallon J).
Palliative Care Australia,
‘Palliative Care and Voluntary Assisted Dying’
Statement, September 2019)
(‘PCA Position Statement’).
The PCA Position
Statement also draws a distinction between VAD and palliative care, but suggests
palliative care practitioners may
decide whether to be involved in VAD.
Conscientious objection is addressed
in section 7 of the
Victorian VAD Act 2017
(Vic), but this is limited to
registered health practitioners. Section 7 indicates registered health
practitioners may refuse to:
provide information; participate in the request and
assessment process; apply for a VAD permit; supply, prescribe, or administer
medication; be present at the time of administration; or dispense a VAD
prescription. The
Victorian VAD Act
(Vic) does not specify
whether the health practitioner must refer the patient or disclose their
conscientious objection.
Department of Health and Human
Services, State Government of Victoria, ‘Voluntary Assisted Dying Model of
Care Pathways for
Health Services’
(Guidance, January 2019)
<https://www2.health.vic.gov.au/~/media/Health/Files/Collections/Policies%20and%20guidelines/V/VAD%20Model%20of%20care%20pathways%20for%20health%20services>
(‘DHHS Model of Care Pathways’); Department of Health and Human
Services, State Government of Victoria, ‘Preparing
for Voluntary Assisted
Voluntary Assisted Dying Act 2017
’ (Guidance, 24 April 2019)
<https://www2.health.vic.gov.au/about/publications/policiesandguidelines/preparing-for-voluntary-assisted-dying>;
of Health and Human Services, State Government of Victoria,
‘Voluntary Assisted Dying Guidance for Aged Care Providers’
(Guidance, 17 April 2019)
<https://www2.health.vic.gov.au/about/publications/policiesandguidelines/vad-guidance-aged-care-providers>;
Department of Health
and Human Services, State Government of Victoria,
‘Voluntary Assisted Dying Safety and Quality Guidance for Health
(Guidance, January 2019); Department of Health and Human
Services, State Government of Victoria, ‘Health Service Participation
Voluntary Assisted Dying’ (Guidance, August 2018)
<https://www2.health.vic.gov.au/~/media/Health/Files/Collections/Factsheets/V/VAD-health-service-participation>
(‘DHHS Health Service Participation’); Department of Health and
Human Services, State Government of Victoria, ‘Health
Service Policy
Guidance for Voluntary Assisted Dying’
(Guidance, 12 June 2019)
<https://www2.health.vic.gov.au/about/publications/policiesandguidelines/Health-service-policy-guidance-for-voluntary-assisted-dying>.
All Department of Health and Human Services policy documents aimed at
institutions can be found here: ‘Health Services Information’,
Department of Health and Human Services,
State Government of
, (Web Page)
<https://www2.health.vic.gov.au/hospitals-and-health-services/patient-care/end-of-life-care/voluntary-assisted-dying/health-services-information>.
DHHS Model of Care Pathways (n 39) 3.
See also DHHS Health Service Participation (n 39) 1.
DHHS Model of Care Pathways (n 39)
For example, partnering with general
practitioners to conduct VAD assessments.
DHHS Model of Care Pathways (n 39) 3,
The DHHS Model of Care Pathways (n 39)
document invites institutions to assess their staff or service mix and their
organisational
values. It states: ‘After assessing the capacity of their
service to provide voluntary assisted dying, a health service may
determine they
do not have the appropriate staff or service mix to provide access to voluntary
assisted dying, or that providing
access to voluntary assisted dying would not
be consistent with the values of the health service’: at 3. See also Shadd
Shadd (n 6). Cf Sumner (n 6).
The DHHS Model of Care Pathways (n 39)
document states that Pathway C ‘is likely to include health services that
do not provide
care to people who are at the end of their life as well as health
services that have chosen not to provide voluntary assisted dying’:
Note, however, that Pathway B may apply depending on the nature of the objection
(eg, if the objection extends only to providing
access to VAD and does not
include the provision of information or eligibility assessment). For example, an
aged care facility might
choose to partner with general practitioners to provide
VAD assessments but object to their residents consuming the VAD medication
DHHS Health Service Participation (n
DHHS Model of Care Pathways (n 39) 6.
The DHHS Model of Care Pathways document puts forward this language from the
Medical Board
of Australian Code of Conduct. It also addresses nursing and
pharmacy professional codes of conduct.
Department of Health and Human
Services, State Government of Victoria, ‘The Statewide Voluntary Assisted
Dying Care Navigator
(Fact Sheet, September 2019)
<https://www2.health.vic.gov.au/Api/downloadmedia/%7B443D45A2-9F81-4BCB-9D3A-EE3B36FD3306%7D>
VAD Care Navigators’).
DHHS Model of Care Pathways (n 39)
CHA Taskforce Document (n 32). This
statement was contributed to by CHA member organisations: Calvary Health Care;
Cabrini; Mercy
Health; St John of God; St Vincent’s Health; and Vita Maria
Catholic Homes (‘VMCH’). See also CHA Media Statement
CHA Taskforce Document (n 32) 2. It
appears that at least some organisations under the Catholic Health umbrella will
referrals or transfers of care. The CHA Media Statement (n 32) that
accompanied the commencement of the
Victorian VAD Act
indicates that ‘[e]ach of our services has a system in place that will
respond respectfully and compassionately to any
questions about
“VAD”. This includes coordinating transfer of care to other
providers if a patient/resident wishes to
seek “VAD”. We will not
impede access to the provision of “VAD” elsewhere’: at 1.
Note, also, that
guidance has been issued by the Australian Medical Association
in its broad statement on conscientious objection in medicine. The
also addresses institutional objection and may inform Victorian health
providers’ responses. It states that institutions
may object to providing
certain services, and if this occurs the institution should visibly inform the
public so potential patients
can seek care elsewhere. It indicates that where a
patient admitted to an institution requests VAD, doctors should still be allowed
to refer the patient to a VAD provider outside the facility. In other words, the
organisation should not limit its staff from making
appropriate referrals. This
guidance is likely to pose difficulties for religious organisations that would
seek to limit VAD referrals:
see ‘Conscientious Objection: 2019’,
Australian Medical Association
(Web Page, 27 March 2019)
[3.1]–[3.2]
<https://ama.com.au/position-statement/conscientious-objection-2019>.
Waran and William (n 26).
Waran and William (n 26) describe that
the policy was also grounded in ‘the need to minimise
misperceptions’ about the
role of the palliative care unit: at 204. The
Royal Australasian College of Physicians (‘RACP’) statement on VAD
cited to justify this stance, which recommends ‘voluntary assisted
dying must not be seen as part of palliative care’:
Royal Australasian
College of Physicians, ‘Statement on Voluntary Assisted Dying’
(Position Statement, November 2018)
2 (emphasis omitted).
Melissa Cunningham,
‘“Discriminatory and Unethical”: Palliative Care Service
Criticised Over Failure to Verify
Euthanasia Deaths’,
(online, 17 April 2021)
<https://www.theage.com.au/national/discriminatory-and-unethical-palliative-care-service-criticised-over-failure-to-verify-euthanasia-deaths-20210415-p57jif.html>.
See, eg, CHA Clinical Governance
Recommendations (n 32); CHA Taskforce Document (n 32).
Don Sproxton, ‘Euthanasia in
Western Australia’ (Speech, 2019 Australian Catholic Youth Festival, 8
December 2019)
http://perthcatholic.org.au/Our_Archdiocese-Bishop-Speeches_Statements_and_Letters-2019-Speech__Euthanasia_in_Western_Australia.htm
Shine (n 31). However, not all
religious institutions in Western Australia are opposed to VAD. The Buddhist
Council expressed support
for the legislation, and the Uniting Church has put
forward a resolution to allow VAD assessment and administration to occur within
its facilities: see, eg, Synod of the Uniting Church in Western Australia,
‘Proposal 9: Voluntary Assisted Dying Task Group’
(Policy Proposal,
September 2020)
<https://unitingchurchwa-startdigital.netdna-ssl.com/wp-content/uploads/2020/09/VAD-Task-Group-3.pdf>.
Queensland Parliamentary Report (n 9)
50. Similar views were expressed by religious groups to other parliamentary
inquiries: see,
eg, Legal and Social Issues Committee, Parliament of Victoria,
Inquiry into End of Life Choices
(Final Report No 174, June 2016) 213
<https://www.parliament.vic.gov.au/file_uploads/LSIC_pF3XBb2L.pdf>;
Select Committee on End of Life Choices in the ACT, Parliament
of the Australian
Capital Territory,
End of Life Choices in the ACT
(Report, March 2019)
<https://www.parliament.act.gov.au/__data/assets/pdf_file/0004/1334992/9th-EOLC-Report.pdf>.
This includes the four hospitals run
by Calvary Healthcare and around nine aged care facilities operated by Southern
in Tasmania: Marilyn Rodrigues, ‘Peak Health Group Rejects
Dying Bill’,
Catholic Weekly
(online, 17 September 2020)
<https://www.catholicweekly.com.au/peak-health-group-rejects-dying-bill/>.
Parliamentary
, Legislative Council, 30 October 2020, 15 (Bastian Seidel). The
Anglican Church has also publicly voiced its opposition to VAD: Sue
‘Two Churches Have Strongly Opposed an Assisted Dying Bill Being Prepared
for Parliament’,
The Advocate
(online, 22 September 2019)
<https://www.theadvocate.com.au/story/6399252/assisted-dying-proposal-rebuffed-by-churches/>.
In Victoria, the Department of Health
and Human Services established a Statewide Voluntary Assisted Dying Care
Navigator Service
to provide this referral function: DHHS VAD Care Navigators (n
49). In the first year of the
Victorian VAD Act 2017
(Vic), this service
provided support to 613 people (the data does not state whether these supports
were a result of institutional
objections): Voluntary Assisted Dying Review
Board, ‘Report of Operations: January–June 2020’
(Report, 31 August 2020) 5
<https://www.bettersafercare.vic.gov.au/sites/default/files/2020-08/VADRB_Report%20of%20operations%20August%202020%20FINAL_0.pdf>.
End of Life Choice Act 2019
(NZ) has mandated the creation of a
support and referral group in its legislation: at s 25.
As noted above, in Canada, VAD is
referred to as ‘medical assistance in dying’ (‘MAiD’),
but we use the
term VAD in this section for consistency with the rest of the
We do not have full information on the
scope of the problem as the data is not collected in all jurisdictions. However,
in Alberta,
a province that collects and publishes data on this issue, between
17 June 2016 and 30 April 2020 (noting, though, that the website
states it is
current as of April 2020 but actually only includes data up to end of 2019), 125
patients were transferred from faith-based
(109) or non-participating (16) sites
to a participating facility or the patient’s home. This data suggests that
deaths in Alberta follow a transfer from a faith-based site:
‘Data & Statistics: Medical Assistance in Dying’,
Health Services
(Web Page, 28 February 2021)
<https://www.albertahealthservices.ca/info/Page14930.aspx>.
CBC Coverage of Doreen Nowicki (n
CBC Coverage of Bob Hergott (n
Tom Blackwell, ‘BC Man Faced
Excruciating Transfer after Catholic Hospital Refused Assisted-Death
National Post
(online, 27 September 2016)
<https://perma.cc/DE36-V9TA>.
Jennie Russell, ‘Camrose Man
Died in Pain after Covenant Health Hindered Access to Assisted-Dying Services,
(online, 1 December 2018)
<https://www.cbc.ca/news/canada/edmonton/camrose-man-died-in-pain-after-covenant-health-hindered-access-to-assisted-dying-services-son-says-1.4927739>.
‘Should Catholic Hospitals Have
to Provide Access to Medically Assisted Dying?’,
11 January 2018)
<https://www.cbc.ca/radio/thecurrent/the-current-for-january-11-2018-1.4481312/should-catholic-hospitals-have-to-provide-access-to-medically-assisted-dying-1.4482372>.
Flynn and Wilson (n 22) 228–9.
See Carpenter and Vivas (n 25); Flynn
and Wilson (n 22); Gilbert (n 20); Shadd and Shadd (n 6); Sumner (n 6).
Mark R Wicclair, ‘Preventing
Conscientious Objection in Medicine from Running Amok: A Defense of Reasonable
Accommodation’
(2019) 40(6)
Theoretical Medicine and Bioethics
We note it would be possible, however,
to design a policy response which may nevertheless be effective in ensuring
compliance by
institutions – eg, if linked to accreditation or funding
requirements.
A provision requiring such disclosure
was included in the
Voluntary Euthanasia Bill 2016
(SA) clause 21(3)(a). We do
not propose this disclosure being a ground for refusing access to VAD. Rather,
we consider the utility
of such a provision is to help avoid situations, where
possible, of a person finding out subsequent to their admission or residence
that the facility objects to access to VAD.
See, eg, Schuklenk (n 8).
It is worth noting that while the
Voluntary Assisted Dying Act 2019
section 20(5)
conscientiously objecting health professionals to provide certain information to
their patients, the
Victorian VAD Act 2017
(Vic) s 7 imposes no
accommodation duties on doctors who conscientiously object.
Sumner (n 6) 972.
White and Willmott (n 9) 36. See also
Voluntary Euthanasia Bill 2016
(SA) cl 21(3)(b). Such a clause was also
reflected in amendments proposed in Tasmania to its
End-of-Life Choices
(Voluntary Assisted Dying) Act 2021
(Tas): see Tasmania,
Parliamentary
, Legislative Council, 30 October 2020, 2 (Bastian Seidel).
Congregation for the Doctrine of the
Faith (n 28) 8, 14.
This is also the position that has
been adopted in Alberta and Quebec, Canada: Gilbert (n 20) 9.
See, eg, Tasmania,
Parliamentary
, Legislative Council, 30 October 2020, 10 (Meg Webb).
This provision would not, of course,
create a right or duty to provide VAD.
A stricter version would be to require
institutions to employ staff capable of and willing to be involved in the
provision of VAD.
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (156 KB)
PDF format (421 KB)
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter