URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/journals/UMonashLRS/2011/1.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 15:42:09
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
de Zwart, M; Lindsay, D; Henderson, M; Phillips, M --- "Randoms vs Weirdos: Teen use of social networking sites and perceptions of legal risk" [2011] UMonashLRS 1
RANDOMS VS WEIRDOS:
Teen use of social networking
and perceptions of legal risk
MELISSA de ZWART, DAVID LINDSAY,
HENDERSON and MICHAEL PHILLIPS
Mainstream media regularly features reports focussing upon the risks
associated with Facebook and other social networking sites (‘SNS’).
For example, in December 2010, a 17-year-old girl posted photos of naked AFL
footballers to her Facebook profile, generating a major
scandal in the AFL
community and further highlighting the privacy risks associated with social
networking.
In March 2011, a Facebook page purporting
to be an open invitation to a party to be held by a schoolgirl in Chatswood,
NSW, displaying
her residential address, attracted 200 000 responses saying they
would attend.
The party was cancelled and police
attended to ensure any potential revellers were sent home. Yet, despite the
widespread coverage
of SNS risks, usage figures continue to grow.
The uptake of social networking by teens indicates that such services perform
a valued role in the social lives of teens, particularly
in the areas of
communication and identity exploration. This article reports on research to
identify the risks relevant to teens
when using these services and provide them
with practical guidance regarding how to miminise and avoid such risks. The
authors, drawn
from the education and law disciplines, undertook to ascertain
the actual scale and nature of use of SNS among teenagers in years
7 to 10, the
perceptions of risk associated with such use and the actual legal risks. The
project produced both a report detailing
the outcomes of the research and an
educational resource to be distributed to all Victorian schools that may be used
to assist students,
teachers and parents to discuss and critically consider the
risks and legal implications of using SNS.
article discusses some key outcomes of the study related to use of SNS and
perceptions of legal risks.
The study surveyed 1004 middle school students (years 7
middle school teachers and 49 parents of middle school students. In addition,
focus group interviews were conducted with
58 middle school students and 21
middle school teachers. The data was collected from 17 Victorian secondary
schools from state (government
run), Catholic and independent systems as well
as metropolitan and rural locations. A comprehensive review of the relevant
literature,
the SNS terms of service and the Australian and international
regulatory environment was also undertaken.
The research concluded that while use of social networking services was
integrated into the daily lives of the majority of Victorian
middle school
students, there was a need to empower students with awareness of the risks they
may face in using SNS and to educate
them regarding how best to deal with those
risks. In particular, there was a distinct gap in the understandings by adults
and teenagers
regarding how these risks may be managed.
Legal Risks
Much of the current literature dealing with risks of SNS and online behaviour
generally focuses upon abusive behaviour, such as cyber-bullying
and grooming.
Little attention has been given to other, potentially more common, legal risks
faced by youth using SNS. This study
attempts to address the gap in that
literature. The key areas identified in the literature review and confirmed by
the survey results
as relevant to giving rise to legal liability for young
people using SNS were:
disclosure and breach of confidence;
Intellectual
property rights, especially copyright infringement;
Defamation; and
Criminal laws,
including harassment and offensive material.
In Australia, policy
responses to the use of SNS by young people have largely been characterised as
part of programs promoting ‘cyber-safety’.
The most recent
initiative in this area is the reference to the Commonwealth Joint Select
Committee on Cyber-Safety, established
in September 2010. The Committee, whose
terms of reference include inquiring into matters associated with cyber-safety
threats, such
as: abuse of children online, cyber-bullying, stalking and
grooming; exposure to illegal and inappropriate content; identity theft
breaches of privacy, presented its Interim Report in June
That Report made a number of recommendations
regarding the need for educational strategies for school age (and younger)
as well as increased teacher training.
may be a need, based on evidence from studies such as that outlined in this
article, to undertake reform of Australia’s
accommodate the widespread use of SNS by Australian youth. However, specific
recommendations for reform
are outside the scope of this article. It is hoped
that the recommendations arising from this study will be used as the basis for
law reform.
What is a social networking site?
SNS are websites that enable users to post information about themselves,
their interests, likes and affiliations and to connect with
other users, usually
through the construction of a ‘profile’.
They may be open to the general public or only to subscribers. They may also
have other elements such as live chat, instant messaging,
As this research project was directed at investigating the legal risks facing
children and young people, the research defined SNS
as having three key
characteristics:
A website where
the user creates a profile and posts information about him or herself, such as
the user’s status (what they
are doing), interests, likes, and
affiliations; and
On that profile
other users are listed with whom the person shares a connection (eg friends or
followers); and
The list and
certain other information, can be seen
by the friends (or
Notably, the increased availability of browser-enabled
devices such as smart phones and iPads, means that access is now available
much smaller devices which also makes it harder for parents and teachers to
Applying this broad definition, the project survey identified the following
SNS as especially relevant to Victorian high school students:
whose name is an acronym of ‘blog early, blog often’, is an SNS
launched in July 2005. Bebo incorporates features of most
SNS, including user
profiles, a list of ‘friends’ and the ability to link to
a microblogging platform that permits users to post text, photos,
quotes, links, chat, audio and video.
a microblogging service, allowing users to make short, text-based
posts of up to 140 characters, known as ‘tweets’, that
are visible
on the user’s profile page.
– a well-known SNS, that includes user profiles, and the ability to post a
wide range of content. Until it was overtaken by
Facebook in April 2008, MySpace
was the most popular SNS. In late 2010, largely in response to the dominance of
Facebook, MySpace
was re-designed to focus more on music and young people, and
rebranded as MY[ ].
the most popular SNS, which allows users to create and update
profiles, add ‘friends’, upload photos and use a ‘chat’
The number of middle school students
The anonymous survey of 1004 middle school students found that 94.9 per cent
of those students reported using at least one SNS. This
analysis also indicates
that the usage of SNS by students from rural state schools (89.7 per cent) is
less than students from metropolitan
state schools (97.7 per cent). Despite this
difference between metropolitan and rural school students the survey results
remain convincing
in terms of the prevalence of SNS usage in all middle school
years. Facebook was by far the most popular SNS with 93.4 per cent of
using it, followed by MySpace which was used by 26.6 per cent of students. Many
of the students used more than one SNS.
Therefore, many of the following
observations may reflect the particular structure and organisation of material
on Facebook, as that
is the platform most users are familiar with.
SNS are used equally by male (95.8 per cent) and female (96.3 per cent)
middle school students. This is reflected across the year
levels with similar
percentages of males and females using SNS.
Despite the high level of student use of SNS it was surprising to note that
in a separate question 26.9 per cent of students stated
that they have not
created an online profile that others can see. This is interesting since all
SNS, including Facebook, require
a profile in one form or another. The response
suggests that many students are unaware that the information about themselves
they place on an SNS can, when combined, constitute a profile. For
example, when asked about their profile, one student replied:
Facebook, I don’t make a profile showing what I am like. It just has
information about me.’ Such lack of
awareness regarding the nature and
potential consequences of information disclosure highlights the potential for
legal risks to arise
in this context, such as privacy issues.
Key findings regarding SNS use by middle school
Students were asked to explain how they chose which social networking sites
to use. 45 per cent indicated that their friends were
a significant factor with
typical responses being: ‘Whatever [sic] one my friends’ use’
and ‘what my mates
had because the whole reason is to socialise with
them’. An additional 30 per cent indicated they chose the SNS because they
thought it was popular (presumably either with their peer group or through
popular media), for example, ‘I reckon everybody
likes to use it because
it’s popular and people know of it.’ Only 6 per cent of students
indicated that family were an
important factor when choosing SNS, and only 5 per
cent of students reported that they gave the choice little thought. The
14 per cent of students did not answer the question.
One of the students in the focus group interviews also highlighted the
potential influence of commercial interests:
Facebook is becoming almost like a marketing thing now, because lots of
people use Facebook, phone companies go, ‘Here, 300
hours of free Facebook
with this sim card and you get this phone as well, with this
plan’. It’s just a marketing thing
now, Facebook and
The majority of students indicated that they update the information on their
SNS on a daily basis and over a quarter of students in
each year level update
their SNS profile several times a day. A general trend is that the frequency of
updating SNS increases across
the year levels. Indeed, three quarters of year 10
(75.3 per cent) update their SNS at least once every day, compared
to 62.3 per cent in Year 7. This increase is partly explained by
which the SNS are used by the different year levels. In general, older year
levels increasingly use the SNS for regular
communication purposes, which in
turn means they need to access their SNS more often.
Whilst the various SNS provide a large number of different activities
including playing games (such as Farmville in Facebook), creating
photo albums,
participating in a variety of surveys, identifying their likes, and so on, in
order to better understand the social
context which makes SNS different from
other Web 2.0 applications, this research focused upon the use of SNS by teens
to engage with
each other.
Overall students indicated that they used SNS to communicate with current
friends and especially to stay in touch with friends they
rarely see in person.
Responses to the surveys clearly indicated that SNS are primarily used to
maintain current networks (staying
in touch and planning with friends, 89.9 per
cent). Expanding the network (making new friends, 40.6 per cent) and sexual
interaction
(flirting, 24.8 per cent) were less common in students’
reported practices.
The content which students post to SNS
The research gathered information regarding the kinds of content students
upload to their own SNS in addition to status updates. This
is particularly
relevant in identifying potential legal risks such as copyright infringement and
disclosure. The most common content
posted is photos of themselves (60.9 per
cent), closely followed by photos of their friends (52.6 per cent). While
posting third
party music, video and pictures of others such as celebrities are
less popular, these activities are still well represented, for
instance while an
average of 38.5 per cent of students reported that they posted videos the
proportion rises to 69.8 per cent for
year 10 students.
As a process of data triangulation students were also asked to identify the
was similar to that
of their own responses. One of the interesting findings of this question was
that 45.6 per cent of students reported
that their photos had been posted on
their friends’ SNS. In addition, 62.1 per cent of students reported that
photos of their
friends had been posted on other people’s SNS. Since there
are increasing concerns of issues of disclosure through posting
of images the
survey asked students if they felt concerned about their images being posted by
others on their friend’s SNS.
Overall 80.3 per cent of students were not
concerned. However, 19.7 per cent indicated that they were concerned with this
Perceptions of risk
Students, teachers and parents were asked if they felt that students’
use of SNS included a degree of risk. In this context,
‘risk’ could
be interpreted by the respondent as broadly as they chose. In the follow-up
open-ended questions, respondents
were then asked to elaborate upon the risks or
problems that they identified as associated with SNS.
It is perhaps not surprising that students were more likely than their
teachers and parents to consider SNS safe. While 48.8 per cent
of students
recognised that there was some element of risk in using SNS over a quarter of
students (28.3 per cent) thought that SNS
were safe. Perhaps just as worrying is
that 19.6 per cent of students were ambivalent by reporting that the degree of
risk was not
relevant because it is ‘just what everyone does’.
However, not all students have the same perception of risk. While similar
percentages of year 7-to-10 students feel that SNS are safe (approximately 25
per cent) there is a decrease across the year levels
in students’
perception of an element of risk with a corresponding increase in disregard for
In contrast with students’ responses, their teachers and parents were
more cautious about the levels of risk associated with
SNS use. Teachers were
particularly concerned that, apart from students’ friendship networks,
they were at risk of being contacted
by undesirable people such as ‘the
occasional weirdo’ and ‘anyone, creepy stalker types’.
Visibility of student SNS profiles
While students generally perceived their use of SNS to be safe or only a
little bit risky, it is useful to contextualise this in terms
of the degree of
visibility of their SNS profile. As a general trend, students from years 7 to 10
are increasingly more selective
in who can view their profile. However, this
means that year 7 students not only have more visible profiles and therefore are
greater risk (of breach of privacy/confidentiality, being contacted by
‘randoms’ etc) but also are more likely to perceive
SNS as safe or
only a little bit risky which in turn may generate complacency about risk
aversion strategies.
Parents were asked about their child’s SNS profile privacy settings.
Most parents (71.7 per cent) believed their child’s
profile could be
viewed by friends or friends of friends while 11 parents (23.9 per cent)
indicated that they believed that ‘anyone’
or ‘Every man and
his dog’ could access their child’s profile. The remaining two
parents were ‘unsure’
child’s SNS. Of the 37 parents who had seen their child’s/
ward’s profile,
nine reported they ‘were a little concerned with
what they saw’, three reported they were ‘very concerned with
they saw’ and 25 reported they were ‘happy with what they
Perceived risks arising from student use of social networking
In an open-ended question, students were asked to explain if there were any
risks or problems associated with the use of SNS. A total
of 460 students
answered this question (out of 1004 survey participants). It is worrying that
21.7 per cent of students who answered
this question were unaware or unconcerned
Most of the students (61.3 per cent) reported potential risks or problems
from unwanted attention from others or cyber-bullying. Both
of these concerns
reflect the popular concerns of media and government. Students who reported the
potential for unwanted attention
from others (31.9 per cent) made statements
add randoms then they could turn out
to be weirdos’;
pedos [paedophiles] add you and try to get
in your pants’;
can add you and you have no idea who they are’; and
people contacting you’.
The students who identified
cyber-bullying as a potential risk included examples of overt bullying such as
‘Sometimes people
bully other kids, because it’s easier to say
things over the internet, rather than to their face’. However the students
also indicated issues of peer pressure, for example: ‘bullying, peer
pressure, self esteem issues based on things like number
of friends someone has
or photos they have of a party that you weren’t invited to etc’.
A smaller group of students (13.8 per cent) identified security risks
relating to their data such as people ‘hacking’
into their SNS
account or committing identity theft. For instance, one of the teachers
I have come across a student who showed me a site that was a mirror image of
his own. And that person, whoever created it, tried to
get his friends to add
him on, pretending to be that person. So, yes, you do get imposters there.
However, the purpose of the identity theft was not known by the teacher or
clarified by the students.
Another group of students (3.2 per cent) also identified a related issue of
unwelcome disclosure of
information about themselves by others. For instance one student in the
interviews explained how students
who do not have strict privacy settings can
disclose information about themselves but also their friends, such as through
the tagging
(naming) of people in photos.
Another student explicitly indicated they felt there was a risk of
corporations gathering SNS profile and usage data for their own
‘The fact that Google can track and monitor my actions and build up a file
on me from the actions on my Facebook
page. Paedophiles etc are the least of my
worries, Google is watching me far more than them’.
Teachers and parents were also asked to identify any risks or problems which
they perceived in their students’/child’s
use of SNS. The teachers
were particularly concerned with issues of cyber-bullying (43.6 per cent of 204
teacher responses), for
example: ‘harassment, taunts, make fun of
others’. Another key concern was that of grooming or stalking (27 per
which one teacher described as ‘Huge risks regarding privacy and
targeting by unwholesome sorts’. A third perceived risk
was that of
identity theft (14.2 per cent) by other students or strangers for a variety of
reasons including malicious posting of
false information, or the use of the
identity for financial gain.
The parents, like the teachers, indicated that they were concerned with
cyber-bullying (22.4 per cent of 49 parents) and grooming/stalking
cent). Parents also reported risks to privacy in the form of disclosure (14.3
per cent), or as one parent said ‘giving
too much info re
themselves’. Four parents (8 per cent) felt that there was little or no
Students’ risk reduction strategies
Surveyed students reported an awareness of a variety of strategies for
avoiding or dealing with risks associated with SNS use, including
friendship requests from strangers, blocking, deleting or
‘unfriending’ unpleasant or unwanted contacts, setting
their profile
to ‘private’, not disclosing private information on their profile,
changing their password, threatening
people who wanted to be added as friends
and self-censorship. Only 1 per cent of respondents indicated that they would
ask for help
or guidance from an adult as a viable strategy. This self-assured
nature of all of the students with regards to their safety in using
characteristic which needs to be researched further.
The majority of students (72.4 per cent) had reported that a stranger had
These students
were then asked what they did in response to that contact. 43.4 per cent of the
students reported that they had either
deleted (21.9 per cent) or blocked (21.5
per cent) the unwelcome contact. A further 15 per cent of the students reported
ignored the contact. The remaining 14 per cent of students did not
explain if they had responded or what strategy they employed.
The strategies
employed by the students are reasonable, however it is noteworthy that none of
the students reported that they told
an adult, notified the SNS provider of an
inappropriate contact, or reviewed their own security settings.
Most of the students conveyed the impression that strategies in dealing with
risks associated with SNS are common sense. For instance,
one student said:
‘Um, don’t post shit that can get you in trouble? Duh!’
Another student explained:
if we get added by some random person we have never heard of, we dont talk to
them :| its actually pretty easy to tell if a profile
is real or fake anyway. No
one i know has ever been lured into a trap by some pedo or something and told
anyone they didn’t
know where they lived or whatever. We don’t stand
in the middle of the street yelling “I LIVE ....” do we? I barely
even give my friends personal information (mobile no. etc) over the internet,
just in case (most people are the same).
This was similar to most of the responses and is even more succinctly
described by one student as: ‘If they sound sus, don’t
anymore. If they ask for details like an e-mail address, etc. ignore them
eternally. If they sound too innocent, take
them for a freak. xD’.
However, while the students expressed a confidence in their ability to recognise
‘freak’ or someone who is ‘sus’
they do not elaborate how this is achieved.
Summary and recommendations
The results indicate that there is a degree of awareness of risks in using
SNS by middle school students, although concerns about
risks differ markedly
between parents and teachers, on the one hand, and students, on the other. The
research findings also indicate
that there is a high degree of trial and error
in how middle school students are seeking to manage risks associated with SNS
Moreover, although there is some degree of understanding of legal risks,
there is very little clear understanding by students, parents
and teachers
alike, of the precise nature of the legal risks that may arise from everyday SNS
use. On the other hand, there is much
more awareness of the more dramatic
consequences of cyber-bullying. While there is some awareness of the social
context within which
use of SNS takes place and some attempt to moderate
behaviour accordingly, there seems to be very little awareness of the legal
within which SNS use occurs. Given the likely ongoing importance for
teens of using SNS and the outcomes of the research discussed
above, the key
recommendations arising from this project include:
The development
and provision of educational activities and resources to empower young users to
identify and manage the risks associated
with using SNS. These resources need to
be focussed on equipping teens to function as responsible digital citizens
rather than focusing
upon rare or hypothetical fears. The education booklet
produced by the research team is offered as an example of such a resource
(http://newmediaresearch.educ.monash.edu.au/SNSrisks).
The reported
prevalence of posting of photographs to SNS suggested that legal and ethical
issues, such as privacy, copyright and defamation,
should be given special
attention in any cyber-safety curriculum.
The disparities
reported between the understandings of risks faced by users of SNS held by
students, teachers and parents, and the
discussion of strategies which may be
adopted to handle such risks, indicates that there is a need for greater
education of teachers
and parents as well. The wider community could also
benefit from greater informed discussion of the implications of SNS use.
There is a need
to promote holistic policy responses to the full range of risks associated with
the use of SNS by young people. Any
responses should be coordinated so as to
minimise the risk of fragmented, inconsistent and potentially contradictory
policy initiatives
at commonwealth, state and territory levels. This view was
endorsed in the Commonwealth Joint Select Committee on Cyber-Safety’s
Interim Report. Having considered the potential value of an Online Ombudsman,
the Committee’s Report concluded that, while
there is a need for better
coordination, the ‘role of an ombudsman may be too restrictive to achieve
this goal’ (para
MELISSA de ZWART teaches law at
Adelaide Law School, University of Adelaide and DAVID LINDSAY teaches law at
Monash University. MICHAEL
HENDERSON is a senior lecturer in the Faculty of
Education, Monash University and MICHAEL PHILLIPS is a PhD Candidate, also in
Monash University Faculty of Education.
© 2011 Melissa de Zwart, David Lindsay, Michael Henderson and Michael
melissa.dezwart@adelaide.edu.au
david.lindsay@monash.edu
michael.henderson@monash.edu
michael.phillips@monash.edu
1. Chip Le Grand, ‘St Kilda vows to pursue teenager in AFL club’s
photo scandal’,
The Australian
(Sydney), 23 December 2010.
There have been ongoing ramifications for the St Kilda Football Club, Ricky
(a player manager) and the girl from these posts. Further allegations,
aired via various social media services, were still arising
in June 2011.
2. ABC News online, ‘Police warning over Facebook party
“hoax”’, 15 March 2011,
<abc.net.au/news/stories/2011/03/15/3164063.htm>
at 15 August 2011.
3. The project was funded by a General Grant from the Victoria Law
Foundation, Project G09-010: Guidance for children engaged in social
on the internet. Both the Report:
Teenagers, Legal Risks and Social
Networking Sites
, March 2011, and the Education Booklet:
Will u friend
me? Legal Risks and Social Networking Sites, A Legal Resource for Victorian
, March 2011, may be downloaded from
http://newmediaresearch.educ.monash.edu.au/moodle/course/view.php?id=37
at 15 August 2011.
4. Joint Select Committee on Cyber-Safety, Terms of Reference, 14 May 2010,
http://www.aph.gov.au/house/committee/jscc/tor.htm
at 15 August
5. Joint Select Committee on Cyber-Safety,
High Wire Act: Cyber-Safety and
, Interim Report, June 2011,
http://www.aph.gov.au/house/committee/jscc/report/fullreport.pdf at 15 August
6. For discussion of the definition of SNS, see Danah Boyd, and Nicole B.
Ellison, ‘Social Network Sites: Definition, History
and Scholarship’
Journal of Computer –Mediated Communication
13(1); and James
Grimmelmann, ‘Saving Facebook’
Iowa Law Review
1206, 1143.
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (96 KB)
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter