URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/journals/AULegHist/2008/9.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 14:35:41
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Spigelman, James --- "Bicentenary of the Coup of 1808" [2008] AULegHist 9; (2008) 12(1) Legal History 1
Bicentenary of the Coup of 1808
THE HONOURABLE JAMES SPIGELMAN, AC*†
Bicentenary of the Coup of 1808
THE HONOURABLE JAMES SPIGELMAN,
Australia Day this year marks the bicentenary of the only military coup in
Australian history. Popularly, but inaccurately, known
as the “Rum
Rebellion”, the Coup of 1808 played a crucial role in establishing a firm
foundation for the rule of law
in this nation. On an anniversary such as this,
it is appropriate to pause and consider how and why it was that our ancestors
the institutions which we take for granted and which explain the
long-term stability and prosperity that so few nations have been
Just before sunset on 26 January 1808, the twentieth anniversary of the
arrival of the First Fleet, over 300 soldiers of the New South
Wales Corps, the
102nd regiment of the British army expressly created to protect the new colony,
gathered on the parade ground in
front of their barracks, of which the last
remnant is now Wynyard Square. The officers of the Corps had reinforced their
esprit de corps at a rare full dress dinner at the barracks two
nights before the coup. The next day they decided to arrest and depose
William Bligh, fourth Governor of New South Wales, who already had one mutiny on
his record.
The soldiers were led in formation from the parade ground by their commander,
Major George Johnston, with drawn sword in one hand
and the other arm in a
sling, an injury caused when he fell out of his carriage on the way home after
the regimental dinner. It was
one of Sydney’s first drink driving
Guns loaded, bayonets fixed, sweltering in their scarlet woollen coats, with
banners flying and the regimental band playing
The British Grenadiers
the column marched down High Street, since renamed George Street, across the new
stone bridge spanning the Tank Stream and up Bridge
Street to Government House
where the Museum of Sydney is now, at the base of Governor Phillip Tower.
This was all for show, no doubt designed to impress and perhaps to intimidate
the general populace. Bligh’s personal guard had
already been suborned and
the two naval vessels under his command were out of port. There was no
possibility of resistance nor, as
Bligh was taken by surprise, of escape. He was
kept under house arrest for a year and it was another year before Governor
Macquarie arrived with his own 73rd regiment to enforce the removal of
the NSW Corps.
************
One of the oldest and most debated questions of political philosophy is the
identification of the circumstances when resistance to
established authority is
permissible. Whether or not that was so in Sydney two hundred years ago has
divided contemporaries and historians.
Personal values and beliefs often
influence the interpretation of the past and the role of the NSW Corps has not
been immune to such
influences.
At the risk of over simplification, the history of the Coup of 1808 has been
written in two distinct ways. Each emphasises one or
other of two sets of facts,
selected from the limited pile of contemporary records as if they were iron
filings into which a magnet
had been dipped, so that some facts gather at one
pole and different facts at the other pole, with little in between. The
differences
in interpretation are as divergent as the north and south poles of a
At the north pole the emphasis is on the fact that the rebels had become a
kleptocracy, motivated by crass avarice. Bligh’s
policies threatened their
wealth. At this pole, John Macarthur, a former officer of the Corps who had
become one of the wealthiest
men in the colony, is cast as a conniving puppet
master and Bligh’s personal defects are played down. This interpretation
to appeal to those who have faith in Government enterprise and an
egalitarian inclination to support, as Bligh did, the small farmers
hapless settlement on the Hawkesbury flood plain.
However, one person’s idea of greed is another’s commercial
incentive. At the south pole the primary focus is on the fact
that the officers
of the NSW Corps provided much of the entrepreneurial drive in trade and
agriculture that was necessary to enable
the colony to succeed. Bligh’s
policies threatened that success. His was a static vision of a
government-dominated society
serviced by yeoman farmers, in contrast with the
dynamism of Sydney based commerce reaching across the South Pacific to trade in
sandalwood, seal skins, whaling and wool. Adherents to this approach emphasise
Bligh’s character and policy defects and play
down the cupidity and
cunning of the rebels. This pole appears to appeal to those who have faith in
private enterprise and are unsympathetic
to government control.
The analysis at the south pole appears to have been the judgement of the only
systematic contemporary investigation of the events,
the court martial which let
Johnston, the commanding officer, off with a mere discharge, expressed to be,
and universally regarded
as, exceptionally lenient.
Both perspectives are open. This is one of those historical controversies
that is not capable of final resolution. The historical
record – that pile
of factual iron filings – largely consists of assertions by those with a
vested interest in the outcome,
as is inevitable with an event that polarised a
small community. In such circumstances, it is understandable why a particular
can find a reason not to accept something said by anybody.
Three matters must be borne in mind when assessing the body of writing on
this topic.
First, any explanation of why the coup occurred can look like justification
or condemnation. The distinction between explanation and
judgment has proven
difficult to maintain.
Secondly, when assessing the venality and corruption of the officers it is
necessary to avoid that imperialism of the present by which
today’s values
are projected back on a different era. What we would regard today as corruption,
such as officers exploiting
access to regimental finances for personal gain and
preference dependent on personal patronage, was then regarded as normal conduct.
Eighteenth Century British politics and public administration was, by our
standards, profoundly corrupt. There was no reason to expect
the early Sydney
colony to differ.
Finally, it is necessary to allow for a fundamental cultural difference
between that time and our own. That was an age of status and
anyone aspiring to
the rank of a gentleman behaved in ways quite incomprehensible to those who have
become more accustomed to venality
as the principal motive for action. Much
conduct was then prescribed, as powerfully as by religious rule, by the code of
to which all gentlemen had to subscribe. The significance of this code
is manifest in the long tradition of duelling where, for centuries,
rational men risked, and often enough lost, their lives over the most trivial of
aspersions on their character. Part of
the explanation for the Coup of 1808 lies
in the operation of this code.
************
The first thing that needs to be said about the so-called “Rum
Rebellion” is that it had nothing to do with rum. The appellation
conferred some fifty years after the event by an activist for a teetotal
society. It was popularised by H V Evatt as the title
of the series of lectures
he delivered at the University of Queensland for the 150
anniversary of the Coup.
In the early years of the settlement – particularly during the two
years between Governor Phillip’s retirement on health
grounds in December
1792 and the arrival of his successor, when the commanding officer of the Corps
acted as Governor – alcohol,
generically referred to as rum, was a readily
tradeable item in the barter-based, rudimentary economy operating beyond the
bureaucratic,
requisition system at the government store. Rum became a
substitute for currency. The shortage of currency in the colony was aggravated
by the fact that the agent appointed by the British Government to operate the
colony’s accounts from London was in the process
of embezzling some 80,000
The officers’ early
trading success was based on the fact that they were paid in London and could
draw bills which would be
honoured there. They alone, in the early years, had
access to sterling for purposes of trade.
In those years the trading cabal, which operated as an extension of the
officers’ mess, was able to profitably exploit a monopoly
position in rum
and other goods. That was no longer the case in 1808. By then, competition
ensured that monopoly profits were substantially
reduced, although high prices
were retained by the penumbra of illegality that surrounded the trade.
Some officers had built up capital during the period of exploitation when
mark-ups were high and by preferential access to governmental
largesse such as
land grants, cheap labour by assignment of convicts and supply of provisions,
livestock and equipment delivered
for government purposes at the cost of the
British taxpayer. In 1808, many officers retained an interest in trade, which
more diverse and much more competitive, but their principal economic
interests now lay in the land, both acres of land for agriculture,
granted at no
cost and without compensation to the traditional owners, and urban leaseholds in
Sydney, where one subdivisible block
had changed hands for the extraordinary
amount of 900 pounds just before Bligh’s arrival.
As I wish to highlight one aspect of the coup – its implications for
the rule of law – it is appropriate to focus on the
urban leases.
Governor Phillip intended to reserve the land between, roughly, Hunter Street
and the water for public purposes. It was the first
attempt at town planning in
Sydney. Cutting into this reserved area, during Phillip’s time, was a
track formed by the passage
of traffic behind the row of tents that the officers
of the First Fleet had pitched on arrival, soon replaced by rudimentary huts,
the western bank of the Tank Stream that flowed into Sydney Cove, now Circular
That accidental track became
George Street and this fortuitous origin, rather than Phillip’s
conception, proved to be the model
for the grand Sydney tradition of urban
planning. The only remnant of Phillip’s plan around the original
Government House is
Macquarie Place.
Phillip’s successors gradually abandoned his plan. Leases were granted,
at first only for short periods. However, the third
Governor, Phillip King,
attempted to regularise the haphazard system and to establish clearly defined
property rights: creating a
register of dealings, quadrupling the rent and
granting a large number of leases, many for periods of 14
His successor, William
Bligh, wanted to return to critical aspects of Phillip’s original plan
– clearing grand spaces
around Government House and the church – but
King’s leases stood in the way.
Bligh set out to use all the wide discretionary powers at his disposal as
Governor of a penal colony to achieve his objective. He
refused to issue any
more leases, announced that he would not approve building on existing leases,
ordered residents to surrender
possession of homes, ordered the demolition of
structures built without approval and threatened to demolish others. Intending
revoke the leases, but unsure of his power to do so, he sought instructions
from London.
The wife of a commercially successful emancipist wrote complaining:
“From some he took good houses and gave them bad ones. From others he took
their houses and turned them into the street and
made them no recompense
whatever. Some he stopped building. Others he made make improvements against
their inclinations and on the
whole endeavoured to crush every person as much as
When one occupant of a leasehold residence in the environs of Government
House objected to Bligh’s order to remove it, asserting
that he could not
be forced to do so by the laws of England, Bligh allegedly exploded:
“Damn your laws of England! Don’t talk to me of your laws of
England. I will make laws for this colony, and every wretch
of you, son of a
bitch, shall be governed by them. Or there (pointing over to the gaol) is your
habitation!”
The lease of land next to the gaol was held by Major Johnston, the commanding
officer of the Corps. It was one of those Bligh wanted
The Coup of 1808 was the result of a range of factors including various
aspects of commercial self-interest. The traffic in rum was
of little if any
significance, except to some of the non-commissioned officers. Much more
important, amongst multiple causes, was
the conflict between real estate
developers and the public interest over the exploitation of prime urban land
near the water. Nothing
could be more “Sydney” than this.
The tension over urban leases was one of a number of conflicts in which Bligh
sought to reverse practices permitted by his less resolute
predecessors. He made
only three land grants in 18 months and issued no leases; he pardoned only 2
convicts in 18 months; he cracked
down on profiteering and enforced import
restrictions. His policies undermined the wealth and the prospects of that part
of the local
elite with access to capital. On a number of occasions he deployed
his authority over the rudimentary judicial system to attack those
and intervened directly in court cases to achieve his ends.
To any self-respecting Englishman, the kind of untrammelled executive power
that Bligh exercised was an abomination. Executive authority
had to be based on,
and subject to, pre-existing rules. Government by whim or caprice in the
exercise of an absolute discretion,
was tyranny, typical of Continental nations
and an anathema to the English. The broad discretionary powers of the Governors
may have been necessary vis-à-vis the convicts. However when
applied to free settlers and emancipists, they were reminiscent
prerogatives claimed by the Stuart kings.
************
The civic discourse of early Sydney was, understandably, expressed in terms
of the intellectual toolkit of 18
century Britain. The core concept
of that era, before both political discourse and jurisprudence came to be
dominated by Bentham’s
utilitarian philosophy, was the bundle of
procedural and substantive principles known as the rule of law, then generally
in terms of rights, particularly rights of property and of personal
liberty. Later, under the influence of the utilitarians with
their impoverished
view of human nature, talk of rights ceased for a century and a half, especially
talk of inalienable human rights,
which Bentham had denounced as “nonsense
on stilts”.
Blackstone’s great work, which functioned as a core authority in the
nascent Australian legal system, used the language of rights,
until watered down
in subsequent editions. The edition current in 1808 remained faithful to the
original in this respect. That edition,
by way of an interesting aside, was
edited by the brother of Fletcher Christian, who led the mutiny on
Three decades ago, the English Marxist historian, E P Thompson, after close
study of 18
century British society, was driven by his intellectual
honesty to the unexpected, at least to him, conclusion that the upper class
subject to the law and that the rule of law was a “cultural achievement of
universal significance and an unqualified human
He was treated as an
apostate and attacked by his fellow left wing
historians.
The centrality of the discourse about the law in late 18
Britain cannot be doubted.
was this discourse that accompanied soldiers, convicts and free settlers to
Australia and created from the outset a strong legal
tradition in the penal
************
Bligh’s conduct may have been accepted from the chief warden of an
open-air prison or the captain of a ship – the culture
of authority in
both created an expectation of unquestioning and immediate execution of orders.
Bligh, as an accomplished naval commander
and a brilliant navigator, brought
this expectation to his role as Governor. However, such conduct was unacceptable
when applied
to free subjects, who constituted the majority of the 7000 persons
in the colony. Indeed there were serious doubts, privately expressed
Bentham but known to some settlers, about whether, in the absence of express
Parliamentary authority, the Governor could
lawfully exercise such authority
over free men and women at all.
Whatever his formal powers may have been, Bligh undermined what the local
elite regarded as property rights, perhaps most clearly
with respect to the
urban leases. This was fundamentally inconsistent with the universal
understanding of the rights of free Englishmen.
Bligh, of course, relied on his formal authority and had the personal
strength to exercise powers that his two predecessors, Hunter
and King, had
compromised. They, Bligh believed, had permitted private men to grow wealthy at
the expense of the Crown. He was determined
to reassert the public interest as
he saw it and to act strictly in accordance with his instructions. In most
respects his approach
to governing was disciplined and purposeful. However, even
in a small settlement like Sydney of the day, where the petty rivalries,
bickering, slights and vendettas of village life were all manifest, effective
government required an understanding of communal
expectations. Bligh proved as
oblivious to the fears and aspirations of the Sydney elite as he had earlier
been to the delights that
the crew of
had experienced in
The scene was set for a conflict of institutional cultures between that of
the navy, where authority was typically exercised in the
confined autocracy of a
ship, and that of the army, where the exercise of authority often required
interaction with a broader community.
************
Those adversely affected by Bligh’s policies included many with no
association with the NSW Corps. However, no coup could have
occurred without the
united resolve of the current officers. Their commercial interests, which were
engaged to varying degrees, cannot
fully explain the Coup. The risk of
retributive action from London for such gross insubordination must have been
regarded as high
and any commercial advantage would, at best, be short term.
Bligh had also stirred the acute status anxieties of the officers by
challenging their individual and collective reputation. This
was a serious
affront under the code of honour which they, as members of the caste of
gentlemen, regarded as the most important social
bond of their
Bligh offended members of
this caste by his conduct, by his bearing and, perhaps most of all, by his
The officers of the NSW Corps, as well as most free settlers, were attracted
to the colony precisely because their family background
did not enable them to
live as a gentleman should at home. Commissions in the army were then bought and
those who signed up for the
NSW Corps could not afford to buy a commission in
one of the more fashionable regiments. Nor were there opportunities for
advancement
in the peace-time army during the interlude between the American
Revolution and the Napoleonic Wars. The economic and, therefore,
status of the officers was never secure.
In one of the books published in 2005 to mark the bicentenary of the Battle
of Trafalgar, the perceptive author describes the social
group from which the
NSW Corp’s officers came:
“Social and financial security, which are deeply connected to the question
of honour, had a shaping effect on the officer corps
of the British fleet at
Trafalgar. They were men on edge, not certain of the place they held in the
hierarchy for which they were
fighting, with enormous rewards in terms of money
and status dangling before their eyes, but the equal and opposite possibility of
failure, ignominy and poverty if chance did not favour them or their connections
did not steer them into the path of great rewards.
The quartet of honour, money,
aggression and success formed a tight little knot at the centre of their lives,
the source at times
of an almost overwhelming
The author goes on to indicate the vulnerability of such men, in words
directly applicable to the officers of the NSW Corps, most
of whom had a
precarious hold on the status of gentleman:
“A body of officers coming from an uncertain and ill-defined social
position needs to rely on the idea of their honour to establish
their place in
the social hierarchy ... [W]hen, if you defined yourself as a gentleman, you had
nothing else, as so many did not,
honour was what you had. It was membership of
a moral community, which is why the language used is so critical. Your
membership was
defined by the respect with which other people treated
Bligh proved viscerally incapable of treating other gentlemen in the
language, or with the respect, that the code of honour required.
Devoid of tact,
quick tempered, infuriated by insubordination or incompetence, incapable of
compromise, prone to indulge in mockery
and abuse, Bligh failed to respect the
boundary between criticism and
Manning Clark described him thus:
“If anyone dared to object or remonstrate with him, he lost his senses and
his speech, his features became distorted, he foamed
at the mouth, stamped on
the ground, shook his fist in the face of the person so presuming, and uttered a
torrent of abuse in language
disgraceful to him as a governor, an officer and a
Bligh did not only attack the commercial interests of the officers of the NSW
Corps. He challenged the core of their personal identity.
************
John Macarthur – often referred to as the creator of the Australian
wool industry, although his wife Elizabeth deserves the
title more than he
– precipitated the crisis. He challenged Bligh to what was, in effect, a
political duel in defence of both
his honour and his money. Macarthur’s
wealth was regarded by Bligh as the most egregious example of private profit at
expense. He was determined to confine and reduce it.
Bligh refused to make a major land grant that Macarthur thought he had
negotiated in London. His tone was dismissive: ”Are you
to have such
flocks of sheep and such herds of cattle as no man ever had before. No
Bligh refused to
intervene when Macarthur’s commercial expectations over a promissory note
were rejected in favour of a wealthy
emancipist, who happened to be
Bligh’s manager on the property granted to Bligh on his arrival by
Governor King. On Bligh’s
express orders, his officers dismantled a fence
that Macarthur erected on one of his urban leases, part of which he had,
and ostentatiously, personally erected in their presence. Two stills
that Macarthur sought to import, contrary to the policy of permitting
be supplied only with the Governor’s permission, were declared forfeit and
Bligh refused him permission to recycle
the copper boilers for other use.
Macarthur was as vituperative, domineering, short-fused and arrogant as
Bligh, but had an unscrupulous shrewdness, indeed subtlety,
which Bligh both
lacked and could not discern in others. He chose the venue for the final
confrontation with care.
The criminal court of that era was constituted by six military officers,
chaired by the Judge Advocate, Richard Atkins, an educated
but legally
illiterate drunk, who had, no doubt to the consternation of the bewildered
litigant, pronounced a death penalty when
intoxicated. The civil disputes in
which Macarthur had become involved could come before the criminal, rather than
the civil, court
if he challenged the Governor’s authority. He did so over
an attempt to enforce a 900 pound bond upon a ship, in which Macarthur
interest, which was forfeit when it became known that a convict had stowed away
on board. Rather than challenge the legality
of the fine in the civil court,
Macarthur refused to comply with the subsequent process. This precipitated a
warrant for his arrest
to which he responded, to use his words, “with
scorn and contempt”.
defiance required proceedings in the criminal court, where the officers would
decide his fate.
When the court convened on 25 January, in a room packed with soldiers,
Macarthur challenged the right of Atkins to preside on the
ground of bias, based
in part on the fact that he owed Macarthur money – on a promissory note
that Macarthur had bought long
before and kept for such an occasion. Bligh and
Atkins correctly concluded that the court could not sit without him. When the
officers, no doubt by prearrangement, purported to do
Bligh ordered that they be
charged with criminal conduct. He even suggested that it amounted to treason.
There could be no greater slur on their honour. There had been tension
between the Governor and the regiment, but this was an attack
institutional integrity, not least if six of the nine officers of the Corps were
put out of action. Nothing was more calculated
to ensure that the loyalty of the
officers’ mess, which had been confirmed the previous night at dinner,
would lead the officers
to arrest Bligh before he could arrest them.
The commanding officer of the Corps Major George Johnston, although highly
critical of Bligh’s conduct, had little by way of
commercial interest at
stake and may not have been part of the coup planning. He was finally convinced
that the Corps had no choice
but to depose the Governor. And it did.
This is an explanation of the coup but, of course, not a justification. The
officers’ reaction was, at best, self-indulgent.
Their conduct was
fundamentally inconsistent with the maintenance of the social order that it was
their very purpose to preserve.
Even acknowledging the inappropriateness of
Bligh’s conduct, other means of resolution should, at least, have been
difficult as that may have been when communications to and from
England took a year.
************
The code of honour, with duelling as the principal form of alternative
dispute resolution, was incompatible with the rule of law.
Rebellion against
legitimate authority, whatever the reasons, was the most fundamental challenge
to it. As I have said, the rule
of law provided the central legitimising
discourse of eighteenth century England. It was firmly established in Australia
by the experience
of the coup itself and, perhaps more significantly, by the
experience of government under a military regime.
Bligh had united a number of disparate interests. His removal took away that
unity. The absence of a clearly legitimate authority,
as could easily have been
predicted, enabled anyone with a grievance to seek vengeance and anyone with
access to power to abuse it.
The rule of law was compromised and, on many
occasions, set aside.
The sense of personal security of citizens, indeed the existence of social
order, is determined in large measure by the extent to
which people can arrange
their personal affairs and their relationships with associates, friends, family
and neighbours on the assumption
that basic standards of propriety are met and
reasonable expectations are satisfied. In all spheres of conduct it is essential
persons know that they can pursue their lives with a reasonable degree of
security, both of their person and of their property. All
forms of social
interaction, including economic interaction, are impeded by the degree to which
personal and property rights are
subject to unpredictable and arbitrary
incursion, so that people live in fear, or act on the basis of suspicion, rather
than on the
basis that others will act in a predictable way.
After the Coup of 1808 the sense of personal security was lost to a
substantial degree. Those who could exercise power were not confined
effective operation of the rule of law, save insofar as ultimate retribution
from London was anticipated.
Until a superior officer to Johnston arrived six months after the coup, John
Macarthur was clearly in control. During that period
the rudimentary legal
system was abused, where not suspended. Atkins was replaced and Macarthur was
quickly acquitted of the charges
that precipitated the coup at a joke of a
trial. Magistrates loyal to Bligh were dismissed. Other loyalists were subject
to a parody
of justice that was no more than malevolent revenge. They were
convicted on bogus charges and sent to work in the coal mines at Newcastle.
civil court processes were
Commerce was adversely
affected as it was uncertain whether the negotiable bills payable in sterling,
that had traditionally been
used for transactions with the government, would be
honoured in London.
lived through this period could have had any doubt that the rule of law was
severely compromised.
Later, the courts appeared to operate more normally and fairly. However,
throughout the two years between the deposition of Bligh
and the arrival of
Macquarie, the colony was controlled by an illegal government. Every
appointment, including to judicial office,
was invalid. So was every
governmental decision, including every exercise of judicial power. Uncertainty
was ubiquitous. Personal
and property rights were institutionally insecure.
The English political nation welcomed the restoration of the Stuarts after
the depredations of Cromwell, which experience left an
abiding mistrust of a
standing army that was forbidden, without express Parliamentary approval, by the
Bill of Rights of 1689. For
much the same reasons, the residents of New South
Wales welcomed the restoration of legitimate authority under our greatest
Lachlan Macquarie.
In accordance with his instructions, he invalidated the appointments and the
decisions of the rebel administration, including appointments
to and decisions
by the courts. Perfected court orders were not reopened on the basis of
necessity, perhaps most poignantly applied
in the case of the invalid death
sentences that had been carried into effect. Nevertheless, some redress was
available for the past
illegal exercise of governmental power. One of those
banished to the coal mines sued successfully for false
imprisonment.
The rule of law was emphatically restored. The bicentenary of
Macquarie’s installation as Governor on 1 January 1810, is an
event worthy
of substantive commemoration.
************
The rule of law has only been significantly challenged in Australia on one
occasion since the Coup of 1808.
That occurred, perhaps understandably, over an issue that incited the
passions of the populace more than any other, the issue of race.
The intensity
of the hostility to Chinese migration in the mid to late 19
century, particularly virulent on the gold fields, led to a direct confrontation
between the Government of New South Wales and the
Supreme Court in 1888.
The government ordered its police force to prevent the disembarkation of
Chinese passengers on a number of ships that arrived in Sydney
Harbour in mid
1888. Two Chinese, one an alien and the other a returning resident with a
statutory certificate of exemption from
the poll tax, sought habeas corpus from
the Supreme Court to prevent police restraining their disembarkation.
A submission on behalf of the
government, to the effect that the police were simply acting upon orders, was
summarily rejected. That
after all was the purpose of a writ of habeas corpus.
“No man’s liberty”, said Chief Justice Darley, who referred
an identical claim made by Charles I, “would be safe for one moment were
it held that this was sufficient
The then Premier, Sir Henry Parkes, no stranger to stirring up popular
prejudice for political advantage, dismissed the Supreme Court
decision as
“technical” and asserted that “the law of preserving the peace
and welfare of civil society”
He directed the police
to continue implementing the government policy and to ignore the court
Notwithstanding considerable debate in the Parliament and the media, the
government maintained its defiance of the law for a considerable
period. The
Court reiterated the basic principles of the rule of law, and the necessity for
the government to comply, in an unanimous
judgment upon a subsequent application
for relief by another Chinese
As Chief Justice Darley said with respect to the events that had
“We are not aware that such a course of conduct as has been pursued in the
matter of these Chinese has ever before been adopted
at any period of our
history. No sovereign, no matter how tyrannically inclined, no government,
however unconstitutional in its acts,
has ever ventured to act in open
opposition to, and in disregard of the law, when that law was once pronounced by
the duly constituted
authority. Unfortunately there have been times when by the
appointment of venal judges those in authority have sought to twist the
the land to suit their own purposes, but never has the law, once pronounced,
been set at defiance. The danger of the course
here pursued is obvious. We say
nothing of the evil example set to the weak and thoughtless in the community,
pernicious as this
The government backed off and the detainees were released although Parkes, as
was his want, did so with politically motivated words
of defiance.
I should note that some months later, without the same kind of confrontation
with its executive government, the Supreme Court of Victoria
reached the same
conclusion on the interpretation of the relevant legislation, which was
virtually uniform amongst the States on
the eastern seaboard. It did so,
however, without reference to the prior New South Wales
There is now a sense
of national collegiality amongst Australian judges so that this kind of snotty
indifference is unlikely to occur
today. In any event, the High Court has
indicated that it should not.
The fact that matters of racial and ethnic identity were regarded with such
passion that they could lead to the only serious challenge
to the rule of law in
Australian history since the Coup of 1808, is a matter that should give us all
pause. There is no reason to
believe that the people of this, or of any other,
nation are now so enlightened that these kinds of passions cannot be stirred
There are too many examples in history of such xenophobia leading to
catastrophe for us not to remain vigilant in this regard.
************
As is so often the case, perhaps the best short description of the evils of
racial and ethnic intolerance was written by William Shakespeare.
He wrote it in
a form that was not definitively attributed to him for centuries. Furthermore it
is not found in one of his plays
or poems and, accordingly, is not contained in
anthologies nor taught in literature courses. It is a passage that is very
There is in existence a single manuscript of a play entitled
which was written in at least six different hands in the period
1591-1593. A passage of a few pages, referred to by Shakespearean
scholars as
Hand D, is attributed to Shakespeare. The play was rejected by the censor of the
day, not because any positive depiction
of More was impermissible under a Tudor
monarch, but because of its reference to the London mob rioting in hatred of
foreigners.
In the years 1592-1593 there had been a number of riots against
foreigners, which the authors of the play were obviously intending
to exploit,
but the censor feared the play would aggravate the existing tensions. It was
banned, never finished and its first recorded
performance was in 1994.
The occasion depicted in the play, to which the censor objected, was what
became known as the “Evil May Day” of 1 May
1517, when the London
mob violently attacked foreigners throughout the city in an outburst of what we
would today call ethnic cleansing.
Thomas More was then the Under Sheriff for
the city and played a role in suppressing the riot. It was in this role that he
was depicted
in that part of the draft play attributed to Shakespeare.
More asks what it is the rioters want and is told that they want the
strangers to be removed. More replies in words which ring down
“Grant them removed, and grant that this your noise
Hath chid down all the majesty of England;
Imagine that you see the wretched strangers
Their babies at their backs, with their poor luggage,
Plodding to th’ ports and coasts for transportation,
And that you sit as kings in your desires,
Authority quite silenced by your brawl,
And you in ruff of your opinions clothed;
What had you got? I’ll tell you. You had taught
How insolence and strong hand should prevail,
How order should be quelled – and by this pattern
Not one of you should live an aged man;
For other ruffians, as their fancies wrought,
With selfsame hand, self reasons, and self right
Would shark on you; and men like ravenous fishes
Would feed on one another.”
I know of no passage that more effectively depicts the dangers of ethnic
cleansing and the role of the rule of law in controlling
the kinds of passions
that give rise to ethnic, religious or racial hatred. The “ravenous
fishes” metaphor would resurface
in the mouth of Cardinal Wolsey in
Shakespeare’s
Henry the Eighth
(I.ii.79). It was to Wolsey that
More had appealed for assistance to stop the 1517
The rage associated with ethnic cleansing is well captured in the image of
self-devouring humanity. It is an image repeated in
Troilus and Cressida
and the very phrase “Would feed on one
another” appears in
(I.i.184-8). That is the result when
mob rule replaces the rule of law.
The passage deserves to be better known.
Sir Thomas More is, of course, one of history’s exemplars of commitment
to the rule of law. This is best reflected in the well-known
passage from Robert
A Man For All Seasons
in which Sir Thomas More rejects the
religious fervour of his future son in law. More asserts that he knew what was
legal, but not
necessarily what was right, and would not interfere with the
Devil himself, until he broke the law. The following exchange then occurred:
“ROPER: So now you give the Devil benefit of law!
MORE: Yes. What would you do? Cut a great road through the law to get after the
ROPER: I’d cut down every law in England to do that!
MORE: Oh? And when the last law was down, and the Devil turned round on you
– where would you hide Roper, the laws all being
country’s planted thick with laws from coast to coast – man’s
laws, not God’s – and if you
cut them down ... d’you really
think you could stand upright in the winds that would blow then? Yes, I’d
give the Devil
benefit of law, for my own safety’s
This imagery of the law as a protection from the forces of evil is an
entirely appropriate one. Each society has its own devils, some
imagined. The forest of laws that are planted under the rule of law protects us
from those devils.
As Chief Justice Gleeson has observed, the image of the law as a windbreak in
this passage is apt because: “The law restrains
and civilises
One of the principal reasons why the judicial task is often thankless and
prone to controversy is precisely because judges are obliged
to protect the
legal rights of unpopular people. The judicial oath requires no less.
When, as I have shown, it was popular passion, indeed outrage, that gave rise
to the only serious challenge to the rule of law in
Australia for two centuries,
the words of Shakespeare that I have quoted are of particular resonance on the
bicentennial of the Coup
of 1808. Often it is the law alone that can prevent a
situation in which, to repeat:
“... men like ravenous fishes would feed on one
This a task in which all judgers and lawyers are engaged, perhaps less
dramatically than on the occasions to which I have referred.
Nevertheless, like
any safety system it must be well maintained in order to operate when it is
needed. I have no doubt that the Australian
judiciary satisfies this
requirement.
Only a few decades ago emphasis on the rule of law would have been dismissed
in many circles as Eurocentric and neo-colonialist. That
is no longer the case.
The concept has now been adopted as a model and an aspiration for so many
different nations of divergent cultural
traditions that any approach to this
concept based on cultural relativism must be rejected.
Our own achievement in this respect over a period of some two centuries,
whilst taken for granted in Australia, is increasingly recognised
internationally, not least in the international judicial exchanges in which
Australian judges have participated with increasing frequency
over recent
************
Much of Australian history is written as if it consisted primarily of the
achievement of independence from England: constitutional,
political, economic,
military, cultural, social and legal independence – “a march towards
the light” as one historian
However, many of our most
fundamental institutions were created quickly and, whilst drawing on the
intellectual toolkit of contemporary
Britain, emerged, or were entrenched, in
response to local events and conditions and proceeded to change and develop in a
distinctive
way. The rule of law, the independence of the judiciary, freedom of
representative and
democratic government are such institutions.
The bicentenary of this most significant event in the establishment of the
rule of law, like the commemoration eighteen months ago
of the sesquicentenary
of responsible government in this State, emphasises the longevity that underpins
the robust strength of those
institutions. We do well to understand the source
of that strength.
Chief Justice of New South
This article is an
edited combination of the Opening Address to the Supreme and Federal Court
Judges Conference 2008 and the annual
Australia Day Address delivered in Sydney
on 21 January and 22 January 2008, respectively.
Rum Rebellion: A
Study of the Overthrow of Governor Bligh by John Macarthur and the New South
Wales Corps
Lloyd O’Neil, Sydney (1971). (First published in
See Michel E Scorgie, David J
Wilkinson and Julie D Rowe “The Rise and Fall of a Treasury Clerk: William
Bassett Chinnery”
Paper presented to the Conference of the British
Accounting Association April 1998; c/f Scorgie, “The Rise and Fall of
Bassett Chinnery” (2007) 43
76. See also Anne-Maree
Joseph Foveaux: Power and Patronage in Early New South Wales
P, Sydney (2000) at155-156.
Alan Atkinson
The Europeans
in Australia; A History – Volume I, The Beginning
Oxford Uni P,
(1997) at 273
See generally Alan Atkinson
“Taking Possession: Sydney’s First Householders” in Graeme
A Difficult Infant: Sydney Before Macquarie
NSW Uni P, Sydney
(1988) esp. at 76, 79-82, 83-84.
Ibid at 84-87;
Records of Australia
Vol 6 at 155-156,714-715.
Atkinson supra n 3 at 273.
John Ritchie (ed)
of Mutiny: The Court Martial of Lieutenant Colonel George Johnston for Deposing
Governor William Bligh in the Rebellion of
26 January 1808
National Library
of Australia, Canberra (1988) at 365.
See J J Spigelman
“Blackstone, Burke, Bentham and the
Human Rights Act 2004
Australian Bar Review
E P Thompson
Hunters: The Origin of the Black Act,
Pantheon, New York (1975) esp at pp
For example M J Horwitz
“The Rule of Law: An Unqualified Human Good?”
Law Journal
; Adrian Merritt “The Nature of Law: The Criticism of E
P Thompson’s
Whigs and Hunters
British Journal of
Law and Society
194; see generally D H Cole “‘An Unqualified
Human Good’: E P Thompson and the Rule of Law” (2001) 28
117 accessible at
www.ingentaconnect.com
See e.g. Douglas Hay
“Property, Authority and the Criminal Law” in Hay et al
Albion’s Fatal Tree: Crime and Society in Eighteenth Century
Pantheon, New York (1975); “Introduction” in John
Brewer and John Styles (eds)
An Ungovernable People: The English and their
Law in the Seventeenth and Eighteenth Centuries,
Hutchinson, London
See esp David Neal
Rule of Law in a Penal Colony
Cambridge Uni P, Cambridge (1991); John
Braithwaite “Crime in a Convict Republic”
; John Gascoigne
The Enlightenment and the Origins of European
Cambridge Uni P Cambridge (2002) pp 39-44.
Alan Atkinson “Jeremy
Bentham and the Rum Rebellion” (1978) 64
Journal of the Royal
Australian Historical Society
The emphasis on the code of
honour as a critical factor in the coup was first put forward by George Parsons
in “The Commercialisation
of Honour: Early Australian Capitalism
1788-1809” in Graeme Aplin (ed) supra n 4. The theme was developed by
Michael Duffy
in his biography
Man of Honour: John Macarthur - Duellist,
Rebel, Founding Father
Macmillan, Sydney (2003).
Adam Nicolson
Honour: Trafalgar and the Making of the English Hero
Harper Perennial,
London (2005) at 102-103.
Ibid at 114.
There is even a book
devoted to Bligh’s foul mouth: Greg Dening
Mr Bligh’s Bad
Language: Passion, Power and Theatre on the Bounty
Cambridge Uni P, Sydney
C M H Clark
A History of
Australia Volume I
Melbourne Uni P, Melbourne (1962) at 216.
Duffy supra n 14 at
Atkinson supra n 3 at
This tactic had worked
before when Governor King backed down after Major Johnston had objected to the
presiding officer on behalf
of one of the officers on Macarthur’s court.
See Evatt supra n 1 at 77-81; John McMahon “Not a Rum Rebellion but a
Insurrection” (2006) 92
Journal of the Royal Australian
Historical Society
125 at 132-133.
Bruce Kercher
Seduction and Other Disasters: The Birth of Civil Law in Convict New South Wales
Press, Sydney (1996) at 41-2.
J E B Currey (ed)
Reflections on the Colony of New South Wales: George Caley
Melbourne (1966) at 157.
Kercher supra n 17 at
Ex parte Lo Pak
(1888) 9 NSWLR (L) 221;
Ex parte Leong Kum
(1888) 9 NSWLR (L) 250; J
Colonial Law Lords: The Judiciary and the Beginning of Responsible
Government in New South Wales,
Federation Press (2006) pp 28-41.
Sojourners:
The Epic Story of China’s Centuries Old Relationship with Australia
Uni of Queensland P, Brisbane (1992) at p 481 and see 487.
Ex parte Woo Tin
(1888) 9 NSWLR (L) 493.
Ibid at 495- 496
Toy v Musgrove
[1888] VicLawRp 102
(1888) 14 VLR 349.
See Stephen Greenblat
Will in the World: How Shakespeare Became Shakespeare,
W W Norton &
Co, New York (2004) at 262-264. See also the Wikipedia entry “Sir Thomas
More (play)”
www.wikipedia.org/wiki-Sir_Thomas_More_(play
Ron Rosenbaum “A Hand for Applause Books: A Hand for ‘Hand
D’” 10 May (1999)
The New York Observer
accessible at
www.observer.com\node\41447
Jasper Ridley
Statesman and the Fanatic: Thomas Wolsey and Thomas More,
Constable, London
(1982) pp 78-79.
Murray Gleeson
of Law and The
Constitution
: The Boyer Lectures 2000
ABC Books, Sydney
Atkinson supra n 3 at
See J Spigelman
“Foundations of the Freedom of the Press in Australia”
Aust Bar Rev
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (149 KB)
PDF format (591 KB)
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter