URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/journals/ALRCRefJl/2009/41.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 14:12:30
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Editors --- "Commission news" [2009] ALRCRefJl 41; (2009) 94 Australian Law Reform Commission Reform Journal 45
Reform Issue 94 Summer 2009
This article appears on pages 45–48 of the original
Commission News
In February 2009, Emeritus Professor David Weisbrot AM became the longest
serving President of the ALRC in its 34-year history. Professor
Weisbrot will be
leaving the ALRC at the end of November having overseen 15 inquiries during his
term. His first inquiry was into
the federal civil justice system, which
culminated in the landmark report
Managing Justice: A review of the federal
civil justice system
(ALRC 89, 2000). Other significant inquiries followed
Essentially Yours: The Protection of Human Genetic Information in
(ALRC 96, 2003);
Fighting Words: A Review of Sedition Laws in
(ALRC 104, 2006); and the inquiry into privacy laws,
Information: Australian Privacy Law and Practice
(ALRC 108, 2008). Other
inquiries during the Weisbrot presidency covered areas of marine insurance; a
review of the
Judiciary Act
; civil and administrative penalties;
protection of classified and security sensitive information; gene patenting;
uniform evidence
law; sentencing; client legal privilege and the three current
inquiries into secrecy laws, royal commissions and family violence.
Professor Weisbrot’s commitment to law reform is renowned across the
legal, policy and government sectors and the high standing
and regard in which
the ALRC is currently held—in Australia and internationally—is
largely due to his leadership, commitment,
judgment and dedication to the
integrity of the law reform process. Professor Weisbrot has been a mentor to
ALRC staff and interns;
and his intelligence, generosity and humour are at the
heart of the organisation.
The ALRC also farewells Professor Les McCrimmon, whose term ends in November.
Professor McCrimmon has worked at the ALRC for the past
four years, leading the
ALRC’s landmark Privacy Inquiry as well as the inquiry into uniform
evidence laws and most recently
Royal Commissions Act 1902
and related issues. As Commissioner in charge of the review of Australia’s
one of the largest inquiries
undertaken in the ALRC’s history. The 2,700-page final report,
Information: Australian Privacy Law and Practice
(ALRC 108, 2008), was
published in three volumes, and contains 295 recommendations for reform. The
breadth of the subject matter covered
in this Inquiry required the ALRC to
undertake one of the largest community consultation programs in its history,
including well
over 250 face-to-face meetings with individuals, organisations
and agencies, roundtables, phone-ins, and public forums. The ALRC
received 585
written submissions from a broad cross-section of individuals, organisations and
agencies, which helped direct the ALRC
in developing its priorities and
determining the ultimate reform agenda. This report provides a clear framework
for establishing
world’s best practice in privacy protection and is a
credit to the leadership provided by both Professor McCrimmon and Professor
The ALRC wishes both Professor Weisbrot and Professor McCrimmon the very best
for their futures, knowing they will remain part of
the wonderful extended ALRC
The ALRC’s inquiry work has continued at a high level during 2009, with
three current inquiries in hand. The Inquiry into Royal
Commissions was due to
report at the end of October 2009. The Secrecy Inquiry has received an extension
to its October deadline and
is now due to report on 11 December 2009. On 24 July
2009, the ALRC received Terms of Reference from the Attorney-General for a third
inquiry that will address issues concerning violence against women and children.
The Family Violence Inquiry is due to report in
Implementation report
ALRC 104—Fighting Words
The Australian Government response to
Fighting Words: A Review of Sedition
Laws in Australia
(ALRC 104, 2006) in December 2008 supported almost all of
the report’s recommendations. The response indicated that the Australian
Government would introduce legislation to implement the recommendations in
In June 2009, the Anti-Terrorism Laws Reform Bill 2009 (Cth)—a private
Senator’s Bill sponsored by Senator Scott Ludlum—was
introduced into
the Australian Parliament. The Bill proposes to repeal s 80.2 of the
Code Act 1995
(Cth), which provides for the offence of sedition.
ALRC 103—Same Crime, Same Time
At a Federal Criminal Justice Forum in Canberra in September 2008, the
Minister for Home Affairs, the Hon Bob Debus MP, noted that
some of the main
priorities for action that emerged from the Forum included:
• implementation of
Same Crime, Same Time: The Sentencing of Federal
(ALRC 103, 2006). The Minister added that the report is now being
actively considered;
• providing more diversionary options for sentencing judges and
magistrates (which is considered in
Same Crime, Same Time
• establishment of a Federal Parole Board (
Same Crime, Same
, Recommendation 23–1).
ALRC 102—Uniform Evidence Law
Evidence Amendment Act 2008
(Cth) was assented to on 4 December
2008, substantially implementing the recommendations of
Uniform Evidence Law
(ALRC 102, 2005). The amending Act incorporates almost all of the
recommendations of Uniform Evidence Law, except for the recommendations
relation to a general confidential relationships privilege. The Government has
indicated that it will address these issues at
the time it responds to the
ALRC’s report
Privilege in Perspective: Client Legal Privilege in
Federal Investigations
(ALRC 107, 2007).
ALRC 99—Genes and Ingenuity
The ALRC is still awaiting the Government response to
Genes and Ingenuity:
Gene Patenting and Human Health
(ALRC 99, 2004).
In March 2009, the ALRC made a submission to the Senate Standing Committee on
Community Affairs Inquiry into Gene Patents, which is
primarily looking at the
patentability of gene sequences—a much more narrow area than that
considered in
Genes and Ingenuity
. The ALRC drew on its experience from
the ALRC inquiry into the intellectual property aspects of genetic material and
technologies,
which culminated in the release of the
Genes and Ingenuity
report. The Committee is due to report by December 2009.
Genes and Ingenuity
, the ALRC recommended an amendment to the
Patents Act 1990
(Cth) to establish an exemption from patent infringement
for acts done to study or experiment on the subject matter of a patented
invention; for example, to investigate its properties or improve upon it
(Recommendation 13–1). In March 2009, IP Australia
released a consultation
Exemptions to Patent Infringement
, which sets out a proposal for
an experimental use exemption under the
Patents Act
that is consistent
with the ALRC recommendation.
In March 2009, IP Australia also released
Getting the Balance Right:
Toward a Stronger and More Efficient IP Rights System
. This consultation
paper proposes a number of amendments to the
Patents Act
, including
two amendments that were
recommended in the
Genes and Ingenuity
• an amendment to include usefulness among the grounds considered
during examination and re-examination and clarify that the
requirement for
usefulness is only satisfied if the patent specification discloses a specific,
substantial and credible use for the
invention (
Genes and Ingenuity
Recommendation 6–3); and
• an amendment to clarify that ‘balance of probabilities’
is the standard of proof applied to all requirements during
examination,
re-examination and opposition proceedings (
Genes and Ingenuity
Recommendation 6–3 and 8–3).
It is expected that drafting instructions based on the proposals in the two
IP Australia consultation documents will be completed
by the end of 2009, with
legislation expected to be introduced in the Australian Parliament in 2010.
ALRC 96—Essentially Yours
Disability Discrimination and Other Human Rights Legislation Amendment
(Cth) received Royal Assent in July 2009 (entry in force 5 August
2009) implementing two key recommendations of
Essentially Yours: The
Protection of Human Genetic Information in Australia
(ALRC 96, 2003):
• amendment of the definition of ‘disability’ in the
Disability Discrimination Act 1992
(Cth) to clarify that the legislation
applies to discrimination based on genetic status (Recommendation 9–3);
• amendment of the
Disability Discrimination Act
to prohibit an
employer from requesting or requiring information, including genetic
information, from a job applicant or employee,
except where the information is
reasonably required for purposes that do not involve unlawful discrimination
(Recommendation 31–3).
Essentially Yours,
the ALRC also recommended amending the
to permit a health professional to disclose genetic
information about his or her patient to a genetic relative of that patient where
the disclosure is necessary to lessen or prevent a serious threat to an
individual’s life, health or safety, even where the
threat is not imminent
(Recommendation 21–1). In June 2009, after extensive consultation, the
National Health and Medical Research
Council (NHMRC) finalised the
for National Privacy Principles about Genetic Information
under s 95AA of
. The Guidelines outline the circumstances in which
genetic information may be used and disclosed for the purposes of lessening or
preventing a serious threat to the life, health or safety of an individual.
ALRC 89—Managing Justice
In December 2008, the Australian Government introduced the Federal Justice
System Amendment (Efficiency Measures) Bill (No 1) 2008
(Cth). The Bill will
Federal Court of Australia Act 1976
(Cth) to allow the Federal
Court to refer a proceeding, or one or more questions arising in a proceeding,
to a referee for report.
This will be useful in many cases, including where
technical expertise is required. In
Managing Justice: A Review of the Federal
Civil Justice System
(ALRC 89, 2000), the ALRC recommended that the Federal
Court should consider the use of referees (or ‘assessors’) in
title proceedings (Recommendations 76 and 77).
ALRC 84—Seen and Heard
Evidence Amendment Act 2008
(Cth) implements a number of
recommendations in
Seen and Heard: Priority for Children in the Legal Process
(ALRC 84, 1997) that were incorporated into the
Uniform Evidence Law
report. These include:
• a new test for the competence of a witness to give sworn and unsworn
evidence that focuses on the capacity of an individual
to understand a question
and to give an answer to a question that can be understood (
, Recommendation 98);
• a prohibition on general warnings about the unreliability of
children’s evidence, instead permitting a warning to be
given only upon
request of a party and where the court is satisfied that there are circumstances
particular to that child (other
than the child’s age) that affect the
reliability of the child’s evidence (
Seen and Heard
, Recommendation
• confirmation that the court may seek expert opinion evidence to
assist it to determine if a witness is competent to give evidence
, Recommendation 101).
In 2009, the Australian Government released
Protecting Children is
Everyone’s Business: National Framework for Protecting Australia’s
Children 2009–2020
. A number of the outcomes outlined in the Framework
reflect recommendations in
Seen and Heard
, including:
• exploring the potential role for a National Children’s
Commissioner (Recommendation 3);
• national standards and monitoring of the out-of-home care system
(Recommendations 161–162); and
• improvement in data collection (Recommendation 166).
ALRC 80—Legal Risk in International Transactions
Legal Risk in International Transactions
(ALRC 80, 1996), the ALRC
recommended that Australia accede to the
Hague Convention on Service Abroad
of Judicial and Extrajudicial Documents in Civil and Commercial Matters 1965
(the Convention) (Recommendation 9). The Convention makes serving documents in
foreign countries quicker and cheaper by enabling
them to be provided to a
designated central authority in participating countries. On 25 June 2009, the
Convention was tabled in the
Australian Parliament, together with a National
Interest Analysis proposing that Australia become a party to the Convention.
in the Australian Parliament represents the first step in the formal
process for Australia’s accession to the Convention.
ALRC 77—Open Government
In November 2008, the Australian Government introduced the Freedom of
Information (Removal of Conclusive Certificates and Other Measures)
(Cth). The Bill repeals the power to issue conclusive certificates in the
Freedom of Information Act 1982
(Cth) (FOI Act) for all exemption
provisions. While the ALRC did not recommend the removal of all powers to issue
conclusive certificates
Open Government: A Review of the Federal
of Information Act 1982
(ALRC 77, 1995), it did recommend that provision for
a conclusive certificate in s 33A (documents affecting relations with states)
and 36 (internal working documents) of the FOI Act should be removed (see
Recommendations 45 and 53A).
In March 2009, the Australian Government released exposure drafts of two
Bills that propose a significant overhaul of the FOI Act.
Many of the provisions
of the Information Commissioner Bill 2009 (Cth) and the Freedom of Information
Amendment (Reform) Bill 2009
implement the ALRC recommendations in
Government:
• the insertion of a new objects clause that explains clearly the
underlying rationale for the FOI Act and its significance
for the proper working
of representative democracy (Recommendations 1–5);
• the establishment of a dedicated Freedom of Information Commissioner
(Recommendations 18–27);
• the extension of the FOI Act to contracted service providers and
subcontractors delivering services for and on behalf of the
Commonwealth
(Recommendations 99–102);
• the amendment of the Cabinet documents exemption to ensure that it
only covers documents at the core of the Cabinet process
(Recommendations
• the amendment of the internal working documents exemption to relate
to deliberative processes (Recommendations 51–52);
• the repeal of exemptions for Executive Council documents, documents
arising out of companies and securities legislation and
documents relating to
the conduct of an agency of industrial relations (Recommendations 50, 57,
In May 2009, the ALRC made a submission to the Department of Prime Minister
and Cabinet, expressing strong support for the two Bills
and noting that they
substantially implement the ALRC’s recommendations. The ALRC did, however,
note that the Bills do not
implement a number of ALRC recommendations (including
recommendations relating to time limits, fees, and the application of the Act
parliamentary departments and agencies listed in Schedule 2 of the FOI Act); as
well as a number of recommendations relating to
the FOI Act made in
Australia’s Federal Record
(ALRC 85, 1998).
Reconciliation
The ALRC has established an Indigenous Advisory Committee to assist in
building stronger relationships with Indigenous peoples, and
to ensure that the
concerns and perspectives of Indigenous communities are more effectively
integrated into the federal law reform
Speaking at the historic first meeting in August 2009, ALRC President
Professor David Weisbrot said that in establishing an Indigenous
Committee, ‘the ALRC’s intention is to ensure that Indigenous people
are effectively engaged in our work, so
that Australia’s laws have proper
regard to Indigenous interests and protect and promote Indigenous
‘The ALRC acknowledges that the Australian legal system historically
has failed to deliver better legal, social and economic
outcomes for Indigenous
peoples. As the premier national law reform body, the ALRC has the
opportunity—and indeed the obligation—to
contribute to greater
social justice, equity and inclusion in Australia. Securing the advice and the
experience of the outstanding
members of the Indigenous Advisory Committee is a
critical first step towards realising these important ambitions.’
The establishment of an Indigenous Advisory Committee is one of several
initiatives included in the ALRC’s Reconciliation Action
Plan (RAP). Other
measures in the RAP include commitments by the ALRC to:
• suggest future references that address the particular needs, concerns
and priorities of Indigenous peoples;
• facilitate greater direct participation of Indigenous people in the
work of the ALRC as staff members and as student interns;
• consult more widely and effectively with Indigenous people and
communities; and
• ensure that the ALRC’s reports and recommendations to the
Australian Government fully take into account Indigenous perspectives.
Foundation Members of the ALRC’s Indigenous Advisory Committee are:
• Professor Larissa Behrendt, Director, Jumbunna Indigenous House of
Learning, University of Technology Sydney;
• Ms Neva Collings, Solicitor, Environmental Defender’s
• Mr Lincoln Crowley, Barrister, NSW Indigenous Barristers Strategy
Working Party;
• Ms Megan Davis, Director, Indigenous Legal Centre, University of
• Mr Darryl French, Program Manager Aboriginal Studies, Tranby
Aboriginal College;
• Ms Terri Janke, principal solicitor of Terri Janke &
Associates;
• Mr Warren Mundine, Chief Executive Officer, NSW Native Titles
• Mr Steven Ross, Coordinator, Murray Lower Darling River Indigenous
Nations; and
• Mr Maurice Shipp, Manager, Indigenous Children’s Strategic
Policy, ACT Government.
Internship program
The reputation of the ALRC’s internship program continues to grow both
locally and overseas. There was strong competition for
the 15 internship places
offered by the ALRC in 2008–09. The successful candidates were of a high
calibre, providing invaluable
input into the ALRC’s inquiries and other
areas of the ALRC’s work.
The internship program is an important part of the ALRC’s community
education program. An internship at the ALRC provides an
opportunity for
students to increase their awareness of law reform issues and improve their
research and writing skills, while contributing
to an ALRC inquiry. Interns
become a member of the team for one of the ALRC’s current inquiries and
are supervised by a legal
In 2008–09, our interns were involved in a range of other ALRC work
areas. Interns provided articles and book reviews for inclusion
, assisted in the development of online forums for ALRC inquiries,
attended consultation meetings and participated in ALRC functions.
For the first time, a student from the Harvard Law School in the United
States joined the ALRC. Ms Isley Markman worked full-time
at the ALRC on the
Secrecy Inquiry in January 2008 as part of the Harvard Clinical Placement
Mr Peter Fox, from the University of Maryland in the US, and Ms Smriti Sriram
from Durham University in the United Kingdom, were also
offered placements with
the ALRC as part of the winter intake of interns. Mr Fox worked on various
aspects of native title, which
were incorporated into
‘Native Title’ (Issue 93, 2009) while Ms Sriram joined the
Secrecy team.
The internship program will be expanded in the next year to include a
targeted Indigenous internship stream. The ALRC has committed
to creating
opportunities for Indigenous peoples to be involved with the ALRC as interns as
part of the Reconciliation Action Plan.
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (246 KB)
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter