URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/journals/IntJlSSWC/2010/3.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 15:04:58
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Ciccarelli, Marina; Dender, Jessica --- "Contextual Factors Influencing Early Return to Work in the Rural and Remote Sector" [2010] IntJlSSWC 3; (2010) 2(1) International Journal of Social Security and Workers Compensation 17
I INTRODUCTION
II THE UNIQUE EMPLOYMENT LANDSCAPE OF WESTERN AUSTRALIA
III FACTORS INFLUENCING EARLY RETURN TO WORK IN RURAL AND REMOTE EMPLOYMENT SECTORS
IV CONCLUSION
CONTEXTUAL FACTORS INFLUENCING EARLY RETURN TO WORK IN THE
RURAL AND REMOTE SECTOR
AND JESSICA
Early return to work (RTW) interventions are important in facilitating
successful and timely resumption of the worker role following
a work-related
injury. Early RTW strategies include strong communication between the employer,
injured worker and treating physician;
maintenance of the worker role, and
accommodation of the injured worker through the provision of suitable
alternative duties and
modification of the workplace. In the State of Western
Australia, all regions beyond the capital city are considered rural and remote.
Workplace rehabilitation providers working in rural and remote regions face
unique challenges in implementing early RTW interventions
for injured workers
due to issues of geographic distance, work cultures and limited availability of
alternative job duties. This
paper discusses some of the factors restricting
early RTW interventions and possible strategies to overcome these hurdles.
I INTRODUCTION
Various individual, organisational, health care, and legislative factors have
been identified in the literature as important in facilitating
a successful
Implementing early RTW
interventions is considered vital to preventing long-term disability and
achieving timely and durable RTW
following a work-related
Early RTW interventions to
prevent long term work disability include clear and regular communication
between the employer, injured
worker and treating physician; maintenance in or
early resumption of the worker role, and accommodation of the injured worker
the provision of suitable alternative duties and modification of the
workplace. The Model of Human Occupation
has been used to explain the
impact of injury on a worker and highlights the importance of early intervention
initiatives that maintain
the connection between the injured worker and the
The MOHO proposes that
four main factors influence work behaviour: volition, habituation, performance
and the environment.
refers to the work choices individuals make based on values, interests and their
belief in their ability to perform the
Additionally, work that is
meaningful and satisfying is likely to have a positive impact on the
individual’s perception of
themselves in the worker role. Injured workers
with little job satisfaction or a poor sense of connection to the work or
may have less motivation to return to work, compared to motivated
injured workers.
Internalising the worker role is important in developing daily routines and
habits that are congruent with the requirements of the
job, including
appropriate dress, punctual attendance, pace and quality of work, and
interpersonal relationships with co-workers
supervisors.
The presence of pain
and other symptomatologies following work injury can interrupt the daily
routines of individuals. Increased
time away from the workplace following injury
can result in the development of habits that are incongruous with a worker role,
as irregular sleep and waking patterns, physical
and an increase in
time spent in other roles (eg, patient, homemaker, carer). Early intervention
initiatives may include the promotion
of regular daily work routines soon after
injury such as waking and dressing, attending vocational rehabilitation
appointments, and
attending meetings and participation in suitable work
activities at the workplace related to the RTW program. All these can assist
injured worker to retain habituation around the worker role.
The MOHO proposes that skilled performance in the task demands of a job
occurs through knowledge, training, and experience performing
the job. Injury
can interfere with the worker’s presence and participation at the
workplace, which over time can lead to physical
de-conditioning, reduced
self-confidence in their capacity to do the job, and redundancy in knowledge and
These factors all
negatively impact on volition, habituation and performance in the worker role,
as over time the worker role is
replaced by other incompatible roles, including
the ‘patient’ role.
Prior research identified that in the acute stages of injury, low intensity and
workplace specific interventions resulted in better
RTW outcomes than medically
oriented interventions
viewed the injured worker as a patient. Therefore, opportunity for early
re-connection with the workplace following injury is
important in preventing
loss of identity of the worker role and the development of secondary physical
and psychological disability.
The physical, social, organisational and legislative environments can act as
either barriers or enablers to maintaining the injured
worker in the worker
Accommodation of the
injured worker through provision of suitable alternate duties, modifications to
the work environment,
support by co-workers and supervisors are essential to prevent long-term work
disability following injury.
Workers’ compensation in Western Australia (WA) is a no-fault system and
workers’ compensation insurance for workers
is a mandatory requirement of
employers. The State workers’ compensation
legislation
outlines the
responsibilities of key stakeholders (employer, injured worker and treating
physician) in achieving a timely and efficient
work-related injury, illness or disease. Through effective communication between
stakeholders, a suitable
work-place based graduated RTW programme for the
injured worker can be developed, implemented and
outlining the minimum
requirements for implementing work-placed-based injury management strategies
provides a framework for employers
to manage the process.
While many large employers provide in-house injury management services,
medium- and small-sized employers often do not have sufficient
financial resources to provide these services and rely on external expertise.
Similarly, when cases are complex as in the
case of a stress-injury claim,
workplace rehabilitation providers approved by the State workers’
compensation authority (WorkCover
WA) and chosen by the injured worker, assist
the key stakeholders in the RTW process through provision of case management and
rehabilitation services. In accordance with the State workers’
compensation legislation, vocational rehabilitation activities
are work-place
and involve a range of workplace interventions including identifying
suitable alternative duties, workplace modification, job modification,
in safe work practices and case management; interventions that are reported as
being effective in achieving positive RTW
Workplace rehabilitation providers assisting injured workers in rural and
remote work sectors face challenges in facilitating early
RTW interventions.
This paper outlines the contextual factors impacting on early RTW initiatives in
rural and remote Western Australia,
and discusses some strategies that have been
used to facilitate positive RTW outcomes.
II THE UNIQUE EMPLOYMENT LANDSCAPE OF WESTERN
The State of Western Australia (WA) occupies the western third of the
Australian continent. It has an area of 2.5 million square kilometres
distance from north to south is approximately
Despite the enormity of the State’s physical size, the capital city of
Perth is the sole metropolitan area within the State,
and all regions outside of
the metropolitan area are classified as rural and/or remote.
WA has a population of approximately 2.56
and over one quarter of
WA’s population reside in rural and remote geographic regions. In 2009, WA
experienced 2.9 per cent
population growth from the previous 12 months, compared
to a national population growth of 2.1 per
Some of the most rapid
increases in labour force growth rates during 2000-05 were in rural and remote
regions of the State.
factor influencing this growth has been increase in employment opportunities
within the resources sector, specifically on-
and off-shore exploration and
mining of gas and mineral deposits in WA. The increase in mining activity
occurred during the ‘resources
boom’ in the first half of this
decade, to cater for rising international demand for iron ore, natural gas and
oil with the
rapid industrialisation of China and India. Consequently, the
mining sector is responsible for approximately 30 per cent of the State
Product and 70 per cent of the State’s total exports
This growth contributed
to the subsequent migration to WA of skilled and unskilled mining company
employees, as well as workers who
provide support services within the
surrounding communities of the mines. In addition to the mining industry, rural
and remote workers
support tourism, grain and sheep farming, and fishing
industries and their surrounding communities across the State.
Industries based in rural and remote regions of WA are among those with the
highest frequency rate of lost-time claims arising from
a work-related injury.
For example, in 2007-08, agricultural, forestry and fishing industries accounted
for 17.4 lost-time claims
per million hours worked, second only to the
manufacturing industry with 19.0 lost-time claims per million
The highest number of
work-related injuries for male workers in Australia occurs in agriculture,
forestry and fishing industries,
with 128 per 1000 employed experiencing at
least one day/shift absence due to a work-related
Accordingly, in 2009-10
the average recommended workers’ compensation insurance premium rates for
agriculture, forestry and
fishing industries were the highest of all industry
reflecting the high
frequency and duration of work-related injury claims among workers in these
rural and remote occupational groups.
High injury rates may be related to the
heavy manual labour nature of the work in these
industries,
as well as the work
and social cultures within rural communities.
III FACTORS INFLUENCING EARLY RETURN TO WORK IN RURAL
AND REMOTE EMPLOYMENT SECTORS
Rural and remote regions have unique characteristics that influence not only
the incidence and prevalence of work-related injuries,
but also the success of
early RTW initiatives. The following commentary discusses factors that impact on
early RTW for workers in
rural and remote regions of WA, and describes case
management strategies that are used to either counter the effects of these
or to use them to advantage.
A The work culture within agricultural
communities
Many agricultural farms in WA are family-owned and operated. The workplace
(ie the farm) is also the family home, and there are often
few boundaries,
physical or otherwise, to differentiate the two. The employer/owner is typically
the male head of the family, whose
adult child/children may also work on the
farm. Additional seasonal workers, such as sheep shearers and crop pickers, are
in as necessary. The focus of business is very much on maximising
production, and consequently less time and resources are made available
formal processes in place at the workplace with regard to induction in safe work
practices, training and supervision, recording
of lost-time injuries and injury
management procedures.
Agricultural workers have been described as ‘having a close affinity
with the land’
and develop
their sense of identity from their work. Within the context of MOHO, this
self-identity related to the work role serves
as an enabler to a successful RTW,
with farm workers motivated to returning to pre-injury work duties. Agricultural
workers often
work longer hours in comparison to other
occupations,
with the average
number of hours worked among male agricultural workers 49.5 hours per
When considered against
statistics that indicate the highest injury rate among male workers in Australia
was among those who work
41-49 hours per
the likelihood of a
work-related injury among agricultural workers is high.
A study of Victorian farm workers who had sustained a spinal cord injury
reported that seven of 20 injured workers returned to farming
post-injury,
despite the degree
of manual labour tasks involved. Many agricultural workers do not have formal
post-secondary school education,
with training in their profession occurring on
the job. Thus, options for alternative, less physically demanding, jobs outside
may be restricted due to the injured-worker’s limited transferable
skills, knowledge and non-motivation to work anywhere other
than in agricultural
Young et al found that
a successful RTW to pre-injury work was influenced by the fact that farmers were
self-employed and were able
to modify the working environment to accommodate
functional limitations related to the physical injury and did not have to deal
negative attitudes of
self-employment is not always an option and opportunities for re-deployment into
alternative suitable work are limited in
small rural and regional communities.
The following case study illustrates this issue.
In a regional centre located in the ‘wheat belt’ of WA (ie
farming of predominantly wheat and other grain crops), a young
male sustained a
disc-related lower back injury during the course of his work as the sole
employee and farm manager on a small farm.
The severity of the injury prevented
him from returning to his pre-injury role and due to the small size of the
farming business,
internal redeployment was not a viable option. To achieve his
injury management goal of external redeployment into a physically suitable
vocation, a work trial was required to enable a graduated RTW. With his
employment and educational history limited to agricultural
work, and without any
formal qualifications, opportunities for redeployment into the more sedentary
agricultural retail or insurance
industry were extremely limited. Furthermore,
the culture within the town was that individuals should ‘start at the
as a stores-person and work their way up to more senior positions’.
This reduced the opportunity for the injured worker to
enter into agricultural
retail work that potentially offered duties that were either sedentary or had
low physical demands, and thus
engage in a safe RTW.
In order to obtain suitable alternative work placements in small regional
centres the injured worker and workplace rehabilitation
provider must: (i)
extrapolate the injured worker’s identified transferrable skills across
industries; (ii) examine local and
sometimes personal contacts who may be drawn
on to provide work trial placements; and, (iii) conduct labour market research
to identify
current local employment trends; to plan a viable, outcome focused
redeployment path for the injured worker.
B Disconnect between the injured worker and the rural
and remote workplace
Early intervention RTW initiatives focus on maintaining a physical and
psychological connection between the injured worker and the
workplace. As
illustrated using the MOHO, this connection to the workplace assists in
retaining the injured worker in the ‘worker’
role and fosters
communication with, and psychosocial support by, the employer and co-workers.
Lack of co-worker and employer support
at the workplace has been identified as a
factor that impedes re-integration to the workplace following
work-injury.
Therefore, injured workers who are unable to immediately return to work are
encouraged to at least attend injury management meetings
at the workplace to
maintain a physical connection to the employer and their co-workers; however,
this is not always possible for
injured workers employed in rural and remote
regions. A unique characteristic of employment within the mining industry in WA
high prevalence of
fly-in fly-out
(FIFO) positions, whereby mine
workers maintain a permanent residence in the metropolitan area and commute by
aeroplane to and from
the mining towns, where they are provided with temporary
housing for the duration of their weekly, fortnightly or monthly rosters.
Therefore, there are many mine workers who maintain a permanent residence in the
metropolitan area, but work in regional and remote
areas of the State.
Consequently an injured FIFO worker who returns home to the metropolitan area
for medical attention and to convalesce
is unlikely to maintain the physical
connection to the workplace due to the geographic distance between the two.
One example of this difficulty is the case of a middle-aged plant (bogger)
operator at a remote mine site who sustained a work-related
knee injury. The
injured worker is required to drive his machine in the mine, located several
hundred metres underground. In the
event of an emergency, the worker would not
have been able to climb out of the mine shaft via the vertical emergency ladder,
so alternative work duties were required. However, the injured worker was
unable to participate in an on-site RTW programme because
he was physically
unable to drive to and from his home and the airport to access the worksite by
aeroplane. Alternative transportation
options were considered including public
transport, car pooling, taxi and a family member driving the injured worker to
the airport; however, all these options were ruled out after
considering the worker’s graduated RTW schedule and cost-effectiveness
the options.
This case study and the case study described in III A are two examples of how
the physical environment can impact on return to a worker
role; however the
social and organisational environments can also impact on return to work
initiatives. Many work teams on mine sites
are paid bonuses based on
productivity performance, and so team members assist one another to achieve the
production targets. The
job description for a bogger operator is not likely to
include frequent heavy lifting as an identified physical job demand; however,
reality the bogger operator assists the labourers on the team with their work as
needed, to maximise the likelihood of the team
reaching the productivity target.
As a consequence, other members of the work team are less likely to want an
injured worker on-site
and on-shift, who is unable to contribute to the
team’s productivity.
Therefore, when working with injured workers, who are unable to complete a
graduated RTW at the original workplace due to physical,
organisational or
social barriers, the workplace rehabilitation provider must attempt to source
work hardening programmes in their
local area. Obtaining a suitable work trial,
replicating the physical demands of the job and, and perhaps more importantly,
site’s physical, social and organisational environments, is
difficult. The nature of work completed on-site is usually specific
to that mine site; and as such, the regional workplace rehabilitation provider
must obtain physical pre-injury job demand
information from workplace
representatives, and identify a role within the injured worker’s local
community that incorporates
similar physical demands and that is vocationally
appropriate. A suitable alternative for the injured bogger operator was to
participate
in a graduated work hardening program on a construction site that
mimicked the uneven ground of the mine site, but also provided
opportunity for
the worker to perform pre-start checks on vehicles, and to begin climbing on and
off small plant.
While work trials in other workplaces provide opportunity for increasing the
worker’s physical capacity for heavy manual work
and long duration work
shifts, the physical and psychological connection of the injured worker to the
workplace and communication
between the key stakeholders (injured worker,
employer and treating physician) are diminished. Regularly scheduled telephone
conferencing has been used effectively to ensure that all stakeholders have
the opportunity to communicate regarding the injured
worker’s progress,
discuss any potential barriers to a RTW to the pre-injury job and hours, review,
and if necessary, modify
The social culture within the mining communities can however, be used to
advantage in the RTW process. FIFO mine workers develop strong
connections with their co-workers on regular rostered shifts and time away from
the work-site due to injury negatively impacts
on these social relationships.
Employers and work rehabilitation providers can capitalise on the social
motivation (volition to be
in the work role and work environment) by using the
following strategies. Injured workers who do not demonstrate physical capacity
for physical work duties over a full 12 hour shift can remain at the worksite
and participate in on-site training activities to maintain
their skills,
participate in on-site gym programs to supplement the work hardening activities,
provide supervision of work teams,
leading hands and trades assistants, and
participate in staff social functions to maintain the injured worker’s
to the workplace. Opportunity to bring injured workers to the mine
site for shorter roster periods during the RTW process is more
likely to be a
financially viable option when the employer has access to a charter aeroplane,
rather than using more expensive commercial
C Limited opportunities to find suitable alternative
duties in physically demanding work environments
Employers in rural areas are generally smaller than those in metropolitan
areas, with self-employed workers over-represented in agricultural
Small-sized organisations
tend to be associated with fewer formalised return to work processes, and the
relationships between no
early RTW measures due to company size within the
agricultural, mining and forestry industries are
significant.
work-injury, not all injured workers are able to immediately return to
pre-injury duties. Injured workers provided with
modified work programmes have
almost half the number of lost-time days related to their injury, and
approximately twice the RTW rate
of injured workers who are not provided with
modified work duties.
inability of the employer to find suitable alternative duties that match the
physical and/or psychological capacity of
the injured worker can hinder early
intervention initiatives and delay the planned RTW outcomes.
Some mining companies will not accommodate an injured worker at the mine site
until they are able to fully perform their pre-injury
work duties and hours. In
this case, teleworking may be a viable option to minimise lost-time from work
and maintain the injured
worker’s performance in the worker role. The
following case study demonstrates this RTW strategy.
An experienced Haulpac driver who resides in a south-west regional centre is
employed on a FIFO basis by a mining company operating
in the State’s far
north-west. The driver experienced a whiplash injury as a result of a motor
vehicle accident at the workplace.
The injured worker was unable to tolerate the
four hour drive from his home to metropolitan Perth to board the flight to the
town, even with an overnight rest before the flight. The work
rehabilitation provider negotiated with the employer, on behalf of
the injured
worker, for the injured worker to work remotely from home updating the
company’s training manuals for new employees,
including instructions for
safe work practices using various plant and equipment. This workplace
accommodation providing suitable
alternative work duties in an appropriate
environment resulted in a win-win situation: there was minimal lost-time from
work (thereby
reducing claim costs for the employer) and the injured worker was
able to remain productive in his worker role during the period
convalescence.
Another case example of a successful RTW strategy involves an injured worker
from a south-western wine producing region of WA. Many
local residents in this
regional centre are employed in viticulture, which is an extremely seasonal
industry. Winemaking processes
tend to be linear in nature, requiring one task
to be repeatedly performed for up to 12 hour shifts, over a designated period. A
middle-aged female vineyard hand experienced a laceration injury to the palmar
aspect of her thumb on her dominant hand. Post-operatively
she relied solely on
her non-dominant hand to complete her activities of daily living, and
subsequently reported localised aching
in the dorsal aspect of her non-dominant
wrist extensor and forearm extensor muscles. The winery was unable to provide
suitable alternative
duties outside of the vineyard and the next available
vineyard task was pruning, which involved extension of both wrists and
gross gripping with both hands. Consequently, the worker was unable
to commence a RTW programme with her pre-injury employer and
a work placement
for work hardening was sought. The workplace rehabilitation provider approached
a network of occupational safety
and health representatives working with various
employers in the local area. A larger winery in the area provided the
opportunity
for jobs at the cellar door, restaurant, gift store and
administrative departments, which had light physical task demands. The injured
worker was placed at the larger winery to participate in a graduated work
hardening programme until she was able to perform her pre-accident
duties, and a
successful RTW with the pre-injury employer was achieved.
Establishing a network of occupational health and safety representatives
across or within specific industries in rural and remote
regions, allows for
each to assist the other with work placements as required, enabling earlier
D Completion of work projects in rural and remote
Another barrier to early RTW following work injury relates to the completion
of projects within small rural or remote towns. This
is for example the case,
when large construction or mining projects that provide direct or indirect
employment for the majority of
residents in regional centres, complete their
work and cease operation.
In 2009, a large-sized employer completed construction works in an inland
regional centre in WA. As a result, all employees were terminated,
those with open workers’ compensation claims. Injured construction workers
were required to engage in RTW work hardening
programmes with a view to
returning to their pre-injury duties with a new employer; or for redeployment
into a new job entirely.
RTW delays were encountered as other terminated
employees, who had no work injuries, filled job vacancies in other local and
construction projects in surrounding areas. Furthermore, small
businesses, such as food and retail outlets, that supported the workers
residents in the local community, began closing down due to reduced business and
income as terminated construction employees
moved away in search of other work
opportunities. Consequently, these businesses could not accommodate interim work
hardening programmes
for those injured workers with transferrable skills.
Strategies engaged to overcome RTW barriers in this scenario included: (i)
canvassing for work trials in nearby regional town centres;
(ii) assessing
public transport routes where transportation was a barrier for the injured
worker, and structuring the graduated RTW
programme around public transport
schedules; (iii) identifying, via personal and professional contacts, and
assessing opportunities
on other local construction projects for work hardening
with the view to employment; (iv) reviewing the injured worker’s
history and determining whether work hardening activities could be
provided by a previous employer; and (iv) research into the estimated
commencement dates of proposed local construction projects to provide a goal and
timeframe for potential work hardening and work
trial opportunities.
In cases where RTW objectives and targets were determined through the active
involvement of the injured worker and utilised identified
work hardening/work
trial opportunities in the local area, the injured workers demonstrated greater
motivation to participate in
their RTW rehabilitation programme.
E Timely and routine access to medical and
rehabilitation specialists
Many agricultural, mining, fishing and forestry workers residing in rural and
remote WA live long distances from specialist services
situated within the
capital city, Perth, and therefore potentially have less opportunity for
frequent and timely access to medical
and rehabilitation services. This may
result in poorer RTW outcomes following work injury. Evidence from the
literature indicates
that a strong multidisciplinary approach to managing a work
injury provides the best work
For injured workers in
rural and remote regions, access to a team of specialist medical, rehabilitation
and support staff can be
problematic.
By way of example, a young male miner sustained a fractured wrist during
work. He was taken to the closest regional hospital where
he was advised that a
doctor would not be on site for three days. He was advised that he would need to
travel to the next regional
medical centre, located approximately two hours
drive away, for medical imaging of the injury. During the three day period while
awaiting a medical review, his employer was not provided with a diagnosis for
the injured worker, or with any medical restrictions
for his RTW. Consequently,
the injured worker was returned to unsuitable duties involving repetitive
flexion, extension and deviation
of the injured wrist. After three days the
injured worker was unable to use the injured hand.
Mining companies operating in WA generally nominate treating medical
practitioners in the Perth metropolitan area to treat fly-in-fly-out
Nominated treating practitioners generally have awareness of the
employer’s early RTW procedures, and of the light
duties available and the
respective physical and psychological task demands. This can assist in effective
early coordination of RTW.
However, for those injured workers residing
regionally who attend a medical review initially with a Perth-based
practitioner, may
be required to regularly travel significant distances from
their regional homes to Perth for follow up medical reviews, especially
periods of incapacity for work. Nominating a local treating medical practitioner
to oversee management of the injured workers’
continuity and regularity of medical management for the duration of the claim,
whilst reducing the workers’
need to travel significant distances.
‘Yellow flag’ is the term given to psychosocial, workplace,
personal, or compensation-related factors that increase the
likelihood of a
long-term disability following a physical
The absence of timely
and comprehensive medical management of the work injury can result in the
injured worker unsure of diagnosis
and prognosis, fearing re-injury and possibly
catastrophising the injury. A work-related injury that presents with yellow
flags requires
management using a multidisciplinary approach of medical, allied
and psychosocial health staff that work collaboratively with the
injured worker
and employer,
and maintain
strong, effective communication among all stakeholders. This can be problematic
when physical distance separates the
stakeholders and the injured worker is
physically disconnected from the workplace.
The development of a community-based model of intervention has been proposed,
whereby increasing the knowledge and skills of local
community health
professionals may improve the delivery of specialised services to injured
workers in rural and remote
This is an important
issue as professional development opportunities in rural and remote areas in WA
are limited, and travelling
to the capital city Perth for training courses can
be a time consuming and expensive option for health professionals working in the
State’s far north, approximately 2200km away. Thus, the most commonly used
method for professional development and community
education activities among
health professionals working in WA’s rural and remote communities is via
computer-based teleconferencing
conferencing.
In addition to improving rural health professionals’ knowledge of
injury management processes and strategies for facilitating
effective RTW
outcomes, better communication with rural and remote employers and workers
regarding their rights and responsibilities
within the provisions of the
workers’ compensation and injury management legislation is warranted.
There are current initiatives
that promote safety management among rural and
remote workers in WA. For example, FarmSafe WA Alliance is a community-based
comprised of (among others) farmers, occupational safety and health
consultants, representatives from the Injury Control Council
of WA, and the
Combined Universities Centre for Rural Health, whose focus is to provide
education, training and awareness of occupational
safety and health and
well-being matters to farmers, their workers, and
Workshops on issues such as farm safety, child farm safety, and emergency
procedures when working in remote areas, are held locally
in rural farming
communities across the
The State workers’ compensation authority (WorkCover WA) provides
regular information sessions regarding the injury management
employers and injured workers in metropolitan Perth, and there is a need for
similar locally-offered community-based education
regarding injury management to
assist injured workers in rural and remote regions, many of whom are
self-employed or small-sized
employers, achieve an early RTW. In 2010 WorkCover
WA offered injury management seminars in five regional centres across the
If face-to-face delivery of information sessions is not viable within a
greater number of regional and remote centres, opportunities
for web based
interactive seminars (webinars) should be explored. Webinars provide opportunity
for individuals in multiple locations
to meet in an online forum, receive
information from an instructor, and engage in discussion and ask questions in
real time. Injury
management seminars for health professionals, injured workers
and employers in rural and remote areas could be delivered in this
IV CONCLUSION
Large physical distances among regional and remote employment centres, the
injured worker’s residence and specialist medical
and rehabilitation
services, can negatively impact on early RTW interventions and prolong work
disability. Limited local access to
specialist services can delay diagnosis and
medical management of the work injury, and regular and timely communication
between the
key stakeholders in developing and monitoring a graduated RTW
programme can be problematic. Furthermore, agricultural, forestry,
fishing and
mining jobs involving predominantly heavy physical job demands may offer limited
opportunity for workplace-based work
hardening activities. Workplace
rehabilitation specialists employed to case manage the RTW of injured workers in
rural and remote
areas can utilise a number of strategies to overcome these
potential barriers. These include utilising professional and social networks
regional areas to identify opportunities with other employers for work trials
and work hardening activities to progress to pre-injury
capabilities; and
nominating a treating physician in close proximity to the injured worker’s
rural/regional home to liaise
with specialist medical professionals in the
metropolitan area. The provision of local education, either in person or via
seminars, to rural and remote health professionals, employers and workers
in the management of work injuries is recommended.
Centre for Research into Disability and
Society, Curtin Health Innovation Research Institute, Curtin University, Western
People Sense Pty Ltd, Busselton,
Western Australia. Case studies used throughout the document are based on the
experiences of the
second author in her course of practice.
Niklas Krause et al, ‘Determinants
of Duration of Disability and Return-to-Work After Work-related Injury and
Illness: Challenges
for Future Research’ (2001) 40
American Journal of
Industrial Medicine
Edward J Bernacki, ‘A Facilitated
Early Return to Work Program at a Large Urban Medical Center’ (2000) 42
Journal of Occupational and Environmental Medicine
Gary Kielhofner,
A Model of Human
(Williams and Wilkins,1985).
Gary Kielhofner et al, ‘The Model of
Human Occupation: Understanding the Worker Who is Injured or Disabled’
Kathi Brenneman and Michael J
Littleton, ‘The Model of Human Occupation: A Return to Work Case
Study’ (1999) 12
Philip Davis, Maziar Badii and Annalee
Yassi, ’Preventing Disability from Occupational Musculoskeletal Injuries
in an Urban,
Acute and Tertiary Care Hospital: Results from a Prevention and
Early Active Return-to-Work Safety Program’ (2004) 46
Occupational and Environmental Medicine
1253; Annalee Yassi et al,
’Early Intervention for Back-Injured Nurses at a Large Canadian Tertiary
Care Hospital: An Evaluation
of the Effectiveness and Cost Benefits of a
Two-Year Pilot Project’ (1995) 45
Occupational Medicine
Kielhofner et al, above n 4, 43.
J Crook, H Moldofsky and H Shannon
‘Determinants of Disability After a Work Related Musculoskeletal
Injury’ (1998) 25
Journal of Rheumatology
William S Shaw ‘Employee
Perspectives on the Role of Supervisors to Prevent Workplace Disability after
Injuries’ (2003)
Journal of Occupational Rehabilitation
Workers' Compensation and Injury
Management Act 1981
Government of Western Australia,
Workers' Compensation Injury Management Code of Practice
WorkCover WA,
Injury Management
Code of Practice Guidance Notes
http://www.workcover.wa.gov.au/NR/rdonlyres/31CADB83-248A-4352-BFF2-80C3169285F7/0/Injury_Management_Code_of_Practice_Guidance_Notes.pdf
Johannes R Anema,
‘Multidisciplinary Rehabilitation for Subacute Low Back Pain: Graded
Activity or Workplace Intervention
or Both?: A Randomized Controlled
Trial’ (2007) 32
Tourism Western Australia,
Western Australia
http://www.westernaustralia.com
Australian Bureau of Statistics,
3101.0 - Australian Demographic Statistics
Australian Bureau of Statistics,
1367.5 - Western Australian Statistical Indicators
Australian Bureau of Statistics,
1367.5 - Western Australian Statistical Indicators
(December- 2007)
WorkCover WA,
Workers' Compensation
in Western Australia Statistical Report 2004/05 to 2007/08 (
Australian Bureau of Statistics,
4102.0- Australian Social Trends - Work-related Injuries
Amanda E Young, Roger Strasser and
Gregory C Murphy, ‘Agricultural Workers' Return to Work Following Spinal
Cord Injury: a
Comparison with Other Industry Workers’ (2004) 26
Disability and Rehabilitation
David Glasscock, ‘Psychosocial
Factors and Safety Behaviour as Predictors of Accidental Work Injuries in
Farming’ (2006)
Work and Stress
Young et al, above n 30, 1020
Australian Bureau of Statistics,
4102.0 - Australian Social Trends- Work-related Injuries
Amanda Young and Gregory Murphy,
‘Spinal Cord Injury Rehabilitation Outcomes: A Comparison of Agricultural
and Non-agricultural
Workers’ (1998) 6
Australian Journal of Rural
Young et al, above n 30, 1020.
WE Hoogendoorn et al, ‘High
Physical Work Load and Low Job Satisfaction Increase the Risk of Sickness
Absence Due to Low Back
Pain: Results of a Prospective Cohort Study’
Occupational and Environmental Medicine
Tom Seekins, ‘Rural and Urban
Employment Patterns: Self-employment as a Metaphor for Rural Vocational
Rehabilitation’
(Report, Montana University Affiliated Rural Institute,
Missoula, MO, 1992) 2.
Raymond Baril, ‘Early Return to
Work of Injured Workers: Multidimensional Patterns of Individual and
Organizational Factors’
Safety Science
Niklas Krause, Lisa K Dasinger and
Frank Neuhauser, ‘Modified Work and Return to Work: A Review of the
Literature (1998) 8
Journal of Occupational Rehabilitation
JB Staal, ‘Occupational Health
Guidelines for the Management of Low Back Pain: An International Comparison
Occupational and Environmental Medicine
Accident Compensation Corporation,
‘New Zealand Acute Low Back Pain Guide’ (Wellington, 2004 ed)
Michael JL Sullivan,
‘Integrating Psychosocial and Behavioral Interventions to Achieve Optimal
Rehabilitation Outcomes’
Journal of Occupational
Rehabilitation
WA Country Health Service,
http://www.wacountry.health.wa.gov.au/default.asp?documentid=408
See FarmSafe WA Alliance,
http://www.farmsafewa.org
See FarmSafe WA Alliance,
http://www.farmsafewa.org
WorkCover WA,
Calendar of
http://www.workcover.wa.gov.au/Returning+to+Work/Calendar+of+Events/Default.htm
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (168 KB)
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter