URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/journals/MqJlBLaw/2007/15.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 15:20:40
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Wei, Yuwa --- "China's Capital Market and Corporate Governance: The Promotion of the External Governance Mechanism" [2007] MqJlBLaw 15; (2007) 4 Macquarie Journal of Business Law 325
CHINA’S CAPITAL MARKET AND CORPORATE GOVERNANCE: THE PROMOTION OF THE EXTERNAL GOVERNANCE MECHANISM
I INTRODUCTION
II A REVIEW OF THE SECURITIES MARKET
III SECURITIES MARKET AND CORPORATE GOVERNANCE
IV THE CHINESE EXPERIENCE
V THE FUTURE
VI CONCLUSION
CHINA’S CAPITAL MARKET AND CORPORATE GOVERNANCE:
THE PROMOTION OF THE EXTERNAL GOVERNANCE MECHANISM
I INTRODUCTION
Companies are fundamental cells of modern commercial society. Although people
generally regard the rise and fall of companies as part
of the natural circle of
corporate development, the collapse of large corporations and the
consequentially profound social and economic
impact have caused great concern in
the community, particularly when corporate failure has resulted from
mismanagement. For this
reason, issues of corporate governance have attracted
enormous attention since the 1980s.
Securities markets and takeover activities are important mechanisms of
corporate governance.
The law and
economics tradition recognises that the hostile takeover performs a desirable
disciplinary function by placing management
under the market's
According to law and
economics literature, the pressure of takeovers and the advantages of being
listed on a stock exchange are
effective stimuli of promoting good corporate
governance. Furthermore, by having a wide and varied scope of owners, listed
generally tend to improve on their management standards and efficiency
in order to satisfy the demands of their shareholders.
In the past two decades, interesting developments have occurred in this area,
particularly in some emerging economies such as China.
In China, the securities
market and its regulation play essential roles in encouraging and advocating
sound corporate governance
It is widely recognised
for a while that the securities market is not only a place where companies raise
funds, but also a means
of assisting China’s enterprise reforms and
promoting good corporate
governance.
However, structural
defects, corporate misconduct, and legal violations in the securities business,
have undermined the efforts to
reform China’s financial sector and
enterprise system.
These problems
have not only jeopardised the efforts to promote sound corporate governance in
state-owned listed enterprises but
also encumbered the development of the
securities market
The Chinese experience has once again proven that a well-functioning
securities market and a sound system of corporate governance
are mutually
dependent: The development of the securities market provides an external
monitoring mechanism of corporate governance,
and good practice of corporate
governance, in turn, ensures the orderly operation of the securities
This article attempts to explore the rationalities behind and the functions
of securities markets and takeover activities. It analyses
the relationship
between securities regulation and corporate governance, and investigates the
Chinese experience in fully exploiting
the monitoring function of the stock
market over listed companies. Furthermore, it examines the legal regimes
governing securities
markets and takeovers in some leading corporate economies
including the US, Germany, Japan and the UK. This article will demonstrate
in a world of commercialisation and globalisation, securities markets and
speculative activities in securities markets play
an increasingly important role
in disciplining listed companies. These examination and analyses are to be
developed in four parts
as set out below:
Part one provides an overview of the historical development of the securities
market and a review of literature on the economic functions
of stock markets.
It investigates the role of human and social cognitive and emotional biases
in economic decision making and how they affect market
prices and resources
allocation. In doing so, it explains the function of speculation in the
financial market, its economic benefit,
and its undesirable effects on the
market. Part one will ultimately establish that there is a need for regulatory
intervention in
order to restrain the undesirable consequences of speculative
Part two seeks to measure the potential disciplinary capacity of stock
markets as an instrument of corporate accountability. It attempts
to ascertain a
balanced approach that recognises the social utility of the securities market
for corporate control on the one hand,
and appreciates the possibility of market
failure and the need for limited regulatory intervention on the other.
Part three focuses on the Chinese experience of utilizing the securities
market as an effective mechanism of corporate control. The
Chinese government
anticipates that the securities market will play an important role in promoting
good corporate governance in China’s
listed companies. However, there is a
danger that China’s endeavours to reform its financial sector and
enterprise system may
be thwarted by the problems inherent in its corporate
system. The Chinese experience suggests that there is a close relationship
between the development level of a country’s capital market and the nature
of its legal system.
Part four analyses the future development of China’s financial market
in the current environment of economic globalisation.
It discusses China’s
current and future financial sector reforms, and the development of the capital
market and corporate governance
in post-WTO entry China.
II A REVIEW OF THE SECURITIES MARKET
The securities market is part of the financial market which comprises the
securities market and other markets for various financial
instruments including
commodity markets, money markets, derivatives markets, future markets and
foreign exchange markets.
the above markets and their transactions are concentrated in a few financial
centres called stock exchanges.
securities market includes both the stock market and the bond market. It is the
place where shares, debentures and bonds are
It is also referred to as
the capital market. On some occasions, people used the terms “securities
market” and “stock
market” interchangeably, owing to the
important function of the securities market in providing long-term finance to
development of the securities market can be better understood if the evolution
of the stock market is known.
The stock market evolved from ancient merchants or bankers associations
trading with debts and government securities in
It assumed its modern
form around the 17th century, when shares were invented and sold to the public
by Dutch, French and English
joint stock
Share trading in
London gained extraordinary momentum by the 18th century due to the flourish of
joint stock companies expanding
aggressively in overseas and domestic
Shares were sold at the
Royal Exchange, as well as in taverns and coffee houses between Cornhill and
Threadneedle Street in London.
It was at this time that specialised brokers and jobbers
Public investment in
company shares soon turned into a speculative mania resulting in the incredible
inflation of share prices in
the stock market, and eventually, the spectacular
crash of the market following the burst of the South Sea
It was not until 1844,
Limited Liability
was passed by the Parliament, that
the UK securities market was able to recover from the South Sea
Industrial expansion encouraged the continued formation of joint stock
companies and the further development of the stock market.
In the years
following the industrial expansion, the London Stock Exchange evolved into the
largest stock exchange in the world,
which lasted until the end of the Second
The history of stock markets in the US dates back to 1792 at Wall Street, New
In 1817, the New York
Stock Exchange (NYSE) was formally
established.
The NYSE only
admitted large and well established companies, whilst smaller companies had to
trade outside it. This fuelled the formal
establishment of the American Stock
Exchange (AMEX).
The US market
developed rapidly by the mid-1800s due to the fast growth of the industrial
firms, which required large amounts of
Because European economic
powers went up in smoke during World War II, the US replaced the UK in becoming
the leading economy in
the world after the
The NYSE also replaced the
London Stock Exchange and has been the largest stock exchange in the world.
The history of the stock market shows that shares facilitate the expansion of
companies, and also demonstrates the fact that the stock
market is one of the
most important devices by which companies can raise capital. It is therefore
necessary to regulate the stock
market to ensure its prosperity and efficiency.
The securities market is also known as the speculators’ market, and
speculation often causes the market to behave
irrationally.
Investors in the
secondary market mainly trade with the goal of making short-term profits by
reselling shares to others. The prices
of shares are exposed to subjective
speculation of investors and the market can therefore become
investors’ speculation can result in waves of manias and panics in the
market. The common scenario is that share
prices are pushed unreasonably high,
and then plummet. This is evidenced by the South Sea Bubble event in the London
stock market
and the disastrous market crashes that occurred on the NYSE in 1929
and 1987. The securities market crash in 1929 instigated a long
term economic
depression in the US which haunted the country until World War II. The market
crash in 1987, though less disastrous
compared with the 1929 crash, once again
depressed the country’s economy.
Facts and empirical studies suggest that irrational volatilities in the
securities market do not necessarily have a definite cause,
and sometimes are
mainly related to investors’
psychology.
Classic economics
investigated the relationship between economics and psychology. Regrettably,
psychology faded away in the mainstream
neo-classic economics by the
The dominant view of
neo-classic economics is that individuals/investors in the market are rational
agents acting according to rational
principles. Although they are subject to
errors and inconsistencies, they generally make rational decisions and choices,
individual systematically making mistakes would eventually be ousted
from the market.
until the 1970s that the concepts of behaviour finance and behaviour economics
were revisited by some
economists.
Behaviour finance
and behaviour economics are two related scientific fields studying the role of
human cognitive and emotional
decision-making and how they affect
allocation of resources
The aim of these two
scientific fields is to combine psychological and
neo-classical economic theory
to explain economic choices where there is
uncertainty.
Behaviour finance/economics does provide explanations for volatilities such
as bubbles and crashes in the securities market when the
orthodox doctrines
including the rational choice model and the efficient market hypothesis in
neo-classical theory do not satisfactorily
rationalise the market behaviour.
Behaviour finance/economics acknowledges that individual biases do not impact
the securities market.
only when individual biases evolve into social or cognitive biases that the
market may be affected.
such as herd behaviour, group thinking, and mass panic are all used to
illustrate this point of view.
The highly speculative nature of the securities market makes it vulnerable to
manipulative conduct, which under certain conditions
will result in social
psychological phenomenon such as herd behaviour or mass panics, which may upset
the market order. It is therefore
important to bring speculation under control.
In most jurisdictions, regulation is regarded as an efficient mechanism for
controlling
the manipulative behaviour in the securities
Furthermore, the functions of the securities market and its significant role
in the economy, particularly in the developed markets,
also justify regulation
of the market in a pervasive
The securities market
primarily has the following functions: (1) raising capital for companies; (2)
mobilizing savings for investment,
facilitating company growth, and
redistributing wealth; (3) creating investment opportunities for investors; (4)
raising capital
for governments to develop projects; and (5) through corporate
control, it allows managerial failure to be corrected through its
Because of the above
utilities, no government can overlook the inefficiency of the securities market,
and the securities market is
usually closely monitored.
III SECURITIES MARKET AND CORPORATE
The securities market has been perceived as a mechanism of corporate
governance. The law and economics literature acknowledges the
contribution of
stock markets in promoting good corporate governance. The main argument of the
law and economics tradition is that
stock exchanges facilitate takeovers and
dispersed ownership, and produce listing rules for listed companies. These
functions of
the securities market provoke listed companies to improve on their
management standards and
efficiency.
According to the literature, hostile takeovers perform a unique disciplinary
function by placing management under the market's
This is because the
managerial efficiency of a listed company is closely reflected in the share
price of the company.
of a poorly managed company are unattractive to investors. Investors may be
willing to invest in the company if the company
is willing to reduce
investors’ investment risks by selling its shares at a discount price. In
doing so, the company becomes
vulnerable to takeover predators. If the company
is taken over by a bidder, the bidder usually dismisses the current board and
new directors. Takeovers thus pose a threat to the management of a
listed company. To avoid becoming a takeover target, one of the
predominant aims
of management is to improve the managerial efficiency and the economic
performance of their companies.
As mentioned above, when a company’s shareholdings become dispersed,
the chances of the company being taken over increase. This
is because small and
dispersed shareholders are more likely to sell their shares in the stock
The securities market
makes public investment possible and therefore facilitates scattered
shareholdings. This further enhances the
threat of takeovers.
Nevertheless, some reports have found that takeovers, as a mechanism of
accountability, are imperfect.
Some point out that takeovers do not always push corporations to improve
management.
It could encourage
corporate managers to focus on short-term performance, because managers may make
business decisions just to frustrate
For example, company
managers may try to make themselves indispensable, and therefore, costly to
In addition, studies
have shown that the shareholders of the bidder company may be worse off after
the takeover.
Given that the takeover threat does not always effectively influence the
management of some listed companies, share prices can still
act as motivation
for management to work towards greater efficiency. It is especially relevant for
managers that are only motivated
to work for security and enlargement of
personal gains. This is because such goals are likely to be best achieved by
expanding their
businesses into bigger organisations and therefore creating
themselves better paid
Business expansion
requires finance. Poorly performed companies are likely to have difficulties in
attracting investors, and thus
fail to raise sufficient funds. Hence, it may
not be costly for managers to ignore investors’ interest and the
of their company on the securities market.
Research also shows that price movements often provide incentives or
penalties on a personal basis for managers who have shareholdings
When directors hold
significant shares in their companies, they have a personal incentive to improve
the economic performance of
their companies. This is because poor performance of
the companies will result in downgrade of their share prices and eventually
cause personal losses to the directors, whereas advancement of the share prices
of the companies brings personal gains to the directors.
In addition, a company’s share price can have some secondary
disciplinary influence over the management. Since depressed share
indicate ineffective and incompetent management, those managers who do care
and the labour market will
be motivated to promote the economic efficiency of their
Apart from consciousness of share price movements, listed companies are
subject to the scrutiny of the stock exchanges. Stock exchanges
produce their
own rules regulating the participants and transactions. These rules are known as
listing rules. Listing rules provide
conditions for companies to be admitted to
the stock exchanges and regulate the conduct of listed
To be admitted into a
stock exchange, a company must meet the listing requirements of the specific
stock exchange and comply with
the rules of conduct. Non-compliance with the
rules of conduct may result in the company being de-listed. Stock exchanges
incorporate codes of corporate governance in their listing rules or
publish codes of corporate governance as a separate regulatory
Consequently, higher
standards of corporate governance apply to listed companies.
In a market where there is a lack of transparency, business order and
effective regulation, share prices are usually distorted and
thus do not truly
reflect their companies’ managerial and economic
efficiency.
In such a market,
market misconduct may have little consequences. Poorly performed companies are
likely to conceal their economic
failure by misleading or manipulating
investors. In such an environment, the market is somewhat handicapped in
identifying well managed
companies from poorly managed companies. Thus, the
function of takeovers as a corporate control mechanism is substantially
Furthermore, since directors can avoid personal penalties through
market misconduct, the incentives for directors holding shares
companies to promote the companies’ economic performance diminish. For
example, the directors can pass the losses
caused by low share prices onto other
investors through inside trading.
When a person trades securities based on the information intended to be
available only for a corporate purpose and not for anyone’s
benefit, the person engages in insider
Directors and managers
of companies have access to the companies’ price sensitive information
unavailable to the public. In
a market where insider trading is not effectively
controlled, directors and managers are more likely to abuse their positions and
trade their shares based on inside information. Sometimes, managers may engage
in insider trading in combination with other forms
of market misconduct. For
example, the directors of an unsuccessful company may disclose misleading
information and create false
trading impressions on the market, and then sell
their own shareholdings right before the market receives the correct
information.
The above discussions further demonstrate the need for regulating the
securities market. An inadequately regulated securities market
cannot function
effectively. In a well functioning securities market, there is adequate
disclosure to facilitate informed judgements
and participants thus are able to
act with integrity.
IV THE CHINESE EXPERIENCE
In China, the securities market and its regulation have developed in tandem with
its economic reforms.
been means of achieving the goals of the country’s economic
This is evidenced by
the increasing attention paid to the development and regulation of the
securities market by the Chinese government
in the past decade. However, at the
beginning of China’s economic reforms, the development of the securities
market was not
a significant concern.
Before the economic reforms, China adopted a planned economy. Under the planned
economy, enterprises were wholly state-owned and
they operated according to
state plans. This meant that the state supplied resources and labour for
production and was entitled to
all the final products. Since there was no
connection between production and profitability, the state-owned enterprises had
incentive to promote economic efficiency and technology
innovations.
At the initial state of China’s economic reforms, the key concern was the
modernisation of China’s enterprise system
by introducing competition and
modern managerial mechanisms into the state-owned enterprises. In this process,
China took a cautious
approach, which contrasted with the Russian’s reform
Reforming a planned
economy into a market economy was an unprecedented project, since there was not
an existing reform model to
The goal of the economic
reforms was to create a market economy. However, no one could be sure of the
best method for achieving the
goal. This made the reform an arduous task. The
Chinese therefore decided to adopt the approach of trial and error, partial
and reinforcing reforms.
Western economists describe Chinese reform style as “gradualism”.
The Chinese themselves described their reform strategy
as “crossing the
river by feeling stones under foot and stepping on the stones”.
In the beginning, the Chinese attempted to introduce incentives and competition
into the enterprise system without corporatising
and privatising the
enterprises.
However, the
various strategies used brought new problems, and had only a limited
In the end,
corporatisation became the only solution for modernizing the organisational
structure of China’s enterprises and
an important step in improving the
economic efficiency of the
enterprises.
However, the
Chinese government made it clear that corporatisation should not challenge the
dominance of public ownership.
Consequently, most state-owned enterprises were converted into state-owned
companies. Corporatisation commenced in the early 1980s
and was mostly completed
by the end of the 1990s.
The newly corporatised enterprises were troubled with new problems. The problem
that was most difficult to overcome was insider control.
Insider control
problems existed in state-owned or dominated companies where the state was the
sole shareholder or the dominant shareholder.
In such companies, the state as a
shareholder does not have a physical appearance and must rely on
Furthermore, the state
lacks information about managerial efficiency and corporate performance.
Consequently, managers of the companies
seize the control of the companies. In
such a company, the directors on the board of directors and the supervisors on
the supervisory
board are usually appointed by the same government department,
and they are likely to work together to promote their common interests
expense of the shareholder’s (the state’s)
Mechanisms responding
to the insider trading problem were needed. To solve this dilemma, the Chinese
policy makers envisioned that
the securities market could bring external control
mechanisms into these companies.
When China decided to develop a securities market in the mid 1980s, the policy
makers aimed to achieve three primary goals. Firstly,
companies would have new
channels to raise funds.
the deepening of the enterprise reforms and reforms in the banking sector, as
well as an increase in the exposure to international
competition, companies
required more and more capital for further
The securities market
could aid companies in raising capital. Furthermore, the securities market would
assist the development of
privately owned enterprises by providing them with a
means of obtaining outside finance.
Secondly, the securities market would absorb a large amount of bank savings and
make the best use of them.
1978 to 1990, individual savings in China had increased dramatically from
RMB21,600,000,000 yens to 703,420,000,000
Chinese enterprises also
had a substantial amount in bank
The existence of a
securities market would allow these net savings to flow to well performing
enterprises and efficient sectors,
and thus exert their best utility.
Thirdly, the securities market would discipline the listed companies and promote
good corporate governance in these
To be listed on the
stock exchanges, companies needed to satisfy the minimal capital requirement,
demonstrate that it made profits
in the past three consecutive years, provide
evidence that it was not involved in serious breaches in the last two years,
After being listed on the
stock exchanges, the company was subject to the continuous disclosure
requirements and other behaviour
rules specifically tailored for listed
companies. It was understood that the incentives of being listed on the stock
exchanges and
the consequences of de-listing for breaches would act as a
disciplinary force stimulating listed companies to embrace good corporate
governance practice. Therefore, except in the core sectors essential to the
national economy and people’s livelihood, state-owned/dominated
were encouraged to be listed on the domestic and foreign exchanges.
The Chinese government’s determination to develop a securities market in
China resulted in the establishment of two national
stock exchanges in the
beginning of the 1990s.
fifteen years have witnessed mixed outcomes. The development of the securities
market and related activities occurred in
three phases. The first phase was the
initial stage of development, which started in 1978 and ended in 1990. In this
stage, the concepts
of bonds and shares were not well understood by most
ordinary Chinese. By 1981, China resumed the practice of issuing government
bonds (treasury bonds). Very few were interested. The government had to allocate
the bonds to government organisations, state institutions
and enterprises for
further distributing them to individuals. Senior officers and party members were
called on to set an example
by subscribing for possibly more treasury bonds. Ten
years later, the wealth of those who subscribed for the bonds increased by
hundred times, while those who refused to buy stayed status
Gradually, Chinese citizens
realised the benefits of subscribing for treasury bonds.
Share issuance began by 1984. The practice from pilot projects extended to some
cities, the most notable being Shanghai and Shenzhen.
Share issuance was under
close government supervision and
Most of the time, the
market was quiet. However, this only remained the case until 1990. From March
1990, the securities business
suddenly thrived, mainly because the public
discovered that the earlier investors made a fortune
After the establishment of the two national stock exchanges in 1990,
China’s securities market came into its second phase of
development, the
era of vigorous development. From 1991 to 2000, the securities market soared.
The number of new issues was far behind
the demand of investments. The
government introduced new procedures including application, casting lots and
quota allocation methods
for distributing newly issued shares. Quota control was
an important strategy of keeping the capital market in check. By having quota
control in place, the government firmly took the power of deciding which
companies’ stocks should be admitted onto the market.
Theoretically, quota
control would ensure the quality of listed companies. However, because of policy
preference quota control was,
in fact, exercised to safeguard the interests of
state dominated companies. Consequently, state-dominated companies were given
in obtaining quotas. During this period, various types of shares
including A, B, H, and N shares were introduced. A regulatory framework
built up. The market generally exhibited a booming trend, however, also
fluctuated violently.
Since 2001, the securities market has come into its third phase of development.
This is a period of adjustment. From July 2001, the
market experienced more than
four years of depression.
Between June 2001 and June 2005, the index fell from 2245 points to 998
The government has been
introducing methods to restore investors’ confidence. The pace of reducing
state shares has been accelerated.
Since April 2006, the market has begun to
recover. However, this time the market is even more volatile and manipulation is
more acutely
felt. The market showed sign of picking up by April and soon dipped
4.84% on 13 July 2006.
September it became clear that bullish market was coming. The market soared by
the end of December 2006 and January 2007, and
then plummeted on January 31. In
the following five weeks, the market fluctuated frequently and drastically. The
Shanghai index reached
its historical high of above 3000 points on 26 February.
In the morning of 27 February the marked opened with 3048 points and fell
spectacularly five hours later.
The index lost of 8.84% in the single day. On March 14 and 16, the market
plunged twice with Shanghai index fell more than 100 points
on March 14 and
21.22 points on March 16.
Many factors have contributed to the market depression and volatility. Bubbles
existed before 2001. By early 2001, A shares were
sold, on average, 70 times
above their issuing prices.
was caused by great demand in new issues. Official explanations intimated that
the past few years of recession were mainly due
to the market’s natural
adjustment after the substantial market
Financial policies
including interest rate policies, imperfect regulatory infrastructure, a lack of
legal protection for investors,
adjustments on macro-economic policies could all
contributed to the market
Some researches tend to attribute the market depression and volatility mainly to
the market irregularities and irresponsible conduct
Many companies see
the securities market as a place where they can raise easy and quick
Instead of improving the
corporate governance and economic efficiency of their companies, directors and
managers are more interested
in manipulating the market and investors by
disclosing misleading information or creating false trading
impression.
Some unqualified
companies obtained listing by giving false accounting and auditing information
in their applications.
result, investors’ confidence has been heat hardly by notorious cases
involving market misconduct. Furthermore, it is
reported that China’
capital market has been the target of local and international sharks. In 2006
alone, there was at least
RMB300,000,000,000 of unknown sources participated in
the market.
Part of them was
probably state assets, and part was international idle
The inflow of large
amounts of speculative money aiming at swaying the market has further increased
the uncertainty on China’s
Statistics indicate that the objectives behind developing securities market have
not been effectively achieved. The market has not
cured the insider trading
problems in state-dominated listed companies, and abuse of the market and
misbehaviour by listed companies
has been widely
Today, insider control
continues to plague Chinese listed companies in which the state is the dominant
shareholder. This problem
undermines China’s efforts to promote sound
corporate governance in listed companies and is responsible for irregular
on the securities
In China’s capital market, takeovers as an external mechanism of corporate
control have contributed little to the improvement
of management efficiency in
listed companies. Irregularity and widespread breaches have serious undermined
the efficiency of the
securities market. Fraudulent conduct such as misleading
disclosure and market manipulation by listed companies and market intermediaries
confuses the market and thwarts investors in their effort to differentiate well
performed companies from poorly performed companies.
Consequently, the threat of
takeover to inefficient management is significantly compromised.
China’s experience illustrates that corporate governance
and securities markets are interactive and interdependent. Therefore,
economic efficiency in China’s companies must be promoted in conjunction
with improving corporate governance practice and
advancing a transparent and
orderly securities market. To build a modern corporate governance system, China
needs to make further
efforts to rationalise the shareholding structure in its
companies. It also needs to continue to develop its securities regulation
reinforce the monitoring function of the securities market.
V THE FUTURE
For the purposes of establishing an efficient corporate governance system in
China and ensuring the healthy operation of China’s
securities market, the
Chinese will have to shoulder heavy responsibilities in the coming years. The
experience of the successful
corporate economies illustrates that a good
corporate governance system is one that is adapted to its political, economic,
and legal environment, and takes maximum advantage of its political,
economic, cultural and legal
traditions.
The corporate
governance system must be reinforced by the political, economic, cultural and
legal strength of the system. It should
promote and enhance certain social,
political, economic, cultural and legal values of the society in which it is
implemented.
evidenced by the co-existence of the diversified but equally successful
corporate governance practices in the world’s
leading corporate economies,
namely, the US, Germany and Japan.
While the US corporate governance system is characterised by a highly
developed capital market and managerial capitalism, German and
corporate governance systems are described as bank-based and co-operative
systems where corporate ownership is concentrated,
usually in the hands of banks
and related companies.
US, the focus of corporate governance is how to reduce agency costs caused by
dispersed ownership and control and hold the
management accountable. Takeovers,
as a side product of the developed stock market and dispersed ownership, play a
significant role
in corporate governance. In Germany and Japan, the issue of
corporate governance is how to increase corporate finance choices, enhance
monitoring capacity of the board and other corporate organs, and reduce pressure
Whilst China is determined to develop a modern corporate economy with its
unique characteristics by retaining a significant proportion
of state ownership
in its industrial and financial sectors, it has endeavoured to establish a US
style securities market and regulatory
regime. The question is whether China can
reconcile the two contradictory systems and thus create a new method of
achieving economic
efficiency. From what is occurring in China today, it appears
that China has made the efforts. The strategy is to divide shares of
stock company into state shares, state-owned legal person shares, and individual
While state shares
are prohibited to be traded on the stock market, state-owned legal person shares
can only be transferred among
Only individual
shares are freely transferable on the market. However, they merely account for
thirty per cent of the total
This approach has achieved the purpose of retaining substantial state
ownership on the one hand, and introducing market mechanisms
on the other.
Consequently, wholly state-owned companies continue to be financed by the state
via state-owned banks, and state dominated
companies are able to have access to
external finance through being listed on stock exchanges. In doing so, the
companies can prevent
losses of state assets, guarantee state domination, and
obtain outside investments. In the meantime, it is also expected that these
companies will accept market supervision and uphold good corporate governance.
However, as discussed in the beginning of this article and in the previous
section, the plan has not worked satisfactorily. Unlisted
state-owned companies
continue to burden the state banks with non-performing
The misconduct of
listed companies has not been curtailed by the operation of the stock market,
and, in some cases, it has even been
exacerbated. Enormous opportunities for
profits existing in China’s securities market have provoked some companies
to purposely
engage in irresponsible and manipulative conduct. Inevitably, the
market will suffer the consequences. This illustrates the fact
existence of a securities market does not automatically guarantee a better
regime of corporate governance. On the contrary,
poor corporate governance may
shake investors’ confidence and eventually undermine the market.
There are three alternatives to China in regulating its capital market and
improving corporate governance of its companies. Firstly,
if China is to retain
substantial state ownership in essential sectors for social and economic
reasons, it may need to look at the
experiences of the countries successfully
running a corporate economy with a high proportion of state
representatives of such countries include France and Italy. In France and Italy,
a large amount of firms are state
It is believed that
the state should play an important role in directing large corporations in order
to ensure that companies will
serve public
In such countries,
the government bureaucrats have substantial discretional power in the allocation
of credit, foreign exchange and
Since China
accumulated rich experience in state guidance and control over economic
activities under the planned economy, the state
oriented model of corporate
governance may well be a practicable
China may also draw inspiration from the experience of bank based systems,
namely Germany and Japan, to fully exploit state banks’
potential in
monitoring companies. Since a comprehensive and practical legal infrastructure
is a fundamental requirement for building
a successful corporate economy (this
is evident in all leading corporate economies), China needs to continue to
perfect its legal
infrastructure. In addition, it is important that China
develops a corporate culture that promotes transparency, business efficiency,
fair competition and managerial accountability.
Secondly, if China wants to fully exploit the governance function of the
securities market and thus enhance the governance practice
of listed companies,
it needs to take the following steps to improve the market efficiency:
The first step is to strengthen regulation over the securities market and
listed companies by enhancing disclosure requirements. Disclosure
is the key in
ensuring transparent and orderly transactions on the securities market. It is
generally recognised that publicity is
the best remedy for social and industrial
Disclosure is thus
the highlight of most countries’ securities
regulation.
The fact that
many incidents of market misconduct in China involve misleading disclosure or
non-disclosure further demonstrates the
necessity of improving disclosure
requirements.
The second step is to increase the protection of investors and small
shareholders’ remedies. Research has shown that successful
economies all seek to provide sufficient remedies to shareholders, particularly
small shareholders in their
It is important that
investors have the option of pursuing a legal remedy. When investors pursue
their legal rights, they bring the
management of their companies under further
scrutiny. Currently Chinese law is silent on what civil remedies share investors
have in the case of market manipulation by
corporations.
Company Law
has made shareholders’ derivative actions
possible, a lack of detailed stipulation makes the implementation
In the meantime,
shareholders’ right to class actions is still unclarified. There is a need
to improve the Chinese law in order
to offer further protection to share
The third step is to gradually reduce state shareholdings and liberalise
non-tradable shares. The current price distortion on China’s
market is mainly caused by a lack of transferable
Reduction of state
shareholdings may ease the pressure, and therefore diminish bubbles in the
However, China may wish to go for the third option: that is fully taking the
advantage of the securities market, while retaining significant
state control in
essential sectors. This is the current approach of the Chinese government, and
is the optimal, but ambitious, choice.
A difficulty of this strategy is making
state owned and dominated companies truly competitive. A possible solution is to
the traditionally affinal relationship between the companies and state
banks, and make sure that the banks will fully exert their
supervisory
functions. Currently, China is introducing the practice of securitization. The
Chinese government allows the state banks
to securitise non-performing loans and
sell the bonds on the securities market. In doing so, the government hopes that
banks and state companies will no longer be tied together, and
companies will be under greater pressure to pay back the
Using securitization
to control non-performing loans is a popular practice in many countries that
have introduced securitization,
particularly within Asia and Latin America.
What distinguishes China from
other countries is the fact that securitization in China is expected to play an
important role in assisting
the banking sector reforms. The outcome of the
securitization practice will have far reaching influence on China’s
life in coming years. How far China can go along this path remains to
The world’s financial products and markets are moving towards
globalization. China’s entry into the WTO has accelerated
the integration
of its financial sector and securities market into the world economy. China will
inevitably achieve greater financial
liberalisation and develop a more
sophisticated capital market. However, the globalisation of financial services
and the capital
market could be a double-edged sword. While capital flows do
Chinese banks will face fierce competition from international financial
institutions. China’s capital market will offer attractive
opportunities
to international investors, which will increase competition and result in a race
for opportunities. Both China’s
financial sector and its listed companies
will encounter unprecedented challenges in their quest for survival and
expansion. A task
faced by Chinese policy-makers and the corporate elite is how
to enhance the competitive strength of the country’s financial
national industries, while enjoying a high inflow of international capital.
Globalisation is a challenge as well as an
opportunity to the Chinese. China can
use the opportunity to speed up the reforms in China’s financial sector
and to modernise
China’s capital market and corporate governance system.
History once again tests the Chinese on their wisdom and determination.
VI CONCLUSION
Large and small investors around the world are hunting for investment
opportunities including direct investments, bank deposits, and
investing in
securities markets or real estate. The development of the securities market in
China provides a new channel for capital
flow. However, opportunities in
securities markets always come with risks. Making informed investment decisions
is one way to reduce
these risks. It is therefore important to closely watch the
investment environment in China’s securities market.
Political, social, local, international, economic, and financial pressures
all impact on the securities market. The development of
China’s securities
market is part of the economic reform package. The establishment of the market
is closely guided and monitored
by the Chinese government, and is therefore more
responsive to the government’s policy changes. However, after the initial
stages of development, administrative intervention has become less effective.
The problems inherent in China’s corporate system
and companies have
persisted. It is time for the Chinese to respond to these problems and
strengthen their regulatory intervention.
Experience indicates that to achieve the goal of the enterprise reforms,
China needs to continue to improve its corporate governance
practice on the one
hand, and standardise securities activities on the other. The two are
interactive. Good corporate governance
facilitates the transparent operation of
the securities market, while an orderly performing securities market can greatly
good corporate practice in listed companies.
LLB (China), LLM
(Australia), Ph.D (Australia); Senior Lecturer, Griffith Law School, Griffith
University, Australia; Member, the
Socio-Legal Research Centre, Griffith
University; Honorary Professor, Harbin University of Science and Technology,
China. The Research
for this article was supported by a research grant of the
Socio-Legal Research Centre, Griffith University, Australia. The author
to acknowledge the Socio-Legal Research Centre of Griffith University and
Griffith Law School for their support.
See Yuwa Wei,
‘Maximising the External Governance Function of the Securities Market: A
Chinese Experience’,
International Company & Commercial Law
(forthcoming, 2007) 1.
See Frank H Easterbrook &
Daniel R Fischel ‘The Proper Role of a Target's Management in Responding
to a Tender Offer’
Harvard Law Review
Easterbrook & Daniel R Fischel, ‘Corporate Control Transactions’
Yale Law Journal
; and Daniel R Fischel, ‘Efficient
Capital Market Theory, the Market for Corporate Control, and the Regulation of
Cash Tender
Texas Law Review
. 1. John C
Coffee Jr, ‘Regulating the Market for Corporate Control: A Critical
Assessment of the Tender Offer's Role in Corporate
Governance’
Columbia Law Review
See generally Daniel M
Anderson, ‘Taking Stock in China: Company Disclosure and Information in
China’s Stock Markets’
(June 2000) 88
Georgetown Law
See Yuwa Wei, ‘The
Development of the Securities Market and Regulation in China’
Loyola of Los Angeles International and Comparative Law Review
See Yuwa Wei,
‘Volatility of China’s Securities Market and Corporate
Governance’
(2006) 29.2
Suffolk Transnational Law Review
See Wei, above n 1, 1.
available at
<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Financial_markets#Definition
See Kenneth Midgley &
Ronald Burns,
The Capital Market: its Nature and Significance
See Wikipedia, available at
http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Securities_market
See Zhijun Li,
Securities Market Regulation
available at
http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Stock_market#History
See K G Davies,
‘Joint-Stock Investment in the Later Seventeenth Century’, 4.3
The Economic
History Review
(1951-1952) 288, 291-292. See also
Josette Peyrard,
See Alan Jenkins,
Stock Exchange Story
See E Victor Morgan & W
The Stock Exchange: Its History and Functions
Ibid, 14-17.
In 1711 the South Sea
Company was established. The new company offered to buy the government’s
war debts, in return for a
monopoly on English trade with the Spanish colonies
of South America. Thus, the outstanding short-term war debts, not funded by a
specific tax, were converted into equity of the proposed joint-stock company.
The company’s share price inflated from 120 to
950 before its collapse in
1720. See Morgan & Thomas, above n
See R J Briston,
Stock Exchange and Investment Analysis
(1973) 23-24.
See Baishan Xie, Xuelai Dai
& Lan Xu, ‘Comparative Study of US and Chinese Securities
Markets’, in
International Comparison of Securities Markets
Xie ed, Vol 1, 2003) 6.
See Editor of
Enlightenment
, ‘The History of the Stock Market’
http://www.hermes-press.com/wshist1.htm
. See also Li, above n 10,
The market started at the
curbstone on Broad Street near Exchange Place and was moved indoors in 1921. See
http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/American_Stock_Exchange
http://www.stockmarketinvestinginfo.com/smi_history.html
See Encyclopaedia of
American History,
http://www.answers.com/topic/market-1
See Xie, Dai & Xu,
above n 18.
See general David Cohen,
Fear, Greed and Panic: the Psychology of the Stock Market
See Wikipedia, available at
http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Behavioral_Finance
See Robin M Hogarth &
Melvin W Reder (eds),
Rational Choice: The Contrast Between Economics and
See representative works
including Daniel Kahneman & Amos Tversky, ‘Prospect Theory: An
Analysis of Decision under Risk’,
Econometrica
and Andrei Shleifer,
Inefficient Markets: An Introduction to Behavioral
(1999). See also Matthew Rabin, ‘Psychology and
Economics’ (1998)
Journal of Economics Literature
American Economic Association
11-46; Hersh Shefrin,
Beyond Greed and
Fear: Understanding behavioral finance and the psychology of investing
(2002); and Colin F. Camerer, George Loewenstein, and Matthew Rabin (eds),
Advances in Behavioral Economics
See supra note 27.
See Li, above n 10, 21-49.
See also Xujiang Xie,
China’s Capital Market: An Analysis Based on the
Theory of Competition
When the NYSE sneezes, the
whole America feels sick. See Thomas Lee Hazen,
(3rd ed, 1998) 8. See also John Coffee & Joel Seligman,
Securities Regulation
: Cases and Materials
(2003) 2-7.
See Colin Mayer,
‘Stock-markets, Financial Institutions, and Corporate Performance’
in Nicholas Dimsdale & Martha
Prevezer (eds),
Capital Markets and
Corporate Governance
(1994) 179; Paul Marsh, ‘Market Assessment of
Company Performance’, in Nicholas Dimsdale & Martha Prevezer (eds),
Capital Markets and Corporate Governance
(1994) 66, 67.
See Coffee,
See Daniel R Fischel,
‘Efficient Capital Market Theory, the Market for Corporate Control, and
the Regulation of Cash Tender
Texas Law Review
See Thomas Lee Hazen,
‘The Short-Term/Long-Term Dichotomy and Investment Theory: Implications
for Securities Market Regulation
and for Corporate Law’
Carolina Law Review
See Pauline
O’Sullivan, ‘Governance by Exit: An Analysis of the Market for
Control’ in
Kevin Keasey, Steve Thompson &
Mike Wright, (eds),
Corporate Governance: Economic and Financial Issues
(1997) 125.
See generally Robin Marris,
The Economic Theory of ‘Managerial Capitalism’
See Midgley &
Burns, above n 8, 16.
Ibid at 18.
See Jinqing Zhu,
Securities Law
For example, the UK
Combined Code contains Code of Best Corporate Governance Practice, while China
Securities Regulatory Committee
(CSRC) and the State Economic and Trade
Commission (SETC) jointly published
Code of Corporate Governance for Listed
Companies in
See Li, above n 10,
See Coffee & Seligman,
above n 35, 1071.
These situations happened
in notorious cases including the Hainan Minyuan case, the Yinguangxia case, and
the Beihai Yinhe case.
See Commonwealth of
Financial System Inquiry Final Report
See Shenshi Mei,
Research on the Structure of Modern Corporate Organs’ Power: A Legal
Analysis of Corporate Governance
Peter Nolan and Robert F
Ash in their research into the Chinese reforms concluded that China’s
success stems primarily from
its refusal to implement ‘transition
orthodoxy’ (shock therapy) which Russia has whole heartedly embraced. See
Nolan & Robert F Ash, ‘China’s Economy on the Eve of
Reform’, in Andrew G Walder (ed),
China’s Transitional
See Wei, above n 1, 2.
See Yuwa Wei
, Investing
in China: Law and Practices of Joint Ventures
See Wen Liang, ‘Some
Legal Problems of Reforming the State Owned Enterprises into Limited
Companies’, in Chen Hua &
Jiu Jingwei (eds
), Research on the State
Owned Enterprise Reform and Corporate Law
(1997) 29-30.
See Comments by Li
Guangyuan, in Zhang, Wenmin
The Great Economic Debate in
(1997) 14-15. See also Nicholas R Lardy,
China’s Unfinished
Economic Revolution
(1998) 22-23.
See Dou Jianmin,
Research on the History of Corporate Ideology in China
(1999) 108.
See Yuwa Wei,
Comparative Corporate Governance: A Chinese Perspective
(2003) 20-21.
Ibid at 103-107.
See Mei, above n 58,
See the World Bank,
China’s Management of Enterprise Assets: the State as Shareholder
(1997) 51. See also Wei, above n 65, 121.
See Stephen C Thomas &
‘Privatizing China: The Stock Markets and Their Role in
Corporate Reform’ (July 1,
China Business Review
See Baisan Xie,
China’s Securities Market
See Qingquan Ma,
History of China’s Securities Business
(2003) 2-3.
See Thomas & Ji,
See sec. 152 of the
Company Law of the People’s Republic of China
They are Shanghai Stock
Exchange and Shenzhen Stock Exchange.
See Xie, above n 70,
Share issuance at this
stage was subject to government approval.
See Ma, above n 71, 60.
See Wei, above n 5, 37-38.
See Baisan Xie,
‘China Needs not to Go with the Tide on the US Securities Market’,
available at
http://cn.biz.yahoo.com/070317/16/l9c6.html
See Xiaobing Wu, Wenjun Liu
& Ye Chen, ‘Who Pulled the Trigger?’ Available at
http://zhoukan.hexun.com/Magazine/ShowArticle.aspx?ArticleId=11963>.
The Commentator, ‘The
Market on the Two Stock Exchanges Continues to Fall, and the Index Dives More
Than 21 Points’,
available at
http://finance.people.com.cn/GB/67815/68059/5480901.html
A shares are shares issued
to Chinese investors on the domestic securities markets, and should be paid in
Renminbi yens. See China
Securities Regulatory Committee,
Studies of Cutting
edge Issues concerning the Development of China’s Securities Market
(2005) 3, 12-13, 41-43.
See Qilin Fu,
Cases relating to China’s Securities Market in the Past Ten Years
(2002) 70. Huang, Z.,
Civil Liability and Civil Litigation in US Securities
See Xie, Dai & Xu,
1, 3-4; Also see generally Wei, above n 5.
See Xie, above n 70, 70,
Ibid, 202. See also Xie,
above n 34, 133-134.
See editor, ‘Congress
Representatives Call for Vigilance against International Hot Money Undermining
China’s Share Market
and Weathering Risks on the Capital Market’,
available at
http://finance.people.com.cn/GB/67815/5473287.html
Ibid. See also
Shujiang Xie,
China’s Capital Market: An analysis based on the
theory of competition
(2004) 124.
See Xie, Dai & Xu,
above n 18. See generally also Wei, above n 5.
See Wei, above n 65, 175.
See Alfred D Chandler,
Scale and Scope: The Dynamics of Industrial Capitalism
(1990) 383-592.
Also see Johannes Hirschmeieer, ‘Entrepreneurs and the Social Order:
American, Germany and Japan, 1870-1900’
(1977) in Keiichiro Nakagawa
Social Order and Entrepreneurship
7-8. See generally also Mark J
Roe, ‘Some Differences in Corporate Structure in Germany, Japan, and the
United States’
Yale Law Journal
, 1927-2003.
See Ronal Gilson &
Curtis J Milhaupt, ‘Choices as Regulatory Reform: The Case of Japanese
Corporate Governance’,
Columbia University Law School, Center for Law
Economic Studies Working Paper No 251; Stanford Law School, John M Olin Program
Law and Economics, Working Paper No. 281; and European Corporate Governance
Institute, Law Working Paper No. 22/2004),
http://ssrn.com/abstract=537843
. See also Helmut M Died,
Markets and Corporate Governance in Japan, Germany and the United States:
Organizational Response to Market Inefficiencies
(2005) 120.
See Chengxi Yao,
Stock Market and Futures Market in the People’s Republic of China
A legal person is a body
that has an independent personality in law. A state-owned legal person is
usually a state-owned company.
See Baishan Xie,
‘Huge Deficits of Shen Kang Jia Reveal the Serious Problem in the
Company’s Share Issue’, in
Baishan Xie,
International Comparison
of Securities Markets
(vol 1, 2003) 170.
See Yanrong Hong,
Studies of Legal Issues concerning Asset Backed Securitization
223-224; See also Baozhong Gao,
Institutional Analysis of Asset
Securitization in China
(2005) 155.
See generally
Simon Johnson, Peter Boone, Alasdair Breach & Eric Friedman,
governance in the Asian Financial Crisis
, (Rutgers U. Dept. of Econ.,
Working Paper No. 279, 1999).
See Yiwen Deng,
Swords: Great Debate on State Ownership Reforms
See Henry Hansmann &
Reinier Kraakman, ‘The End of History for Corporate Law’ (Harvard
Law School, John M Olin Center
for Law, Economics, and Business Working Paper
No. 280, 2000) 6.
See Wei, above n 65,
See Louis D Brandeis,
Other People’s Money and How the Bankers Use It
See Zhu, above n 50,
Johnson, Peter Boone, Alasdair Breach & Eric Friedman, above in 100.
See Zhu, above n 50,
See Wei, above n 65, 202.
See Louis D Brandeis,
Other People’s Money and How
the Bankers Use It
See Zhu, above n 50, 92.
See Simon Johnson, Peter Boone, Alasdair Breach &
Eric Friedman, above n 100..
See sec. 152 of the
amended 1993
Company Law
Company Law
was amended twice.
The first amendment was made in 1999 and the second in 2005. The amendments in
2005 were substantial, with 137
sections amended, 41 inserted, and 46 repealed.
See Xie, above n 34,
114, 116, 122..
See Baozhong Gao,
Institutional Analysis of Asset Securitization in China
Two notable countries
are Japan and Korea. See Baozhong Gao,
Institutional Analysis of Asset
Securitization in China
165 (2005).
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (255 KB)
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter