URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/journals/LegEdDig/2013/40.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 15:13:41
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Davis, W B --- "Collaborating with students as co-authors" [2013] LegEdDig 40; (2013) 21(3) Legal Education Digest 29
Collaborating with students as co-authors
Collaborating with students as co-authors
The Law Teacher
, Vol 47, No 1, 2013, pp 44-63
Most law professors seek to maximise the effectiveness of the learning
processes of their students, hoping to inspire them to learn
skills, gain
knowledge, and enhance their sense of justice. I have written two published
casebooks, with significant portions of
each book written by students as
contributing authors.
Aviation Law: Cases and Problems
was written while
I was a visitor at Roger Williams Law School in Rhode Island in 2003.
& Acquisitions: Cases and Problems
written while I was on the faculty at
Albany Law School in New York in 2006.
Many law schools and professors are examining the effectiveness of their
teaching methods and analysing how students learn. This may
be due, in part, to
the recent criticism of how law schools teach. Most professors accept the
premise that employing a variety of
teaching methods facilitates learning by our
students. Most of us attempt to add variety to our classrooms with
hypotheticals, written
quizzes, oral presentations by students, practical skills
problems, and other exercises. Many schools teach practical skills through
clinics, internships and externships, adding variety to their students’
experience.
While this article only describes one end result, the creation of a casebook,
the process of creating that book involves many different
teaching methods, thus
many different opportunities to address students’ differing learning
styles. My suggestion is that writing
a book or other publishable work with your
students not only adds variety to the teaching methods to which they are
exposed, but
has other benefits for both the professor and the student. The
relationship becomes one of collaborators rather than teacher–student.
former students have benefited from the enhancement to their
résumé. Most students told me that it was one of the
rewarding experiences of their law school career. I have benefited from the
encouragement, enforced deadlines, inspiration,
and quality contributions from
my students.
Each student in my course was expected to do the following: (1) Write a
chapter to be published, including at least three featured
cases, edited to
approximately five pages, plus four notes for each case with references to at
least five other cases, and one essay
question; (2) Write the accompanying
chapter of the teachers’ manual, with summaries of each featured case,
explanations
of the notes, and answers to the essay question; (3) Present the
chapter topic to the class, facilitating a discussion. Preparations
presentation, as well as the actual presentation, may have been the most
effective learning tool in this process. Studies
have shown that students gain a
more in-depth knowledge of a subject when they teach the topic to other
students, which they were
required to do both in their written chapter as well
as in their classroom presentation; and (4) Edit two other chapters, assisting
the student-authors with editing, proofreading, and research. This editing will
take some, but not all, of the burden off the professor,
as editor, while
enhancing the confidence and competence of the students.
The added value of working with students as collaborators is multi-faceted.
The theory of behaviourism proposes that students learn
when an environmental
stimulus causes an appropriate response, reinforced by feedback. The
collaboration among students provided
materials in class and assisted classmates in editing their chapters. The
environmental
stimulus of expecting their work to be published, and working
collaboratively on a group project encouraged them to do their best.
The experience of working collaboratively with colleagues is much more
similar to the anticipated experience of working in a law firm,
rather than the
artificial environment of law school competition caused by class rank and grade
curves. Learning to work as a team
to create a complex finished product teaches
students skills in communication, cooperation, negotiation, and management.
Cognitive learning theories, which are currently dominant, focus on the
sensory input, which leads to selective perception, only a
small portion of
which is stored as long-term memory. Information that is more deeply processed
is more likely to be remembered longer.
Students in my classes were required to
deeply process all information in their chapters, by researching their subject
to identify
appropriate case law and statutes, analysing those cases,
summarising those cases in the teachers’ manual, creating essay questions,
comparing to other cases, presenting before the class, and editing their
writing. They spent an entire semester intensely involved
in their chapter
subject, often working independently.
Metacognitive theories of learning, where students are encouraged to actively
participate in their learning process and the methods
that work best for their
individual learning style, support the process of collaboration. As stated by
Miriam Felsenberg and Laura
Graham, ‘... the student who expects to be a
passive vessel for knowledge supplied by expert teachers is less likely to be
successful than the student who carefully monitors her own learning
process’. Collaboration requires some active involvement
of the students
at each step. Students were required to independently develop the materials from
which they would learn the legal
foundation of their chapter subject. Classroom
discussions among the students were lively, where each student’s expertise
their subject was added to the mix of classroom knowledge. Students had the
freedom and flexibility to work at their own pace and
in their own style, with
an end result of a completed chapter as the goal.
Scholars have suggested the use of scaffolding of taxonomies, where students
are given specific goals for the stages of learning the
skills, as a method of
teaching legal analysis in legal writing. This was my intent in encouraging
students to attend a symposium
which I organised early in the semester, where
they could obtain an overview of the various subjects encompassed in the topic.
first few classes were similarly intended as an introduction to the simpler
concepts of the topic. We added to this knowledge by
building on the
students’ skills as writers, which was a familiar skill from first-year
writing courses. We then built upon
these skills by requiring a classroom
presentation and editing the work of a classmate. At each stage, the students
met with me individually
to assess their progress. This provided not only
not designed around a final exam, the students were given multiple goals in
stages dependent on their research and knowledge progress.
Unlike other courses, where students are handed a book to passively read,
these students were actively involved in the selection of
cases, the scope of
the subject matter, and the format of the chapter. Presenting to the class
involved using the blackboards or
slide projectors for PowerPoint presentations,
as well as visual aids. Touring the airport and interacting with professionals
work helped my aviation students who were able to touch radar screens,
luggage carriers, and other equipment. My mergers and acquisitions
students were
involved in setting up the symposium and interacting with the presenters.
Although each of the steps I took could be modified, enhanced, or eliminated
to suit the needs and desires of the professor, the following
are the steps I
used for both casebooks. Both of these casebooks were the result of a seminar
class where students were expected
to learn the doctrinal subject as well as
collaborate in the writing of the book.
First-year courses are probably not an appropriate topic for a casebook to be
written by students, because first-year students may
not be capable of producing
a quality chapter. While it may be possible to have an upper-level writing
course where upper-level students
write a book on a first- year topic that they
have already studied, this undermines the concept of using collaboration as a
method; the students would be learning how to write but perhaps not
learning a great deal more about a subject matter they have already
studied. My
goal was to introduce them to a new subject matter which they had not previously
studied, so that they could get credit
for a new course, while using the book as
an effective and creative method for them to learn the new topic.
The ideal topic for a student-written legal casebook may be an
upper-level elective course for which there are currently
relatively few
casebooks on the market. The topic should be one which fascinates you, since you
will be focused on it for months,
and one in which you have both fundamental
knowledge and a unique outlook, so that you can add to the field of knowledge in
The table of contents will be used as the syllabus for the course. It will
also determine the number of students who can be involved
in this project, and
enrolled on your course. If the proposed book has only 10 chapters, then the
course probably cannot have more
than eight student co- authors, because the
professor will need to write at least two chapters, as explained below. Chapter
should be divided as equally as possible, so that chapters can be
nearly equal in length and complexity.
The professor will need to draft a sample chapter to send to potential
publishers. The professor may want to choose a subject that
would be too complex
for a student to handle.
Most publishers will want to see a table of contents and at least one sample
chapter, as well as the professor’s personal qualifications.
Execution of
the publishing contract prior to student registration for the course will add
credibility, assuring the students that
their hard work on a chapter will indeed
be published. William S. Hein & Co. published both of the books written by
my students.
If you have a choice of more than one publisher, here are some points to bear
in mind: (1) Consider the format of the finished work.
Some publishers will
publish in paperback or online. I elected to go with the publisher who would
print it in hard cover; (2) Consider
the percentage of royalties: 10 per cent of
sales is common, but some publishers offer as low as 7 per cent, and many deduct
costs of printing before royalties accrue; (3) Consider whether you will
be sharing your royalties with your contributing authors.
I told my students
that I would not seek them out years after graduation unless their share of the
annual royalties exceeded US$100.
It never has; (4) The professor may want to
negotiate additional complementary author copies of the book for all students. I
negotiated for additional copies at half-price, in case a student wanted
more than one to share with parents, spouses, or others;
and (5) When agreeing
to a deadline with the publisher, recognise that although the students will be
submitting their chapters by
the end of the semester, the professor will need
months to edit and proofread, as well as time to write any additional chapters
were not assigned to students.
I wanted my students to have a general understanding of merger and
acquisition issues before they began drafting their chapters. In
frontload their absorption of the material, I planned a symposium in early
September, a few weeks after classes began. Speakers
were not difficult to find,
as most were working at firms that would give them pro bono credit, or teaching
at other law schools
for which their participation would be a CV enhancement. I
also invited several of the speakers to contribute a chapter to the book,
their lecture notes from the symposium as a start. One or two became
contributing authors.
Alternatively, it might be helpful to invite guest lecturers to share their
expertise in areas about which the professor is less familiar.
For my aviation
students, I invited several guest lecturers for an hour’s presentation.
The head of the Boston airport control
tower discussed his job with my class,
providing insight into the technical operations and challenges faced by air
traffic controllers.
I also arranged for guest lectures by a former military
aviation mechanic and a litigator who represented passengers in aviation
For my aviation students, I also took them on a tour of the local airport,
T.F. Green Airport in Providence, Rhode Island. The airport
manager personally
took us around the airport, showing us the backroom operations of the security
systems, luggage handling, and
other airport operations. Although it could be
argued that a tour of an airport may convey minimal legal knowledge to students,
of the students asked pertinent questions and became engaged in lively
discussions to increase their knowledge of the operations
of air traffic
controllers and responsibilities of the Federal Aviation Administration. It
also helped the students to understand
their subject in ontext
Although the professor will be presenting the chapters written by the
professor during the first few class meetings, most of the class
meetings will
include student presentations. Because these presentations cannot all occur
during the last couple of weeks of classes,
the professor will need to prepare
some students to present earlier in the semester. I chose students I knew and
asked them during
the break, long before the class commenced. Their reward was
that they completed most of their work for this course early in the
Early selection of topics allows students to start the process early, and
rewards those who register early. This also allows
the professor to begin
assisting by providing each student with relevant cases, articles, and
I required each student to meet with me individually several times during the
semester, at times they selected. Each individual meeting
coincided with a
deadline for a particular stage in their preparation. I met with them first when
they identified and selected the
cases they would use in their chapter; again
when they had a draft of the chapter; a third time when they were preparing to
their chapter to the class; and a fourth time to go over the final draft
of their chapter. They were allowed to work independently
within these
Many of the students told me that this was their favourite course in law
school. Many of them became friends with whom I am still
in contact. Cognitive
learning theories, indicating that students retain more of the material if they
process it more intensely,
were proven accurate when students retained an
interest in the subject matter of their topics. Not only did they gain a more in
knowledge of the topic than they could have gained by reading a book
written by another, but many became convinced that their topic
was the most
interesting and important in the field.
Theories of behaviourism, suggesting that feedback and external stimuli
assist in the learning process, were supported by the students
cooperatively with their classmates, and forming close relationships during the
This method involved metacognitive learning, because students were able
to control their own method for researching, compiling,
and processing the
material, as well as preparing the presentation to the class. The freedom to
choose their own pace and system
was successful, with the result that every
student met every deadline.
The scaffolding of taxonomies was particularly effective, where students
added to their skills and knowledge and were evaluated at
each task, from
outlining, drafting, presenting, editing, and final chapter production. Students
were sufficiently confident of their
subject matter knowledge that none was
intimidated by the prospect of presenting their topic for 45 minutes to their
classmates.
Students gained confidence by producing the finished product, and their pride
was evident when most of the students purchased extra
copies to give to
grandparents and other family members.
Students learn best when they are allowed some independence, actively
participate in the learning process, and are proud of the finished
Collaborating with students to produce a casebook provided this environment, and
was a successful teaching method.
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (616 KB)
PDF format (3.22 MB)
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter