URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/journals/CICrimJust/2018/4.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 14:49:56
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Ralph, Felix --- "Convictions Through Kith and Kin: Legal, Policy and Ethical Issues in Dna Familial Matching and Genetic Metadata" [2018] CICrimJust 4; (2018) 29(3) Current Issues in Criminal Justice 243
Convictions through Kith and Kin: Legal, Policy and Ethical Issues in DNA
Familial Matching and Genetic Metadata
Felix Ralph
DNA databases are now vast libraries of genetic metadata. It is possible to
match the genetic relationships of a person and their
family simply through
their blood ties. Such DNA searches are called ‘familial matching’.
Investigators can take unknown
DNA and then search through their existing DNA
While there is legitimate interest in solving crime, it is not hard to
foresee a future where thousands of familial matching searches
are conducted
each day. Despite the existence of this capability, it has barely been debated
in Australia. This article tries to
balance the legitimate societal need to
solve crime against the whole host of legal, ethical, political, economic and
racial concerns
that familial matching raises.
DNA – genetic metadata – familial matching
– Australia
Introduction
To understand the concept of familial matching a basic understanding of how
DNA works is required. Deoxyribonucleic acid (‘DNA’)
is the genetic
makeup that is unique to each individual, except for identical twins. It is the
base building blocks of all life and
how our genetic likeness is passed to our
children. When we are born we inherit the genes from our biological fathers and
We share this unique genetic code with our family and they share it
with us. Unfortunately for the criminally minded, the miracle
of life that is
DNA can be used by investigators to put a defendant behind bars very quickly,
often signalling an efficient and scientific
doom for even the best-prepared
Since the 1980s, DNA evidence has grown in acceptance by the courts and by
the general public (Kirby 2010) and is now commonplace
in criminal proceedings.
Genetic analysis works by isolating the genetic markers inherent within our DNA.
Scientists do this by looking
for telltale signs completely individual to us.
These signs are called short tandem repeats (‘STRs’) where our DNA
and creates a unique identifier. If a scientists analyse
enough of these DNA stutters at enough locations in our genome a unique
identifiers for every individual is painted. This is then mapped and catalogued
as unique to that individual and used to identify
them in criminal
investigations but also paternity tests. This is made possible by STRs which are
‘stretches of DNA where the
DNA replicating mechanism appears to
“stutter” resulting in a different numbers of copies of repeated
(Greely et al. 2006, p. 249). Each STR has a different number
of repeats. These repeats operate as a useful ‘markers’
identification. Each marker has a location within the genetic sequence and can
be used to map the identifiers on every individual’s
genome. This location
or marker is known as a
, which is a specific location of our
chromosome. The identification of the location of such markers is the
traditional way in which
DNA testing is undertaken in criminal investigations.
It is in this way that similarities are often drawn between the markers within
our genetic profiles and the whorls, loops and arches present on our fingertips.
Most importantly for the purposes of this article,
we share half our chromosomes
(including STRs) from each parent. When we match these
STRs enough
times we can determine genetic relatedness. This is the basic science behind
paternity testing. The science is accurate
enough to test further genetic
relationships, for example, between brothers, sisters, great great grandfathers,
uncles and aunties.
This relatively new scientific development comes much to the
delight of writers of daytime soap operas and to the despair of the
father trying to shirk his financial obligations. For the purpose of this
article it is sufficient simply to understand
that DNA is shared between family
and that scientists can cross-reference an unknown sample of DNA (for example,
from a ‘cold
case’ or unsolved crime) through a database and
‘match’ a suspect through their blood relatives.
But what is the logical progression of this development and how does this
work? What happens when DNA information is used just like
metadata, to map and
plot our genetic bonds to each other? What happens when it is cross-referenced
to a database? Is this fair or
just? This article examines the implications of
when we combine the scientific principles of testing for the DNA of our family
and cross-reference this data on a DNA database. This is called familial
familial searching is
simple and uses the same principles found in paternity testing. Familial
not a direct match. This type of matching is possible because closely related
‘are more likely to have originated from a relative of the donor
of the unidentified DNA profile’ (Independent Committee
p. 129). If a police officer has an unidentified DNA sample they can search
DNA database to search for their relatives. If
this is done on a large enough
scale, potentially anyone is ‘findable’ on a DNA database through
familial matching. How
does this work and how has it evolved from traditional
DNA technology?
Familial matching is merely an extension of these basic DNA principles
because we invariably share our DNA with our blood relatives.
Familial matching
can be achieved because ‘any individual will often have inherited
different length STRs from his mother and
his father’ so ‘they can
“mark” which genomes came from which parent’ (Greely et al.
2006, p. 249).
This is because, with the exception of monozygotic or identical
twins, the DNA of each individual is unique because any two human
genomes differ
at about 3,000,000 sites (Freckleton & Selby 2009 p. 1173)
noted by Urbas and Smith (2012, p. 66), familial matching is made possible
because first-degree relatives share at least half
of the non-coding regions,
and second-degree relatives share a quarter. Based upon a 26 site allele DNA
test, a father and son would
share an average of 15.7 alleles (notwithstanding
randomly shared alleles). Alleles are essentially different versions of the
that we inherent from our biological parents. These alleles can be tested
and used as identifiers through this partial matching of
familial DNA.
Crucially, if investigators have the DNA identifiers of one person they can then
these shared characteristics either through
actual testing or searching through a database. A crucial difference between
generate only leads, which in turn point only to a list of possible
all but one of whom definitely did
leave the evidence’ (Murphy
2009, p. 313). This means that all those people who are searchable due to their
genetic relatedness
to any one profile (that is, an offender whose DNA is on our
national system) could be subject to DNA surveillance and the possible
consequence police questioning and investigation. While the majority of blood
relatives will be speedily eliminated through a familial
may become subject to unnecessary and stressful investigations and/or
accusations simply based on the family
ties to their relatives.
While there has been no confirmed Australian prosecution based on familial
matching (Urbas & Smith 2012, p. 66) it is now practically
available at the
Victorian Police Forensic Services Department (‘VPFSD’) as they have
recently upgraded their DNA testing
technology to allow them to detect 21 loci
instead of nine loci. The science and technology to enable familial matching
could be implemented today. A debate throughout the community,
academia, the judiciary, lawyers and police associations must occur
such change is adopted.
DNA databases and ‘findable’ persons
Since 2010, in Victoria, upon a finding of guilt for an
offence, an application can be made for a compulsory acquisition of the
offender’s DNA under the
Crimes Act 1958
s 464ZF(3)(b).
Genetic information retained from that sample is then kept on a DNA profile
offenders, crime scene samples etc under
The national database is
called the National Crime Investigation DNA Database (‘NCIDD’), and
is operated by CrimTrac.
It has been subjected to massive growth of 66.9 per
cent of samples between 2010 and 2016. The database has increased 602,317
(CrimTrac 2011) to 1,005,322 profiles (CrimTrac 2016). Traditional DNA
testing means that only samples that are on the NCIDD would
be compared for a
match with any unknown DNA. However, the scientific capacity to
genetically identify individuals through their family has the consequence
turning this database into a genetic metadata library for the executive.
This has the capacity to drastically change the way in which the criminal
justice system operates because of the sheer number of people
‘findable’ through the genetic metadata. Greely et al (2006, p. 249)
class a person as ‘findable’
if they are a first-degree relative to
someone who has a profile on the database. Using simple arithmetic and a basic
that a person has between two and five first-degree relatives, the
total number of people who are ‘findable’ if it was
used in our
current DNA database equates to roughly two to five million people. The sample
size of the genetic metadata library is
always increasing. While this is not
calculated scientifically and is unlikely to represent the true expansion of the
does show the sheer size and range of people that could
potentially
be affected by familial searching. Additionally, these
figures only take into account the science as it is capable
the way that DNA is passed through families, it may be possible (in the future)
to use familial searching against second-degree
relatives, which further expands
the reach of the database (McCarthy 2006, p. 86). It is reasonably foreseeable
that the rapid development
of science will enable a DNA search to stretch
through an offender’s bloodline. The point is that any laws formulated
around familial matching must consider future potential scientific
developments.
It is imperative that the policy, legal and ethical implications are
democratically examined before familial searching is given
carte blanche
in Australia. It is acceptable to a democratic society that a person loses their
right to genetic privacy once they have been found
guilty of certain offences.
But it is a fetter on a person’s rights and freedoms for the database to
expand through the sphere
of the family so that a citizen (either the sample
source or their relatives) can be placed under suspicion simply due to their
Function creep
The breakdown of the numbers of people who are ‘findable’ through
familial matching is a symptom of what is dubbed by
United States
(‘US’) commentators as ‘function creep’ (Murphy 2010, p.
291). The original function of DNA
matching is now changing drastically from its
original function and intention. The databases that have collected all of this
information can also change in their basic functions as well. DNA
matching is no longer isolated to an individual but has crept towards
families as well. If we peer back through the history of justifications for
traditional DNA databases we can see that the broad
justification for retaining
a citizen’s DNA profile is essentially to resolve past and future crimes.
The public policy of
keeping a DNA profile was favourably likened to keeping a
record of a person’s fingerprint — it is an unobtrusive way
obtaining an identifier of that person. A buccal swab, pre-familial matching, is
likened to the taking of a fingerprint sample.
The Massachusetts Supreme
Judicial Court in
Landry v Attorney General
No 98462 WL 1181741 (Mass
at p. 345 justified in the following way:
The courts then engage in a balancing test, weighing the government’s
strong interest in preserving an identification record
of convicted persons for
resolving past and future crimes, against the minor intrusion into their
diminished privacy right in their
identities by the taking of a DNA sample
...The courts conclude that the high government interest in a particularly
reliable form
of identification outweighs the minimal intrusion of a pin
In that case the Court held that the taking of a DNA sample does not
constitute an unreasonable search and seizure violation of the
Fourth Amendment
Constitution
if the appellant had been convicted of a crime.
This is because the state has a high interest in preserving a permanent record
convicted felons. The primary justification was that the intrusion was a
‘minimal ... pin prick’ or today a buccal swab.
The court in
at p. 347 held that:
The State has an established and indisputable interest in preserving a
permanent identification record of convicted persons for resolving
future crimes, and uses fingerprints, and now will use DNA identification, for
these purposes. The obtaining of a very small
amount of blood by pin prick
constitutes only a minimally intrusive search.
The above logic seems to be the status quo in relation to DNA databases and
has been widely adopted in the US. There, DNA databases
have remained
constitutionally valid despite multiple challenges through the vehicle of the
Fourth Amendment — and despite
it being a form of ‘suspicionless
concludes, ‘the
societal value of DNA databanks outweighs the privacy
interests of convicted offenders’.
The kernel of this reasoning
is justified due to the recidivism of people convicted of crimes that then helps
to resolve past and
future criminal acts.
Within Australia, the retention of DNA profiles operates upon a conviction of
prescribed offences. The logic of this is essentially
related to: (a)
recidivism; and (b) the legitimate need for police to investigate unsolved
crimes. Because of this, ensuing laws
ensured that DNA databases have exploded
in popularity in recent times. In a few short years, all 50 states and the US
Federal Government
have statutes creating DNA databases with profiles from
certain convicted criminals (Suter 2010, p. 311). In Australia, since the
authorising statute of
Crimes Act 1914
(Cth) and various
other state legislation, at least 1,005,322 profiles have been collected,
categorised and stored (CrimTrac 2016,
p. 41). That is a remarkable amount of
growth in the span of a few short years. However, this is nothing compared to
the leapfrog
in ‘findable’ people if familial matching was embraced.
Documenting the function creep in the US, Suter analyses how
‘[o]ver the
years, the trend has been to broaden the pool of offenders to include nonviolent
felons, misdemeanants, and even
and rightly
concludes that familial searching is ‘just one more step in this trend
toward expanding the reach of DNA profiling’
(Suter 2010, p. 311). The
concern then becomes that if these two trends conflate then a giant
expansion of the database occurs, placing citizens under genetic
surveillance for no reason other than genetic ties.
The United States Supreme Court recently approved the extension of the reach
of DNA identification in
Maryland v King
569 US ___ (2013) where it was
narrowly held that a DNA buccal swab upon
(not conviction) is a
proper police ‘booking’ procedure that does not violate the Fourth
Amendment. The decision was
a narrow one, with Kennedy J penning the majority
judgment with Roberts CJ and Thomas, Breyer and Alito JJ joining. The decision
is notable because it categorises DNA as a legitimate booking procedure, that
in the past is part of the
profile that police may legitimately start collating upon arrest. Kennedy J held
that DNA ‘uses
a different form of identification than a name or
fingerprint, but its function is the same’. Aligning DNA buccal swabs with
common practice police ‘booking’ procedures it was decided that this
was not an unreasonable search and seizure. The
decision is significant because
it extends US police enforcements powers to search the DNA of an arrestee
without court order. It
is also significant because it is the first instance
where the US Supreme Court mentions familial matching. Kennedy J touches on
matter in passing, referring to the Act in question and how ‘[t]ests for
familial matches are also prohibited’. While
mention of familial matching
is very brief, it is the opinion of this author that
Maryland v King
significant because it represents the high water mark as to the limit of DNA
identification procedures with respect to familial
two factors. First, the majority in
Maryland v King
is razor thin with a
strong dissent from Scalia J with Ginsburg, Sotomayor and Kagan JJ agreeing.
Scalia J writes:
Today’s judgment will, to be sure, have the beneficial effect of
solving more crimes; then again, so would the taking of DNA
samples from anyone
who flies on an airplane (surely the Transportation Security Administration
needs to know the ‘identity’
of the flying public), applies for a
driver’s license, or attends a public school. Perhaps the construction of
such a genetic
panopticon is wise. But I doubt that the proud men who wrote the
charter of our liberties would have been so eager to open their
mouths for royal
inspection.
Second, and more importantly, the core reasoning of the majority rests on the
fact that a DNA buccal swab is a ‘booking’
procedure — like
fingerprinting or photographing the suspect. The key distinction is that the
logic of the majority focuses
on the rights of government authorities with
respect to searching
. It is on this basis alone that a DNA
buccal swab and database search is deemed constitutional. While they did not
decide this issue,
upon reading the judgment it would seem unlikely that the US
Supreme Court would then overturn and extend this line of reasoning
familial searches towards people who have not been arrested. By focusing on the
procedural element of processing arrestees,
it could be interpreted to exclude
the ability of the state to ‘process’ people who have not been
The function creep is not limited to the mere ease of collecting DNA or the
size of the database, but also the function of that database.
In essence, DNA
Science has forced the advance and our laws and policies have
not kept up. Contrary to
Landry v Attorney General
, a DNA profile is no
longer analogous to a fingerprint
Maryland v King
the same analogy that DNA is like fingerprinting, it does seem to confine DNA
identification searches to arrestees only.
However, we are now in a situation
whereby DNA databases may derogate from their original intended mandate and
encroach towards the
sphere of the family. The creation of the DNA database was
justified through its likeness to holding of fingerprint evidence. It
assumed that, like fingerprinting before it, DNA profiles were limited to the
offender and the offender only. But science has
expanded the breadth of these
genetic library to expand
to their families?
In Australia, DNA profiles undoubtedly fall under the definition of
‘personal information’ found in
(Cth). That section defines personal information as ‘information or an
opinion (including information or an opinion forming
part of a database),
whether true or not, and whether recorded in a material form or not, about an
individual whose identity is apparent,
or can reasonably be ascertained, from
the information or opinion
’ (emphasis added).
It is clear that each time a familial search is done it scans through the
personal information of people who just happen to be related
to someone on the
DNA database. The repugnancy of this privacy breach does not stem from the
and possible subsequent investigation
based purely on someone’s blood-relatives. The genetic interrelatedness of
citizens can
be mapped, measured and quantified as a network of genetic
metadata. This is extremely intimate and private information. Moreover,
likely to circumvent the existing laws that govern the collection and retention
of DNA information. It is for this reason that
the Victorian Privacy
Commissioner raised the spectre that strict existing procedures for collecting
DNA could be circumvented by
taking samples from a relative instead (Victorian
Office of the Privacy Commissioner 2010, p. 18) For example, police may have
that two brothers are engaged in criminal activity. Imagine a state
where DNA profiles can be obtained through arrest; police reasoning
arrest sister A for the purpose of a partial matching of brothers B and C.
Is familial searching currently legal?
Familial searching impinges on civil liberties and raises serious privacy
concerns (Suter 2010, p. 327; Victorian Office of the Privacy
Commissioner 2010,
p. 114) and fundamental issues of guilt by association. In an Australian
context, Urbas & Smith (2012) note
that there are no legal principles that
would preclude investigation of familial relationships by police. They then use
of police producing a likeness of a suspect’s face, and the
witness stating it looked similar and was maybe his brother. They
‘it would be absurd to suggest that they could not investigate whether
this person had a similar looking brother who
may have committed the
offence’ (Urbas & Smith 2012, p. 66), concluding that familial
matching because it using non-coding
parts of the genome is ‘an advanced
form of traditional investigation methods’ (2012, p. 66).
With respect, this reasoning is oversimplified and potentially misleading.
First, the physical similarity of family is merely that.
Genetic information on
the other hand is personal information that is unique to the individual. The
very nature of the coding itself
differs from fingerprints and physical
likeness. For example, in the minority judgment of the House of Lords by
Baroness Hale of
Richmond in
1 WLR [2218], Her Honour noted that a
person’s genetic information (relating to samples and not profiles) is
the most private
European Convention on Human Rights
, specifically the right
respecting a private and family life. The European Court of Human Rights
(‘ENCHR’) in
S and Marper v United Kingdom
[2008] ECHR 1581
essentially agreed with Her Honour. While the case was primarily about the
indefinite retention of DNA samples on a database, the
ENCHR cited the Nuffield
Council on Bioethics Report
(2007) and the Grand Chamber in
held that ‘the DNA profile’s capacity to provide a means of
identifying genetic relationships
individuals is in itself sufficient to conclude that their retention
interferes with the right to the private life of the individuals
(emphasis added). It is no small thing to be able to
tell the interrelatedness of individuals, with such information being intensely
Charter of Human Rights and Responsibilities Act
(Vic) (‘the Charter’) recognises that a person has the
right ‘Not to have his or her privacy, family, home or correspondence
unlawfully or arbitrarily interfered with.’
Furthermore, within
, the importance of families are emphasised as the
‘fundamental group unit of society and are entitled to be protected by
and the states. McCarthy (2011, p. 383) argues that these rights are
threatened because familial matching can turn family members
into ‘genetic
informants’, potentially leading to lifelong genetic surveillance. Privacy
and family concerns intersect,
with familial matching having the potential to
destabilise the family unit. The investigative pressure and suspicion created
through genetic relatedness may impact on families. For example, familial
matching could reveal previously unknown genetic relationships
(Suter 2010, p.
347). International comparisons with similar legislation to the Charter
indicate that familial matching may be contrary to these rights. Canada has
a similar, albeit constitutional, charter of rights. In
discussing familial
matching under Canadian law, Bellamy-Royds and Norris (2010, p. 21) state that
‘even if the Act were amended
to permit familial searching, the practice
might be considered unconstitutional under the
Canadian Charter of Rights and
So while it is unclear how familial searching will
be judged in Victoria, it is clear that the Charter introduces, via
an interpretive legal principle plainly ignored by Urbas and Smith.
Third, in analysing the operation of
Crimes Act 1914
(Cth), the national legislative framework for DNA sampling and profiling, an
independent review from the Attorney-General’s
department noted that there
is nothing within
familial matching.
Recommendation 23 of the Ford Committee (2010, p. 116) nevertheless recommended
that it ‘should
be adopted after an appropriate exposure to
public examination and assessment’. Familial matching is not an issue that
been properly considered and debated by the legislature or public.
Because of this lack of consideration, the judiciary assumes Parliament
intend that legislation impinge on fundamental rights unless there is
unambiguous language to the contrary. This is a legal
principle known as the
‘principle of legality’ as held in the case of
Evans v NSW
[2008] FCAFC 130.
Due to this principle it is arguable that familial matching may not be
possible in Australia. For example, Spigelman CJ citing
Rodriguez v United
[1987] USSC 36
(1987) in the case
Khalid Lodhi v
[2006] NSWCCA 121
states ‘no legislation pursues its
purposes at all costs ... and it frustrates rather than effectuates legislative
simplistically assume that whatever
furthers the
statute’s primary objective must be the law.’ Lastly, for a juror to
hear that the accused is part of a ‘family
of crooks’ may create the
prejudice of guilt by association, which could bolster arguments for exclusion
of that evidence to
ensure a fair trial.
Contrary to the arguments of Australian commentators, these factors indicate
that familial matching may not be sanctioned under the
current framework either
at a state or national level in (see generally
Crimes Act 1914
Interestingly, the Northern Territory does have regulations that may just
allow of familial matching. Reguation 20B of the
Police Administration
Regulations
(1) For section 147C(3) of the Act, the following types of DNA analysis are
prescribed:
(a) genomic (nuclear);
(b) mitochondrial.
(2) However, a sample may be analysed to obtain information only for the
following purposes:
(c) to compare DNA profiles for a person’s identification;
(d) to determine the gender of a person;
(e) to link a person with one or more of the following;
(i) another person;
(ii) a place;
(iii) a thing.
Regulation 20(2)(a) specifically refers to allowing analysis to obtain
information for ‘comparing’ the DNA profiles for
identification and with reg 20(2)(c) to ‘link’ that DNA information
with reg 20(2)(c)(i) ‘another
person’. Such a regulation arguably
encompasses a situation of familial matching. But, on the other hand, this is
extraordinarily
wide language. It is difficult to imagine what other use there
is for genetic information other than comparing to that of another
linking it with another person, place or thing. That, combined with language of
exclusion in the use of the word ‘only’,
seems to make for an odd
piece of legislative drafting. The two sentiments seem to conflict. If this
regulation was relied upon in
a court for questions of familial matching, there
may be an argument of statutory interpretation in terms of (i) the intention of
parliament not extending to that of the family and (ii) the maxim of
expressio unius est exclusion alterius
As a matter of reasoning, it cannot be that such a legislative leap could be
taken when the original drafters of that legislation
had not considered the
possibility that DNA could be used in such a novel way. An analysis of the
Second Reading Speeches of all
legislation that could touch on familial matching
revealed no discussion by any parliament on this subject. As a matter of course,
the legality of familial matching remains in limbo.
Investigative accuracy
While the scientific accuracy of DNA familial matching is accepted, it should
not be assumed that this equates to accuracy at the
investigative level. Murphy
(2010, p. 20) outlines dual concerns of investigative over-reliance and
‘confirmation bias’
when evidence ‘so dominate[s] and shape[s]
the court of a subsequent investigation that it inevitably taints the
Murphy (2010, p. 21) uses an example of the wrongful
identification of Oregon lawyer Brandon Mayfield as a perpetrator of the Madrid
subway bombings. This injustice occurred when the FBI ‘matched’ his
fingerprints at the scene and worked backwards, built
a seemingly damning case
based on innocuous facts and an over-reliance on the science and database to
provide a match. If familial
matching becomes
investigative level the possibility of confirmation bias increases the chances
of wrongful investigation and conviction simply
because of the location of
someone’s DNA.
Within Australia, the case of the wrongful conviction of Farah Jama is an
example of the dangers of confirmation bias and investigative
over-reliance in
DNA evidence. In his report on the matter Vincent J (2010, p. 37) noted
the unreserved acceptance of the reliability of the DNA evidence appears to
have so confined thought that it enabled all involved
to leap over a veritable
mountain of improbabilities and unexplained aspects, that objectively
considered, could be seen to block
the path to conviction.
Jama’s case
is a horrific example of our jurisdiction failing to
understand the nuance and complexities of the science involved. The
thought’ that Vincent J speaks of was present within all
arms of the criminal justice system: the judge, defence and prosecuting
and the police who investigated the case. The conviction of Farah Jama was based
on a single cell of DNA that was attributed
to him by secondary transfer; that
is, an existing piece of his DNA had contaminated the sample taken from the
complainant, thereby
securing his wrongful conviction. Vincent J (2010, p. 37)
found that the scientific complexities of the case resulted in no one in
criminal justice system considering Locard’s Principle, the rule that
every contact leaves a trace. Despite the fact that
no finding of guilt in
Victoria had ever been based on a single piece of DNA evidence before, Mr Jama
was wrongfully convicted of
rape even though no sexual assault had occurred. On
the facts of the case there was no other evidence except for that single piece
of DNA. The alleged rape occurred in a nightclub, with neither patron nor
security camera providing evidence of a 19-year-old Somalian
man being present.
The complainant was found in a toilet cubicle locked from the inside. Everything
confirmation bias, where an
over-reliance on a single piece of sketchy evidence is used to secure a false
conviction. Combined with
elements of racial profiling and unfounded police
Jama’s case
is a powerful example of investigators
over-reliance on ‘the science’ and the criminal justice systems
tacit and unquestioning
acceptance of DNA evidence.
A similar example of secondary transfer and miscarriages of justice can also
be seen in the High Court case of
Fitzgerald v The Queen
[2014] HCA 28.
The case is short on legal analysis and instead focuses on the facts of the
case, which essentially involved the ‘rare’
‘alternative hypothesis’ that the blood of the appellant found on a
didgeridoo arrived there via secondary
transfer. The judgment is important
because it extends the secondary transfer argument to a rational alternative
theory that
be excluded by the prosecution in such a DNA-only case.
Both of these cases point to the very real and distinct possibility that
investigative
accuracy and over-reliance on DNA evidence can lead to wrongful
convictions. It remains unknown how these lessons of law will impact
of family matched DNA evidence. Also the practical difficulties for defence
counsel and prosecution counsel to prove or
counteract this evidence would be
quite challenging.
If familial matching was given free reign at the investigative level, police
could be monitoring and pursuing the genetic breadcrumbs
of suspected family
members based on genetic suspicion alone. Such a situation is undesirable due to
the massive strain a police
investigation can have on an individual’s
reputation and wellbeing. Murphy (2010, p. 304) adopts the strong view that
presumptions that our constitutional and evidentiary rules have long endeavoured
to counteract: guilt by association, racial discrimination, propensity, and even
biological determinism’.
While this view places the privacy of the individual above the legitimate
needs of the state to seek justice, it does raise significant
points regarding
the impact familial matching could have if it was unrestrained. Take, for
example, the radio report (‘Police
use DNA to track suspects through
family’ 2007) about the ‘BTK’ killer, who was apprehended
after a warrant was
issued to obtain the residual DNA of his daughter’s
pap smear. The result of this investigation is undoubtedly just, but that
not mean it may be suitable as a routine investigative procedure for all crimes
involving DNA. It is a dangerous precedent to
set that in order to put an
offender to justice we must investigate his or her relatives. Additionally Gabel
(2010, p. 53) argues:
‘The danger is that police would interpret a
familial DNA hit as a “
cquit.” Meaning,
they would take a lackadaisical approach to the investigation, and assume that
the DNA will win the conviction
on its own.’ There is also the accepted
rule in Australia that forensic samples could be gathered for one purpose but
for another (Ross 2011).
This raises the spectre that police
may investigate relatives for comparatively minor or flimsy allegations and then
use that DNA
information for the ulterior purpose of securing a conviction
against a relative.
Logic dictates that if the DNA database is expanded to relatives, so too does
the capacity for miscarriages of justice expand. There
is a legitimate fear that
if familial matching becomes wholly accepted within the criminal justice system,
these investigative biases
will extend towards the sphere of the family. While
the pure science itself may be certain, the capacity for human error cannot be
underestimated. In the US, a statistical analysis by Saks and Koehler (2005,
p. 892) of 86 DNA exoneration cases found that 63 per
cent of wrongful
convictions were caused by forensic science testing errors and 27 per cent by
false or misleading evidence by scientific
experts. By expanding the size,
scope, function and reach of the DNA database there is an increased risk of
miscarriages of justice.
Racial justice
The fear with DNA familial matching is that it will have a disproportionate
impact on ethnic groups that are already over-represented
within the criminal
justice system. This means that minorities, which are already over-represented,
endure far greater genetic surveillance
than the White majority as Greely et al.
(2006, p. 258) state, ‘not because they are convicted felons, but because
related to one’.
Greely et al. (2006, p. 259) examined the
African-American incarcerated population in 2006. Using the working guess of
five first-degree
relatives it is argued that ‘[u]nder these assumptions,
the 1.1 million African-Americans in the Offender Index will have 5.5
first degree relatives, leading to a total of 6.6 million African-Americans
‘findable’ through the database —
the offenders and their
relatives. That constitutes about seventeen percent of all
African-Americans’. In Australia, as at
30 June 2016 the Australian Bureau
of Statistics (‘ABS’) (2016) counted 11,288 prisoners who identified
as Aboriginal
or Torres Straight Islander representing 28 per cent of the prison
population, despite forming only 2.3 per cent of the overall Australian
population (ABS 2006).
Because of this over-representation in the
penal system, Aboriginal and Torres Straight Islander people would endure a far
and disproportionate amount of genetic surveillance than the Caucasian
majority. Familial matching therefore has the capacity to
enhance an already
biased system and further entrench the racial inequities that we are trying to
In response to these critiques, proponents for familial matching like
Rothstein and Talbott (2006, p. 154) have adopted the reasoning
‘[h]aving a disproportionate number of minority criminals is a social
problem, not a DNA database problem’. While
this statement rings true, it
sidesteps the issues and ignores the fact that familial searching would
exacerbate and entrench these
existing social problems.
ignores the many iniquities that racial minorities and socially disadvantaged
groups would face under familial matching.
over-representation of Aboriginal Australians both in the prison system and
in the NCIDD would create an instant bias towards this
group of people.
The question of racialised justice is perhaps the strongest argument against
DNA familial matching. It is noteworthy that several
academics, including Greely
et al. (2006), have proposed that the
way to avoid racialised
justice is to establish a universal DNA database, with every citizen’s
profile being retained. Such
a move would invariably have its fierce critics
because of the inherent privacy and political concerns. Short of adopting a
who are often from the poorest and most disadvantaged groups
in our society.
Can familial matching be challenged in court?
Generally, when defendants are found guilty of a crime their DNA (if the case
is serious enough) tends to go on a DNA database. This
is established law that
is enabled by statute and common law. However, could a family member of someone
on that DNA database launch
an attack on the legality of DNA familial matching?
For example, could the innocent brother of a burglar challenge in court a
matching search on behalf of his family and himself? Would the
fictional innocent brother even have a right to appear in court and
judicial review apply to a question of law surrounding familial matching? In
Victoria, when questions first arose regarding
procedural fairness, judicial
review, natural justice and DNA sample applications under
Crimes Act 1958
(Vic), it was left to the Victorian Supreme Court to
decide the issues in
Lednar v Magistrates’ Court
[2000] VSC 549.
The questions in that appeal concerned the limited right of judicial review
regarding forensic sample applications by the police
The core of
the court’s judgment found that a person has a right to be heard in
relation to forensic sample applications because
(a) the principle of
alteram partem
(‘listen to the other side’) essentially requires
proper notice to be given to persons affected by the adverse decision,
the taking of such a forensic sample would be a cause of assault and battery.
Gillard J notes at [278]:
By its very nature, a term of imprisonment involves the loss of many of the
prisoner’s rights. He no longer enjoys freedom of
movement, he cannot
complain that he is being physically restrained against his will, and he is
subject to rules and regulations
concerning prison discipline. On occasions he
may be physically restrained in circumstances which would constitute a trespass
the person but which are justified to ensure prison discipline and the safety
and welfare of not only the person involved but other
prisoners and prison
The reasoning becomes that upon the finding of guilt of a citizen that
citizen sacrifices certain rights in relation to their physical
security and
not apply to familial matching because
it is outdated. This uncertainty in the
law makes it unclear as to whether the prisoner’s loss of rights extends
towards becoming
genetic informants against their own family. Gillard J has
quite rightly limited this reasoning to the physical body of the appellant
not to the consideration of familial matching. This is another example of how
courts traditionally (and currently) view the retention
of DNA information. The
logic is limited to the assumption that DNA information solely identifies one
person. Several questions remain
unanswered. Does the loss of the
prisoner’s rights mean a loss for their families’ genetic privacy as
well? Or should
DNA be limited to just that person? Who gets to make the
decision to investigate the DNA of a family member and on what basis is
decision made? Is such a decision something that is able to be challenged and
reviewed by a court?
If the courts demand that they ‘listen to the other side’, does a
person have the right to know their DNA is being cross-referenced
familial matching? The case of
is also useful because it is
authority for the fact that the principle of
audi alteram partem
This principle requires that the person whose interests will be affected by an
adverse decision be given adequate notice
and a fair opportunity to be heard.
Such a right extends to a right to be notified of any decision affecting the
person’ of any person who may be impacted by a decision.
The modern statement of this principle has been taken to mean that
‘principle talks about a person’s rights, interests or legitimate
expectations’
Roebuck v Mayor etc of Geelong West
[1876] VicLawRp 101
(1876) 2 VLR (L) 189
). If that is the statement of principle that can
be extracted from
, then it can be strongly argued that a person
whose interests may be affected from a familial matching situation (that is, a
member being investigated for a crime through DNA familial matching) has
a right to be heard on such matters. However, a right to
judicial review does
not necessarily mean that the court would have any power to prevent a familial
matching search from occurring.
It would be hubris to pre-empt how the court
might decide the matter if it did proceed down this path because it is unsettled
What is settled though is that a clear, considered and democratic approach
is far preferable to an
judicial one.
Having a considered approach informed through public debate and enacted
democratically through legislation is far preferable than
policy evolution
through the courts. That is not their role. It is not a stretch of the
imagination to assume that sooner rather
than later a situation will arise that
will require such a question to be decided by the courts. It is argued that the
and the avenue of judicial review may be insufficient to deal with
the legitimate concerns arising out of any future familial matching
The proposed test
There is no existing legal test that deals specifically with familial
matching. The parliament did not consider the future possibility
of DNA familial
matching when creating the statutory framework found in
(Cth). State parliaments were no better. There is a disconnect
between the current science and the current state of the law. The scientific
advances have created a tension between the legitimate concern of solving crime
and the rights of the individual citizen and their
families. Recommendation 29
from the Attorney-Generals independent review of
Crimes Act 1914
(Cth) (2010, p. 21) stated ‘[f]amilial matching, should only be
adopted after an appropriate exposure to public examination
assessment’. Many years have passed since that recommendation and yet
there has been barely a ripple of debate in the law,
the public or academia.
This is despite the very strong likelihood that it would impact a large majority
of citizens and have disproportionate
impacts on certain racial and economic
groups. Conversely, it could be assumed there are some ‘cold cases’
definitely benefit from such an innovative new technology.
What is clear is that
familial matching is implemented, it must be
debated extensively. Due to the strong civil liberty concerns, and the potential
this to become a live political issue, it would be wholly inappropriate for
familial matching to be adopted by the executive on a
departmental level.
Democratic debate will highlight the serious family, privacy, racial and civil
liberty concerns raised by the
prospect of familial matching. Australia has had
a remarkable lack of discussion as to the policy effects and legal validity of
matching. The public may have serious concerns in relation to their
genetic privacy and their freedom from a state cataloguing and
citizen’s genetic metadata. Such concern is logically implicit in the
legislative landscape today: see, for
example, s 464ZF applications under the
Crimes Act 1958
(Vic), which must be granted by a judicial officer before
a DNA buccal swab can be obtained from criminals who have been found guilty
listed criminal offences. However, there is also the legitimate interest in the
executive being able to effectively police and
solve crimes. It may be that the
debate reveals that a balance should be struck between the interests of genetic
need of the state to solve certain crimes.
As a result, this article seeks to weigh two important factors:
1. the serious policy concerns raised by familial matching and its impacts on
the rights of the citizen; and
2. how to achieve a balance between these rights and the legitimate desire to
prosecute unsolved crime.
It is argued that the best way to achieve this balance is through stringent
judicial oversight. There should be an appropriate legal
test that would limit
the capacity of familial matching to impinge on the rights of the citizen. This
would be somewhat similar to
the operation of a warrant, albeit stricter in
application. The judiciary could decide the question after an application
by the police/prosecution, and give potentially affected person’s
locus standi
to argue reasons why the applications should not be granted.
Such persons would include any person whose primary DNA is used to identify
relative. The reasons for any judicial decisions should be subject to appeal
and, when possible, be published in the public domain.
Such a judicial test
would have a number of advantages. First, it would be independent and judicially
administered, thus allowing
faith in the independent application of such an
extraordinary power. Second, by giving the affected persons notice and standing
argue against any such application in open court it gives them the
opportunity to defend their legal rights. Lastly, by giving notice
to affected
persons it may prevent, in practice, an investigative over-reliance on DNA and
familial matching. Alternatively, police
could rely on the DNA notice as a
legitimate surveillance technique to monitor the movements of a suspected
criminal who feels the
net tightening.
The test should read as follows:
Familial matching should only be used for listed serious crimes that would,
but for familial matching, remain unsolved. When considering
such a matter a
judge must weigh the protection of families, minorities, civil liberties,
factors against the public interest of
solving a crime.
This test is a modified version of the test proposed by Thomas (2006, p. 76),
with the addition of ‘listed serious crimes’
which would presumably
appear in a Schedule within the legislation. This has several advantages because
it provides democratic legitimacy
for what is considered familial matching
offence and it limits what may and may not be considered a familial matching
offence. This
test ensures that traditional policing methods, which generally do
not intrude upon civil liberties, would be used for the vast majority
Only when a crime is substantially serious and outlined by the legislature and
where it would remain unsolved by traditional
policing methods would familial
matching be justified. For example, ‘cold cases’ where familial
matching is at its most
useful would clearly pass the proposed test. This is due
primarily to the ‘but for’ test that the crime would remain
unsolved, and the clear interest of justice in solving such cases.
The test would restrict the function creep of DNA databases, reduce
investigative over-reliance on DNA, ensure democratic accountability
the infringement on civil liberties, while also serving the important public
interest of bringing criminals to justice.
It may well be that for operational
reasons such hearings would be required to be heard
; however, it
would be better to have a test that balances these interests than solely relying
on the judgment of investigators.
This article has sought to outline how the science has rapidly evolved past
the current law. Undoubtedly, there are unsolved cases
across Australia that
could benefit from familial matching. Due to the issues outlined in this article
there is a delicate balance
that needs to be struck between the rights of the
citizen and the expectation of a society. There will undoubtedly come a time
the state wishes to utilise the technology of DNA familial matching. It is
inevitable. What is not inevitable is how our society
chooses to use this new
form of crime investigation. Do we want familial matching to become the new
norm, the exception or somewhere
between the two? The crucial question is: do we
want to be living in fear of our own genetic bonds by allowing
access to our genetic metadata? A balance must be struck, but this can only
be done through public debate and via the proper creation
of an appropriately
weighted law through parliament. This article has sought to highlight some of
the very real dangers and inequalities
that can arise if we, as a society,
blindly lurch towards an unquestioning acceptance of familial matching. The
proposed balancing
test to be used by the courts seeks to correct some of these
inequalities. Imposing a limit on familial matching will prevent this
new technology from becoming a potential instrument of injustice and
inequality.
Evans v New South Wales
[2008] FCAFC 130
(15 July 2008)
Faheem Khalid Lodhi v The Queen
[2006] NSWCCA 121
(13 April 2006)
Fitzgerald v The Queen
[2014] HCA 28
(13 August 2014)
Landry v Attorney General
No 98462 WL 1181741 (Mass 1998)
Lednar v Magistrates’ Court
[2000] VSC 549
(22 December
1 WLR [2218]
Maryland v King
569 US ___ (2013)
Rodriguez v United States
[1987] USSC 36
Roebuck v Mayor etc of Geelong West
[1876] VicLawRp 101
(1876) 2 VLR (L) 189
S & Marper v United Kingdom
[2008] ECHR 1581
Legislation
Charter of Human Rights and Responsibilities Act 2006
Crimes Act 1914
Crimes Act 1958
Australian Bureau of Statistics 2007,
Australian social trends
no. 4102.0, ABS, Canberra.
Australian Bureau of Statistics 2008,
Population characteristics,
Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander peoples
, cat. no. 4713.0, ABS,
Australian Bureau of Statistics 2013,
Aboriginal and Torres Straight
Islander prisoners
, cat. no. 4517.0, ABS, Canberra.
Bellamy-Royds, A & Norris, S 2010,
New frontiers in forensic DNA
analysis: international practices and implications for Canada
Library of Parliament.
CrimTrac 2011,
Annual report 2010/11
, Attorney-Generals Department,
CrimTrac 2016,
Annual report 2015/15
, ACIC, Canberra.
Freckleton SC, I & Selby, H 2009,
Expert evidence: law, practice,
procedure & advocacy
, 4th edn, Thomson Reuters, Sydney.
Gabel, J 2010, ‘Probable cause from probable bonds: a genetic tattle
tale based on familial DNA’,
Hastings Women’s Law Journal
vol. 21, pp. 3–57.
Greely, T, Riordan, D, Garrison, N & Mountain, J 2006, ‘Family
ties: the use of DNA offender databases to catch offenders’
Journal of Law and Medical Ethics
, vol. 34, pp. 248–62.
Independent Committee 2010,
Further independent review of
Crimes Act 1914
, Parliament of Australia, Canberra.
Kirby, M 2010, ‘Forensic evidence: instrument of truth or potential for
miscarriage?’,
Journal of Law, Information and Science
no. 1, pp. 1–22.
McCarthy, M 2011, ‘“Am I my brothers keeper?” Familial DNA
Notre Dame Law Review
vol. 86, no. 1, pp. 381–412.
Murphy, E 2009, ‘Relative doubt: familial searches of DNA
Michigan Law Review
, vol. 109, no. 3, pp.
Nuffield Council on Bioethics 2007,
The forensic use of bioinformation:
ethical issues
, Cambridge Publishers Ltd, Cambridge, UK.
‘Police use DNA to track suspects through family’ 2007,
things considered
, radio program transcript, NPR, New York, viewed 17 April
http://www.npr.org/templates/story/story.php?storyId=
Ross QC, D 2011,
Ross on crime
edn, Law Book Company
of Australasia, Victoria.
Saks, M & Koehler, J 2005, ‘The coming paradigm shift in forensic
identification science’,
, vol. 309, no. 5736, pp.
Smith, M 2010, ‘Universal law and genetics: the future development of
DNA evidence in the Australian criminal justice system’,
PhD thesis,
Australian National University.
Suter, S 2010, ‘All in the family: privacy and DNA searching’,
Harvard Law Journal of Technology
, vol. 23, pp. 311–30.
Thomas, L 2006, ‘Nothing to hide, something to fear?: the use of
partial DNA matching in criminal investigation’,
Journal of Law
Information and Science
, vol. 17, pp. 72–93.
Urbas, G & Smith, M 2012, ‘Regulating new forms of forensic DNA
profiling under Australian legislation: familial matching
phenotyping’,
Australian Journal of Forensic Sciences
, vol. 44, no.
1, pp. 63–81.
Victorian Office of the Privacy Commissioner within the Independent Ford
Committee 2010,
Further independent review of
, Attorney-Generals Department, Victoria.
Vincent, FHR 2010,
Report: inquiry into the circumstances that led to the
conviction of Mr Farah Abdulkadir Jama
, Victorian Government Printer.
Criminal lawyer, C Marshall
& Associates, 238 Hampshire Rd, Sunshine Vic 3020, Australia. Email:
fchralph@protonmail.ch. The
author expresses his gratitude to his father for his
guidance on life and this article and to Professor Jeremy Gans for his wise
counsel on DNA and the law.
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (512 KB)
PDF format (385 KB)
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter