URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/journals/JCULawRw/2024/6.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 15:07:02
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Yau, Barry; Bloomfield, Glenda --- "The Road Taken: an Australian Longitudinal Study of Law Graduates and Lawyers Who Pursued Careers Outside of Law" [2024] JCULawRw 6; (2024) 30 James Cook University Law Review 87
The Road Taken: An Australian Longitudinal Study of
Law Graduates and Lawyers Who Pursued Careers Outside of Law
Glenda Bloomfield
Never before have there been as many Australian law schools as there are
today. This has led to a perception amongst lawyers and the
media about the
oversupply of law graduates, usually in the context of whether the legal
profession can absorb the substantial number
of law graduates. What is lacking
in this discourse is the choices that law graduates make to pursue or continue
their careers outside
the legal profession. Our Australian qualitative
longitudinal study, which researched a cohort of law graduates and lawyers for
period 2014 to 2021, reports on the motivations such law graduates have in
sidestepping a legal career. Whilst these reasons cannot
be generalised to all
law graduates, the motivations throws into sharp relief the burdens that
commercial and corporate lawyers face
in practice. It is these experiences that
are pertinent to law graduates, many of whom have been influenced by commercial
and corporate
career paths during their time in law school.
I Introduction
This article draws on the qualitative data obtained through interviews with
law graduates and lawyers from our longitudinal study
covering the period 2014
to 2021. In particular, this article focuses on the law
who pursued paths outside
of law. With anecdotal evidence that an increasing number of law graduates are
pursuing careers outside
of law, we seek to contribute to the body of research
by analysing their motivations and aspirations. We also aim to add to this
of research our data on the practising lawyers who decided to pivot to careers
beyond the law.
In our study, most of the law graduates who chose not to pursue private legal
were already career
employees of the Australian Public
whilst studying their LLB
or JD. The central argument that will be developed is that a career public
servant, having chosen to remain
in the public service instead of pursuing legal
practice, continues to experience high levels of satisfaction and contentedness
their career beyond the law. The reasons for continuing a public service
career are grounded in factors such as being able to accomplish
service to the
public and maintain a suitable work-life balance. Other factors, which draw on
negative perceptions of private practice
such as the pressures of billings,
actually reflect the challenges and concerns of some of the corporate lawyers
who participated
in our study. This commonality could elevate the relevance of
such reasons to the broader legal community, including law students
teachers who seek to appreciate the wider demands of being a private practice
lawyer. Relatedly, a public servant’s
commitment to the notion of public
service was an ideal pursued by some of the corporate lawyers in our research
that motivated them
making significant career-altering choices.
II Literature Review
Our literature review identified reported longitudinal studies of law
students and lawyers in the USA,
All were primarily
quantitative studies and varied in the size of the cohorts and the period of
time covered. One common factor amongst
these longitudinal studies was their
attention to the legal career journeys of law graduates and their experience in
legal practice.
The literature appears to give only secondary consideration, if
at all, to the stories of law graduates who did not pursue legal
practise. The
corollary is that the literature and popular media contains an abundance of
studies and accounts of the challenges
law graduates generally face in entering
the legal profession, sometimes within the context of the
‘oversupply’ of law
graduates. Yet even then, much of the emphasis
is on the lack of opportunities in the legal profession for law graduates,
than a serious exploration of career paths pursued outside the legal
profession.
Melville acknowledges that past research into the ‘oversupply of law
graduates has focused almost exclusively on employment
within the legal
profession’, predicated on the assumption that law graduates ‘will
be disappointed’ if they do
not move into a legal
Melville posits the
concept of a law degree being a ‘generalist degree’ rather than
legal career-specific, suggesting
that effectively the law degree is becoming
the ‘new arts
She draws upon
annual surveys conducted by the Graduate Destination Survey between 1999 and
2014, indicating the percentage of law
graduates in Australia who enter
‘private legal practice’, ‘government positions’, and
‘industry/commercial
positions’. The percentage of law graduates
entering industry/commercial positions between 1999 and 2014 increased from
to 21.6%. The percentage of law graduates entering positions outside the
categories of private and government positions is actually
higher, as there is a
small unreported percentage between 1999 and 2014 (ranging between 1% and 5%)
outside the ‘industry/commercial
Also, it is unclear if the survey, in categorising ‘government
positions’, lumped together law graduates practising as
government with law graduates working in government generally. If they were
combined, then the percentage of law graduates
in careers outside of law is
actually higher than that reported by the Graduate Destination Survey. Also,
this survey is silent about
the motivations of law graduates who pursue a career
outside of law, and more fundamentally what drove such law graduates to
a law degree in the first place. There appears to be no other public
source of data indicating the percentage of law graduates who
become legal
practitioners (and conversely the number of law graduates who do not enter legal
III Methods
Narrative Inquiry
The literature review revealed some longitudinal studies that reported its
data through the lens of narrative
Whilst it is not our
intention to provide a comprehensive account of narrative inquiry, it is worth
noting that, similar to longitudinal
research, narrative inquiry seeks to
understand the experiences from our research participants’ stories through
an intimate
study of an individual’s experience over time and in
Connolly and Clandinin
first used the term narrative inquiry in the context of educational research in
the early 1990s.
inquiry attempts to understand how people think through events, what they value,
and how they make sense of the
Narrative inquiry
considers the storyteller’s position, characters, the endpoints, and
sequencing and tension created by the
events through a metaphorical
three-dimensional narrative inquiry space with the elements of past, present and
future (time), personal
and social (people), and places
(situation).
We are influenced to utilise some or all of the three elements of the
narrative inquiry space to observe how the lives of our participants,
particularly the law graduates who have chosen careers outside of law, unfold
through transitions and turning points through the
flow of past, present and
Some elements will be
more pertinent than others in examining such transitions and turning points. We
draw upon Neale’s definition
of ‘transition’ as a
‘dynamic period of a life course that constitute a passage from one
concrete status or circumstance
Hareven and Masaoka refer to examples of major transitions in work and family
lives which are considered normative: leaving home,
starting a career, getting
It is reasonable to say
that traditionally the transition from law graduate to practising lawyer is
normative, although our article
will consider whether within certain contexts
transitions go against the norm, or start to become a new norm. A normative
can be concurrently seen as a ‘turning point’ that
captures ‘critical events, defining moments or interactions
that can act
as triggers of change.’
Participants
The Human Research Ethics Committee at the Australian National University
(ANU) approved waves one and two on 24 December 2013 and
13 January 2021,
respectively.
Wave One, 2014–2015
We recruited respondents in wave one from three cohorts: LLB and JD students
, PLT students at
and early career commercial
lawyers practising in the Australian Capital Territory
Wave one was originally a one-off study researching the attitudes law
students and early career commercial lawyers have towards commercial
the role of legal ethics in the study and practise of this area. We collected
data through semi-structured
The principal
investigator moderated the focus groups in
The researchers
conducted the interviews in person or by
The principal
investigator transcribed the focus group and interview recordings. The
researchers analysed the data by reading several
times the transcripts to
identify and code themes, terminology and patters. The transcripts were cut and
sorted for categorisation
into themes and sub-themes. We published our wave one
findings regarding the impact of notions of success on career aspirations and
work-life balance.
The principal
investigator remained in contact with the respondents by sending them these
publications.
Conversion to Longitudinal Study: Wave Two, 2021
The principal investigator decided in 2020 to convert the one-off study into
a qualitative longitudinal project. One motivator was
filling the literature
void by researching a law graduate’s transition to legal practice or other
professions, and the trajectory
of early career lawyers. A longitudinal study
would help us better understand how their lives progressed since wave
and how their future could
unfold in the context of life, family and career.
In 2021 the principal investigator emailed the 48 wave one respondents
inviting them to participate in the second wave. Respondents
were given an
opportunity, through a semi-structured interview conducted by the principal
investigator, to reflect back and look
forward on the factors, forces and
choices shaping life, family and
Seventy-seven per cent
volunteered to return.
some researchers consider an 80% return rate as adequate, 70% is acceptable as
the time and expense required to go above this
figure would exceed the
contribution of the additional cases to the overall
The interviews,
conducted and recorded through Zoom or
included questions
built upon each respondent’s wave one data.
After transcribing the interviews, the principal investigator cut and sorted
both waves of the transcripts of each respondent into
a roughly chronological
narrative for thematical analysis. We sent each respondent their chronological
narrative to check for
Sub-cohort of Law Graduates Who Did Not Pursue Legal Practice
Of the returning cohort of 15 LLB/JD students to wave two, 12 became legal
practitioners. Two of the cohort (one of whom was in the
public service whilst
studying the LLB) declined to enter legal practice after completing their LLB.
The final participant (who was
a longstanding public servant), at the time of
the second wave interview, was attempting to enter legal practice.
Of the cohort of the 12 PLT students who returned for the second wave, seven
entered legal practice (one of whom was a career public
servant who transitioned
to private legal practice and ultimately became a sole practitioner). Three
common factors of the five PLT
students who chose not to enter legal practice
was that all are female, all were career public servants, and there was an
intervening
period between the completion of their LLB and the commencement of
their PLT. Of these five, three already had work experience in
environments prior to studying their PLT.
Sub-cohort of Lawyers Who Departed Legal Practice
Of the returning cohort of 10 early career commercial lawyers, eight
continued in legal practice. Of the other two, one lawyer, who
had extensive
experience in corporate law firms, transitioned to senior legal policy roles
across the public service, before moving
overseas where she pursued
post-graduate study. The other lawyer had moved from a legal policy role to
senior management positions
in a government
As mentioned earlier, 12
participants from the returning cohort of 15 LLB/JD students became legal
practitioners. Of these 12, three
departed legal practice after several years:
one entered the public service, one returned to his home country and entered the
service there, and one enrolled in medical studies.
IV Limitations
One limitation of our research is a lack of, for example, private
sector-based participants who chose not to enter private practice
practice generally. Without in any way discounting the experiences of the public
service participants, such participants
in the private sector could have
provided a broader perspective of the motivations of law graduates who sidestep
legal practice.
Related to this limitation is that our study does not include
people who worked in less secure employment whilst studying law.
Further limitations are that none of these participants were based in
regional or rural areas of Australia, and none had attended
regional or
‘non-sandstone’ universities. Perhaps a larger and diverse sample of
participants across Australia could
have provided more in-depth explanations of
decisions to pursue careers beyond the law. We acknowledge the small size and
composition
of our sample does not necessarily reflect the reasons, perspectives
or experiences of law graduates who choose not to enter legal
practice more
Only 10 of the original 17 early career commercial lawyers who participated
in the first wave returned for the second wave. The return
of more of that
cohort’s participants could have provided further insights into career
changes in or out of law between the
two waves, and how they compare with the
decisions of the law graduates who chose not to practise law.
V Themes and Findings
Selected quotes from both waves illuminate the themes and define
Decision Not to Enter Private Practice
Three themes arose from our public service participants regarding their
concerns about private practice. These themes stem from the
participants’
perspectives with respect to one or more elements of narrative inquiry: place
(the public service, private practice),
time (length of service in the public
service) and people (family, work colleagues). These themes also reflect the
challenges, concerns
and ambitions raised by some of the participants who were
corporate lawyers.
who advanced in the
public service between the first and second waves, expressed in her second wave
interview the gratefulness for
the success achieved as a public servant. PLT-1
explained one of the dominant reasons for declining to enter private practice
being eligible to practise:
... the uncertainty that surrounds your ability and how your job defines your
life because the more billables you do, the more likely
you’ve got to keep
your job at the end of the day.
PLT-1 drew upon the importance of the public service in preserving the
boundary between work and family life:
I think the public service is good for making sure that’s a good
distinction without blending, blurring the boundaries too much.
LLB-1, who completed her LLB whilst progressing in the public service,
explained in her second wave interview her perception of billable
It seemed incredibly stressful ... and I know that’s not every job, but
obviously the public service ... is relatively chill
compared with what I
imagine like working to billable hours would
PLT-4, who had a lengthy public service career, had a stint in a global law
firm as part of her work experience requirements for her
PLT. PLT-4 observed in
the firm the ‘pyramid system’ where the senior lawyers were:
... standing on the shoulders of all people under them that were bringing in
all the money and the work and doing all the long hours
... and [the senior
lawyers] were so horrible to them ... the way they treated their own staff meant
I wouldn’t have touched
them with a barge pole.
The sentiments of these participants about billing practises reflects a
universal concern in the legal profession that has been the
subject of numerous
articles in the literature in Australia and
Whilst not all law
graduates are deterred by the challenge of achieving billable hours, even some
of the more experienced and seasoned
corporate lawyers in our research confirmed
the enormous pressures in fulfilling billable hour targets. ECL-1 explained in
wave interview that whilst he had very much enjoyed working in a
global law firm, a ‘very stressful’ aspect was the ‘absolute
pressure to have billable targets met every day.’ He further explained the
consequences of lawyers who cannot achieve their
billable targets, even if
through no fault of their own:
People who can’t do it are very swiftly disposed of. They’re
gone. A lot of grads have not made it, they basically, cut
loose. Their food
line gets cut off so, once a partner does not like you, you’re not working
up to standard or something, they
just stop giving you work. Then you
don’t have any billables, then you get performance managed, then
you’re basically
encouraged to leave. I’ve seen that [happen] to
Another early career lawyer, ECL-2, who had garnered much experience in
top-tier practice, was very open in her wave one interview
the ‘quite stressful’ situation of falling short of her billable
targets in a top-tier firm:
So it started to become quite stressful because they have seven billable
hours a day there, which is quite a lot ... I was literally
like pulling teeth
to try and get one, maybe two billable hours a day ... I was asking everybody
for work and I wasn’t getting
anything, and that’s when it started
to become a stressful issue for me because I knew that it was going to work
when it came time for my performance review ... they would say you
haven’t hit your billables, and it isn’t going to
matter in the
slightest how much I say, ‘well you didn’t give me any
Through narrative inquiry, we see that the pressures of billing is dominant
in the timeline of legal practice, thus being an influential
factor for some law
graduates in deciding whether to enter practice, and a pressure point for
lawyers themselves. The element of
personal and social can be critical for law
graduates, e.g. not allowing the pressure of billings to define one’s
The element of place comes into play where law graduates prefer the work
environment of the public service for example, compared to
the very stressful
demands of private practice billables. The concept of place was evident with
ECL-2’s experiences with billing.
ECL-2 recalled in her first wave
interview that her expectations of a lawyer were shaped by her law school, which
never showed her
‘anything other than a commercial lawyer as an
option.’ She strongly expressed her view that law schools should provide
more information to students about a broader range of careers beyond top tier
practice. Based on some of her unsettling experiences
in top tier practice, she
was open to exploring options in government where there might be a
‘slightly better environment.’
Mundanity of private practice
Not all law graduates, especially if they are already established career
professionals, are willing to transition to entry-level lawyer
status if it
involves performing tasks which would usually be undertaken by junior
administrative staff.
PLT-2, who studied her PLT between waves one and two whilst being a career
public servant, had prior experience in the legal field
following the completion
of her LLB several years earlier. PLT-2 became a magistrate’s associate
soon after completing her
LLB, followed by a career in the public service
(including in one department covering law and justice) focusing in major policy
PLT-2’s enrolment in the PLT was to ‘finish the
journey’ for eligibility to practise. PLT-2 explained her reasons
turning down an offer from a large law firm:
I found that because given my experience that I wouldn’t be, just a
starter, fresh from uni. But the biggest concern I had was
when I asked about
what were some of the jobs I would be doing ... It was very much more, and
there’s nothing wrong with that,
but a lot of administrative component. I
asked about proportions of time of what I would be doing in a typical day,
do a lot of photocopying, you do a lot of admin circulars and
stuff like that to the partners. You’ll be assisting this person
documents together.’ I appreciate that’s part and parcel of a task,
but I found that’s not commensurate
of what is being taught at law
When I was in the public service that’s what I would actually have very
junior staff do ... and I’m thinking why would
you want [a lawyer] to do
that when you can employ someone to do that without the title of a lawyer ...
Then they said ‘we’re
charging out $425 an hour.’
Ultimately PLT-2 declined the position and instead enrolled in a PhD
researching the diversity of the Australian judiciary.
Through narrative inquiry, a person’s experiences can sometimes be
contextualised through time such as within a longer-term
PLT-2 expressed
concerns about the disconnect between her law studies in addition to her
previous experience in the legal environment,
and what was expected of her as a
lawyer. This reflects a trend that Susskind has identified, where young lawyers
to undertake routine legal work largely as a way of them
learning their trade’.
doing so, clients are charged for ‘fairly high hourly rates for the
work’ of young lawyers, despite them ‘learning
on the job’
performing duties that is ‘administrative or process-based’ and
perceived as ‘routine and
repetitive.’
ECL-1’s account of his early experience with a global law firm appears
to be aligned with the trend amongst young lawyers. ECL-1
detailed in his 2014
first wave interview the prosaic nature of some of his work that ultimately made
him a better lawyer:
... mundane yes definitely. The amount of paperwork and printing and things
that photocopying. The amount of checking ... and that’s
I guess what you
pay a law firm to do, is to check things. But yes, a huge contract can be
beautifully written but then of course
you need to think of the cross
references, the glossary terms and all these things and they take forever, those
things I find incredibly
mundane and dull. But they’re a huge part of the
work I do and I can, and they’ve also made me, I would hate to say it,
they have made me a better lawyer.
ECL-1’s conclusion that his expertise grew through the mundane tasks is
consistent with Susskind’s observation that lawyers
become experts by
‘spending months on what is largely administrative
The operative term in Susskind’s observations is ‘young
lawyer’. In Australia a young law graduate entering a competitive
market, often saddled with substantial loans that supported their law studies,
may be more willing to embrace the initial mundanity
to progress in the legal
profession, especially if they are not raising a family. However, someone like
PLT-2, who had a successful
career in the public service, may understandably
demur. Through the lens of narrative inquiry, we see PLT-2 would have had to
in her immediate family commitments and perhaps even professional
self-esteem as she had been a senior public servant with experience
in Australia
and abroad (the elements of personal and social, and place).
Contributing to Society
One reason for some of the participants choosing to remain in the public
service was because they were better positioned there than
in private practice
to contribute to society as a whole. In the context of narrative inquiry, this
involves a participant working
from the space of the public service to have a
meaningful impact in the community space. PLT-3, who had been in the public
for over a decade at the time of her second wave interview, explained
that a huge driver for her was ‘working for the public
which started when, during her LLB, she undertook internships with community
legal centres. Her career has been ‘shaped
by opportunities to give back
to the public’ in the broader sense of public service:
You can do a job and you can earn a salary and that’s all good and well
but I had the privilege of education and I wanted to
make it count. I really
liked working in government departments because I feel a tangible link between
the effort that I put in everyday
and the community that we’re there to
look after and support. That’s a huge driver for me ... by the time I
my undergraduate degree and definitely when I was doing my practical
legal training I wanted to be using the law to create tangible
outcomes to
people and to be hopefully leaving society slightly better off because of the
effort that I put in. That’s been
a huge driver for me ...
PLT-3’s career path could have gone into private practice if she had
followed her assumption as a law student that the goal
of being a lawyer was to
be a partner. However, her work experience in corporate firms representing
insurance companies steered her
away from private practice:
It felt like my whole job was trying not to pay out money, trying to find
exceptions or loopholes or staying on top of legal precedents
that were going to
be working in the favour of very big corporations. It made me feel icky to be
honest. I think from about my third
year at law school ... I thought about
in-house but it looked to me like in-house lawyers were just lawyers who used to
work in private
sector firms and then they decided to go in-house ... By the
time I was in my last year I was pretty set on working for government
for a big NGO or an organisation that had some community values driving it.
PLT-1 stated in her second wave interview her reasons for remaining in the
public service:
I sort of like that sort of underdog social policy, working with vulnerable
Australians that other people would kind of turn their
noses up at.
PLT-4, who had lengthy public service career, explained in her second wave
interview the importance of serving the public interest:
So definitely I look for a career and employers where I can add value and I
can do something that is going to make a difference. So
that’s why I like
the Public Service career. I want to be doing something that matters. I like the
Public Service because at
the heart of government you can actually play with big
levers that make a difference to peoples’ everyday lives.
The pursuit of being in a position to help people was also embodied in the
response of ECL-3, who worked in legal, regulatory and
policy roles in the
public service between waves one and two. ECL-3 had, prior to joining the public
service, worked as a lawyer
in private practice:
[The private practice] work wasn’t too bad ... I could see, obviously
it’s a business, it’s a money-making business
that involves
people’s legal affairs. It was really I guess the pursuit of helping
others, it wasn’t so much about helping,
it was about helping your clients
but it wasn’t about helping the public. Maybe that sense, when I was
working there I wasn’t
getting the feeling I feel rewarded, like I’m
doing something with my life, with my work. I do feel that I do resonate with
the public service.
The notion of helping the public was also shared by several of the
participants who were corporate lawyers. LLB-3, soon after admission,
position at a commercial legal practice in a major Australian capital city.
Whilst he enjoyed being a corporate lawyer
and being rewarded with a generous
salary, he explained in his second wave interview:
For me the things that are more important than just money, and sometimes
you’ve got to do things that are worthwhile and that
actually contribute
towards making the community a better place. So I feel that if the usual large
firms are basically making the
rich richer, helping the people pay less tax even
though they are already earning a lot of money.
LLB-3 was motivated to ‘help the people in need’, building on his
first wave interview where he stated he was not in the
law ‘for the
money’, but was interested in how lawyers can ‘contribute to society
as a whole.’ This led to
a major turning point in his career trajectory,
with his transition to a community legal centre in a regional area where he had
work-life balance that came with:
who have the
potential to go to jail, because they don’t understand the legal
The notion of community service led LLB-4 to make a drastic career change
beyond his top tier law firm position. As he explained in
his second wave
Then as time went on and as I began to work as a [top tier] lawyer I thought
well actually I’m starting to value perhaps having
a legacy that’s
perhaps more fulfilling rather than just making the ASX listed companies richer,
I can look back on having
He reasoned that medicine was a good way to achieve this, coupled with the
job and financial security (in his first wave interview
he expressed his
ambition to study medicine, but his attention turned to law studies). By the
time of his second wave interview he
was on the verge of completing his medical
degree and commencing his journey in medicine.
ECL-2, who was dissatisfied with the pressure to achieve billing targets in
corporate practice, transitioned to legal regulatory and
compliance positions in
the public service which she found to be a ‘great environment’.
ECL-2’s second wave interview
provided an affecting narrative of the
driving factor in her life:
I was always seeing some more meaningful purpose, some sort of role that
transcended money and things. That’s why I went to
law school. I went to
law school because I wanted to work with the Red Cross as a humanitarian lawyer
or something like that. That’s
why I went to law school. So, I was always
seeking a way to help people, to do something different, to make a difference
never wanted to be like those lawyers that just were there to bill and
that was six minutes, okay bye.
Challenge of Maintaining Seniority and Remuneration
Conditions in Private Practice
Sometimes the higher one goes up the public service armed with legal
qualifications, the more of a step down it is to become lawyers
private practice or government. Two of the participants, who held senior public
service positions, found themselves in
this position. PLT-1 explained in her
second wave interview:
... obviously I don’t have that skill set anymore, I can’t just
go into corporate law right now and be on the same money,
the same level as
management that I am now. So, it’s kind of I think my ship has sailed
unless I want to go back and be an
intern again or something, which I
don’t think I could do with a mortgage.
PLT-5, who had extensive experience in regulatory policy, observed in her
second wave interview the drop in conditions she would face
in transferring to a
government in-house role:
If I was to get a legal officer position then they would expect me to have
had a lot more practical legal experience, which I don’t
I’m not willing to take a pay cut now, so I won’t be able to get a
legal officer at my level.
However, one participant, PLT-6, did enter legal practice after accumulating
nearly 30 years in the public service and related activities.
PLT-6 was keen to
become a lawyer in private practice despite a dramatic drop in remuneration.
After gaining entry-level experience
in a small firm where the newly admitted
lawyer enjoyed the work but was supervised by an unfriendly supervisor, the
participant
was motivated to set up a sole practice with more professional
freedom and autonomy. Of all the Australian-based participants in
our research,
PLT-6 was the only one to set up or work as a sole practitioner between the
first and second waves. In comparison to
the Australia-wide statistics as at
October 2020, 82% of private practices were ‘sole practices or law
practices with one
principal.’
participant from the research, LLB-6, who studied his law degree in Australia as
an international student, set up a part-time
sole practice in his home country,
which he works on around his full-time government agency duties.
The Benefits of a Law Degree Without Practising
The comments of some of the law graduates who did not pursue legal practice
reflect Thornton and Shannon’s observation that
certain law schools can
promise prestige through their law degree, with the degree providing a
‘bridge to coveted and prestigious
highlighted the benefits of her legal qualification as a career public
So, I think my legal training has really helped me to look at a problem and
break it down into small parts and try and predict what
might go wrong.
PLT-4, who also completed her law studies while continuing being a public
servant, observed:
I haven’t practised as a lawyer in that narrow sense ... people have
thought it was useful to have somebody with legal qualifications
on their team.
I certainly have forgotten a lot of what I learned through my degrees ... but
certainly having the ability to go and
research things and find the answers and
work out where you would go for the information, that’s been really
LLB-2 placed a premium on her law degree in pursuing a career in public
I knew that people would trust me because I spent five years studying law ...
I think that’s where the value of studying law
lies is that you can have,
status and power to make money, or status and power to be involved in like
politics, it’s a very
unique type of status that you get in society
compared to something like medicine where you have status and respect but
in a very narrow field ... I never had to work as a lawyer to be able
to get the benefit of having a law degree.
VI Conclusion
Despite some significant limitations outlined earlier in this article, the
study still presents a range of perceptions and factors
that can influence law
graduates to steer away from legal practice, particularly private practice.
Importantly, most of our participants
who continued their career in the public
service were not dismayed about a potential legal career passing them by. Any
disenchantment
participants may have experienced about not having a stint as a
legal practitioner was diminished by their firm commitment to the
public service and their concerns about the nature of private practice and its
impact on family and social life. This finding
partly goes against the
assumption identified by Melville that law graduates ‘will be
disappointed’ if they don’t
transition to a legal
As our participants were career public servants located in Canberra, we
acknowledge that their choice to continue in the public service
may not be an
experience relatable to law graduates working in different sectors and
industries around Australia contemplating breaking
into the legal profession. A
further study about this would be welcome, especially for law graduates living
in regional or rural
areas or working in professions that some may perceive as
being far removed from legal practice. Nevertheless, the finding that the
servants’ concerns about private practice are shared by seasoned corporate
lawyers themselves lends further credibility
to their choice to affirm their own
paths beyond the law. Whilst it is unclear whether our findings point to a
growing normality
of a law degree being a valuable career tool for careers
outside the legal profession, our findings show a high level of career
satisfaction
for a category of participants who have affirmed their choice to
continue their public service career.
Associate Lecturer in Law, College of Business, Law and
Governance, James Cook University and an honorary law academic at the Australian
National University.
Academic Researcher and Lawyer. Glenda was formerly a lecturer
in the practical legal training program and undergraduate law at the
National University and has extensive experience in legal practice in the
government and private sectors.
Declaration of conflicting interests:
The authors declared no
potential conflicts of interest with respect to the research, authorship, and/or
publication of this article.
The author(s) received no financial support for the research,
authorship, and/or publication of this article.
Acknowledgement:
The authors are very grateful for the work of David
Catanzariti and Alexandra Johnstone, who were co-investigators in the first wave
of the research.
In Australia a ‘law
graduate’ is usually synonymous with a person who has completed their law
degree, i.e. LLB or JD.
However, before a law graduate can practice law, they
need to then complete their practical legal training course. Once a law graduate
has completed their practical legal training and met other formal requirements,
they are eligible to be admitted in as an ‘Australian
lawyer’. An
Australian lawyer who chooses to enter practice can then become an
‘Australian legal practitioner’
by virtue of holding a practicing
certificate: each state and territory in Australia has uniform legislation that
more or less uses
this terminology, e.g.
Legal Profession Act 2007
. Therefore, it is not uncommon for someone to have the title of
Australian lawyer but not be in legal practice and thus not be an
legal practitioner.
As at 2022 (the year after the
data was collected for wave two), two-thirds of solicitors in Australia were
working in private practice:
2022 National Profile of Solicitors:
Final Report
In this article the shorthand
reference to the Australian Public Service and its employees is ‘the
public service’ and
‘public servants’, respectively, unless
the contrary is indicated.
John Monahan and Jeffrey
Swanson, 'Lawyers at the Peak of their careers: A 30-Year Longitudinal Study of
Job and Life Satisfaction'
(2019) 16(1) (March)
Journal of Empirical Legal
4; Ronit Dinovitzer, Bryant G. Garth and Joyce S. Sterling,
‘Buyer's Remorse? An Empirical Assessment of the Desirability of
Career’ (2013) 63(2) (November)
Journal of Legal Education
Ronit Dinovitzer and Bryant Garth, ‘The new place of corporate law firms
in the structuring of elite legal careers’
(2020) 45(2)
Social Inquiry
339; John Bliss, ‘Divided Selves: Professional Role
Distancing Among Law Students and New Lawyers in a Period of Market
(2017) 42(3) (Summer)
Law & Social Inquiry
Fiona M Kay and John Hagan,
‘Building Trust: Social Capital, Distributive Justice, and Loyalty to the
Firm’ (2003) 28(2)
Law & Social Inquiry
483; Fiona M
Kay and Jean E Wallace, ‘Mentors as social capital: Gender, mentors, and
career rewards in law practice’
(2009) 79(3)
Sociological inquiry
Lynne Taylor et al, ‘The
making of Aoteoroa | New Zealand lawyers: a longitudinal study of law students
and law graduates’
(2023) 57(3)
The Law Teacher
In Australia see: Christine
Parker, ‘An Oversupply of Law Graduates – Putting the Statistics in
Legal Education
; Peter Young,
‘Are law schools producing too many lawyers’ (2014) 88(6)
Australian Law Journal
367; Angela Melville, ‘It is the worst time in
living history to be a law graduate: or is it? Does Australia have too many
graduates?’
(2017) 51(2)
The Law Teacher
Musgrave, 'Frustration grows over unis ‘cashing in’ on law grad
oversupply' Lawyers Weekly (online at 20 February
<https://www.lawyersweekly.com.au/sme-law/22768-frustration-grows-over-unis-cashing-in-on-law-grad-oversupply>..
Melville (n 7) 220
Graduate Destination Survey,
Gradstats Reports 1999–2014
http://www.graduatecareers.com.au/research/researchreports/gradstats
cited in Melville (n 7) 220.
Council of Law Deans,
Data Regarding Law School Graduate Numbers and Outcomes
<https://cald.asn.au/wp-content/uploads/2017/11/Factsheet-Law_Students_in_Australia.pdf>.
For example: the experiences
of students from ‘non-traditional’ backgrounds studying at a
regional Australian university:
Suzanne Macqueen and Carmel Patterson,
‘Reflexivity in a longitudinal narrative inquiry: in pursuit of clarity of
interpretations’
(2021) 44(2)
International Journal of Research &
Method in Education
125-134; the decision-making of British further
education students: Z. Baker (2020) ‘The vocational/academic divide in
participation: the higher education decision making of further
education students’ (2020) 44(6)
Journal of Further and Higher
Vera Caine, Andrew Estafan
and D. Jean Clandinin, ‘A Return to Methodological Commitment: Reflections
on Narrative Inquiry’
(2013) 57(6)
Scandinavian Journal of Educational
574, 576-577.
Michael F Connelly and D
Jean Clandinin, ‘Stories of experience and narrative inquiry’ (1990)
Educational researcher
2; D Jean Clandinin, Debbie Pushor and Anne
Murray Orr, ‘Navigating sites for narrative inquiry’ (2007) 58(1)
Journal of teacher education
Therese Riley and Penelope
Hawe, ‘Researching practice: the methodological case for narrative
inquiry’ (2005) 20(2)
Health education research
Ibid 226; D Jean Clandinin,
‘Narrative inquiry: A methodology for studying lived experience’
(2006) 27(1)
Research studies in music education
Claire Bidart, ‘What
does time imply?’ (2013) 22(2)
Society 254, 257; Bren
What is Qualitative Longitudinal Research?
(Bloomsbury Academic,
Neale (n 17) 42.
Tamara K Hareven and Kanji
Masaoka, ‘Turning points and transitions: Perceptions of the life
course’ (1988) 13(1)
Journal of family history
Neale (n 17) 39.
LLB or JD students were
eligible to participate in wave one if they had already studied Corporations Law
and Legal Ethics. One of
the LLB respondents was a student at the University of
Canberra, who we included as the student had studied those two subjects. We
recruited students from the Australian National University because the
researchers were law academics there.
LLB or JD graduates seeking
to apply for admission in Australia are required to complete their PLT.
We recruited lawyers (most
with up to five years post-admission experience) from firms located in the ACT
because the Australian
National University is located in the ACT.
Semi-structured interviews
were held for respondents not participating in a focus group. We conducted the
interviews because of the
recruitment and logistical challenges in bringing
together the adequate number of respondents for a focus group.
Two focus groups comprised
LLB or JD respondents, two comprised PLT respondents, and two comprised the
lawyer respondents, with each
focus group composed of between four and six
respondents.
The principal investigator
is the first author. Focus groups ran between 90 minutes and two hours.
The conduct of the
interviews was divided between the Principal Investigator and the then
co-investigator, Alexandra Johnstone. Semi-structured
interviews ran for about
Barry Yau and David
Catanzariti. ‘Bridging the Information Gap’ (2018)
Institute Journal
40; Barry Yau, David Catanzariti and Joanne Atkinson,
‘The Information Gap: A comparative study of the paradigms shaping
perceptions
of career success for law undergraduates and professional legal
training students in Australia and the latent implications of non-professional
legal career opportunities for law graduates in England’ in Rachel Field
and Caroline Strevens (eds)
Educating for Well-Being in Law
(Routledge,
2019) 74; Barry Yau, ‘Reshaping the teaching–research nexus:
connecting with students through research blogging
(with an autoethnographic
perspective) before they become lawyers’ (2020) 54(2)
261; Barry Yau and David Catanzariti, ‘At play in the
field of dreams: Theorising attitudes, perceptions and practices of law
in conjunction with the reflections of early career commercial
lawyers’ (2020) 37(1)
Law Context: A Socio-Legal
One or two of the
respondents suggested to the principal investigator that follow-up research be
Neale (n 17) 10; Lars R.
Bergman, ‘Some methodological issues in longitudinal research: looking
ahead’ in David Magnusson
and Paul Casaer (eds)
Longitudinal Research
on Individual Development: Present Status and Future Perspectives
University Press, 1993) 217.
Organising focus groups for
wave two was impractical as some of the respondents were possibly dispersed
across Australia and the
Even if enough respondents were
willing to travel to a mutual location for a focus group, the COVID-19 lockdowns
made this virtually
impossible.
The retention rate for the
LLB/JD and PLT cohorts was very high (94% and 80% respectively), compared to the
low retention rate of
the early career commercial lawyers (59%). One LLB
participant, two PLT participants, and five early career commercial lawyers from
wave one did not respond to the research team’s repeated email invitations
to participate in wave two. Originally 15 LLB/JD
students from wave one
participated in wave two, but after one of them withdrew their participation for
personal reasons after their
wave two interview was completed, the researchers
decided to exclude the respondent’s data. Another PLT respondent from wave
one declined to participate in wave two without disclosing a reason. Another two
early career commercial lawyers from wave one declined
to participate in wave
two due to family or personal reasons.
Robert B Cotter et al,
‘Contacting participants for follow-up: how much effort is required to
retain participants in longitudinal
studies?’ (2005) 28(1)
Evaluation and Program Planning
A small number of
respondents were interviewed by telephone due to technical difficulties with
Zoom. The principal investigator also
accepted the request of one of the
respondents not to record their interview.
Seven respondents provided
updates or edits. Several respondents commented on their chronological
narrative, with one writing that
‘it was very special to read’.
References in this article
to ‘public service’ or ‘government agency’ careers
denote public service positions
that are not lawyer positions, unless stated to
the contrary, e.g. government in-house lawyer.
Code identifiers have been
used as ‘pseudonyms’ for the participants. Code identifiers that
start with LLB denotes that
the participant was originally part of the LLB/JD
cohort in 2014/15, code identifiers starting with PLT denotes that the
participant
was originally part of the PLT cohort in 2014/15, and code
identifiers starting with ECL denotes that the participant was originally
of the early career commercial lawyer cohort in 2014/15.
It may be a surprise to some
lawyers that billable hours is not just confined to private practice firms. The
principal investigator,
prior to becoming an academic, worked for an Australian
government law agency that set ‘billing targets’ for its legal
practitioners in relation to their work for government clients.
In Australia: Adele J.
Bergin and Nerina L. Jimmieson, ‘Australian lawyer well-being: Workplace
demands, resources and the
impact of time-billing targets’ (2014)
Psychiatry, Psychology and Law
427; Margaret Thornton,
‘Squeezing the life out of lawyers: legal practice in the market
(2016) 25(4)
Griffith Law Review
James, ‘Legal practice on time: The ethical risk and inefficiency of the
six-minute unit’ (2017) 42(1)
Alternative Law Journal
the USA: Susan Saab Fortney, ‘The billable hours derby: empirical data on
the problems and pressure points’
Fordham Urban Law
; Christine Parker and David Ruschena, ‘The pressures of
billable hours: Lessons from a survey of billing practices inside law
University of St. Thomas Law Journal
Canada: Alice Woolley,
‘Evaluating value: a historical case study of
the capacity of alternative billing methods to reform unethical hourly
(2005) 12(3)
International Journal of the Legal
339. In the UK: Hilary Sommerlad, ‘“A pit to put
women in”: professionalism, work intensification, sexualisation
work–life balance in the legal profession in England and Wales’
(2016) 23(1)
International Journal of the Legal
D. Jean Clandinin and F.
Michael Connelly,
Narrative Inquiry: Experience and Story in Qualitative
(Jossey-Bass, 2000) 19.
Richard Susskind,
Tomorrow’s Lawyers: An Introduction to your future
University Press, 2023) 215.
Ibid 39, 231.
In October 2022 there were
16,393 private law practices in Australia, with 82% being sole practices or law
practices with one principal:
National Profile of Solicitors 2020
Margaret Thornton and
Lucinda Shannon, ‘Selling the dream’: law school branding and the
illusion of choice’
[2013] LegEdRev 12
(2013) 23(2)
Legal Education Review
Melville (n 7) 220.
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (97.5 KB)
PDF format (446 KB)
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter