URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/journals/UNSWLawJlStuS/2025/27.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 15:46:24
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Rogers, Uma --- "Generative Artificial Intelligence and Indigenous Intellectual and Cultural Property: Impacts and Implications for Visual Art" [2025] UNSWLawJlStuS 27; (2025) UNSWLJ Student Series No 25-27
GENERATIVE ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE AND INDIGENOUS INTELLECTUAL AND CULTURAL PROPERTY: IMPACTS AND IMPLICATIONS FOR VISUAL ART
I INTRODUCTION
II OUTLINING GENERATIVE ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE
III IMPLICATIONS OF GENERATIVE ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE
A Implications on Artists Generally
B Implications for Indigenous Artists
1 Violation of Permission Protocols
2 Use of Artwork for Inappropriate Purposes
3 Appropriation of Style
IV PROTECTION UNDER AUSTRALIAN INTELLECTUAL PROPERTY LAW
A Tensions between ICIP and IP
B Copyright
1 Are Artworks Copyright?
2 Does GenAI’s Use of Artwork Constitute Infringement?
B Moral Rights
1 Right of Attribution
2 Right of Integrity
3 Reasonable Use Defence
C Prospect of Legislative Change
V CONCLUSION
GENERATIVE ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE AND INDIGENOUS
INTELLECTUAL AND CULTURAL PROPERTY: IMPACTS AND IMPLICATIONS FOR VISUAL
I INTRODUCTION
The development and dissemination of generative artificial intelligence
(‘GenAI’) has disrupted long-standing assumptions
what, can produce creative artwork. As artists grapple with the challenges posed
by AI-generated artworks, it is crucial
to determine whether the use of artwork
in artificial intelligence (‘AI’) training infringes intellectual
property (‘IP’)
rights. While there has been broad commentary on the
applicability of IP in the regulation and training of AI modules, there has
a lack of scholarly attention to the implications of generative AI art for
Indigenous intellectual and cultural property (‘ICIP’)
context of art. This omission is notable considering the significance of
Indigenous art in Australian visual culture; the
importance of artworks for
Indigenous culture and law; and the historic shortcomings of Anglo-Australian IP
in protecting ICIP. As
an early effort to address this gap, this article seeks
to examine the relationship between GenAI, ICIP and IP through the lens of
visual arts.
Following this introduction, this article is structured as follows: Part II
provides an overview of GenAI related terminology and
establishes this
article’s scope. Part III considers the implications of GenAI, both
generally and relating to Indigenous communities
specifically. It argues that
the advent of GenAI has significant adverse implications for the upholding of
Indigenous customary law.
Moreover, it considers that GenAI is likely to
exacerbate economic and cultural harms which disproportionately impact
artists. Part IV evaluates the potential of IP in protecting ICIP
from these associated harms. It demonstrates that a discussion
of GenAI can
illuminate fundamental conceptual incompatibilities between ICIP and IP.
However, it ultimately acknowledges the potential
usefulness of copyright and
moral rights as pathways to protect Indigenous artists and art.
II OUTLINING GENERATIVE ARTIFICIAL
INTELLIGENCE
Artificial Intelligence is a type of technology that enables machines to
perform cognitive tasks, usually associated with human
intelligence.
GenAI is a subset of
AI and refers to the ability of computer systems to create new content,
including text, audio, and images. While
there are numerous approaches to
modelling GenAI,
commonly require vast amounts of external data, or ‘inputs’ upon
which GenAI is trained.
Training is
fundamental to GenAI and denotes the process through which algorithms are taught
to ascertain information from existing
data, and subsequently, to apply this
knowledge into the generation of new material or ‘outputs’. This is
facilitated
by data scraping and data mining practices. Data scraping is the
process of importing raw data from websites. It is often done on
a mass scale
and can compile billions of sources. Data mining is the process of analysing
such raw data to generate statistical patterns
and relationships. Overall, the
efficacy of GenAI in generating outputs is directly informed by the quality and
quantity of data
available for training.
GenAI modules can be distinguished as ‘creative’ and
‘non-creative’ depending on the nature of their
Creative modules produce
outputs which are stylistically alike, or capable of substituting, the kinds of
material used in training.
For example, the NextRembrandt project is an AI
module trained on the works of Dutch painter Rembrandt Harmenszoon van
It produces
‘Rembrandt’ style paintings which might be mistaken as authentic.
Non-creative modules produce other outputs
that respond to training data but are
not capable of substituting or competing with them. A program that is trained to
identify trends
and patterns in Rembrandt paintings over time, for example,
could be classified as non-creative. While both classes have significance
intellectual property rights, the scope of this article is limited to creative
GenAI and the implications of artificially generated
III IMPLICATIONS OF GENERATIVE ARTIFICIAL
INTELLIGENCE
A Implications on Artists Generally
Empirical research has identified three main concerns around the emergence of
GenAI in art production.
the use of artist’s work in GenAI training without compensation or
For many artists, the
unauthorised use of their content by GenAI companies is akin to theft, as one
online commentator wrote: ‘AI
is stealing our art to “learn”
when we don’t consent to it at
Second, is the
increased competition from GenAI art in similar markets. Outputs are typically
cheaper and faster to produce than
humanmade artworks. Since employers are
incentivised to use GenAI rather than hire human professionals, GenAI can
diminish artists’
prospects of
employment.
artists’ lack of agency over how their art style might be used. Mimicry of
style can be viewed as disrespectful
and unethical in professional practice. Use
of an artist’s style in GenAI can lead to inappropriate outputs that
conflict with
an artist’s intended philosophical
B Implications for Indigenous Artists
To determine the implications of GenAI on Indigenous artists, it is crucial
to highlight the unique ways that GenAI might interact
with protocols of ICIP.
According to leading ICIP expert Terri Janke, ICIP refers to:
Indigenous peoples’ rights to their heritage. Heritage consists of the
intangible and tangible aspects of the whole body of
cultural practices,
resources and knowledge systems developed, nurtured and refined by Indigenous
people and passed on by them as
part of expressing their cultural identity. The
heritage of an Indigenous people is a living one and includes items that may be
in the future, based on that
A key aspect of ICIP is the norms associated with Indigenous visual art and
practice. For many Indigenous artists, artmaking is a
significant cultural
practice that derives from ‘Indigenous peoples’ deep and continuing
connections to land, seas, and
all things on
The continual
practice of artmaking on country across thousands of years has resulted in
distinctive artistic styles, associated
with particular regions. For example,
dot painting broadly originates from the Central and Western desert,
cross-hatching and x-ray
paintings from Arnhem land, and Wandjina Spirit motifs
from the Kimberley Coast.
visual techniques expressed in these traditional Indigenous art styles are not
solely aesthetic devices, but are vital means
of expressing, cultivating, and
sharing cultural knowledge.
Accordingly, the production of traditional Indigenous artworks is regulated by
complex knowledge sharing protocols under Indigenous
customary law, or the
‘social and cultural norms and customs by which Indigenous communities
The emergence of GenAI represents a significant challenge for upholding
Indigenous customary law. Images of Indigenous artwork and
cultural designs have
been widely disseminated and are likely to appear in most datasets used to train
GenAI. Accordingly, GenAI
can generate outputs that imitate the aesthetics of
Indigenous art. A practical example of this occurring is demonstrated by an
by Terri Janke and Company: When the phrases ‘Aboriginal
art’ and ‘Wiradjuri’ were used as prompts into the
program Stable Diffuser, the program produced outputs which resembled the
textures and motifs of existing material found
In what follows, I will
discuss three potential ways that outputs such as those generated by this
experiment might breach customary
law through: (1) violation of permission
protocols; (2) use of artworks for inappropriate purposes; and (3) appropriation
1 Violation of Permission Protocols
Customary laws typically involve complex networks of authority and consent
processes that regulate who is privy to certain stories
In the context of
visual arts, individuals must be granted permission before they can recreate
certain patterns, styles, and designs
with associated
narratives.
The importance of
permission protocols is evidenced by the copyright case
Bulun Bulun v R &
T Textiles Pty Ltd
In this case,
a painting which contained sacred knowledge made by Ganalbingu artist Johnny
Bulun Bulun was reproduced on clothing
fabric. The unauthorised recreation had
significant cultural impact, as explained by Bulun Bulun: ‘Unauthorised
reproduction
of [Magpie Geese and Waterlilies] At the Waterhole threatens the
whole system and ways that underpin the stability and continuance
programmers input data which contains Indigenous cultural imagery without
consulting the relevant right-holders, they
circumvent the permission protocols
which regulate the dissemination of cultural knowledge. In doing so, they risk
disturbing the
complex systems that protect Indigenous heritage.
In addition to the communal harms outlined by
Bulun Bulun
unauthorised copying also impacts artists’ personal obligations. When
artists are given permission to use sacred imagery and
patterns, they become
responsible for the proper maintenance of this
Bulun Bulun
this responsibility was recognised as a fiduciary duty which obliged Bulun Bulun
‘not to exploit the artistic work in a way
that is contrary to the law and
custom of the Ganalbingu
and upon learning
of an instance of infringement to ‘take reasonable and appropriate action
to restrain and remedy the
infringement’.
of reasonable steps can include, as in
Bulun Bulun
, taking action in an
Australian court.
As such, the
applicability of existing IP regimes for protecting ICIP can be relevant to an
artist’s ability to uphold their
obligations under customary
The failure to protect traditional designs by artists can lead to personal
repercussions from community members. Inappropriate uses
of artworks by third
parties can be deemed as a failure of artists to protect sacred knowledge. This
is so even when third party
action is done without the knowledge or consent of
artists. A key illustration of this dynamic is
Milpurrurru v Indofurn Pty Ltd
Milpurrurru
In this case, designs of several Indigenous artists were reproduced, either
wholly or in part, in commercially sold carpets. Despite
the original artists
having neither authorised nor been notified of the textile reproductions, they
were still liable to face punishments,
including ostracisation from community
and revocation of their rights to reproduce images. GenAI’s capacity to
mimic traditional
patterns can undermine Indigenous artists’ ability to
protect their designs and prevent unauthorised reproduction. It thus
significant implications for artists’ personal wellbeing and connection to
2 Use of Artwork for Inappropriate Purposes
Customary law may permit those outside Indigenous communities to reproduce or
display artworks in particular contexts, whilst forbidding
it in others. In
Milpurrurru,
the recreation of artworks by the Australian National
Gallery (with consent) in educational publications was seen as valid, while
unauthorised use of designs in carpets was deemed as unacceptable. Here, the
likelihood that traditional designs would be stepped
and trodden on was an
important point of distinction.
In another case,
Yumbulul v Reserve Bank of Australia
the display
of an artwork in a public institution such as a museum was seen as acceptable,
but the reproduction of the work on currency
by the Reserve Bank was
That the use of artwork on
currency could be interpreted as a mark of respect from mainstream Australian
culture was here irrelevant.
cases demonstrate the importance of designs being treated respectfully and used
towards appropriate purposes, in accordance with
customary law.
The primary function of GenAI is to respond to user prompts, as they have
been written, and to generate an output corresponding to
their request. Many
GenAI systems include guardrails and automated filters that monitor for
‘offensive’ or ‘inappropriate’
However, these
protocols are limited in
and are typically
designed with colonial rather than Indigenous customary norms in
There have already been
instances of GenAI being utilised for denigrating purposes. In 2023, an
unofficial campaign against the plebiscite
to introduce an Indigenous voice to
Parliament produced and disseminated advertisements featuring an AI-generated
male character
with a seemingly Indigenous appearance.
The content was harshly condemned by
the official opposition
Another example from
the plebiscite campaign is the distribution of anonymous flyers containing a
digitally augmented version of
Gadigal artist Danny Eastwood’s
The flyers took the
original painting, a depiction of Uluru using dot-painting techniques, and
digitally integrated the word ‘no’
using in the same dot-painting
style. While the alteration to Eastwood’s work was done using Photoshop
rather than GenAI, the
result resembles the types of content that GenAI can
produce. The availability of GenAI makes digital manipulations more accessible
and efficient, thus increasing the likelihood that denigrating alterations will
3 Appropriation of Style
A major concern related to the rise of GenAI is an increase in style
appropriation. Style appropriation is ‘a kind of cultural
appropriation’
‘takes place when a person makes use of stylistic innovations distinctive
of a cultural group that is not her
In Indigenous
culture, style appropriation is particularly harmful as it ignores
artmaking’s vital role as a conveyor of
information.
Visual elements in
Indigenous artworks are informed by artist’s local knowledge and are
carefully applied to ensure that they
express an intended meaning. The
importance of precision in artmaking was recognised in
Milpurrurru
‘Accuracy in the portrayal of the story is of great importance.
Inaccuracy, or error in the faithful reproduction of an artwork,
can cause deep
offence to those familiar with the
When GenAI uses
Indigenous art to train its algorithms, it decontextualises visual elements from
its associated stories and generalises
its aesthetics. In doing so, it treats
Indigenous patterns as abstract aesthetics that can be mimicked and emulated at
will, ignoring
their functional purpose.
The implications of style appropriation by GenAI are particularly significant
in context of inauthentic products in the Australian
Indigenous arts industry.
The Indigenous arts industry is a major economic market, earning at least $250
million in 2019–2020.
this number, $30 million was generated from Indigenous art centres and $80
million from merchandise and consumer products predominantly
The commercialisation
of Indigenous art practice has provided positive outcomes for Indigenous
communities, providing considerable
economic opportunities for artists, and
facilitating Indigenous peoples to share aspects of their culture on their own
However, this positive
aspect has been largely undermined by the widespread dissemination of
inauthentic Indigenous art. A 2022 Productivity
Report into Aboriginal and
Torres Strait Islander Visual Arts and Crafts, found that up to 75% of
Indigenous-style consumer products
in the market are non-Indigenous
million generated by Indigenous style souvenirs, more than half came from such
inauthentic products.
introduction of GenAI into this lucrative Indigenous arts market would make the
production of non-Indigenous authored products
cheaper, and thus likely
exacerbate the problem of inauthentic products.
Notably, many recurring themes of the report – appropriation of
Indigenous designs by non-Indigenous people without compensation
or consent;
loss of income from competition of fake or inauthentic products; lack of agency
over how Indigenous styles are used –
correspond with the general concerns
around creative GenAI raised in empirical research. While the advent of GenAI
has ushered concerns
around arts exploitation into mainstream legal discourse,
these issues have long been familiar to, and commented on by, Indigenous
communities outside the digital realm. As non-Indigenous artists seek to
vocalise their concerns over arts exploitation, insights
can be gained from
engagement with Indigenous voices and the existing body of research and reform
proposals associated with inauthentic
Indigenous art.
IV PROTECTION UNDER AUSTRALIAN INTELLECTUAL PROPERTY
It is highly likely that the use of Indigenous art in GenAI constitutes a
breach of Indigenous customary law, however, this infringement
is not currently
actionable under Australian law. Indigenous artists seeking to protect ICIP
through legal action will have to consider
pathways that already exist under
Australian IP regimes. The following sections will consider the conceptual
difficulties that may
arise when relying on IP for ICIP protection, before
evaluating the effectiveness of potential options under the
A Tensions between ICIP and IP
ICIP and IP contain vastly different conceptual foundations. Anglo-Australian
approaches to IP are rooted in ‘possessive
individualism’,
notion that an individual is the ‘proprietor of his own person or
capacities, owing nothing to society for
typically assume that intellectual assets can be attributed to an
individual’s particular creative act, at a given
and seek to incentivise
such acts of creative production without stifling long-term innovation. As such,
they tend to equip right-holders
with an exclusive entitlement to use and
exploit their assets, but for a limited duration of time. While intended to
promote the
growth of human knowledge, the individualistic and temporally
limited nature of IP conflicts with Indigenous understandings of knowledge
‘part of a continuing relationship between people and their
heritage’. IP regimes are thus often considered inadequate
comprehensively protecting ICIP and can risk marginalising Indigenous interests
‘in such ways that alienate Indigenous groups
from their own
knowledge’.
The dissonances between IP and ICIP can be further elucidated through a
consideration of GenAI and its conceptualisation of data.
GenAI has a
complicated relationship to data. On one hand, data is indisputably essential to
the existence and development of GenAI:
‘Industry experts agree, data is a
fuel in the AI industry, and its importance in developing successful AI modules
overstated.’
the other hand, GenAI’s reliance on pre-existing material impacts its
claim to originality: ‘while the output of generative
AI is new, it is
also an imitation of humanmade works based on the millions of samples it is
trained upon’.
foundations in collectiveness and continuity, ICIP offers a strong, albeit
rather ironic, conceptual framework for acknowledging
the communal contributions
provided by training data. In contrast, IP’s orientation towards
individuality struggles to accommodate
competing claims on a particular work.
One strategy employed by GenAI commentators to overcome this struggle is to
appeal to naturalistic
For Petro Domingo, the use of data in training can be likened to
nature turns seeds into crops, programs are ‘grow[n]’ rather than
written. Inherent to Domingo’s metaphor
is a construction of data as an
earthly resource where, per Eric Drott, ‘training data is positioned as
the soil that nourishes
programs and that encourages their
In analogising
data as a facilitator, rather than fruit of, creative labour, naturalistic
metaphors validate the exploitation of
existing data, and minimise its authorial
contribution to outputs. Similar associations appear in the term ‘data
For Celia F Matias, the affinity between data and unrealised
natural resources insinuates that ‘to some extent, data are free
Her interpretation
resonates with the view within Big Tech that ‘the value of data lies not
in the data itself but in the extraction
of value from
The use of naturalistic language may be effective in aligning GenAI with IP,
however, its relationship to ICIP appears more sinister.
Where Domingo’s
metaphor situates humans as farmers, Indigenous informed perspectives
contextualise colonial farming in the
context of environmental degradation:
‘humans are being farmed by generative AI writing tools; this metaphor is
particularly
apt given how white man’s farming methods have homogenised,
denatured and exhausted ecosystems, soils and waterways in Australia
Moreover, the
language of extraction corresponds with Peter Drahos description of Australian
IP legislation as an ‘extractive
that is, a system
which ‘allow[s] one group (the extractor group) to obtain control of
assets belonging to a second
compensation or consent. Overall, an interrogation of the linguistics of GenAI
is helpful in exposing IP’s shortcomings
– both in its ability to
uphold ICIP and to conceptualise GenAI more broadly. Despite these limitations,
Australian IP law
does offer some viable pathways which can be applied to
protect Indigenous art. The following will consider two such avenues –
B Copyright
reproduced in particular ways, without permission from
the owner. In Australia,
‘reproduce the work in
a material form’, ‘publish the
work’ and ‘communicate the work to the
These rights are
automatic and do not require registration to be enforceable. Where a work, or a
‘substantial part’
of a work, is used in contravention of the
, infringement
occurs. Copyright infringers can be held liable to a series of civil remedies
including damages, account of profits
and injunctions. If use of artworks by
GenAI constitutes copyright infringement, artists may have legitimate and
effective pathways
to protect ICIP.
Evaluating the efficacy of copyright as a means of protecting Indigenous
artworks in the context of GenAI involves two questions:
first, whether artworks
are covered by copyright protection, and second, whether the use of artworks in
GenAI systems constitutes
a breach of copyright. These will be considered in
1 Are Artworks Copyright?
There are certain requirements and limitations that determine whether a work
is protected by copyright in Australia. Of particular
relevance to Indigenous
artworks are the requirements of ‘originality’ and
‘materiality’.
Regarding the first, copyright protects ‘original’ works produced
through ‘independent intellectual
Since a mere copy
of an existing artwork will not meet the originality requirement, Indigenous art
which replicates existing material
very closely may not be protected.
Nevertheless, works do not have to be entirely novel. Indigenous artworks that
recreate existing
traditional imagery whilst expressing an independent artistic
sensibility will satisfy
originality.
Regarding the
second, copyright protects the material expressions of ideas, not an idea
itself, and works must have a material form.
While a particular artwork may be
covered by copyright, the ideas and styles which underpin it are
Fake Indigenous art which
uses generalised aesthetics associated with Indigenous culture is unlikely to
infringe copyright unless
it directly copies a particular copyright artwork. In
addition to these requirements, copyright is limited by time and only lasts
the duration of the creator’s life plus 70
Works made outside this
temporal scope are not covered by copyright and can be copied without infringing
the act. Since Indigenous
artworks remain culturally significant throughout
time, this limitation is arguably the most detrimental to ICIP. Despite these
constrains,
cases such as
Milpurrurru
demonstrate that copyright can be
successfully applied to Indigenous artworks. Copyright law is thus a potentially
useful pathway
for protecting Indigenous artist rights.
2 Does GenAI’s Use of Artwork Constitute
Infringement?
It is generally acknowledged that GenAI developers use copyrighted material
when training modules. OpenAI, for example, has confirmed
that its training
processes utilise datasets that include copyrighted material, albeit those that
are freely available.
it remains uncertain whether the utilisation of these materials in GenAI
training involves ‘reproduction’ as
understood by the
Rita Matulionyte identifies two stages where GenAI training is likely to
involve reproduction.
compilation of materials into data sets involves a lasting duplication of works.
The LAION 5b data set used to train the
Stable Diffusion algorithm, for example,
is a collection of almost six billion images scraped from the
The compilation of
fair dealing exception, such as for
research and study. However, since these
coverage under
fair dealing is
Second, GenAI
typically requires multiple temporary copies of data to be made to facilitate
its training. Temporary copies are permitted
in some circumstances, such as
where it forms ‘a part of the technical process of making or receiving a
communication’
‘if the reproduction is incidentally made as a necessary part of a
technical process of using a copy of the
Nevertheless, per
Matulionyte, these exceptions were not designed to cover copies incurred during
AI training and are unlikely to
apply. Moreover, temporary exceptions only apply
if the initial copy is legitimate. If the compilation of datasets constitutes
infringement, temporary copying of its content will not be covered by
exceptions.
Matulionyte identifies a further two stages where infringement might occur
post-training, through user
engagement.
First, in the input
stage. As users write prompts, they can independently submit copyrighted works,
including images, for GenAI to
use in its response. For example, a user might
input an image and ask GenAI to describe what it looks like. Second, in the
While GenAI
programs are typically designed to produce ‘original’ outputs which
are distinct from its training data,
it is possible that outputs will generate
content that substantively resembles copyrighted material. This might occur if a
user prompts
GenAI to recreate works of a particular artist or requests that a
specific artwork be substantively remade with minor stylistic changes.
reproduce, copyright law has limited utility
for preventing infringements by
users and user prompts. Nevertheless, where reproductions do occur,
right-holders may be able to
seek relief on a case-by-case basis, using existing
by Matulionyte, it will likely constitute copyright infringement. As such,
artists may have effective pathways to pursue legal action
under copyright law.
B Moral Rights
An alternative source of protection under the
recognition of moral rights. Moral rights are personal rights which entitle
creators to be properly attributed to their work,
and to object to their
work’s derogatory treatment. They were introduced in Australia in 2000 and
were intended as a ‘recognition
of the importance to Australian culture of
literary, artistic, musical and dramatic works and of those who create
Moral rights
contain similar limitations as copyright – namely, the same
‘originality’ and ‘materiality’
requirements,
and temporal
confines apply.
However, unlike
date of the right’s expiry.
contains three moral rights. First, the right to
attribution, that is ‘the right to be identified, in a clear and
prominent manner, as the author of a work if an attributable act is
done with respect to the
Attributable acts
include reproduction of a work in a material
Second, the right not to
be falsely attributed,
the right to prevent others from being credited for their work. Third, the right
of integrity, that is, the right ‘not
to have the work subjected to
derogatory treatment’.
addition to these rights, the
also includes broad
exceptions to moral rights infringements. Significantly, the reasonable use
defence precludes infringements from
being found in cases that were
‘reasonable’, based on a series of
As moral rights are a relatively recent addition to Australian IP
legislation, there is limited caselaw on their application in general,
in relation to GenAI. Nevertheless, Matulionyte argues that the use of
artists’ work in GenAI training is likely
to establish prima facie cases
of infringement of the right to attribution and right to integrity.
The following will consider her
analysis in the context of Indigenous art.
1 Right of Attribution
Per Matulionyte, establishing a prima facie infringement of the right of
attribution is relatively
straightforward.
This is because
AI developers do not typically disclose the contents of datasets used, and
creators of training data are not usually
identified in any accessible way.
Since the creation of datasets includes the reproduction of works, and
reproduction is an ‘attributable
act’, the failure to disclose
authors will likely constitute infringement.
2 Right of Integrity
The relationship between GenAI and the right of integrity is more complex.
For infringement to be established, the use of works in
GenAI systems must
amount to derogatory treatment. Derogatory treatment can be established through
a number of ways, including ‘the
doing of anything else in relation to the
work that is prejudicial to the author’s reputation or
This description
is broad in scope and is intended to ‘address those instances where a work
is used in an inappropriate context
and prejudices the author’s honour or
reputation,’
unauthorised use of Indigenous art in GenAI training constitutes a breach of
customary law, it is likely that inappropriate
context could be established.
However, whether this constitutes prejudice to an artist’s reputation or
honour will depend on
judicial interpretation.
Boomerang Investments Pty Ltd v
Perram J provided
that the phrase ‘honour or reputation’
section 195AJ
‘involves two distinct concepts and it is
not a composite expression’. His honour further provided that reputation
honour should be determined objectively and subjectively,
respectively.
Perram J did not
consider ‘reputation’ in detail, however, a common definition of
‘reputation’ defines the
term as ‘the condition, quality, or
fact of being highly regarded or esteemed; credit, fame, distinction;
respectability, good
Considering that
Indigenous artists may be subjected to significant adverse treatment and
condemnation if their artwork is misappropriated,
there is a strong intuitive
argument that misuse of artworks by GenAI could establish objective prejudice to
reputation. Where this
is insufficient, subjective prejudice to honour, or a
‘personally held set of high-minded
principles’
as described
by Perram J, is also available. The unauthorised use of Indigenous art for
inappropriate purposes is often antithetical
to an artist’s cultural
obligations and personal relationships with heritage, and thus would likely
impact subjective feelings
of honour. Overall, considering the significant
extent of harm that GenAI’s use of art poses to Indigenous artists, it is
that a breach to the right to integrity could be established.
3 Reasonable Use Defence
Prime facie infringements of the right to attribution and right to integrity
will be set aside if they were found to be
reasonable.
Reasonableness is
determined based on a variety of factors including the nature and purpose of the
work, the manner and context in
which a work is used, and any relevant industry
practise, or voluntary codes of practices, in the industry in which the work was
Matulionyte argues that
infringements of the right to attribution in GenAI training would likely be
deemed reasonable. This is because
when systems use billions of works scraped
from the internet, attribution to all authors is not
As such, the right to
attribution will have limited utility for Indigenous artists. By contrast, the
relationship between infringement
to the right of integrity and reasonableness
has more scope for discussion. On one hand, it is standard industry practice to
works without seeking the consent of artists. On the other hand, considering
the significant degree of harm that is associated with
the misappropriation of
Indigenous art, Indigenous artists might still find protection through moral
C Prospect of Legislative Change
Overall, and despite the conceptual differences between IP and ICIP,
Australian copyright and moral rights offer promising pathways
for Indigenous
artists seeking to protect their art from misappropriation. However, it should
be noted that Australia contrasts with
other jurisdictions, which have more
applicable copyright exceptions. The United Kingdom, European Union and Japan,
have all introduced
legislation that excuses text and data mining
specifically.
While the United
States does not have a TDM exception, their fair use doctrine is broad and will
likely be invoked by AI developers
in copyright
Considering the
increasing domination of GenAI in society, and the overriding intention of IP
law to encourage innovation, the introduction
of change and reform to Australian
law is inevitable. As the law responds to changes in AI, care should be taken to
preserve, improve,
and create new legal pathways for protecting ICIP.
V CONCLUSION
This article has considered the complex relationships between law,
technology, and art that lie at the centre of creative GenAI. Initially
by the lack of scholarly attention on Indigenous style GenAI and its
implications for artists, it has sought to provide
broader insight into the ways
in which IP and ICIP conceive of, and respond to, creative work. Although
Indigenous peoples are likely
to be uniquely impacted by GenAI, their central
concerns with consent, respect, and proper attribution are universally relevant.
As Australian lawmakers grapple with the challenges of GenAI on IP, guidance for
reform can be found in the established principles
and procedures of ICIP.
See English Oxford Living
Dictionary (online at 16 July 2025) ‘artificial intelligence’.
Some prominent types of GenAI
modelling relevant to visual content are Generative Adversarial Networks
(‘GANS’), Recurrent
Neural Networks (‘RNNs’), and
Diffusion Models.
Celeste Shen, ‘Fair Use,
Licensing, and Authors’ Rights in the Age of Generative AI’
Northwestern Journal of Technology and Intellectual
The differentiation between
‘creative’ and ‘non-creative’ is drawn from Rita
Matulionyte, ‘Generative
AI and Copyright: Exception, Compensation or
Intellectual Property Forum
(‘Generative AI and Copyright’). A similar distinction between
‘expressive’ and ‘non-expressive’
works is raised in
Shira Perlmutter, ‘Art and Authorship: From Warhol to the Creativity
(2023) 34(1)
Australian Intellectual Property
, 15. Both sources inform the description in this article.
See Dutch Digital Design,
‘The Next Rembrandt: Bringing the Old Master Back to Life’,
(Web Page, 24 January 2018)
<https://medium.com/@DutchDigital/the-next-rembrandt-bringing-the-old-master-back-to-life-35dfb1653597>.
See Reishiro Kawakami and
Sukrit Venkatagiri, ‘The Impact of Generative AI on Artists’
(Conference Paper, Conference
on Creativity and Cognition, 23 June 2024), 79.
Insights can also be drawn from Isabella Alexander, Pat Grant, Genevieve
and Evana Wright, ‘Sketching Moral Rights’
(2024) 23(1)
Australian Intellectual Property Journal
See eg, Sohani
Goonetillake, ‘Why the AI-generated “Studio-Ghibli” Trend is
So Controversial’
(online, 3 April 2025)
<https://www.abc.net.au/news/2025-04-03/the-controversial-chatgpt-studio-ghibli-trend-explained/105125570>.
Terri Janke,
‘Managing Indigenous Knowledge and Indigenous Cultural and Intellectual
(2005) 36(2)
Australian Academic and Research
, 96 (‘Managing Indigenous Knowledge and Indigenous
Cultural and Intellectual Property’).
Terri Janke,
Tracks: Respecting Indigenous Knowledge and Culture
Publishing, 2021) 23 (‘
True Tracks
See ‘Aboriginal Art
Still in Style After 60,000 Years’,
Artlandish Aboriginal Art
<https://www.aboriginal-art-australia.com/aboriginal-art-library/aboriginal-art-styles/?srsltid=AfmBOoqcNIn-MJzdIfeVqMI8N52OIti9rSS3cIVvZwJlsKgbUtecSvpYtran>.
Marie Hadley and Clara
Klemski, ‘Art Law and Policy in Australia and the Appropriation of
Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander
Art Styles’
(2022) 25(1)
Media and Arts Law Review
Janke, ‘Managing
Indigenous Knowledge and Indigenous Cultural and Intellectual Property’ (n
Emma Fitch et al,
‘The New Frontier: Artificial Intelligence, Copyright and Indigenous
Terri Janke and Company
(Blog Post, 30 November 2023)
<https://www.terrijanke.com.au/post/the-new-frontier-artificial-intelligence-copyright-and-indigenous-culture>.
Hadley and Klemski (n 14)
Bulun Bulun v R & T
Textiles Pty Ltd
[1998] FCA 1082
(1998) 86 FCR 244
Bulun Bulun
Hadley and Klemski (n 14)
Bulun Bulun
Of course, pursuing legal
action in an Australian court will not necessarily be relevant for customary
law. The significance of
court proceedings on customary obligations will depend
on the customary laws which are impacted, and the methods for regulating
[1994] FCA 975
(1994) 54 FCR 240
Milpurrurru
[1991] FCA 332
(1991) 21 IPR 481.
See eg OpenAI safety
practices ‘Open AI Safety Update’
(Web Page, 21 May
2024) < https://openai.com/index/openai-safety-update/>.
Efficacy is impacted by
algorithmic limitations or ‘jailbreaking’ (when limitations are
removed) see Fiona Fui-Hoon
Nah et al, ‘Generative AI and ChatGPT:
Applications, Challenges, and AI-Human Collaboration’ (2023) 25
Journal of Information Technology Case and Application
However, there is growing
awareness of the risks of AI for ICIP in discussions around AI guardrails. See
eg Australian Government
Department of Industry, Science and Resources,
‘Safe and Responsible AI in Australia: Proposals Paper for Introducing
Guardrails for AI in High-Risk Settings’ (Proposals Paper, 5
September 2024)
<https://storage.googleapis.com/converlens-au-industry/industry/p/prj2f6f02ebfe6a8190c7bdc/page/proposals_paper_for_introducing_mandatory_guardrails_for_ai_in_high_risk_settings.pdf>.
See Josh Butler,
‘Unofficial Indigenous Voice No Campaigner Defends use of AI-generated Ads
on Facebook’
The Guardian
(online article, 7 August 2023)
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2023/aug/07/indigenous-voice-to-parliament-no-campaign-ai-facebook-ads>.
See Pat McGrath, Michael
Workman and Kevin Nguyen, ‘Aboriginal Artist’s Painting Being Used
to Spread False Claims about
Voice to Parliament Referendum’
(online, 20 July 2023)
<https://www.abc.net.au/news/2023-07-20/voice-to-parliament-misinformation-flyers/102621334>.
Julian Dodd, ‘Style
Appropriation, Intimacy, and Expressiveness’ (2021) 761(3)
Journal of Aesthetics
Hadley and Klemski (n 14)
Milpurrurru
Australian Government
Productivity Commission, ‘Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander Visual
Arts and Crafts’ (Study
Report, 13 December 2022) 2.
Ibid. See also Colin Golvan
‘Aboriginal Art and the Protection of Indigenous Cultural Rights’
[1992] AboriginalLawB 26
(1992) 1(56)
Aboriginal Law Bulletin
Australian Government
Productivity Commission (n 40).
Eric Drott,
‘Copyright, Compensation, and Commons in the Music AI Industry’
(2021) 14(2)
Creative Industries Journal
C B Macpherson,
Political Theory of Possessive Individualism (Hobbes to Locke)
University Press, 1962) 3.
See Michael
Intellectual Property
(Oxford University Press, 2007)
True Tracks
(n 12) 261.
Rita Matulionyte,
‘Can AI Infringe Moral Rights of Authors and Should We Do Anything about
It? An Australian Perspective’
(2023) 15(1)
Law, Innovation and
129 (‘Can AI Infringe Moral Rights of
Shen (n 3) 161.
Pedro Domingos, ‘A
Few Useful Things to Know about Machine Learning’ (2012) 55
Association
for Computing Machinery
Drott (n 46) 199.
Célia F Matias,
‘Generative AI, Copyright and Emancipation: The Case of Digital Art’
(2024) 6(3)
Law, Technology and Humans
Saliltorn Thongmeensuk,
‘Rethinking Copyright Exceptions in the Era of Generative AI: Balancing
Innovation and Intellectual
Property Protection’
Journal of World Intellectual Property
Lucinda McKnight and Cara
Shipp, ‘“Just a Tool”? Troubling Language and Power in
Generative AI Writing’
(2024) 23(1)
English Teaching: Practice and
Intellectual Property, Indigenous People and Their
(Cambridge University Press, 2014) 1.
s 31(1)(b).
Mary Wyburn,
‘Protecting the Works of Indigenous Artists under Copyright Law and at Its
(2012) 86(12)
Australian Law Journal
IceTV Pty Ltd v Nine
Network Australia Pty Ltd
[2009] HCA 14
(2009) 239 CLR 458.
Milpurrurru
Wyburn (n 61) 832.
Section 33.
‘Comment Regarding
Request for Comments on Intellectual Property Protection for Artificial
Intelligence Innovation Docket
No. PTO–C–2019–0038’
(Request for Comments, 2019) cited in Thongmeensuk (n 55) 281.
Matulionyte,
‘Generative AI and Copyright’ (n 4).
Christoph Schuhmann et al,
LAION-5B: An Open Large-Scale Dataset for Training Next Generation Image-Text
Models (Conference Paper,
Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems,
28 November 2022) <https://doi.org/10.48550/arXiv.2210.08402>.
Ibid s 43 B.
Matulionyte,
‘Generative AI and Copyright’ (n 4).
Commonwealth, Parliamentary
Debates, House of Representatives, 8 December 1999, 13026 (Daryl Williams,
Attorney-General) cited in
Alexander et al (n 6) 5.
Ibid s 195AM.
Ibid s 193.
Ibid s 194.
Ibid s 195AC.
Ibid s 195AI.
Ibid ss 195AR,
Matulionyte, ‘Can AI
Infringe Moral Rights of Authors’ (n 50).
(Moral Rights) Bill 1999
Revised Explanatory Memorandum [44]–[46]
Cited in Ibid 133.
[2020] FCA 535
(2020) 383 ALR 202
Boomerang Investments
Ibid [400].
Oxford English Dictionary
(online at 16 July 2025) ‘reputation’.
Investments
(n 87) 286 [400].
ss 195AR, 195AS.
Matulionyte, ‘Can AI
Infringe Moral Rights of Authors’ (n 50) 137.
See Matias (n 54) 126.
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (268 KB)
PDF format (322 KB)
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter