URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/journals/CICrimJust/2017/20.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 14:50:21
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Segrave, Marie; Burnett-Wake, Cathrine --- "Addressing Family Violence Through Visa Sponsor Checks: A Step in the Right Direction?" [2017] CICrimJust 20; (2017) 29(2) Current Issues in Criminal Justice 155
Contemporary Comment
Addressing Family Violence through Visa Sponsor Checks:
A Step in the Right Direction?
Marie Segrave
and Cathrine
Burnett-Wake
In 2017, the
Migration Amendment (Family Violence and Other Measures) Bill
(Cth) was reintroduced. The Bill proposes to mandate character checks for
people seeking to sponsor family visa applications and
to refuse sponsorship
applications on grounds of conviction for various offences relating to abuse and
family violence. With reference
to the Senate Legal and Constitutional Affairs
References Committee inquiry into the Bill, this comment outlines the current
sponsoring requirements, and identifies the implications, impact and
limitations of the proposed measures, exploring whether they
will in fact offer
protection from family violence experienced by women without permanent status
in, or outside of, Australia.
migration – regulation – visa –
sponsorship – family violence
Introduction
In early 2016, the Turnbull Government introduced the
Migration Amendment
(Family Violence and Other Measures) Bill 2016
(Cth) (‘Migration Amendment
a piece of legislation that seeks to mandate character
checks for anyone seeking to sponsor a family visa application (Minister for
Immigration and Border Protection (‘MIBP’) 2016). This Bill aims to
ensure that the Department of Immigration and Border
Protection (‘the
Department’) can ‘refuse sponsorship applications in circumstances
where the sponsor has convictions
for pedophilia, other offences against
children or offences relating to violence’ (MIBP 2016). The amendment to
the legislation
follows the commitment in the Second National Plan to Reduce
Violence against Women and their Children, Action Item 11, to require
‘additional information disclosure by the Australian husband or
fiancé applying for an overseas spouse visa’ (Department
Services (‘DSS’) 2013, p. 25). On 17 March 2016 the Bill was
referred to the Senate Legal and Constitutional
Affairs Legislation Committee
(‘the Committee’) for inquiry and report; however, due to the
dissolution of the Parliament
for the 2016 election in July, the Inquiry lapsed.
In the wake of the re-election of the Turnbull Government, the Bill was
re-introduced
into the Senate in September 2016 and the Committee’s
Inquiry was reopened briefly for additional submissions. In total,
submissions were made over the two time periods. The Report of the
Committee endorsed the Bill, with one dissenting position (Legal
Constitutional Affairs Legislation Committee 2016). While at the time of writing
it remains a Bill, it is important to note that
alongside this legislation the
Migration Legislation Amendment (2016 Measures No 3) Regulation 2016
(Cth) was processed on 1 September 2016. This amendment pre-empts the Bill,
putting in place a number of the processes attached to
the Migration Amendment
Bill regarding sponsor checks, as we detail below. At the time of the
re-introduction of the Bill the Minister
for Women, Senator Michaelia Cash,
stated that the Bill is an important step toward protecting women and children
against the very
real threat of family violence (MIBP 2016). This comment
identifies some of the implications and the impact of these measures, in
particular considering whether this legislation offers protection in the context
of family violence experienced by women without
permanent status in Australia or
outside of Australia.
Migrant women, family violence and partner visa applications
Accurate statistics on culturally and linguistically diverse
(‘CALD’) women and family violence are not easily obtainable
state, territory or national level. The absence of data in this area was noted
recently in the Victorian Royal Commission into
Family Violence Report (2016,
volume VIII, p. 145), which identified that ‘improving the data capture
and quality of information
in relation to ... CALD communities’ (among
other key communities) should be a priority. What is well known is that intimate
partner and family violence in CALD communities requires dedicated and specific
responses tailored to the unique needs and situations
of CALD women and their
children. It is also critical to attend to the migration status of CALD women.
This was highlighted by recent
research in Victoria, undertaken as part of the
Review of the Family Violence Risk Assessment & Risk Management Framework
Final Report (McCulloch et al. 2016), following the
Victorian Royal Commission into Family Violence, which noted that migration
is one of two important risk factors for CALD women (McCulloch et al.
2016). More specifically, temporary migration is a particular
vulnerability. Temporary migration status is broad and applies to women who are
seeking asylum, those who have a provisional
partner-related visa (for example,
Partner (Provisional and Migrant) visa [subclass 309 100]), but also includes
those who have come
to Australia on a student visa or a tourist visa, for
example, who during their time in Australia have formed a relationship. Our
focus here is those who are partner visa applicants and/or those who plan to
apply for a partner visa.
Partner visa applications can be made onshore or offshore. Since the early
1990s the number of migrants (this includes offshore and
onshore applicants)
applying for partner visas has increased significantly, reaching 47,825 in
2014–15 (DIBP 2015, p. 19).
Of these, the majority are offshore applicants
(n=28,768 or 60 per cent). The current provisions require the applicant to
his or her application with the named sponsor agreeing to support the
holder of the visa to the extent necessary while that person
is a visa holder
(that is, during the two-year waiting period until he or she can apply for
permanent residency). Currently this
is an undertaking that carries no legal
weight if the person is non-compliant. Specifically, reg 1.20 of the the
Migration Regulations 1994
Regulations
’) obliges family sponsors to adequately maintain and
accommodate the visa applicant for a period of two years (dating from
of the visa or the applicant’s first entry into Australia, whereby after
two years he or she is eligible to apply
for permanent residency). Clause 9(3)
of the Migration Amendment Bill proposes to impose
enforceable
obligations on sponsors. If these obligations extend to a financial requirement
to be satisfied by the sponsor, it is plausible
that some families will be
prevented from being united. This has been seen in the United Kingdom
(‘UK’), in the case
MM, Abdul Majid and Shabana Jave
v Secretary of State for the Home Office
[2013] EWHC 1900 (Admin)
, which was
presided over by the UK High Court. The Court held the financial requirement as
disproportionate interference with family
life, and this case law may be used as
authority if mounting a challenge here in Australia if (or when) this
legislation is implemented.
It is also worth noting that in situations where
children are attached as secondary applicants to partner visas the sponsor is
required to provide a police check. This is not the focus here.
When an application is made onshore, the applicant will be granted a bridging
visa. The bridging visa comes into effect once the substantive
visa ceases. The
bridging visa allows the applicant to remain lawfully in Australia while
awaiting the decision of the Department.
An unknown percentage of applicants,
onshore and offshore, are in the process of applying for a partner visa with a
sponsor who is
already abusing them. This discussion is focused on this group:
those who do not yet have a temporary partner visa or permanent residency
Historically there has been awareness and recognition regarding family
violence and the vulnerability of women who are sponsored by
citizens. These concerns date from the 1980s and 1990s. For example, in a
Parliamentary Research Service Background Paper
published in 1992, Millbank
noted that:
Serial sponsorship has emerged as a problem because of claims of violence in
these relationships, and failure to provide maintenance
for former spouses and
children. While the numbers of serial sponsors may be small (estimates range
from 50 to a few hundred), the
issue has been highly publicised, including,
recently, on Couchman Over Australia (ABC Television, 15 July 1992).
‘Serial Sponsorship’
has to an extent become synonymous with
domestic violence, and the perception that the immigration program is being used
some Australian men with a series of women to be exploited or abused
has caused considerable concern and outrage, particularly amongst
and ethnic organisations. Coverage of the issue in the overseas (Manila) press
has also raised concern that the problem
has damaged Australia’s image
overseas. The issue is now of public concern and there is an expectation, within
the media, State
Governments and the broader community that the Commonwealth
Government will ‘do something’ to address it (Millbank 1992,
The work of Iredale (1994) with women from Asian nations and support workers
also noted that repeat sponsorship was a common phenomenon
and that repeat
sponsors demonstrated a high level of perpetration of various forms of domestic
violence. In July 1994, the Minister
for Immigration announced changes in
government policy which sought to better identify and monitor so-called
‘serial sponsors’,
although at the time it did not go as far as to
potential sponsors of spouses/fiances to formally disclose
domestic violence and assault records as ‘the Government felt that
were too many difficulties with endorsing such a legalistic approach and that
there was a need to strike a balance between
the rights of individuals to
marriage and the protection of individuals from the consequences of their own
actions’ (Iredale
1994, p. 563). As part of the suite of reforms
implemented, the
Migration Regulations
were amended to provide for a
‘family violence exception’ that enabled temporary partner visa
holders to access permanent
residency in circumstances where the relationship
with their sponsor had ceased due to family violence. Despite these changes,
continued to be raised in relation to intimate partner and family
violence within the context of women having temporary migration
status continued
to be raised (see, for example, Cunneen & Stubbs 2002 regarding homicide in
this context).
The Commonwealth protections for partner visa applicants in Australia, and
some other visa holders who experience family violence,
known as the
‘family violence provisions’ remain in placed and importantly are
accessible only to those on specific family
or business stream visas (DIBP
Relevant family
violence is defined in the
Migration Regulations
reg 1.21(1). The
Family Law Legislation Amendment (Family Violence and Other Measures) Act
(Cth) defines and expands the meaning of ‘family
violence’. These amendments inserted a new s 4AB into the
(Cth). Specifically, reg 1.23 outlines family violence must have
occurred while the spousal or de facto relationship existed between
the alleged
perpetrator and his or her spouse. In order to access family violence provisions
within the regulations the Department
must first be satisfied that the applicant
and the sponsor meet the definition of spouse or de facto partner, that is that
the relationship
is genuine and also has been in place for some time
Migration Regulations
regs 1.15A and 1.09A). Assuming the Department is
satisfied there is a genuine
relationship,
and it has been
established that family violence occurred while the relationship was in tact
(that is, that the violence did not
occur after the relationship had broken
down) then family violence provisions can be accessed. The practical effect of
this requirement
is that if the Department deems the relationship is not
genuine, or if the relationship has already ceased, subsequent family violence
is irrelevant for immigration purposes, and the victim has no grounds for a
permanent visa.
Senator Michaelia Cash and Peter Dutton, then Minister for Immigration and
Border Protection, in a joint media release relating to
this proposed Bill
outlined that family violence cases amounted to two per cent of the program
(MIBP 2016). These provisions are
being accessed in greater numbers every year.
In 2015–16, 529 successful applications to access the family violence
were made, compared to 458 claims made the previous year (MIBP 2016).
It is a matter of record that the Department’s own statistics
that only a very small percentage of visa holders are victims of family
violence. However, in part, the introduction of
the Bill is effectively aiming
to reduce this by reducing the number of applicants via refusing sponsorship
applications. This, as
the Minister identified, is driven by a commitment to
‘implementing policies to keep women arriving in Australia safe from
violence’ (MIBP 2016). This expectation and understanding that preventing
some sponsors being approved will protect women was
reflected in the details
provided in the Second Action Plan, with regards to specifically targeting
overseas spouse and fiancé
visa applicants in terms of meeting a
recognised gap in the provision of information about support services in
Australia and ensuring
that they are not supported to come to Australia to marry
a sponsor who fails the character check (see DSS 2013, p. 25) — a
shift from the position held in 1994. This discussion focuses specifically on
the details of the amendment proposed to bring
Background to the amendment
As indicated in the introduction, while the Committee review process was
interrupted by the dissolution of parliament for the federal
election and the
Bill was reintroduced in September 2016, immediate changes to the
Legislation Amendment (2016 Measures No 3) Regulation 2016
(Cth) were made
in September 2016 which put in place limitations on approval of sponsorship for
prospective marriage and partner
This has given the
Department/Minister the power to request a criminal record check from the
sponsor and for that record to form
the basis of a refusal of an application.
These powers have effectively brought forward the ability for the Department to
the sponsor, however the proposed legislation will enable the police
check to be a requirement for all sponsors
an application is
submitted. According to the Minister’s office, it will ensure that the
grounds for refusal are unambiguous
and thus make the legislation tighter and
more difficult for a decision to be challenged in the Administrative Appeals
and it will override aspects of the Privacy Act to enable the
Department to share with the potential applicant the sponsor’s
record history, and thus the reasoning for the decision to refuse (as explained
in personal communication with Ministerial
office 15 September 2016).
We argue that the changes to the
Migration Regulations
commitment to realising this legislation in its current form, which preceded the
Legal and Constitutional Affairs Legislation
Committee report recommendation.
This change, as the Australian National University College of Law Migration
Program (‘ANUCLMP’)
noted, ‘represent[s] a fundamental change
to Australia’s family migration program with consequences extending beyond
family violence’ (2016, p. 2). While the reform is in line with the
COAG commitment to increased scrutiny of sponsors in the
visa application
process, it is also in direct contradiction with the Australian Law Reform
Commission’s (‘ALRC’)
Family Violence and Commonwealth
Laws — Improving Legal Frameworks
report, which, after consideration
of the potential for a separate sponsorship criterion or process, concluded:
The ALRC reiterates its view expressed in Equality Before the Law, that the
‘Australian government has a special responsibility
to immigrant women who
are particularly vulnerable to abuse and the consequences of abuse’
(p100). Rather than instituting
a separate criterion for sponsorship, the ALRC
considers that the safety of victims of family violence can be promoted through
education and information dissemination (ALRC, cited in Border Cross
Observatory 2016, p. 2).
Of the 14 public submission made to the Committee regarding this Bill ten
(ALRC, FECCA, MIA, IARC, LCA, ANUCMLP, SCA, Monash &
InTouch, AWAVA, McAuley
and WLSNSW) made direct reference to the ALRC report and recommendations, and
specifically to the recommendation
above, and endorsed the ALRC’s 2011
position. In total, 11 of the submissions were opposed to the measures
introduced in the
Migration Amendment Bill. Of the other three, the DIBP
endorsed the Bill, the Office of the Australian Information Commissioner simply
noted the legal issues pertaining to privacy that would require further
clarification, while the ALRC referred to its 2011 report
without further
comment. In the discussion below we bring to the fore some of the intersecting
concerns raised across all of the
submissions, but also point to the importance
of recognising the broader and complex context of intimate partner and family
as it impacts temporary migrant women. Our concern here is that policy
is being made without consideration or consultation with women
and/or agencies
who support women who are are directly affected by this change.
Key considerations
The full spectrum of concerns raised across the submissions go beyond the
three specific issues we focus on below: the administrative
implementing amendment to the partner visa process, the variable impact on
offshore and onshore applicants and the extent
to which such a measure is going
to accomplish the aim of protecting women from family violence. Indeed there
are, as some of the
submissions note, other critical issues worthy of closer
examination. They include the potential breach of Australia’s
international
obligations with regard to not interfering in interpersonal
relationships and issues of fairness (and the differential interference
personal relationships when they involve a non-citizen and a citizen or
permanent resident). Also of note are concerns regarding
the rights of the
sponsor to privacy protection and the impact of the sharing refused sponsor
applicant’s criminal history
with the named partner visa applicant and
other parties. Both New South Wales (see Wangman 2017) and the UK (see
Fitz-Gibbon &
Walklate 2017) have moved much further on revoking privacy
rights for perpetrators in relation to family and intimate partner violence
disclosure schemes.
Does a sponsor check really identify family violence risk?
Numerous significant administrative implications arise from the proposed
changes. Currently sponsors are not subject to a police check
unless children
are involved in the application, but under the amendments,
will be subject to this check. The administrative burden of this is not
insignificant, and the impact of processing delays
has been predicted to be
substantial. This is, in part, because refusing an application will not be
determined by the presence or
absence of a violent criminal offence, but will be
a discretionary decision whereby ‘the Department will have to consider a
range of factors including the length of the relationship, the type of offence
and how recently it occurred, the relevance of the
offence to the family
relationship and any other mitigating circumstances’ (MIBP 2016).
The second implication is the limitations of a sponsor check process. Family
violence issues are not solely dealt with via criminal
current framework introduces a check for criminal offences, intervention orders
and family safety notices
(as they exist in various iterations across Australian
states and territories) are not criminal offences and they will not be
in a police check that individuals can access via state/national
police unless the intervention order has been breached (correspondence
Victoria Police 13 September 2016). There is no clarity regarding how the
criminal history of an Australian permanent resident
or citizen who has resided
overseas for any length of time will be included in this (Federation of Ethnic
Communities’ Councils
of Australia (‘FECCA’) 2016, p. 2).
Arguably this measure will, at best, capture serious, serial offenders, but it
protects migrant women from these offenders (while also ensuring these
women do not access this visa route to permanent residency
in Australia).
Variable impact on offshore and onshore applicants
Many onshore applicants will be living with their proposed partner visa
sponsors at the time of the application. What risks are posed
to women in
situations where the decision by the Department is to refuse approval for a
sponsor? There is a very real and informed
concern that this new
‘sponsorship framework may create further barriers to those already
experiencing FV [family violence]
and leave them more vulnerable’ (FECCA
2016, p. 3), and that it may ‘deter applicants from disclosing a serious
(including family and domestic violence)’ (Immigration Advice
& Rights Centre (‘IARC’) 2016, p. 3). Such concerns
supported by the findings of the Victorian Royal Commission into Family Violence
(‘VRCFV’) (2016) regarding immigration
status and impact on women
and other research (McCulloch et al. 2016). There seems to be no consideration
of the impact on applicants
is not approved. As the
ANUCLMP noted, for intended applicants the consequence may be that they are
subsequently ‘liable for
a visa cancellation [and] unless the person can
make an application for another visa, they would be liable for detention and
from Australia’ (2016, p. 6). Many women are dependent on their
partners because of their own migration status and related
visa conditions (for
example, women who are in Australia on a tourist visa or a student visa) which
may impact, for example, their
ability to work and/or to access child support if
they leave the relationship because they are not permanent residents and have no
formal process for accessing the family violence provisions (see Segrave 2017).
These concerns suggest the potential outcomes are
at odds with the intention and
claimed benefit of the Migration Amendment Bill and the broader national
commitment to reducing violence
against women and children (IARC 2016). Indeed,
the Coalition against Trafficking in Women Australia (‘CATWA’)
notes ‘with “unease” the characterization of the
Bill as improving management of family violence’ and argues
measure fails to recognise that:
a migrant woman who has already experienced harm from the sponsor in question
will be left without recourse to the legal remedies
and support services that
she would otherwise be afforded had the application been processed. It is
equally problematic to assume
that the abusive nature of the relationship will
end merely because the sponsor’s application has been refused (CATWA 2016,
We emphasise that this amendment does not equate to protection, for potential
migrants or newly arrived migrants. At best it will
prevent serious and
identified offenders from sponsoring new partners. This in and of itself is not
insignificant. However, the system
is designed in a way that is not about
protection. In fact, it
women from accessing permanent status in
Australia. It is clear that in situations where a woman’s migration status
is temporary
and her partner’s status is permanent, that the partner has
significant power (see McCulloch et al. 2016; DIBP 2016) and in
some ways this
women, safety and protection will never
be achieved without permanent residency.
A further issue, as mentioned, is that this proposed change will directly
target offshore applicants who apply for approximately 60
per cent of the
partner visas lodged. The implementation of the Migration Amendment Bill as it
currently stands will push a further
majority of partner visa applications
offshore. The Bill is explicit that a partner visa cannot be lodged prior to the
related sponsorship
being approved. It is assumed that there will be some
mechanism in place for those arriving on a 300 prospective partner visa, which
will bypass the need for the Sponsor to be approved for a second time for the
820 partner visa.
However, all of those on other temporary visas looking to apply onshore will be
faced with the almost certain likelihood that the
sponsorship approval would not
be completed prior to their substantive visa expiring (as there is no evidence
or indication to the
contrary). This would result in them being forced to depart
Australia to apply for a partner visa offshore. There is no access to
violence provisions for offshore applicants. This raises an interesting question
of why, if the current government is committed
to reduce violence against women
and their children, would it force them to apply outside of Australia where they
cannot access family
violence provisions?
For offshore applicants there are other considerations, but not least of
these is to challenge the assumption that abuse requires
the perpetrator to be
in the same geographical location as the victim survivor. It is not uncommon for
Australian citizen or permanent
resident men to enter into relationships with
women overseas, and have a child who has resulted in the relationship. Although
child was born and resides overseas, he or she is entitled to citizenship by
descent or possibly a child visa to enter Australia.
Under the current system,
such mothers would be able to apply for a partner visa without issue even if the
sponsor had a criminal
record, such as the Migration Amendment Bill is trying to
highlight. If these women are experiencing family violence, and even if
sponsor is a serial perpetrator, they could still come to Australia with their
Australian citizen or permanent resident child
and have access to family
violence protections upon arrival. Under the proposed Bill, these women will
never have access to family
violence protections if they are unable to access
permanent residency independent of their partner. This means that these
could result in women remaining in situations of family violence with
little to no hope of escaping the abuse.
In addition, there are significant impacts of the delays described above for
families that are already separated, including financial
and emotional stress
for partners and children involved in the wait which has consequences for
Australia’s commitment to upholding
Convention on the Rights of the
. Article 3 of the Convention requires the best interests of the child
to be a primary consideration and that appropriate legislative
administrative measures reflect this. The implementation of the Migration
Amendment Bill would, in effect, prevent a child from
accessing the protection
necessary for his or her wellbeing due to possible forced separation from one
parent as that parent must
depart Australia for visa processing, or because the
child is prevented from being granted a visa as his or her Australian permanent
resident parent has a criminal record.
An alternative way forward
There is a need to consider the collateral damage that can be created via
migration regimes that are intended to protect, but which
are developed and
implemented in the absence of any recognition of the migrant women’s lives
and/or their priorities, particularly
in relation to the importance of gaining
the security of permanent residency in Australia for themselves and, in many
their children. We know there are many complex reasons why women stay
in situations of family violence, and there are myriad social,
economic and
other pressures that contribute to these decisions that are specific to women
whose migration status is uncertain (see
Tually et al. 2008; McCulloch et al.
2016; Segrave 2017).
There was majority support in the submissions to implement the ALRC’s
2011 recommendations. It is not clear why the recommendations
have been ignored
and the decision made to follow the path of sponsor-focused changes. Arguably
the Migration Amendment Bill represents
the challenges we continue to face when
well-meaning legal change is developed that is not informed by the complexity of
women’s lives. We hope that the concerns raised about this Bill do
not come to fruition and we hope equally that, if and when
they do, we have a
legislature ready to accept that critical amendments must be made.
MM, Abdul Majid and Shabana Jave v Secretary of State for the Home
[2013] EWHC 1900 (Admin)
Legislation
Family Law Act 1975
Family Law Legislation Amendment (Family Violence and Other Measures) Act
Migration Amendment (Family Violence and Other Measures) Bill 2016
Migration Legislation Amendment (2016 Measures No 3) Regulation 2016
Migration Regulations 1994
Australian Law Reform Commission (ALRC) 2016, Submission No 1 to the Senate
Legal and Constitutional Affairs References Committee,
Inquiry into the
Migration Amendment (Family Violence and Other Measures) Bill 2016
2016, viewed 9 November 2017, http://www.aph.
gov.au/DocumentStore.ashx?id=b3ffce46-ef1a-43bc-a50b-95cd06940079&subId=411171.
Australian National University College of Law Migration Law Program 2016,
Submission No 8 to the Senate Legal and Constitutional Affairs
Committee, Inquiry into the
Migration Amendment (Family Violence and Other
Measures) Bill 2016
, 14 April 2016, viewed 9 November
http://www.aph.gov.au/DocumentStore.ashx?id=1d602097-f284-4939-9f5d-4ce255106a8e&
subId=412380.
Australian Women against Violence Alliance (AWAVA) 2016, Submission No
12 to the Senate Legal and Constitutional Affairs References
Committee, Inquiry
Migration Amendment (Family Violence and Other Measures) Bill 2016
October 2016, viewed 9 November 2017, http://www.aph.gov.au/
DocumentStore.ashx?id=58bf68d6-a98c-478e-97e3-8d79a1aa1bb1&subId=414461.
Border Cross Observatory, InTouch Multicultural Centre against Family
Violence and Monash Gender and Family Violence Program 2016,
Submission No 11 to
the Senate Legal and Constitutional Affairs References Committee, Inquiry into
Migration Amendment (Family Violence and Other Measures) Bill 2016
October 2016, viewed 9 November
2017, http://www.aph.gov.au/DocumentStore.ashx
?id=347c4b7d-e6b5-4b22-a7b9-d186d2ce554a&subId=414437.
Coalition against Trafficking in Women Australia (CATWA)
2016, Submission No 2 to the Senate Legal and Constitutional Affairs
Committee, Inquiry into the
Migration Amendment (Family Violence and
Other Measures) Bill 2016
, 6 April 2016, viewed 9 November 2017,
http://www.aph.gov.
au/DocumentStore.ashx?id=8c6fb8be-dc8e-4e74-b7e4-3bdf86517ad4&subId=411831.
Cunneen, C & Stubbs, J 2002, ‘Migration, political economy and
violence against women: the post immigration experiences
of Filipino women in
Australia’, in EJ Freilich, G Newman, SG Shoham & M Addad (eds.),
Migration, culture conflict and crime
, Ashgate Publishing, Aldershot, pp.
Department of Immigration and Border Protection (DIBP) 2015, 2
migration programme report: programme year to 30 June 2015
, Canberra.
Department of Immigration and Border Protection (DIBP) 2016, Submission No 3
to the Senate Legal and Constitutional Affairs References
Committee, Inquiry
Migration Amendment (Family Violence and Other Measures) Bill 2016
2016, viewed 9 November 2017, http://www.aph.gov.au/Document
Store.ashx?id=c577d37f-eb27-484d-9bbc-b7d03b1a4bcf&subId=412097.
Department of Immigration and Border Protection (DIBP) 2017,
— family violence provisions
, viewed 7 November 2017,
https://www.border.gov.au/about/corporate/information/fact-sheets/
38domestic#b.
Department of Social Services (DSS) 2013, Department of Social Services
second action plan 2013–2016 — moving ahead —
of the national
plan to reduce violence against women and their children 2010–2022,
Canberra, viewed 9 November 2017,
https://www.dss.gov.au/sites/default/files/documents/
06_2014/sap_updated_26june.pdf.
Federation of Ethnic Communities’ Councils of Australia (FECCA) 2016,
Submission No 4 to the Senate Legal and Constitutional
Affairs References
Committee, Inquiry into the
Migration Amendment (Family Violence and Other
Measures) Bill 2016
, 11 April 2016, viewed 9 November
2017, http://www.aph.gov.au/DocumentStore.ashx?id=e204d92e-37b7-4ac5-93c2-57a828629
be1&subId=412120.
Fitz-Gibbon, K & Walklate, S 2017, ‘The efficacy of Clare’s
Law in Domestic violence law reform in England and
Criminology and Criminal Justice
, vol. 17, no. 3, pp.
Immigration Advice & Rights Centre (IARC) 2016, Submission No 7 to the
Senate Legal and Constitutional Affairs References Committee
2016, Inquiry into
Migration Amendment (Family Violence and Other Measures) Bill 2016
2016, viewed 9 November 2017, http://www
.aph.gov.au/DocumentStore.ashx?id=6f91326f-7659-4e46-897a-d5e3198fa820&subId=412274.
Iredale, R 1994, ‘Patterns of spouse/fiance sponsorship to
Australia’,
Asian and Pacific Migration Journal
, vol. 3, no. 4, pp.
Law Council of Australia 2016, Submission No 9 to the Senate Legal and
Constitutional Affairs References Committee, Inquiry into the
Amendment (Family Violence and Other Measures) Bill 2016
18 April 2016, viewed 9 November
http://www.aph.gov.au/DocumentStore.ashx?
id=8cded603-1b4c-4e5b-8667-1e1950e210eb&subId=412485.
Legal and Constitutional Affairs Legislation Committee 2016,
Amendment (Family Violence and Other Measures) Bill 2016
[Provisions], October
2016, viewed 9 November 2017,
http://www.aph.gov.au/Parliamentary_Business/Committees/Senate/Legal_and_Constitutional_Affairs/MigrationFamilyViolence/Report.
McAuley Community Services for Women 2016, Submission No 13 to the
Senate Legal and Constitutional Affairs References Committee, Inquiry
Migration Amendment (Family Violence and Other Measures) Bill 2016
, 6 October
2016, viewed 9 November 2017, http://www.aph.gov.au/
DocumentStore.ashx?id=c75feb22-3558-49b1-a43b-b3ac1b209e1d&subId=414539.
McCulloch, J, Maher, J, FitzGibbon, K, Segrave, M & Roffee, J 2016,
‘Review of the Family Violence Risk Assessment
and Risk Management
Framework (CRAF) final report’, Monash University, Melbourne.
Migration Institute of Australia 2016, Submission No 5 to the Senate Legal
and Constitutional Affairs References Committee, Inquiry
Amendment (Family Violence and Other Measures) Bill 2016
, 11 April 2016, viewed
9 November 2017, http://www.aph.gov.au/DocumentStore.ashx?id=
d3b113ea-fb81-4866-8101-cbd34045d002&subId=412124.
Millbank, A 1992, ‘Sponsorship of spouses and fiancees into
Australia’, Parliamentary Research Service Background Paper
Canberra, viewed 9 November 2017, https://www.aph.gov.au/binaries/
library/pubs/bp/1992/92bp25.pdf.
Minister for Immigration and Border Protection (MIBP) 2016, ‘Partner
and family visa checks to address family violence’,
Press release, 1
September 2016, viewed 9 November 2017,
http://www.minister.border.gov.au/peterdutton/Pages/Partner-and-Family-Visa-Checks.aspx.
Office of the Australian Information Commissioner 2016, Submission No 6 to
the Senate Legal and Constitutional Affairs References
Committee, Inquiry into
Migration Amendment (Family Violence and Other Measures) Bill 2016
2016, viewed 9 November 2017, http://www.aph.gov.au/
DocumentStore.ashx?id=b124399e-9bb1-480c-a34a-fa77acaa80cf&subId=412240.
Segrave, M 2017, ‘Temporary Migration and family violence: an analysis
of victimisation, vulnerability and support’,
Monash University
, Melbourne.
Settlement Council of Australia 2016, Submission No 10 to the Senate Legal
and Constitutional Affairs References Committee, Inquiry
Amendment (Family Violence and Other Measures) Bill 2016
, 20 September 2016,
viewed 9 November 2017, http://www.aph.gov.au/Document
Store.ashx?id=c3e53d75-bbf5-44ed-b58f-61a26bbfde0d&subId=414077.
Tually, S, Faulkner, D, Cutler, C & Slatter, M 2008, ‘Women,
domestic violence and homelessness: a synthesis report’,
prepared for the
Office for Women, Department of Families, Housing, Community Services and
Indigenous Affairs, August 2008, Flinders
University, Adelaide.
VRCFV 2016, Volume VIII: commissioned research, viewed 9 November 2017,
http://www.rcfv.com.
au/MediaLibraries/RCFamilyViolence/Reports/Final/RCFV-Vol-VII-Commissioned-research.pdf.
Wangman, J 2017, ‘Has he been violent before? domestic violence
disclosure schemes’,
Alternative Law Journal
, vol. 41, no. 4, pp.
Woman’s Legal Services NSW 2016, Submission No 14 to the Senate Legal
and Constitutional Affairs References Committee, Inquiry
Amendment (Family Violence and Other Measures) Bill 2016
, 7 October 2016, viewed
9 November 2017, http://www.aph.gov.au/DocumentStore.
ashx?id=d74822f9-cb4d-4c1d-a720-02a2f74f0330&subId=414638.
Associate Professor,
Criminology, Monash University, Wellington Road, Clayton Vic 3800, Australia.
Email: marie.segrave@monash.edu.
Director & Principal
Migration Agent, Harris Wake Legal & Migration Services, Ground Floor, 92
Foster Street, Dandenong
Vic 3175, Australia. Email: info@harriswake.com.
Specifically, in the
Family Stream, primary applicants for Partner (permanent) (subclass 100) visa,
Spouse (permanent) (subclass
100) visa,* Interdependency (permanent) (subclass
110),* Partner (temporary and permanent) (subclasses 820/801) visas, Spouse
and permanent) (subclasses 820/801) visas,* Interdependency
(temporary and permanent) (subclasses 826/814).* In the Skilled stream
(business): Partners of primary applicants for Established Business in Australia
(subclass 845),* State/Territory Sponsored Regional
Established Business in
Australia (subclass 846),* Labour Agreement (subclass 855),* Employer Nomination
Scheme (subclass 856),*
Regional Sponsored Migration Scheme (subclass 857),*
Distinguished Talent (subclass 858). *These visas have been closed to new
from 1 July 2009; existing applicants are covered by family violence
provisions.
It is worth noting here
that for author two, who is a practicing Migration Agent, every non-judicial
family violence claim she has
put forward for a client in the last three to four
years has been sent to an ‘independent expert’, which is always one
psychology group who presumably holds a contract to undertake this work. This
means that in one 30-minute session (often through
an interpreter) a
psychologist who the victim survivor has never met makes a determination on the
situation, and this determination
overrides the views and submission of the
treating psychologist who, in many situations, may have known the applicant
over a long period. These are issues for further analysis elsewhere.
Specifically: (a) a
Prospective Marriage (Temporary) (Class TO) visa; (b) a Partner (Provisional)
(Class UF) visa; (c) a Partner
(Temporary) (Class UK) visa (sch 6, reg 1.20KC)
based on a criminal record (see reg 1.20KD for details of significant and
criminal history definitions).
The Prospective
Marriage Visa (subclass 300) requires the sponsor and the applicant to marry
within nine months of the visa being
approved. This allows the applicant and
sponsor, within the nine-month period, to apply for a
(subclasses 820 and 801)
https://www.border.gov.au/Trav/Visa-1/300-/Prospective-Marriage-visa-(subclass-300)-document-checklist).
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (388 KB)
PDF format (701 KB)
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter