URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/journals/MqLawJl/2018/1.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 15:21:08
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Somes, Teresa; Vickovich, Ilija; Voyce, Malcolm; Willis, Sonya --- "Editor's Note" [2018] MqLawJl 1; (2018) 18 Macquarie Law Journal 1
EDITORS’ NOTE
On 14 June 2017 the Australian Law Reform Commission (‘ALRC’)
handed down its much anticipated final report ‘
Elder Abuse—A
National Legal Response
.’ The ALRC report demonstrated the urgent need
for law reform in the elder sphere and also highlighted the need for further
research in relation to elder abuse. This special edition of the
Law Journal
is a response to the need identified by the ALRC’s report,
inviting contributions on issues raised by the report and, more
encouraging research on legal issues that directly impact the elderly.
We are delighted with the response we have received from the academic and
practitioner communities, which has enabled us to provide
readers with a
collection of articles addressing important legal issues facing our aging
population. The articles in this edition
Macquarie Law Journal
focus on what we consider to be three key challenges for elder abuse law reform:
confronting the difficulties of identifying elder
abuse; reforming disparate
areas of law affected by elder abuse; and exploring the hurdles for legal
professionals who are tasked
with ensuring that elder abuse is minimised.
In furthering the ALRC’s research on these three key issues, this
edition aims to contribute to the ongoing effort by the academic
communities to develop solutions, and continue the next stage of analysis in
what is unquestionably one of the most pressing
socio-legal problems currently
facing our society. On a broader level, these conversations implicitly, and
sometimes explicitly,
question the accepted norms and ageist attitudes that
contribute to a culture of elder abuse. This is a crucial process because,
without it, many issues affecting older people would remain
‘invisible’ to the general population, and policies and practices
that have been shaped by ageist attitudes would remain unchecked.
We are privileged to commence the edition with a submission by Emeritus
Professor Rosalind Croucher, who presided over the ALRC’s
Abuse—A National Legal Response
’ report and Dr Julie MacKenzie,
Acting Principal Legal Officer with the ALRC. Professor Croucher and Dr
MacKenzie’s paper,
titled ‘Framing Law Reform to Address Elder
outlines the challenges involved in undertaking the ALRC
Elder Abuse inquiry and in framing proposals for a multidimensional issue,
particularly in the context of the fragmented legal landscape created by our
federal, state, and territory jurisdictions. In particular,
Professor Croucher
and Dr MacKenzie highlight the difficulties in creating a framework within this
context that would achieve adequate
protection for the elderly, while still
preserving the dignity and autonomy of the individual. This overview of the work
by the ALRC establishes a point of reference for the subsequent
contributions to the journal.
Two articles, the first by Lois Bedson, John Chesterman and Michael Woods,
and the second by Bill Mitchell, examine the difficulties
that arise in
understanding elder abuse in particular contexts, and the complications that
plague attempts to measure the causes
and prevalence of elder abuse. In
considering our first key hurdle of identifying elder abuse, both papers suggest
there are serious
deficiencies surrounding current practices and approaches to
information gathering. Using guardianship case data from Victoria’s
of the Public Advocate, the first article makes an important contribution to
measuring instances of elder abuse among those
suffering cognitive impairment,
who to date have been omitted from relevant statistics. Titled ‘The
Prevalence of Elder Abuse
among Adult Guardianship Clients’, it
demonstrates that older people with cognitive impairment, such as dementia or
intellectual
disability, and higher levels of dependency, can be vulnerable to a
wider range of elder abuse, and, in particular, are more susceptible
than others
to financial abuse.
Bill Mitchell’s article, ‘Identifying Institutional Elder Abuse
in Australia through Coronial and Other Death Review Processes’,
a different but equally important aspect of elder abuse, that occurring in
residential aged care services (RACS). The author
proposes methods of enhancing
our understanding of institutional elder abuse in residential aged care services
by reviewing the systems
currently in place for reporting deaths in aged care.
The proposed reforms suggest reappraising the processes that generate coronial
and death process reviews to allow deaths in RACS to fall within the ambit of
those investigations.
Our third and fourth articles concern the second key theme of reforming the
law to reduce elder abuse, especially given the diversity
of legal circumstances
in which such legal abuse can occur. Supporting Professor Croucher and Dr
MacKenzie’s emphasis on the
complexity of elder abuse, the contributions
– the first by Professor Eileen Webb and the second by Dr Anne Wand and
Carmelle Peisah, Brian Draper and Henry Brodaty – demonstrate
the breadth of contexts in which elder abuse can arise. These
articles address
two disparate areas of the law but both analyse the impact elder abuse has on
existing legal structures.
Professor Webb in her article, ‘Housing an Ageing Australia: The Ideal
of Security of Tenure and the Undermining Effect of Elder
explains the importance of safe and secure housing for the ageing and examines
how elder abuse can deleteriously affect security
of tenure and the ontological
security of elderly individuals. Through a careful analysis of existing real
property law, Professor
Webb proposes law reforms to give greater protection to
the elderly, with the aim of improving both housing and ontological security.
In an important and thought-provoking article titled ‘The Nexus between
Elder Abuse, Suicide and Assisted Dying’
Dr Wand and her team
consider the new Victorian legislation that legalises assisted dying. The
authors apply their significant combined
expertise in psychiatry to identify
concerns about the potential for undue influence and abuse to erode the autonomy
of decision
making of an elderly person in the context of a decision to end
one’s life. They stress the need for greater understanding
of the factors
involved in decision making in end of life decision making to eliminate the
potential for Victoria’s new legislation
to be co-opted as a means of
elder abuse.
This leads to the final theme of our special edition, which relates to
obstacles facing the legal profession. It begins with ‘Addressing
Abuse: Perspectives from the Community Legal Sector in the ACT’, an
examination by Dr John Boersig and Dominic Illidge
of the role of the legal aid
solicitor, and the key position Legal Aid has in providing legal services to
elderly clients at risk
of abuse. In line with the recommendations of the ALRC,
the authors explain the approach of the ACT Legal Aid office in implementing
strategies to improve legal services to elderly clients. They argue that, in the
context of developing an appropriate legal strategy,
a rights-based approach
should be adopted that focuses on the needs and views of the client. Whatever
law reforms follow the ALRC’s
report to reduce incidences of elder abuse,
the role of lawyers will be paramount in giving those reforms effect.
Finally, Margaret Castles’ article, ‘A Critical Commentary on the
2017 ALRC Elder Abuse Report: Looking for an Ethical
Baseline for
Lawyers’, takes up the theme started by Bedson, Chesterman and Woods in
their article on issues concerning the
elderly with cognitive impairment, but
considers it from the legal practitioner’s perspective. The author raises
some intriguing
questions concerning a practitioner’s ethical
responsibilities when dealing with clients exhibiting signs of mental
incapacity,
and the potential for these clients to be subject to influence or
abuse. She highlights the tension between the duty to protect the
human rights
of a vulnerable client and a practitioner’s duty of confidence to their
client. Castles’ article questions
traditional norms of practice and the
duties of solicitors in the context of the profession’s dealings with the
elderly and
matters affecting elderly people. The contributions by Boersig and
Illidge, and Castles, to this special addition are a timely reminder
practitioners play an integral role in the manner in which law reform is
developed and applied.
The special edition is rounded off by two case notes, authored by members of
the Macquarie Law School student editorial team. Both
cases demonstrate how the
interpretation of existing law is being shaped by the heightened awareness of
issues concerning the elderly.
The case note on
Katsis v The Queen
, by Harriet Gresham, explores the extent to which a court may have the
capacity to take the age and vulnerability of a victim into
consideration when
sentencing offenders. The second, by Mikaylie Page, reviews the decision of
Public Trustee (WA) v Mack
[2017] WASC 325
, in which a court extended the
forfeiture rule to prevent an accused from indirectly benefiting from his
mother’s estate through
the death of his brother.
The ALRC’s Report ‘
Elder Abuse—A National Legal
’ has drawn attention to the deficiencies in the law as it
affects older people. This special edition of the Macquarie Law Journal
represents one step in ensuring these topics become part of the social
conversation and contribute to growing awareness throughout
the community of
elder abuse and its ramifications for society. While the process of revealing
the nature and extent of elder abuse
is at times confronting, it is ultimately a
positive step. The academic and professional interest in exploring the difficult
surrounding elder abuse, and seeking solutions to complex and dynamic
problems, provides hope that we will be able to translate the
growing pressure
on law and policy makers into sophisticated and nuanced reforms which balance
the needs of the elderly with their
rights to maximum dignity and autonomy.
We would like to express our gratitude to the authors who contributed to this
special edition, as well as to the academics and experts
who provided peer
review of submissions. The breadth and quality of the published papers underpin
the strength of this edition’s
contribution to the growing body of much
needed research in the elder law area. The high calibre and significant
diversity of legal,
medical, academic, and practice expertise represented by the
authors of this edition are truly impressive.
Finally, we wish to express our thanks to, and commend the excellent efforts
of, the Student Editors who have worked diligently to
make this publication
Teresa Somes
Ilija Vickovich
Malcolm Voyce
Sonya Willis
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (184 KB)
PDF format (297 KB)
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter