URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/journals/JCULawRw/2023/8.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 15:06:51
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Lavery, Daniel --- "Native Title as Property: Yunupingu v Commonwealth" [2023] JCULawRw 8; (2023) 29 James Cook University Law Review 125
Native Title As Property:
Yunupingu v
Commonwealth
In May 2023, a Full Federal Court in
Yunupingu v Commonwealth
unanimously that native title is 'property' within the terms of
Constitution
. In its defence, the Commonwealth argued the native
title recognised at common law in the landmark 1992
Mabo [No 2]
was susceptible to an exercise of the radical title of the Crown
any duty to pay compensation. Special leave to appeal was sought by the
Commonwealth and has been granted. This novel constitutional
issue will now be
conclusively determined by the High Court of Australia. Although a simple yes
or no is all that is required to
answer whether native title is property within
, at another level it calls into question the still-unsettled terms of
the legal relationship between the Crown and the Indigenous
I Introduction
It is commonplace in Australian law to depict native title as 'a bundle of
rights', as inherently fragile and susceptible to extinguishment.
A minority has
argued that native title should be seen as proprietary in
albeit that this customary
title is sourced in the traditional laws and customs of an Indigenous society,
not an interest granted
by a non-Indigenous Crown. The prevalent view had potent
authority, particularly from the High Court of Australia decision of
Australia v Ward
a Full Federal Court decision in May of 2023 has thoroughly doused this view. In
a unanimous judgment in
Yunupingu v
Commonwealth,
Federal Court
bench emphatically concluded that native title is
'property' within the terms of s 51(xxxi) of the
Constitution
II The Facts
The applicant, the late Dr Yunupingu, brought two applications under
Native Title Act 1993
(Cth) on behalf of the Gumatj Clan of the
Yolngu People in 2019. The first was a native title application seeking a
determination
in favour of the Gumatj over land on the Gove Peninsula in the
Northern Territory. The second was a compensation application seeking
for the impacts on the claimed native title of certain executive and legislative
acts of the Commonwealth of Australia between
1911 and 1978. In 1911, the
Northern Territory became a territory of the Commonwealth, and then only became
self-governing in 1978.
Any executive and legislative acts during this
intervening period thus rested solely with the Commonwealth.
The Gumatj submitted that, even though any exclusive native title may have
been extinguished by grants of pastoral leases at the turn
century, their non-exclusive native rights and interests
remained extant and were then affected by the grants of other interests,
including a lease to allow the establishment of a religious mission and mining
tenements which permitted the extraction of bauxite
and ancillary activities.
They submitted such grants or acts were invalid, unless otherwise validated
under the 'past acts' regime
Native Title Act
, by reason of not
providing just terms compensation as required by
s 51(xxxi).
The native title determination application by the Gumatj Clan is yet to be
determined. It is opposed by the Rirratjingu Clan of the
Yolngu People
presumably because they, too, assert they have complementary interests in the
This claim will be
determined in the ordinary course of events.
The compensation claim, however, poses several important issues of law
– including a novel constitutional question – and
the parties agreed
to have these threshold questions determined by the Federal Court. Although the
Federal Court Rules 2011
do not expressly provide for a
demurrer that procedure was adopted and, due to the significance of the issues
raised, former Chief
Justice James Allsop gave a direction the notional demurrer
be heard by a full bench. Active parties made written submissions, and
argument was heard over five days in late October 2022. While the Commonwealth
and other respondents opposed the applicant's
submissions on the questions
posed, the Rirratjingu representatives supported the Gumatj on the compensation
III The Issues
The issues, refined between the Court and the parties, centred on the
extinguishing effects of various Crown grants over the claimed
land, but the two
principal constitutional issues contended by the defendant Commonwealth
(a) the just terms requirement contained in s 51(xxxi) does not apply to laws
enacted pursuant to the power in
Constitution
Territories power); and
(b) the relevant grants and acts were not capable of amounting to an
acquisition of 'property' within the meaning of
Constitution
because native title is inherently defeasible and
susceptible to extinguishment by a valid exercise of the Crown's sovereign
IV The Decision
The Full Federal Court, comprising Chief Justice Mortimer and Justices
Moshinsky and Banks-Smith, unanimously answered 'No' to both
contentions. The
Court held the just terms obligation in
does apply to laws enacted
pursuant to
and that native title rights and interests do constitute
property for the purposes of
s 51(xxxi).
Each of these conclusions is not without controversy. On the former, an issue
their Honours described as 'of the highest
significance',
the Court determined
that the 2009 High Court in
Wurridjal v
Commonwealth
overruled its
a unanimous full bench decision of 40 years earlier. On the latter issue, as
noted above, the preponderance of legal opinion was
that native title was
'fragile' and so susceptible to extinguishment by the Crown, but this opinion
was decidedly rejected in favour
of viewing the native title of Australian
Indigenous peoples, exclusive or non-exclusive, as being property from a
constitutional
perspective. It is this latter issue which will now be
V Discussion: Native Title As Property?
It is not unusual for the Commonwealth to oppose any application if it does
not consider there has been an acquisition of 'property'
so avoid paying just terms compensation. There was no authority which held that
native title is such 'property' and, in this
instance, the compensation payable
for the alleged impacts on the claimed native title is sizeable. Media reports
put it $AUD700m,
not to mention the
further compensation claims that would surely follow from other Indigenous
peoples in the Northern Territory covering
the same 1911-78 period if the claim
was successful.
The Commonwealth's essential argument was that the common law recognition of
the native title of Indigenous peoples accepted in
Mabo [No 2]
in 1992 was
'on the basis that it was susceptible to an exercise of the Crown's radical
title in one or other of those ways
without any duty on the Crown to pay
compensation
At the heart
of this proposition is that the British Crown was plenipotent against these
Indigenous societies once it asserted territorial
sovereignty and gained this
'radical title' over their traditional lands. The Crown could then exercise this
radical title in any
way it saw fit without any obligation to compensate
Indigenous peoples for the loss of any of their traditional rights and interests
in land, whether or not those rights and interests could be classified as
proprietary. In other words, the Crown could do as it pleased
pre-existing customary rights and interests.
Such a contention is extraordinary for the Commonwealth of Australia to
advance in Australian jurisprudence in the 2020s. Firstly,
there is a chain of
Imperial constitutional law authority to the contrary. The Australian courts
are, of course, no longer bound
by superior Imperial courts but it would be
unusual common law methodology to ignore such jurisprudence. The Judicial
Committee of
the Privy Council precedent is that the Crown, as Sovereign, can
acquire land for public purposes but that Indigenous inhabitants
who have an
interest in such land by their traditional laws and customs – even
interests unknown to English law – must
be respected and be awarded proper
compensation.
precedent is not to be followed, then it must be distinguished or at least
Secondly, it challenges the general principle that the
Crown should act honourably and lawfully in its dealings with its subjects.
the context of the customary land rights, the Commonwealth is arguing the Crown
can assert sovereignty over Indigenous peoples,
theoretically making those
persons subjects of the Crown, and then, by exercise of the entirely gratuitous
radical title it acquired
by the assertion of sovereignty, extinguish any
pre-colonial individual or other group rights and interests in their lands
any compensation payable to these subjects.
What is interesting in this unanimous decision by the Full Federal Court is
the decisiveness with which the principal contention of
the Commonwealth was
rejected. The submission as to the fragility of the native title of Australian
Indigenous peoples to extinguishment
by an all-powerful Crown exercising its
radical title was dismissed with seeming incredulity. Yet it was not contrary
colonial-era
precedent or conventions around ensuring honourable conduct by the
Crown in relation to indigenous populations which guided the Full
conclusion; t was more a growing contemporary legal understanding of these
ancient pre-colonial rights which Australian Indigenous
peoples assert.
Even putting to one side the obvious distinction that these [native title]
rights pre-date colonisation, and have not been created
by the Australian
Parliament, and no Parliament has decided what the content of the rights should
be, how the rights described so
clearly by Mansfield J can be said to fall into
the same category for the purposes of
as a medicare benefit, a
pension entitlement or a mining exploration permit is difficult to
understand.
Quoting from the plurality judges in the 2002 High Court
decision, the Court issued a reminder that native title 'is not a
creature of the common law, whether the Imperial common law as
that existed at
the time of sovereignty and first settlement, or the Australian common law as it
exists today.'
The description
mentioned by their Honours, that of Mansfield J in the
determination, stated native title rights and interests involve:
a perception of socially constituted fact, an important aspect of which is
the spiritual, cultural and social connection with the
land under laws and
customs that define the Aboriginal community concerned [being the Ngaliwurru
Nungali Peoples] and their relationship with
Native title is a communal title held by an Indigenous people and not
something, the judges emphasised, that can or should be compared
non-Indigenous real property interests. They quoted from the Full Federal Court
Yindjibarndi
appeal decision, that 'it is to misunderstand the concept of
native title rights and interests to require them to fit into non-Aboriginal
concepts of property, the exercise of proprietary rights and the enforcement of
property rights.'
It is notable that the colonial-era chain of authority in the Imperial
constitutional law, reaching its zenith in the 1957 Privy Council
decision in
Oyekan v Adele
referenced. That decision held that even if the real property rights of
Indigenous peoples in British colonies are not as
common law lawyers might
conceive, those rights are nonetheless to be seen as property and the
appropriation of any such rights by
the Crown is compensable. The Privy Council
stated that there is 'one guiding principle' in recognising what are existing
traditional
rights to real property. 'It is this', their Lordships wrote, '[t]he
Courts will assume that the British Crown intends that the rights
of property of
the inhabitants are to be fully
respected.'
acquisition of such rights and matters of compensation, Earl Jowett, and Lords
Cohen and Denning, stated:
Whilst, therefore, the British Crown, as Sovereign can make laws enabling it
compulsorily to acquire land for public purposes, it
will see that proper
compensation is awarded to everyone of the inhabitants who has by native law an
interest in it; and the courts
will declare the inhabitants entitled to
compensation according to their interests, even though those interests are of a
kind unknown
to English law.
Their Lordships were adamant that such an acquisition be done according to
law, presumably with an appropriate process to authorise
the acquisition of any
of their interests and with an entitlement to proper compensation for their
What is remarkable is that in 2023, a full bench of the Federal Court of
Australia arrived at an almost identical conclusion to that
of the Privy Council
without any seeming reference in argument to earlier Imperial law
authorities,
instead relying on
its own deepening jurisprudence over the 30 years of the Australian native title
VI Special Leave To Appeal
Given the importance of the legal issues, not unexpectedly the Commonwealth
sought special leave to appeal this decision to the High
Court of Australia, the
Attorney- General stating the compensation issues in the context of native title
represent the first time
these constitutional issues have been judicially
determined and the law in this area required clarity and
On 19 October 2023, Gageler and Gleeson JJ granted special leave and the
appeal will be heard in Darwin over three days in August
VII Indigenous Peoples In The Constitutional Framework?
It is expected that all seven members of the High Court will sit on such an
important constitutional
At face value, it is a
straightforward question the court is required to answer: is native title
property within
Constitution
? On a black-letter textual
approach, it calls for a simple yes or no answer. Yet at another level that
simple question traverses
some difficult terrain because it raises the
still-unfurling terms of the legal relationship between the Crown and the
peoples of Australia.
This relationship is a particularly awkward one and, in recent years, the
question of situating Australia's Indigenous peoples within
our constitutional
framework has been judicially
In 2020, in
Commonwealth
Justices of the High Court wrote seven judgments, the matter being decided by a
bare majority that persons indigenous to
Australia could not be defined as
'aliens' by the Australian Parliament. Such was the difficulty in finding a
ratio decidendi
the majority judges asked the most senior
puisne judge, Justice Bell, to state: 'although we express our reasoning
differently, we
agree that Aboriginal Australians (understood according to the
tripartite test in
) are not within the reach of the ''aliens'' power
conferred by
Constitution
The reasoning expressed by the majority judges on foundational issues was
indeed different. Justice Nettle, for example, found in
the Imperial
constitutional law a fundamental duty on the Australian Crown to protect
Indigenous societies, referring to a 'unique
obligation of protection to
Australian Aboriginal societies and their
And Gordon J
The fundamental premise from which the decision in
Mabo v Queensland
proceeds – the deeper truth – is that the Indigenous peoples of
Australia are the first peoples of this country, and the
connection between the
Indigenous peoples of Australia and the land and waters that now make up the
territory of Australia was not
severed or extinguished by European
“settlement”.
Her Honour also stated:
Native title is one legal consequence flowing from common law recognition of
the connection between Aboriginal Australians and the
land and waters that now
make up Australia. That Aboriginal Australians are not
‘‘aliens’’ within the meaning
of that constitutional
is another.
Justice Edelman spoke in terms of indigeneity, forsaking discredited notions
of race and of 'the Aborigines', adopting the notion
of connection to
far-ranging in his discussion of the principal issues, concluding that 'an
Aboriginal person cannot be an alien to Australia.
Aboriginal people belong to
Australia and are essential members of the "community which constitutes the body
politic of the nation
In the minority, Justice Keane completely rejected any
sui generis
duty to protect 'Australian Aboriginal societies and their members' proposed by
Nettle J, stating:
Aboriginal persons in Australia were not subjects of the Crown with a special
claim to the protection of the Crown that differentiated
them from other
inhabitants of the continent; nor were they subject to some special obligation
to the Crown as a reciprocal of such
protection".
Chief Justice Susan Kiefel, also in the minority, took it further and asked
where the principles adopted by the majority judges might
be found. If they were
not to be found in the common law, she stated, then ‘it might be
understood to bear the characteristics
of a higher principle of which natural
law might conceive’. She dismissed this possibility, taking aim at the
sources of the
majority opinions, stating 'such conceptions are generally not
regarded as consistent with constitutional theory. And they are regarded
as antithetical to the judicial function since they involve an appeal to the
personal philosophy or preferences of
In dismissing natural law and the common law as not consistent with
'constitutional theory', Kiefel CJ avoided any reference to the
constitutional law, commonly called the Colonial Law. The eminent Canadian
jurisprudent, Emeritus Professor Brian Slattery,
noted many years ago that the
legal principles concerning aboriginal peoples in the British Empire was
developed at the same time
as other doctrines of the Imperial constitutional
Just as the eighteenth century colonial law harboured rules governing such
matters as the constitutional status of colonies, the relative
powers of the
Imperial Parliament and local assemblies, and the reception of English law, it
also contained rules concerning the
status of native peoples living under the
Crown's protection, and the position of their lands, customary laws, and
political institutions.
These rules form a body of unwritten law known
collectively as the doctrine of aboriginal
It is in this body of Imperial law where the answers to these issues are most
likely to be found. The Imperial Crown did not only
have a prior relationship
with the Indigenous peoples of Australia, it had many other aboriginal peoples
under its aegis throughout
its global Empire, and it developed a body of
principles to govern those relationships. The majority judges in
were not dipping into any ancient natural law font or their personal
philosophies, they are merely turning to the largely-common
law colonial law
principles and seeking there – sensibly, one might venture –
contemporary answers to ancient questions.
Despite the messiness for commentators of seven judgments in a single
decision, the conclusion in
was historic. A majority of the High
Court of Australia accepted the habitation of the Indigenous peoples of
Australia in their respective
territories – their connection to
constitutional
fact. Behind the fading black-letter
curtain that is the
Constitution
are these Indigenous
peoples and that out-dated colonial document is no longer the be-all and end-all
of Australian constitutional
law, the place where Australian constitutional
theory begins and ends. That these Indigenous peoples are the first peoples of
is that 'deeper truth' spoken of by Justice Gordon, long pre-dating
any Anglo-Australian constitution. This irrebuttable constitutional
fact has any
number of consequences, many of which are still not visible to a jurisprudence
which wilfully blinded itself for generations.
The complement of the High Court of Australia, however, has changed
considerably since the
decision. In the intervening years, Chief
Justice Kiefel and Justices Bell, Nettle and Keane have retired and Gageler J,
member of the
minority, has been elevated to Chief
Justice. The new appointees to the High Court, Steward, Gleeson, Jagot and
Beech-Jones JJ have
varied exposure to native title jurisprudence. Justice
Jagot, most certainly, and Justices Gleeson and Steward have had exposure
such jurisprudence from their time on the Federal Court of Australia. Justice
Beech-Jones, promoted from the NSW Supreme Court,
may be coming fresh to native
title litigation.
One of the features of the High Court membership since the recognition of
native title in 1992 is that many appointees from the Federal
Court are well
versed in the complexities and nuance of native title litigation. These judges
bring some 'understandings' to our
highest court which were not present in
earlier generations. They understand that the colonial notion of an 'Aboriginal
spoken of so often in public discourse and in the law, is no real
thing. Rather these supposedly homogenous 'Aborigines' are –
have been – a diverse grouping of Indigenous peoples on the Australian
continent and in present-day Tasmania.
Another of these fundamental understandings of native title law –
consistent with the statutory definition – is that the
recognised native
title rights and interests are sourced in the traditional laws and customs of a
particular Indigenous society.
That society is not any single Australia-wide 'Aboriginal' society but is
localised, confined to a distinct territory – their
to which they have a spiritual, cultural and social connection, with these
connections unaffected by the British assertions
of sovereignty.
Further, as the High Court emphasised in
Yorta Yorta
, the laws and
customs which generate their native title must be traditional, in the sense that
these customary laws existed prior
to the assertions of British sovereignty yet
must still be vital and normative to that Indigenous society into the present
their native title to be recognised and, indeed, survive.
Critically, the judges in the Full Court in
collectively
stressed the conceptual difference between what is native title and how
non-Indigenous lawyers conceive of proprietary
interests in our Anglo-European
jurisprudence. It was Justice Mansfield who again captured the essence of this
difference and the
indigenous sense of connectedness with their
by stressing 'one cannot understand hurt feelings in relation to a boxed quarter
acre block'. 'Rather', he wrote, 'the effects of
acts have to be understood in
terms of the pervasiveness of
Although not
explicitly stating it, the Full Court refused to view the concept of native
title through any real property lens but
seemed to see it as something more than
'property', as an appellation which captures this ancient multi-layered
'connectedness' to
There is also the growing historical awareness by members of the Federal
Court bench of what the annexation of the British-Australian
territories entailed. In every native title determination application, it is
customary for the applicant Indigenous people
to file a 'Connection Report'.
This report addresses the elements which may lead to a consent determination and
by the means of these
reports many Federal Court judges are intimately exposed
to the history of the applicant People.
Reading these historical and anthropological materials can be a very sobering
exercise, in a close examination of the brutal manner
in which these peoples
were treated at the frontier and in the wake of the European colonisation of the
Australian territories. After
Justices Deane and Gaudron wrote in the
decision of the 'conflagration of oppression and conflict which was,
over the following century, to spread across the continent to
dispossess,
degrade and devastate the Aboriginal peoples and leave a national legacy of
unutterable shame',
impolitic to reference this dictum. It was seen as not the province of the
judiciary to enter such a contested arena –
utterable by historians and
anthropologists perhaps, but not by superior court judges. That reluctance seems
now to have passed and
it may be that insurmountable evidence of the extent to
which the Australian Indigenous peoples were dispossessed, degraded and
could become a matter of judicial notice in the federal courts.
While the historical record may be being clarified, there remains the
often-referenced notion that the Australian territories were
acquired by
'settlement'. Despite being popular, it is contradicted by the High Court of
Australia in the
Mabo [No 2]
decision. In speaking to the Australian
colonies, Brennan J stated:
To these territories the European colonial nations applied the doctrines
relating to acquisition of territory that was terra nullius.
They recognized the
sovereignty of the respective European nations over the territory of 'backward
peoples' and, by State practice,
permitted the acquisition of sovereignty of
such territory by occupation rather than by
His Honour defined these 'backward peoples' as 'indigenous inhabitants' who
'were not organized in a society that was united permanently
for political
the Indigenous peoples of Australia, being 'backward peoples', were thus
terra nullius and so 'sovereign'-less under this engorged notion
of terra nullius and so could be annexed as if first discovered
occupied by Great Britain. It is not thus any settlement doctrine by which the
Australian territories were annexed by the
British Crown but under an Occupation
of Backward Peoples doctrine.
The new sovereignty was perceived as an original sovereignty, not derived,
and whatever sovereignties the original peoples possessed
seems to have been consumed by the all-powerful British Crown.
It seized for itself a 'radical' or ultimate title over all the Indigenous
territories seemingly unburdened by any conditions. The orthodox theory remains
that an original, plenipotent British sovereignty
swept in three stages across
the vast 7.5 million square kilometres of mainland New Holland and Van Diemen's
Land, meeting no other
'sovereigns', or even other forms of some lesser
autonomy, in its path. And in what must be one of the most curious pieces of
Anglosphere
jurisprudence, the Indigenous populations of Australia purportedly
become subjects of the Imperial Crown at these moments in time
property, real, personal and communal, could be stripped from them by that Crown
without any lawful process or compensation.
They may have become British
but these Indigenous persons were not treated as
rights-bearing subjects. Again, it was Justice Brennan in
Mabo [No 2]
spoke directly of this allodial connection to their traditional lands of these
Indigenous peoples and of the total disregard by
the Crown of that connection.
The common law itself took from Indigenous inhabitants any right to occupy
their traditional land, exposed them to deprivation of
the religious, cultural
and economic sustenance which the land provides, vested the land effectively in
the control of the imperial
authorities without any right to compensation and
made the Indigenous inhabitants intruders in their own homes and mendicants for
a place to live.
Yet, with respect, it was not the common law which permitted the injustices
and outrages against Australian Indigenous peoples, but
the British colonists
under the aegis of an acquisitive Imperial Crown and a local judiciary compliant
to the desires of Empire.
As an example, as late as 1970, in the Northern Territory Supreme Court
decision of
Milirrpum v Nabalco
to Judge Blackburn as an authority which was wholly binding on his court, their
Lordships accepting a post-British sovereignty
common law recognition of
pre-existing customary rights in land and compensation for their acquisition.
One of the grounds upon which
Blackburn J distinguished this decision was that
he found it 'impossible to believe' that compulsory acquisition of land 'from
vested a right in those natives to receive compensation from the
Despite the utmost
clarity of their Lordships' language, Judge Blackburn would not accept that a
right of compensation payable to
'every one of the inhabitants who has by native
law an interest in it' applied to 'natives'!
Despite numerous assertions that Judge Blackburn in
overruled in the landmark
Mabo [No 2]
decision, this compensation point
was not. And, although a landmark decision in Australian legal history, it is
tenuous on this particular
point. It may be recalled that the sole dissentient
Mabo [No 2]
, Justice Daryl Dawson, joined with Mason CJ, and McHugh
and Brennan JJ to determine this compensation issue 4:3. Three members of
6:1 majority, Justices Deane, Toohey and Gaudron, held that the extinguishment
of native title
compensable at common law.
It is this thread of the present theory of territorial sovereignty, that the
acquisition of the native title of the Indigenous peoples
is not compensable,
that is now being laboured. If, as the Commonwealth of Australia contends, the
native title of the Yolngu People
was vulnerable to an exercise of radical title
without any duty on the Crown to pay compensation at common law, the orthodox
will prevail. The exercise of the radical title the Crown acquired
– still begging the question from whom it was acquired –
theory, free and unconditional.
Yet, there is a real danger in the manner in which the Commonwealth has
framed its principal argument. Relying on the bare 4:3 majority
to deny Indigenous Australians any right at common law for the historical
pre-1975 extinguishment of their native titles has risk.
Within days of him
assuming the Chief Justiceship, the Gageler Court delivered the Commonwealth a
'fabulous yellow Roman candle'
moment when, in the
it reversed an earlier
4:3 decision of nearly 20 years standing on the indefinite detention of
immigration detainees. It is over
30 years since
Mabo [No 2]
by the slimmest of majorities that native title was not compensable at common
law but the coupling of the majority/dissenting
positions on this point, as
noted, was complex.
If this thread is laboured enough, the orthodox theory of territorial
sovereignty may begin to unravel. This is not to say that the
present-day
Australian sovereignty (being an Act of State) can be challenged in the High
Court or any domestic court. That is impermissible.
which the acquisition of Indigenous territories in Australia was purportedly
achieved and the
consequences
of such acquisition for those Indigenous
peoples and the acquiring Crown are certainly justiciable.
Justice Nettle alone in
spoke of the fundamental duty of
protection owed to Indigenous peoples but he was not alone in naming other
consequences. Justice
Gordon wrote that 'the connection between the Indigenous
peoples of Australia and the land and waters that now make up the territory
Australia was not severed or extinguished by colonisation'. Even in the
minority, then-Justice Gageler was most sympathetic to
the applicants but just
could not find any 'common law antecedents of the
Constitution
support their argument.
Nonetheless he acknowledged the preamble of the
Native Title Act
states that our Indigenous peoples have become 'the most disadvantaged in
Australian society'.
he also wrote, '[t]he body politic of the Commonwealth of Australia is uniquely
responsible for that consequence, and it
is uniquely placed to redress that
consequence.'
Likewise, it is the High Court of Australia which is uniquely placed to state
the means and determine the consequences of the acquisition
of territorial
sovereignty over the Australian territories in the late 18
centuries. As Justice Gordon stated in
channelling the embryonic United States Supreme Court in
from that very same epoch, it 'is emphatically the province and duty
of the judicial department to say what the law
And while, in the opinion
of the present Chief Justice, there were no common law antecedents of the
Constitution
which could be found to support the appellants in
appeal there is arguably a very persuasive
chain of Imperial precedent. Surely if the British Crown acquired this potent
title over the territories of Indigenous peoples it must, minimally,
extend its aegis over these peoples and, as new subjects of
that Crown, have
their pre-existing customary rights upheld.
VIII Conclusion
judgment in the Full Federal Court, with special leave
already granted, presents the High Court of Australia with a unique opportunity
to state the law as to whether native title constitutes property within
Constitution
. Unlike the
decision, there is,
to date, little political heat is this matter, but there are financial
implications. The Full Federal Court
in the financial press, and no doubt Australian governments will be paying close
attention to the hearing in August 2024
from a budgetary perspective. But it is
not a matter such as in the
decision where the outcome will
privilege Indigenous Australians over non-Indigenous Australians. Rather it is
to place Indigenous
peoples in a similar situation in respect of their
pre-existing native title to that of other Australians whose property is
Yet the question of how the Australian jurisprudence regards the traditional
'native' title of its Indigenous peoples – as compensable
property under
Constitution
or at common law – has broad societal
ramifications and it presents an open window into the orthodox theory of
territorial
sovereignty. The language of the majority justices in the
decision hinted that the membership of the High Court is not as
cautious at leaving the judicial safety of the text and structure
Constitution
in seeking answers to constitutional questions or examining
constitutional theory, and particularly so when discussing the legal
relationship between the Crown and the Indigenous peoples of Australia.
To ignore these original peoples and to treat their customary rights as
irrelevant to constitutional law and theory has been very
convenient for an
Anglo-based jurisprudence because it struggles to situate them in its
Anglo-Australian black-letter constitutional
framework. Peering clear-eyed at
the historical record and the unfortunate colonial constitutional legacies and
– interrogating the many false hypotheses upon
which the orthodox theory of territorial sovereignty resides in Australian
jurisprudence
is no easy task. But a creditable jurisprudence needs sensible
foundations, not the manifold imaginings of the present theory.
It would be too much to expect common law judges to abandon common law
methodologies and manufacture some novel theory to replace
the present
nonsensical orthodox theory of territorial sovereignty. But the signs suggest
that these 21
century jurists are not as accepting of the
historical and legal fictions as previous generations of judges raised under the
aegis of the Anglo-Australian Crown. Suggesting the 'natives' became
subjects of the Crown yet from whom that Crown can acquire their
traditional
rights and interests without paying those subjects compensation may be one
colonial legacy a modern judiciary can no
longer accept.
BA LLB (Hons) LLM PhD, Adjunct Research Fellow, College of
Business, Law and Governance, James Cook University. The author wishes
Michael Drew for his helpful comments on the draft.
See Janice Gray, 'Is native
title a proprietary right?',
E Law: Murdoch University Electronic Journal of
(2002) 9, and Sean Brennan, '
Section 51(xxxi)
and the Acquisition of
Property under Commonwealth-State Arrangements: The relevance to Native Title
Extinguishment on Just Terms',
Australian Indigenous Law Review
Western Australia v Ward
[2002] HCA 28
(2002) 213 CLR 1.
Yunupingu on behalf of the
Gumatj Clan or Estate Group v Commonwealth of Australia
(2023) 298 FCR 160
Some Indigenous individuals are
also respondents.
(2009) 237 CLR 309.
Teori Tau v Commonwealth
[1969] HCA 62
(1969) 119 CLR 564.
Some active respondent parties, notably the Northern
Territory and Swiss Aluminium, did not support the Commonwealth on this issue.
Queensland did not take a position. The Full Court did state it found the
Commonwealth's argument 'somewhat surprising' in that the
headnote for
in the authorised Commonwealth Law Reports stated that
was 'overruled'.
Hannah Wotton, 'Late Yunupingu
wins final court battle in landmark native title case',
Australian Financial
, 22 May 2023.
[1992] HCA 23
(1992) 175 CLR 1.
Mabo [No 2]
Submissions of Commonwealth,
(n 3) [287]. Emphasis added. This 'radical' or
ultimate title was described in
Mabo [No 2]
as 'a postulate of the
doctrine of tenure and a concomitant of sovereignty'; ibid 47 (Brennan J).
Oyekan v Adele
1 WLR 876 (JCPC).
This case is discussed below.
Members of the Yorta
Yorta Aboriginal Community v Victoria
[2002] HCA 58
(2003) 214 CLR 422
, [75]-[76].
Griffiths v Northern
Territory of Australia (No 3)
[2016] FCA 900
(2016) 337 ALR 362
Fortescue Metals Group v
Warrie on behalf of the Yindjibarndi People
[2019] FCAFC 177
(2019) 273 FCR 350
(Mortimer and Jagot JJ).
Oyekan v Adele
This statement was made at a
time when all Australian courts were bound by the opinions of the Judicial
Committee of the Privy Council.
There are no decisions of
the Judicial Committee of Privy Council mentioned in the 'Cases cited' even
though these similar issues
have been canvassed in other colonial jurisdictions.
Mark Dreyfus MP, 'High Court
special leave application – Gumatj claim', (Media Release, Tuesday, 20
June 2023).
In April 2022, prior to her
appointment to the High Court, Jagot J was involved in issuing orders to
incorporate the notional demurrer
into current processes using separate
questions procedures of the
Federal Court Rules
. It is unlikely that any
party would seek her recusal based on such scant prior procedural involvement.
Daniel Lavery, 'Judicial
Distancing in the High Court:
Love/Thoms v Commonwealth
James Cook University Law Review
(2020) 270 CLR 152
Ibid 260. Footnotes
Brian Slattery, 'Understanding Aboriginal Rights'
Canadian Bar Review
For an interesting argument
on how the Anglo-Australian 'law' views these other 'laws', see Diana Margaret
Anderssen, 'The Construct
of Indigenous Australian “Traditional Laws and
Customs” in Contemporary Australian Law: A Conceptual Analysis' (PhD
Australian National University, 2021).
Griffiths (No 3)
(n 14) [325].
Mabo [No 2]
(Deane and Gaudron JJ).
The author has argued
elsewhere that the principle stated by Brennan J is wrong because the citation
given as the source (Sir Frank
Lindley's 1926 thesis) does not support the
conclusion reached by his Honour. See Daniel Lavery, 'No Decorous Veil: The
Reliance on an enlarged terra nullius notion in
Mabo [No 2]
[2019] MelbULawRw 14
2019 43 (1)
Melbourne University Law Review
Mabo [No 2]
See John Hookey, 'The Gove
Rights Land Case: A Judicial Dispensation for the Taking of Aboriginal Land in
Federal Law Review
Dr Hookey argued Blackburn J
misconstrued a number of Privy Council decisions.
NZYQ v Minister for
Immigration, Citizenship and Multicultural Affairs
[2023] HCA 37
(2023) 97 ALJR 1005.
(n 24) 209.
[1803] USSC 16
(1803), 177.
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (72.7 KB)
PDF format (402 KB)
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter