URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/journals/HRD/2007/7.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 15:01:49
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Davis, Megan; Brennan, Dean (update) --- "A Narrative of Exclusion: Indigenous rights in Australia" [2007] HRightsDef 7; (2007) 16(1) Human Rights Defender 16
A Narrative of Exclusion: Indigenous rights in Australia
A Narrative of Exclusion:
Indigenous rights in
Megan Davis
This article was originally printed in the HRD, Vol. 14, issue 3, 2005.
It is followed by an update written for this issue by Sean
Indigenous peoples’ relationship with Australia’s public
institutions – the executive, the parliament, the constitution,
judiciary, the people - continues to reflect a narrative of exclusion. The
abolition of the Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander
Commission (ATSIC) and
the recently announced proposals to privatise Aboriginal communal title and
transform the collective nature
of Aboriginal culture, carry their dislocation
from Australia’s public institutions into the twenty-first century. The
Racial Discrimination Act
(Cth) (RDA) has been an important advocacy
tool in the absence of a Bill of Rights, a Treaty or any constitutional
recognition of
first peoples in domestic law. In addition, in the absence of
adequate domestic rights protections, Indigenous peoples have significantly
utilised international law, and in particular the United Nations, in their
perennial battles with conservative federal and state
governments. In light of
such factors, this article is a brief conspectus of Indigenous peoples rights in
Australia has no Bill of Rights prohibiting discrimination on the basis of
race or protecting any fundamental human rights and freedoms,
agreement with the Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander peoples, and a
Constitution
that may permit the Commonwealth to make laws to the detriment of
Indigenous peoples on the basis of their race (
, 1998). The
Constitutional Convention records clearly show that certain rights were
specifically excluded from the
Constitution
so that the states could
discriminate on racial grounds. The debates about rights were imbued with
racism. At the 1897-98 Convention,
Sir John Forrest, Premier of Western
Australia stated:
It is of no use for us to shut our eyes to the fact that there is a great
feeling all over Australia against the introduction of coloured
persons. It goes
without saying that we do not like to talk about it but still it is so. I do not
want this clause to pass in a shape
which would undo what is about to be done in
most of the colonies and what has already been done in Western Australia in
that class of persons (4 Convention Debates, 1898: 666).
There was an attempt to include a provision for due process, known as clause
110, but that was watered down to a provision protecting
citizens from
discrimination on the basis of state residence. In this compromise it was
succinctly noted that there was ‘no
discrimination there based on
residence or citizenship; it is simply based on colour and race’ (5
Convention Debates, 1898:
For Aboriginal people in Australia, the racist sentiments expressed in the
Constitutional Conventions debates are not simply an archaic
consequence of the
historical period, an explanation which continues to provide convenient solace
for relativist Australians. Rather,
race has remained a dominant issue in the
relationship between Aboriginal people and the state and the Australian
community. For
decades, Aboriginal freedom to move, to work, to live and to
continue to practice traditions and customs were subject to the legislative
control of Parliament (Reynolds, 1981). Aboriginal people’s lives were
controlled by legislative protection Acts. Apart from
the emotional and social
devastation of the Stolen Generations, less commonly acknowledged historical
wrongs such as the legacy of
Stolen Wages and exclusion from intestacy laws have
contributed to the intergenerational poverty that consumes Indigenous
communities
One of the most significant acts of inclusion by the Australian state and
people, however, was the 1967 referendum that removed the
exclusion of the
Commonwealth power to make laws with respect to Aboriginal people (amending
and included Indigenous peoples in the census (repealing s127). The
next significant act for Indigenous inclusion was the enactment
of the RDA,
which implemented the International Convention on the Elimination of Racial
Discrimination (CERD). Another significant
inclusive act was Prime Minister Paul
Keating’s famous Redfern speech in 1991, to celebrate the beginning of the
United Nations
International Decade of the World’s Indigenous Peoples
(Keating, 1991). It was one of the first and only times the office of
Minister has officially acknowledged on behalf of the nation the important place
that Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islanders
have in the Australian state:
Imagine if ours was the oldest culture in the world and we were told that
it was worthless. Imagine if we had resisted this settlement,
suffered and died
in the defence of our land, and then were told in history books that we had
given up without a fight. Imagine if
non-Aboriginal Australians had served their
country in peace and war and were then ignored in history books. Imagine if our
on sporting fields had inspired admiration and patriotism and yet did
nothing to diminish prejudice. Imagine if our spiritual life
was denied and
ridiculed. Imagine if we had suffered the injustice and then were blamed for it.
It seems to me that if we can imagine
the injustice then we can imagine its
The globalisation of human rights discourse and the influence of the United
Nations human rights system have contributed much to the
development of human
rights in Australia but it is often overlooked that they have been integral to
acts of inclusion for Indigenous
peoples and the state.
A recent example of the value of the United Nations human rights system to
Indigenous Australians can be seen in the actions taken
pursuant to a view
formed by Indigenous leaders that the Australian Government’s conduct
during consultations on amendments
Human Rights Defender : 16 A Narrative of Exclusion
Native Title Act
(Cth) were in breach of Australia’s
obligations under CERD. In particular, the Government’s intention to
suspend the
operation of the RDA in respect to certain provisions of the
amending act was seen as evidence of a breach of its international obligations
to protect and uphold human rights in Australia.
Indigenous advocates at the time included the National Indigenous Working
Group, ATSIC and the Acting Aboriginal and Torres Strait
Islander Social Justice
Commissioner who submitted complaints to the CERD Committee. On 11 August 1998,
the Committee listed Australia
under its urgent action/early warning mechanisms.
The Committee requested that the state party provide the Committee with
information
nation had been listed using these mechanisms.
The ultimate decision by the Committee was to condemn the Australian
Government for its failure to consult meaningfully with Aboriginal
people. The
Committee also noted the lack of entrenched basic human rights in the Australian
legal system. This lack of entrenched
rights means that the Parliament can
override any statutory rights such as those contained in the RDA as it sees
necessary, often
depending on the political tenor of the day. This is consistent
with the principle of parliamentary sovereignty. It effectively enables
Government to legislate against Indigenous interests on the basis of race, a
capacity arguably supported by the races power
in the Australian constitution
, 1998, especially Gummow and Hayne JJ).
The political backlash against the Committee from the Australian Government
was severe (Kinley and Martin, 2002; Collings, 2000).
It entailed threats of
withdrawing from the human rights system (Downer, August 2000; Downer, May 2000)
as well as accusations of
violations of Australian state sovereignty (Marks,
2001). For Indigenous peoples in Australia and around the world it stands as an
example of the symbolic power of the human rights treaty system. While the
United Nations treaty bodies cannot force states to change
domestic law or
policy, the process was important for Indigenous Australians. It confirmed that
the amendments violated Australia’s
human rights obligations under
international law. It confirmed to Indigenous Australians, as recently as 1998,
their suspicions that
the Australian Government doesn’t have its best
interests at heart. It confirmed to Indigenous Australians that their connection
to land and relationship to the Australian nation is not as important as the
economic connection to land of pastoralists and farmers
bolstered by mythologies
of the romantic bush and the frontier. And it confirmed the value of
international human rights law in the
absence of adequate rights protections
within a domestic legal system. International human rights instruments such as
CERD or the
United Nations Draft Declaration on the Rights of Indigenous Peoples
provide standards to states as to how its citizens should be
treated and
consulted. As Larissa Behrendt has observed:
In the absence of rights protection in the constitution, it is the reporting
and monitoring mechanisms under international law that
have created the most
effective method of monitoring human rights in Australia.
Moreover broader international law has been significant to the advocacy
campaign for Indigenous rights in Australia. Mick Dodson has
remarked that:
Racial Discrimination Act 1975
Land Rights
(Northern Territory) Act 1976
the High Court’s 1992
on native title – all of them were firmly grounded in, if not
from, international law
(Dodson, 1998).
This is not to provide a romanticised or naïve view of international
law. As the experience of the
Native Title Amendment Act
showed, nothing can protect Indigenous rights in the event of a Government
willingly legislating against a group on the basis
of race. Parliamentary
sovereignty and the rhetoric of state sovereignty are powerful political
principles in the Australian community.
Given that the Native Title amendments,
for example, occurred barely seven years ago, nothing has changed in the
Australian polity
to indicate that the need for Indigenous Australians to rely
on supra-national institutions will lessen in the near future. Indeed
2005, the United Nations Committee on the Rights of the Child during its 40th
session handed down its concluding observations
on Australia’s second and
third periodic report. The Committee held that it ‘remains concerned about
the overall situation
of Indigenous Australians, especially as to their health,
education, housing, employment and standard of living’ and questioned
whether the abolition of ATSIC and the new arrangements were in the best
interests of the child (Committee on Rights of the Child,
In 2005 Australians continue to laud themselves as fair minded and
egalitarian people while Indigenous peoples remain the perennial
footnote to
Australia’s record as a civil and humane liberal democracy. The continued
lack of legal or political status within
the state fuels Indigenous dislocation
from Australia’s public institutions, though it is fashionable today to
attribute this
exclusion to Indigenous peoples own misgivings and personal
failings. Equally fashionable is to exclude racism as a contributor to
Indigenous peoples situation today, because such a charge is considered the
bastion of the weak, of victimhood or the province of
the morally vain, as Noel
Pearson has recently noted (Pearson, 2005). That is why Indigenous peoples take
great solace in human rights
internationally and the United Nations system. The
United Nations is an institution in which racism is recognised as having had a
serious and insidious impact upon the lives of Indigenous peoples globally. It
recognises that racism remains a significant contributor
to intergenerational
poverty and dysfunction in communities – poverty and dysfunction of which
the contemporary culture in
Australia charges Indigenous peoples as being the
architects.
Megan Davis is a Senior Lecturer at the Faculty of Law, University of NSW,
and the Director of the Indigenous Law Centre. She was
a United Nations
Indigenous Fellow with the Office of the High Commissioner for Human Rights,
Geneva. Megan was formerly a Senior
Research Fellow, Jumbunna Indigenous House
of Learning, UTS.
Collings, Neva, (2000), ‘Australian Government exposes itself
the UN’ 30 Indigenous Law Bulletin vol 5 no 4; 11-15
Committee on the Rights of the Child (2005), Concludin
Observations, http://www.ohchr.org/english/bodies/crc/docs/co/CRC
C.15.Add.268.pdf
Dodson, Mick, (1998), ‘Linking international standards wit
contemporary concerns’ in Sarah Pritchard (ed), Indigenous
The United Nations and Human Rights (Leichardt: Federation Press)
Downer, Alexander (Minister for Foreign Affairs), Williams, A
General), and Ruddock P (Minister for Immigration and
Multicultura
Affairs), (2000), ‘Improving the effectiveness of united
committees’, Press Release, 29 August
Downer, Alexander (Minister for Foreign Affairs), (2000),
to review UN treaty committees’, Press Release, 30 March
Keating, Paul (2001), ‘Redfern Park speech ‘cited in
Indigenous La
Bulletin (2001) 57 vol 5 no 11; 9-11
Kinley, David and Martin, Penny (2002) ‘International human rights
at home: addressing the politics of denial’ 24 Melbourne
Law Review vol 26 no 2; 466-477
Marks, Gregory (2000), ‘Sovereign states vs peoples:
rights and origins of international law’ 5(2) Australian Indigenous
Pengelley, Nicholas (1998) ‘The Hindmarsh Island Bridge Act.
laws based on the race power be for the “Benefit” of
Aborigines an
Torres Strait Islanders? And what has bridge building got to do
the race power anyway?’ 20 Sydney Law Review vol 20 no 1
Reynolds, Henry (1981) The Other Side of the Frontier (Townsville
James Cook University)
Kartinyeri v Commonwealth
[1998] HCA 22
(1998) 152 ALR 540
Convention Debates (1898), vol 4, Melbourne
Convention Debates (1898), vol 5, Melbourne
Little has happened since 2005 to overcome the institutional exclusion of
which Megan Davis wrote. Governments show little interest
in supporting
representative organisations that give Indigenous people a political voice at a
national and regional level. Post-ATSIC,
the Commonwealth proclaimed a
‘quiet revolution’ in Indigenous affairs, but its new bureaucratic
arrangements have not
fared well in early evaluations.
The decision whether to prosecute a police officer for the death of Mulrunji
Doomadgee on Palm Island was mishandled by Queensland
Premier Beattie. It
reinforced the perception that Aboriginal people still don’t get a fair go
in the criminal justice system,
15 years after the Royal Commission into Deaths
in Custody.
In native title, a legal system set up to ‘recognise and protect native
title’ rejected the claim by Larrakia people,
recognised as the traditional people for Darwin. The answer to Wongatha
claimants was also ‘no’. It arrived
with 1000 pages of explanation
and the suggestion that starting again with a different approach might
The recognition of the Noongar as native title holders for the
Perth metropolitan area
was a positive development.
Changes to the Northern Territory Land Rights Act
confirmed that
even long-established Aboriginal institutions like the NT Land Councils will be
ignored when a Commonwealth Government
has its own agenda and a Senate majority.
Progress has occurred on stolen wages – money belonging to Aboriginal
people, but never repaid from government trust accounts
inquiry gave the issue national prominence and recommended Commonwealth and
State action.
Echoing Megan’s theme, it was the
non-discrimination principle from international law, expressed domestically in
Racial Discrimination Act
(Cth), that supplied Aboriginal people
with a remedy in a case about underpayment of wages on former Queensland
The 40th anniversary of the 1967 referendum – and its theme of
inclusion – is celebrated this year. So much yet to be
Sean Brennan is a lecturer in the Faculty of Law at UNSW and Director of
the Indigenous Rights, Land and Governance Project at the
Gilbert + Tobin Centre
of Public Law. He convenes and teaches the UNSW course Native Title Law, Policy
and Practice and, together
with George Williams, Larissa Behrendt and Lisa
Strelein, is co-author of the book Treaty (Federation Press, 2005).
1 See, for example, two evaluations commissioned by the federal
Government and authored by Morgan Disney & Associates: Synopsis
the COAG Trial Evaluations (2006); A Red Tape Evaluation of Selected Indigenous
Communities (2006).
2 Risk v Northern Territory
[2006] FCA 404.
3 Harrington-Smith on behalf of the Wongatha People v State of Western
Australia (No 9)
[2007] FCA 31.
4 Bennell v Western Australia
[2006] FCA 1243.
Aboriginal Land Rights (Northern Territory) Amendment Act 2006
6 In NSW a repayment system began operation. See <www.atfrs.
nsw.gov.au> at 15 March 2007.
7 See <www.aph.gov.au/senate/committee/legcon_ctte/stolen_
wages/index.htm> at 15 March 2007.
8 Baird v Queensland
[2006] FCAFC 162.
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (44.7 KB)
PDF format (105 KB)
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter