URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/journals/AUJlLegHist/2005/2.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 14:33:40
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Low, Alex --- "Sir Alfred Stephen and the Reform of the Court System in Van Diemen�s Land" [2005] AUJlLegHist 2; (2005) 9(1) Australian Journal of Legal History 19
Sir Alfred Stephen And The Reform Of The Court System In Van Diemen’s Land
I Introduction
VI Conclusion
Sir Alfred Stephen and the Reform of the Court System
in Van Diemen’s Land
I INTRODUCTION
In nineteenth century England, a groundswell had developed calling for reform
in many areas of the law.
The English legal
system at the turn of the 19th century was one inflicted with vast complexity
and characterised by ‘decentralised
and overlapping laws and
In the area of administration
of justice, the workings of the Court of Chancery were under critical
examination.
By the 1860’s there was an
attempt to introduce a system of county courts to make justice more readily
available to outlying
areas and to make it function more
effectively.
Legal reform came at the same time as interests in social reforms were
stimulated by economic, humanitarian and utilitarian factors.
These reforms were
just part of the reform movement which swept England and to which
Bentham’s ideas formed the basis of a
movement which was to transform not
only the law but permeated economics, religion and politics. In singling out the
‘parasitic’
aristocracy as the class which profited most from the
perpetuation of the political system and established church, which were both
‘riddled with abuses’, the reforms suggested by Bentham had powerful
forces resisting their implementation.
In examining the roots of the 19th century English reform movements, the role
and trajectory set by the popular radicalism of the
1790s and the democratic
agitation caused by the French revolution, to some extent, moulded the shape of
what was to come. Whilst
the radicals of the 1790s aroused ‘anti-jacobin
and never established a broad
base of support, it was nevertheless these initial flickers of change that were
to grow into flames
Having developed over hundreds of years essentially unimpeded, the English
court system underwent drastic reforms during the nineteenth
century in order to
overcome many of the ‘illogicalities and
which had arisen. The case for
change was perhaps most forcefully articulated by Lord Brougham in a six-hour
lecture delivered to
the House of Commons in 1828. The speech was met by a
flurry of official inquiries and eventually legislative action which was to
a broad and lasting impact.
This push for reform was mirrored in the colonies; but in addition there was
now a sea-change from having English laws adopted almost
verbatim in the
colonies, to a view that laws needed to suit local requirements and so would
better guarantee free Englishmen abroad
The Australian colonies were no
different and with their changing population composition from a predominantly
convict demographic
to free settler
there was increasing
dissatisfaction with the carte blanche adoptive approach. As noted by
In the result not only did the Council
ignore certain legal amendments arising out of principles and practices peculiar
to England, and adopt only so much of the different
British statutes as were of
value to the Colony but ... they enacted measures embodying principles new to
In Van Diemen’s Land, this manifested itself in concern for the plight
of convicts and the need to re-examine penalties in the
light of changing
economic and social conditions caused by the increasing pressure from now freed
convicts who demanded the same
rights as free British
The percentage of convicts in Van
Diemen’s Land to free settlers in 1820 was 54%; however this figure fell
dramatically to
29% by 1851 as the colony expanded and numbers of convicts were
emancipated.
As noted by Kercher, ‘[s]imple societies, the authorities felt, needed
only simple courts’.
premise, it was to the authority
Governor of New South Wales to establish ‘from time to time, a court of
judicature for trial and punishment’.
The court was to consist of a judge advocate presiding over all legal matters in
the colony and continued as such for nearly three
decades. In being neglected by
both Sydney and London between the years of its association with the colony of
New South Wales (1803-1825),
Van Diemen’s Land was essentially a realm of
legal amateurism.
It was not until 1814
that a separation of criminal and civil jurisdictions was effected in the
colonies and a Lieutenant-Governors
Court was established in Van Diemen’s
Land to deal with purely civil matters where the sum in dispute did not exceed
Matters over 50 pounds were to be dealt with in the Supreme Court
which was similarly established in the colony of New South Wales
through the
1814 letters patent (commonly known as the ‘Second Charter of
) but did not open until
1815. Criminal matters in Van Diemen’s Land were removed to the Court of
Criminal Judicature at Port
however, it was not until 1821 that this Court of Criminal jurisdiction actually
convened when ‘the colonial administration
in Sydney was virtually shamed
into sending it on circuit to the southern dependency by Commissioner
Prior to the establishment of the Lieutenant-Governors Court, the Bigge
Report points out that ‘there had existed [in Van Diemens’s
authority for the trial and determination of civil causes’ and criminal
matters were generally dealt with through
the modalities of the New South Wales
judicial framework.
Up until the machinery
of the criminal law was operating in Van Diemen’s Land in 1821, serious
criminal offences (of a capital
nature) were dealt with locally and severely by
magistrates who often had ‘no legal authority to impose capital punishment
or further transportation’.
development of the criminal jurisdiction in Van Diemen’s Land prior to
1821 reflected ‘deeply entrenched customary
practices’ which
‘deeply affected attitudes in Van Diemen’s Land towards
authority’.
In reaction to such
sentiments, and in an effort to make somewhat of a statement to the British
authorities on the need for a court
in Van Diemen’s Land to trial serious
offences, a large number of criminals were put to trial and nineteen executed on
first visit by the Criminal Court in 1821 to the Island. Such unprecedented
official slaughter in the colony even moved the ‘normally
conservative’ Bigge to cast such actions as an over
In terms of the civil jurisdiction in Van Diemens’s Land, the first
four terms of the Lieutenant-Governors Court, from 1816
to 1819, saw one
thousand five hundred and sixty causes
The composition of the court
consisted of a deputy judge advocate and two inhabitants of the colony appointed
by the Lieutenant Governor.
On the whole, the Lieutenant-Governors Court
operated in a ‘more summary and less complicated manner than the other
of New South Wales’.
drawing no explicit connections with the observation of judicial expediency, the
Bigge Report also noted that as late as November
1821 no lawyers had arrived in
Hobart Town to practice.
The Supreme Court’s first visit to Van Diemen’s Land was in 1819.
As Van Diemen’s Land grew as a settlement and
commerce began to take an
increasing role in the life of the colony, the difficulty in having the limited
Court (with its 50 pound limit) and the
sheer distance of the Supreme Court in Sydney became an
‘embarrassment’ to local
merchants and consignees of
Upon this basis and the fact that
criminal activity had increased in Van Diemen’s Land owing to the
‘distance and long
absence of any controlling judicial authority’,
the Bigge Report recommended the establishment of a separate civil and criminal
judicature for Van Diemen’s Land distinct from the colony of New South
The power to officially establish a Legislative Council and Supreme Courts in
each Colony was derived first from the Imperial Act
and then subsequently from the new
Charter of Justice, 1828
which had been
designed to solve problems which had emerged since 1823. Furthermore, the 1823
Act authorised the creation of the
Courts of Quarter Sessions and the Courts of
Requests in what Kercher maintains was a reflection of the transplantation of
the diversity
of the bodies of English Law and Court structures to
The main problem, however, had been the inadequacy of the judicial system in
New South Wales, and so the new Act (1828) was particularly
directed at the
administration of justice. Apart from making certain provisions as to the
Supreme Court in New South Wales,
details of the judicial system were left to the Colonial governments. This meant
the government of Van Diemen’s Land
was given power to control the
machinery of the Courts of Quarter Sessions and Courts of Requests. As a result
of this power, a local
was passed in
1830, outlining the power of the Quarter Sessions. These powers were
significantly greater and stricter than those
which had applied before 1828 in
the colony, a reflection of Arthur’s strict philosophy upon penal
administration philosophy.
Arthur’s views were moulded by the British
government. The British view was dependant upon whether one accepts a long-term
or a short-term interpretation. In the short-run, British authorities had the
idea that Van Diemen’s Land would be a repository
for its criminals, yet
it did have a longer view that eventually Van Diemen’s Land would be a
free colony with the entire infrastructure
that would be expected by a free
citizen. Arthur, being the bureaucrat that he was, accepted to the letter that
Van Diemen’s
Land was a penal colony, first and foremost, even if some of
the inhabitants were free citizens. As Arthur put it: ‘... (he)
Governor of a wretched sequestered lot, peopled by the refuse of
The radical anti-government
newspaper the
Cornwall Chronicle
expressed reluctance in accepting
Arthur’s outlook as late as 1835, when in a discussion upon prison
discipline in the context
of transportation being ended in Van Diemen’s
Land, the Editor related:
We differed with our contemporary, the
Colonial Times,
expressed the late meeting at Hobart Town ... (which) ... argued discontinuing
this Colony as a Penal settlement ... it would
not be productive of good to the
general interests of the free inhabitants to put into effect the prayer
advocated at that meeting.
Specifically the Act increased the powers of the court:
The three magistrates of the Quarter
Sessions were given the power of summary jurisdiction in all non-capital cases.
The Court was also given jurisdiction over
all felons in cases of drunkenness, disobedience, neglect of work or duty,
indecent language
and indecent
in relation to punishment were extraordinary. They extended the earlier
so that, for example, sentences of
transportation could be extended for three years.
Simultaneously, a local Act set up the Courts of
The function of this Court was to
adjudicate in small debts cases. The courts were given power to deal summarily
with all matters
involving not more than 10 pounds. In cases involving more than
10 pounds the Courts’ decision was final except in cases involving
rights. Whilst the new court structure adopted was expressly based on that of
England, it was not burdened by much of the
complexities and overlapping
On the 4 May 1831, a Royal Charter was granted, pursuant to the English
Legislature
which empowered the Van
Diemen’s Land Legislature to set up the Supreme Court of Van
Diemen’s Land.
It was within this climate that Alfred Stephen was appointed
Solicitor-General in 1825 and as Attorney-General in
In the course of carrying out these
duties he developed an intimate knowledge of the framework of the Courts of Van
Land. Apart from this official connection, Stephen was concerned
to make the Courts function efficiently. Between 1830 and 1839,
he was to be the
main force behind the reforms which significantly improved the functioning of
the Supreme Court, the Quarter Sessions
and the Courts of Request.
II STEPHEN: A REFORMING VISION
Stephen did not openly display dissatisfaction with the functioning of the
Courts until 1831 and until his departure in 1839, Stephen
single-handedly investigated, changed and reformed the entire administration of
the Courts.
This was foreshadowed in 1831, when Stephen wrote an article, published in
, outlining his plans for improving the administration of
justice and evidencing his concern at the inefficiency of the present Court
system. Stephen explained the need for a new Court system by highlighting that
such reforms would confer upon the colonialists ‘the
benefits of
expedition, certainty and regularity of justice in all the Courts of the island
to the great relief of suitors and prevention
of crime by a speedy and equal
system of punishment’.
He then proposed ways of standardising decisions and generally increasing the
efficiency of the legal system:
Stephen suggested that the Supreme
Court should have three Judges instead of two, the second and third Judges
combining their Supreme
Court functions with the Chairmanship of the Courts of
Quarter Sessions and the Courts of
Stephen also proposed the
setting up of a circuit system which the Judges would attend alternately,
ensuring the sittings of minor
innovation that Stephen suggested was the keeping of official record books in
one place in the hope that this would enable
‘a uniform system of
decisions and course of
Stephen’s plan elicited considerable praise in unofficial circles. The
, for example, referred to it as a ‘highly judicious and
expedient plan for the reorganisation of our judicial
establishment’.
The same paper felt
that the suggestion for a circuit system was the most important of
Stephen’s ideas but in no small part
to the rapidly expanding population
of the island. The
also referred to ‘[t]he obvious
necessity of not confining the administration of justice to this Town only but
expanding it
to the ... northern division of the
The changes that Stephen envisaged could only be implemented, however, with
the approval of British officials and Parliament as the
changes went well beyond
the powers granted in the Charter and would thus have been repugnant to British
Legislation.
This certainly was a source of frustration for Stephen, knowing that someone
with competence and understanding was needed to lobby
the British Officials, and
it was soon transparently clear to Stephen he was the only person who had the
ability and knowledge to
At the same time, he appeared to be reassessing his personal achievements and
future ambitions. Of course it is impossible to understand
Stephen’s frame
of mind at the time. However if we look at the facts, we find that whilst he was
only 29 years of age in 1831,
he had been Solicitor-General for 6 years and
perhaps it was the lack of challenge in the position that made him restless. He
ambitions to become Attorney-General or for elevation to the Bench. These
ambitions were perhaps most poignantly revealed in Stephen’s
when he wrote in a letter to Arthur:
I assume the necessity of appointing a judge ... I bear in mind the Necessity
of my quitting this Colony in January next or thereabouts
... there appear to be
two courses open to me
were appointed I would depart and
there would be no harm to the public interest for it would be easy to find a
locus tenens to the
Solicitor-Generalship.
2. If Hone were undesirable Mr. Montaque would be appointed ....the state of
the Bench would be infinitely advanced, but on the other
hand the public
interest would suffer ... since it would not be so easy to find a locus tenens
for the Attorney-Generalship ... For
my part I have made up my mind I will not
be a judge if I can be Attorney-General and I will be neither one nor the other
if it should
prevent my leaving Van Diemen’s Land in January-February
Stephen revealed his thoughts to Arthur when he wrote to him about his
possible trip to England. He informed the Lieutenant-Governor
that he would
rather be a judge than stay in his present position, that he wanted the
Attorney-Generalship ‘most of all’
but with the admission that
‘of Mr Montaque vacating his office I utterly
Finally in September
Stephen had made up his mind and he wrote to Arthur saying he would not accept
any office which prevented him
departing Van Diemen’s Land.
Stephen’s disappointment was common knowledge and in the community it
was rumoured he would not return. Even his most trenchant
critic, the
Colonial Times
opined that his permanent departure would be unfortunate
and praised his talents:
In whatever point of view we regard his loss whether as a public or private
character, as a lawyer or a gentlemen ... we know not
in what his final
departure is to be most deplored ... he reminds us of the late Sir Samuel
Romilly, we equally trust in the elevation
to which his great talents and
reputation cannot fail to raise him at the English
It can be seen that even at this early stage of his career, Stephen was being
seen as a man with a strong sense of public duty and
as a potential force in law
reformation. This showed remarkable insight, for up until his departure, Stephen
had done very little
in this area; yet the rest of his life was almost entirely
devoted to law reform in both Van Diemen’s Land and New South Wales.
Most of all, Arthur must have felt the impact of Stephen’s departure.
Stephen was the only legal advisor in whom he had confidence,
and this was
probably instrumental in Arthur nominating him for Attorney-General after he
left the Colony.
In any case, it was agreed
that Stephen would discuss official business whilst in England.
He reached London in November and went, almost immediately, to Downing Street
to get ‘news of official
and at the same time to
discuss the Colony’s judicial
Whilst Alfred Stephen was not acting under strict orders from Arthur in this
matter he had the courtesy to correspond with him to
explain that he would not
implement any measures without Arthur’s approval.
Alfred obviously felt no hesitation indicating to James Stephen, his first
cousin, his views and aspirations for Van Diemen’s
Land and, in
particular, upon the administration of justice.
As Alfred wrote to Arthur
I have satisfied James of the inconvenience likely to arise from the want of
any plan in our present Charter for deciding points where
the two Judges may
differ. I deem the only plan for this purpose is the creation of a third
It may be said that considering the broad scope of Alfred Stephen’s
original suggestion, it is not surprising that he tried
‘to get some
points attended to, of still greater moment in relation to the
It can be seen he was not
attempting to override Arthur but rather to grasp the opportunity to introduce a
vitally important reform.
As he made clear to Arthur,
[n]o plan would be acted on without your and Mr Pedder’s report on it.
All that I want is
Colony and its Courts are on the
legislative carpet that a door should be opened for improvements also in Van
Diemen’s Land
at a future period.
James Stephen was obviously impressed with Alfred’s ability as he left
to him the tasks of preparing the Charter along the lines
Alfred wanted and of
drawing up the Act of Parliament.
Alfred’s suggestions were revealed in a long official letter to
Under-Secretary Hay, and were obviously based on his
August 1831. The letter pointed out the need for constitutional reform to set up
for resolving differences of opinions
between the currently two Judges in the
Supreme Court, since the cases in which conflict was likely were ‘those of
interest to the Colony and on which it is most important ... that there
should be decision’.
Stephen then discussed the wider topic of the inadequacy of the existing
Court system. His main criticism was the lack of established
rules for the
practice of the Court and he pointed out that such defects could only be
remedied by an Act of the Imperial Parliament.
Stephen was also critical of the inconsistencies between the
and local legislation as well as some
technical faults in it. For example, the local Act made provision for trial of
issues at different
places simultaneously, whilst the Act stipulated trials at
only one place.
Stephen also pointed out that the local Acts established circuits whilst the
Charter only allowed the Imperial Parliament to do this.
Finally, the Charter allowed trials before one Judge yet there was an
ambiguity, for a Judge sitting alone could not give judgments
or sentence.
A fundamental criticism that Stephen advanced was the lack of centralised
control of the Courts. This, he said, led to inconsistencies
and consequently
injustices. He pointed out that there were seven district Commissioners of
Requests and five district Chairmen of
Quarter Sessions, each having the
administrative powers of fixing the time of trial, of transportation, hearing,
and determining
appeals. Stephen’s solution was, as he had done in 1831,
to coordinate the various positions into two Chairmanships, held by
and third Judges.
Stephen was convinced of the advantages of this scheme, and expressed his
confidence in recording that ‘[e]very friend of the
Colony must wish for
the adoption of this plan which is of all others best celebrated to remedy the
manifold and serious defects
in the existing judicial
Stephen also made suggestions in relation to practitioner’s viz.
altering the standing of Article Clerks. Stephen recognized
the dire shortage of
the legally trained in the colony and, to make it easier for an articled clerk
to become qualified, he effectively
deemed that any period served under an
attorney in any English or Australian court was accepted and counted toward the
5 year clerkship
More over, Stephen
also made suggestions with respect to separating Attorneys and Barristers and
restricting the rights of law officers
in private practice. In 1825 Stephen had
a rather bitter experience when he had reason to lay a complaint against his
superior, Joseph
Tice Gillebrand, the first Attorney-General of Van
Diemen’s Land, for overcharging and for accepting payment from both
when conducting his private
His overall aim was to reform the
judicial system so as to provide, in his own words: ‘a uniform system of
decisions and the
correct course of
A testament to Stephen’s search for efficiency, was the method he
suggested to introduce his reforms. Originally Stephen had
wanted a new Charter
for the Colony but soon realised that this would be too sweeping as it meant in
reality, abolishing all the
Courts, Judges, law officers, and proceeding
Instead he asked James to introduce a
short Bill entitled ‘An Act for the more effective administration of
practice in New
South Wales and Van Diemen’s Land’.
Alfred Stephen’s hope was that such a Bill would be considered when the
Australian Courts Act 1828
had expired in 1836. The Act, however, was
kept in operation by successive enactments and it was not until 1839 that an Act
which contained a provision
giving the local legislature the power to regulate entirely the judicial
structure of the Colony.
III REFORM OF THE EXISTING COURT SYSTEM
Despite his failure to convince the Colonial Office to support his overall
reform of the Court system, Stephen was still able to improve
the nature and
functions of the various individual Courts.
The Courts of Quarter Sessions
The inadequacy of the
Quarter Sessions
which completely regulated the
procedure and defined the powers of the Courts had become obvious to Arthur by
late 1834. He wrote
to Stephen asking him to correct an administrative defect in
the Act relating to the taking of fees at the Police
Stephen was too busy to do this for
finished drafting
the law, Stephen had both complied with Arthur’s
specific request, dealt with in sections 12 to 15 of his draft, and at the
time completely transformed the Act. Stephen, apologising for the delay, wrote
‘I had very much mistaken the extent of
my task, as it approached
completion I found a hundred things to improve on or
Stephen’s draft Act was published in the
afterwards and the paper commented ‘From what appears there is much to
The published plan had nine major points but most were technical and the only
provisions which received any public attention were
three relating to punishment
and to aiding criminals. The question of punishment had been an issue in the
Colony from early in 1835,
when editorials appeared in several newspapers
complaining about the severity of sentences imposed in the Quarter Sessions. The
Tasmanian’s
opinion had been typical in its position that
‘The severity of the sentences passed by the Magistrate in the Quarter
has been from the very institution of the Court a subject of general
The promise of modification of this severity as well as the changing of laws
relating to assisting criminals met with approval in
the press. The
for example, wrote ‘[w]e rejoice to be able to state that
Mr. Attorney-General Stephen has prepared an Act of Council consolidating
extremely obnoxious Turkey and Persia Act – the Police Harbouring
Some months later, whilst reviewing Stephen’s proposals again, the same
newspaper raised the punishment question again:
Among the modifications is the wide distinction to be drawn between the
punishment to be adopted in the case of free felons and convicts
... the great
mistake in legislating for PRISON DISCIPLINE hitherto has been the mixing
together of the free and the bond.
Stephen’s new Act was obviously designed to accommodate the growing
class of free citizens in the Colony. The statistics show
that in 1820 convicts
were 54% of the population. By 1851 the number had dropped to
When the original Act had been passed
in 1829 its main object had been to regulate the efficiency of a large prison.
By 1835, however,
the free Colonists had become a far more powerful force and
were demanding the same rights that all free British subjects received.
Quarter Sessions Act
was to give to these free citizens many of these
rights by reducing some of the arbitrary powers under the Act, and by making a
distinction between free and non-free in relation to punishment.
The completed Act
was passed by the
Council on 4 August 1835. Its emphasis was on consolidation. The act
incorporated six separate Acts into one, cutting
down areas of over lapping or
conflict and including areas which and been neglected. The
written of the Bills that ‘[i]t consolidates in substance most of the
provisions of several acts and as to the remaining
provisions substitutes
enactments more or less
The new Act was divided into three Divisions:
Division One
The first division of the Act dealt with the functioning of the Court and
with the punishment of offenders; Division Two dealt with
the jurisdiction of
the Court and with matters relating to the harbouring of criminals; and Division
Three dealt with transported
offenders and bushrangers.
The most important innovation in the first category was the regulation of the
Courts in cases of summary jurisdiction. Such cases
were to be heard regularly
and in each district. Stephen also clarified the application of summary
offenders under original or extended
The Act also defined the type of punishment for summary matters and the
defendants to whom this would apply. The same punishment could
now be given to
both imprisoned and transported offenders – a consolidation of the old
. Stephen’s Act also reduced the powers of magistrates,
sitting alone in summary jurisdiction, from being able to give sentences
three years, to one year.
In addition, the Act greatly simplified procedure in the Court. In relation
to summary matters, the long process of initiating convictions
in the Supreme
Court was replaced by a far simpler procedure where the Clerk of Peace was
nominally made the Prosecutor.
In addition,
convicts accused of capital crimes could be sent to the Quarter Sessions, rather
than to the Supreme Court, if it was
obvious that the convict would not be put
Division Two
The second Division of the Act dealt with matters that Arthur had asked
Stephen to investigate. In addition, Stephen wrote ‘[t]he
draft contains
certain provisions upon subjects as to which I have received no specific
instructions but to which my attention ...
Arthur’s main concern related to the punishment of
but Stephen went far beyond
this. His Act removed the magistrates’ rights to punish summarily free
men. Thus these provisions
did two things. They simplified procedure and, by
radically reducing summary powers in relation to free citizens, they brought the
Act more into line with the changing nature of the Colony.
A main concern in this Division of the Act was to prevent assistance being
given to runaways.
This was a continuing
problem in the 1830’s and to this end he included Section 40, which
provided that if there was reasonable
cause to believe that a person was a
runaway, then this was to be taken as actual
Whilst Stephen considered the punishment of prisoners in the 1835 Act, he did
not immediately address the internal management of the
imprisoned. However, he
did address this area in his 1839 reform of the Act after raising the matter
with Arthur.
In summary, the Second Division of the Act provided absolute certainty as to
the laws relating to absconding criminals and to persons
assisting them,
including certainty as to a magistrates’ power in such cases.
Division Three
The third division of Stephen’s
achieved two main objects. It
modernised some of the provisions of the
Transportation Act
by abolishing
the death penalty for convicts illegally at large and allowing the offence to be
dealt with as a misdemeanour,
provided that
two magistrates were in agreement. In addition, the Act introduced sections to
allow for severe punishment for all
persons supporting or receiving from
bushrangers.
Stephen’s provisions were much more extensive than similar provisions
in the New South Wales Act and included the provision
that publication of a
reward was prima facie evidence of guilty knowledge that a person was a
bushranger.
Taken as a whole, the Act transformed the functioning and powers of the
Court. It was far more procedurally simple due to the selective
extension of its
summary power. Yet on the one hand it was more positive and straightforward, in
that for the first time the Court
could deal expediently and effectively with
all types of criminals and persons’ assisting and harbouring them as all
were now under the umbrella of one Act. On the other hand the Division
also contained special limiting powers in relation to free
The reform of the
Quarter Sessions Act
was thus the result of a number
of factors:
Arthur’s desire to increase
the efficiency of his administration;
The free community’s desire to
establish their rights; and
Stephen’s desire to ensure that
the law provided society with the maximum possible benefit.
Stephen saw that the social changes in
the Colony made the existing laws inadequate, and convinced Arthur that to
preserve social
harmony many of the restrictions appropriate to a purely penal
Colony would have to be lifted.
At first blush, one could not see how the Attorney-General could convince a
disciplinarian such as the Lieutenant Governor of the
advantages of introducing
such enlightened legislation.
Consider the facts: Arthur was a person who believed strongly in the rule of
law as narrowly interpreted by him; he believed in exercising
personal control
over the system he had established under the auspices of the brief he had been
given to run a convict colony; Arthur
was a devoutly religious man who
subscribed to the utilitarian approach of pleasure and pain as a basis for
As such, Arthur’s approach to
the punishment of convicts, although strict, could not be called sadistic. Given
this personal
moral foundation, Arthur’s actions were generally fair
according to his own standards as he took ‘considerable trouble
ascertain the facts in a dubious case’ in the dispensation of
punishment.
Arthur’s philosophy on the ideal on the common good generally
encompassed the social dominance of a landed, god-fearing gentry
‘unsympathetic to radical fantasies, whose behaviour would provide a good
example to the lower classes, and whose industry
would stimulate the economic
development of Van Diemen’s
This subscription to the
virtue of authority on the part of Arthur’s professional (if not personal)
beliefs can be used to
translate the attitude held by Arthur in respect of the
rule of law. The rule of law was the strict adherence to established authority
with little, if any, room for deviation or discourse.
Consequently, the newspapers of the day, at every opportunity, attacked
Arthur not only for the way he ruled with an iron hand but
also for the alleged
favours he gave to relatives and supporters. He favoured the appointment of men
with a military background because
of their disciplined background, even though
these men may not have been the best qualified for a position: for example he
magistrates and lacking a legal background they often overlooked
material facts. However, at least they were honest, unlike their
predecessors.
He also appointed relatives
to important colonial positions, but then again, it was an age of patronage and
they all proved to be
honest and capable.
Stefan Petrow
looks at this rigid and
almost cruel disciplinarian streak in Arthur when he examines the case of
convicts who conspired to murder
‘even though it might end in their
death’ but would provide a respite for fellow conspirators, such was the
and rigors of convict life at Port Arthur.
In the end it was the Attorney-General who prevailed, probably due to the
unquestioning respect Arthur had for him as a lawyer; Stephen’s
skill and tireless energy, together with Stephen’s undoubted influence
upon Arthur which enabled him to have a statute
enacted which satisfied both
Arthur and the free community. A third factor which probably weighed heavily
upon Arthur’s mind
was that he was at the time under siege for
disregarding the rights and liberties of the colonists and he simply had had
The late Professor Alex Castles argues that in Van Diemen’s Land, there
was developing what he describes as a Vandemonian Spirit,
characterised by a strongly independent frame of mind, a deep suspicion for
authority, healthy cynicism about it and a
refusal to take things at face
The anti-Arthur newspaper, the
Cornwall Chronicle
, seems to echo this spirit when it stated that even
convicts should receive fair and democratic treatment according to British law
which applied to every Englishman.
The Act as it stood was still too complicated and, although it worked fairly
effectively for a number of years, the changing population
composition and
social mores of the Colony necessitated a further change towards the end of the
By this time Stephen was no longer working for the
yet he was by far the most
experienced lawyer in the Colony and was persuaded by Arthur to prepare a new
Act for the Colony.
The resultant Act
did not break new
ground as the 1835 Act had done, but it considerably refined some of
Stephen’s earlier work. The following
points can be made:
The new Act reflected, as the old
Act had done, the changing social composition of the Colony.
powers of the magistrates were again reduced specifically in the following
The right of imposing
transportation for life was abandoned and all crimes which were liable to
penalties of ten years or more had
to be tried before a jury.
There were fewer opportunities for use
of the punishment of solitary confinement and powers of flogging were
drastically reduced.
Fines replaced
prison sentences as the penalty for assisting or harbouring absconding
The punishment handed out to bushrangers illustrates that Stephen’s
reforms may not have had the effect of granting the fair
treatment that is
presupposed by the reforms.
Fate of Van Diemen’s Land Bushrangers:
Shot and killed whilst at large
Re-transported to a penal settlement
Lesser punishment (flogging, confinement, etc)
Pardoned or surrendered under amnesty
Never Caught, run, absconded
Fate not known
Total (percentages in brackets)
Source: Hamish Maxwell-Stewart, ‘I Could Not Blame the Bushrangers
....’ (Tasmanian Historical Research Association, papers
and proceedings,
Volume 42, No 3, September 1995, 117).
On the surface it appears the above statistics would support such a
contention; if we look beyond these, there is perhaps another
side to the story.
Statistics show during Arthur’s period of governorship there were 129
active bushrangers, of which 74% were
executed. As stated by Hay: ‘the
discretion embodied in the law allowed authorities to use terror with greater
flexibility’.
Indeed the gallows
‘played a frighteningly large part in Arthur’s
Another commentator
points out that
from 1835 onwards, ‘the rate of judicial carriage of justice
subsided’ and this coincided with the setting
up of Port Arthur as a
repository for felons and the reopening of Norfolk Island. This meant that
institutionalised punishment now
existed and so pressure was eased on other
forms of punishment and death by hanging. Furthermore, between 1835 and 1846
of bushrangers were executed compared to 69% in the previous decade. So
effectively the bushranging population had declined dramatically.
Overall of course, an argument can be made that the philosophy behind these
proposals were aimed at distributing the type of punishment
available instead of
making examples of individual felons, introducing into Van Diemen’s Land
for the first time, an almost
paternalistic prerogative instead of relying on
terror as a deterrent; this created at least on the surface the impression that
Colony was normal and stable.
Such changes reflected the increasing sophistication of the Colony. Along
with the Administration’s acceptance that Van Diemen’s
Land was no
longer only a prison, there arose a humanitarian spirit of which the new
Quarter Sessions Act
was an obvious manifestation. Commenting on the Act,
[i]t will be seen from the above that considerable improvements have been
made upon the repealed Act as respects the limiting of summary
power ... as also
by the introduction of a highly salutary and mitigatory spirit into the laws
relative to convicts.
Stephen’s new Act remained in force until the introduction of the new
Act in 1847.
In summary, Stephen greatly improved the efficiency of the Quarter Session.
He helped keep the Court a popular tribunal by consolidating
various Acts,
amending others, and introducing others, and introducing new Acts which greatly
improved the practice.
The Courts of Request
Stephen was also involved in the reform of the powers of the Courts of
Request although, as with much of his career in Van Diemen’s
contribution was equivocal.
The Courts of Request were designed to deal with small debts and had been
introduced to Van Diemen’s Land in
Under the powers granted by the
1828 Act, to give the local legislature control of the Court a local act to
establish the Courts
of Request was passed in
This Act defined the power and
functions of the Court.
Even the anti-government
Launceston Advertiser
newspaper was
approving, for it meant cheaper and more expedient dispensation of justice to
all. The paper commented that ‘[l]aw
expenses being now the cry –
and who is to wonder! – Give us Courts of Requests’ economy is a
natural demand.
The economy given, the justice will be unobjected to...’.
The reason for the newspaper’s support was that it stopped ‘...
the wealthy wrong-doer to trample upon his humble victim
with a settled,
understood, and even acknowledged
Originally, the Act gave the Court power to deal with all matters involving
or less by summary
proceedings. Procedure was very simple, for example, no proceedings could be
quashed through a bad plea
were kept to a minimum. This was in contrast to the Supreme Court where costs
were often quite large, the procedure complicated
and time-consuming. As an
example, often cases involving an amount as small as ten guineas had to be heard
in the Supreme Court and
such a case could easily result in costs of 50 pounds
or more. A contemporary historian, Henry Melville, thus observed that
is beyond dispute that numbers of Colonists have been ruined by the
enormous charges the Supreme Court has allowed its legal
practitioners’.
Besides expense, jurisdiction also was a problem. Often it was necessary to
seek an order to prevent a defendant leaving the jurisdiction
of the court and
this could only be done in Hobart before the Supreme Court. One example of the
problem was reported where a creditor
was owed 700 pounds and the debtor was
from leaving,
but failed:
The answer of course was negative – the applicant’s only recourse
being a journey to Hobart Town. The result we have not
heard; but the
probability is that the creditor to the amount of 700 pounds, will have to add
the expense of a tedious journey to
his other losses!
However, Stephen’s reform was not carried through until early 1836. The
main reason for the delay was the opposition it met
in the Council, and was
indeed supported by Stephen, the architect of the reform. He gave his support,
not because of any personal
motive, rather he took the pragmatic view that to
support one piece of legislation ie, reform the Court of Requests without at the
same time, the Supreme Court was inefficient. It was better to reform both
courts simultaneously.
Opponents, however, did not see it his way, leading to a series of bitter
attacks on the Council, accusing it of submitting to the
pressure of the lawyers
in the Council. These lawyers were alleged to fear the reform because it would
reduce their costs in the
Supreme Court. Melville reflected the views of a large
proportion of the free inhabitants when he wrote ‘Composed as the
Legislative
Council is, relief from such monstrous charges is scarcely to be
hoped for. The Legal profession is well supported – well represented
– in this Council of which his Honour the Chief Justice and the
Attorney-General are members’.
The same view was held by the moderate
which also attacked
the Council and, especially, the Attorney-General, for their short-sightedness.
The paper was adamant about the
necessity for this reform: ‘We are
convinced’, they wrote, ‘that giving the people cheap law would also
the profession’.
The pressure of such criticism ultimately convinced the Council and an
amendment was passed increasing the Court’s jurisdiction
involving a maximum of 50 pounds.
The intense criticism of Stephen for opposing this measure appears, at least
on the surface, to be justified. Stephen appeared to
oppose the reform on the
grounds that it would reduce lawyers’ incomes and for no other reason.
A closer analysis reveals, however, that his accusers were mistaken. Stephen
felt that an amendment of the type which was ultimately
passed was merely
incidental to the main problem. The real issue was the inefficiency of the
Supreme Court and the inconsistencies
between certain sections of the
of Requests Act
Supreme Court Administration Act
. Thus rather
than attempt temporary repairs to the
Courts of Request Act
aimed to reform both Acts simultaneously. He felt that only with such a
fundamental reform could justice truly be served.
With this aim in mind, Stephen wrote to the Colonial Secretary in late
proposing an almost total reform of
the functioning of the Courts of Request.
His main suggestions were:
That the Supreme Court should
recognise cases which could also be heard in the Courts of Request and adjust
costs accordingly;
That expenses be granted to
witnesses; and that some cases should be decided by a jury as well as the
Commissioners of the Court;
He also included the proposal that
the Court should extend its jurisdiction in all cases of debt of 30 pounds.
Stephen’s view
of this extension was that it would decrease legal
efficiency and its’ inclusion in his original letter was obviously a
of public pressure and pressure inside the Council.
After the bill had been drawn up and when it was debated in the Council,
Stephen argued against the extension and moved that the second
reading of the
Act be postponed.
His argument was a
practical one: that the extension of the Court’s jurisdiction would
encourage too much litigation. This
motion was defeated, as was Stephen’s
further attempt to amend the fourth section, reducing the 30 pounds to the
original 10
It was obvious that Stephen’s arguments carried considerable weight in
the Council, for on both issues the vote was five each
and only the
Lieutenant-Governor’s vote decided the
It can be seen that of the four who supported Stephen, the only lawyer was
the Chief Justice, so all the allegations of selfish financial
motives was
unfounded. Undoubtedly they felt, as Stephen did, that the reform of the Courts
of Request without parallel reform to
the Supreme Court was inadequate. The
in fact took this argument a step further and fancifully argued
that but for the passage of the ‘Court of Requests Cheap Law
there would not be legislation setting up the Supreme
The newspaper with its catch-cry, ‘open to all – influenced by
none’ was generally supportive of the government,
and also of Arthur who
they thought of as a righteous and principled person. This is firmly illustrated
after Arthur voted in favour
of the Court of Requests
His Excellency, the Lieutenant-General is entitled to the warmest gratitude
of the whole colony for the DECISIVE support His Excellency
thus afforded to its
best interests. But for his casting vote the People’s Cheap Law Bill
would have been BURKED!
Finally, ‘an Act to provide further for the institution of Courts of
Requests and to extend their
became law in late
May 1836 and was based on Stephen’s proposals which had been outlined
earlier to the Lieutenant-Governor
in November 1835.
The Act made the following changes:
The number of Courts was
and the jurisdiction of the
Court was raised to 30 pounds.
In all claims for an amount exceeding
10 pounds the amount of damages was to be determined by a Commissioner of the
Court and two
assessors and if there was disagreement a majority was to
The most important reform was the
section which was designed to remove the inconsistencies between the Court of
Requests and the Supreme
Court. This meant that if an action was brought in the
Supreme Court which should have been brought in the Court of Requests, the
could award the decision to the defendant with costs, notwithstanding the
verdict for the
V REFORM OF THE SUPREME COURT
The reform of the Court of Requests was only one side of Stephen’s plan
to improve the whole of the administration of Justice.
The reform of the Supreme
Court also held his attention.
At the Supreme Court level the years between 1823 and 1850 in the Eastern
Colonies were primarily years of
consolidation.
In Van Diemen’s
Land the Royal Charter of 1831
the Supreme Court, declaring; there shall be in this Colony a Court to be called
the Supreme Court of Van Diemen’s Land
to be consistent of and beholden
before two Judges.
Pursuant to this power, the local Act called
The Supreme Court
Administration of Justice Act
drafted by Chief Justice Pedder and Attorney-General Montague and enacted in
September 1831. At the time of its enactment, there
was considerable controversy
as to whether the Act was repugnant to British Legislation. Despite this
controversy it was finally
passed in 1835.
Attacks continued after its passage, concentrating on the obvious
inconsistencies between what the Charter allowed and what was enacted
local legislation. As an example, the local legislation had given the
Lieutenant-Governor power to appoint a second Judge
and at the same time allowed
the Judges to sit separately. The Charter was silent on these
These inconsistencies were obvious to all the Colonists. Their attitude was
summed up by the
when it declared that ‘our objections
(to the Act) remain
unchanged’.
It is to be remembered that Stephen himself had attempted to persuade the
Colonial Office to introduce a new Charter whilst he had
been in England in
1823-24. This plea was ignored, and so reforms were left to local initiative and
in the main to Alfred Stephen.
Stephen did not begin to reform the Supreme Court
until the beginning of 1836. The initial motivation to do so was provided by the
public protest over the Courts of Request.
These protests opened his eyes to the possibility of reforming a number of
Courts in a coordinated manner in order to transform the
whole of the
administration of Justice. Stephen’s particularly wanted to simplify its
proceedings in the Supreme Court, to
make litigation before it cheaper and to
lessen delays.
His plan, which was published in the
at the end of March,
again emphasised consolidation rather than
innovation.
As Stephen had put it when describing his draft of the Act:
... (it) comprises most of the leading provisions of no less than five Acts
of Parliament passed of late years for the amendment of
the law and of above
forty sections of rules passed by the courts of Westminster exclusive of ...
three of four original provisions
on subjects requiring mere local
arrangements.
was enacted on the 9 July
1836 and, in structure and scope, was a great improvement on all previous Acts
relating to the Supreme
It reduced delays and costs by
increasing the Judges’ powers to allow a judge to alter methods of
It regulated and settled
by providing for speedy execution
after the handing down of the
allowed civil actions which involved less than 50 pounds to be tried before a
Commissioner
It allowed documents to be used in
evidence without having to prove their contents, unless objections were
As well as these specific sections, the Act introduced ‘Sundry
miscellaneous provisions as to practice ... for the more effective
prevention of
expenses and delays in action’,
which related to costs, leave to plead, rules in relation to pleading, taxing of
costs and so on. In summary, the result was that
actions would be heard more
quickly, forms of pleading were simplified, meaning hearings were more expedient
and less time-consuming
and much cheaper.
VI CONCLUSION
By the middle of 1836, Stephen had greatly improved the administration of
justice in the Colony. His combined reform of the Courts
of Requests and the
Supreme Court coordinated their functions and provided cheaper, quicker justice.
By providing for juries
in some cases
where they had previously been excluded, decisions were also potentially more
just, certainly more popularly acceptable.
When the reforms of the Quarter
Sessions are also considered, the breadth of Stephen’s work becomes even
more impressive. None
of the reforms were spectacular but this was
understandable since only the Colonial Office and the Imperial Parliament could
large scale changes. Rather, Stephen realised that dedicated work
directed to piecemeal reforms would increase the efficiency and
justness of the
Courts and would lessen their costs, making them more accessible.
Stephen’s desire to reform the Courts in Van Diemen’s Land was
the result of a number of factors. On one side of the coin
he can be viewed as
an ambitious public official who wished to please his superiors and advance his
career. On the other side of
the coin, Stephen can be seen as one motivated
sincerely by the Benethamite philosophy of
with a desire to make the law a
better instrument to serve the needs of society. The reforms of the Courts are a
good example, for
whilst Stephen did not radically alter the legal machinery of
the Colony, he did improve its functioning and broaden its ambit.
Population of Van Diemen’s Land
Total Population
Convict Population
Source: R M Hartwell,
The Economic Development of Van Diemen’s Land,
MEc (Syd), LLB (Hons)
(UTS), DipLabRel & the Law (Syd), SJD (Deakin), Senior Lecturer, Division of
Law, Macquarie University.
My sincere thanks to Professor Bruce Kercher for his
assistance and guidance in the writing of this paper. Any errors or omissions
are mine alone. I also thank the blind referee for the very helpful and positive
comments which have contributed to the finalization
of this article.
Juries in 1825, criminal procedure in
1826, specific offences such as offences against the person in 1828 and coinage
offences in
1832 and the law of bankruptcy in the 1830’s.
Bruce Kercher,
An Unruly Child, A
History of Law in Australia
Cases took a long time before they were
heard and the number of appeals actually dealt with was under scrutiny,
resulting in the
appointment of a Vice Lord Chancellor to assist with the
See Sir William Holdsworth,
(1937) 263-4.
J R Dinwiddy,
From Luddism to the
First Reform Bill
(1986) 16-17.
Brian Abel Smith and Robert Stevens,
Lawyers and the Courts
Ibid 29-52.
See especially Kercher, above n 2.
Kercher’s thesis highlights the tension between the received wisdom of the
English legal
system and its application to the colonial context of Australia.
Van Diemen’s Land became officially a free British colony
with access to
all English laws existing at that time, but retained its penal functions. This
allowed future legislation to develop
according to the colonies own conditions
and unique requirements; See also Bruce Kercher,
Debt, Seduction and Other
Disasters: the Birth of Civil Law In Convict New South Wales
(1996) and Alex
An Australian History
See W D (Mick) Borrie,
‘Australia’s First Demographic Transition, 1788-1830: From
Convictism to Free Settlement in New
South Wales’ (paper presented at the
Australian Population Association, 3rd National Conference, 1989, kept at
Australian Bureau
of Census and Statistics, Canberra). As can be expected, the
first half century of settlement saw convicts being the major component
population growth. The first official census was in 1828 and these statistics
showed in the New South Wales (including Van Diemen’s
Land) colonies,
there was a population of 36 602 persons of which 4121 arrived free and 3503
were born free. The remaining 23 198
adults consisted of 15 668 convicts and
7530 emancipists. There were 5780 local born Australians. By 1853 this
composition had changed
dramatically. There were now a total of 68 609 persons
in Van Diemen’s Land of which 30 488 arrived free, 16 531 were convicts
emancipists and 21 590 were local born. In summary, the population became
largely free, though the majority were migrants. See
also Wray Vamplew (ed),
Australians: Historical Statistics
Referring to the NSW Legislative
Charles Herbert Currey,
Sir Frances
Forbes: the First Chief Justice of New South Wales
(1968) 296.
See V Markham Lester,
Insolvency: Bankruptcy, Imprisonment for Debt, and Company Winding-up in
Nineteenth-Century England
(1995) 23-25.
See Appendix.
Kercher, above n 2
27 Geo 3, c 2.
Report of the Commissioner of
Inquiry on the Judicial Establishments of New South Wales and Van Diemen’s
Land (The Bigge Report
Kercher, above n 2, 59.
J M Bennett,
Sir John Pedder
W C Wentworth,
A Statistical
History and Political Description of the Colony of New South Wales and its
Dependent Settlements in Van Diemen’s
(2nd ed, 1820) 165-6.
Alex Castles, ‘1991 Eldershaw
Memorial Lecture The Vandemonian Spirit and the Law’ (1991) 38
Tasmanian Historical Research Association
The Bigge Report Volume 2
above n 17, 41.
Castles, above n 21, 109.
The Bigge Report Volume 2
above n 17, 42. Of these causes, 477 were withdrawn, 1083 were tried and a total
of 18 848 pounds was obtained by the various litigants.
In 1816 the total amount
of causes tried was 309 with a total of 2580 pounds obtained as contrasted to
497 causes in 1819 with an
amount totalling 7089 pounds obtained.
Ibid 44; see also Bennett, above n 19,
The Bigge Report Volume 2
above n 17, 46.
4 Geo 4, c 96; this Act was originally
known as the
New South Wales Act
and was superseded and
became the Charter of Justice in the same year and proclaimed on 17 May, 1824 to
allow the establishment of
a Supreme Court.
9 Geo 4, c 83; entitled: ‘An Act
to provide for the Administration of Justice in New South Wales and Van
Diemen’s Land,
and for the more effectual Government thereof, and for
other purposes relating thereto, 1828’; more commonly known as the
Australian Courts Act
Kercher, above n 2, 73.
These will not be dealt with in this
article. To explore this further, see Alexander Clifford Vernon Melbourne,
Early Constitutional Development in Australia: New South Wales 1788-1856
(1934) 160 onwards.
10 Geo 4, No 2; a copy annotated by
Stephen’s in his own hand-writing is in the Mitchell Library.
See Michael Charles Ivan Levy,
Governor George Arthur: A Colonial Benevolent Despot
(1953) 127-128.
Sections III, IV, V.
4 Geo 4, c 96, this Act later became 6
Geo 4, c 69
a local Act which applied only to Van Diemen’s Land.
Specifically it found its way into the earlier Act as Article XIX and not
did it apply to extending the period of transportation, the extension also
applied to complaints against convicts for drunkenness,
disobedience of orders,
neglect of duty, absconding, bad language to overseers and employers. It also
allowed the convict to be whipped
and any punishment that ‘did not extend
to the privation of life’.
10 Geo 4, No 3, which was entitled
An Act to Institute the Court of Requests
Kercher, above n 2, 73.
9 Geo 4, c 83; hereinafter,
Australian Courts Act
W A Townsley,
Tasmania from Colony
to Statehood 1803-1945
Official positions he held in a
distinguished public career were: 1839, Judge, Supreme Court of New South Wales;
1844, Chief Justice,
Supreme Court New South Wales; 1856-91, President,
Legislative Council of New South Wales; 1891-92, Member, Legislative Council of
New South Wales; 1875, Lieutenant-Governor of New South Wales; 1890, Member,
Privy Council.
, 13 August 1831; the
was first published in 1827 and merged with
Austral-Asiatic Review
in 1830. From 1831-1833 the
publication was continued as the
Tasmanian and Southern Liberary and
Political Journal
. In 1834 it merged with the
Austral-Asiatic Review
and this publication split in 1839 into three entities:
Austral-Asiatic Review
Tasmanian and Australian
Advertiser.
Four times per year for the minor
Courts; twice a year for the Supreme Court.
13 August 1831.
Ibid 20 August 1831.
The Courts of Requests and Quarter
Sessions were headed by Major E Abbott who was not a lawyer was considered
‘somewhat of
an old woman’, see
Historical Records of
, Series 3, Volume iv, 136-8, 296; and also see Arthur Papers A4, J
Stephen to Arthur, 16 September 1825.
Joseph Hone was made acting Attorney
General following the dismissal of J T Gellibrand. Although legally trained, it
was said he
‘was out of his place and quite unfit for the office’
... and ... he appeared to know little about law ... and with his
bodily and facial contortions, turned his Court into a Punch and Judy
show’ see Arthur Papers, A4, Arthur to J Stephen,
21 April 1827; see also
Levy, above n 36, 47. Just a little more about him: He arrived in Hobart in 1824
to become Master of the
Supreme Court and then after being replaced as Acting
Attorney General in 1826, he became Commissioner of the Court of Requests and
Chairman of Quarter Sessions. When the office of Master was abolished he became
Chairman of the Caveat Board for investigating titles
to land. He was
reappointed Master when the position was revived. He was reputed to be a hard
worker but not a brilliant lawyer and
had a health problem which hampered him
throughout his life; see Douglas Pike (ed),
Australian Dictionary of
Volume 1 A-H 1788-1850
Stephen to Arthur, 19 June 1831;
Arthur Papers (A2214 – Mitchell Library). Clearly Arthur had a problem
because of the quality
of the lawyers he had access to and so he was continually
worried about any legal advice he was given, except of course from Stephen
he regarded as an excellent lawyer, but who sometimes was consumed by his own
Stephen to Arthur, 25 August 1831;
Arthur Papers (A2214 – Mitchell Library).
Colonial Times,
See Gipp’s Despatches, 1844;
(1235, Mitchell Library). Stephen was not officially appointed until January
1833, when he was
in England. His appointment was gazetted in April, 1832,
whilst he was in England, so whilst in London he acted in his capacity as
colony’s Attorney-General. See Alfred Stephen to James Stephen, 15 March,
1833; Arthur Papers (A2214 Mitchell Library);
and also see
, 4 December, 1832. Stephen arrived in England in June, 1832 and spent
the next 6 months catching up on the English countryside and
visiting old
friends; for a short account of places he visited, see Alfred Stephen’s
Diary. Stephen Family papers (777/3-Mitchell
Stephen to Arthur, 17 November 1832;
Arthur Papers (A2214 – Mitchell Library).
His cousin James Fitzjames Stephen was
Legal Advisor to the Colonial Office at the time, and it was with James that
these discussions
Stephen to Lieutenant-Governor, 9
February 1833; Arthur Papers (A2214-Mitchell Library).
Ibid. In relation to laws passed to
improve the administration of justice, such laws were generally unspectacular,
technical and
did not arouse public interest; yet were essential to protect
public interest. It was here that Stephen played a singularly important
for he drafted and introduced legislation that resulted in a total
transformation of the court system viz: the
Supreme Court Act
Quarter Sessions Act
Court of Requests Act
Expenses of Witnesses Act
Ibid. These are Alfred Stephen’s
Stephen to Hay, 14 March 1833; Arthur
Papers (AA2214-Mitchell Library). This letter is a long one and its contents
constitute the
basis of the following discussion in this article.
9 Geo 4, c 83.
Obviously if trials could only be held
in one venue it would mean additional expense for litigants who may have to
travel long distances
to get to a trial court venue.
Stephen to Hay, above n 61. This
comment is written in pencil and is in Stephen’s hand-writing.
See John Michael Bennett and Alex
A Sourcebook of Australian Legal History
(1979) 172.
For a detailed analysis of this case
see Enid Campbell ‘Trial by Commission: the Case of Joseph Tice
Gellibrand’ (1987)
Tasmanian Historical Research Association
Alfred Stephen to James Stephen, 15
March 1833; Arthur Papers (A2214-Mithcell Library).
2 Vic, No 31 & 32; entitled
‘An Act to set up the Courts of General Quarter Sessions and Punishment of
Transported and
other officers’.
Edward Sweetman,
Constitutional Developments
(1925) 73. See also Alex Castles,
Introduction to Australian Legal History
(1971) 70 and John Michael Bennett
and Alex Castles, above n 65, 77.
10 Geo 4, No 2; This was the original
piece of legislation covering the Courts of Quarter Sessions.
There is no record of Arthur’s
letter to Stephen but Stephen’s letter of 30 October 1834 makes it obvious
that Arthur
had written to him. Stephen to Colonial Secretary, 30 October 1834,
Letter Book II (A670-Mitchell Library).
Stephen to Colonial Secretary, 20 May
1835. Letter Book III (A671-Mitchell Library).
, 29 May 185.
16 January 1835.
, 29 May 1835.
‘Turkey and Persia Act’ refers to a comment made by Stephen some
years before denouncing the Act, as fit
only for Turkey and Persia.
, 10 July 1835.
See Ronald Maxwell Hartwell,
Economic Development of Van Diemen’s Land, 1820-1850
reproduced in Appendix.
6 Will 4, No 2 and was entitled
‘Courts of General Quarter Sessions and Punishment and Control of
Transported and Other Offenders’
and this act repealed the earlier
statute, 2 Vic, No 31 and 32. The Harbouring Act, Hard Labour Act, Apprehension
of Felons Act,
Quarter Sessions Act, Quarter Sessions Amendment Act and the Gaol
Act. See A Stephen, Letter Book III 20 May 1835 (A671-Mitchell
, 10 July 1835.
Draft of Act in A Stephen’s
Letter Book III, 20 May 1835 (A671-Mitchell Library).
See Schedule A & B to the Act.
Section 32.
A Stephen to Colonial Secretary, 22
May 1835. Letter Book III (A671-Mitchell Library).
A runaway was a convict who
re-offended in the colony. When caught they were harshly treated, so many
escaped and took their chances
with the harsh winter climate, the local
aboriginals and the ever impending threat of recapture. Some settlers took
advantage of
them by absorbing them into their assigned work-force. Other
runaways simply became bushrangers, being hunted, and coming to a violent
Very few died of natural causes. A notable exception was Martin Cash who
eventually returned to society and died of old age;
his life is a story of
romance and intrigue; See generally Frank Clune,
Martin Cash: The Last of the
Australian Bushrangers
This was enacted in 4 Geo 4, c 96,
section 39 which stated that any person assisting in the escape of a felon was
guilty of a misdemeanour
and subject to a fine of up to 500 pounds and/or
imprisonment up to 5 years.
Sections LX to LXVI of the 1839 Act
were devoted to this purpose. Here the Lieutenant-Governor’s powers in
relation to gaols
were defined, how gaols should be set up the power of gaol
governors was also clearly defined.
Sections 53-62.
Sections 53 and 54.
Under the non de plume ‘De
Fox’, A writer delivered a sermon on the evils of bush-ranging following
the death of an
unnamed bushranger: ‘To all those misguided characters
among the prison population who have mediated on a bush-ranging life
careless independence, this is one more instance of the certainty of a fatal
termination ... the life of these men has
been one of intolerable hardship and
privation ... there is held out to them the certainty of punishment for renewed
delinquency,
the equal certainty of freedom for good conduct – of freedom
in a young and flourishing country ... where there is the highest
reward to the
industrious and sober freeman’. See
Launceston Advertiser
February 1835.
Richard Davis,
The Tasmanian
A G L Shaw,
Sir George Arthur
The History of
(1971) 138, 595.
Ibid 138-139.
Stefan Petrow, ‘Drawing Lots:
Murder at the Port Arthur Penal Settlement in 1835’ (1998) 45(3)
Tasmanian Historical Research Association
Stefan Petrow, ‘A Case of
Mistaken Identity: the Vandiemonian Spirit and the Laws’ (1998) 6(1)
Tasmanian Historical Studies
Castles, above n 21, 113-14.
Cornwall Chronicle
January 1836; the same sentiments were expressed in the
Hobart Town
, 6 November 1835.
He retired officially in September
1838 to have a short break before taking up a judgeship in New South Wales.
2 Vic.No.32. This was in essence
the same as 2 Vic No14, but corrected ‘Sundry errors and omissions chiefly
of a clerical
nature’ – see preamble to 2 Vic 32.
See page 1 of this paper and
Appendix B.
Hamish Maxwell-Stewart,
‘“I Could Not Blame the Rangers...” Tasmanian Bush-Ranging,
Convicts and Convict Management’
(1995) 4(3)
Tasmanian Historical
Society Research Association
Douglas Hay, ‘Property,
Authority and the Criminal Law’ in Douglas Hay,
Albion’s Fatal Tree: Crime and Society in Eighteenth-century
(1975) 14, 17-63.
Davis, above n 93, 13; During
Arthur’s tenure, 230 executions were carried out which represents nearly
half the total number
of executions in Tasmanian History.
Hamish Maxwell-Stewart, above n
104, 109-118.
Hobart Town Courier
November 1838.
The new Act used Stephen’s
Act as a framework.
Under 4 Geo 4, c 96.
10 Geo 4, No 3.
17 September 1835.
This amount was increased to 30
pounds in 1835 and at the same time allowed sittings of the court at Waterloo
Launceston Advertiser
, 17 September 1835.
Section VI.
Henry Melville,
The History of
Van Diemen's Land: From the Year 1824 to 1835, Inclusive During the
Administration of Lieutenant-Governor George Arthur
(first published 1835,
Launceston Advertiser
Melville, above n 116, 175.
, 11 September
Stephen to Colonial Secretary, 13
November 1835. Letter Book III (A671-Mitchell Library).
, 6 May 1836; where
there is a report of the Legislative Council Debate.
The voting was tied as follows: For
the people: Captain Foster, Captain Swanton, Mr Archer, Mr Wallis, and Mr
McLachlan. For the
lawyers: Pedder CJ, Colonial Secretary Montaque,
Attorney-General Stephen, Colonial Treasurer Mr Gregory, Mr Barnes, a
businessman
and land-owner. The deciding vote in favour of the people was cast
, above n 124.
, 13 May 1836.
7 Will, No 1.
Section IV.
Section XII.
See Alex Castles,
Australian Legal History
(1982) 77 for a short account, especially in New
South Wales.
2 Will 4, No 1, entitled
Administration of Justice in the Supreme Court of Van Diemen’s Land; its
name was altered by an amendment,
26 Geo 5, No 16 [Supreme Court Act,1831].
Prior to the Act there existed a Van Diemen’s Land Supreme Court with
appeal to the
New South Wales Supreme Court and then appeal to the Privy
4 March 1831.
2 Will 4, No 8.
In such inconsistencies the Charter
prevailed since under the 1828 Act any matters which were repugnant to the
British Legislature
were invalid; See Melbourne, above n 34, 159.
, 3 September 1835.
, 10 September 1835, for an article attacking the
inconsistencies between the Charter and the local Act.
Stephen to Colonial Secretary, 25
February 1836. Letter Book IV (A672-Mitchell Library).
Stephen to Colonial Secretary, 25
February 1836. Letter Book. (Mitchell Library).
7 Will 4, No.2; entitled
‘Practice and Proceedings in the Supreme Court of Van Diemen’s
Section III.
Section XV states inter alia,
‘if a judge should be of opinion that Justice may by that course be
attained at less expense
and with greater convenience’. It was also
reported that a further Bill would be introduced providing for the appointment
such Commissioners, and set out their powers viz. to draft affidavits and to
oversee the execution of them, issue writs and to hear
applications for
recognisance. Commissioners were to be situated in the towns and suburbs outside
of Hobart so that members of the
public, wherever they lived, would have easy
access at minimum cost; see
Launceston Advertiser
, 2 April 1835.
Section XXX.
Section XXXVIII.
Beyond the scope of this article,
but discussed in Alex Low, ‘Sir Alfred Stephen and the Jury Question in
Van Diemen’s
Land’ (2002) 21(1)
University of Tasmanian Law
Commentaries on the Laws of
, J H Burns,
Jeremy Bentham: an Iliad of Argument
Project (are these two separate references? Year of publication?), There are a
number of critiques and commentaries upon
the Benthamite approach to law. Just
some are: J H Burns, ‘Bentham and Blackstone: A Lifetime’s
Dialectic’ (1989)
(starting page?), 22-40 (are these
pages pinpoint or article in entirety?); on Bentham’s critique of law and
his recommendations,
see Ross Harrison,
(1983); L J Hume,
Bentham and Bureaucracy
(1981); David Lieberman,
The Province of
Legislation Determined: Legal Theory in Eighteenth Century Britain
Douglas G Long,
Bentham on Liberty: Jeremy Bentham’s Idea of Liberty in
Relation to His Utilitarianism
(1977); David Lyons,
In the Interest of
the Governed: A Study in Bentham's Philosophy of Utility and Law
Gerald J Postema,
Bentham and the Common Law Tradition
(1986); Michael
Lobban, ‘Blackstone and the Science of Law’ (1987) 30
311-35; Allen Watson, ‘The Structure of Blackstone’s
Commentaries’
Yale Law Journal
; and Fredrick
Jeremy Bentham and Representative Democracy
(1983). Also see
generally Jeremy Bentham, ‘A Fragment on Government and an Introduction to
the Principles of Morals and
Legislation’ in Wilfred Harrison (ed),
Fragment on Government
(1948); see also C J W Allen, ‘Bentham and
the Abolition of Incompetency from Defect of Religious Principle’
Legal History
; Bentham’s legal and political ideas
have been the subject of general scrutiny in a number of writings and for a
fuller appreciation
of his views; see as a starting point, the Bentham Project
at website: http://www.ucl.ac.uk/Bentham.
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
PDF format (831 KB)
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter