URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/journals/SocSecRpr/2014/15.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 15:37:16
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Editors --- "Disability support pension: assets test; whether member of a couple; meaning of principal home" [2014] SocSecRpr 15; (2014) 16(2) Social Security Reporter, Article 7
JAMIESON and SECRETARY TO THE DSS
Legislation
Consideration of the evidence – member of a couple
Consideration of the evidence – principal home
Consideration of the evidence – value of principal home
Formal decision
Disability support pension: assets test; whether member of a couple;
meaning of principal home
JAMIESON and SECRETARY TO THE DSS
Decided: 10th April 2014 by A.F. Cunningham
Jamieson was in receipt of disability sup-port pension (DSP) from 19 April
2004. At the time he applied for DSP, Jamieson was the
registered owner of a
property at Busselton in Western Australia (the Busselton property) and one at
Innisfail in Queensland (the
Innisfail property).
Centrelink decided to raise and recover a debt for the period 19 April 2004
to 28 May 2010. The debt was caused by the incorrect value
of assets being taken
into account when Centrelink calculated the rate of Jamieson’s DSP. On 5
May 2011 an Authorised Review
Officer (ARO) affirmed the decision. The amount of
the debt was adjusted to $38,766.65 prior to the decision of the Social Security
Appeals Tribunal (SSAT). On 29 May 2013 the SSAT affirmed the decision.
Jamieson sought review by the Tribunal and contended that Centrelink had
incorrectly decided that his principal residence was the
Innisfail property and
not the Busselton property. He contended that he was not living in a
marriage-like relationship with Ms Finna
during the relevant period so that the
value of her assets should not have been included in the calculation of his rate
The issues to be determined were:
1. Whether Jamieson was a member of a couple for all or part of the relevant
2. Which property was his principal home during the relevant period;
3. Whether he had been overpaid DSP; and
4. If so, whether the debt should be waived or written off for a period.
Legislation
The relevant legislation is contained in the
Social Security Act 1991
(the Act). Module G at
Section 1064
-G1 sets out a six step process to work
out the effect of a person’s assets on the maximum rate of payment.
Section 1064
-G2 states that the value of the assets of a member of a couple is
to be taken to be 50% of the value of the person’s assets
and the value of
the person’s partners assets.
The term ‘member of a couple’ is defined in
subsection 4(2)
the Act and relevantly provides that a person is a member of a couple if:
1. The person has a relationship with another person (the partner):
2. The person is not legally married to the partner;
3. The relationship between the person and the partner is a de facto
relationship;
4. Both the person and the partner are over the age of consent applicable to
the state in which they live; and
5. The person and the partner are not within a prohibited relationship.
The criteria for forming an opinion about the nature of a couple’s
relationship are contained in
subsection 4(3)
of the Act.
Consideration of the evidence – member of a
The Secretary contended that Jamieson was in a de facto relationship with Ms
Finna between 26 March 2005 to 15 September 2005 and
between 13 January 2006 to
25 January 2011. Jamieson conceded that he lived with Ms Finna during these
periods but he did not agree
that that their relationship was
‘marriage-like’.
The Tribunal considered the evidence under the headings in
section 4(3)
the Act. It accepted much of Jamieson’s evidence about each of the 5
Financial aspects
: Jamieson gave evidence that they operated separate
bank accounts and had their own sources of income (Centrelink benefits). They
generally ate out at his expense. He had paid for Ms Finna to accompany him on a
number of trips including a trip to Romania. He
paid her $30,000.00 by way of a
property settlement following their separation.
The nature of the household
: Jamieson and Ms Finna did not have
children together but Ms Finna’s grandchildren often spent time with them.
When Ms Finna
first moved into his home they shared a bedroom together and had a
sexual relationship. After a month or so Ms Finna moved into a
separate bedroom
and their sexual relationship ceased. They generally ate their meals together
but mostly ate out. Ms Finna helped
him when his back condition was particularly
bad. Jamieson did most of the house work and Ms Finna washed their clothes.
Social aspects of the relationship
: They ate out together on a regular
basis and went on numerous holidays together. People in Innisfail probably
viewed them as a couple.
Sexual relationship
: Their sexual relationship ceased a short time
after they commenced living together.
Nature of commitment to one another
: Jamieson maintained that his
relationship with Ms Finna could not be described as ‘marriage-like’
and that whilst he
cared for her, he did not love her. He claimed that there was
a period when she looked after him and acted as his carer. Jamieson
Tribunal that Ms Finna ceased living with him around the time of Cyclone Yasi
(31 January 2011).
The AAT noted that the existence or absence of any one factor was not
conclusive and regard must be had to all of the circumstances
of a relationship.
It noted similarities between the relationship de-scribed in the decision of the
Tribunal in
Pala and Secretary, Department of Fam-ilies, Housing, Community
Services and Indigenous Affairs
[2010] AATA 1070
and this case. The AAT
concluded that Jam-ieson and Ms Finna were in a marriage like relationship
during the relevant period.
Consideration of the evidence – principal
of the Act contains the general provisions relating to the assets
‘Principal home’ is defined in
section 11A.
Subsection 11A(9)
provides that a residence of the person is taken to continue to be the
person’s principal home during any period not exceeding
12 months during
which the person is temporarily absent from the residence.
The AAT noted that although nothing in the definition section of
‘principal home’ specified which of two properties owned
occupied by a person should be considered the person’s principal home, the
term had been considered in a number of previous
cases before the Tribunal.
Matula and Secretary Department of Families Housing Community Services
and Indigenous Affairs
the Tribunal said at paragraph 35
‘..The words “principal” and “home” are
ordinary English words and should be given the ordinary meaning
in the context
in which they appear.’
Samek and Department of Social Security
held that where a person had two or more properties in which they had a
proprietary interest, the ‘principal home’
should generally be the
one where they spent most of their time.
The only evidence before the AAT of periods Jamieson was in Busselton were
his bank statements for the relevant period. Jamieson agreed
that the recorded
transactions in Busselton would suggest his presence in the area at the time of
those transactions. These occurred
during a total period of nine months. He
spent the remainder of the time at the Innisfail property.
The AAT noted that Jamieson had nominated the Innisfail property as his
postal address for Centrelink correspondence and arranged
for all mail from
Busselton to be redirected to this address.
In the Real Estate Declaration Form completed by him on 12 February 2009,
Jamieson described the Busselton property as a two acre
vacant block with an
unlined tin shed comprising just one room. He estimated the current market value
of the property including land
and buildings was $300,000 and stated that the
property was owned jointly with his partner in equal shares. He purchased it on
On 1 April 2009 and 1 May 2009 Jamieson advised Centrelink that a friend was
staying at the Busselton property to keep an eye on it
In his claim for DSP dated 19 April 2004, Mr Jamieson nominated Innisfail as
his permanent home address but failed to answer question
14 which asked
‘do you own your own home but live somewhere else?’ He told the
Tribunal that he understood the reference
to real estate to not include a vacant
block of land.
The Tribunal was satisfied that Jamieson’s main place of residence and
principal home during the relevant period was the Innisfail
property and so the
Busselton property could not be disregarded as an asset under
subsection 1118(1)
of the Act.
Consideration of the evidence – value of
principal home
The Innisfail property consisted of two units, one of which was occupied by
Jamieson and the other by a tenant who paid rent to Jamieson.
The Secretary
submitted that in accordance with the Pension Rate Calculator A at the end of
section 1064
, where a person owns an investment property, the value of the
property can be assessed under the assets test or rent received from
property can be assessed under the income test. Both the value and the rental
income are recorded in the Department’s computer
system and a periodic
calculation is undertaken to determine which of the income and asset tests
generates the lower amount of DSP
payable which is the one that is applied.
The Secretary considered that the questions raised were whether it was
appropriate to treat only one of the two units as Jamieson’s
Innisfail property to ascertain the value
of the investment unit. Reference was
made to a number of authorities in which the Tribunal had found that only part
of a property
on a single title should be considered as a person’s
principal home.
The Tribunal considered that it was appropriate to treat only the unit
Jamieson occupied at the Innisfail property as his principal
purposes of the assets test.
The next question was what value should be ascribed to the second unit of the
Innisfail property. The value ascribed to Jamieson’s
principal home by the
Secretary was one half of the AVO valuation of the duplex property.
Jamieson informed the Tribunal that he did not accept the valuation. The
Tribunal considered that it was appropriate to dir-ect that
the Secretary obtain
a valuation from the AVO in relation to the historical value of the Innisfail
investment unit.
The remaining issues were whether Jamieson had been overpaid DSP and if so
whether the debt that arose should be waived or written
off for a period. On the
basis that the values ascribed to Jamieson’s assets excluding his
principal home were in excess of
the allowable asset limit, the AAT was
satisfied that Jamieson was overpaid DSP for the relevant period and that
pursuant to
section 1223
of the Act the amount of the overpayment was a debt due
to the Commonwealth. The AAT concluded that neither waiver provision applied
the debt arose either wholly or in part as a result of Jamieson’s failure
to disclose his true asset position. The AAT concluded
that write-off was not
appropriate.
Formal decision
The decision was set aside and in substitution the matter was remitted to the
Secretary for further consideration with the direction
that the Secretary obtain
a valuation from the AVO in relation to the historical values of the Innisfail
investment unit.
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
No downloadable files available
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter