URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/journals/AUJlLegHist/2004/10.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 14:33:44
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Hunter, Ann --- "The Boundaries of Colonial Criminal Law in Relation to Inter-Aboriginal Conflict (�Inter Se Offences�) in Western Australia in the 1830s-1840s" [2004] AUJlLegHist 10; (2004) 8(2) Australian Journal of Legal History 215
THE BOUNDARIES OF COLONIAL CRIMINAL LAW IN RELATION TO
INTER-ABORIGINAL CONFLICT (‘
OFFENCES’) IN WESTERN
AUSTRALIA IN THE 1830S-1840S
ANN HUNTER*
I INTRODUCTION
The question of whether Aborigines were subject to British law for conflicts
between themselves (
offences), arose in New South Wales and
Western Australia during the 1830s and 1840s. There is evidence that the
colonial government
and the courts in Western Australia responded to a perceived
problem independently from New South Wales.
had already been confirmed by the courts in 1837 that British law applied to
offences against Europeans by Aborigines.
issue of how the colonial government and the courts were to deal with
offences had initially arisen out of complaints by settlers of increased
street violence in Perth amongst groups of Aborigines. This
perceived problem
then extended to the need to deal with attacks by Aborigines on other Aborigines
residing with or employed by settlers
in towns and dwellings of the colony. This
reflected the value of their labour amongst other things, in the pre-convict
to 1838, colonial government policy had been not to interfere with
the ‘private quarrels’ of Aborigines, partly because
it was not seen
as their business where Europeans were not directly
This is likely to have arisen from a
growing realisation by both courts and the colonial government that Aborigines
could not really
be treated as British subjects, nor could British law
effectively be applied in relation to
A variety of
‘experiments’ were attempted by a colonial government eager to
resolve this aspect of ‘the Aboriginal
Unlike New South Wales which had convicts from 1788, the Swan River colony
was established as a free settler colony in 1829 and land
grants were allocated
based on what its small population of settlers could provide in the way of
collateral. Despite the fact that
there was indentured labour tied to the land
grants, there was a shortage of labour in the
Aborigines were increasingly
dispossessed of their lands. By the 1840s the colonial invasion had spread from
Perth and the south-west
to the Murchsion, and North West of Western Australia.
Aborigines were often perceived as a threat by the settlers, when they
congregated
in large numbers, and when they threatened the settlers’
security and livelihoods.
This paper examines the approach of the colonial government and courts to the
application of British criminal law to murder and assaults
between Aborigines in
Western Australia. It examines the
cases, and makes comparisons with key New South Wales cases in the
1830s and 1840s.
This includes the debates
surrounding the legal status of Aborigines and the kinds of arguments put
forward relating to recognition
of customary law.
CASES IN NEW SOUTH WALES
In the same year as the formation of the Swan River colony in 1829, the first
case was heard in New South Wales which tested whether
the Supreme Court had
R v Ballard or
The tribal killing had occurred
at the Domain near to central Sydney in 1829. On 21 April, the Attorney General
had initially sought
Chief Justice Forbes opinion on whether Robert Ballard was
amenable to British law. Forbes opinion was that the Supreme Court would
have jurisdiction if the killing was a result of a dispute within a tribe solely
in accordance with Aboriginal customs, but that
it would have if an Aborigine
had come to town and placed himself under the protection of British
The formal hearing that followed
resulted in Ballard being discharged for want of jurisdiction.
Forbes noted that it had been the policy of the courts and government not to
interfere in quarrels between Aborigines.
it appears to me that it is a wise principle to abstain in this Colony as has
been done in the North American British Colonies, with
the institutions of the
natives which, upon experience will be found to rest upon principles of natural
justice ... . They gave up
no natural rights. This is not merely a matter of
theory but practice ... They make laws for themselves, which are preserved
and are rigidly acted upon.
He also pointed to the injustice and impracticality of applying British law
to Aborigines in relation to
The other judge in the
matter, Dowling had said that:
Until the aboriginal natives of this country shall consent, either actually
or by implication, to the interposition of our laws in
the administration of
justice for acts committed by themselves upon themselves, I know of no reason
human or divine, which ought
to justify us in interfering with their
institutions even if such an interference were
practicable.
R v Murrell
case seven years later was to overrule the
In Februrary 1836, Jack Congo Murrell
had been indicted in the Supreme Court for the wilful murder of Jabinguy
(Jabbingee) and George
Bummery was charged for the murder of Pat Cleary on the
road between Windsor and Richmond.
oral argument (which expanded on his plea against the court’s
that New South Wales
was neither ceded, settled nor conquered.
Aborigines continued to be governed by their own laws since time immemorial. The
British had come to reside amongst them and by analogy
the British should obey
Aboriginal laws. Murrell belonged to a tribe who were not British subjects nor
subject to British laws. Neither
Murrell nor Jabinguy were practically able to
be protected by British laws and therefore were not bound by
The Supreme Court overruled the plea
on jurisdiction.
The leading judgement by Justice Burton (with which the other judges were in
agreement) stated that Aborigines were amenable to British
offences and against the peace of the
The act had occurred on New South
Wales territory that had been possessed by England, and ‘the English
nation has obtained
and exercised for many years the rights of Domain and Empire
over the country thus possessed and it is particularly designated by
the Imperial Parliament’.
Burton made
no distinction in law between British subjects and aliens as both came under the
protection of British law. Aborigines
did not have laws that could be
recognised.
He said that:
Although it be granted that the aboriginal natives of New Holland are
entitled to be regarded by Civilized nations as a free and independent
and are entitled to the possession of those rights which as such are valuable to
them, yet the various tribes had not attained
at the first settlement of the
English people amongst them to such a position in point of numbers and
civilization, and to such a
form of Government and laws, as to be entitled to be
recognized as so many sovereign states governed by laws of their
As Kercher points out that a theory of
terra nullius
was invoked by
Burton had taken a pragmatic
approach by concluding that, if the Supreme Court had not had jurisdiction, then
there would continue
to be violence on the streets and there would be no
protection under British law for
Aborigines.
Despite there being no
provision for Aborigines to give evidence in New South Wales, Burton dismissed
Stephen’s arguments of
the likely injustice, stating that this could be
overcome by the local legislature and by the exercise of the royal prerogative
As the Court found it had
not guilty and the Crown
did not proceed with the prosecution of Bummery.
case was authority for the courts jurisdiction on
matters, Justice Willis in Port Phillip (also a part of New
South Wales) reached a very different conclusion in
R v Bonjon,
the issue of sovereignity of the
Aborigines.
In September 1841, Bonjon (Bon
Jon), was tried for the murder of Yammowing in
Bonjon’s lawyer Redmond
Barry argued that the court did not have jurisdiction. He argued that New South
Wales was occupied
which gave the Crown a right to the soil, but not authority
over the Aborigines as subjects unless some treaty, compact or other
of assent had been made. Aborigines had their own laws and modes of regulation
and punishment and were self governing
communities.
In his judgment Justice Willis said he was not bound by
his opinion the Supreme court did not have jurisdiction over crimes committed by
Aborigines against one another.
Wales was not unoccupied at the time the colony commenced and Aborigines were
distinct though dependent allies, not British
subjects who were entitled to
exercise their own usages and laws. This case was not viewed as authority at the
time, but (along with
case) it is viewed today as the highest
to which the Supreme Court reached on Indigenous legal
III WESTERN AUSTRALIA
Lieutenant-Governor Stirling received hastily drafted Instructions from
London in 1828 with no information on the legal status of
Aborigines. However,
in his proclamation of 1829, Stirling stated that:
... the Laws of the United Kingdom as far as they are applicable to the
Circumstances of the Case, do therein immediately prevail
and become security
for the Rights, Privileges, and Immunities of all His Majesty’s Subjects
found or residing in such Territory.
He also proclaimed that:
if any Person or Persons shall be convicted of behaving in a fradulent,
cruel, or felonious Manner towards the Aborigines of the Country,
such Person or
Persons will be liable to be prosecuted and tried for the Offence, as if the
same had been committed against any other
of His Majesty’s
When the full instructions eventually arrived from London in 1831, Stirling
was instructed to
do to the utmost of your power promote Religion and Education among the
Native Inhabitants of Our said Territory or of the Lands and
Islands thereto
adjoining And that you do especially take care to protect them in their persons
and in the free enjoyment of their
possessions and that you do by all lawful
means prevent and restrain all violence and injustice which may in any manner be
or attempted against them and that you take such measures as may
appear to you to be necessary for their conversion to the Christain
for their advancement in Civilization.
Increasingly, public officials found it more difficult to treat Aborigines as
British subjects in accordance with colonial office
instructions.
The priority focus for legal
policy was on the protection of settlers’ lives and property more than
protection of the rights
of Aborigines.
Governors had considerable influence in determining legal policy in relation
There was a
close relationship between the colonial government and the magistrates. The
Governor could issue instructions on legal
policy to Magistrates on a regular
basis, but was required to refer death sentences to the Executive Council as
contained in his
instructions.
The Court of
Quarter Sessions conferring criminal jurisdiction was set up in December 1829,
which was confirmed in 1832 by legislation.
Legally trained Magistrate, Chairman William Mackie was appointed in
In the early 1830s, the Swan River Colony comprised of a small but scattered
population of Europeans, which became a steadily expanding
frontier of
settlement towards the 1840s. Settlers became increasingly fearful of attacks by
Aborigines on their property and lives.
early as 1833, they had expressed their concerns to the colonial government
building huts, lighting fires
and undertaking tribal battles near to houses, and in the streets of
The more frequent congregation of
different tribes was attributed partly to the increasing scarcity of traditional
game as a result
of settlers’
activities.
Whilst Aborigines engaging in
traditional activities were not welcome in Perth, increasingly, Aborigines from
tribes around Perth,
were casually employed for various jobs and paid in
The government’s interpreter
and ‘superintendent of natives’ Francis Armstrong had on previous
occasions sought
advice from Mackie about how to deal with matters involving
tribal conflict in Perth. Mackie had told him that the Governor thought
not to interfere in what was seen as their ‘private
Courts operated in an frontier environment and often acted as an extension of
The first criminal law case to
definitively spell out the law in relation to the treatment of Aborigines for
offences against Europeans
in 1837, in the Court of Quarter Sessions was
Gear (alias Obediah)
In that case, Gear had been tried
for stealing some wheat from Advocate General George Fletcher Moore’s farm
on the Upper Swan.
Mackie applied the direction of the Home Government when he
it must be remembered, that the Aborigines were adopted as British subjects,
and had every right to our protection; but at the same
time they became amenable
to our laws, and liable to punishment when they violated them. It must be borne
in mind, that they (the
jury and the magistrates) were not sitting there to
create new laws, but to administer them as they had
The emphasis was on punishment and making an example to other Aborigines, in
order to protect the property and security of settlers,
often mixing legal and
illegal remedies.
Mackie had warned Gear
would be very sulky, and would
threaten and injure the white man, if they sent
him away’. Mackie had asked the Interpreter to explain to Gear that
his friends adopt any measure to resent his being punished he will be
kept in confinement still longer, to answer for their
A year earlier, Moore in his private journal had outlined official policy in
relation to inter-Aboriginal conflict where Aborigines
came into contact with
Weenat had placed his wife in my kitchen as a refuge this morning. Some of
the Murray River natives came to tell me they wanted to
spear her and asked me
if I would be angry. Of course I did not suffer them to do it, telling them that
when natives were in our
houses they must be unmolested, but when they were in
the bush we did not interfere. Now all this shews the absurdity of directions
that have been sent from home that natives are to be treated and dealt with as
British subjects. There were perhaps 100 people in
a deadly fight. Fancy a
magistrate going and reading the riot act or fancy any attempted interference by
case was the first that came before the Court of Quarter
Sessions in Perth involving an
Helia had been indicted for the
murder of Yatoobong (Yatorbong) in a tribal conflict in the streets of Perth and
had pleaded not
guilty. According to his statement made through the
Government’s Interpreter, Helia admitted spearing Yatoobong but not with
the intention of causing her death.
intention in spearing Yatoobong had been to avenge his daughter’s
Wilgup’s death.
Helia was not
represented by a lawyer and no witnesses were presented on his behalf. There was
no debate on the applicability of
British law to Aborigines, and ‘the
court directed the meaning of the sentence of the indictment and the grounds and
of his arraignment as arising out of the laws of the white
Helia was found guilty and
sentenced to death. The issue of whether his sentence should be commuted was
referred to the Governor
in Council. At its meeting on 13 July 1838, Governor
Stirling sought the opinion of George Fletcher Moore. Moore’s opinion
that Aborigines had their own established laws that guided their conduct amongst
themselves. In Moore’s opinion, Helia
was an inoffensive and quiet old man
who was acting in retaliation obligated by his own laws.
In doing so he was acting in the fulfillment of what he considered an
imperative duty, in discharge of a binding obligation and it
would be cruel to
take away his life for acting amongst his own people, in a manner sanctioned and
recognised as right by them, and
although his conduct be in contradiction of one
law, yet of that law as applying to his own people he neither knows the
nor could understand the
Moore considered that it was necessary to educate Aborigines about British
laws and to allow them to receive the benefit of them,
before British law could
be applied to their transactions with each
Governor Stirling agreed. Stirling
was concerned:
‘that consequently to apply steadily and impartially the British law,
to this particular offender would be to pass sentence
of death upon the whole
race’... and, ‘that the time did not appear to have arrived for its
application, to the natives
in question between themselves. Instruction must be
conferred upon them. Civilisation reclaim them and protection be secured by the
they could justly be tried
[my emphasis] or liable to its
punishment.
Helia was sent to Carnac Island in July 1838 and then to the new prison being
constructed for Aboriginal prisoners on Rottnest Island
with several others.
However he was drowned in an escape attempt, when the boat overturned on 9
August 1838.
It was thought by some that he
had been killed by his companions and this information spread to others who
sought revenge for this
action. The congregation of tribes mourning
Helia’s death close to settlers’ houses increased fear amongst the
of retaliation.
A memorial lodged in October 1838 by influential townspeople in Perth,
complained of inter Aboriginal violence and appearance of nudity
in the streets
of Perth, which increased pressure on the colonial government to
Measures that resulted included a
change to Interpreter Francis Armstrong’s role to include that of town
policeman under the
control and direction of the magistrates residing in
This was later formalised in 1840
with the Protector and Magistrate Charles Symmons being instructed to banish
offenders from the
town for comittingh
constable was also especially appointed for this
This increasingly focused
attention on the application of formal legal processes to Aborigines and added
to the Nyungars’ continual
loss of rights to practise their own laws
within the precincts of the town site of
Aborigines resisted the various
measures that included having their spears broken in towns or settlements, but
the combined effects
adopted by the magistrates and colonial government pushed
their traditional activities outside of the town, where there was no
interference.
As a result of various
control measures in 1839 and 1840, there were no
cases in Perth
until 1846, the year that Hutt left the
The focus moved to the rural settlements with the apprehension and subsequent
prosecution of Weban, before the Court of Quarter Sessions
Weban (Weeban) had been indicted for
killing an Aboriginal child named Yellelan who had been living in a house in the
Upper Swan,
under the particular care of a settler named Eliza
The issue of jurisdiction of the
court to hear the matter was not raised. However, the case attracted the
attention of the editor
Perth Gazette.
He reported the Advocate
General’s explanation to the jury. that the relationship between the
murder of Yellelan to previous
conflict had led to Weban killing
Yellelan in retaliation, the act being a ‘final determination of all
differences arising
out of the several
In answer to the charge,
Weban responded by saying that Weenat’s party had killed his brother and
that Tomigin had told him
to kill the child in revenge for that act. Weban was
found guilty but his sentence of death was commuted to transportation to
Island for life.
Governor Hutt had been appointed in January 1839 four months earlier, and
immediately began reviewing colonial policy towards Aborigines.
later, he issued a notice that read:
If a native residing with, and under the care of a European is killed by a
native, the Governor will immediately have the murderer
apprehended and punished
in precisely the same manner as if the murder had been committed on a white
This was even if the injury was inflicted in accordance with Aboriginal laws
and customs.
IV GREY’S ‘GENERAL PRINCIPLES’
Although there is no evidence that Western Australia was directly influenced
by the other Australian colonies on
policy, in 1840, Captain
George Grey had written a report to Secretary of State for the Colonies, John
Russell (which was later distributed
to New South Wales and New Zealand)
advocating a policy that could be adopted throughout Australia subject to local
circumstances.
Grey had been a resident
magistrate in Western Australia in King George Sound from 1837 to 1839, and his
experiences formed the basis
of his report.
Grey stated that his intention was to formulate ‘general principles’
before more widespread settlement of Australia
He argued that the main reason
why the current policies were not working was the erroneous principle that:
although the Natives should, as far as European property and European
subjects were concerned, be made amenable to British laws, yet,
so long as they
only exercised their own customs upon themselves and not too immediately in the
presence of Europeans, they should
be allowed to do so with
Grey referred to examples in Perth in October 1838 shortly after the
case, and to various rural examples, where no official action had been
He claimed that the reason why this
principle had been defended was: ‘that the natives of this country are a
conquered people,
and that it is an act of generosity to allow them the full
power of exercising their own laws upon
themselves’.
In stating his
disagreement with the principle, Grey believed that Aborigines did not have a
regular code of laws and that:
when Great Britain ensures to a conquered country the privilege of preserving
its own laws, all persons resident in this territory
become amenable to the same
laws, and proper persons are selected by the Government to watch over their due
and equitable administration.
However, because Aboriginal customs were not considered a code of laws by
Grey, he did not believe the cases alluded to, presented
Grey wanted Aborigines to be
weaned from their own laws, and for them to re replaced by British law which he
envisaged would provide
protection against violence for all
‘offences’ as well as meet the objects of policies on
‘civilisation’.
In his view,
under the present practice there were no benefits or protection under British
law for Aborigines, only the effect of
punishment.
Hutt disagreed that the British law should apply to all
He thought that they should only
apply to those ‘which come under our cognizance’ which ‘must
be treated as breaches
of the peace, and that even murder can only be visited
with the penality of banishment’.
his opinion, one of the difficulties was the inability of the Government to
establish a larger police force, which was presently
inadequate to provide
protection to the scattered Aborigines from one another, and until this could be
done, it would be ‘unjust’
and inexpedient to interfere with their
laws and customs so as to prevent their protecting
themselves.
Hutt also emphasised the
difficulty of obtaining evidence in cases in which Aborigines alone were
He believed in a gradual approach
towards the assimilation of Aborigines into a ‘civilised’ society,
and expected that
education and training programmes would assist this
In his opinion, ‘if the
Aborigines and the colonists are destined to occupy this land in common as
British subjects, they ought
to be encouraged to mingle together as one
He therefore approved and
implemented Grey’s other idea for a financial concession to settlers who
purchased land, on condition
that they employ an Aborigine for two years
employment such as in a trade.
In his view
there was an inequity arising from the lack of ability of the British laws and
procedures to apply to Aborigines for
their protection and for their liability
for offences against Europeans and each other. It is interesting to compare
response to Grey’s general principles, with that of Governor
Gipps in NSW, who in 1840 told Russell that this principle of
non-interference
had not been practised for many years by the government in New South
Hutt believed that special laws should be applied to Aborigines in the
interests of justice rather than a strict enforcement of British
law, and that
once this happened then civilisation would be possible and Aborigines would no
longer have to seek redress from their
Hutt had sent a draft Bill to the
Colonial office in May 1839, which would allow Aborigines to give evidence
without an oath in criminal
proceedings, and allow magistrates to administer
summary punishment for offences for which not more than twelve months
imprisonment
could be given.
The Act had
been passed in 1840 by the Legislative Council and this Act was in operation for
a year, before news reached Hutt of
its disallowance by the home
government.
A second amended Act was
enacted by the Legislative Council in November 1841, but it does not appear to
be until 1843 that the matter
was settled by the passing of an Imperial Act that
confirmed colonial legislation on the subject, and not until 1849 that summary
punishment provisions were allowed.
The first case to debate the jurisdictional issue in WA was
In October 1841, We-war (We-wa)
from the Murray River tribes, was arrested for the wilful murder of Dy-ung
(Dyang) from the Canning
River area, which had occurred on Thomas Peel’s
farm. Dyung had been employed by settler and government resident John Phillips
to guide soldiers through Murray tribal territory towards Peel’s
According to European witnesses,
Wewar had joined the party with the consent of Dyung and the two were reported
as getting on well
together. Later that night, while Dyung and Wewar were
sleeping in a separate hut adjacent to Peel’s house, Wewar speared Dyung.
The trial was held in January 1842 before Chairman Mackie and a full bench of
magistrates.
Wewar pleaded not guilty. In
his statement made in October 1841, Wewar is reported to have said through an
interpreter
I speared Dy-ung to avenge the death of Nindar, a Murray Native killed at
Perth by Ningena ... Dy-ung was Ningena’s nephew,
but after I had left
him, another native Ki-bar made the wound
The newspaper report of the case stated that Nindar was Wewar’s adopted
Wewar was represented by lawyer Edward Landor who had only recently arrived
from England in August of the previous year. Landor had
been asked by the
Protector of Aborigines and Magistrate Charles Symmons to represent Wewar, and
Landor made a number of arguments
against the court having
The first was that:
It being declared and acknowledged that we acquired possession of this colony
, and not by conquest, it follows that our laws would not
apply to the aborigines for offences committed among themselves, without
express assent on their part by which they agreed to adopt and acknowledge them.
2ndly. Even if the colony were acquired by
, it would still be
necessary to show that our laws had been expressly imposed upon the natives, and
were to be thenceforth received
by them in lieu of their own. 3rdly. If they be
subject to our laws, they must be subject to the whole machinery of the law, and
ought to be punished for minor offences committed among themselves, as slander,
perjury, theft, indecent exposure of the person etc.
4thly. The natives have
laws of their own, and stated punishments for particular crimes, and therefore
the prisoner had most probably
been already either punished or acquitted for the
same offence, by the only laws he was acquainted with or bound to obey; and that
it is contrary to all justice that he should be tried and punished again. 5thly.
There is no act of Parliament which provides that
the aboriginies shall, as
among themselves, be answerable to our laws, and that, as we choose to found our
, no local proclamation is sufficient authority to make
them so amenable; for if the Governor have not arbitrary power to impose penal
laws by proclamation upon
, who are really British subjects,
(all the more so), he cannot possess that power over strangers. If
they were already British subjects, there was no need of a proclamation;
were not British subjects, no proclamation could impose penal laws upon them.
And 6thly. The circumstance of killing a man
who happens to be casually employed
by the British, does not make that to be murder, within the meaning and
cognisance of our laws,
which would not be murder, had the party not been so
employed by the British.
Chairman Mackie announced that Landor’s arguments had been overruled by
the majority of magistrates.
He outlined
three modes of the acquisition of foreign territory, treaty, conquest and
occupancy. Mackie ruled out conquest even though
he said that some of the
measures of the British Government may be more consistent with this mode, but
that ‘the theory of
that government, as expounded by successive
Secretaries of State, is, that its possession of the territory is based on a
occupancy’.
While there were not a large range of law books available at the time, Mackie
had access to Vattel and Blackstone and, ‘other
writers on the law of
nations’. However, there is no reference to any New South Wales cases or
other cases.
Mackie observed that:
There are two cases in which such a right may be exercised. First, in the
case of an uninhabited country; which is not the present
case. Secondly when a
large extent of country is roamed over by wandering savages, who make no use,
or a very trifling use, of the
soil, and subsist by the chase and spontaneous
products of the earth.
... Those savage
tribes have no right to exclude the rest of mankind from which they themselves
make no proper use. Those writers,
however do not proceed to prescribe by what
common principles or rules the intercourse of the Aborigines, within the limits
so occupied,
and the newcomers is to be regulated. But as jurisdiction is
clearly an inseparable incident of sovereignity, it follows that the
nation having, under the principle of the law of nations just stated, taken
possession and assumed the sovereignty of a territory
bounded by certain
parallels and meridians, the law of that nation must be paramount coextensively
with that territorial sovereignty.
In Mackie’s opinion, there were limits to the application of British
criminal law to ‘offences’ committed between
Aborigines:
It is not however to be supposed that a prudent and judicious government
would enforce the application of British Law indiscriminately
transactions of the natives
, so as to incur the risk of
burlesqueing the persons of justice, or turning them into engines of wanton
oppression. There are certain
obvious limits to that application, as to a right
to be protected and offences to be punished. There are on the one hand those
rights of persons, which regard the safety of life and member;- on the
other, those offences against the laws of god and the law
of nature (or, as the
latter has been defined, ‘the dictates of natural conscience’) which
infringe those rights; and
among which offences, the vindictive spilling of
blood is unquestionably one, even within these limits, as to rights and offences
the operation of the law has hitherto been further confined to cases in which
the suffering party was, at the time of the offence,
in the service, in the
house, or otherwise under the protection of a
According to Mackie the purpose of setting these limits were for
‘justice and humanity’ and advancing the objects of
‘civilisation’
by encouraging Aborigines into employment by the
settlers, and by allowing the British law to protect them from their kin and
from their own customs. Mackie expressed concern that settlers might take
matters into their own hands if the law was not applied
in this instance and
acknowledged that up to this point, there had not been any interference with the
‘laws and usages of the
natives’, as between each other, outside of
towns and dwellings.
The category of
exceptions now included the protection of British law to those Aborigines
employed or in a settler’s house.
While matters of public policy were a large factor in Mackie’s
decision, he added that: ‘The court cannot entertain the
objection that
by holding the British Criminal Law to be applicable to the Aborigines, they
render the latter liable to unjust and
arbitrary interference with their natural
laws and usages’.
The Advocate-General Richard Nash argued:
The title of England, or of any nation to a savage territory, was that of
occupancy, where the individual savages or families (for
tribes were nothing
more) did not resist, and of conquest where they
Did any man believe that if all the
tribes had gone to the first party of settlers, and informed them that they did
not intend to
allow them to reside here, that the British Government would have
obligingly abandoned the territory? In fact, there never was a
more unlucky case
for such an argument than that of the prisoner at the bar, whose tribe had
actually so resisted, and been accordingly
attacked and conquered in the fullest
sense of the word. ...
Nash had referred to the massacre at Pinjarra that occurred on 28 October
1834 which resulted in many more Aborigines than Europeans
being killed. Wewar
had been one of the two elders remaining from the Murray River area that had
Stirling had led an official
party of soldiers to punish the Murray River tribes for earlier reprisals by
members of the tribes on
settlers and soldiers in that
Stirling had been concerned
uprising, and had proceeded
to seek out the offenders. He had warned survivors
that the punishment had been inflicted because of the misconduct of the
tribe; that the white men never forget to punish murder; that
on this occasion
the women and children had been spared; but if any other person should be killed
by them, not one would be allowed
to remain on this side of the
Nash argued that British criminal law should punish rather than deter crime,
as an example to other Aborigines. His argument of expediency
did not impress
Landor who objected to such an approach in a court of
In reply, Landor argued that
criminal law could not be applied to Aborigines who already have their own laws,
which they are bound
to obey. Aborigines could not be expected to be subject to
laws that they did not understand until they had been taught the value
Wewar was found guilty by a grand jury of settlers, and his sentence was
commuted to transportation for life.
the way to prison at Rottnest, Wewar was reported to have said to Henry Trigg
who was present at the trial:
I can not understand why the Governor is sulky or severe with me, if a white
man kills a white man we never interfere. Sometime back
the white man killed
many of the natives and the Governor took no notice, now why should the Governor
take any notice of me if I
kill a fellow native that steals my wife, or kills my
brother, when it is according to our
In the debates that followed the trial, the editor of the
Francis Lochee (a solicitor and journalist), referred to the distinction between
personal and territorial law, stating that there
were customs practised under
personal law that were not punished under British criminal law, (such as in
India) even though they
would be considered an
While Lochee equated the
case with this example of a personal law, he added that:
so far then his punishment by us would seem to be unauthorised and against
precedent; but we do not see why we are compelled to follow
the practice of the
Indian government ...
civilised people go, they carry their rights along with them and the first is
their power to protect themselves...
In a letter to the
and in his subsequent book, Landor had
referred to the potential flexibility of the common law. He had argued that even
if territorial
sovereignity was coextensive with jurisdiction there was scope
within this framework to recognise the rights of Aborigines to exercise
own laws for inter-Aboriginal conflict. He concluded his letter to the
Perhaps the relation that exists between the red Indians of North America,
and the Government of the United States, may afford a parallel
case to ours, but
there (I understand) though the territorial sovereignty of the Americans extends
over a great part of the land
of the Red Savage, the latter is answerable only
to the laws of his own tribe for offences committed against any of his own
After Wewar – 1842 to 1850
From the 1840s, there was increased expansion of European settlement and
encounters with Aboriginal tribes who had little experience
of Europeans.
Coupled with the strengthening of law enforcement, several more
cases were brought to trial that occurred in rural settlements, but still within
the categories defined by Mackie in the
However after 1848, there was
a sharp increase in the number of cases with the arrival of Governor Captain
Fitzgerald, who with Colonial
Secretary Richard Madden, had introduced a more
rigorous policy on
matters, with the objective of reducing the
number of incidents and breaking the hold of customary
This policy as described by the
Protector of Aborigines Charles Symmons would ‘take cognizance of all
aggravated cases of assault
committed even by bush natives
The severity of
punishment was increased, including carrying out the death sentence for murder.
This had variable effect and in many
cases no effect at all, and many Aborigines
wary of coming to the attention of the colonial authorities moved into the bush,
to escape beyond the boundaries of British
From the 1840s there had been increasing employment of Aborigines especially
for farm work.
The earliest statistical
report in 1848, indicated there were approximately 541 Aborigines (out of a
total estimated population in
the relevant districts of 1,960) employed by
settlers in a total European population of 4,620 in
While there were opinions expressed
that the number of Aborigines were gradually disappearing within the
settlements, there was added
incentive to apply British law to protect those
Aborigines who were employed by settlers, from their bush
counterparts.
The first public hanging
was carried out for an
murder in 1850, to make a public
Ironically, it drew objections
from several settlers on the grounds that it would be unjust to apply the full
force of British law.
V CONCLUSION
case recognised a certain legal status for Aborigines who
were employed by or residing with settlers, in that they were entitled to
protection under British law, despite the inequitable application of this law to
Their protection from attack from
other Aborigines became increasingly important to the colonial government and
the courts. The outcomes
cases reflected
the colonial government’s pragmatic policy of the time which questioned
whether Aborigines could fairly and
effectively come under the British legal
Like Sydney Stephen in
, Landor had argued in
Aborigines were regulated and bound by their own customs and laws, and not
British laws and that as Aborigines could not practically
be protected by all
aspects of British law, they could not be subject to it.
Mackie had dismissed the idea of conquest preferring to follow the
administrative instructions of the colonial office that the theory
of settlement
applied to Western Australia. In addition, he justified his decision by
interpreting international law and in particular
Vattel as authority for the
exercise of his right. While Mackie adhered to the theory of settlement espoused
by successive Secretaries
of State there is some evidence to suggest that he and
others at that time did not really believe this fitted the facts. Landor later
criticised Mackie for not following his moral conscience by following the
direction of the home office: ‘Judges are compelled
to yield to their
authority and do violence to their own consciences whilst they help to lay the
healing unction to those of their
lawgivers’.
While Mackie recognised the injustice of applying British law to these cases,
expediency outweighed abandoning the jurisdiction of
the court in relation to
the category that he defined. The main difference between the
cases is that unlike Chief Magistrate Mackie, Justice Burton in
concluded that
transactions
amenable to British law, and that any difficulties in bringing Aborigines under
British law should be legislated for. Mackie
attempted to limit the application
of British law rather than relying like Burton in the
case on the
local legislature to remedy the injustice. However like
reference to and reliance on the prerogative power of mercy where Wewar’s
death sentence is commuted to transporation
for life. Mackie avoided the issue
of whether Aborigines were British subjects.
was similar to the
case in its policy discussion
on the boundaries of the application of British law, and natural law, where
Chief Justice Forbes defined
(before and after the case) the boundaries of what
matters might fall within the court’s jurisdiction and
what did not. Like Mackie, Forbes referred to rights arising from natural
which, although something less than civilised law was something that Aborigines
did not give up to magistrates.
What was the consequence of this absence of exercise of British law in the
there was scope for the common law to recognise that
customary law needed to remain in force in the bush at least for the time being.
did not reflect a formal recognition of customary law or
recognise indigenous autonomy, such as in
there was a conscious
policy decision not to apply British law to the Aborigines who did not fall
within the category outlined by
Mackie. The precedent created by
for the application of British law created a form of legal pluralism in which
Aborigines were to be treated as British subjects only
in their relations with
Europeans, but if they had very limited contact with the white man there was
some ability to exercise their
own laws without
interference.
It was anticipated by
colonial government policy and the courts that in time all Aborigines would come
under the category of usefully
employed in a ‘civilised’ society.
However by the 1850s the objective of ‘civilisation’ was giving way
a harder line, coinciding with the arrival of convicts as an alternative
source of labour. The arrival of convicts is likely to have
shifted the focus
for the need to employ Aborigines at least in the South West. The focus on
economic development and political control
of the land for settlement, meant
that the law often lagged behind, but gradually there were likely to be fewer
circumstances in
which British law would not reach.
∗ BA (UWA), Grad Dip Bus (Curtin), Grad Dip Env Sc (Murdoch), Postgrad
Dip Public History (Murdoch), LLB (Murdoch), PhD candidate
1 The Swan River Colony was isolated from the East to a large extent. By
1834, tradelinks had still not been established and shipping
was infrequent
adding to the Swan River Colony’s isolation. See Green,
(1984) 95. Hutt referred to local conditions in WA that he believed
were different to NSW in certain ways. Despatch from Hutt to
Russell 15 May
Papers relative to the Aborigines, Australian Colonies
Parliamentary Press (first published 1844, 1968) vol 8, 380.
The earliest Court of Quarter Sessions
case involving Aborigines was
(Obediah) regarding the theft of
wheat, reported in
Perth Gazette,
2 January 1837. Prior to 1837, a quasi
– military approach was taken. For example, the capture of Midgegooroo
(‘outlawed’)
in May 1833 for charges of murder, assault and robbery
where depositions were taken before the Executive Council. Midgegooroo was
by firing squad shortly afterwards,
Perth Gazette,
25 May 1833, 83.
For examples of reference to
‘private quarrels’, see Interpreters Report 27 December 1836 to 27
October 1837,
Perth Gazette
28 July 1838, 119.
Examples include holding Aborigines
hostage, threats, public floggings, see
Gazette 3 May 1834, 11 July
1835, 4 July 1836.
Examples of ‘experiments’
include threatening to discontinue supplies of flour, and
‘temptations’ to keep
Aborigines out of town, etc. See
22 October 1836, 784;
Perth Gazette
28 October 1836, 700.
Statham, ‘Swan River Colony
1829-1850’ in Stannage (ed),
A New History of Western Australia
(1981) Ch 5
Perth Gazette
, 31 October 1846.
Examples of Governor acting on fears; G F
Diary of Ten Years Eventful Life of a Settler in Western Australia
(first published 1884, 1978) 234, 236, 321;
Perth Gazette
16 February
1833; Rumours abounded as well of fears of attacks on Europeans by large groups
of Aborigines,
Perth Gazette
13 April 1833, 58-59.
(1838) Court of Quarter
Sessions, reported in
Perth Gazette
2 July 1838;
Court of Quarter Sessions, reported in
Perth Gazette
12 January 1842 and
12 January 1842, 4-5.
R v Ballard or Barrett (1829)
reported in the
Sydney Gazette
23 April and 13 June 1829, and
published in
Decisions of the Superior Courts of NSW 1788-1899
Division of Law, Macquarie University (www.law.mq.edu/scnsw/cases) 3 of 7.
Robert Ballard or Barrett was indicted for the
murder of Borrondire or
‘Dirty Dick’.
C J Forbes gave his opinion before and
after the trial (
Sydney Gazette
23 April and 16 June 1829). The Court
hearing on 13 June 1829 before Forbes CJ and Dowling J, published in
Decisions of the Superior Courts of NSW 1788-1899
, Macquarie
University.
Proceedings of the Supreme Court, Vol
22 in Archives Office of NSW 2/3205 published as
Decisions of the Superior
Courts of NSW 1788-1899
, Macquarie University.
www.law.mq.edu/scnsw/cases
Ibid 3 of 7.
Ibid 4 of 7.
R v Murrell
(1836) 1 Legge 72.
It was not until the 1890s that formal reporting in the Legge’s selection
of Supreme Court cases covering
the determinations of the Supreme Court of NSW
from 1825 to 1862 occurred. Up to then the reports were in the newspapers.
Annotated Bibliography of Printed Materials on Australian Law
(1994) pxxi.
R v Murrell
of the Superior Courts of NSW 1788-1899
, Macquarie University.
The oral argument was slightly
different to the plea. The plea made on 5 February 1836 in Sydney Morning
Herald, 8 February 1836.
The oral argument is in
Sydney Gazette
February 1836, cited in
Decisions of the Superior Courts of NSW 1788-1899
R v Murrell and Bummaree
CJ, Dowling and Burton JJ, 19 February 1836,
Sydney Gazette
, 23 February
Decisions of the Superior Courts of NSW 1788-1899
University.
Forbes CJ, Dowling and Burton JJ in
banco, 11 April 1836, Supreme Court, Miscellaneous Correspondence relating to
Aborigines, State
Records of NSW, 5/1161, 210-216[4] in
Decisions of the
Superior Courts of NSW 1788-1899
Macquarie University.
B Kercher, ‘The Recognition of
Aboriginal status and Laws in the Supreme Court of New South Wales under Forbes
CJ, 1824-1836’
in A R Buck, J McLaren and N E Wright (eds),
Law, Property Rights and the British Diaspora
(2001) 83 and
See above n 19, 5.
Supreme Court, Miscellaneous
Correspondence relating to Aborigines, State Records of New South Wales, 5/1161,
210-216, 11 April 1836,
Forbes CJ, Dowling and Burton JJ in banco.
of the Superior Courts of NSW 1788-1899
Phillip Patriot
, 20 September 1841
, Decisions of the Superior Courts of
NSW 1788-1899
Macquarie University. See also
Indigenous Law Reporter
Bonjon was from the Wadora people and
Yammowing from the Colijon tribe.
of the Superior Courts of NSW 1788-1899
Other Supreme Court judges in Sydney
disagreed with Willis J that
was not the accepted law. See
Dowling to Gipps 8 January 1842 in
Historical Records of Australia
Series 1, Vol XXI, 656-658.
Unruly Child, A
History of Law in Australia
(1995) 11. On Ballard see
‘Recogition of Indigenous Legal autonomy in nineteenth century New South
[1998] IndigLawB 54
(1998) 4(13)
Indigenous Law Bulletin
A History of Law in Western
Australia and its development from 1829 to 1979
, (1980) Appendix III, Copy
of Captain Stirling’s Proclamation of 18 June 1829, 334.
Ibid 350 Appendix IV,
‘Instructions as to the Office of Governor, March 1831’.
George Fletcher Moore, who was
Commissioner of the Civil Court and Advocate General from 1834 referred to the
issue on 6 June 1833
in his private diary: ‘I wish it was either peace or
war between us, but now we must not touch them for, by proclamation, they
declared under the protection of the law as British subjects’. J M R
Cameron (ed),
Swan River Letters: George Fletcher Moore’s Journal,
220 (unpublished typescript (200) 485pp. I am grateful to Dr
Cameron for permission to access this source). See
Perth Gazette
October 1839, 171. The Editor stated: ‘it will be seen with much
satisfaction that His Excellency the Governor has honorably
acknowledged a
conviction, founded in experience, in opposition to his preconceived opinions,
that the Aborigines cannot be treated
as British subjects’. See also
Perth Gazette
report on the Legislative Council meeting of 23 October
Legislative Council minutes 23 June
Perth Gazette
1 July 1837. The allocation of limited funds
discussed in terms of the priority of protection and security of lives and
of settlers.
Fall ‘Crime and Criminal Records
in Western Australia 1830-1855’ (Nov 1978) 111
Studies in WA History
A History of the Law in
Western Australia and its development from 1829 to 1979
, Instructions as to
the Office of Governor, 5 March 1831, 350.
Quarter Sessions Act
1832 (2 Wm IV, No 4) 80 and Castles and Bennett (eds),
A Source Book of
Australian Legal History
(1979) 217.
Broken Spears
Perth Gazette
16 February 1833, 27.
Perth Gazette
, 18 May 1833, 78;
18 June 1836, 712 No 181. It was probably earlier in other towns. Minute by
Stirling on a letter received from
Government Resident at Fremantle, 26 July
1831 re inhabitants combining to drive the Aborigines out of town because of
their pilfering.
Perth Gazette
editorial 28 April 1838 which
refers to the precincts of several towns not only Perth, and Executive Council
Minutes, 3 March 1840,
No 6, 12 CO 20/3 AJCP, Battye.
Perth Gazette
18 June 1836, 712;
Executive Council minutes 3 March 1840, CO 20/3 AJCP 104, Battye.
Perth Gazette
21 May 1836,
This was in 1837. Interpreters Report
27 December 1836 to 27 October 1837, 27 March to 27 April 1837, CSR Vol 58, 145,
‘Warned? the natives repeatedly of fighting in the town,
explained to them the consequence if they should happen to spear a
white person,
spoke to Mr Mackie on subject who told me the Governor thought it best not to
interfere in their private quarrels’.
Query: How can I so act when they
quarrel and fight in town?.
See for example,
Perth Gazette
2 January 1837 where for example Gear was asked
whether any of the jurors were his enemy.
R v Gear (Obediah
2 January 1837 – Similar comments were made in
case (1837) reported in the
Swan River Guardian
1837, 229; ‘The respective addresses of the Chairman to the Grand Jury and
of the Advocate General to the Petty jury
merely enforced the truism, that the
aboriginal inhabitants of Swan River were placed within the pale of the law, and
as British subjects by the King of England, that in regard to crime
no difference could be made between a white and a black –
the instructions
of the British Government must be obeyed ...’ .
Perth Gazette
2 January 1837,
829. Mackie had deferred to administrative instructions. Despatch from Stirling
to the Earl of Aberdeen, 10 July
1835 No 53, WAS 1166, CONS 390/2, SROWA,
‘One of the earliest measures adopted in this colony was to issue a
proclamation in
which the right of the natives to the protection of the British
law was formally declared on every possible occasion their equality
respect with all His Majesty’s subjects has been urged upon the notice of
magistrates’.
See above n 4.
(1837) Court of Quarter
Sessions, 2 January 1837 reported in
Perth Gazette
, 7 January 1837.
Diary entry made in 1836 by G F Moore.
Cameron, above n 35, 385.
(1838) reported in
Perth Gazette
2 July 1838.
Report from Mackie to Colonial
Secretary on
case, CSR 62, Vol 79-80, SROWA.
(1838) reported in the
Perth Gazette
, 2 July 1838, 107 – (before Mackie, Rev J B
Wittenoom, J Lewis, J R Phillips, JP’s) – See also the examination
in April 1838 reported in the
Perth Gazette
28 April 1838, 7. For more on
case, see R H W Reece, ‘Laws of the white people: the
frontier of authority in Perth and early Western Australia’ in
International Law and Aboriginal Human Rights
(1988) Ch 7.
Report by Mackie above n 53.
Executive Council minutes 13 July 1838,
CO 20/2, 1118 AJCP, Battye.
N Green and S Moon,
Far from Home,
Aboriginal prisoners at Rottnest Island 1838-1931
(1997) 185.
‘Helia’s family refused to accept the notion of accidental death and
tracked and allegedly killed a fellow
escapee named Goordap in a payback
Letter from Thomas Yule, Resident
Magistrate to Colonial Secretary, CSR Vol
62, Fol 222
, 20 August 1838,
17 October 1838 Executive Council No
291, AJCP, CO20/2 Reel 1118, Battye;
Perth Gazette
13 October 1838, 162.
Memorial also stated that the ‘inhabitants of the town should be empowered
to destroy all spears found
in the hands of the natives within the limits of the
An instruction issued in 20 February
1839 to resident magistrates stated that no ‘native’ should be
allowed to enter
any town or dwelling of Europeans armed with a spear.
Western Australian Government Gazette
(WAGG) 23 February 1839 No 129.
Report of Charles Symmons dated 31
December 1840 in
, 8 January 1841 No 235, ‘To evince our
disgust at objects which, however disgusting to civilization have been
perpetrated by
the natives on each other only in strict accordance with their
established customs and prejudices, I have invariably punished the
offenders by
banishment from the town, for a limited period, thus depriving them of many of
their comforts, and compelling them to
seek a precarious subsistence in the
chase. His Excellency has been pleased to adopt my suggestion ... the including
in the banishment
the wives and children of the offender, as I discovered that,
in several instances, the prescribed party, although living in the
actually supported in indolence by the ample supplies procured through his wife
or wives, from the inhabitants of Perth.’
The proceeding of the Magistrates
Court in Perth on 4 January 1839, was reported in
Perth Gazette
January 1839, 7, ‘Inquiry on the suggestion of Francis Armstrong into the
conduct of certain Aborigines (Miago, Wiup, Munday
and others) engaged in an
affray in the streets or townsite of Perth. Miago was convicted of assault and
battery on one of his black
friends and was sentenced to 7 days imprisonment.
White witness only. A warrant issued for arrest of Munday and Wiup.’
For examples of Aboriginal resistance
to their spears being broken by Europeans, see
Perth Gazette
21 December
1839, 203 and 28 December 1839.
Some examples of incidences in Perth
that did not go to court are listed Green,
Broken Spears
(1984) Appendix
2, 230-231.
1 April 1839 Court of
Quarter Sessions,
Perth Gazette
, 6 July 1839. Weban was known as a
‘boylya’ or ‘native doctor’ with extraordinary powers.
Helia was his brother.
Tilbrook and Hallam (eds),
Aborigines of the South
West Region, 1829-1840, The Bicentennial Dictionary of Western Australians
(1990) vol VIII, 3-15.
Also known by Weeban, Webam, and
Beewullo. William Shaws statement – Yellelan had been clothed as a
European child, Criminal
Indictment file, Case Number 204, CONS 3472, Item 38,
Perth Gazette
6 July 1839.
Weban escaped shortly afterwards, CSR
9 July 1839.
Despatch from Hutt to Lord Glenelg 3
Papers relative to Aborigines, Australian Colonies, British
Parliamentary Papers, Papers relating to Emigration, the Aboriginal Population
and other Affairs in Australia (
1844, 1968) Colonies vol 8, 372.
‘Portions of it have in the
interim been laid before some of the local governments in Australia, and a few
of the suggestions
contained in it have already been acted upon’, G Grey,
‘Report upon the best means of promoting the civilisation of the
Aboriginal inhabitants of Australia’ Enclosure, Russell to Gipps, 8
October 1840
Historical Records of Australia
(HRA) XX1, 35. (see also
Despatch from J Russell to J Hutt, 8 October 1840, 391 and by G Grey 4 June
Papers Relative to Aborigines, Australian Colonies, British
Parliamentary Papers
(1844, 1968) vol 8.
Journals of Two
Expeditions of Discovery in North West and Western Australia during the years
1837, 1838 and 1839
London (1841, Facsimile ed, 1984) vol 2, 371. Grey was
also an explorer and later became Governor of South Australia. ‘The
information I had collected regarding the Aborigines of Western Australia,
encouraged me to address a report to Lord John Russell,
the Secretary of State
for the Colonies, embracing the general principles which I considered would best
promote the civilisation
of the race’.
Despatch from Russell to Gipps 8
October 1840,
Historical Records of Australia
, Vol 21 Series 1, 34.
Grey, ‘Report upon the best means
of promoting the civilization of the Aboriginal Inhabitants of Australia’.
to the Despatch from Russell to Hutt dated 8 October 1840, 391, and 4
June 1840, 100, Point Number 2,
Papers Relative to Aborigines, Australian
, British Parliamentary Papers (1844, 1968) vol 8.
See Grey, above n 74, 369 Grey reported
that in Oct 1838 a woman had been killed and in south WA, and a servant of
Europeans was
killed in May 1839.
Grey, ‘Report upon the best means
of promoting the civilization of the Aboriginal Inhabitants of Australia’
5, Despatch from Russell to Gipps
Historical Records of
, vol 21, Series 1, 8 October 1840, 35.
Ibid 35, Point No 5.
Ibid Point No 6 and 9.
Executive Council minutes dated 15 June
1841, No 73, 140, CONS 1058 WAS 1620 SROWA.
Despatch Hutt to Glenelg 3 May 1839,
Papers Relative to the Aborigines, Australian Colonies
Parliamentary Papers (first published 1844, 1968) vol 8, 365. The Colonial
Office supported Hutt’s policy regarding
conflict. J
Stephen Memo, 26 Nov
1841, COL 18/28
See above n 82, 140 and above n 83,
See above n 82.
Despatch from Hutt to Glenelg 3 May
1839, 363 and Despatch from Hutt to Russell 10 July 1841, 392,
relative to the Aborigines, Australian Colonies
, British Parliamentary
Papers (1844, 1968) vol 8. The Select Committee suggested short and simple rules
that may form a temporary
and provisional code for the regulation of Aborigines,
Report from Select Committee
British Parliamentary Papers,
Anthropology, Aborigines,
Session 1837 (1968) vol 2, 84.
Despatch from Hutt, to Stanley, 8 April
Papers relative to the Aborigines, Australian Colonies,
Parliamentary Papers (first published 1844, 1968) vol 8, 413.
See the Executive Council minute of 15
June 1841.CONS 1058, WAS 1620 , SROWA. There was a similar proposal to employ
females, see
Despatch from Hutt to Russell, dated 21 July 1841 No 55,
Parliamentary Papers, Anthology
(first published 1844, 1968) vol 8, 1968
Despatch from Gipps to Russell dated 7
April 1841,
(1924) vol XXI, Series 1, 312-315.
Hutt had also read the British
Parliament Select Committee report of 1837, which recommended special laws to
protect Aborigines until
‘advancing knowledge and civilization shall have
superseded the necessity of any such special laws’
Parliamentary Papers, Anthropology, Aborigine
Session (first published 1837,
1968) vol 2.
Despatch from Hutt to Glenelg, 3 May
Papers Relative to Aborigines, Australian Colonies
Parliamentary Papers (first published 1844, 1968) vol 8, 363, 365 and Russell,
A History of Law in Western Australia
(1980) 317.
Vic No 8 was passed in
the Legislative Council but Royal Assent was refused. (See Despatch from
Russell to Hutt dated 30 April 1841,
Papers Relative to Aborigines,
Australian Colonies
, British Parliamentary Papers (first published 1844,
1968) vol 8, 377). It was in operation for a year. (Legislative Council Minutes
26 November 1841 in the
Perth Gazette
1 December 1841) ‘The bill
was passed into law, and the experience of a year, during which period it had
been in operation,
and shown that it had been attended with consequences of
great benefit to the aborigines as well as to the Europeans’. A second
amended ‘Act to Allow the Aboriginal Natives of Western Australia to give
information and Evidence without the sanction of
an Oath’ 5 Vict No 22 was
passed by the Legislative Council on 26 November 1841 and intended to operate
for two years. However
it did not get approval from the Home Government (see the
Despatch from Glenelg to Hutt, Stanley to Hutt dated February 1843, in
Relative to the Aborigines, Australian Colonies,
401-402). A notation on a
copy of the 1841 Act states as follows: ‘See Statute 6 and 7 Vic C. 22,
reciting (in 1843) that doubts
had arisen whether these Acts passed by the
Legislatures of the Colonies are not repugnant to the Laws of England, therefore
and void, and legalising all such enactments.’
Acts of Council B,
Western Australia 1832-1853
117. The statute referred to was an
Imperial Act relating to the evidence of persons without religious belief, which
seems to have
settled any confusion that previously existed which was adopted in
WA in 1844. The WA legislature had also passed an Act in 1843
which allowed the
1841 Act to continue, See 7 Vic No 7 1843 and later 12 Vic No 14 1849. The
summary punishment provisions came in
Summary Trial and Punishment
of Aborigines Act
(1849) 12 Vic No 18. Russell,
The History of Law in
Western Australia
(1980) 318, 408. In 1839, Hutt had also sent a draft bill
to Glenelg relating to establishing a prison for Aborigines at Rottnest
It had to be amended before it was given Royal assent in 1841 (4 & 5 Vic No
(1842) reported in
The Inquirer
on 12 January 1842 and
The Perth Gazette
on 8 January
, SROWA. Letter to
Colonial Secretary from Protector Charles Symmons dated 21 October 1841 −
‘Dyung was employed as a
guide to Mr Phillips of the Canning under that
gentleman’s protection’.
The magistrates on 3/1/1842 listed in
the register in addition to the chairman (Cons 3577/4, Battye) were George
Leake, Rev G B Wittenoom,
Chas Symmons, W H Drake, J W Hardey, M B Brown.
See Criminal Indictment File,
, 1842, Case No 253, CONS 3472 Item 50, SROWA. The Inquirer reported
that Wewar had an adopted son who had been killed by a relation
of Dyung, which
Wewar’s lawyer Landor argued required Wewar to act under his own laws, 12
January 1842, 5.
Ibid. See also Tilbrook and Hallam,
Aborigines of the South West Region 1829-1840
,{1990} Nundjar is listed as
one of Wewar’s sons. Also spelt Ngan-jar. CSR Vol 58 159, SROWA, provides
list of names of Aborigines
from the south side of the Murray or Kan=neeng,
Boo=yang, Bee=la of which Wi-wa and his family are listed as members.
See William Nairne Clark’s letter
, 19 January 1842.
, 12 January 1842.
The Inquirer
12 January 1842,
Diary of Ten Years Eventful Life of a Settler in WA
published 1884, 1978) 312, April 1837, ‘You can not imagine the perplexity
we are in here sometimes for books on law
subjects, especially where alterations
have been made by statute law recently. The Governor himself is not even
furnished with a
copy of the Acts of Parliament.’ The NSW cases were
unreported until the late 1890s.
12 January 1842, 5.
R Nash replaced G F Moore as
Advocate General in an acting capacity on 5 January 1841 while Moore was on a
leave of absence, see
Government Gazette
15 January 1841, No 234,
Tilbrook and Hallam (eds),
Aborigines of the Southwest Region, 1829-1840, The Bicentennial Dictionary of
Western Australians
(1990) vol VIII, 317-8; ‘Wewa 1837, (referring to
Armstrong’s list CSR 58/159, SROWA).
See Despatch from Stirling to
Stanley dated 1 November 1834. The extract is also in
Report for Select
Committee on Aborigines, (British Settlements) with the minutes of evidence
(1837, 1968) vol 2, 12-13.
The Inquirer
See Green and Moon,
(1997) 305 −
Wewar was given a free pardon in 1846 by Governor Clark after falling ill on
Rottnest and being unable to work.
He was subsequently sentenced to 6 months for
stealing flour and sent back to Rottnest.
11 February 1842 No 291,
Trigg’s Report.
Francis Lochee was the editor in
1842 to 1846 of
the Inquirer
and a solicitor.
The Inquirer
, above n 103,
The Inquirer
, above n 103,
The Inquirer
, above n 103, 4.
The Bushman, Life in a New Country
(first published 1847, 1998)
Fall, ‘Crime and Criminal
Records in Western Australia 1830-1855’ (18-29)
Studies in Western
Australian History, III
There were also incidences where
warrants were issued for
murders and assaults, and Aborigines
were shot while trying to escape. See Drummond Police Journal − York CSR
Vol 115/57 1
June 1842 for example. Governor Fitzgerald arrived in August 1848.
S Moon and N Green,
Far from Home: Aboriginal Prisoners of Rottnest Island
Richard Robert Madden, The Memoirs,
edited by his son, T M Madden, London (1891) 233. Prior to the arrival of
Fitzgerald, Madden had been instrumental in a change of
policy towards
enforcement where ‘a respect for human life, whether of native or settler,
was enforced’.
Annual Report of Charles Symmons
Protector of Natives dated 5 January
1849. WAGG 6
February 1849, 2.
See Reports by Charles Symmons in
Perth Gazette
1 February 1850, Report of Guardian of Aborigines in
York for 1849 and
Perth Gazette
11 January 1850, Report of Protector of
Natives, for year ending 31 December 1849.
Black Australians
(first published 1942, 1970) 149; Annual Report by Symmons to Colonial Secretary
office, for 1848,
Government Gazette
6 February 1849, 2.
Black Australians
(1942, 1970) 87-88 The first census of Aborigines who had been employed.
Government Gazette
19 December 1848, No 163, 8. The figures were subject
to various problems in compiling accurate statistics in districts occupied
settlers, see page 1.
This view was held as early as 1838.
See Hasluck, above n 126, 121.
Broken Spears
174-5.. Kanyin was hanged in 12 April 1850 near York −
Reg v Kanyin,
Mongean and Ngolangwert
− Three Aborigines were charged with wilful
murder of Tadupwert alias Monkey. Aboriginal witnesses were used in this case.
Perth Gazette
12 April 1850. See petition of H H Hall, and letter to
Perth Gazette
, 10 May 1850.
Petition by H H Hall was mounted in
an attempt to prevent the execution of two Aborigines, Mongean and Ngolangwert
were reprieved
at the eleventh hour.
For example; civil law, giving
evidence in court.
Landor, above n 120, 193.
Law Reform Commission Report No 31,
The Recognition of Customary Laws
(1986) vol 1, 123.
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
PDF format (789 KB)
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter