URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/journals/UNSWLawJlF/2020/3.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 15:45:51
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Douglas, Michael; Eldridge, John --- "Coronavirus And The Law Of Obligations" [2020] UNSWLawJlF 3; (2020) UNSW Law Journal Forum No 3
I INTRODUCTION
II CONTRACT
A Frustration
B Force Majeure
A Trespass to the person
B Wilkinson v Downton
C Negligence
IV CONCLUSION
CORONAVIRUS AND THE LAW OF OBLIGATIONS
MICHAEL DOUGLAS* AND JOHN ELDRIDGE**
COVID-19 has touched every aspect of Australian society, including the law
of obligations. This comment considers how the pandemic
could affect contracts
– a topic which is already a very popular subject of law firms’
client updates. After discussing
frustration and force majeure, it addresses a
few relevant torts, including trespass to the person, the tort recognised in
v Downton, and negligence. The comment is intended to provoke further
dialogue on how COVID-19 is affecting Australian law, including
forthcoming thematic issue of the University of New South Wales Law Journal on
‘Rights Protection amidst COVID-19’.
I INTRODUCTION
On 11 March 2020, the World Health Organisation characterised COVID-19 as a
At the time of writing,
the situation is developing rapidly. There is still great uncertainty
surrounding this virus and the impact
it will have.
Australian law is undergirded by the
Commonwealth
Constitution
This basic law provides the legal framework within which civil rights and duties
are created, recognised and
This pandemic will damage
every aspect of Australian society, and our branches of government are no
exception. As the work of Ministers
and employees of their departments is
disrupted, important executive action may be delayed. As the priorities of
governments change,
law reform initiatives may be delayed indefinitely.
COVID-19 is already having an impact on the civil litigation by which
obligations disputes are adjudicated. Some superior courts are
directions hearings to telephone; civil trials are being truncated to be
comprised only of evidence, with legal issues
determined on the
While the judiciary has
slowed down, so too are the firms that bring the cases: many closed their
offices and transitioned to a new
work-from-home reality. Unfortunately, the
pandemic may spawn a wave of potentially litigious disputes while simultaneously
undermining
the institutional infrastructure on which clients depend for dispute
resolution. Law students of generations to come may look back
on this period
through a lens of weird COVID-19 cases, just as we look back on the post-war
years through the likes of the
Australian Communist Party v Commonwealth
Communist Party
There is plainly much which might be said respecting the impact of COVID-19
on the law and legal system. This brief comment considers
how this event could
engage and impact the law of
obligations.
The impact of COVID-19 on contracts is already a popular topic for commercial
firms’ client updates.
social and economic disruption wrought by the virus will plainly have a
significant impact on contractual relations in a range
of settings. In some
cases, commercial contracting parties may seek to escape loss-making projects by
purporting to exercise express
termination rights. In other cases, disputes will
arise as to the scope of coverage provided in contracts of insurance. Further
litigation may ensue when consumers seek compensation for holidays and
trips which were ruined by the outbreak of the
This is not the place to canvass in detail the full range of contractual
disputes which may be fomented by the outbreak of
It is, however, worth
considering those doctrines which may become especially significant in
contractual disputes connected with
the virus and its effects.
A Frustration
The doctrine of frustration has now been recognised for well over a
The outbreak of COVID-19
has seen a surge in interest in the nature and scope of the doctrine, which, as
will be seen, may be of
considerable significance in some
The seminal statement of the doctrine of frustration was provided by Lord
Radcliffe in
Davis Contractors Ltd v Fareham Urban District Council
[F]rustration occurs whenever the law recognizes that without default of
either party a contractual obligation has become incapable
of being performed
because the circumstances in which performance is called for would render it a
thing radically different from
that which was undertaken by the contract.
haec in foedera veni
. It was not this that I promised to
Although this formulation has been approved by the High
it omits an aspect of the
doctrine which, while controversial, is often cited as one of the key
requirements for its engagement –
namely the requirement that the
frustrating event was not foreseen by the parties at the time of the
contract’s formation.
Where the elements of frustration are established, the result is that the
parties’ contract is automatically
discharged.
There is, in other
words, no room for choice on the part of the parties – the effect of the
frustrating event is that the contract
comes to an end, irrespective of the
parties’ wishes.
which have unconditionally accrued prior to the frustrating event will survive
but in many cases it
will be necessary for parties to avail themselves of restitutionary remedies to
avoid injustice which would
otherwise result from discharge. In New South Wales,
Victoria and South Australia, the legislature has intervened to remedy what
perceived to be the inadequacy of the common law response in this
The classic case in which the doctrine of frustration will be engaged is that
in which the subject matter of the contract is destroyed
(without any fault on
the part of the parties) after
The COVID-19 outbreak
is unlikely to cause a surge in cases of this type. The doctrine is, however,
also capable of applying in other
scenarios which may arise with some regularity
in the coming months. There is authority, for instance, which holds that the
may be engaged where, as a result of changed circumstances, the
‘foundation’ of a contract has
disappeared.
, when the coronation procession of King Edward VII was cancelled as a
result of the monarch’s illness, it was held that a contract
for the use
of rooms on Pall Mall (from which the party hiring the rooms intended to view
the procession) was frustrated.
This decision will doubtless attract renewed attention as the community grapples
with an unprecedented spate of event cancellations.
Many in the business
community will also be driven to re-examine authorities which suggest that the
doctrine may be engaged where
changes to the commercial practicability of the
contract would render performance of the contract radically different from that
Of perhaps even greater significance is the question of the application of
the doctrine to contracts of employment. Here, it is important
to distinguish
between two different paradigm scenarios. First, there will be many employees
who remain able in principle to perform
their ordinary employment duties without
contravening any statutory or regulatory rule, but who, as a result of the
downturn in economic
activity, have suddenly become surplus to their
employers’ needs.
there will be other employees who will be unable to perform their ordinary
employment duties without engaging in conduct
which would contravene a statutory
or regulatory provision.
There is good reason to doubt whether the doctrine of frustration has scope
to operate in respect of scenarios of the first type.
Although the sudden
deterioration in economic conditions will doubtless have severe impacts on many
employers, the first paradigm
scenario described above nonetheless remains in
substance a scenario in which employees have become redundant as a result of
in their employer’s needs. The circumstances in which an
employment contract can be discharged on the basis of an employee’s
redundancy is the subject of detailed
regulation.
There also exist
statutory provisions which govern the circumstances in which an employee can be
temporarily stood down in response
to a ‘stoppage’ of
It is doubtful whether
this statutory regime leaves room for the operation of the doctrine of
frustration.
The second paradigm scenario is rather different. In a case of this type, it
would appear that performance of the contract would necessarily
involve the
doing of an illegal act. Such a scenario might thus – at least where the
illegality can be expected to subsist
for an indefinite period of time –
be thought to amount to a case of ‘supervening illegality’, such
that the doctrine
of frustration is
Yet even in a case such
as this, it is far from clear whether the doctrine has scope to operate. The
proper place of the doctrine
of frustration in modern Australian labour law may
eventually be clarified in the courts as the economic consequences of the
B Force Majeure
Given the nature of the doctrine of frustration – which can operate
quite harshly in some circumstances – it is common
for parties to make
express contractual provision for supervening events. By doing so, parties can
work around some of the limitations
of the common law – such as its
blunt-instrument response to a frustrating event, and its failure to recognise
impossibility’ as a ground of
frustration.
Where parties have included a clause of this type in their contract, the
impact of a supervening event will largely become a question
interpretation and application of the relevant term of the parties’
Where parties have, by
their contract, dealt with the impact of a particular event, there will
typically be no room left for the
operation of the doctrine of
frustration.
The impact of COVID-19 has sparked considerable interest in the question of
whether the pandemic is capable of triggering contractual
force majeure
Although this question
is plainly of great practical importance, there is little that can be said
definitively at a general level.
The question of whether a particular force
majeure clause has been enlivened by the COVID-19 pandemic will always turn upon
construction of the particular clause in issue. Major firms’
client updates on the topic of force majeure clauses have for
the most part
acknowledged this difficulty, and have sought to circumvent it by considering
cases which have dealt with expressions
– such as ‘act of God’
– which are commonly included in force majeure
provisions.
Although it may be profitable to consider such authorities, it must be
remembered that there is a limit to the utility of this approach.
While it is
certainly true that force majeure provisions tend to share common
it is nonetheless
imperative not to lose sight of the context in which relevant contractual
language in used. While the pandemic
is in principle capable of enlivening a
force majeure provision, it is unsafe to arrive at a conclusion in respect of a
contract until close attention has been given to the proper
construction of the clause in question.
This crisis has the potential to test the boundaries of the law of tort on
several fronts. Whether any cases of the types discussed
below actually arise
will depend on the behaviour of would-be parties. As a deteriorating economy
begins to make its impact felt,
litigation for smaller sums of money may become
less frequent. Accordingly, the following section may be little more than a
of thought experiments.
A Trespass to the person
The virus affects the human body, so we shall start with the torts that
protect bodily integrity. The advent of a pandemic does not
alter ‘[t]he
fundamental principle, plain and incontestable, ... that every person’s
body is inviolate’.
three varieties of trespass to the person, each descended from the writ of
trespass – assault, battery and false
imprisonment
have relevance in the months to come.
Could a cough deliberately directed into another person’s face
constitute an assault? That is: would it be an act which ‘causes
person to apprehend the infliction of immediate, unlawful, force on his
It depends.
Whether the person contracts COVID-19 does not matter, as trespass is actionable
per se. It might be questioned whether
a cough is ‘force’, but with
respect to assault, that is not the correct question. Force is the subject of
the apprehension
– so here, the issue for consideration is whether
infection by a virus would constitute sufficient force. You can see a punch
the face; you cannot see the virus with a naked
There is no physical
Yet if you threaten to
throw a brick at a person, that could constitute an
it would not matter
that there would be a moment in time when the brick was flying through the air
and you were not physically holding
it any longer. The virus may be too small to
see, and it may need to be outside of your body in order to infect another
person. Yet
it may leave your body and then hit another like a brick – or
like a smaller dangerous object, a bullet. There seems to be
no principled
reason to deny that the apprehended interference in such a case would be
actionable. Indeed, this conclusion might
be thought to derive further support
from the acceptance (albeit in dicta) by Glidewell LJ in
Kaye v Robertson
that the flashing of a bright light into another person’s eyes may amount
to a battery.
The fact that the victim’s ‘damage’, at least in the form
of physical suffering, may not manifest until later would
not preclude
liability, as a threat of impending force may be
actionable.
Pointing a gun at
someone might be enough for an apprehension of
once shot, you may or may
not be injured. In the current environment, having someone deliberately cough in
your face might be as
confronting as facing the barrel of a gun, depending on
your constitution. Yet if the victim knew that the cougher was not infected
(knowledge that is hard to come by at the time of writing), then the cougher
would not be liable.
All of that
said: the ancient pedigree of the trespass torts may discourage development of
the tort to relatively novel
If a cough in the face
were actionable at all, it would likely be through means of a different cause of
Battery is a far more likely to be relevant in this pandemic. ‘The
least touching of another in
actionable. Hostility is probably unnecessary; lack of consent would be
Tearing a packet of
toilet paper from your neighbour’s hands in Coles would be
actionable.
Licking a stranger
on the bus would be actionable. Would the deliberate cough, considered above, be
actionable? In
throwing water on a
person was a battery, despite the lack of physical contact between the parties.
R v Cotesworth
held that spitting in a person’s face could constitute a battery;
Majindi v The Northern Territory of
held the same. So
yes, deliberately coughing in a person’s face could amount to a
Many of us are about to be ‘imprisoned’ in one way or another in
the months ahead, but it is unlikely to constitute actionable
imprisonment. At common law, imprisonment for the sake of public safety would be
defensible via necessity.
defence would be unnecessary, however, in that any imprisonment to come will be
carried out pursuant to statutory authorisation.
Difficult questions, which are
beyond the scope of this comment, will arise in those Australian jurisdictions
which have enacted
human rights statutes. As our needs for personal security
continue to grow, our individual liberties will continue to be challenged.
Wilkinson v Downton
The coughing hypothetical might be more naturally accommodated within the
principle in
Wilkinson v
According to this
principle, a deliberate act calculated to cause physical harm, including
psychiatric injury,
actionable.
However, the
coughing victim may not have a cause of action if they suffer no more than
emotional distress.
application of this relatively unusual tort to a case of ‘mere’
emotional distress would vindicate the intuition
that being deliberately coughed
on amidst a pandemic is wrong enough to be actionable.
C Negligence
Of the torts considered here, negligence has the greatest potential to be
utilised in litigation in response to damage suffered in
coming months.
Case studies are not in short supply. On 16 March 2020, ABC’s
program relayed the story of a young man in self-isolation, trapped in his
bedroom within an Australian share house, having his housemates
leave him bowls
of pasta at his bedroom door.
The bartender and student attended drinks with colleagues a week or so earlier,
including with one friend who, unbeknownst to the
group, had recently been
tested for COVID-19 and failed to self-isolate. The young man had shaken hands
and hugged his friend, and
even finished one of his beers. When the friend
tested positive not long after the gathering, the young man was informed, then
himself tested and went into isolation. Against the backdrop of explicit
government advice to self-isolate, the failure to warn the
group – and a
fortiori the decision to attend the event – is a clear breach of duty of
care on the part of this
The content of one’s duty of care is a question which ought to be on
the minds of every business owner. At the time of writing,
a business offering
hand sanitiser to customers at reception is not an uncommon sight, while
supermarkets are offering disinfectant
wipes for shoppers to clean their
trolleys before entering a Mad Max-esque quest for toilet paper. Many businesses
that depend on
large crowds – like promoters of
– have been
forced to cancel events to comply with government
Even ANZAC Day
commemorations have been
For the foreseeable
future, every time a business encourages a group of people to come into close
proximity with one another, they
will be flirting with a foreseeable risk of
harm to their customers. Although there is social utility in keeping many
open, at some point, the probability and likely seriousness of harm
underlying many forms of trading will outweigh that
Apart from risk to
customers, risk to employees – who may be required to stay in close
periods of time – is pronounced.
We should also consider those institutions who could adapt to the new reality
relatively easily, but for reasons of cost or convenience,
have failed to do so.
At the time of writing, for example, against a backdrop of conflicting expert
advice, many schools and universities
are still open and delivering face-to-face
instruction. Those with the power to close these institutions or alter the way
instruction is delivered, who have so far failed to exercise that
power, may soon be asked whether continuing in this way is consistent
duties of care to students and staff. Higher education is one of the few sectors
of our economy that might survive an
immediate transition to a 100% virtual
workplace; the relatively less severe burden of taking precautions to avoid the
risk of harm
means that failure to take those precautions has graver
consequences at law.
Certain jurisdictions contain provisions within the Civil Liability Acts
regarding liability for harm from obvious risks of dangerous
recreational
activities.
Those provisions
historically had application to things like bungee jumping or contact sport, yet
may find new application in this
pandemic. If a person attends a small bar and
is infected, would the proprietor of the bar have a statutory
Even in the absence of
statutory protection, the proprietor may have a defence at common law via
volenti non fit injuria
The law of torts will tacitly encourage each of us to be vigilant, and to take
personal responsibility for avoiding transmission
of the virus.
Unlike trespass to the person, damage is the gist of negligence; it is not
actionable unless the negligent conduct factually caused
The need for a plaintiff
to demonstrate factual causation on the balance of probabilities may preclude
many actions in negligence:
there will be a point at which there are so many
vectors surrounding each of us that it would be almost impossible to identify
source of transmission. The forensic task will be much easier in the early
days, for cases like that of the poor young man at the
pub, considered above.
Putting aside the causation problem, what heads of damage would be
compensable for COVID-19 negligence? An infected person would have
compensable ‘personal injury’, a term which includes
That head of damage
captures three kinds of loss: non-pecuniary loss for (inter alia) pain and
suffering; loss of earning capacity;
and actual financial loss, including for
example, medical expenses.
Consequential economic loss would be compensable, although economic loss for
personal injury remains limited by the Civil Liability
IV CONCLUSION
Casebooks on obligations recount disputes: stories of conflict, loss and
human suffering. In the months ahead, Australia will see
more conflict, loss and
human suffering than we authors have seen in our lifetimes. A morbid silver
lining to this tragedy is that
it may give rise to interesting cases for future
casebooks. We sincerely hope that it does not, and that families, businesses and
societies around the world recover as quickly and painlessly as possible.
There are so many issues that this comment has left untouched, and so we
conclude by encouraging colleagues in the legal academy to
spend some time in
self-isolation investigating the implications of COVID-19 for other areas of
law. A glaring omission from this
piece is the impact of the crisis on property
and equity. For example, when thousands of millennial casual workers lose their
and stop paying rent, what will that mean for landlords? This crisis will
pose countless further questions of law and policy worth
considering in the
months ahead.
* Senior Lecturer, UWA Law School; Consultant, Bennett + Co, Perth.
** Senior Lecturer, University of Sydney Law School. Thanks are due to
Joellen Riley, Andrew Stewart and the anonymous referees for
Any errors are our own.
1 Tedros Adhanom Ghebreyesus, ‘WHO Director-General’s Opening
Remarks at the Media Briefing on COVID-19 – 11 March
2020’ (Media
Briefing, World Health Organisation, 11 March 2020).
Although it is not the focus of the
present discussion, the COVID-19 pandemic may also test the boundaries of
Australian constitutional
law. There is, for instance, some scope for an
argument that the need for a coordinated national response to the pandemic
the ‘nationhood power’. For a detailed discussion, see Peter
Gerangelos, ‘Sir Owen Dixon and the Concept of “Nationhood”
a Source of Commonwealth Power’ in John Eldridge and Timothy Pilkington
Sir Owen Dixon’s Legacy
(The Federation Press, 2019) 56. At
the time of editing, constitutional challenges to state border closures are
pending; they are
not considered in this piece: see generally Transcript of
Proceedings,
Palmer v Western Australia
[2020] HCATrans 62
; Tony Zhang,
‘Clive Palmer Launches High Court Challenge to Queensland Coronavirus
Border Closure’,
LawyersWeekly
(online, 31 May 2020)
<https://www.lawyersweekly.com.au/biglaw/28463-clive-palmer-launches-high-court-challenge-to-queensland-coronavirus-border-closure>.
See generally Jerome Doraisamy,
‘How Our Nation’s Courts Are Responding to COVID-19’,
LawyersWeekly
(online, 16 March 2020)
<https://www.lawyersweekly.com.au/biglaw/27727-how-our-nation-s-courts-are-responding-to-covid-19>.
[1951] HCA 5
(1951) 83 CLR 1.
There are, of course, many other areas of
law that will be forced to grapple with the COVID-19 pandemic. Indeed, the law
is no stranger
to the difficulties which can be occasioned by a dangerous and
contagious virus. The most familiar example is HIV, which has occasioned
difficulties for the criminal law as a result of (rare) instances of deliberate
transmission: see, eg, David J Carter, ‘Transmission
of HIV and the
Criminal Law: Examining the Impact of Pre-exposure Prophylaxis and
Treatment-as-Prevention’ (2020) 43(3)
Melbourne University Law
(forthcoming).
See, eg, Shane Ogden and Oliver Collins,
‘The Impact of Coronavirus on Your Contract: Remedying Where the
“Frustration”
King & Wood Mallesons
Page, 25 February 2020)
<https://www.kwm.com/en/au/knowledge/insights/the-frustrating-impact-of-the-coronavirus-20200226>.
See, eg, Mark Giancaspro and John
Eldridge, ‘Memories Overboard! What the Law Says about Claiming
Compensation for a Holiday
Gone Wrong’,
The Conversation
21 February 2020)
http://theconversation.com/memories-overboard-what-the-law-says-about-claiming-compensation-for-a-holiday-gone-wrong-132012
In addition to the matters discussed
below, there is good reason to suppose that litigation sparked by the pandemic
will prompt
a re-examination of the principles respecting economic duress,
implied terms, and the construction of exclusion clauses. Although
each of these
subjects is of considerable importance, they can be set to one side here in
favour of a discussion of those doctrines
which are likely to be of principal
significance in the litigation prompted by the pandemic.
The modern doctrine has its origins in
Taylor v Caldwell
[1863] EngR 526
(1863) 3 B & S 826
For a general discussion of topical
questions in respect of frustration (and force majeure, discussed below), see
Howard Hunter,
‘From Coronations to Sand Bans: Frustration and Force
Majeure in the Twenty-First Century’
(2011) 28(1)
Journal of Contract
[1956] UKHL 3
[1956] AC 696
, 729. Prior to the
development of the modern law of frustration, the difficulties posed by
supervening events were sometimes addressed
by the equitable doctrine of
‘accident’: see John Zerilli, ‘Accident in the Equitable
(2008) 24(2)
Journal of Contract Law
Codelfa Construction Pty Ltd v
State Rail Authority of New South Wales
(1982) 149 CLR 337
, 357 (Mason J),
408 (Brennan J).
See, eg, JW Carter,
Contract Law in
(LexisNexis, 7
ed, 2018) 761.
Hirji Mulji v Cheong Yue Steamship
[1926] AC 497
, 505 (Lord Sumner).
This aspect of the doctrine has
provoked considerable consternation in some quarters, and has been the subject
of much analysis:
see, eg, Ewan McKendrick, ‘Frustration: Automatic
Discharge of Both Parties?’ in Andrew Dyson, James Goudkamp and Frederick
Wilmot-Smith (eds),
Defences in Contract
(Hart Publishing, 2017) 141,
Hirji Mulji v Cheong Yue Steamship
[1926] AC 497
, 510 (Lord Sumner).
Frustrated Contracts Act 1978
Frustrated Contracts Act
Australian Consumer
Law and Fair Trading Act 2012
The various statutory regimes
have been the subject of criticism. See also Andrew Stewart and JW Carter,
‘Frustrated Contracts
and Statutory Adjustment: The Case for a
Reappraisal’
(1992) 51(1)
Cambridge Law Journal
Taylor v Caldwell
[1863] EngR 526
(1863) 3 B & S 826
ER 309. Where, unbeknownst to the contracting
parties, the relevant subject matter has perished
to formation, the
case falls within the ambit of the doctrine of common mistake.
Krell v Henry
[1903] UKLawRpKQB 169
, 749 (Vaughan Williams LJ).
Ibid 754 (Vaughan Williams LJ).
Codelfa Construction Pty
Ltd v State Rail Authority of New South Wales
(1982) 149 CLR 337.
same time, it must be stressed that where changed circumstances merely render
performance more costly for one of the parties,
there will be no frustration:
see the discussion in Jack Beatson, ‘Increased Expense and
Frustration’ in F D Rose (ed),
Consensus ad Idem: Essays in the Law of
Contract in Honour of Guenter Treitel
(Sweet & Maxwell, 1996) 121.
Many examples might be instanced here.
Airline baggage handlers, for instance, will doubtless have little work to do in
the present
Fair Work Act 2009
. Provisions in respect of redundancy may, of course, also
be found in Enterprise Agreements or in individual contracts of employment.
See the default statutory provision in
Fair Work Act 2009
Provisions of this type may also be found
in Enterprise Agreements or individual contracts of employment.
Such a conclusion is consistent with a
body of Australian authority which casts doubt on the scope for the operation of
the doctrine
of frustration in respect of contracts of employment: see, eg, the
discussion in Andrew Stewart et al,
Creighton and Stewart’s Labour
(Federation Press, 6
ed, 2016) 739
[22.48]–[22.49].
Fibrosa Spolka Akcyjna v
Fairbairn Lawson Combe Barbour Ltd
[1942] UKHL 4
[1943] AC 32
, 41 (Viscount Simon LC).
The lack of recognition of
‘partial impossibility’ at common law has been the subject of
criticism: see, eg, Michael
Bridge, ‘Exceptions Clauses and Contractual
Frustration Clauses’ (2020) 136 (January)
Law Quarterly Review
The task of construing a force majeure
clause is for the most part governed by the general principles relevant to
contractual interpretation.
Although these principles are largely settled in
Australian law, considerable doubt remains in respect of some questions. The
intractable difficulty relates to the question of when evidence of
‘surrounding circumstances’ may be used for the purpose
construing a contract: see John Eldridge, ‘“Surrounding
Circumstances” in Contractual Interpretation: Where
are We Now?’
(2018) 32(3)
Commercial Law Quarterly
While the event may be dealt with
expressly, it is important to note that there also exists the possibility that
the parties’
contract contains an implied term that deals with the
difficulty in question. The law respecting implied terms has been the cause
some difficulty in recent years, and to a certain extent continues to pose
challenges: see, eg, Timothy Pilkington and John Eldridge,
‘Implied Terms
and Contract Formation’ (2019) 135 (October)
Law Quarterly Review
See, eg, Emma Schaafsma et al,
‘COVID-19: Pressure Points: Force Majeure Considerations in a Potential
“Second Wave”
of COVID-19 (UK)’,
Herbert Smith
(Web Page, 27 April 2020)
<https://www.herbertsmithfreehills.com/latest-thinking/covid-19-pressure-points-force-majeure-considerations-in-a-potential-%E2%80%9Csecond-wave%E2%80%9D>.
See, eg, ‘COVID-19: Does It Fall
within Your Force Majeure Clause?’,
(Web Page, 25 March
<https://www.ashurst.com/en/news-and-insights/legal-updates/covid-19-act-of-god/>.
It is common, for instance, for a
clause of this type to impose notice requirements on the parties.
Collins v Wilcock
[1984] 1 WLR
, 1177 (Robert Goff LJ).
Michael A Jones (ed),
Lindsell on Torts
(Sweet & Maxwell, 22
Collins v Wilcock
[1984] 1 WLR
, 1177 (Robert Goff LJ).
To express the same point slightly
differently, one might contend that the apprehended interference with the
plaintiff’s person
would not be sufficiently ‘direct’: see
Reynolds v Clarke
(1795) 1 St 634
, 636 (Fortescue CJ);
[1828] EngR 580
(1828) 4 Bing 628
130 ER 911.
Stephen v Myers
(1830) 4 Car
& P 349; 172 ER 735.
Pursell v Horn
[1838] EngR 726
8 Ad & E 602
[1990] EWCA Civ 21
[1991] FSR 62
‘Mr. Caldecott, for Mr. Kaye, could not refer us to any authority in
which the taking of a photograph or indeed the flashing
of a light had been held
to be a battery. Nevertheless I am prepared to accept that it may well be the
case that if a bright light
is deliberately shone into another person's eyes and
injures his sight, or damages him in some other way, this may be in law a
Bingham LJ expressed some doubt in this regard: at 70. See further
[2008] VSC 596
, [307] (Smith J).
Barton v Armstrong
McClelland v Symons
[1950] VicLawRp 75
, 163–4 (Sholl J).
Cf a situation where a gun is pointed
at a person who knows it is unloaded or a toy:
Logdon v DPP
[1976] Crim
Stingel v Clark
[2006] HCA 37
, 475–6 [97] (Kirby J).
Cole v Turner
(1704) 6 Mod 149;
90 ER 958 (Holt
Boughey v R
(1986) 161 CLR 10
25 (Mason, Wilson and Deane JJ);
Secretary, Department of Health and
Community Services (NT) v JWB
[1992] HCA 15
(1992) 175 CLR 218
, 310 (McHugh J).
See ‘Video Captures
Women’s Brawl over Toilet Paper at Woolworths’ (YouTube, 6 March
2020) <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=DQv5PWMzI-w>.
[1838] EngR 726
(1838) 8 Ad & E 602
(1704) 6 Mod 180;
[2012] NTSC 25
(2012) 31 NTLR 150.
Southwark London Borough Council v
[1971] 1 Ch 734
, 746 (Edmund Davis LJ).
[1897] 2 QB 57, 58–9 (Wright
Stingel v Clark
[2006] HCA 37
Barbara McDonald, Ross Anderson and
David Rolph,
Cases on Torts
(Federation Press, 6
Giller v Procopets
[2008] VSCA 236
(2008) 24 VR
, cf the dissent of Maxwell P;
Habib v Commonwealth [No 2]
[2009] FCA 228
‘Coronavirus is
Changing the Way We Live and Work’,
7:30 with Leigh Sales
Page, 16 March 2020)
<https://www.abc.net.au/7.30/coronavirus-is-changing-the-way-we-live-and-work/12061306>.
Applying the statutory ‘
calculus’ enacted in each of the Civil Liability Acts: see, eg,
Civil Liability Act 2002
Wyong Shire Council v
[1980] HCA 12
(1980) 146 CLR 40
, 47 (Mason J).
For example, Bluesfest Services Pty
Ltd, behind the cancelled Byron Bay music festival: see ‘Bluesfest Has
Been Cancelled
Due to Coronavirus, but Will Proceed in 2021’,
(online, 16 March 2020)
<https://www.abc.net.au/doublej/music-reads/music-news/bluesfest-2020-cancelled-coronavirus-covid-19/12059026>.
Brett Worthington, ‘Gatherings
of More than 500 People to be Cancelled, Australians Urged Not to Travel
Overseas Amid Coronavirus
(online, 13 March 2020)
<https://www.abc.net.au/news/2020-03-13/coronavirus-scott-morrison-coag-premiers-cancelling-events/12053382>.
‘Coronavirus Forces Cancellation
of Anzac Day Services in Victoria, NSW, Tasmania, Queensland and Western
Australia’,
(Online, 16 March 2020)
<https://www.abc.net.au/news/2020-03-16/anzac-day-services-cancelled-due-to-coronavirus/12060466>.
Civil Liability Act 2002
ss 5B(2)(a)
See, eg, ibid
s 5B(2)(c).
South Tweed Heads Rugby League
Football Club Ltd v Cole
[2002] NSWCA 205
(2002) 55 NSWLR 113.
Civil Liability Act 2002
s 5D(1)(a).
See, eg, ibid
See also, as
noted above, cases of criminal liability for infecting a victim with a serious
disease like HIV, for example
Zaburoni v The Queen
[2016] HCA 12
(2016) 256 CLR
CSR Ltd v Eddy
[2005] HCA 64
(2005) 226 CLR
, 15–16 [28]–[31] (Gleeson CJ, Gummow and Heydon JJ).
Civil Liability Act 2002
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (138 KB)
PDF format (651 KB)
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter