URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/journals/UNSWLawJlF/2020/7.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 15:45:34
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Golru, Sara --- "Regulating The Use Of Genetic Information In The Life Insurance Industry" [2020] UNSWLawJlF 7; (2020) UNSW Law Journal Forum No 7
I INTRODUCTION
II CURRENT LEGAL FRAMEWORK
Disability Discrimination Act 1992
Insurance Contracts Act 1984
C Self-Regulation Standards
1 Standard No 11: Genetic Testing Policy (2016)
2 Standard No 11: Moratorium on Genetic Tests in Life Insurance (2019) (‘Moratorium’)
III INTERNATIONAL CONTEXT
A United Nations
B United Kingdom (‘UK’)
C United States
IV CURRENT ISSUES
A Self-Regulation
B Accuracy of Genetic Testing and Underwriting
C Adverse Selection
D Participation in Genetic Testing and Research
A Independent Oversight
B Amendment of FSC Standards
C Government Intervention
VI CONCLUSION
REGULATING THE USE OF GENETIC INFORMATION IN
THE LIFE INSURANCE INDUSTRY
SARA GOLRU*
I INTRODUCTION
The Australian life insurance industry has been the subject of extensive
media and academic criticism due to their treatment of genetic
information in
the underwriting process. As the field of genetics advances, the potential for
genetic discrimination also increases.
The nature of this discrimination can be
crudely summarised in the statement of a member of the Australian insurance
industry, who
informed a carrier of the
gene mutation that
‘if you were a horse, we wouldn’t bet on you because we know you
wouldn’t finish the
The insurer dismissed
the relevance of the carrier’s significant efforts to reduce her risk by
undergoing preventative surgery,
in the form of a double mastectomy as well as
the removal of her fallopian tubes and one of her
Similarly, a life insurance applicant who tested positive for Lynch syndrome
was consistently denied coverage, despite undergoing
regular colonoscopies and
preventative surgery.
Federal Labor
MP Matt Keogh noted that an oncologist informed him that he spent more time
discussing the insurance ramifications
of genetic tests with his patients than
the health ramifications.
cases have prompted politicians, medical and legal professionals as well as
academics to call for greater claims process transparency
and government
oversight of the life insurance industry.
Genetic test results cannot affect private health insurance in Australia, as
it is community risk rated under the
Private Health Insurance Act 2007
Consequently, private
health insurers are required to offer the same premiums to all applicants for
equivalent policies and are prohibited
from discriminating on the basis of
health or other information.
However, life insurance is mutually rated so insurers classify individuals
according to their personal risk.
This regime inevitably creates great potential for genetic discrimination, as
genetic results can be used for underwriting life insurance
in Australia, with
little consumer transparency or government oversight. It is true that the use of
genetic information has been
relatively rare in Australian life
However, it must also be
acknowledged that genetic advancements are occurring at a rapid rate and genetic
testing is becoming increasingly
In order to harness the
true potential of genomics in healthcare, we need to avoid impediments to the
uptake of genetic testing and
participation in genetic research.
From 2016 to 2018, the Australian Parliamentary Joint Committee on
Corporations and Financial Services conducted an inquiry into the
life insurance
Following 77
submissions and seven hearings, the Committee made a number of recommendations
including: strengthening consumer protections
and regulatory oversight of the
industry; greater transparency of remuneration, commissions, payments and fees;
appropriate access
to personal medical and genetic information and; fairer
claims handling practices.
particular, Recommendation 9.1 suggested that
the Financial Services Council, in consultation with the Australian Genetic
Non-Discrimination Working Group, assess the consumer
impact of imposing a
moratorium on life insurers using predictive genetic information, unless the
consumer provides genetic information
to a life insurer to demonstrate that they
are not at risk of developing a
As a result of this recommendation, the Financial Services Council
(‘FSC’) imposed a moratorium on genetic tests in life
insurance from
1 July 2019.
this article will review the current Australian and international legal
frameworks governing the use of genetic information
in life insurance.
will highlight policy concerns and
will provide recommendations for
II CURRENT LEGAL FRAMEWORK
The current legal framework consists of a mixture of legislative provisions
imposing duties of disclosure, ‘utmost good faith’
non-discrimination as well as industry self-regulation of life insurers by the
Disability Discrimination Act 1992
Disability Discrimination Act 1992
’) allows life insurers to discriminate on the basis of
genetic test results, only where they have actuarial or statistical
justify their decisions.
Insurance Contracts Act 1984
Section 13(1)
Insurance Contracts Act 1984
’) provides that there is a reciprocal duty of
‘utmost good faith’ implied in all contracts of insurance. The
law principle of utmost good faith was famously established in the case
Carter v Boehm
where Lord Mansfield observed that ‘[g]ood faith
forbids either party by concealing what he privately knows, to draw the other
into a bargain, from his ignorance of that fact, and his believing the
This principle
allows insurance companies to charge premiums commensurate to an
applicant’s risk status.
imposes a duty on an insured to disclose any
matter that the insured knows to be of relevance to the insurer. This includes
an obligation
to provide full disclosure of all information material to the
insurer’s assessment of risk, which a reasonable person in the
circumstances could be expected to know to be a matter that is relevant. The
central issue is whether genetic test results constitute
information that would
have a material effect on the judgment of a reasonable person in determining the
terms of the insurance contract.
The onus is on the insurer to prove materiality as a question of
In the context of life
insurance, material information includes information within the
applicant’s knowledge that may affect
their mortality or morbidity.
Therefore, an applicant will breach their duty of disclosure if they fail to
disclose the results of
a genetic test when they have full knowledge of the
results. An insured’s failure to fully disclose this information may have
severe repercussions, including avoidance of the insurance contract for
misrepresentation or
non-disclosure.
The requirement
to disclose this information is also subject to other policy documents,
including FSC Industry Standards on Genetic
(‘Standards’).
C Self-Regulation Standards
The FSC is the peak industry body in Australia for life insurers and
establishes the Standards. Compliance with the Standards is mandatory
members, which includes a number of life insurers, and full FSC members must
produce annual compliance
statements.
Breach of a Standard
can lead to disciplinary action, including suspension or even expulsion from the
1 Standard No 11: Genetic Testing Policy
The FSC’s 2016 Standard prohibited life insurers from asking applicants
to undergo genetic testing to support an application
In addition, the
Standards stipulated that insurers could not request an applicant to undergo
genetic testing on the basis of an
adverse underwriting assessment as a result
of their family history.
Insurers could only obtain genetic test results with the informed written
consent of the tested applicant and those results could
not be used for the
underwriting assessment of a relative of the tested
However, insurers were able to ask applicants to disclose existing genetic
test results that were within the applicant’s
The FSC also allowed
life insurers to ask applicants if they were even considering having a genetic
The FSC maintained that
the requirement to disclose existing medical information was consistent with the
duty of disclosure required
They assumed that
genetic information satisfied the test for materiality, as ‘like other
personal medical information, [genetic
information] may influence a
person’s decision to seek life
insurance’.
They justified
their position by arguing that deliberately withholding genetic information
results in inequality of access to material
information and has the potential to
‘significantly increase the cost of claims, eventually leading to premium
rate increases
costumers’.
The FSC established an important caveat that insurers could not request
disclosure of genetic tests used solely for the purpose of
a medical research
study where the results were unknown to the
The reasoning behind
this exception was to uphold the significance of ongoing scientific
The FSC also
encouraged life insurers to ‘consider the potentially-beneficial effects
of medical screening, early diagnosis
and treatment on the Applicant’s
long-term health outlook’ in their assessment of the applicant’s
risk rating.
2 Standard No 11: Moratorium on Genetic Tests in
Life Insurance (2019) (‘Moratorium’)
Following the recommendations of the Parliamentary Inquiry into the Life
Insurance Industry (‘Parliamentary Inquiry’),
FSC Standard No
was amended to exclude genetic research findings from insurance
underwriting.
The FSC states
that the primary purpose of the revised Standard is ‘to ensure people can
access a level of life insurance without
being asked about the result of a
previously taken Genetic
The Moratorium only
applies to life insurance applications received on or after 1 July 2019 until 30
Most importantly, life insurance providers are no longer able to request or
use genetic test results for applications under:
• $500,000 of lump sum death Cover.
• $500,000 of total permanent disability Cover (TPD).
• $200,000 of trauma and/or critical illness Cover.
• $4,000 a month in total of any combination of income protection,
salary continuance or business expenses
Life insurance providers are still entitled to request applicants to disclose
the diagnosis of a condition, ‘even if the diagnosis
resulted directly or
indirectly from a Genetic
The diagnosis may
also be used as part of the underwriting
Moreover, where an
applicant’s total amount of cover exceeds any of the above limits,
‘a Life Insurance Provider may
ask for and use the result of a previously
taken or planned Genetic Test (where planned means the Applicant has consented
a Genetic Test)’, provided that there is evidence of the
test’s relevance to the
Life insurers are still unable to ask applicants to undergo genetic testing
or to disclose results obtained from a medical research
study where the results
are unknown to the applicant.
The revised Standard provides additional consumer protections by allowing
applicants to disclose favourable genetic test results
and taking into account
‘[e]vidence based preventative treatment, or adherence to evidence based
preventative measures, which
reduce the possibility of developing an illness
that runs in their
The FSC have declared their intention to undertake a review of the
Moratorium, in consultation with stakeholders, in
The review will consider
the limits of Cover, rates
of participation in genetic research, advances in the
field of genomics and impacts on the sustainability of the life insurance
III INTERNATIONAL CONTEXT
A United Nations
Article 1 of the
Universal Declaration on the Human Genome and Human
describes the human genome as the ‘heritage of humanity’
and article 6 stipulates that ‘[n]o one shall be subjected
discrimination based on genetic
characteristics’.
Declaration aims to protect the confidentiality of genetic information and
prevent genetic discrimination.
B United Kingdom (‘UK’)
In 2001, the British government and the Association of British Insurers
agreed upon a moratorium and concordat allowing consumers
to withhold the
results of genetic tests and still obtain significant levels of life
It also prevents
insurance companies from using the results of such tests unless pre-approved by
the government following independent
consultation.
It excludes
results for Huntington’s Disease for policies above £500,000 as well
as allows consumers to disclose negative
test results in order to demonstrate
that they are not at risk of an inherited
The Concordat involves
an agreement that insurers should have access to relevant information in order
to fairly price risk for the
broader benefit of
In October 2018, this
regime was replaced by the Code on Genetic Testing and Insurers, with the same
parties and effect as the
moratorium.
It is important to
note that there may be some compliance issues, as insurers in the UK are not
required to be members of the Association
C United States
The United States has a number of state laws that govern genetic
discrimination for a variety of contexts and diseases. The American
congress has imposed a common minimal level of protection that states across the
country must provide.
absence of a universal health care system means that access to personal
insurance is usually linked to
employment.
Importantly, the
current American federal framework does not encompass life insurance and the
only relevant legal protection is at
the state level, if
In May 2017, the Canadian Parliament passed the
Genetic Non-Discrimination
’) into federal
insurers from requesting individuals to undergo genetic tests or requiring
disclosure of any previous or future genetic test
It extends to
predictive and diagnostic genetic tests as well as information obtained in
clinical and research settings. However,
insurers maintain their access to
family medical history, such that family members of applicants are required to
disclose their medical
conditions but not their genetic test results. The
fails to stipulate whether individuals are required to inform
insurers that they have had a genetic test.
The Canadian Life and Health Insurance Association strongly opposes the
and argues that legislative regulation is unnecessary following an
update in January 2017 of the Industry Code to include a stipulation
insurers would not request or use genetic test results for life insurance
coverage of $250,000 or less.
This means that approximately 85% of life insurance applications would not
require any disclosure of genetic
information.
It is worth noting
that compliance may be an issue because, similar to the UK, the Industry Code is
voluntary for members of the
Canadian Life and Health Insurance Association.
The Canadian Institute of Actuaries predicted that the
a substantial impact on insurance companies with the potential for premiums to
increase from between
However, the
Office of the Privacy Commissioner of Canada found that the
ban on the use of genetic information would not have any significant impact on
the Canadian insurance industry or insurance
The key reasoning for
this finding was that severe single gene mutations certain to cause early death
and necessitating a high level
of expensive coverage, such as Huntington’s
disease, occur so rarely as to have little impact on the insurance markets and
the notion of pooled risk.
However, it was acknowledged that this position is subject to change as a result
of continuing technological advancements and the
increasing reliability,
predictability and scope of genetic
was subject to constitutional challenge, as there was some
dispute about whether the
is a legitimate exercise of federal power
because it seeks to legislate matters that are within the jurisdiction of
Canadian provinces.
However, the Supreme Court of Canada on 10 July 2020
resolved this dispute, ruling that the
is a constitutional exercise
of federal powers.
The Council of Europe’s
Convention on Human Rights and
Biomedicine
prohibits genetic discrimination in countries in the European
In addition, a
recommendation of the Council of Europe in 2016 proposed that insurers should
provide reasons for the processing of
all health related personal information
and should not require the taking of genetic tests, or use test results, for
insurance purposes.
Consequently, legislative reforms and moratoria have been enacted in many
European countries that prevent insurers from using genetic
data when setting
IV CURRENT ISSUES
Prior to June 2019, the FSC’s Standards required insurers to provide
the FSC with de-identified data on applications involving
However, the FSC has
not been able to determine the total number of applications for life insurance
that involved genetic
information.
Therefore, the
precise prevalence of the use of genetic data in the life insurance industry
remains unclear. Nevertheless, ongoing
medical and technological advances signal
the increasing importance of genetic testing, fuelling the debate surrounding
genetic discrimination
in life insurance and highlighting the issues with the
current legal framework.
The implementation of a voluntary moratorium is certainly a positive step
towards achieving greater consumer protections but it also
arguably fails to
address broader concerns relating to self-regulation, accuracy of genetic
testing, adverse selection and participation
in medical research.
A Self-Regulation
The current legal framework lacks independent regulatory oversight of the use
of genetic information by the life insurance industry.
In their submission to
the Parliamentary Inquiry, the FSC asserted that such independent oversight is
unnecessary due to Australia’s
‘strong self-regulation
maintained that their regime of self-regulation allows the insurance industry to
rapidly respond to any technological and
research advancements in genetic
testing, unlike legislation which ‘could take years before a law is
However, self-regulation has proven ineffective in ensuring the
implementation of, and adherence to, the non-binding recommendations
Australian Law Reform Commission’s (‘ALRC’) Report on the
Protection of Human Genetic Information in
The ALRC recommended
that the reasoning provided to an applicant for an adverse underwriting decision
based on genetic data should
clearly explain the actuarial, statistical or other
basis for the conclusion.
ALRC also recommended that access be provided to reviews of underwriting
decisions involving the use of genetic
The failure to implement
these recommendations has resulted in situations where life insurance policies
have been denied or premiums
increased without sufficient supporting data or
explanation.
Standards also previously contained clauses that could be considered to conflict
with the ALRC’s recommendations,
such as the FSC’s policy requiring
applicants to disclose even a consideration of genetic testing where the insurer
such information.
conflict, coupled with a lack of regulatory oversight, created great potential
for the industry standards to diminish consumer
For example, an applicant in his early 20s was denied full life insurance
cover when he disclosed that he had discussed genetic testing
with a genetic
counsellor.
He later underwent
genetic testing and discovered he carried a mutation in the
After he disclosed these results, two other life insurance companies denied him
coverage for cancer. He presented the insurance
companies with extensive
research supporting his claim that an annual colonoscopy would reduce his risk
of cancer to the same as
the population risk but he was still denied coverage
and denied his request for actuarial evidence supporting the insurer’s
risk assessment. He was later offered full coverage by the latter of these
insurance companies only after he lodged a complaint to
the Australian Human
Rights Commission.
The case ultimately demonstrates the high level of initiative and
proactivity, in the form of extensive research and advocacy, required
applicant to achieve a fair result. The denial of full coverage to the applicant
was plainly unjustified, as the FSC’s
Standards and section 46 of
require insurers to take into account the benefits of special medical
surveillance and to have actuarial, statistical or other data
on which it is
reasonable to rely on in justifying their
Self-regulation
clearly failed to assist the applicant in these circumstances, as it was only
the threat of legal action that prompted
the insurer’s change of position.
Such cases have prompted medical and legal professionals to conclude that
‘[a]ny model
of industry self-regulation for the use of genetic
information by life insurers, who are inherently motivated by commercial gain,
represents a conflict of
B Accuracy of Genetic Testing and
Underwriting
As the Moratorium only applies to life insurance applications under a certain
limit, the accuracy of genetic test results and underwriting
remains a valid
concern for life insurance applications falling outside the scope of the
Moratorium. Dr Veikko Launis succinctly
stated that ‘the more accurate
(reliable, predictive) the information, the more morally legitimate it is to
incorporate it
into actuarial
calculations’.
reasoning is reflected in the ALRC’s recommendation to establish a process
for ascertaining which genetic tests are sufficiently
accurate, reasonable,
actuarially relevant and scientifically reliable for the purposes of use in life
insurance underwriting.
this recommendation about vetting of genetic tests to determine which are
suitable to insurance underwriting was not implemented
government.
Instead, the
government left this recommendation as a matter for the industry to implement.
This government response was contrary
to the terms of some of the
recommendations themselves, which would have seen more direct government
involvement through a national
In the course of giving evidence to the Parliamentary Inquiry, the Australian
Medical Association pointed out that ‘many genetic
tests are predictive in
nature and the results do not necessarily guarantee a person will develop the
condition that is being
For example,
tests for single gene disorders may only predict that a disease will probably
manifest at some time in the future but
that time cannot be accurately predicted
nor can the test predict the severity with which the person will be affected by
the disease.
Tests for the more
common complex or multifactorial disorders are even more uncertain as they can
only identify predisposition to
disease and cannot determine whether the person
will ever in fact develop that
Genetic test results
therefore only suggest a probability of developing a given disease for one
individual, whereas another individual
who has not undergone testing, or who may
not have a predisposition to a disease, might fall ill and die before the
individual who
disclosed the result of a genetic test. Genetic test results have
consequently been described as ‘fallible regarding future
and therefore insufficiently accurate and inappropriate for use in the
underwriting process, either ‘as evidence
in assessing insurability or,
indeed, in deciding the premium to be
The uncertainty of genetic test results has led to concerns that insurers
conducting risk assessments may credit genetic information
‘with greater
probative value than it
professionals and academics have suggested that the information currently
‘obtained from genetic testing is not sufficiently
robust to justify its
use in actuarial
modelling’.
Each genetic
condition requires a separate assessment of the relationship between genetic
indicators and the economic costs of the
The increasing complexity
of genetic tests demands increasingly specialised knowledge to deduce accurate
and reliable statistics
and probabilities related to the
It is also highly
difficult or even impossible to adjust statistical risk depending on an
individual’s actions to address their
predisposition to a specific
These difficulties
increase the likelihood that insurance brokers or underwriters may be
unnecessarily cautious in their use of genetic
data, or misinterpret this data,
resulting in the overcharging, or denial, of applicants for a life insurance
Ultimately, it appears
that insurance underwriters do not have adequate guidance and lack sufficient
expertise or resources to understand
and interpret genetic
The lack of transparency
associated with underwriting exacerbates the problem, as applicants are unable
to confirm whether the actuarial
tables and/or the calculations of the
underwriter accurately reflect the correct calculation for their
C Adverse Selection
The FSC maintains that they require access to genetic test results in order
to avoid the ramifications of adverse
Adverse selection
arises where applicants do not fully disclose all material information within
their knowledge and are subsequently
not charged a premium commensurate to their
risk status. This presents a major obstacle to insurers who will struggle to
profitability when lower premiums are charged to applicants with a
higher risk grade. Adverse selection also arises where applicants
with a higher
mortality or morbidity risk take advantage of that knowledge by applying for one
or multiple insurance policies or
additional coverage, which they would not have
otherwise sought.
If applicants
are not required to disclose genetic test results to insurers, the concern is
that they will have a stronger economic
incentive to purchase insurance at
underpriced premiums relative to actuarially fair
At its worst, this information asymmetry can lead to market failure or low
profitability and losses where only those applicants most
likely to require a
payout purchase insurance.
dire financial implications are more likely to arise where applicants with a
positive genetic test result present an increased
probability of purchasing
insurance and requesting significantly higher levels of
If the applicant
deliberately conceals genetic information or provides misleading information,
the insurer may undergo the significant
financial and time expenses of
investigating any claims made and/or paying out the insured sum under fraudulent
It should be noted that
purchasing insurance, or larger sums of insurance, on the basis of a genetic
test result ‘is not a
crime and cannot, therefore, be considered
fraudulent as such’.
Nevertheless, it may have considerable impacts upon the insurance industry by
disrupting the symmetry of information and potentially
also the market
equilibrium.
The Parliamentary Inquiry found that the insurance industry’s fears of
market unsustainability as a result of adverse selection
arising from
non-disclosure of genetic test results ‘may be
overstated’.
certainly great concern for consumers that information asymmetry may lead to
increased premiums to compensate for the industry’s
financial costs
arising from adverse selection. However, the Parliamentary Inquiry found that
‘there is presently greater benefit
to consumers in preventing a duty of
disclosure from arising in respect of predictive genetic tests’ due to a
number of reasons,
including to encourage greater participation in genetic
testing and research.
D Participation in Genetic Testing and
Genetic testing could be highly beneficial to an individual’s health,
as well as that of their biological family members, by
allowing them to improve
their chances of early detection and survival by instituting preventative health
measures, screening and
lifestyle alterations. However, a study found that
knowledge of insurance implications influenced the uptake of genetic testing by
participants.
involved 106 people from 25 families believed to be at risk of bowel
It found that
participants informed of the prospect of increased premiums, or even refusal of
coverage, were 2.6 times more likely
to decline genetic testing compared to
participants without this
These results are
particularly concerning because genetic testing for colorectal cancer is
potentially lifesaving. It can lead to
screening and regular colonoscopies,
which are proven strategies for detection and prevention among carriers of
genetic mutations.
testing is a potentially highly cost-effective way of reducing the burden of
bowel cancer on the public health
In Australia, genetic counsellors ‘commonly recommend clients organize
life insurance policies before undertaking genetic
This practice
is designed to protect clients from denial of coverage due to genetic test
results but it can also encourage them to
decline genetic testing altogether due
to insurance fears.
concerns have prompted medical and legal practitioners to recommend that the
Australian insurance industry reconsider how genetic
information is used in
circumstances where the information can potentially reduce morbidity and
The new Moratorium
goes some way towards addressing these
but, as highlighted
by the recent Royal Commission into Financial Services, industry self-regulation
without adequate oversight continues
problematic.
Having regard to the international context, scientific advancements and
domestic regulatory issues, Australia’s current legal
framework is
unsustainable. Australia requires independent oversight of the insurance
industry and amendment of the FSC Standards
to enhance the sustainability of the
life insurance industry. The new industry-led Moratorium is insufficient to
protect consumers.
A Independent Oversight
In line with the ALRC’s recommendations, the federal government should
establish an independent body to oversee the use of genetic
information in the
Australian insurance
An independent
government body would be better suited to ensure increased transparency of the
underwriting process and to avoid any
potential for a conflict of interest. The
government did establish the Human Genetics Advisory Committee in 2009 but it
clear mandate, could not compete with industry bodies and was
subsequently disbanded in
The Parliamentary Inquiry recommended the Industry Code be registered with
the Australian Securities and Investments Commission (‘ASIC’)
ASIC be endowed with the requisite enforcement powers to implement a
co-regulatory approach between ASIC and the
This approach is less
appealing following the recent findings by the Royal Commission into Financial
Services revealing ‘ASIC’s
ineffective enforcement culture’
including ‘a deeply entrenched culture of negotiating outcomes rather than
upon public denunciation of, and punishment for,
wrongdoing’.
the Royal Commission also suggested that ASIC ‘should be given time to
demonstrate that changes can be made and to
demonstrate that, once made, the
changes are durable’.
Following the revelations of their apparent reluctance to litigate against
larger financial institutions, ASIC accepted that when
considering enforcement
measures, it should start with the question ‘[w]hy not
also since renewed their enforcement approach by establishing an Office of
Enforcement within ASIC, accelerating enforcement
outcomes and strengthening
penalties available to them.
ASIC has therefore demonstrated that ‘changes can be made’ but only
the passage of time will determine whether ‘once
made, the changes are
If the changes prove to be short-lived, ASIC would not be well suited to
regulate the use of genetic information by life insurers
and an entirely new
government body would be more suitable as the regulator for this purpose. The
new body should be a government
entity provided with clear terms of reference
and the requisite authority to implement robust
regulation.
It should be
responsible for conducting regular audits on the use of genetic data by
It should also have
the power to mandate and enforce the compliance of all insurers with its
decisions and it should provide an accessible
avenue for independent dispute
resolution in cases where an adverse insurance decision
B Amendment of FSC Standards
The 2016 FSC Standards were particularly problematic and a number of their
clauses required extensive alteration or deletion. In June
2019, the Standards
were amended to exclude genetic research findings, up to certain limits, from
insurance underwriting.
alleviates any lingering fears that consumers may have about participating in
genetic research and also ensures the unhindered
progression of the Australian
research industry and the identification of emerging health
The Standards should also be amended to include a detailed guide of how
underwriters should assess genetic information in cases of
cover excluded from
the Moratorium. This guide should highlight the current limitations in the
interpretation of genetic data and
clarify what level of evidence is required
before an underwriter can reach a conclusion about the use of the genetic test
It should also stress the significance of underwriters recognising in
the risk-stratification process an individual’s lifestyle
changes to mitigate their risk. Finally, it should assist insurers to understand
that genetic test results are not always
entirely accurate and the source of the
genetic data should be considered before underwriters reach any conclusions.
Importantly,
the Standards should address the fact that direct-to-consumer
testing is becoming increasingly common and the results are sometimes
questionable quality.
C Government Intervention
Even though a moratorium has been implemented, it is important that the
government keep abreast of advancements in the field of genetics
in order to
ascertain the suitability of enacting legislation or other regulation
prohibiting or restricting the use of genetic information
by the life insurance
It is important to also briefly note the argument that ethical issues
associated with the use of genetic information in life insurance
addressed through social policies, rather than a moratorium or increased
regulation. For example, it has been argued that
the government should provide
targeted assistance in the form of subsidies to individuals who are subject to
dramatic increases in
life insurance premiums as a result of genetic
However, with
continuing genetic advancements, such legislation could prove to be a great
burden on the Australian economy and the
taxpayer. It should be kept in mind
that ‘hurried and premature legislation in the rapidly evolving field of
human genetics
counterproductive’.
VI CONCLUSION
The Australian life insurance industry has struggled to keep up with
scientific and international legal advancements. The duty of
enshrined in section 21 of
inherently conflicts with the principle of
non-discrimination pursuant to section 46 of
. The concerning lack of
transparency in the insurance claims process denies applicants the ability to
determine why their claim was
denied, their coverage diminished or their
premiums increased. This lack of transparency, coupled with the complexity of
calculations based on genetic test results and the potential
inaccuracy of such results, has led to significant unfairness. It has
discouraged individuals from participating in potentially lifesaving genetic
testing or research due to fears of the insurance
ramifications.
The implementation of the voluntary Moratorium is a significant first step
towards ensuring greater consumer protections in the life
insurance industry.
However, the country’s current legal framework still requires extensive
reform by establishing an independent
government body to oversee the use of
genetic information in life insurance, as well as significant amendment of the
Industry Standards
and potential legislative intervention.
* PhD Candidate, University of Sydney Law School. I extend my gratitude to
Professor Robert Merkin QC and Professor Cameron Stewart
for reviewing earlier
drafts. I am also particularly grateful to the anonymous reviewers of earlier
drafts for their insightful comments.
1 Krystal Barter, ‘Genetic Testing and Insurance: I Was Destined to
Get Cancer, but I Don’t Deserve Discrimination’,
(online, 9 November 2017)
<https://www.abc.net.au/news/2017-11-09/genetic-testing-discrimination-from-life-and-health-insurers/9133878>.
Kate Aubusson, ‘Insurers
Discriminating against People Who Get Genetic Test Results Could Hobble
Research, Bioethicists Warn’,
The Sydney Morning Herald
(online, 8 November 2017)
<https://www.smh.com.au/healthcare/insurers-discriminating-against-people-who-get-genetic-test-results-could-hobble-research-bioethicists-warn-20171102-gzd7vu.html>.
‘Call for Life Insurance Genetic
(online, 27 March 2018)
<https://www.sbs.com.au/news/call-for-life-insurance-genetic-test-ban>.
Jane Tiller, Margaret Otlowski and Paul
Lacaze, ‘Should Australia Ban the Use of Genetic Test Results in Life
Insurance?’
(2017) 5(330)
Frontiers in Public Health
See Parliamentary Joint Committee on
Corporations and Financial Services, Parliament of Australia,
Life Insurance
(Report, 27 March 2018) 148 (citations omitted) (‘
Insurance Industry
Mr Brett Clark, Chief Executive Officer and Managing Director of TAL, stated
that out of 33,000 applications for retail insurance,
only 750 applications
contained genetic information. Likewise, Mr Tim Bailey, Chief Executive Officer
of Zurich, commented that it
would be extremely rare for genetic information to
be disclosed at the time of underwriting.
See also Evidence to Joint Committee on Corporations and Financial Services,
Parliament of Australia, Canberra, 18 August 2017, 12
(Brett Clark, Chief
Executive Officer and Managing Director, TAL); Zurich Financial Service
Australia Limited, Answers to Questions
on Notice to Joint Committee on
Corporations and Financial Services, Parliament of Australia,
Inquiry into
the Life Insurance Industry
(9 June 2017); MLC Life Insurance, Answers to
Questions on Notice to Joint Committee on Corporations and Financial Services,
of Australia,
Inquiry into the Life Insurance Industry
See, eg, Australian Health
Ministers’ Advisory Council, ‘National Health Genomics Policy
Framework: 2018–2021’
(Policy Paper, August 2017) which aims to
integrate genomics into national healthcare through significant government
investment.
This signals a clear expectation that issues generated by genetic
testing will increasingly arise in healthcare.
Life Insurance Industry
Ibid xv–xxv.
Financial Services Council,
Standard No 11: Moratorium on Genetic Tests in Life Insurance
(at 21 June
FSC Standard No 11: Moratorium
Disability Discrimination Act 1992
ss 46(1)(b)
, (f)–(g), (2)(b), (f)–(g) where it states that
it is not unlawful for life insurers to discriminate on the basis of another
person’s disability if:
(f) the discrimination:
(i) is based upon actuarial or statistical data on which it is reasonable for
the first-mentioned person to rely; and
(ii) is reasonable having regard to the matter of the data and other
relevant factors; or
(g) in a case where no such actuarial or statistical data is available and
cannot reasonably be obtained–the discrimination
is reasonable having
regard to any other relevant factors.
[1766] EngR 157
(1766) 97 ER 1162
, 1164 [1910].
Barclay Holdings (Aust) Pty Ltd v
British National Insurance Co Ltd
(1987) 8 NSWLR 514
, 517 (Kirby P).
Western Australian Insurance Co Ltd
[1924] HCA 58
(1924) 35 CLR 355
, 379 (Isaacs ACJ).
Insurance Contracts Act 1984
Financial Services Council, ‘FSC
Standards’ (Web Page)
<https://www.fsc.org.au/resources/standards>.
Financial Services Council,
Standard No 1: Code of Ethics & Code of Conduct
(at 4 May 2018) app
Ibid app C.5.
Financial Services Council,
Standard No 11 Genetic Testing Policy
(at 7 December 2016) 5 [10.1]
FSC Standard No 11
Financial Services Council,
Standard No 16 Family Medical History Policy
(at 7 December 2016) 5
FSC Standard No 11
[10.6]–[10.7].
Ibid 5 [10.2].
Ibid 8 [10.11].
Ibid 5 [10.2.1].
Ibid 5 [10.2.2].
Ibid 5 [10.2.3].
Ibid 6 [10.3].
Ibid 6 [10.3.1].
Ibid 7 [10.5].
Life Insurance Industry
156 [9.98]–[9.101];
FSC Standard No 11: Moratorium
FSC Standard No 11: Moratorium
(n 13) 3 [1.3].
Ibid 3 [2.2].
Ibid 4 [3.3].
Ibid 3 [3.1].
Ibid 4 [3.4].
Ibid 3 [3.2].
Ibid 4 [3.5].
Ibid 5 [5].
GA Res 53/152, UN GAOR, 53rd sess, UN
Doc A/RES/53/152 (1998). See also
International Declaration on Human Genetic
, Records of the General Conference, UNESCO, 32nd sess, 32
C/Resolutions, 39 (16 October 2003) art 1(a) where it states the aim of
Declaration:
[T]o ensure the respect of human dignity and protection of human rights and
fundamental freedoms in the collection, processing, use
and storage of human
genetic data ... in keeping with the requirements of equality, justice and
solidarity;
Universal Declaration on Bioethics and Human Rights
, Records of the
General Conference, UNESCO, 33rd sess, 33 C/Resolutions, 74 (19 October 2005)
art 16 which acknowledges the importance
of protecting ‘future
generations, including ... their genetic constitution’.
HM Government and Association of
British Insurers, ‘Concordat and Moratorium on Genetics and
Insurance’ (Concordat,
Ibid 9 [35].
Ibid 5 [21(d)(ii)], 7 [24(d)].
Ibid 1 [1], 2 [6].
HM Government and Association of
British Insurers, ‘Code on Genetic Testing and Insurance’ (Code,
October 2018).
Ainsley J Newson et al,
‘Genetics and Insurance in Australia: Concerns around a Self-Regulated
Industry’ (2017) 20(4)
Public Health Genomics
(‘Genetics and Insurance in Australia’).
Americans with Disabilities Act of
42 USC (1990);
Patient Protection and Affordable Care
, Pub L 111-148,
124 Stat 119 (2010);
Health Insurance
Portability and Accountability Act of
, Pub L 104-191
, 110 Stat 1936
Genetic Information Nondiscrimination Act of
, Pub L 110-233
122 Stat 881 (2008).
Genetic Information
Nondiscrimination Act of
, Pub L 110-233
, 122 Stat 881
See, eg, California prevents life
insurers from using predictive genetic testing as a condition for coverage:
Underwriting on the Basis of Test of Genetic Characteristics
, 761 Cal Ins
Code §§ 10146–9 (1994).
Genetic Non-Discrimination Act
SC 2017, c 3.
Ibid ss 3–5.
Canadian Life and Health Insurance
Association Inc, ‘Canada’s Life and Health Insurers Announce
Commitment of Use of
Genetic Testing Information’,
11 January 2017)
<https://www.newswire.ca/news-releases/canadas-life-and-health-insurers-announce-commitment-on-use-of-genetic-testing-information-610363125.html#>.
Canadian Institute of Actuaries,
Canadian Institute of Actuaries’ Proposed Amendment to Bill S-201: An
Act to Prohibit and Prevent Genetic Discrimination
(Report, 21 November
Michael Hoy and Maureen Durnin,
Potential Economic Impact of a Ban on the Use of Genetic Information for Life
and Health Insurance
(Report, March 2012) 2.
Angus MacDonald,
The Actuarial
Relevance of Genetic Information in the Life and Health Insurance Context
(Report, July 2011) 2.
Hoy and Durnin (n 59) 2–3.
Canadian Coalition for Genetic
Fairness v Attorney General of Canada
[2020] SCC 17.
Convention for the Protection of
Human Rights and Dignity of the Human Being with regard to the Application of
Biology and Medicine:
Convention on Human Rights and Biomedicine
, opened for
signature 4 April 1997, ETS No 164 (entered into force 1 December 1999). See
Additional Protocol to the Convention on Human Rights and Biomedicine
concerning Genetic Testing for Health Purposes
, opened for signature 27
November 2008, CETS No 203 (entered into force 1 July 2018);
Fundamental Rights of the European Union
[2000] OJ C 364/1, art 21(1) which
expressly provides that ‘[a]ny discrimination based on any ground such as
... genetic features
... shall be prohibited’.
Committee of Ministers, Council of
Europe, ‘Recommendation CM/Rec(2016)8 of the Committee of Ministers to the
Member States
on the Processing of Personal Health-Related Data for Insurance
Purposes, Including Data Resulting from Genetic Tests’ (26
For example, Germany’s
Genetic Examination Act
prevents insurers from requesting any genetic data
for policies valued under a specified financial limit, such as lump sum policies
valued under €300,000:
Gesetz über genetische Untersuchungen bei
[Human Genetic Examination Act] (Germany) 24 April 2009, § 4.
For a table summarising European approaches to the use of genetic
information by
life insurance companies, see
Life Insurance Industry
FSC Standard No 11
See Financial Services Council,
Supplementary Submission No 26.2 to Parliamentary Joint Committee on
Corporations and Financial
Services, Parliament of Australia,
Inquiry into
the Life Insurance Industry
(5 September 2017) 5, where it merely states
that ‘[t]he FSC Genetic Testing database was recently independently
scrutinised
by the University of Sydney, which found there were “no
widespread, or systemic issues identified”’ (‘Supplementary
Submission No 26.2’). See also
Life Insurance Industry
Supplementary Submission No 26.2 (n
Australian Law Reform Commission,
Essentially Yours: The Protection of Human Genetic Information in
(Report No 96, 30 May 2003).
Ibid vol 2, 723.
Ibid vol 2, 733.
Tiller, Otlowski and Lacaze (n 5)
FSC Standard No 11
Louise A Keogh and Margaret F A
Otlowski, ‘Life Insurance and Genetic Test Results: A Mutation
Carrier’s Fight to Achieve
Full Cover’
(2013) 199(5)
Journal of Australia
FSC Standard No 11
Tiller, Otlowski and Lacaze (n 5) 2. A
recent study completed by Tiller et al reveals the high incidence of genetic
discrimination
by Australian insurance companies, with the authors concluding
that the high ‘number of cases reflects a systemic problem with
Australian life insurance industry’: see Jane Tiller et al, ‘Genetic
Discrimination by Australian Insurance Companies:
A Survey of Consumer
Experiences’
(2020) 28(1)
European Journal of Human Genetics
Veikko Launis, ‘The Use of
Genetic Test Information in Insurance: The Argument from Indistinguishability
Reconsidered’
(2000) 6(3)
Science and Engineering Ethics
quoted in Joseph S Alper and Jon Beckwith, ‘On the
Philosophical Analysis of Genetic Essentialism’ (2000) 6(3)
Science and
Engineering Ethics
Australian Law Reform Commission (n
70) vol 2, 711.
Australian Government,
Australian Government Response to ALRC Report 96
(9 December 2005)
Recommendation 27-1.
Australian Law Reform Commission (n
70) vol 1, 211.
Chris Moy, ‘Ethics and
Medico-Legal: AMA Evidence to the Inquiry into the Life Insurance
Industry’ (2017) 29(19)
Australian Medicine
Margaret Otlowski, ‘Genetic
Testing and Insurance: The Case for Regulation’ (2002) 9(4)
Journal of Policy Analysis and Reform
Louise A Morris, ‘Life Insurance
and Genetic Tests: Risks for Insurers and Society’ (2010) 12(3)
Risk & Society
Otlowski (n 83) 345.
Life Insurance Industry
152; Evidence to Joint Committee on Corporations and Financial Services,
Parliament of Australia, Canberra, 26 May 2017, 61,
63 (Paul Lacaze); Evidence
to Joint Committee on Corporations and Financial Services, Parliament of
Australia, Canberra, 8 September
2017, 31 (Kate Stockhausen).
Otlowski (n 83) 345.
Morris (n 85) 262.
J v London Life Insurance
[1999] BCHRT 36
where ‘an insurance applicant was refused
insurance due to a lack of statistical data on the part of the insurer’:
(n 85) 262; Trudo Lemmens, ‘Selective Justice, Genetic
Discrimination, and Insurance: Should We Single Out Genes in Our Laws?’
(2000) 45(2)
McGill Law Journal
Newson et al, ‘Genetics and
Insurance in Australia’ (n 50) 253.
This is implied in
FSC Standard No
(n 22) 5 [10.2.2] where it states that ‘[g]enetic information, like
other personal medical information, may influence a person’s
decision to
seek life insurance’. See ibid.
James Butler, ‘Adverse
Selection, Genetic Testing and Life Insurance: Lessons from Health Insurance in
Australia’ (2003)
Agenda: A Journal of Policy Analysis and Reform
Richard Heaney and David Pitt,
‘Impact of Genetic Testing on Life Insurance’ (2003) 10(1)
Agenda: A Journal of Policy Analysis and Reform
Morris (n 85) 254.
Life Insurance Industry
Louise A Keogh et al, ‘Is
Uptake of Genetic Testing for Colorectal Cancer Influenced by Knowledge of
Insurance Implications?’
(2009) 191(5)
Medical Journal of Australia
Ibid 256–7.
Tiller, Otlowski and Lacaze (n 5)
Keogh et al (n 103) 258.
FSC Standard No 11:
Royal Commission into
Misconduct in the Banking, Superannuation and Financial Services Industry
(Final Report, 1 February 2019) vol 1, 310–15.
Australian Law Reform Commission (n
70) vol 1, 211, vol 2, 711.
Newson et al, ‘Genetics and
Insurance in Australia’ (n 50) 249.
Life Insurance Industry
Royal Commission into
Misconduct in the Banking, Superannuation and Financial Services Industry
112) 430, 425.
Ibid 427; Australian Securities and
Investments Commission, Submission to Royal Commission into Misconduct in the
Banking, Superannuation
and Financial Services Industry (2 November 2018) 9
Sean Hughes, ‘ASIC’s
Approach to Enforcement after the Royal Commission’ (Speech, Annual
Conference of the Banking
and Financial Services Law Association, 30 August
<https://asic.gov.au/about-asic/news-centre/speeches/asic-s-approach-to-enforcement-after-the-royal-commission/>.
Newson et al, ‘Genetics and
Insurance in Australia’ (n 50) 254.
FSC Standard No 11:
The exclusion of all research
findings reflects international practice, such as arrangements for participants
in the British 100,000
Genomes Project, and is also supported by the Human
Genetics Society of Australasia and an international body of experts: Ainsley
Newson et al, ‘Human Genetics Society of Australasia Position Statement:
Genetic Testing and Personal Insurance Products
in Australia’ (2018) 21(6)
Twin Research and Human Genetics
533; K Barlow-Stewart et al, ‘How
Are Genetic Test Results Being Used by Australian Life Insurers?’
European Journal of Human Genetics
Newson et al, ‘Genetics and
Insurance in Australia’ (n 50) 252.
Life Insurance Industry
Butler (n 95) 88.
Abdullah Daar and
Jean-François Mattei, ‘Draft World Health Organization (WHO)
Guidelines on Bioethics’,
(online, May 1999)
<https://www.nature.com/wcs/b23a.html>.
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (153 KB)
PDF format (421 KB)
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter