URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/journals/SydLawRw/2025/1.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 15:39:01
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Gageler, Stephen --- "The Evolution of the Australian Electoral System as a Constitutional Process" [2025] SydLawRw 1; (2025) 47(1) Sydney Law Review 21122
I Introduction
II The Constitutional Empowerment of Popular Sovereignty
III The Outworking of Popular Sovereignty
A The Immediate Post-Federation Period
B 1911 to 1924
C 1948 to 1983
IV Conclusion
George Winterton Memorial Lecture 2025
The Evolution of the
Australian Electoral System as a Constitutional Process
Stephen Gageler
The form of popular sovereignty empowered by the
Constitution
was framed to be government by ‘the people’ in
constitutive and routine manifestations, both sustaining and sustained
system of government it called into existence. It was framed to be dynamic
— the design of the electoral system according
to which the people would
act in those distinct manifestations having been entrusted to development by
ordinary legislation made
by the Commonwealth Parliament. And this form of
popular sovereignty can be seen to have evolved: through the development of a
franchise and through the establishment of a system of compulsory and
preferential voting by which that broad franchise has come
to be exercised. The
form of popular sovereignty empowered by the
Constitution
accordingly be seen today to be government by ‘the people’ writ
large. In this lecture, I trace this evolution as
a process by which ordinary
legislation has built out the constitutional structure empowering popular
sovereignty.
Introduction
In an essay entitled ‘Popular Sovereignty and Constitutional
Continuity’ published towards the turn of the millennium,
George Winterton
commented on what had then recently been observed to have been a
‘fundamental paradigm shift’ in Australian
constitutionalism from
‘parliamentary sovereignty’ to ‘popular
sovereignty’.
Winterton identified the concept of ‘sovereignty’ as having been
used in two distinct senses: ‘the first referring
to the source from which
Constitution
derives its authority, and the second to the location of
the power to amend the
Constitution
why such a paradigm shift had occurred almost a century after Federation, he
noted that attention had been focused in and
after 1986 on the
marking the end of
Imperial parliamentary
sovereignty.
Winterton pointed out that the popular underpinnings of the
Constitution
in fact dated back to Federation. He referred to the approval
of a draft of the
Constitution
at referenda in 1899 and 1900 by electors
referred to in the preamble to the
Constitution
people’ who had ‘agreed to unite in one indissoluble Federal
Commonwealth’.
quoted historian John Hirst’s description of the movement to Federation as
‘the quintessential republican moment
in our history’, and
Hirst’s observation that ‘the Australian people were more involved
in the making of their
national constitution than the people of any of the other
great democracies’.
the legal authority of the
Constitution
to have been derived originally
from its enactment by the Imperial Parliament, Winterton pointed out that the
‘destiny of the
Commonwealth
Constitution
’ had always lain
‘in the hands of the Australian people acting directly through referenda
and indirectly through their
representatives in the Commonwealth
Parliament’.
Just how successive generations of Australians have been empowered by the
Constitution
to act as ‘the people’ has been
facilitated by and mediated through the electoral system, according to which
of the Senate and the House of Representatives has been chosen in
periodic elections and according to which the constitutional text
itself has, on
rare occasions, been altered in referenda. The legislative realisation of the
federal electoral system is the topic
I now address. My claim is that the
legislative evolution of the electoral system has a constitutional dimension: it
can be seen
as the outworking of the constitutional empowerment of popular
sovereignty; it can be seen to have contributed to the representative
contemporary functioning of the Commonwealth Parliament; and it can meaningfully
be said to be a constitutional aspect
of our national identity.
The Constitutional Empowerment of Popular
Sovereignty
We the People
Bruce Ackerman has emphasised the role of the American people not only in
creating, but also in sustaining and changing, the
United States
Constitution
. Ackerman has portrayed American constitutional history in
terms of popular movements in which ‘constitutional moments’
led the people to engage in ‘higher lawmaking’, sometimes leading to
formal constitutional amendment but oftentimes
leading to informal, yet no less
enduring, constitutional change.
In a similar vein, Akhil Reed Amar has chronicled the contributions of
generations of Americans in fulfilling the founding-era vision
Constitution
as profoundly democratic for its time, despite what can
be seen in retrospect to have been its original shortcomings and problematic
The form of popular sovereignty empowered by the
Constitution
is more integrated. In its terms, the
Constitution
makes provision not just for its own amendment in
constitutional moments of higher lawmaking, but also for the development of the
democratic principles it embodies during non-constitutional periods of ordinary
Constitution
, as I have noted in the
refers to ‘the
people’ in two manifestations. The first is ‘the people’
acting as nation-builders in rare
and important moments of constitutional time.
In that manifestation, the people are those described in the preamble to the
Constitution
as having ‘agreed to unite in one indissoluble Federal
Commonwealth’ and who, since becoming so united, have on rare
agreed in referenda to make alterations to the constitutional text. The second
is ‘the people’ whose government
is regulated and sustained by the
Constitution
. In that manifestation, the people are those by whom the
constitutional text requires the senators and members of the House of
Representatives
to be directly chosen in periodic elections and to whom the two
Houses of Parliament are by those means directly accountable.
Despite providing in ss 7 and
for senators and members of the House of
Representatives to be ‘directly chosen by the people’ and in
for a proposed law for the alteration of the
Constitution
be ‘submitted to the electors’, the
Constitution
that is important to Australian democracy to be developed legislatively from
time to time by the Commonwealth Parliament.
It did so through repeated use of
the expression ‘until the Parliament otherwise provides’ combined
with empowerment
s 51(xxxvi)
of the Commonwealth Parliament to make laws
with respect to ‘matters in respect of which this
Constitution
makes provision until the Parliament otherwise provides’.
, until the Commonwealth Parliament otherwise provided, the
qualification of electors of members of the House of Representatives would
each State that which was prescribed by the law of the State as the
qualification of electors of the more numerous House of
Parliament of that
State. And by s 8, the qualification of electors of senators was to be that
prescribed as the qualification of
electors of members of the House of
Representatives. Sections 9 and
made corresponding transitional provision for
the Parliament of each State to make laws prescribing the ‘method of
senators’ for that State and for laws in force in each State
‘relating to elections’ for the more numerous House
Parliament of the State to apply to elections in the State of members of the
House of Representatives.
, a transitional
of significance having
regard to women’s suffrage having been secured by Federation in South
Australia and Western Australia
but not yet in other States, provided that no
adult person having a right to vote at elections for the lower house of a State
was to be prevented by any Commonwealth law from voting at elections
for either house of the Commonwealth
Parliament.
Inherent in the transitional nature of these provisions was that the
development of the franchise and of the method of choosing senators
and members
of the House of Representatives would be taken up by the Commonwealth Parliament
after its coming into existence. This
approach emerged in response to the
original form of
proposed at the 1891 National Australasian
(Constitutional) Convention in Sydney. In its original form, the clause was
by Sir Samuel Griffith as having adopted ‘the American
system’ according to which the qualification of electors of the
legislature was left to the
In response, Edmund
Barton proposed that the clause ‘operate for the first election’
after which the Commonwealth Parliament
was to be ‘competent ... to take
its own course as to this
Barton remarked
that ‘if you are going to trust the Parliament of the Commonwealth at all,
you must trust it to fix its own
franchise’.
proposal was ultimately reflected in the revised form of the clause submitted to
the 1897 Australasian Federal (Constitutional)
Convention and in the enacted
Constitution
The design of the electoral system through which ‘the people’
would act in constitutive and routine manifestations was
accordingly entrusted
to the Commonwealth Parliament. So, the form of popular sovereignty empowered by
Constitution
to be government by ‘the people’
was framed to be dynamic and self-sustaining.
The Outworking of Popular Sovereignty
Around the same time George Winterton was writing about popular sovereignty
and constitutional continuity, David Malouf was speaking
in his Boyer Lectures
consciousness.
The features of
Australian society that Malouf then identified as ‘visibly alive in the
present’ yet so much taken for
granted that ‘we fail sometimes to
see how rare they are’ included what he described as ‘the saving
grace of lightness
and good humour, the choice of moderation over the temptation
to any form of extreme’.
‘Consider’, he said, ‘the atmosphere in which election days
are celebrated here’.
description of that atmosphere was as follows:
Voting for us is a family occasion, a duty fulfilled, as often as not, on the
way to the beach, so that children, early, get a sense
of it as an obligation
but a light one, a duty casually undertaken. And it can seem casual. But the
fact that voters so seldom spoil
their vote, either deliberately or by accident,
in a place where voting is compulsory and voting procedures are often extremely
complicated,
speaks for an electorate that has taken the trouble to inform
itself because it believes these things matter, and of a citizenship
lightly but
much the same theme in an institutional context, Adrienne Stone drew attention
in her 2022 High Court of Australia Public
Lecture to the existence of a
distinctive ‘Australian constitutional identity’ entailing an
‘inclusive’,
if ‘incomplete’, approach to the
Features of the
electoral system she identified as contributing to that distinctively Australian
constitutional identity included
Saturday voting, compulsory voting,
preferential voting, continuous direct updating of the electoral rolls, as well
as the establishment
of an independent Electoral
Commission.
Notably, none of
those features is to be found in the text of the
Constitution
All have emerged within the framework of the
Constitution
developments and innovations enacted by the Commonwealth Parliament.
Arranged chronologically, the main developments and innovations can be seen
to have occurred across three periods. The first period
was in the immediate
post-Federation era, marked by a consciousness on the part of the architects of
the relevant developments of
the solemn constitutional function entrusted to the
Commonwealth Parliament for the design of the electoral system along with an
innovative and inclusive exercise of that function. The second period, from 1911
to 1924, saw momentous building out of government
by the people through reforms
originally framed and presented as mere ‘machinery’ measures and
debated and enacted with
corresponding and distinctive mundanity. The third
period, taking place from 1948 through to 1983, realised in fact the
Federation-era
vision of a profoundly inclusive system and contributed to the
perception of a paradigm shift to popular sovereignty, which Winterton
to explain as the outworking of ‘constitutional
The Immediate Post-Federation
As Barton had foreshadowed in 1891, the newly established Commonwealth
Parliament came to enact the
Commonwealth Franchise Act 1902
Franchise Act
’) a year after it was first summoned to meet,
terminating the operation of the transitional provisions in ss 8 and
Constitution
by establishing a national uniform franchise. The inaugural
Parliament had been elected in 1901 according to the rules in force at
in the various States. As recounted by Marian Simms in her edited volume
1901: The Forgotten Election
, that meant that only South Australian and
Western Australian women were entitled to vote, while a property qualification
to apply in Tasmania.
Tasmania voted according to its unique ‘Hare-Clark’ form of
preferential voting; a ‘contingent vote’ form
of preferential voting
was used in Queensland (effectively a two-round run-off election); while a
first-past-the-post system prevailed
in the remaining
The 1901 poll was taken
on two separate days across the nation: in New South Wales, Victoria, Tasmania
and Western Australia on Friday
29 March and in South Australia and Queensland
the following day.
patchwork of electoral administration formed the backdrop to the enactment of
Franchise Act
The Bill for the
Franchise Act
was presented to the Senate by Richard
O’Connor. In the second reading speech, O’Connor noted the
Constitutional Conventions
to have ‘determined that there should be a
National House representing the whole of the people of Australia entitled to
and a States House representing the same people voting on the same
franchise but grouped together as
He emphasised
that it was ‘an essential part of that plan that the basis of the
representation should be uniform throughout
Australia’.
He recorded
that ‘[w]e are often asked — “Why cannot you leave things as
they are; both Houses have been elected
upon the State franchises, why not leave
them alone?”’.
response to that frequently asked question was to say that
[i]f that implies that it is the duty of this Parliament under the
Constitution
to leave the election of senators and members of the House
of Representatives to be conducted on the existing franchises for all
is an absolutely mistaken view of our duty as representing the people of the
Commonwealth.
Franchise Act
provided for a uniform franchise throughout the
Commonwealth on a sweeping scale. Section 3 declared as ‘entitled to vote
the election of Members of the Senate and the House of
Representatives’: all persons not under 21 years of age whether male
female, married or unmarried, who had lived in Australia for six months
continuously, who were natural born or naturalized subjects
of the King, and
whose names were on the electoral roll for any electoral division. Having been
framed against the backdrop of the
women’s suffrage movements of the 1880s
and 1890s in New Zealand, South Australia and Western Australia, O’Connor
in his address to the Senate that ‘the question of reform in the
direction of women’s suffrage has already won its
Responding to
another Senator pointing to the unsuccessful movements in New South Wales and
Victoria, O’Connor noted that a
Bill extending the franchise to women had
passed the Legislative Assembly of each State but had been rejected by its
Legislative
Council, each of which O’Connor noted to be ‘a nominated
He argued that
women’s suffrage would then have been law in nearly all the States but for
what he described as ‘a certain
hesitancy to march with reform’
found ‘in all the Upper Houses in
Australia’.
Returning to
the function of the
Franchise Act
, O’Connor pointed out that there
were then three-quarters of a million women in the Commonwealth, who in South
Australia or
Western Australia would be entitled to vote, but who were
‘disfranchised in the other
‘uniformity [could] only be brought about by extending the franchise to
all women’.
The result, he
predicted, ‘[would] be infinitely to strengthen the means by which we
shall get a true record of the real opinions
of Australia upon all the different
questions that will come up for
settlement’.
Marian Sawer has pointed out that the immediate effect of the
was to double the electorate across much of the
Yet the inclusive vision was impaired and lamentably would remain so for more
than half a century. The marginal note to s 4 of the
Franchise Act
titled ‘[d]isqualification of coloured races’, provided that
‘[n]o [A]boriginal native of Australia Asia Africa
or the Islands of the
Pacific except New Zealand’ was entitled to be enrolled. That was so
despite Indigenous Australians having
been entitled to vote at the 1901
Election, most States having by then enfranchised them.
Commonwealth Electoral Act 1902
1902 Electoral
’) complemented the
Franchise Act
by establishing the
nationally uniform electoral system according to which the broad national
uniform franchise would be exercised.
Part II of the Act established an
electoral office to be administered by the Chief Electoral Officer for the
Commonwealth, responsible
to the Minister administering the Act. Functions to be
performed by the office included: preparing and keeping electoral rolls of
electors in each State; facilitating the taking of the poll including by
administering polling places; and ascertaining the result
of the polling by
scrutiny. Although the electoral office would not be reconstituted as a
statutory body formally independent of
the Executive Government of the
Commonwealth until 1984, it has been observed that among the ‘continuities
... of federal electoral
administration’ following the establishment of
the electoral office under an ordinary departmental structure was ‘the
degree of independence’ that
The establishment of
the electoral office in 1902 facilitated the early development of what Marian
Sawer described as ‘professionalism
of electoral
administration’.
referred to the enrolment in 1903 of ‘[a]lmost two million names ...
believed to be some 96 per cent of the adult population’
‘undoubtedly the most comprehensive enrolment of any nation up to that
time ... undertaken by a fledgling government with
only a skeleton public
The enrolment of
the national uniform electorate enfranchised by the
Franchise Act
absence of sophisticated administrative architecture was facilitated instead by
the enlistment, pursuant to a proclamation
made under the
1902 Electoral
, of State police forces to canvass the continent door to door.
One function not conferred on the electoral office was electoral distribution
and redistribution. The
1902 Electoral Act
instead made provision in Pt
III for the Governor-General to appoint one person in each State to be the
Commissioner for the purpose
of electoral distribution. Although the
Commissioner would hold office during the pleasure of the
Governor-General,
without any formal guarantee of independence, this basic structure for
distribution stood in contrast to the approach in comparable
including the United States where districting was then and has since remained
largely the responsibility of legislatures
themselves. Graeme Orr has observed
that assigning responsibility for electoral distribution and redistribution to
non-parliamentary
commissioners mitigated the risk that inheres in such
responsibility being assigned to legislatures precisely because the legislators
who comprise those legislatures are subject to the ultimately controlling
influence of the electoral choice that is distributed and
redistributed through
its performance.
Electoral Act
also prescribed the decision-making process of the
Commissioners in making any distribution, which was to be constrained by a quota
of electors to be ascertained by dividing the whole number of electors in a
State by the number of members of the House of Representatives
to be chosen in
that State, with a very small margin of allowance for
By this means, the
Act added explicit protections against manipulation of electoral distribution
and redistribution to the institutional
protections which arose from assigning
the function to non-parliamentary commissioners.
1911 to 1924
A decade on from Federation, accumulation of experience in electoral
administration had exposed a range of imperfections in the system.
professionalisation of electoral administration facilitated by the establishment
of the electoral office came over the ensuing
decade to inform legislative
developments framed to address some of those imperfections.
In a paper prepared by the Chief Electoral Officer in 1911, the system
established by the
1902 Electoral Act
was noted ‘not [to] permit of
the adoption of a continuous system of compulsory
enrolment’.
The door-to-door canvassing across the continent during the immediate
post-Federation period was said to have introduced ‘a
considerable degree
of compulsion ... without reference to
Parliament’.
According to the Chief Electoral Officer,
[t]he existing system of voluntary enrolment during the currency of a Roll,
supplemented by official action to remedy errors and
omissions ... [was]
inherently weak, in that it create[d] something in the nature of a divided
responsibility [leading] many people
to believe that it [was] the duty of the
Electoral Administration to follow them from place to place
The opinion
of the Chief Electoral Officer was accordingly that ‘a thoroughly
efficient Roll can only be continuously preserved
under a system of compulsory
enrolment’.
The opinion of the Chief Electoral Officer was presented to the Senate by Sir
George Pearce in October 1911 in support of an Act to
Electoral Act
to make provision for a system of compulsory enrolment, among
other measures. The reform was submitted by Pearce to be ‘a machinery
as if following
inexorably from the Chief Electoral Officer’s ‘official
Within the ensuing
parliamentary debate, the ‘question of compulsion’ was considered
primarily in terms of ‘the
administrative advantages it was designed to
Pearce, however,
articulated his ‘own reasons for the change’ at the level of
Although he
emphasised that the question of compulsory voting was not itself before the
Parliament, he ventured to say that ‘in
a country like Australia, where we
recognise that every man and woman should have the right to vote, that right
becomes more than
a privilege — it becomes a
The outcome was
1902 Electoral Act
was amended to provide for the
Governor-General, by proclamation, to ‘declare that ... new Rolls shall be
prepared under a
system of compulsory
enrolment’.
Another imperfection in the electoral system which had by then become
apparent was that of three or more candidates resulting in
‘vote-splitting’
and leading to unrepresentative outcomes, as an
incident of the first-past-the-post form of simple majority voting. Whilst the
form of the Bill for the
1902 Electoral Act
had provided for a
form of preferential voting for both Houses designed to avoid such outcomes, the
relevant provisions had then
been amended in favour of first-past-the-post
voting both for the House of Representatives and the Senate after the
preferential
voting provisions failed to gain widespread
The issue of vote-splitting was considered in 1915 by the Royal Commission
upon the Commonwealth Electoral Law and Administration,
appointed by Sir Joseph
Cook’s Liberal Government against the backdrop of what Benjamin Reilly has
described as ‘[t]he
increasing incidence of minority Labor candidates
beating a divided field of
conservatives’.
Although attention had thus been drawn to the issue ‘more by
considerations of partisan advantage than by the finer points
of electoral
Commission reported that in principle
[t]here must necessarily be many shades of political opinion, which, in a
democratic country, should be given expression to in the
freest possible manner
[and] [i]n order that public opinion may be portrayed in distinct broad tones of
thought, we strongly urge
the adoption of preferential voting for the House of
Representatives.
recommendation to adopt preferential voting for the House of Representatives was
one of a suite of reforms enacted in the
Commonwealth Electoral Act 1918
1918 Electoral Act
’), which superseded the
Franchise Act
1902 Electoral Act
. The form of preferential
voting then introduced was that described by political scientists as the
‘alternative vote’
model, as distinct from the other differing forms
adopted historically in Queensland and Tasmania. Although the alternative vote
model is well familiar to us more than a century later, the terms in which the
reform was introduced by Patrick Glynn bear repeating:
The preferential method ... provides a remedy for a party split, gives the
result of a second poll of the same voters, and scope
for the expression of
wider electoral opinion ... The significance of this method is that the elector
declares in advance his choice
in each of the possible contingencies. In advance
he says ‘These are my contingent choices.’ Where three candidates
standing for one seat the elector says in effect ‘Number 1 is my
choice of the three; I prefer him, but if Number 1 is not
in the running I shall
give my vote to Number 2.’ ... The candidate is returned by an absolute
majority of operative votes,
and he then represents the majority of the
1918 Electoral Act
prescribed a form of ballot paper for the House of
Representatives on which electors would record their order of preference and
contained specific commands relating to scrutiny under the new preferential
system, including that
[i]f no candidate has received an absolute majority of first preference votes
... the candidate who has received the fewest first
preference votes shall be
excluded, and each ballot-paper counted to him shall be counted to the candidate
next in the order of the
voter’s preference [a process which was to] be
repeated until one candidate has received an absolute majority of votes
It has been
observed that, in combination with the convention of government being formed by
the party or parties having majority support
in the House of Representatives,
the alternative vote would thereafter function to ensure that the party or
parties with majority
support in the most electoral divisions nationwide formed
government.
Another imperfection exposed by the accumulation of experience in electoral
administration was low voter turnout. The historically
low turnout of 58% at the
1922 General Election proved to be the catalyst for change. While the Royal
Commission upon the Commonwealth
Electoral Law and Administration had considered
compulsory voting to be ‘a natural corollary of compulsory
enrolment’,
the reform had
yet to be taken up at the federal level. It had, however, been introduced in
Queensland in 1914. Anne Twomey has noted
how ‘[t]he experiment of
compulsory voting ... in Queensland had proved so successful in creating a
culture of voting that
over 82% of electors in Queensland voted at the 1922
[F]ederal [E]lection, without legal
compulsion’.
statistic was seized upon when a Bill to establish compulsory voting was
presented to the Senate in 1924.
The Bill was introduced by Herbert Payne, a backbencher in the Senate, as a
private Member’s Bill. It passed through both Houses
on the voices without
significant debate. In the words of Geoffrey Sawer, ‘[n]o major departure
in the federal political system
had ever been made in so casual a
But whilst what little debate there was can fairly be described as mundane
– the introduction of compulsory voting having been
submitted to be
‘the natural corollary to compulsory enrolment’ – more than
just a hint of principle can be discerned.
Given that ‘Parliament is
supposed to be a reflex of the mind of the people’, argued Senator Payne,
‘a Parliament
elected by less than one-half of the electors ... surely is
a travesty on democratic
government’.
Steering the
Bill through the House of Representatives, backbencher Edward Mann provided a
principled answer to what he identified
as a principled objection that
compulsory voting was an interference with liberty. He did so by adopting the
distinction drawn by
James Bryce between ‘individual liberty’
(‘consist[ing] in exemption from legal control’) and
liberty’ (‘consist[ing] in participation in legal
‘Individual liberty’, Mann argued, ‘is less likely to be
invaded when the legal control is that exercised by a
real majority of the
A constitutional challenge to compulsory voting as introduced in 1924 was
unanimously rejected by the High Court of Australia two
years later. The
Commonwealth Parliament, as the ‘community organised’, Isaacs J then
said, ‘being seised of the
subject matter of parliamentary elections and
finding no express restrictions in the
Constitution
, may properly do all
it thinks necessary to make elections as expressive of the will of the community
as they possibly can
By the middle of the interwar period, the Commonwealth Parliament had thus
exercised its legislative power to build out the form of
popular sovereignty
empowered by the
Constitution
by establishing a system of
preferential and compulsory voting according to which ‘the people’
would be both empowered
and required to make an effective choice of government
through the ranking of their preferences for candidates for election to the
House of Representatives. Neither development featured quite the controlling
presence of conscious statecraft or awareness of such
ordinary lawmaking
operating on a higher plane as the enactment of the
Franchise Act
each, mundanity combined with innovation in a distinctively Australian way.
1948 to 1983
The aftermath of the Second World War saw impetus both to reform the system
of voting for the Senate and to continue the expansion
of the electorate towards
universal adult suffrage, which had been imperfectly realised in 1902.
Writing in 1910, Harrison Moore had observed with evident dismay that
‘no scheme of “proportionate representation”’
Senate had then ‘received favourable consideration’ and that the
first-past-the-post system enacted by the
1902 Electoral Act
‘open to the objection that it enable[d] an organized plurality of voters
to secure the whole representation, though it
[had] only a small majority of
votes, or, even in the case of a large number of candidates, [was] an actual
minority of the electors
Amendment of the
1918 Electoral Act
to introduce preferential
voting in the Senate in the form of ‘block voting’ was seen only to
exacerbate ‘the so-called
“windscreen-wiper effect”, which
delivered almost all contested Senate seats in each state to whatever political
The Royal Commission on the
Constitution
of the Commonwealth in 1929 reported
that this state of affairs was ‘undesirable’ and that ‘the
Senate would be
better qualified to act as a chamber of revision if senators
were elected under a system of proportional
representation’.
However, it was not until 1948 that the Chifley Government, facing electoral
defeat at an impending general election, introduced the
Bill for the amending
Act that ultimately introduced proportionate representation for the
In the second reading speech for the Bill, Dr Evatt said:
The great defect, from the representation aspect, of both the old “first
past the post” and the more recently used “block
majority” is
that at an election, generally all seats in a State are won by candidates of the
one party, leaving a minority
of between 40 to 50 per cent of the electors
without any representation at all in the Senate. ... It has [been] decided that,
relation to the election of senators, where each State votes as one
electorate, the fairest system and the one most likely to enhance
the status of
the Senate is that of proportional
representation.
‘single transferrable vote’ form of preferential voting introduced
by the 1948 amending Act involved voters ranking
candidates in order of
preference on the ballot paper in the same manner as the alternative vote with
scrutiny proceeding by dividing
the number of seats contested to establish a
quota of votes needed to elect a single candidate, treating candidates achieving
quota as elected and then redistributing preferences, both from the surplus
votes of elected candidates and from candidates with
the least votes, until all
seats were filled.
Unlike the alternative vote in elections for the House of Representatives,
which had from 1918 functioned to ensure that the party
or parties with majority
support in the most electoral divisions nationwide formed government in the
House of Representatives, the
single transferable vote in elections for the
Senate would function from 1948 to match party votes within each State with
seats for each State.
enduring outcome, as John Uhr summed it up, has been that ‘the Senate
which from its beginnings has represented the minor
States now also represents
minorities within the States: within the big States as well as smaller
By 1949, Indigenous Australians could vote only if they were otherwise
entitled to do so for State elections or if they had served,
or were serving, in
the Australian military.
meant that the many civilian Indigenous Australians in Queensland, Western
Australia and the Northern Territory still could
National organisations
such as the Federal Council for Aboriginal Advancement, as well as State-based
groups such as the Aborigines
Advancement League in Victoria and the Aborigines
and Torres Strait Islanders’ Advancement League in Queensland, campaigned
to extend the franchise to all Indigenous
Australians.
With domestic and
international comparisons being made to apartheid in South
the campaign reached a
crescendo in 1961 when the House of Representatives established the Select
Committee on Voting Rights of Aboriginals.
On 19 October 1961, the Select
Committee finally recommended that the national franchise be so
The amending Act which implemented that recommendation the following year was
spare in its
The second reading speech noted, however, that while it was a short piece of
legislation, its implications were ‘of the greatest
significance’ in
that it ‘would proclaim to the world that the representatives of all
sections of the Australian community
are determined to ensure that the
[A]boriginal people of Australia enjoy complete political equality with the rest
of the community’.
the heading ‘[p]ersons entitled to enrolment and to vote’, the
critical provision simply stated that ‘[s]ection
thirty-nine of the
1918 Electoral Act
] is amended by omitting sub-section
sub-section (6)
having contained the express disqualification of Indigenous Australians from
entitlement to enrol — a disqualification
which had persisted since the
1902 Electoral Act
. Indigenous Australians would accordingly be entitled
to enrol and, if in fact enrolled, would be subject to the provision for
voting in the
1918 Electoral Act
. The arc of Indigenous
Australian enfranchisement was finally completed in 1983 when compulsory
enrolment was legislated for Indigenous
Australians,
as it had been for other Australians almost 70 years beforehand.
Another broadening of the franchise during this period was the lowering of
the minimum voting age. Since the enactment of the
Franchise Act
of eligibility had been set at 21 years, reflecting that of most comparable
the First World War, it was the Second World War which led to palpable agitation
towards a lower
voting age, as many Australian military personnel were younger
than 21. In response, the Parliament first enacted the
Commonwealth Electoral
(War-time) Act 1943
(Cth), which extended the right to vote to active and
discharged military personnel who had served overseas and who were under 21.
With the coming of the Vietnam War and the introduction of compulsory national
service, calls for lowering the voting age to 18 grew
louder still. The
rationale was pithily captured in the slogan: ‘Old enough to fight, old
enough to vote’.
persisted for the voting age to be lowered for all citizens, not simply those
who had served in the military. By 1971,
the United Kingdom, the United States
and Canada, for instance, had all lowered the voting age to 18. Ultimately, in
1973 during
the period of the Whitlam Government, Australia followed suit:
legislation to amend the
1918 Electoral Act
was passed unanimously by the
Commonwealth Parliament, without
A little over a decade later, following the election of the Hawke Government
and the establishment and reporting of the Joint Select
Committee on Electoral
Reform, a comprehensive package of amendments came to be made to the electoral
legislation by the
Commonwealth Electoral Legislation Amendment Act 1983
1983 Amendment Act
’). That Act provided, among other
things, for the registration of political parties, the printing of their names
papers, and the division of the Senate ballot paper by a line allowing
the option of above-the-line voting for political parties
or groups and
below-the-line voting for individual candidates.
1983 Amendment Act
also introduced compulsory enrolment of
Indigenous Australians together with mobile polling booths. As Senator Gareth
Evans noted
during the parliamentary debates, arrangements for mobile polling
booths were part of the set of ‘provisions to enable people
to vote who
were previously
disenfranchised’.
Saturday voting, the legislative requirement for which had been introduced in
1911 at the same time as the introduction of compulsory
mobile polling booths
were aimed at making voting
For Saturday voting,
that ease was through reducing what an economist would call the opportunity cost
of voting as more people could
readily access voting without needing to arrange
for time off work or other responsibilities during the working week. Similarly,
mobile polling would reduce what an economist would call the transaction costs
of voting as it became more readily accessible.
Another important reform introduced by the
1983 Amendment Act
establishment of the Australian Electoral Commission (‘AEC’) as an
independent statutory authority which would
be ‘seen to operate
independent of political
influence’.
The AEC was to exercise functions which included those of the Australian
Electoral Office, the most recent incarnation (as a statutory
office since
of the electoral office
originally set up by the
1902 Electoral Act
. The AEC was also to assume
responsibility for electoral redistribution, meaning that ‘for the first
time the electoral commissioners
[would] be totally independent’ in
securing ‘fair’
redistributions.
AEC-appointed Redistribution Committee for each State would determine
redistributions to commence ‘whenever the Electoral
Commission so
direct[ed]’.
proposed redistributions by the Redistribution Committee had to be justified
with reasons and then the proposed electoral
map(s) together with the reasons
and other materials were required to be publicly displayed and objections able
to be lodged by any
organisation.
‘augmented’ composition of the AEC was then required to determine
any objections lodged against any proposed
redistribution.
Yet another function of the AEC established by the
1983 Amendment Act
which bears emphasis in its support of representative government was the express
statutory function to promote public awareness of
electoral and parliamentary
matters through ‘education and information programs’ as well as
other means.
An active educative
function was viewed by the Joint Select Committee as essential to inform the
people ‘as to their rights,
responsibilities and entitlements as
Greater voter
education was viewed as a means of informing people both as to their right to
vote and, perhaps more significantly
given the compulsory enrolment of all adult
Australians following the 1983 amendments, enabling ‘improved’
the sense that electors would better understand how to vote, which
would in turn lead to fewer informal votes being
The cumulative effect of compulsory enrolment, compulsory voting and voter
education as part of the constitutional process of empowering
Australians to act
as ‘the people’ can be seen in contemporary statistics. As at 31
December 2024, around 98% of eligible
Australians were enrolled to
In the 2022 Federal
Election, around 90% of those enrolled turned out to
By way of international
comparison, the most recent enrolment and turnout figures for Canada were around
respectively, and for New
Zealand were around 89%
respectively. For the
United Kingdom, the comparable figures were as low as
respectively. In the
United States, around 64% of the eligible voting population voted in the most
recent Presidential
Constitution
empowered a form of popular sovereignty in
which ‘the people’ as ‘electors’ sustain and are
sustained by
a system of representative government. It expressly left the
contours of the electoral system — pursuant to which ‘the
people’ were to exercise that sovereignty — to the Commonwealth
Parliament to develop by ordinary legislation.
The democratic and inclusive Federation-era vision for the form of popular
sovereignty empowered by the
Constitution
has been realised through
Commonwealth legislation which has shaped and reshaped our national electoral
system in a process which
has both reflected and contributed to the
representative nature of the Commonwealth Parliament and which has both
reflected and contributed
to a constitutional dimension of our distinctive
national identity. The liberty the Australian people nurture, to repeat the
of James Bryce, is ‘political liberty’. An Australian is an
‘elector’: to be Australian is to vote.
Please cite this lecture as:
Chief Justice Stephen Gageler AC, ‘Winterton Lecture: The Evolution of
the Australian Electoral System as a Constitutional Process’
Sydney Law Review
21122: 1–17
<https://doi.org/10.30722/slr.21122>.
This work is licensed via CC BY-ND 4.0
https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nd/4.0. Unmodified
content is free to use with proper attribution
Chief Justice of Australia. This is an edited version of
the 2025 George Winterton Memorial Lecture delivered in the Banco Court
Supreme Court of New South Wales on 19 February 2025. Thanks are due to Flyn
Wells and Priyanka Banerjee for their careful
research and substantial
contributions to the structure and content.
George Winterton,
‘Popular Sovereignty and Constitutional Continuity’
[1998] FedLawRw 1
(1998) 26(1)
Federal Law Review
, 1 (‘Popular Sovereignty and Constitutional
Continuity’), earlier published as George Winterton, ‘Popular
Sovereignty
and Constitutional Continuity’ in Charles Sampford and
Carol-Anne Bois (eds),
Sir Zelman Cowen: A Life in the Law
Publishing, 1997) 42.
Winterton, ‘Popular
Sovereignty and Constitutional Continuity’ (n
Australia Act 1986
Australia Act 1986
Winterton, ‘Popular
Sovereignty and Constitutional Continuity’ (n
Ibid 9. See also at
See Bruce Ackerman,
People: Foundations
(Harvard University Press, 1993); Bruce Ackerman,
the People: Transformations
(Harvard University Press, 2000); Bruce
We the People: The Civil Rights Revolution
(Harvard University
Press, 2018).
We the People:
Foundations
See, eg, Akhil Reed Amar,
America’s Unwritten
Constitution
: The Precedents and Principles We Live
(Basic Books, 2012) ch 7.
Stephen Gageler,
‘Foreword’ in Benjamin B Saunders,
Responsible Government and the
Constitution
: A Government for a Sovereign People
Publishing, 2023) v.
R v Pearson; Ex parte
[1983] HCA 6
(1983) 152 CLR 254.
Constitution
Official Report of the
National Australasian Convention Debates
, Sydney, 2 April 1891, 613 (Sir
Samuel Griffith).
Ibid 619 (Edmund
David Malouf,
A Spirit of
Play: The Making of the Australian Consciousness
(Boyer Lecture Series,
Lecture 6, 20 December 1998).
David Malouf,
A Spirit of
Play: The Making of the Australian Consciousness
(ABC Books, 1998) 111.
Adrienne Stone, ‘More
Than a Rule Book: Identity and the
Constitution
Public Law Review
Winterton, ‘Popular
Sovereignty and Constitutional Continuity’ (n
Marian Simms, ‘Voting
and Enrolment Provisions’ in Marian Simms (ed),
1901: The Forgotten
(University of Queensland Press, 2001) 28.
Joan Rydon, ‘Electoral
Methods’ in Marian Simms (ed),
1901: The Forgotten Election
(University of Queensland Press, 2001) 21.
See generally Marian Simms,
‘Election Days: Overview of the 1901 Election’ in Marian Simms (ed),
1901: The Forgotten Election
(University of Queensland Press, 2001)
Commonwealth,
Parliamentary Debates
, Senate, 9 April 1902, 11450 (Richard
Ibid 11452.
Ibid 11451.
Ibid 11452.
Ibid 11451.
Marian Sawer,
‘Enrolling the People: Electoral Innovation in the New Australian
Commonwealth’ in Graeme Orr, Bryan Mercurio
and George Williams (eds),
Realising Democracy: Electoral Law in Australia
(Federation Press, 2003)
52, 56 (‘Enrolling the People’).
Colin A Hughes, ‘The
Independence of the Commissions: The Legislative Framework and the Bureaucratic
Reality’ in Graeme
Orr, Bryan Mercurio and George Williams (eds),
Realising Democracy: Electoral Law in Australia
(Federation Press, 2003)
205, 205–6.
Sawer, ‘Enrolling the
) 62–3. See
also Marian Sawer, ‘Pacemakers for the World?’ in Marian Sawer (ed),
Elections: Full, Free and Fair
(Federation Press, 2001) 1, 16.
Sawer, ‘Enrolling the
Commonwealth Electoral
1902 Electoral Act
Graeme Orr,
Politics: Elections, Parties and Money in Australia
(Federation Press,
ed, 2019) 35.
1902 Electoral Act
) ss 15, 16.
Chief Electoral Officer,
Compulsory Enrolment
(Government of the Commonwealth of Australia,
Parliamentary Paper No 27, 1911) 1.
Neil Gow, ‘The
Introduction of Compulsory Voting in the Australian Commonwealth’ (1971)
Chief Electoral Officer (n
Commonwealth,
Parliamentary Debates
, Senate, 6 October 1911, 1176 (George Pearce).
Ibid 1178 (George
) 203. See also at 205.
Commonwealth,
Parliamentary Debates
, Senate, 6 October 1911, 1178 (George Pearce).
Ibid 1179 (George
Commonwealth
Electoral Act 1911
See generally David M
Farrell and Ian McAllister, ‘1902 and the Origins of Preferential
Electoral Systems in Australia’
(2005) 51(2)
Australian Journal of
Politics and History
; David M Farrell and Ian McAllister,
Australian Electoral System: Origins, Variations and Consequences
Press, 2006) 30–36 (‘
The Australian Electoral
Benjamin Reilly,
‘Preferential Voting and Its Political Consequences’ in Marian Sawer
Elections: Full, Free and Fair
(Federation Press, 2001)
85. See also Farrell and McAllister,
The Australian Electoral System
Report from the Royal
Commission upon the Commonwealth Law and Administration
(1915) 7 [11].
Commonwealth,
Parliamentary Debates
, House of Representatives, 4 October 1918, 6678
(Patrick Glynn).
1918 Electoral Act
s 136(6) (as made 21 November 1918).
Patrick Dunleavy, Mark
Evans, Harry Hobbs and Patrick Weller, ‘Situating Australian
Democracy’ in Mark Evans, Patrick
Dunleavy and John Phillimore,
Australia’s Evolving Democracy: A New Democratic Audit
(LSE Press,
2024) 33, 45.
Report from the Royal
Commission upon the Commonwealth Law and Administration
Anne Twomey,
‘Compulsory Voting in a Representative Democracy: Choice, Compulsion and
the Maximisation of Participation in
Australian Elections’
(2013) 13(2)
Oxford University Commonwealth Law Journal
, 287. See also Lindsay
Smith, ‘Compulsory Voting in Australia’ in Richard Lucy (ed),
Pieces of Politics
(Macmillan, 3
ed, 1983) 235, 240.
See Commonwealth,
Parliamentary Debates
, Senate, 17 July 1924, 2179–80.
Geoffrey Sawer,
Australian Federal Politics and Law 1901–1929
(Melbourne University
Press, 1956) 237.
Commonwealth,
Parliamentary Debates
, Senate, 17 July 1924, 2180 (Herbert Payne).
Commonwealth,
Parliamentary Debates
, House of Representatives, 24 July 1924, 2448,
quoting James Bryce,
Modern Democracies
(Macmillan, 1921) vol 1, 55.
Commonwealth,
Parliamentary Debates
, House of Representatives, 24 July 1924, 2448.
Judd v McKeon
[1926] HCA 33
W Harrison Moore,
Constitution
of the Commonwealth of Australia
(Sweet & Maxwell,
ed, 1910) 115.
Commonwealth Electoral
John Uhr, ‘Why We
Chose Proportional Representation’ in Marian Sawer and Sarah Miskin (eds),
Representation and Institutional Change: 50 Years of Proportional
Representation in the Senate
(Department of the Senate, Papers on Parliament
No 34, 1999) 13, 16.
Report of the Royal
Commission on the
Constitution
(1929) 267.
Commonwealth Electoral
Commonwealth,
Parliamentary Debates
, House of Representatives, 16 April 1948, 965 (Dr
Herbert Evatt).
Commonwealth Electoral
Day v Australian Electoral Officer (SA)
(2016) 261 CLR 1, 9
Dunleavy et al (n
Commonwealth Electoral
Will Sanders,
‘Delivering Democracy to Indigenous Australians: Aborigines, Torres Strait
Islanders and Commonwealth Electoral
Administration’ in Marian Sawer (ed),
Elections: Full, Free and Fair
(Federation Press, 2001) 158, 159.
See John Chesterman,
Civil Rights: How Indigenous Australians Won Formal Equality
(Queensland
University Press, 2005) 62–3.
House of Representatives
Select Committee on Voting Rights of Aboriginals, Parliament of Australia,
Report from the Select Committee on Voting Rights of Aborigines
— Report and Minutes of Proceedings, October 1961).
Commonwealth Electoral
Commonwealth,
Parliamentary Debates
, Senate, 2 May 1962, 1050–51 (Harrie
Commonwealth Electoral
Commonwealth Electoral
Legislation Amendment Act 1983
1983 Amendment
See Ian McAllister,
‘The Politics of Lowering the Voting Age in Australia: Evaluating the
Evidence’, (2014) 49(1)
Australian Journal of Political Science
Commonwealth Electoral
Commonwealth,
Parliamentary Debates
, Senate, 30 November 1983, 3062 (Gareth Evans).
Commonwealth Electoral
See Lisa Hill,
‘Australia’s Electoral Innovations’ in Jenny M Lewis and Anne
Tiernan (eds),
The Oxford Handbook of Australian Politics
(2021) 75, 83–4.
Joint Select Committee on
Electoral Reform, Parliament of Australia,
First Report
(September 1983)
39 [2.30]. See also
1983 Amendment Act
Australian Electoral
Office Act 1973
Commonwealth,
Parliamentary Debates
, Senate, 30 November 1983, 2990 (Michael
1983 Amendment Act
) s 9, substituting new pt IIIA and
see especially s 25K.
Ibid ss 25L, 25T, 25U, 25V.
Ibid s 25W.
1983 Amendment Act
) s 9, substituting new
s 7A(1)(c).
Joint Select Committee on
Electoral Reform (n
) 41 [2.38].
Commonwealth,
Parliamentary Debates, Senate, 30 November 1983, 2981.
Australian Electoral
Commission, ‘Enrolment Statistics’ (Web Page, 23 January 2025)
<https://www.aec.gov.au/enrolling_to_vote/enrolment_stats/>.
Australian Electoral
Commission, ‘Voter Turnout – Previous Events’ (Web Page, 7
November 2023)
<https://www.aec.gov.au/Elections/federal_elections/voter-turnout.htm>.
Elections Canada,
‘National Register of Electors – Updates: November 2024 Annual Lists
of Electors’
<https://www.elections.ca/content.aspx?section=pol&document=index&dir=ann/upd&lang=e>.
Elections Canada,
‘Voter Turnout at Federal Elections and Referendums’
<https://www.elections.ca/‌content.aspx?section=ele&dir=turn&document=index&lang=e>.
See Electoral Commission
(Te Kaitiaki Take Kōwhiri) (New Zealand), ‘Enrolment by General
Electorate’ (31 December
<https://www.elections.nz/stats-and-research/enrolment-statistics/‌enrolment-by-general-electorate/>.
See Electoral Commission
(Te Kaitiaki Take Kōwhiri) (New Zealand), ‘2023 General Election:
Voter Turnout Statistics’
(Web Page, 2023)
<https://elections.nz/democracy-in-nz/historical-events/2023-general-election/voter-turnout-statistics/>.
See Office for National
Statistics (UK), ‘Estimates of the Population for the UK, England, Wales,
Scotland, and Northern Ireland’
(8 October 2024)
<https://www.ons.gov.uk/peoplepopulationand‌community/populationandmigration/populationestimates/datasets/populationestimatesforukenglandandwalesscotlandandnorthernireland>;
Office for National Statistics, ‘Dataset: Electoral Statistics for the
UK’ (11 April 2024)
<https://www.ons.gov.uk/peoplepopulationandcommunity/elections/‌electoralregistration/datasets/electoralstatisticsforuk>.
‘UK General
Election 2024: What Happened and What’s Next?’,
<https://www.reuters.com/world/uk/uk-election-what-happened-2024-07-05/>.
James M Lindsay,
‘The 2024 Election by the Numbers’,
Council on Foreign
(18 December 2024)
<https://www.cfr.org/article/2024-election-numbers>.
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (174 KB)
PDF format (378 KB)
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter