URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/journals/MqLawJl/2018/5.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 15:21:41
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Webb, Eileen --- "Housing an Ageing Australia: The Ideal of Security of Tenure and the Undermining Effect of Elder Abuse" [2018] MqLawJl 5; (2018) 18 Macquarie Law Journal 57
HOUSING AN AGEING AUSTRALIA: THE IDEAL OF SECURITY OF TENURE AND THE UNDERMINING EFFECT OF ELDER ABUSE
I INTRODUCTION
II AN AGEING AUSTRALIA
A Older People and Accommodation
B Why is Security of Tenure Important to Older People?
III THE NATURE OF SECURITY OF TENURE
A What Does Security of Tenure Mean to Lawyers and Non-Lawyers?
B Extending the Legal Notion of Security of Tenure – The Right to Adequate Housing and Ontological Security
C The Impact of Elder Abuse
IV ACCOMMODATION TYPES AND THE DIFFERING DEGREES OF SECURITY OF TENURE
A Home Ownership
1 Mortgages or Guarantees for the Benefit of Other Family Members
2 Reverse Mortgages
3 Family Agreements (Assets for Care Arrangements)
B Private Rental
C Community Housing and Public Rental
D Retirement Villages
E Residential Parks
F Aged Care
G Boarders and Lodgers
V WHERE TO NOW?
A Home Ownership
1 Education
3 The Conduct of, and Consultation with, Lenders
4 Awareness of Elder Financial Abuse among Bank Staff
5 Abuse of Enduring Powers of Attorney
B Family Agreements (Assets for Care)
C Private and Public Rental
D Retirement Villages
E Residential Parks
F Aged Care
G Boarders and Lodgers
VI CONCLUDING COMMENTS
HOUSING AN AGEING AUSTRALIA: THE IDEAL OF SECURITY OF
TENURE AND THE UNDERMINING EFFECT OF ELDER ABUSE
This article considers the degree of legal security of tenure and ontological
security in various forms of accommodation utilised
by older people. In so
doing, the article examines how elder abuse can dilute legal and ontological
security and makes suggestions
as to how existing real property laws could be
utilised and amended to safeguard housing security for older
I INTRODUCTION
One may gauge the strength or significance of someone’s relationship with
an object by the kind of pain that would be occasioned
It is undeniable that Australia will be faced with challenging economic and
societal realities over the next 40
Australia must respond to
demographic changes, including an extension to the average working life and
increased participation from
Furthermore, various
inquiries that have considered housing affordability in Australia highlight
shortfalls in the provision of age-appropriate
and affordable
These major demographic
and housing issues are closely connected, and are occurring against a background
of stagnating economic conditions
and an oversubscribed health system.
Security of tenure is a crucial factor in making people of all ages,
including older people, feel confident in their housing circumstances.
of tenure can be defined in a narrow legal sense based on the nature of an
interest or the length of tenure in land or,
more broadly, to encompass
ontological security, the confidence that most human beings have in the
continuity of their self-identity
and in the constancy of their social and
material environments. Ontological security is essential to general wellbeing
and the link
between secure housing and positive health outcomes is well
established.
The spectre of elder abuse, estimated to affect up to 14 per cent of older
can have a deleterious
effect on a person’s security of tenure. Elder abuse undermines not only
the physical and emotional
welfare of individuals but often has a financial
impact. Indeed, in Australia, instances of elder financial abuse account for
approximately
42 per cent of reported elder abuse
Given that the pivotal asset
for many older people is their home, the loss of that asset, or an unintended
erosion of equity in the
older people are not homeowners, elder abuse can lead to the loss of a home.
misappropriation of an older person’s personal assets, for example where a
bank account is accessed without the older person’s
consent, can lead to
the older person being unable to pay rent in the private rental market or fees
in an aged care setting. And,
the associated psychological impact is multiplied
where the loss has been perpetrated by a close relative or acquaintance.
elder abuse is prevalent and rising, it is interesting that there has
been minimal consideration of the role real property laws have
to play when
encountering elder abuse, including in relation to security of tenure.
Of course, most legislation relevant to real property and residential
accommodation is generic and, with the exception of retirement
village and aged
care legislation, does not make specific reference to older people. However,
instances of elder abuse commonly involve
some form of real property, such as
the fraudulent sale or mortgage of an older person’s home. The strict
operation of property
laws, for example the indefeasible title bestowed on an
innocent third party despite the transfer being the subject of fraud, can
deleterious effect on an older person’s security of tenure. Furthermore,
the result of such frauds or other property
related losses – or simply
individual circumstances – may result in an older person residing in more
marginal types of
accommodation such as a private rental, a residential park or
a boarding house. All types of accommodation have differing degrees
of legal and
ontological security of tenure which in turn impact upon an older person’s
wellbeing and ability to age well.
This article is in five parts. Part II focuses on older people and examines
why it is important to look at older people as a discrete
group rather than
within the generic population. It also considers the importance of security of
tenure for older people’s
wellbeing. Part III will discuss the nature of
security of tenure and its role and recognition by the law, including references
international human rights instruments. Part III also considers the impact
elder abuse may have on older people’s legal security
of tenure and, in
turn, their ontological security. Part IV examines the legal security of tenure
and the ontological security available
to older people in different forms of
accommodation. The article concludes with suggestions to enhance existing laws,
thus ensuring
a greater degree of legal security of tenure and ontological
security for the ageing population.
II AN AGEING AUSTRALIA
Older People and Accommodation
The laws relating to housing and accommodation are many and they impact
differently on individuals depending on a person’s particular
circumstances. However, the effectiveness of, and any shortcomings in, the law
pertaining to housing and accommodation arrangements
are likely to present a
greater level of stress and anxiety to seniors than other age groups. Seniors
are at a stage in their lives
when tenure is especially important. Seniors place
a high value on their home environment as they are less likely to be in
employment and consequently more likely to spend greater time in their
period in their
lives. This stage in a senior’s life can be impacted by a variety of
issues associated with ageing which may
affect accommodation choices. For
example, there may not be the variety of accommodation options available to
seniors as to younger
persons due to physical limitations and the rising cost of
accommodation. Illness and age-related health concerns are likely to become
prevalent and there may be changes in the family dynamic due to the necessity
for carers, transition to widowhood, and/or the
need to reside with or closer to
From a financial
perspective, if something goes wrong it is unlikely that seniors will be able to
rebuild and recoup losses. Given
that the base retirement age is 55 (although
most people will be unable to qualify for the pension until 67) and that life
has increased to around 80 years, it is foreseeable that many older
people will pass through several forms of accommodation between
retirement and
Therefore, while a particular kind of housing may meet a person’s needs at
one point in time, such needs can change dramatically
with the ageing
Perry, Andersen and
Kaplan note that the experience of aging may necessitate transitions in living
environments, either through adaptations
to current residences or through
relocations to more supportive
environments.
Although such
issues may be experienced by other age groups and demographics as well, it is
suggested that seniors are particularly
vulnerable to their occurrence and may
face distinct barriers in accessing assistance.
Why is Security of Tenure Important to Older
Whatever the mode of accommodation, security of tenure is a priority for
almost all older people. Apart from the obvious desirability
accommodation, there are also discernible health, social and economic benefits
to safeguarding security of tenure as the
population ages. Transitions in later
life are complex and ‘challenge older adults to make projections of a
future self and
to anticipate their emotional, medical and financial
Older people who
are secure in the knowledge that they can stay in their accommodation for an
extended period – or permanently
– exhibit demonstrably better
physical and psychological health than those in less stable
accommodation.
The impact of a change of residence, particularly a sudden or involuntary one,
heightens the risk of physical and psychological health
implications in both the
short and longer term.
Furthermore, relocation that takes place without regard to the personal
preferences of older people gives rise to feelings of
powerlessness.
Insecure accommodation may also impact upon older people’s social
milieu through a reluctance to engage in their local communities
in the event of having to
relocate, the loss of existing support and friendship
The prospect of possibly having to move weighs heavily on older people,
especially where there are limited options for accommodation
Finally, there are significant economic costs which may result from the
heightened risk of illness and the consequences of actual
or potential
dislocation. Much attention has been paid to the rising cost of funding the
healthcare of older people yet the nexus
between secure accommodation and better
health outcomes for older people is, for the most part,
overlooked.
Where an older
person must relocate, voluntarily or involuntarily, support formerly provided by
friends or family within a community
is likely to cease and must be provided in
some other way. Similarly, if an older person must move from a private
arrangement to
public housing, more cost falls to the public
Despite the obvious benefits of secure accommodation for older people, there
has not been a comprehensive response to the focus on
security of tenure for
older people. Unfortunately, issues affecting seniors are often a low priority
for resource allocation and
policy innovation because of older people’s
relative lack of economic and political
Furthermore, gradual
shifts in the nature of society, even with profound consequences, rarely elicit
the same scrutiny as immediate
III THE NATURE OF SECURITY
What Does Security of Tenure Mean to Lawyers and
Non-Lawyers?
In its simplest form, security of tenure is a legal concept that refers to a
person’s right to occupy premises for a given time.
While it is essential
to ground our discussions in the correct legal terminology, we must be mindful
that the expression has taken
on a broader – more colloquial –
interpretation that encapsulates issues of adequate housing and quality of
Both options are
problematic: too narrow a focus on a bare legal notion may exclude consideration
of pertinent related issues and
yet too broad an interpretation will dilute the
precision of the ensuing legal discussion.
Tenure can be defined as the conditions under which land or buildings are
held or occupied.
right of a person to hold property, a person’s entitlement to occupy land,
the nature of that right and the term
and manner of the occupation. For example,
a person’s tenure pursuant to a lease gives that person the right to
land for the term of the lease under the terms and conditions
stipulated in the lease or as implied by statute. The security of a
person’s tenure in any given case is gauged according to the extent of an
individual’s right to occupy the land. Legal
security of tenure means
that, in the eyes of the law, a grantee has a right to remain in occupation of
land that the law will enforce.
It is obvious, therefore, that tenure, and thus security of tenure, is not a
one size fits all concept. There is a vast array of different
arrangements. Determining security of that tenure focuses on a continuum from
people who are very secure in their tenure through
ownership or long term
leases, through to people with little or no security of tenure. In any given
case, the degree of security
of tenure will depend on the nature of the
occupation and the legal rules that will determine the security and the term of
the tenure.
So, a person who owns their own home will, prima facie,
the most secure tenure. A home owner can occupy the premises for as long as they
desire and use the property as they like, subject,
of course, to overriding
government requirements or any arrangements made with others to occupy the
premises, for example a lease.
In comparison, under a private residential lease
for one year under residential tenancies legislation, the tenant will have the
to exclusive possession of the premises for the term of one year. This
right may be impacted upon by the terms of the residential
tenancy agreement
and/or the provisions of the legislation. Therefore, if the tenant is in breach
of his or her obligations under
the lease, the lease – and the
tenant’s tenure – may be terminated. In a boarding or lodging
situation, any notion
of security of tenure is illusory; the occupant can be
evicted from the premises at will.
Extending the Legal Notion of Security of Tenure
– The Right to Adequate Housing and Ontological Security
The legal understanding of security of tenure may be quite different to the
use of the term in common parlance. Rather than an arrangement
between the
grantor of the interest and the grantee, the natural conclusion is that it is an
interest in the land obtained by the
grantee – a relationship between the
tenant and the land. There is often a view that the tenant has rights in and
land for an undefined period. Although in some cases, for example a
leasehold interest, the tenant does obtain an interest in the
land, the interest
is inferior to that of ownership and is regulated by the agreement between the
Also, security of
tenure is often regarded as synonymous with quality of life issues, a matter
explored below in relation to the
concept of adequate housing. This is not
correct in a legal sense. Legal security of tenure has no correlation with
quality of life
issues, except to the extent that people take comfort in knowing
that one’s occupation is secure and long-lasting. Indeed,
there may be an
inconsistency between the two, for example, where a person in public housing has
secure tenure but, in some cases,
the stress of neighbourhood dysfunction
results in a below average quality of
If the extent of an individual’s security of tenure is limited by and
to the characteristics of the form of the tenure, it does
not take us very far.
An unencumbered home owner will, for the most part, have considerable security
of tenure, whereas a boarder
in a lodging house has virtually none. This makes a
legal analysis of security of tenure relatively straightforward because
to the relevant statutes, and in some cases the common law, will
reveal its nature and extent. However, to most people, security
of tenure is not
just occupation for a time span. Commentary clarifying art 11(1) of the
International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights
describes legal security of tenure as one of seven components in the right to
adequate housing.
The other six
factors are affordability,
habitability,
availability of
services, materials, facilities and
infrastructure,
accessibility,
and cultural
As such, security of
tenure is but one of several factors that combine to produce adequate housing.
Although security of tenure is
a – and in many cases
pivotal element in the mosaic that represents adequate housing, it is not the
be-all and end-all. Indeed, after a cursory
examination of the common law and
real property legislation, the existence of or degree of security of, tenure is
easily ascertainable.
What is a more difficult prospect is examining whether,
despite legal security, the housing is adequate to the person’s needs
– adequate meaning by reference to these other factors.
Traditionally, the common law in relation to the occupation of a dwelling is
constrained. It rarely differentiates between real property
(a physical
structure upon land with a capital value) and a home (described by
Fox-O’Mahoney as a social, psychological, cultural
and emotional
phenomenon).
Despite recognition
in other academic disciplines, it is fair to say that real property law has been
slow, even reluctant, to weigh
up the importance of a secure and stable living
environment for an occupant in a contest with commercial or economic
considerations.
With the exception of an unencumbered owner of land, an
occupant’s tenure was viewed traditionally in terms of length and nature
– how long an occupant would be indulged by an owner before the law
permitted the occupant to be moved on.
But is the focus on security of tenure artificial in relation to the overall
wellbeing of older people and the circumstances in which
they age? Does security
of tenure equate to adequate housing or quality of life? Security of tenure may
be a factor that contributes
to quality of life – indeed, in some cases
the lack of security of tenure is a cause of considerable angst – yet its
mere existence does not guarantee a secure lifestyle in the sense of being
comfortable in one’s surroundings. When considering
security of tenure, it
seems appropriate to examine security in the narrow legal but also in a broader
sense. This requires looking
beyond the time based legal notion, to encompass
other issues. Security means a secure condition or
with secure being
defined as untroubled by danger or fear, safe, reliable and
Therefore a wider view
of security of tenure extends beyond the legal notion (which, of course, remains
extremely important) and
encompasses factors such as those outlined above in
relation to adequate housing. Affordable, convenient and secure housing is
in the lives of seniors, and security in one’s home environment
is linked directly to physical and mental wellbeing as people
This discussion links well with housing literature, in particular with
Giddens’ theory of ontological security – the confidence
human beings have in the continuity of their self-identity and in the constancy
of their social and material
environments.
Basic to a feeling
of ontological security is a sense of the reliability of persons and
Several commentators
have explored the relationship between stable housing and ontological security
and, in turn, the link between
ontological security and health and social
Indeed, the World
Health Organisation emphasises the quality and environment of housing and its
impact on the health of occupants.
Affordable and appropriate housing protects
people from hazards and promotes good health and
Ontological security is of particular importance to older private
and is undermined by
factors influencing insecurity of tenure including housing cost and complex
tenancy procedures.
security of tenure does not equate to ontological security, the two concepts
overlap and, in reality, the existence of legal
security of tenure will, in a
predominance of cases, foster the feelings of safety and perceived control
essential for a high degree
of ontological security. Therefore, it is plain to
see that older people who experience elder abuse will, naturally, experience a
dilution of ontological security that will be magnified further by conduct that
undermines the legal security of tenure in their
housing circumstances.
The Impact of Elder Abuse
Differing conceptualisations of elder abuse can be seen in various
disciplines and there is no one accepted definition of elder
However, a commonly
utilised definition is:
‘any act occurring within a relationship
where there is an implication of trust, which results in harm to an older
person. Abuse
may be physical, sexual, financial, psychological, social and/or
Broader scope is
often utilised in relation to elder financial abuse with the World Health
Organisation describing such abuse as
‘the illegal or improper
exploitation or use of funds or other resources of the older
This definition
incorporates abuses committed by persons outside a relationship of trust so as
to include the actions of strangers
and institutions.
Experiencing abuse, whether instigated by persons close to or removed from an
older person, is likely to have profound psychological
and physical impacts upon
an older person’s health as well as dilute his/her income and assets in
retirement. An older person
is unlikely to have the time or the physical,
psychological and financial resolve to recover or recoup
If the abuse undermines
the older person’s ability to retain or find accommodation it is likely
there will be a catastrophic
impact on the older person’s health and
In a time of decreasing housing affordability and income stagnation, the
‘nest eggs’ believed to be held by older people
attractive to family, associates or even strangers. ‘Inheritance
Impatience’ is a term often used to describe
the actions of adult children
or grandchildren who do not want to wait until an older person passes away to
receive money or property
from the older person’s
And, some people seek to
access these funds through a variety of means such as abusing enduring powers of
attorney or dealing with
an older person’s property without their knowedge
or consent. In an abundance of cases, the conduct is directed at land,
particularly
the family home, or has consequences that impact upon the older
person’s accomodation choices, for example through loss of
Real property laws impact upon accommodation choices. The right to dwell in a
property, the term of the residency, the conditions
upon which a person can stay
in or vacate the dwelling are addressed in various statutes and, in some cases,
by the common law. Given
that real property laws will determine a person’s
legal security of tenure – and the nature of that tenure will also
upon ontological security – a logical step is to consider the laws
regulating different types of accommodation and assess
how elder abuse may
impact upon those notions.
IV ACCOMMODATION TYPES AND THE DIFFERING DEGREES OF
SECURITY OF TENURE
Apparently X (interviewee’s brother) gave the signed transfer to the
lawyer and the property was transferred from Mum to him
(X). The lawyer
didn’t ask to see Mum; X said she wasn’t feeling well and that she
just wanted him to drop off the documents.
Mum didn’t know what she had
signed. He (X) sold the house. Mum won’t do anything because she
doesn’t want him
to go to jail. I
A high proportion of older people enter retirement owning their own
Although the home is often
the only major asset held, the increase in real estate values over the past few
decades means that many
of these homes are very valuable indeed. Ironically, the
older home owner’s security of tenure can be undermined by the operation
of the existing legal framework. Of particular concern are instances of elder
financial abuse involving an older person’s real
property, a risk that is
likely to increase as the population ages.
The Torrens system, and
its focus on the indefeasibility of title, leaves a defrauded (former)
registered proprietor unable to reclaim
an unfettered interest in his or her
property when it has been registered in the name of an innocent third
This is the case even
where the older person has been defrauded of that property. Although it is hoped
that provisions such as
Real Property Act 1900
and eConveyancing will make such frauds harder to perpetuate, fraud may
occur through forgery of the older person’s signature
on the mortgage or
transfer instrument, identity fraud or impersonation of the older person, or by
the older person being persuaded
to sign mortgage or transfer documents while
under a misapprehension about the nature of the documents or their
In such cases, the
fraudulent party may transfer the property into his or her name, sell the
property to a third party, or mortgage
the property as security for a loan. Such
transactions may result from the misuse of an enduring power of
If the property had
been transferred into the name of the fraudulent party (or to someone who was
directly involved in the fraud),
the fraud exception to indefeasibility of title
would see the property transferred back to the older
The matter becomes more complicated if a third party is involved. While there
is a fraud exception to indefeasibility of title, it
must, of course, be brought
is transferred to a third
party that is not involved in the fraud and the
transfer is registered, the title of the third party will be indefeasible. The
option for an older person is to seek compensation from the relevant
assurance fund. In some jurisdictions, recourse to the fund
is not direct and
may require that the older person first proceed against the fraudulent
In many cases,
especially when a family member is involved, the older person may not have the
financial, emotional or physical capacity
Where the property is encumbered by a fraudulent mortgage, the mortgage will
be enforceable against the registered proprietor if the
mortgagee was not
implicated in the fraud.
debt is not repaid, the mortgagee could sell the property to recoup the debt.
The older person will be left with either no
property at all or a property
encumbered by a registered mortgage. The only recourse may be to the relevant
assurance fund. Such
a result has a significant impact on legal security of
tenure and, with the concomitant psychological impact, undermines ontological
security and wellbeing. Furthermore, if the perpetrator is an adult child or
person for whom the older person has affection, the
likelihood of pursuing the
perpetrator is small. Although there has been a fraud, older people are unlikely
to seek recourse or report
the matter to police in most
Mortgages or Guarantees for the Benefit of Other
Family Members
The conduct does not necessarily need to be fraudulent. The natural love and
affection between family members means that older people
may be persuaded to
assist family members by using their home as security for a guarantee or a loan.
Such lending is often the result
of an agreement with a family member, for
example an adult child, to help that person financially by entering into an
arrangement
where the older person mortgages his or her property and the family
member agrees to pay the mortgage. These loans are secured against
person’s home, which is a huge risk if the loan defaults and the older
person cannot service the debt. The failure
of (usually) the family member to
pay the mortgage or the guarantee can result in the loss of an older
person’s home. Unfortunately,
many older people enter into such
transactions without being fully aware of the nature of the transaction and the
consequences of
the arrangement going awry. Some such agreements may also come
long as the
lender is not a party to the relevant conduct, the older person will be bound by
the mortgage or guarantee over the
Reverse Mortgages
Reverse mortgages and other home equity withdrawal mechanisms can be
advantageous in permitting older people to access equity in their
improve quality of life in retirement. The downside is that although there may
be low or no repayments, interest is, of
course, accruing. In some cases,
seniors have found themselves in a negative equity situation as such. Although
recent legislative
amendments have addressed this issue, the products still have
some disadvantages and seniors need to be well advised as to the risks
before entering into such arrangements, particularly for the benefit of
Family Agreements (Assets for Care
Arrangements)
Family agreements, sometimes referred to more specifically as assets for care
arrangements, occur when an older person makes a financial
contribution to a
family member, relative or friend in exchange for accommodation for life. This
can be in the form of a granny flat,
a home extension or simply moving into a
contribution to
(usually) an adult child, often through selling the family home.
The key criterion is that there has been a monetary advantage provided
adult child in return for agreeing that the older person will be cared for. If
the arrangement is successful, it can be a
source of a considerable amount of
ontological security. However, legal security of tenure is precarious.
The reality is, these arrangements are unregulated and there is little to no
legal security of tenure in them. The transactions are
usually entered into
without a written contract and without consideration of contingencies such as
the breakdown of the agreement,
the need for the adult child to sell the
property (for financial reasons or as the result of a divorce) or the older
health deteriorating to an extent that residential aged care is
necessary. And, even if the terms of the agreement are written down,
very contingency not considered in the document is the one that
Entering into these
arrangements may also have significant Centrelink ramifications. For example,
the contribution to the adult child
is likely to exceed the deprived assets
(gifting) provisions in the legislation, thus diluting the older person’s
social security
If the relationship breaks down, the older person is in a difficult financial
position. In most cases, the older person has not been
recorded on the title to
the land. Therefore, the older person has given a considerable amount of money
to the adult child and the
value of the adult child’s property has been
enhanced by the fruits of that financial contribution (through a home extension,
the construction of a granny flat or a cash injection into the household). In
most cases the older person’s assets, usually
a home, have been sold. If
the older person has not been recorded on the title as a registered proprietor,
it is difficult for the
older person to be reimbursed. Gifts to even adult
children are subject to the doctrine of
advancement,
and the older
person will need to call upon equitable notions such as a constructive trust or
estoppel to establish an interest in
Such a process is lengthy
and expensive as matters can only be brought in Supreme Courts and in some
Private Rental
I was renting this place from an old lady for 12 years. The rent had been the
same for a while ($210) but she knew I looked after
the place. She died suddenly
just before Christmas. Her son came around and said that the unit had been left
to his daughters. He
said I would have to leave because he wanted to renovate
the unit and lease it out at $450 a week. I looked around but there was
I could afford. I didn’t want to move out of the area because I had choir,
my doctor, shops and the rest. I went to
see my member of parliament and the
woman in his office told me to just stay put for as long as I could. I
didn’t want to do
that because if they threw me out I would never be able
to rent anywhere again. Finally I spoke to the son and told him I didn’t
have anywhere to go. He said he would put off the renovation and I could stay on
for six months. The rent rose by $150. I am happy
to be staying for a while but
I don’t know what’s going to happen when the six months is
Traditionally, as households enter retirement, older people have been very
likely to own their homes outright. However, there is a
growing minority for
whom this is not the case. ‘Critical life events’ such as divorce,
inequalities in relation to employment,
wages and superannuation (particularly
for women) and shifts in affordable housing supply, have resulted in individuals
and households
either falling out of home ownership and being unable to regain
entry, or being unable to ever achieve home ownership at all. In
some cases, the
loss of the home through fraud or a transaction to assist a relative can lead to
the loss of real property and the
need to find accommodation in the private
rental market.
Ontological security is minimal because with rising costs and low
availability older people in rental situations become concerned
that if they
have to leave the property they are residing in, they may not find another
– at least not in a familiar area.
Even under a fixed term residential
tenancy, security of tenure is for only a short period of time. Upon expiry of
the fixed term
many older people continue on periodic tenancies that can be
terminated without grounds on very short notice. Although cheaper accommodation
might be found further out to the fringes of the city, older renters tend to be
apprehensive about difficulties entailed in travelling
greater distances, access
to infrastructure and in establishing new
Legal security of tenure is limited too. Each state and territory has enacted
residential tenancies
legislation.
Despite the
intention behind the legislation – to balance the legal positions of
landlords and tenants – the reality
is that renters are, for the most
part, in a precarious position in relation to legal security of tenure. Although
there are no time
restraints upon residential leases, most such leases are for a
fixed term of six or twelve months. After the expiry of a fixed term,
leases simply revert to periodic status, meaning that the lease can be
terminated after the expiry of a limited notice period,
usually without grounds.
Evidence suggests that renting can be difficult for older people due to a
lack of willingness on the part of landlords to install
age-friendly fittings,
such as shower rails.
persons obtained permission to install such aids themselves, the fittings must
be removed without damage to the property
at the end of the lease. Furthermore,
as people age, it becomes more important to ensure that the landlord actually
carries out repairs.
The refusal of many landlords to allow tenants to keep a
pet also impacts upon an older person’s enjoyment of the property.
unsurprisingly, the lack of legal security of tenure – and a dearth of
ontological security – in the private
market, has been cited as one of the
key reasons for seniors moving into public housing.
Community Housing and Public Rental
There was something in my roof. I complained about it but nobody came to look. I
was terrified; I knew someone was up there. This
went on and on and I was beside
myself. I wanted to leave but DOH said there was nothing available. I think they
thought I was mad.
Finally I got someone to have a look up there. It turned out
some fellows from another unit could climb up through the man-hole,
roof and crawl along to my unit. They thought it was a joke to scare me. They
got warned but they are still around. I still
Community housing is part of a broader social housing system that also
includes public housing. However, community housing differs
from public housing
in that it is generally owned or managed by a non-government, not-for-profit
organisation. Many shires and local
government authorities also offer community
housing. Public housing is much more secure from a legal security of tenure
perspective.
As a result, ontological security is usually better than in private
rental situations, although some residents do express concerns
regarding safety
and neighbourhood atmosphere. Such tenants may want to move but are prevented by
waiting lists from doing so.
Public housing is managed by state government housing authorities, and
residential tenancies legislation extends, at least in part,
to public housing
tenants. The legislation differs from state to state but it is worth noting here
that in Western Australia there
is a controversial three strikes policy that can
result in eviction of older tenants. This can have harmful repercussions in
circumstances
where younger family members cause trouble and the older person is
evicted. Under s 75A of the
Residential Tenancies Act 1987
Housing Authority may apply to the court to terminate a tenancy on the basis
that the tenant has caused or permitted the
premises to be used for illegal
purposes, caused or permitted a nuisance to occur on the premises, or interfered
or permitted an
interference to neighbours. A tenant is also responsible for the
behaviour of others on the premises with the tenant’s permission.
report entitled ‘A Better Way’, the WA Equal Opportunity
Commissioner noted that strikes had been issued to seniors
after unruly
behaviour of guests outside of their control (including when a tenant was in
The Commissioner
argued that as public housing was used by people who could not access the
private market, eviction should not be
Retirement Villages
Although clearly the [Retirement Villages] Act seeks to strike a balance between
the rights and obligations of owners and residents,
the balance falls heavily in
favour of the protection of the interests of the residents of retirement
villages, particularly in the
long term certainty and security of their
accommodation.
The legislative framework regulating retirement villages is complex. All
Australian jurisdictions have domestic retirement village
In addition, the titles to
the land and the contracts themselves are extremely complex and difficult to
understand.
So far as legal security of tenure is concerned, a recent report in Western
Australia identified that there are three key events that
may directly impact on
a resident’s legal right or practical option to remain in a retirement
village, and may result in a
resident being forced to leave the
These include
circumstances in which, firstly, a retirement village ‘fails’ as a
result of operator insolvency or an
operator chooses to terminate a retirement
village scheme. Secondly, a residence contract is terminated by an administering
Or, thirdly, living conditions in a village become untenable for a
resident because of mismanagement and/or clashes with management.
The reality is that there is a high degree of legal security of tenure in a
retirement village. However, ontological security may
not be so robust in many
cases. Because of clashes with residents or management, or a desire to simply
move away, residents may attempt
to leave retirement residences. However, they
may find that they cannot afford to leave because of the fees that they are
to pay upon departure or difficulty selling the unit for a price that
would enable the older person to purchase another home elsewhere.
recently been the subject of considerable media scrutiny due to the unfair
nature of retirement village
the imposition of
deferred management fees,
unconscionable conduct on the part of retirement village administrators and
At the time of writing,
the Australian Competition and Consumer Commission (ACCC) and the Western
Australian Division of Consumer
Protection are also investigating issues
associated with retirement village
Residential Parks
Some of the residents thought they would die in here – to find out now
many of them in their 70s and 80s that they are to move
with nothing in their
pockets, nothing that will buy them anything
Sometimes referred to as, inter alia, relocatable, manufactured or mobile
dwellings are placed. Of late, lifestyle villages, where the dwellings resemble
strata title or villa accommodation but
are governed by the same legislation as
other residential parks, have
Residents of lifestyle
villages obtain longer leases and enjoy a considerable degree of legal security
of tenure through long leases.
Levels of ontological security seem to differ
depending on the relationships within the park and with management and services
The reality is that,
in more traditional environments, legal security of tenure, and often
ontological security, is lacking. This
is particularly the case in circumstances
involving more vulnerable, low-income older people who need to reside in parks
to caravan parks rather than the more expensive and secure, lifestyle
Although the relevant legislation differs from jurisdiction to jurisdiction,
legal security of tenure is minimal because most villages
have limited
availability of fixed term agreements. The term of the agreements are rarely
over five years and are most commonly around
12 months. After the expiry of the
fixed term it is usual for the leases to simply revert to periodic tenancies.
Periodic leases
in such instances can be terminated on short notice and without
grounds. This lack of security of tenure impacts considerably upon
ontological
security. Many residents feel insecure and are reluctant to complain about
issues of concern or seek
A concern regarding this form of accommodation is the fate of residents when
the land on which the park is situated is sold, often
for development. If a
resident has to move, dismantling and transporting a park home is expensive.
Furthermore, there is a lack of
alternative locations to place park homes,
especially in urban areas. This is likely to mean that a new park will be a
considerable
distance from the resident’s former surrounding thus
undermining networks built up over time. The vulnerable position of residents
the event of the park owner’s insolvency is another area of concern.
Mr X is a care recipient in a residential aged care facility. He smokes,
swears and is generally unpleasant and rude to the staff
and other care
recipients. He also rides around on a gopher and drives the gopher at staff
members at the facility if he doesn’t
get his way. He has been told that
he can leave the aged care facility but he doesn’t want to. He is still at
the facility
and he and the staff have come to an
accommodation.
Aged Care Act 1997
(Cth) provides for the Commonwealth to give
financial support through payment of subsidies for the provision of aged
care and through
the payment of grants for other matters connected with the
provision of aged care. Security of tenure in Australian aged care facilities
a topical issue from a legal, economic and societal perspective. Recently,
regulation of aged care facilities has seen the introduction
of a considerable
number of new regulatory measures, including the integration of high care and
low care facilities and ‘Community
Common Care Standards’. Other
legislative changes include variation in the use of accommodation bonds and the
mix of high care
and low care places. In the future it seems likely that the use
of the family home to fund aged care will become a controversial
In most cases, legal security of tenure is relatively secure. However, it can
be undermined, for example, in the following circumstances:
• Where the residential care service is closing.
• Where the residential care facility no longer provides accommodation
and care suitable for the care recipient. The approved
provider may ask a care
recipient to leave if the residential care facility no longer provides
accommodation and care suitable for
the care recipient, having regard to the
care recipient’s long term assessed needs, and has not agreed to provide
care of the
kind that the care recipient presently
• Where the operator of the residential care facility asks the care
recipient to leave for the reasons set out in s 6(2) of
User Rights
Principles 2014
. A care recipient may also be asked to leave for certain
specified reasons.
• Where a care recipient is transferred to a new bed or room within a
residential care facility.
Elder financial abuse has been an issue in relation to aged care facilities
as often the first indication of abuse is where an older
person’s fees are
not paid because a relative is accessing funds from the older person.
Ontological security is dependent on the conditions within a particular
facility. Factors that can impact upon ontological security
in aged care
facilities are the availability of trained staff in appropriate staff-resident
ratios, the conduct of other residents,
the quality of food and the amenity of
the surroundings.
Boarders and Lodgers
For decades private rooming houses have been at the core of boarding and lodging
accommodation in Australia, particularly in inner
urban areas. Western Australia
is no exception. From their origins as short to long term residences for working
single men, the demographic
has changed considerably over the years and they now
provide refuge for many marginalised people on low incomes and other forms of
disadvantage including mental illness and substance
Boarders and lodgers throughout Australia have little legal security of
tenure or ontological security.
Despite this, boarding and lodging accommodation is flexible and, for the most
part, more affordable than renting in the public or
private tenancy market. It
is less expensive to enter into such arrangements as there are lower entry costs
and fewer ongoing expenses.
elsewhere, for example Western Australia, there is no
legislation that directly
regulates the relationship between owners and boarders and lodgers. There is
little to no legal security
of tenure and similarly ontological security is
V WHERE TO NOW?
At the outset, this article noted the importance of legal security of tenure
in underpinning ontological security and wellbeing in
older age. As the
population ages, it is essential that older people can obtain, and retain,
age-appropriate and affordable accommodation.
Apart from the benefit to the
individuals concerned, the economy and society benefits too.
In an era of declining housing affordability and a significant reduction in
Commonwealth and state government contribution to affordable
housing, including
the supply of public housing stock, the scourge of elder abuse has become
problematic. Much elder abuse, particularly
physiological and financial elder
abuse, involves the real property or other assets of an older person.
Experiencing elder abuse
is likely to undermine an older person both physically
and emotionally. Victims of elder abuse express feelings of embarrassment,
disappointment, betrayal and fear. These effects are compounded by the fact that
the abuse is perpetrated by someone in a relationship
of trust. And, often the
abuse results in a significant financial loss, in some cases involving the loss
It is rare for a perpetrator to be pursued or money and/or property recouped.
Although the conduct may fit within the definition of
particular crimes, for
example fraud or stealing, law enforcement authorities seem to regard elder
abuse as a family or domestic
matter. It seems that only cases of considerable
physical or financial abuse are pursued.
Also, contemplating the criminal,
and even the civil, justice system may be intimidating for an older person. Not
only are proceedings
complex, lengthy and expensive, in most cases older people
do not want to pursue the perpetrator because, despite what that person
done, they are in a close relationship and the older person wants to retain the
relationship.
So, how can the existing real property framework be tweaked to provide a
measure of protection to enhance older people’s legal,
and therefore in
most cases, ontological security? Furthermore, given that elder abuse is
undermining this, what safeguards can be
put in place? The article concludes
with some suggestions to enhance security of tenure in the forms of
accommodation discussed in
The Torrens system is prefaced upon the view that the certainty of the
register is paramount. As a result, so long as an exception
to indefeasibility
is not applicable to the circumstances, the registered proprietor, whether a
transferee or a mortgagee, has good
title. Although compensation may be
available for the older person through an assurance fund, the impact upon legal
and ontological
security of tenure of being faced with the loss of a home is
Education is a starting point. It is essential that older people are aware of
the risk of elder financial abuse and of measures available
to protect their
real property.
Many older people
do not realise they may be vulnerable to abuse, especially where family is
involved. Furthermore, education campaigns
cannot reach all older people at
risk. The reality is that a determined fraudster – or an unscrupulous
relative – is
likely to be able to perpetuate a fraud even with the
availability of education programs. Therefore, it is necessary to consider
alternative strategies.
Where an interest in land is transferred to an innocent third party through
fraud, little can be done to assist the older person.
As mentioned, recourse to
the assurance fund may be available. However, in such circumstances,
compensation is unlikely to assist
an older person who would need to find
alternative accommodation – in all likelihood not in a familiar area.
Consideration should be given to an alert on dealings with a person’s
property. This need not be applicable to just older people
– it may be a
useful safeguard generally. If there is a need to make contact with the
registered proprietor prior to a transfer
– or the registration of a
mortgage – potential fraudulent registration could be discovered before
the transaction proceeds
too far. It is suggested that an automated system of
notification could trigger contact with a registered proprietor and evade the
end result of loss of a
The Conduct of, and Consultation with,
The Banking Royal Commission has revealed a litany of procedural breaches
with regard to lending.
consumer applies for credit, the
National Consumer Credit Protection Act
(Cth) obliges a credit provider to make reasonable inquiries about
the consumer’s financial situation and their requirements
objectives.
In so doing, the
credit provider must take reasonable steps to verify the consumer’s
financial situation. This means that payments
must be able to be made
without substantial hardship to the consumer. Unfortunately, it is thought that
often these steps are not
adequately followed by
Also, from the older
person’s perspective, it is not always that the older person is vulnerable
per se, but that they are ‘situationally
vulnerable’ because of
concern for the well-being of a child, or the desire to maintain relationships.
The reality is that
it is often difficult for the older person to refuse to
enter into such transactions. Even if the steps within the legislation are
followed, the legislation does not define ‘substantial hardship’.
There is a presumption that if a consumer must sell
their principal residence to
pay back a loan, this demonstrates substantial
In many cases of older
people obtaining loans or entering into mortgages, this is the case. However,
banks still continue to lend
in these types of
transactions.
In instances of fraud, banks and financial institutions are, to a
considerable degree, protected against fraudulent transactions.
As noted above,
a mortgage will only be set aside where the fraud is brought home to the bank.
Australian case authority suggests
that this will only occur in extreme
circumstances of complicity.
Reckless practices within banks have not been regarded as sufficient to enable
the fraud to be ‘brought home’ to the
However, the major
cases in this area pre-date the responsible lending regime. It is suggested
that, in future, courts may pay more
heed to the role banks play in
‘enabling’ fraud to occur through non-compliance with responsible
lending conduct. Consideration
could be given to an application of deferred
rather than immediate indefeasibility in instances of reckless conduct by
mortgagees.
If this were the
case, as has been the position in New Zealand for quite some
banks may be encouraged
to tighten up procedures and abolish reckless practices.
Awareness of Elder Financial Abuse among Bank
The Australian Bankers Association has taken steps to enhance training of
staff in relation to elder financial
While such programs
are to be welcomed, it is suggested that persons involved in providing loans
should receive additional training
regarding the problematic nature of lending
involving older people, especially where the loan is being entered into for the
of another person. In such cases there needs to be a rigid assessment of
the application in accordance with responsible lending provisions.
imperative that mortgage brokers also receive such training.
Abuse of Enduring Powers of Attorney
Many instances of elder abuse occur through the misuse of an enduring power
of attorney (EPA).
a legal agreement that enables a person to appoint another person or persons to
make financial and/or property decisions
on their behalf. When used correctly an
EPA is a prudent safeguard. The attorney has authority to make financial
decisions on another
person’s behalf because that person is unable to due
to illness or loss of capacity. Unfortunately, when misused, EPAs can
considerable financial and/or property losses. Pitfalls associated with EPAs
include issues of accountability, transparency
and vulnerability to abuse. As
Wuth argues, the lack of scrutiny of EPAs enhances the likelihood for financial
This statement is
borne out by findings that nominate powers of attorney as one of the main
sources of financial abuse
Many fraudulent activities regarding property are the result of a misuse of a
power of attorney. The Australian Law Reform Commission
Abuse Final Report
notes that such documents
may facilitate abuse by the very person appointed by the older person to protect
them. Evidence suggests that financial abuse is
the most common form of elder
abuse and that, in a significant minority of cases, the financial abuse is
facilitated through misuse
of a power of
Given the concerns regarding enduring powers of attorney, it is suggested
that relevant legislation should include penalties for misuse
of an EPA. The
ALRC has recommended that tribunals should have jurisdiction to award
compensation when duties under an enduring document
However, so far as
security of tenure is concerned, such measures may be too little, too late. It
is likely that if the misuse involves
dealings with the older person’s
land, the same issues discussed above in relation to fraudulent transfer or
mortgage of the
older person’s land will arise.
Family Agreements (Assets for Care)
Such agreements were given considerable attention by the ALRC. Indeed, the
ALRC recommended that tribunals be given jurisdiction over
such disputes within
families. In the ALRC’s view, access to a tribunal provides a low cost and
less formal forum for dispute
resolution – in addition to the existing
avenues of seeking legal and equitable remedies through the
The ALRC noted
further that social security laws and Centrelink processes relating to
eligibility for the Age Pension may be resulting
in family agreements that are
disadvantageous to the older person if the agreement fails. To this end,
Social Security Act 1991
(Cth) should be amended to require
that assets for care agreements be expressed in writing in order for the older
person to continue
to be entitled to the Age
While the recommendations of the ALRC are sound, more needs to be done in
this area. It is important to revisit the doctrine of advancement
in relation to
gifts of money or property to adult children. Furthermore, measures such as a
caveat to protect such interests and
legislation to provide some form of
regulation of these arrangements would be
Private and Public Rental
Residential tenancy legislation does not consider the age of tenants.
However, given that home ownership is decreasing and that more
Australians are becoming life-long renters, more people will be entering
retirement in the rental market. Enhanced security
of tenure can be obtained
through longer leases and provision for age-friendly features and ‘home
comforts’, for example
a pet, to be permissible.
Although it is unlikely to be popular with the real estate industry,
consideration should be given to tightening the existing residential
acts to safeguard older, and in some cases, all tenants. In comparison, in
Europe and in some US jurisdictions, there is
a much higher percentage of the
population who rent throughout their lives. Residential rental terms are, for
the most part, lengthy.
There are strict limitations upon termination and, in
some cases, additional protections for older tenants. And, unlike Australia
where 76 per cent of private rentals are owned by smaller
in Western Europe
there are large landholding institutions that treat their housing assets as long
term secure investments that provide
a steady return. This provides for greater
legal security of tenure and, as a consequence, ontological security. For
example, in
France the minimum term of a lease in most cases is three years
where the landlord is an individual and six years where the landlord
corporation. Unless there is a valid notice to vacate, leases are renewed by
operation of law for the same period and on the
conditions.
There are caps on rent for lengthy time periods, safeguards against excessive
rents, and landlords must show just cause to terminate
a lease. Interestingly,
older renters again receive additional
protections.
The exception to
this provision is where the landlord is aged over 60 years or where his or
her annual income is less than one and
one half times the amount of the minimum
The recent inquiry into residential tenancy legislation in Victoria has
recommended several initiatives such as longer periods of
tenure, limitations
upon termination and the ability to keep a pet in rental
accommodation.
Despite the
significant degree of security of tenure available to public and community
housing tenants, issues regarding neighbourhood
amenity, waiting lists, and
repairs need to be addressed.
Retirement Villages
Although legal security of tenure is high in relation to retirement villages,
the ontological security of many residents is undermined
through conditions in
the villages. Some residents complain that the terms of the contracts, and the
general atmosphere in some villages,
contribute to dissatisfaction and a decline
in ontological security.
It is an interesting period in relation to retirement villages. Most state
governments have amended the relevant legislation considerably
to recalibrate
the bargaining positions of operators and residents. It is anticipated that the
present consideration of retirement
village contracts, in particular
identification of unfair contract terms and unconscionable conduct by operators,
will lead to improvements
that will enhance the experience of residents of
retirement villages.
Residential Parks
It is important to draw a distinction between residential parks and lifestyle
villages. Although, for the most part, these forms of
accommodation are
regulated under the same legislation, the reality is that the two situations are
very different. Lifestyle village
residents enjoy considerable security of
tenure through long leases, the only possible issue being the consequences if
the operators
become insolvent. In comparison there are considerable
difficulties with tenants in park accommodation more akin to a tourist park.
Although there have been some attempts by various state governments to support
such tenants, the reality remains that the residents
are merely leasing the land
from the operator and, if the operator wants to sell the land, the resident must
leave. Furthermore,
as most tenants are on short leases, termination periods can
be relatively short, especially where it is difficult to find another
reconstruct the home.
Park home accommodation is marketed as an affordable retirement option. It is
of concern that older people buy into villages and then
may be forced to leave
in a short time. Legislation must do more to balance the rights of the operator
with those of the residents.
Like the discussion about private rental, there
needs to be longer, secure terms. There should also be provision for sufficient
compensation
for residents to move in the event of a park closure.
Again, security of tenure here is almost guaranteed, except in very limited
circumstances. However, it is essential that to ensure
ontological security,
aged care facilities adopt appropriate safeguards and strategies to ensure the
safety and amenity of residents,
including appropriate staff-resident
Boarders and Lodgers
Older people residing in boarding houses enjoy little legal security of
tenure and often lack ontological security. Indeed, ShelterSA
has noted that the
sector ‘lacks sufficient or consistent regulation and is ill-suited to the
diverse and often severely compromised
health and personal circumstances of
vulnerable residents.’
Research in this area notes the lack of security of tenure, poor housing
conditions and issues affecting safety and privacy. Even
in states where there
is legislation extending to rooming houses, much more could be done to assist
older boarders. Examples are
the provision of rights akin to tenants under the
residential tenancies acts, training and certification for operators, and more
links to support services.
VI CONCLUDING COMMENTS
If Australian seniors are to be living longer, healthy lives and retiring
later, it is in the national interest to foster an environment
supportive of
these aspirations. Research in a variety of disciplines, including gerontology,
social work, medicine and, of course,
housing, underscores the symbiotic
relationship between stable and secure accommodation on a continuing basis and
positive health,
social and economic outcomes. Such literature emphasises the
importance placed by older people on secure, long-term tenure and the
insecurities that may arise – thus undermining quality of physical and
emotional health – where their occupation is uncertain
or threatened.
Australian seniors are far from a homogenous group and live in a variety of
dwellings: homes on green title blocks, units and villas,
flats’, residential parks, retirement villages, aged care facilities, and
boarding houses. No matter what the
form of dwelling however, many older people
can experience vulnerability in relation to their accommodation –
including that
brought about, directly or indirectly, through instances of elder
There is a symbiotic relationship between stable and secure accommodation on
a continuing basis and positive health, social and economic
outcomes. To obtain
these benefits, it is essential to safeguard older people’s legal security
of tenure and maximise ontological
security. Real property laws and practice
– and an eye to the growing incidence of elder abuse in relation to
property and
assets – can contribute to this goal with a relatively small
amount of recalibration.
BA LLB (Hons 1) (QUT),
LLM (QUT), PhD (UWA), Dip Ed (UQ). Professor, Curtin Law School.
of this article
utilise material incorporated in a research report of which I was a co-author.
Content in this article from the report
is content that I was solely responsible
for as part of the co-authorship team. Aviva Freilich et al, ‘Security of
the Ageing Population in Western Australia: Does Current Housing
Legislation Support Seniors’ Ongoing Housing Needs. Summary’
(Report, Council on the Aging Western Australia – COTA WA, November 2014)
http://www.cotawa.org.au/wp-content/uploads/2014/11/Housing-for-older-people-summary.pdf
Western Australia Security of Tenure for the Ageing
’). The research was funded by COTA WA and LotteriesWest.
Elderly persons in urban and regional Western Australia living in
a variety of
housing tenures were interviewed for the report.
Margaret Radin
‘Property and Personhood’
Stanford Law Review
The Treasury (Cth),
Intergenerational Report: Australia in 2055
James Massola,
‘Inter-Generational Report: Joe Hockey Warns Difficult Days Lie
The Sydney Morning Herald
(Sydney, 20 February 2015). See
also Productivity Commission (Cth), ‘An Ageing Australia: Preparing for
the Future’ (Research
Paper, November 2013); Joint Center for Housing
Studies of Harvard University,
Housing America’s Older
Adults—Meeting the Needs of an Ageing Population
Senate Economics References
Committee, Parliament of Australia,
Out of Reach? The Australian Housing
Affordability Challenge
(2015) 189–98.
Anthony Giddens,
Constitution
of Society: Outline of the Theory of Structuration
Press in association with Basil Blackwell, 1984); Anthony Giddens,
and Self Identity: Self and Society in the Late Modern Age
(Polity Press,
Western Australia Security of Tenure for the Ageing Report
Rae Kaspiew, Rachel Carson and
Helen Rhoades, ‘Elder Abuse: Understanding Issues, Frameworks and
Responses’ (Research
Report No 35, Australian Institute of Family Studies,
February 2016).
Review into the
Characteristics of Elder Abuse in Queensland’. This research project was
conducted by Barbara Blundell, Joe
Clare, Emily Moir, Eileen Webb and Mike Clare
on behalf of the Department of Communities, Child Safety and Disability Services
It was completed in March 2018 but is yet to be tabled in the Queensland
Parliament. For more information see
<https://www.communities.qld.gov.au/gateway/end-domestic-family-violence/our-progress/enhancing-service-responses/tailoring-responses-meet-needs-vulnerable-queenslanders>.
Wiseman discusses
‘decision-to-move factors’ encountered as people age, beginning with
a ‘triggering event’
that motivates seniors to reconsider their
residential circumstances: Robert F Wiseman, ‘Why Older People Move’
Research on Aging
141. See also David J Ekerdt, Mark Luborsky
and Catherine Lysack, ‘Safe Passage of Goods and Self During Residential
in Later Life’ (2012) 32
Ageing and Society
Indeed a female who was
born in 2012 will on average live for an estimated 94.4 years while a male born
in 2012 will live on average
91.6 years: Productivity Commission (Cth), above n
Three types of relocation
over the course of retirement have been described being motivated by lifestyle,
adaption to increased
needs and finally the need for institutional care: Eugene
Litwak and Charles F Longino Jr, ‘Migration Patterns among the Elderly:
Developmental Perspective’ (1987) 27
Gerontologist
Perry, Troy C Andersen and Daniel B Kaplan
‘Relocation Remembered:
Perspectives on Seniors Transitions in the Living Environment’ (2014)
Gerontologist
Perry, Andersen and Kaplan,
above n 11, 76.
Although studies have
concluded that older people in their own homes have the highest levels of
ontological security, those in longer
term rental or permanent public housing
experience similar levels. Such levels decline the more precarious the
accommodation arrangements:
see generally Rosemary Hiscock et al,
‘Ontological Security and Psycho-Social Benefits from the Home:
Qualitative Evidence
on Issues of Tenure (2001) 18
Housing, Theory and
Involuntary relocation has
been identified as a factor in increased morbidity. The relocation process has
also been linked to the
emergence of physiologic and psychosocial disorders such
Relocation Stress Syndrome
Abir K Bekhet, Jaclene A
Zauszniewski and Wagdy E Nakhla, ‘Reasons for Relocation to Retirement
Communities: A Qualitative Study’
Western Journal
Nursing Research
Indeed, Rutman and Freedman
conclude that maintaining a sense of control over the relocation decision-making
process is critical
to positive post-relocation adaptation: Deborah L Rutman and
Jonathan L Freedman, ‘Anticipating Relocation: Coping Strategies
Meaning of Home for Older People’ (1988) 7
Canadian Journal
17. See also Abir K Bekhet, Jaclene A Zauszniewski and May L Wykle
Milieu Change and Relocation Adjustment in Elders’ (2008) 30
Western Journal of Nursing Research
113; Frank Oswald et al,
‘Relationships between Housing and Healthy Aging in Very Old Age’
Gerontologist
For example, in the
Western Australia Security of Tenure for the Ageing Report
, above n 1, 9
n 11, some interviewees from residential parks reported that many older
residents do not complain even if conditions
in a residential park are poor or
essential maintenance is neglected. Some stated the older residents were not
prepared to engage
with residents’ groups or be seen to engage with other
residents for fear of being branded a troublemaker.
Philippa Howden-Chapman,
Louise Signal and Julian Crane, ‘Housing and Health in Older People:
Ageing in Place’ (1999)
Social Policy Journal of New Zealand
This was a common thread in
many of the interviews in the
Western Australia Security of Tenure for the
Ageing Report
, above n 1, particularly in relation to residents in
residential parks on rolling periodic leases (see ch 8) and older people in
private rental market (see ch 5). Studies have, unsurprisingly, recorded
heightened quality of life for older people formerly
residing in private rentals
who have been able to access age appropriate public housing with community
supports: Ena Ahern,
Older Australians Experience Living in Insecure
(Housing for the Aged Action Group, 2003).
The World Health
Organisation has stated that affordable and appropriate housing protects people
from hazards and promotes good
health and wellbeing: World Health Organisation,
Health Principles for Housin
g (1989). Similarly, see
Powell Lawton and Jacob
‘The Generality of Housing Impact on the Well-Being of Older People’
Journal of Gerontology
194; Howden-Chapman, Signal and Crane,
above n 18.
Western Australia
Security of Tenure for the Ageing Report
, above n 1, 9 n 15, a significant
number of private tenants and residents of residential parks made the comment
that if, in the first
case, the rent increased too much, or, in the second case,
if the resident was forced to vacate the park, their only option was public
Howden-Chapman, Signal and
Crane, above n 18.
Productivity Commission
(Cth), above n 4.
While the legal
classification serves a valid purpose, the reality is that the concept of
security of tenure is generally understood
to mean more than the right to occupy
‘four walls with a roof’. See
A Home is More than Four Walls and
(Directed by Mark Andrew Job, St James Drop-In Centre, 2010)
<https://youtu.be/T9Fyb-0Jp1w>, a short subject documentary produced
St. James Drop-In Centre in Montréal, Québec, Canada.
Angus Stevenson and Maurice
White (eds),
Concise Oxford English Dictionary
(Oxford University Press,
Or as imposed by
For example, in the
interviews for the
Western Australia Security of Tenure for the Ageing
, above n 1, 14 n 26, several senior public housing tenants were quite
distressed by the activities and behaviour of some of their
neighbours but were
told by Housing Authority representatives that it would be several years before
they could be transferred to
other accommodation.
International Covenant
on Civil and Political Rights
, opened for signature 16 December
(entered into force 23 March 1976) art 11(1)
Personal or household
financial costs associated with housing should not threaten or compromise the
attainment and satisfaction
of other basic needs. For example, food, education,
access to health care.
Adequate housing should
provide for elements such as adequate space, protection from cold, damp, heat,
rain, wind or other threats
to health, structural hazards and disease
Housing is not adequate if
its occupants do not have safe drinking water, adequate sanitation, energy for
cooking, heating and lighting,
sanitation and washing facilities, means of food
storage, refuse disposal, etc.
Adequate housing must allow
access to employment options, health-care services, schools, child-care centres
and other social facilities
and should not be built on polluted sites nor in
immediate proximity to pollution sources.
Adequate housing should
respect and take into account the expression of cultural identity and ways of
Lorna Fox, ‘The Idea
of Home in Law’ (2005) 2
25; see generally Lorna Fox
Conceptualising Home: Theories, Laws and Policies
Publishing, 2006).
Stevenson and White, above
Elizabeth Jewell (ed),
The Pocket Oxford Dictionary and Thesaurus
(Oxford University Press,
American ed, 2006) 754.
Hiscock et al, above n
Giddens, The
Constitution
of Society: Outline of the Theory of Structuration, above n 6; Giddens,
Modernity and Self Identity: Self and Society in the Late
Modern Age, above n
Dupuis and Thorns note that
ontological security in a
world that at times is experienced as threatening and
uncontrollable: Ann Dupuis and David C Thorns, ‘Home, Home
and the Search for Ontological Security’ (1998) 46
Sociological Review
There is an abundance of
literature that considers the relationship between ontological security and
referred to above, other noteworthy discussions
include: Susan Bright and Nicholas Hopkins, ‘Home, Meaning and
Identity: Learning
from the English Model of Shared Ownership’ (2011) 28
Housing, Theory and
377; Kathleen Mee, ‘I Ain't Been to Heaven Yet?
Living Here, this is Heaven to Me”: Public Housing and the Making of Home
in Inner Newcastle’ (2007) 24
Housing, Theory and
207; Beverley A Searle, Susan J Smith and Nicole Cook,
‘From Housing Wealth to Well-Being?’ (2009) 31
Sociology of
Health & Illness
112; Kate E Mason et al, ‘Housing Affordability
and Mental Health: Does the Relationship Differ for Renters and Home
Purchasers?
(2013) 94 Social Science and Medicine 91.
World Health Organisation,
‘International Workshop on Housing and Climate Change: Developing Guidance
for Health Protection
in the Built Environment – Mitigation and Adaptation
Responses’ (Meeting Report, 2010)
http://www.who.int/hia/housing/en/
Ann Dupuis and David C
Thorns, ‘Meanings of Home for Older Home Owners’
Housing Studies
Whether ‘secure
housing’ means ‘home ownership’ and whether ownership is a
pre-requisite for ontological
security remains a matter of debate: Ade Kearns et
al, ‘Beyond Four Walls – The Psycho-Social Benefits of Home:
from West Central Scotland’ (2000) 15
Housing Studies
Cf Hiscock et al, above n 14.
Hiscock et al, above n
Kaspiew, Carson and
Rhoades, above n 7, 47–57.
Aged Rights Advocacy
Service, ‘Accessing the Aged Rights Advocacy Service to Prevent Elder
Abuse’ (Report, November
2013) 5 referring to Australian Network for the
Prevention of Elder Abuse (ANPEA) working definition 1999. See also Kaspiew,
and Rhoades, above n 7, 47–57.
Shelly L Jackson and Thomas
L Hafemeister, ‘Financial Abuse of Elderly People vs. Other Forms of Elder
Abuse: Assessing Their
Dynamics, Risk Factors, and Society's Response’
(Final Report to National Institute of Justice, United States Department of
Justice, August 2010
<https://www.ncjrs.gov/pdffiles1/nij/grants/233613.pdf>.
Frances Gibson and Francine
Rochford, ‘Emerging Consumer Credit Issues for Older
Australians’
[2008] UWSLawRw 4
University of Western Sydney Law Review
Duncan Boldy et al, ‘Addressing Elder Abuse: Western Australian
Case Study’ (2005) 24
Australasian Journal on Ageing
Kirsty Needham,
‘Inheritance Impatience Causing Families to Rob Granny for School Fees,
Renovations’
, The Sydney Morning Herald
(online), 21 November
<https://www.smh.com.au/national/nsw/inheritance-impatience-causing-families-to-rob-granny-for-school-fees-renovations-20151121-gl4im7.html>.
Ibid. See also Nick Goiran,
‘Sense of Entitlement Leads to Elder Abuse’,
The West Australian
20 September 2017.
Interview HE 4 in
Western Australia Security of Tenure for the Ageing Report
, above n 1,
Gavin Wood and Rachel Ong,
‘Can the Private Rental Sector Provide a Secure, Affordable
Housing Solution?’,
The Conversation
(online), 19 October 2016
http://theconversation.com/can-the-private-rental-sector-provide-a-secure-affordable-housing-solution-63880
Teresa Somes and Eileen
Webb, ‘What Role for Real Property Law in Combatting Elder Abuse Through
Assets for Care Arrangements?’
[2016] CanterLawRw 8
Canterbury Law Review
Ibid. See also Teresa Somes
and Eileen Webb, ‘Close to Home: Legal Dilemmas Surrounding Family Care
and Accommodation Arrangements’
(2015) 33(2)
Law in Context
Discussed below in
Presuming they choose to do
See generally
Australia Security of Tenure for the Ageing Report
, above n 1, 33.
Frazer v Walker
(1967) 1 AC 569.
Wendy Lacey,
‘Neglectful to the Point of Cruelty? Elder Abuse and the Rights of Older
Persons in Australia’
[2014] SydLawRw 4
Sydney Law Review
Commercial Bank of
Australia Ltd v Amadio
[1983] HCA 14
(1983) 151 CLR 447
See generally
Australia Security of Tenure for the Ageing Report
, above n 1,
Mainieri v Cirillo
[2014] VSCA 227
(2014) 47 VR 127.
Social Security Act
; Somes and Webb, above n 53.
Calverley v
[1984] HCA 81
(1984) 155 CLR 242
Vadisanis &
(2014) 53 Fam LR 345.
Somes and Webb, above n 53;
Somes and Webb, ‘Close to Home: Legal Dilemmas Surrounding Family Care and
Accommodation Arrangements’,
above n 54.
Interview PR 3 in
Western Australia Security of Tenure for the Ageing Report
, above n 1,
Catherine Bridge et al,
‘Age-Specific Housing and Care for Low to Moderate Income Older
People’ (Final Research Report
No 174, Australian Housing and Urban
Research Institute, September 2011) 119. (2011).
Residential Tenancies
Residential Tenancies Act 2010
Residential Tenancies Act 1999
Residential
Tenancies and Rooming Accommodation Act 2008
Residential Tenancies
Residential Tenancies Act 1997
Residential
Tenancies Act 1997
Residential Tenancies Act 1987
Victorian Council of Social
Service, Submission to Consumer Affairs Victoria,
Review of the
Residential
Tenancies Act 1997
, August 2016.
Interview SH 2 in
Western Australia Security of Tenure for the Ageing Report
, above n 1,
Equal Opportunity
Commission (WA), ‘A Better Way: A Report into the Department of
Housing’s Disruptive Behaviour Strategy
and More Effective Methods for
Dealing with Tenants’ (Report, Government of Western Australia, June 2013)
Retirement Care
Australia (Hollywood) Pty Ltd v Commissioner for Consumer Protection
, [175] (Pritchard J).
Retirement Villages Act
Retirement Villages Act 1999
Villages Act 1995
Retirement Villages Act 1999
Retirement Villages Act 2016
Retirement Villages Act 2004
Retirement Villages Act 1986
Retirement Villages Act
Richard McCullagh,
‘Care in Australian Retirement Villages’
Western Australia Security of Tenure for the Ageing
, above n 1, 71–87.
See generally
Australia Security of Tenure for the Ageing Report
, above n 1, 72.
Alison Choy Flannigan,
‘What Retirement Village Operators Need to Know about Australian Consumer
Law and NSW Reforms’
(18 September 2017)
http://www.mondaq.com/404.asp?404;http://www.mondaq.com:80/australia/x/629408/Consumer+Trading+Unfair+Trading/What+retirement+village+operators+need+to+know+about+Australian+consumer+law+NSW+reforms
& login=true
Consumer Protection – Department of Mines, Industry Regulation and Safety
(WA), ‘Special Investigation Unit to Review
Retirement Village
Contracts’ (Media Release, 20 July 2017)
<https://www.commerce.wa.gov.au/announcements/special-investigation-unit-review-retirement-village-contracts>.
Adele Ferguson, ‘ACCC
to Investigate AVEO Over Contract Terms and Conduct’,
Financial Review
3 July 2017
http://www.afr.com/business/health/aged-care/accc-to-investigate-aveo-over-contract-terms-and-conduct-20170702-gx2wze
Jenne Brammer,
‘Retirement Villages to Come Under the Microscope’,
(online), 21 July 2017 <
https://thewest.com.au/news/wa/retirement-fees-investigation-ng-b88542803z>.
Michelle Rafferty,
‘‘Devastated’ Kirra Beach Caravan Park Retirees Vow to Fight
(online), 15 March 2018
http://www.abc.net.au/news/2018-03-15/devastated-kirra-beach-caravan-park-retirees-vow-fight-eviction/9550252?pfmredir=sm
Lifestyle villages have
become increasingly popular and have become a more specialised form of tenancy
arrangement; indeed, separate
legislation for lifestyle villages is a
consideration of the statutory review of the relevant legislation:
Residential Parks (Long-Stay Tenants) Act 2006
Western Australia
Security of Tenure for the Ageing Report
, above n 1, 89–103.
Ibid 110, Interview AC
User Rights Principles
User Rights Principles 2014
Western Australia
Security of Tenure for the Ageing Report
, above n 1, 107.
Val Colic-Peisker, Rachel
Ong and Gavin Wood, ‘Asset Poverty, Precarious Housing and
Ontological Security in Older Age: An
Australian Case Study’ (2014) 15
International Journal of Housing Policy
For example, utility
connections are not required.
Eileen Webb, ‘The
Mistreatment of Older People: Is it Time to Legislate Against Abuse?’,
The Conversation
7 June 2013
<https://theconversation.com/the-mistreatment-of-older-people-is-it-time-to-legislate-against-abuse-14922>.
For examples of such
programs see materials produced by COTA WA and Advocare.
It is acknowledged that
this would not be foolproof.
Eileen Webb, ‘The
Financial Services Royal Commission Highlights the Vulnerability of Many Older
Australians’,
The Conversation
(online), 15 March 2018
<https://theconversation.com/the-financial-services-royal-commission-highlights-the-vulnerability-of-many-older-australians-93359>.
Australian Securities and
Investments Commission, ‘Credit Licensing: Responsible Lending
(Regulatory Guide No 209,
November 2014) 4, 11, 40
http://download.asic.gov.au/media/2243019/rg209-published-5-november-2014.pdf
ASIC Credit Licensing Regulatory Guide
Consumer Action Law Centre,
Submission to
Royal Commission into Misconduct in the Banking, Superannuation
and Financial Services Industry
, 3 April 2018, [2.5]
<https://financialservices.royalcommission.gov.au/public-hearings/Documents/Round-1-written-submissions/Consumer-Action-Law-Centre.pdf>.
ASIC Credit Licensing
Regulatory Guide
, above n 96.
Webb, above n 95.
Australian Guarantee
Corp Ltd v De Jager
[1984] VicRp 40
[1984] VR 483.
Assets Co Ltd v Mere
[1905] UKLawRpAC 11
[1905] AC 176
, 210. See also
Macquarie Bank Ltd v
Sixty-Fourth Throne Pty Ltd
[1998] 3 VR 133
Grgic v Australian and New
Zealand Banking Group Ltd
(1994) 33 NSWLR 202.
Pamela O'Connor,
‘Immediate Indefeasibility for Mortgagees: A Moral Hazard?’
Bond Law Review
Dollars & Sense
Finance Ltd v Nathan
[2008] NZSC 20
[2008] 2 NZLR 557.
Australian Law Reform
Commission,
Elder Abuse—A National Legal Response
, Report No 131
(2017) 295–303 (‘
ALRC Elder Abuse Final Report
Eileen Webb and Teresa Somes, ‘How Can We Prevent Financial Abuse of the
The Conversation
3 October 2017
<https://theconversation.com/how-can-we-prevent-financial-abuse-of-the-elderly-84991>.
See generally Melanie
Joosten, Briony Dow and Jenny Blakey, ‘Profile of Elder Abuse in Victoria.
Analysis of Data about People
Seeking Help from Seniors Rights Victoria’
(Summary Report
National Ageing Research Institute and Seniors Rights
Victoria, June 2015) 5; Kaspiew, Carson and Rhoades, above n 7, 11; Jo Wainer,
Peteris Darzins and Kei Owada, ‘Prevalence of Financial Elder Abuse in
Victoria: Protecting Elders’ Assets Study’
(Research Report, Faculty
of Medicine, Nursing and Health Sciences, Monash University, 2010).
Natalia Wuth,
‘Enduring Powers of Attorney: With Limited Remedies – It’s
Time to Face the Facts!’
Elder Law Review
ALRC Elder Abuse
Final Report
, above n 104, 159–60 [5.2].
Ibid 160 [5.3].
Ibid 204 [6.4].
Ibid [6.5].
There is debate as to
whether the older person would have a caveatable interest in the property.
Julie Power, ‘With
More People Renting than 30 Years Ago, Change is Needed to Protect
Tenants’ Rights’,
The Sydney Morning Herald
(online), 13
October 2013
<https://www.smh.com.au/national/with-more-people-renting-than-30-years-ago-change-is-needed-to-protect-tenants-rights-20131012-2vf3x.html>.
Loi n° 89-462 du
6 juillet 1989 tendant à améliorer les rapports locatifs et
portant modification de la loi n°
86-1290 du 23 décembre 1986
[Law No 89–462 of 6 July 1989 Tending to Improve the Rental Relations and
Modifying Law no 86–1290 of 23 December 1986]
(France) art 10 [Google
Translate]. See the discussion in Adrian J Bradbrook, ‘Residential
Tenancies Law – Lessons from
Property Law Journal
Bradbrook, above n
Residential Tenancies
Review, ‘Rights and Responsibilities of Landlords and
Tenants’ (Issue Paper, Consumer Affairs Victoria, 23 March 2016)
<https://engage.vic.gov.au/download_file/2040/634>.
The Victorian
Government has announced an initial set of reforms focused particularly on
giving tenants a sense of security and support:
Residential Tenancies Act 1997
Review, ‘Options Discussion Paper’ (Discussion Paper, Consumer
Affairs Victoria, 2017)
<https://engage.vic.gov.au/download_file/1650/634>;
Residential Tenancies
Review, ‘Summary of Responses to the Issues Paper, Security of
Tenure’ (Summary, Consumer Affairs Victoria, April 2016)
<https://engage.vic.gov.au/application/files/1114/8816/5813/FSH_Activity_Summary_-_Security_of_Tenure_3.pdf>.
ShelterSA, ‘The
End of the Road – Rooming Housing in South Australia’, (Research
Study, March 2017) 8
http://www.sheltersa.asn.au/wp-content/uploads/170315-Shelter-SA-The-End-of-the-Road-Final.pdf
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (416 KB)
PDF format (407 KB)
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter