URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/journals/UNSWLawSocCConsc/2024/8.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 15:47:34
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Gordon, Faith --- "Climate Harm and Future Generations: Young People Pushing for Australian Law to Change With the Time" [2024] UNSWLawSocCConsc 8; (2024) 18 UNSW Law Society Court of Conscience 47
CLIMATE HARM AND FUTURE GENERATIONS:
YOUNG PEOPLE PUSHING FOR AUSTRALIAN LAW
TO CHANGE WITH THE TIMES
Faith Gordon
I Introduction: Urgent Times In Addressing
Climate Harm For Future Generations
‘People are suffering. People are dying. Entire ecosystems are
collapsing. We are in the beginning of a mass extinction’
‘It is our future on the line, and we must at least have a say in
it’ – Greta
Climate change presents an urgent fundamental threat to human health and
wellbeing and poses a critical threat to the
The World Health
Organisation observes that climate change is directly contributing to
humanitarian emergencies due to heatwaves,
wildfires, floods, tropical storms
and hurricanes, which are increasing in their scale, frequency and
Research demonstrates
that over 3.6 billion people live in areas which are highly susceptible to
climate change,
with the Lancet
Countdown report demonstrating that young people disproportionately bear the
impact of climate change, both physically
psychologically.
As youth climate
activist, Greta Thunberg asserts, young people feel that ‘[i]t is our
future on the line’
adults have let them down.
While a wealth of literature exists on young people’s access to justice
and legal needs,
there has been
limited attention paid to how groups of young people can utilise the law as a
tool to seek redress, challenge injustices
and chart new pathways for future
generations. Namely through strategic litigation and more recently youth
involvement in initiating
strategic legislation, young people and other social
groups can challenge injustices and push for the law to change with the times,
in order to protect the interests of current and future generations.
There is limited literature on class actions, strategic litigation and
strategic legislation in the Global South, particularly literature
that focuses
on the lived-realities, reactions and results of youth-led strategic climate
litigation and youth-initiated strategic
legislation.
This paper presents a
brief discussion of the realities, reactions and results of climate activism,
strategic litigation and strategic
legislation that is initiated and led by
young people in the areas of climate and environmental law in Australia. The
paper draws
upon three core examples of youth-led strategic climate litigation
and youth-initiated strategic climate legislation in Australia:
Minister for the Environment
[2021] FCA 560
(2021) 391 ALR 1
Waratah Coal Pty
Ltd v Youth Verdict Ltd & Ors (No 6)
[2022] QLC 21
, and the proposed
Climate Change Amendment (Duty of Care and Intergenerational Climate Equity)
. The paper situates the discussion within the international child
rights framework, and in particular young people’s right
to participate
— Article 12 of the UN Convention on the Rights of the Child 1989 —
or as Greta Thunberg describes in
the above quotation it as ‘we must at
least have a say in
Having a Say’: Youth Climate
Through activism, young people have been central in bringing about what
refer to as a ‘watershed moment’ in the
politics of climate change.
Youth-led strategic litigation and youth-initiated strategic legislation in many
ways represents ‘political’ actions.
Due to mainstream and social
media representations, they are public and often take the form of visible
examples of young people
in conflict with the government or challenging large
corporations, or in partnership with elected politicians to initiate legislative
change (for example, David Pocock, Senator of Australia). Significantly, class
action jurisprudence, strategic litigation and strategic
legislation, are
evolving as part of global climate action and social movements.
The body of existing research on youth activism demonstrates how ‘the
participatory politics of young people is informed by
the participatory culture
they experience on social
Clark et al
observe how social media platforms and online activism ‘present
catalytic opportunities to harness young people’s
engagement’.
people’s use of social media platforms is ‘transforming political
engagement’ as they offer ‘agency
through the ability to voice their
concerns to a global
A study on Australian youth perspectives on the role of social media in
climate action, concludes that it is ‘a powerful mechanism
for awareness
raising’, ‘to engage diverse youth audiences’, and is
essential in ‘building a sense of urgency
accountability’.
Australian young people who participated in this study felt that there were
limitations in reaching and influencing decision
as they felt that many
adults in decision-making roles do not engage widely with social media content.
The proposed social media ban
for children and young people in
will negatively impact
their ability to exercise civil and political rights, particularly in relation
to their climate activism.
Australian youth climate activists have given speeches in front of global
leaders, as well as to national leaders in the audience,
calling for political
change and urgent action to address climate change. While at the same time some
of the Australian State and
Territory governments have been working ‘to
silence youth voices’, with the latest example being the ‘concerted
effort to criminalise climate protests and to limit the Australian
public’s right to peaceful
However, young
people have been utilising new and significant tools including the law, to seek
redress, challenge injustices and
chart new pathways for future generations.
Youth-Led Strategic Climate Litigation
Globally, climate litigation is becoming more prevalent. The Grantham
Institute at the London School of Economics reports that the
number of climate
change related cases has more than doubled since
Many of the existing and
ongoing climate cases set out to hold governments accountable for failure to act
in line with their climate
commitments and global targets, with human rights
arguments often employed in such
On 8 September 2020, eight young people represented by Equity Generation
Lawyers, and with the assistance of 86-year-old litigation
guardian Sister
Brigid Arthur, filed an action in Australia’s Federal Court seeking
an injunction to stop the Australian Government
from approving an extension of
the Whitehaven Vickery coal mine. Claiming to represent all people under the age
of 18, the litigants
argued that the then Federal Minister, Sussan Ley has a
common law duty of care for all children and young people. The litigants
argued that the digging up and burning of coal would exacerbate climate change
and harm children and young people in the future.
On 27 May 2021, the Federal Court of Australia in
Sharma and others v
Minister for Environment
(2021) 248 LGERA 330, established a new duty of
care to avoid causing personal harm to children but did not issue an injunction
force the Minister to block the coal mine extension. Justice
Bromberg found at [293]:
It is difficult to characterise in a single phrase the devastation that the
plausible evidence presented in this proceeding forecasts
for the Children. As
Australian adults know their country, Australia will be lost and the World as we
know it gone as well. The physical
environment will be harsher, far more
extreme... As for the human experience – quality of life, opportunities to
nature’s treasures, the capacity to grow and prosper –
all will be greatly diminished. Lives will be cut short. Trauma
will be far more
common and good health harder to hold and maintain. None of this will be the
fault of nature itself. It will largely
be inflicted by the inaction of this
generation of adults, in what might fairly be described as the greatest
inter-generational injustice
ever inflicted by one generation of humans upon the
On 15 March 2022, the Full Federal Court of Australia unanimously overturned
the primary judge’s decision to impose a duty of
care on the
As lead applicant,
Anjali Sharma wrote: ‘losing this case feels like we’ve lost our
chance for a safe
On 13 May 2020, the environmental group ‘Youth Verdict’, a First
Nations-led group of young people aged 13 to 30-years,
lodged an objection on
human rights grounds, challenging the proposed Galilee Coal Project in the
Queensland Land Court. The litigants
argued that the project would contribute to
climate change, would infringe on their right to life, the protection of
children, and
the right to culture as protected by the Queensland Human Rights
Waratah Coal Pty Ltd v Youth Verdict Ltd & Ors (No. 6)
, President Kingham of the Land Court of Queensland recommended refusal of
applications by Waratah Coal Pty Ltd for a mining lease
and an environmental
authority in relation to a proposed thermal coal mine in the Galilee Basin. The
Court found that the project
would interfere with the right to life of people in
Queensland, the cultural rights of First Nations People, the rights of children,
the right to property, the right to privacy and home, and the right to enjoy
human rights without discrimination.
Youth-Initiated Strategic Climate Legislation
One of the latest interventions by youth is climate legislation initiated by
young people, including the latest push for legislative
change in Australia with
the proposed
Climate Change Amendment (Duty of Care and Intergenerational
Climate Equity) Bill 2023
(‘Climate Change Bill’). The Bill was put
forward by Senator David Pocock in 2023, with the idea for the legislation
initiated by Anjali Sharma and her lawyers following the appellate court
On 3 August 2023, the Senate referred the Climate Change Bill
Environment and Communications Legislation Committee for inquiry and report
by 1 February 2024. On 3 June 2024, the Committee
was granted an extension
of time for the report until 26 June 2024. The Bill seeks to amend the
Climate Change Act
to require decision makers to consider the
wellbeing of current and future children when making certain decisions that are
to contribute to climate
Young people, including
Anjali Sharma continue to lobby Federal parliamentarians on this
The Environment and Communications Legislation Committee’s report
was published in June 2024. The report made two clear recommendations:
Recommendation 1
2.135 The committee recommends that the bill not be passed.
Recommendation 2
2.137 The committee recommends that the Australian Government consider the
utilisation of the Australian Human Rights Commission’s
Child Rights
Impact Assessment Tool to assist in policy development and decision
While the Committee’s report outlined that ‘policy development
and assessment processes may benefit from a more explicit
emphasis on the
implications of decisions for children and future generations’, the
Committee recommended the use of ‘a
non-binding... child rights impact
assessment tool’ to assist in policy development and decision
making on new or expanded
coal, gas or oil
Following the
publication of the Committee’s report, several young people who have
been campaigning in support of the duty
of care recorded their dismay at the
recommendation against the legislation. As Anjali Sharma
It is outrageous that a government should deny that it has a duty of care to
the young people of today and tomorrow. This serves as
yet another blow to a
generation quickly losing faith in the political system. Despite... substantial
public and cross-parliamentary
support for the bill, the government has chosen
to elevate the voices of fossil fuel lobbyists in parliament rather than those
stand to have their future shaped by today’s
Anjali Sharma compared Australia to the ‘161 countries [that] have
enshrined the right of children to a healthy environment’,
further noting
that: ‘[s]ome have gone even further, instating future
generations-specific legislation and statutory bodies.
In rejecting this duty of
care, the Australian government is once again making our country out to be a
laggard on issues of utmost
importance’.
While children and young people in Australia are the least responsible for
climate change, research demonstrates that this generation
generations will be the most impacted by the negative consequences of climate
change on the environment.
therefore critical that national governments act to develop and implement
climate law, policies and practices that prioritise
a child-centred response.
The recommendation from the Environment and Communications Legislation Committee
not to pass the proposed
amendment, shows a lack of prioritisation of the
well-being and needs of children, young people and future generations.
II Conclusion: Australian Law Needs To Change With The
The climate crisis is a child rights crisis, which needs to be urgently
addressed by governments. Young people around the world are
calling for
government action to protect them and to protect future generations from further
The United Nations
Committee on the Rights of the Child has strongly urged governments to respond
to young people’s concerns
change. In the context of the law, it is evident that, ‘[c]limate change
everywhere – in courtrooms, in international treaty negotiations,
in new climate legislation in countries around the world...
Climate change also
poses deeper questions for the institution of law, and the role that law plays
in society’.
In changing with the times, the law will likely continue to be utilised more
extensively to address the climate crisis. It is likely
that the law will be
required to continue to grapple with, and address climate change impacts. By
utilising the tools of the law
to litigate and initiate legislation, young
people in Australia are directly engaging their right to participate. In 1990,
signed up to the United Nations
Convention on the Rights of the
1989 (‘CRC’). Article 12 of the CRC states that:
‘Parties shall assure to the child who is capable of forming his
own views the right to express those views freely in all matters affecting the
Nations Development Program states that ‘meaningful youth participation is
a pre-condition for the success of climate
action while at the same time,
ensuring ambitious and just climate action is an enabling condition for youth
wellbeing’.
Young people today are acting to create a climate-safe world. Legal
mobilisation for climate change that is initiated and driven by
young people
(and in combination with grassroots activism), is using the courts and the
legislative functions of parliament, as effective
instruments to make solid
progress in achieving significant collective objectives. In effect young people
in Australia are pushing
for the law to urgently change with the times. Their
efforts need to be met with action from the Australian Government.
Acknowledgements:
This research is funded by the Australia
Research Council for the Discovery Project: ‘New Possibilities: Student
Climate Action
and Democratic Renewal’ (DP230101704). Funding received
with colleagues - Pip Collins, Judith Bessant, Michelle Catanzaro,
Jackson and Rob Watts. Thanks also to the anonymous reviewers and to the
editorial board.
Dr Faith Gordon is an Associate Professor at the ANU College of
Law, The Australian National University and Associate Research Fellow,
Information Law and Policy, Centre at the Institute of Advanced Legal Studies,
London. Faith is the Director of the Interdisciplinary
International Youth
Justice Network and a co-founder and co-moderator of the Australian and New
Zealand Society of Criminology&#82
Group on children, young people and the criminal justice
system. Faith’s current funded research addresses three
contemporary issues: 1) children’s rights in criminal justice
and in immigration law; 2) children, online harms, and
AI/emerging technologies;
3) children and climate action. Faith’s research has been referred to by
the UN Committee on the
Rights of the Child, in the Northern Ireland High Court,
the UK Court of Appeal and the Youth Court in Aotearoa New Zealand.
research on online harms was referred to by the UK Joint Committee
on Draft Online Safety Bill, House of Lords. In 2022, Faith was
awarded the ANU
Vice-Chancellor’s Award for Influential Impact and Engagement.
Faith.Gordon@anu.edu.au
Transcript: Greta Thunberg's Speech At The U.N. Climate Action
Summit, September 23, 2019 (online, 23 September 2019) <
https://www.npr.org/2019/09/23/763452863/transcript-greta-thunbergs-speech-at-the-u-n-climate-action-summit
Lisa Friedman,
‘Greta Thunberg to Attend New York Climate Talks. She’ll Take a
The New York Times
(online, 29 July 2019)
https://www.nytimes.com/2019/07/29/climate/greta-thunberg-sailing-climate-summit.html
‘Climate Change’,
World Health Organisation
(Web Page) <
https://www.who.int/news-room/fact-sheets/detail/climate-change-and-health
Watts et al, ‘The 2019
Report of The
Countdown on Health and Climate Change:
Ensuring that the Health of a Child Born Today is not Defined by a Changing
(2019) 394(10211)
Friedman (n 2).
Ellie Palmer and James
Kendrick, ‘Access to Justice for Young People: Beyond the Policies and
Politics of Austerity’
in Ellie Palmer et al (eds),
Access to Justice:
Beyond the Policies and Politics of Austerity
(Bloomsbury Publishing, 2016);
Ton Liefaard, ‘Access to Justice for Children: Towards a Specific Research
and Implementation
Agenda’ (2019) 27(2)
The International Journal
of Children's Rights
For a recent exception, see
Jolene Lin and Jacqueline Peel,
Litigating Climate Change in the Global
(Oxford University Press, 2024).
Friedman (n 2).
Sarah Pickard, Benjamin
Bowman and Dena Arya, ‘“We are Radical in Our Kindness”: The
Political Socialisation, Motivations,
Demands and Protest Actions of Young
Environmental Activists in Britain’ (2020) 2(2)
Youth Globalization
Francesca Belotti et al,
‘Youth Activism for Climate on and Beyond Social Media: Insights from
Fridays For Future-Rome’
(2022) 27(3)
The International Journal of
Press/Politics
Helen Clark et al, ‘A
Future For the World's Children? A WHO–UNICEF–Lancet
Commission’ (2020) 395(10224)
Shelley Boulianne, Mireille
Lalancette and David Ilkiw, ‘“School Strike 4 Climate”: Social
Media and the International
Youth Protest on Climate Change’ (2020) 8(2)
Media and Communication
208, 208–9.
Grace Arnot et al,
‘Australian Youth Perspectives on the Role of Social Media in Climate
Action’ (2023) 48(1)
Australian and New Zealand Journal of Public
Josh Taylor,
‘Australia Plans to Ban Children From Social Media. Is Checking and
Enforcing An Age Block possible?’,
The Guardian
(online, 10
September 2024)
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/article/2024/sep/10/australia-children-social-media-ban-age-limit-under-16-details>.
Madelein Hohenhaus et al,
‘Climate Warriors Down Under: Contextualising Australia’s Youth
Climate Justice Movement’
npj Climate Action
Joana Setzer and Catherine
Higham, ‘Global Trends in Climate Change Litigation: 2021 Snapshot’
(Policy Report, London
School of Economics and Political Science Grantham
Research Institute on Climate Change and the Environment, July 2021) 4.
United Nations Environment
Global Climate Litigation Report: 2023 Status Review
Review Report,
27 July 2023).
Sharma and others v
Minister for Environment
[2021] FCA 560
(2021) 391 ALR 1
, 72 [293].
Sharma and others v
Minister for the Environment
(2022) 401 ALR 108.
Anjali Sharma, ‘Losing
This Case Feels Like We’ve Lost Our Chance For a Safe Future’,
(online, 15 March 2022)
https://www.theage.com.au/environment/climate-change/losing-thiscourt-case-feels-like-we-ve-lost-our-chance-for-a-safe-future-20220315-p5a4sc.html
‘Call of Duty –
Anjali Sharma’,
Australian Broadcasting Corporation
<https://www.abc.net.au/news/2024-03-11/call-of-duty-anjali-sharma/103574470>.
Climate Change Amendment
(Duty of Care and Intergenerational Climate Equity) Bill
(‘Climate Change Bill’).
‘Anjali Sharma on
Lobbying Parliament From Her Dorm Room’,
7AM Podcast
Media, 2024)
<https://www.themonthly.com.au/podcast/anjali-sharma-lobbying-parliament-her-dorm-room>.
Climate Change Bill (n
Ibid 38–9; Human
Rights Law Centre, ‘Albanese Government Urged to Protect Current and
Future Generations from Impacts
of Climate Crisis’ (Media Release, 27 June
Human Rights Law Centre (n
Ibid. See also for reactions
from other young people: ‘Save the Children “Deeply
Disappointed” with Senate committee
Decision on Pocock’s Young
People Bill’,
The Guardian
(online, 27 June 2024) <
https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/live/2024/jun/27/australia-politics-live-julian-assange-free-act-bird-flu-nsw-vic-qld-labor-coalition-albanese-interest-rates-inflation-ntwnfb?filterKeyEvents=false&page=with:block-667c95448f08a8aaa70e4776
Climate and Environment Policies for & with Children and Young People
(Discussion Paper, November 2021) <
https://www.unicef.org/media/109701/file/Making-Climate-Policies-for-and-with-Children-and-Young-People.pdf
‘Climate Crisis: Child
Rights Crisis’,
(Web Page, 2024) <
https://www.unicef.org.uk/climate-change/
Maria Lee et al,
‘Revisiting the Rule of Law in the Climate Rrisis: Legal Bedrock or Legal
(Web Page, 4 October 2021) <
https://www.ucl.ac.uk/law-environment/blog-climate-change-and-rule-law/revisiting-rule-law-climate-crisis-legal-bedrock-or-legal-luxury
Convention on the Rights
of the Child,
opened for signature 20 November
1989, 1577 UNTS 3
into force 2 September 1990) art 12.
Melissa Ingaruca et al,
Aiming Higher: Elevating Meaningful Youth Engagement for Climate Action
(Report, 2022) 9.
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (67.7 KB)
PDF format (355 KB)
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter