URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/journals/MarStudies/2008/16.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 15:16:42
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Gold, Edgar --- "Commentary: The fair treatment of seafarers: An update on international developments" [2008] MarStudies 16; (2008) 160 Maritime Studies 15
COMMENTARY: The fair treatment of seafarers:An update on international developments
Introduction
IMO/ILO responses and action
Fair treatment guidelines
COMMENTARY: The
fair treatment of seafarers:
An update on international
developments
Introduction
In recent years all sectors of the maritime industry and many governments
have become concerned about the criminal action that has
been taken against
seafarers in the aftermath of maritime accidents, especially those that involve
marine pollution. Examples such
as those involving the masters of vessels such
Erika, Tasman Spirit,
immediately come to mind.
However, there are many other cases, both reported and unreported, that
illustrate this increasing trend
where seafarers appear to have become the
‘scapegoats’ for maritime accidents, regardless of whether they are
or indirectly involved or responsible.
In a number of cases masters, chief-engineers, and other sea-going personnel,
have been arrested, imprisoned or otherwise detained,
under a variety of
‘criminal law’ and other proceedings for extensive periods. Often
the most basic rights of such persons
are not observed and access to legal
advice is frequently neither provided nor even permitted. Furthermore, such
persons are often
not charged nor even provided with information regarding why
they are being held. In many instances, such seafarers appear to be
‘material witnesses’ or for other ‘administrative and
technical’ reasons. In other cases where seafarers
are actually
‘charged’ with causing the relevant marine accident and/or causing
marine pollution, this occurs despite
the fact that there is no directly
attributable responsibility for such accidents. In many cases such accidents may
result from circumstances
quite beyond the operational responsibility or
competence of those so charged. Of special concern is the fact that these cases
occur in states that otherwise have an excellent reputation in terms of
their criminal justice system and observance of the rights
of individuals.
This report provides a brief update on the international developments in this
area which has become of major concern throughout the
maritime industry.
IMO/ILO responses and action
A number of states, international organisations and professional groups have
expressed their concern about this growing problem to
the International Maritime
Organization (IMO), as well as the International Labour Organization (ILO) in
recent years. In response
to these concerns a ‘Joint IMO/ILO
Expert Working Group on the Fair Treatment of Seafarers in the Event of a
Maritime Accident’ was formed in 2004. This Working
Group, drawn from
China, Egypt, Greece, Nigeria, Panama, Philippines, Turkey and the USA, as well
as four shipowner and four seafarer
members, was requested to provide
recommendations to the IMO Legal Committee and the ILO Governing Body, including
draft guidelines
on the fair treatment of seafarers in the event of a maritime
accident. The Working Group’s Terms of Reference required that
should be taken of the relevant international instruments. In addition, it was
decided that a ‘Correspondence Group’
composed of other maritime
interests, including interested states, would be formed. This group was
requested to assist the Joint
Working Group in its deliberations through
specific, expert input. In particular, the correspondence group would be
comprised of
a number of non-governmental organisations such as:
• Baltic and International Maritime Council (BIMCO)
• Comité Maritime International (CMI)
• International Association of Classification Societies (IACS)
• International Association of Independent Tanker Owners
(INTERTANKO)
• International Chamber of Shipping (ICS)
• International Christian Maritime Association (ICMA)
• International Confederation of Free Trade Unions (ICTFTU)
• International Federation of Shipmasters’ Associations
• International Group of P&I Associations
• International Shipping Federation (ISF)
During 2005 the IMO/ILO Correspondence Group received input and submissions
from a number of these interests. At the 24
Assembly of the IMO a
‘Resolution on Guidelines on Fair Treatment of Seafarers in the Event of a
Maritime Accident’ was
adopted. This Resolution was also adopted by the
ILO Governing Body at its 292
Session in March 2005. At the same
time, the IMO/ILO Ad Hoc Expert Working Group also decided that its second
session would be held
in London in March 2006 and issued an invitation to IMO
member states, UN and other specialised agencies, inter-governmental and
non-governmental organisations to attend.
At this stage a number of specific responses to the ‘Guidelines’
were submitted to the IMO/ ILO Working Group by interested
members of the
‘Correspondence Group’. This included a submission from the ISF, ICS
and ICFTU, as well as working documents
from the CMI and IFSMA. These were
appended to a ‘Progress Report from the Correspondence Group’ tabled
in January 2006.
This resulted in a progress report on the IMO/ILO working
group’s first and second sessions being submitted to the 91
session of the IMO Legal Committee in April 2006. During this session the IMO
Secretariat introduced a set of agreed guidelines that
were extensively
discussed by the Legal Committee resulting in a number of changes and a
resolution that contained a final set of
approved guidelines. These were also
submitted to the ILO Governing Body and approved in June 2006. As a result, the
‘Guidelines
on Fair Treatment of Seafarers in the Event of a Maritime
Accident’ entered into force on 1 July 2006, but are, of course,
to voluntary acceptance by states. Nevertheless, it was a positive step
Research carried out by the CMI during this negotiating process revealed that
although states have effective legislation that is designed
to protect the legal
rights of seafarers, such laws are frequently and regularly disregarded. That
raises the question on whether
states that disregard their own laws will
implement guidelines that are voluntary. There may even be difficulties with the
implement existing laws, especially in cases where criminal
prosecution is involved. This has been illustrated in a recent case that
involved the master of the container vessel
Zim Mexico III,
charged with manslaughter, held in jail pending trial, and then convicted in the
US port of Mobile. The master spent four
months in prison and was subsequently
sentenced to time served and then deported. He had actually faced imprisonment
for up to 15
years. Submissions on behalf of the master made to the court by
many maritime organisations may have contributed to the ‘lenient’
The charge and subsequent conviction resulted from the vessel striking a
container crane while manoeuvring under the direction of
a compulsory pilot.
Regrettably, the accident resulted in the death of a technician who was working
on the crane without permission.
Nevertheless, the master was charged under an
archaic US federal ‘Seaman’s Manslaughter Statute’ that dated
to 1838 and that required a higher standard of care from seafarers than
from others. There has been widespread and unanimous condemnation
marine industry of the case, the way it has been handled and, of course, the
unfairness of the ‘double-standard’
law. There is no question that
under most other national justice systems the likelihood of criminal charges
against the master would
be minimal. Efforts are still underway to persuade the
US Government to repeal this unfair legislation.
Fair treatment guidelines
The ‘IMO/ILO Guidelines on the Fair Treatment of Seafarers in the Event
of a Maritime Accident’ recognise seafarers as
a special category of
worker. Given the global nature of the shipping industry and the many different
may be in contact, seafarers need special
protection, especially in their relations with public authorities. As a result,
the principal
objective of the Guidelines is to ensure that seafarers are
treated fairly following a maritime accident and during any subsequent
investigation and detention by public authorities. They also stipulate that if
detention is required, it should be for no longer
than necessary.
The Guidelines provide advice on the necessary steps to be taken by the
various interests that may be involved following a maritime
accident. These are
• port or coastal state;
• flag state;
• seafarers’ state;
• shipowner; and
• seafarers themselves.
The overall emphasis is on cooperation and communication between the various
parties involved and to ensure that no discriminatory
or retaliatory measures
are taken against seafarers because of their involvement or participation in
investigations.
For example, the Guidelines set out 22 steps that port and coastal states are
required to consider in ensuring that investigations
are conducted with speed,
civility and full regard to seafarers’ legal and human rights and their
special position in the jurisdiction
in which they find themselves. In this
connection references are made to the rights of individuals and duties of
governments under
Vienna Convention on Consular Relations
International Convention for the Prevention of Pollution from Ships
(MARPOL 73/78), and the ‘IMO Code for the Investigations of
Marine Casualties and Incidents’.
It appears that even full compliance with the Guidelines might not have
assisted the
Zim Mexico III
master in the case outlined above. The fact
is that regardless of whether the US seaman’s manslaughter legislation is
or even discriminatory it is, nevertheless, a valid national law. On the
other hand, it can be argued that prosecuting a master for
an accident that
arose from a mechanical failure while the vessel was under an experienced
pilot’s direction, as well as denying
him bail and detaining him in a very
unpleasant jail for several months, is treatment that cannot be classified as
The Guidelines also enumerate 12 considerations to be taken into account by
flag states in relation to the fair treatment of seafarers.
The main requirement
for flag states, when not conducting their own investigations, is to assist
other investigating states and to
facilitate the fair treatment of seafarers
serving on flag state vessels. Similarly, the Guidelines also provide the
state with eight aspects to consider when investigations
involving their citizens take place. Although such a state may not have
specific legal obligation to assist, the Guidelines suggest that there is a
moral obligation. In many cases, where seafarers are
employed under other flags,
the seafarer’s state frequently has not bothered to become involved. The
Guidelines attempt to
rectify this problem.
The negotiations that produced the new Guidelines had particular difficulties
in framing provisions that would be applicable to shipowners
and the seafarers
themselves. Shipowners were concerned about protecting their legal position as
owners of property, obligations
under carriage and insurance contracts, as well
as exposure to costs of maintenance and welfare for seafarers detained in
ports. The Guidelines attempt to address these concerns in seven
specific provisions for shipowners. In fact, in the
Zim Mexico III
the owners did everything possible to assist the master. This may, of course, be
due to the fact that the owners were a well-established
German shipping company.
The situation might be quite different for masters of single-ship company
vessels registered under flags
of convenience.
Finally, during the discussions there was much concern that seafarers should
be protected from exposure to criminal justice processes
in circumstances where
they need to make statements without legal advice or being familiar with the
rights to silence and not to
self-incriminate. This was addressed in the
Guidelines in four specific provisions for seafarers.
A number of states and international organisations have already expressed
concerns about the effectiveness of the new Guidelines,
including at the IMO
Legal Committee meeting in April 2006. For example, the US, which had
unsuccessfully attempted to introduce
major changes to the draft at a very late
stage, was concerned that the new instrument had insufficient clarity on three
substantive
• incidents committed with criminal intent;
• the definition of ‘maritime accident’; and
• conformity with domestic law.
International organisations representing seafarers, such as IFSMA and the
ICFTU, argue that the voluntary guidelines provide insufficient
protection for
seafarers. It was argued very forcefully that such protection could only occur
if the guidelines became mandatory.
One of the principal concerns relates to the definition of ‘maritime
accident’. This was amply illustrated in another
recent case that occurred
after the conclusion of the Guidelines. The reefer vessel
discharging 27,000 cases of Ecuadorian bananas in the Greek port of Aegion in
July 2007. During a routine banana quality control
inspection, one of the boxes
was found to contain 51.6 kg of cocaine. As a result, the master, chief officer
and bosun were arrested
and held in a high security prison in Athens for over 10
months. There was apparently no evidence that the three seafarers were aware
that the drugs were on board. Applications for bail were routinely rejected.
According to legal sources in Greece it appears that
Greek authorities routinely
arrest and hold crew members of vessels that are found to have drugs on board,
regardless of whether
there is any evidence that such seafarers have had any
involvement in the drugs.
Apart from the general lack of fairness in this type of case, it also seems
that the new Guidelines may not cover this type of incident.
The Guidelines in
their title are applicable to ‘the fair treatment of seafarers in the
event of a maritime accident.’
However, ‘accident’ is defined
any unforeseen occurrence or physical event connected to the navigation,
operations, manoeuvring or handling of ships, or the machinery,
material, or cargo on board… which may result in the detention of
It could be argued that the illegal stowage of drugs
on board may be an unforeseen event connected with the vessel’s cargo
operations.
However, it is doubtful whether it could be classed as an
‘accident’ within the true meaning of that word. If this is
the language in the Guidelines may be too narrow and would not assist seafarers
involved in criminal cases that are not
classed as accidental. This would mean
that seafarers will continue to be treated unfairly in criminal cases,
regardless of whether
there is any evidence of their involvement in a crime. It
also shows that there will continue to be a ‘double standard’
seafarers’ rights appear to have far less protection than anyone else
involved in a criminal matter. It is doubtful whether
police anywhere would
arrest and hold a hotel manager and hotel staff if drugs were found on the
However, the IMO Legal Committee had already decided earlier that an
Working Group should be convened at its 92
October 2006 and it should recommend any changes to the new Guidelines that may
be necessary. A number of states and other
interests wished to re-open the
subject at that stage. However, during this session it became apparent that
consensus in the
Working Group on accommodating the wishes of some
states could not be achieved. As a result, the Legal Committee decided that the
new Guidelines should stand as originally concluded, but that the subject should
be retained on its agenda for is next session in
As a result, the subject was again discussed at the 93
of the IMO Legal Committee in Panama in October 2007. Although many states and a
number of international maritime bodies
expressed concerns about perceived
problems with the Guidelines, no real further progress was achieved.
Nevertheless, it was decided
that the subject was to be kept as a high priority
item on the Legal Committee’s work program.
There was one positive aspect arising out of the Panama discussions that may
well result in better protection for seafarers, but via
a different method. This
was due to the fact that in October 2007 the IMO’s Maritime Safety
Committee (MSC) at its 83
session, decided to include a provision
on the right of seafarers from whom evidence is sought in a casualty
investigation to ‘be
informed, and allowed access to legal advice’
regarding the risk of self-incrimination. This decision was taken in the context
of the MSC’s approval of the ‘Draft Code of the International
Standards and Recommended Practices for a Safety Investigation
into Marine
Casualty or Marine Incident’ as an amendment to International Convention
on Safety of Life at Sea (SOLAS) for adoption
at the MSC’s 84
session in May 2008. The Draft Code (which is to be finalised at the
session) includes a dedicated chapter setting out specific
safeguards to protect seafarers including:
• the upholding of human rights at all times;
• return to vessel or repatriation at the earliest opportunity;
• information on potential self incrimination risks and the right to
remain silent; and
• protection from marine safety investigation evidence being used in
other criminal proceedings.
Although such SOLAS Code provisions will probably not alleviate some of the
problems faced under the Fair Treatment Guidelines, nor
make further development
of the Guidelines redundant, they are a step in the right direction. It can be
expected that the SOLAS Code
will be opposed by some states and the final
version is by no means certain at this stage.
It has to be remembered that one of the principal reasons why there was such
excellent cooperation between the various sectors of
the maritime industry in
reaching these Guidelines was the awareness of the fact that this problem has a
direct and very negative
effect on attracting new personnel into the seagoing
industry. This is exacerbated by the additional consideration that there is
presently already a shortage of skilled senior navigating and engineer officers
and a looming shortage in other areas in the near
future. It is clearly in the
interest of all sectors of the shipping industry, as well as coastal states, to
ensure that every effort
is made to implement these measures. It seems to have
been realised throughout the maritime industry that using skilled maritime
professionals as ‘scapegoats’ for accidents is of no advantage to
Professor Edgar Gold, AM, CM, QC, PhD,
DSc, FNI, is with Marine & Shipping Law Unit, T.C. Beirne School of Law,
University of
Queensland.
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
No downloadable files available
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter