URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/journals/IntJlSSWC/2009/2.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 15:05:05
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Kaseke, Edwin --- "Workplace Initiatives for the Management of HIV and AIDS: The Experience of Zimbabwe" [2009] IntJlSSWC 2; (2009) 1(1) International Journal of Social Security and Workers Compensation 13
WORKPLACE INITIATIVES FOR THE MANAGEMENT OF HIV AND AIDS:
THE EXPERIENCE OF ZIMBABWE
Edwin Kaseke*
A. INTRODUCTION
B. THE IMPACT OF HIV AND AIDS ON THE WORKPLACE
C. WORKPLACE RESPONSES TO HIV AND AIDS
I. Prevention
II. Treatment and Care
III. Compensation
D. CONCLUSION
BIBLIOGRAPHY
WORKPLACE INITIATIVES FOR THE MANAGEMENT OF HIV AND AIDS:
THE EXPERIENCE OF ZIMBABWE
This paper examines workplace initiatives for the management of HIV and AIDS
in Zimbabwe. The HIV and AIDS pandemic has been accepted
as a workplace issue
which warrants intervention from employers. This is a recognition of its
negative impact on productivity at
the workplace. The paper argues that national
instruments have been developed by the Government of Zimbabwe to facilitate the
of HIV and AIDS at the workplace. The private sector has generally
accepted the need to prevent and control the HIV and AIDS pandemic
workplace in order to arrest its negative impact not only on their businesses
but on the economy generally. However, the small
and medium enterprises sector
is lagging behind in the development of workplace policies and programs on HIV
and AIDS. While Zimbabwe’s
preventive programs have been successful, the
same cannot be said of compensation, treatment and care arrangements. It is
Zimbabwe’s social security system is not responsive to the
needs of those infected and affected by HIV and AIDS. The socioeconomic
challenges facing the country have also undermined workplace initiatives for the
management of HIV and AIDS.
A. INTRODUCTION
Zimbabwe, with a population of about 11 million, had its first HIV and AIDS
case in 1985. It is estimated that there are about 1.7
million people living
with HIV and AIDS in Zimbabwe. The percentage of the workforce lost to AIDS is
projected to reach 29 per cent
The HIV prevalence rate
within the 15–49 years age group peaked at 33.7 per cent in 2000 but
dropped to 18.1 per cent in 2006
and to 15.6 per cent in 2007. ‘The
declining trend is largely attributable to behavioural changes such as increased
use in high-risk relationships and reduction in multiple sexual
Despite this
marked decline in the HIV prevalence rate within the 15–49 years age
group, Zimbabwe still ranks among the countries
in southern Africa worst
affected by the HIV and AIDS pandemic. Southern Africa is considered the
epicentre of the HIV and AIDS pandemic.
Higher prevalence rates within the
15–49 years age group are found in Botswana and Swaziland, with 30 per
cent, and Lesotho
with 23.5 per
When HIV and AIDS first emerged as a global phenomenon, it was perceived as a
health problem. However, the social and economic consequences
of the pandemic
convinced world leaders and experts that it was also a social and economic
problem. The social impact of HIV and
AIDS in Zimbabwe has clearly demonstrated
that it is a social problem. For instance, it is projected that by 2010, 34 per
all children in Zimbabwe will either be single or double orphans as a
result of HIV and AIDS.
there are about one million orphans in Zimbabwe. The unprecedented rise in the
number of orphans has resulted in the emergence
of a new phenomenon of
child-headed households. This is an indication that the established care
arrangements are not able to cope
with the pandemic.
Furthermore, life expectancy in Zimbabwe has declined sharply as a result of
the HIV and AIDS pandemic. The projection is that in
‘2010, life
expectancy in Zimbabwe will be 33 years (with AIDS) and 73 years (without
The economic impact
of HIV and AIDS is manifested through reduced savings and investments and,
ultimately, a slowdown in economic
In ‘those countries
where national HIV and AIDS prevalence rates exceed 20%, annual gross domestic
product growth has been
estimated to drop by an average 2.6 percentage
In recognition of the consequences of HIV and AIDS, the Government of
Zimbabwe formulated a National HIV and AIDS Policy in 1999 which
has three major
areas of focus, namely the prevention and control of HIV and AIDS, care of
persons infected by HIV and AIDS and the
mitigation of the impact of HIV and
The policy emphasises a
multisectoral approach to the pandemic. There is, thus, space for the
involvement of government, the private
sector, trade unions, voluntary
organisations and communities.
B. THE IMPACT OF HIV AND AIDS ON THE WORKPLACE
Globally, HIV and AIDS are regarded as workplace issues because of their
negative impact on the labour force and employers. The impact
of the HIV and
AIDS pandemic in Zimbabwe is not different from the rest of southern Africa in
that it affects the most productive
age group and is consequently undermining
productivity at the workplace. It has been observed that ‘AIDS-related
and deaths of workers affect employers both by increasing their costs
and reducing revenues’.
costs to employers arise because infected workers require regular treatment for
opportunistic infections. There is also continuous
recruitment and training
which is necessitated by the frequent deaths and the need to replace lost
skills. Costs are also incurred
in providing funeral assistance to employees.
Loss of revenue, on the other hand, is due to reduced productivity as a result
of absenteeism
at work and the use of inexperienced workers.
It is common for workers to absent themselves from work because of illness or
the need to attend funerals of their relatives or friends.
A study undertaken in
Zimbabwe revealed that some small and medium enterprises (SMEs) lost about
‘9.7 days in the last 30 days
prior to the survey’ due to
absenteeism attributed to either attendance at funerals or
Such a loss is more
debilitating to SMEs since their operations are labour-intensive and their staff
establishments are small. Thus
the absence of a single worker can have an
adverse effect on productivity and may ultimately affect the continuity of the
HIV and AIDS also impact negatively on the labour force itself. First,
increased mortality as a result of HIV and AIDS causes a significant
the size of the population. For instance, the populations of Botswana, Namibia
and Zimbabwe ‘are expected to be
have been by 2015.’
Second, HIV and AIDS exacerbate the problem of child labour as orphaned children
try to support themselves. In the same vein, employers
are forced to keep older
workers beyond their retirement age in order to preserve skills and experience
and assure the continuity
of their business. For the infected workers, HIV and
AIDS diminish their capacity to provide adequately for their families as they
are forced to divert a significant proportion of their income to meet their
health care needs.
C. WORKPLACE RESPONSES TO HIV AND AIDS
The International Labour Organization (ILO) has recognised that HIV and AIDS
are also workplace issues which warrant workplace responses.
Consequently, it
has devised the ILO
Code of Practice on HIV and AIDS and the World of
. This ILO Code calls for the recognition of HIV and AIDS as workplace
issues and acknowledges the need for workplace responses to
curb the spread of
the disease. Therefore, the ILO Code calls on the private sector to contribute
towards the prevention of HIV and
AIDS through education and information, and to
provide a safe environment for workers so that the workplace does not become a
of infection. Finally, the ILO Code provides for the right of workers and
their families to access health services and other benefits.
The Southern African Development Community (SADC), of which Zimbabwe is a
member, has also developed a
Code of Conduct on HIV and AIDS and
(1997). The SADC Code is informed by the ILO Code and affirms the
need to develop workplace prevention programs based on the involvement
employers and employees. The SADC Code suggests that prevention programs should
include education, promotion and distribution
of condoms, management of sexually
transmitted diseases, and the provision of counselling services. The strength of
the SADC Code
rests on the fact that it protects workers against discrimination
on the basis of their HIV status and calls on employers to ensure
that infected
workers are entitled to sick leave provisions enjoyed by the rest of their
Although the Government of Zimbabwe took a long time to recognise the need
for workplace responses in the fight against HIV and AIDS,
it eventually
introduced Statutory Instrument 202 of
These regulations make it
an offence for an employer to require HIV testing as a precondition for
or to terminate
employment on account of one’s HIV
Furthermore, the
statutory instrument requires employers to develop workplace policies and
programs regarding HIV and AIDS.
The Government of Zimbabwe has also devised the
Zimbabwe National Strategic
Framework for the Private Sector Response to HIV and AIDS: 2007–2010
the overall goal of which is ‘to contribute to a reduction in the number
of HIV infections as well as support national initiatives
to achieve commitments
toward the goal of universal access to HIV prevention, care, support and
treatment by 2010’.
Having examined the legal provisions, it is important now to examine some of
the management responses from Zimbabwe’s private
sector. It is noted that
many employers have responded positively, acknowledging that it is in their
interest to be involved in prevention,
treatment and care programs.
However, some sectors, notably the small and medium enterprises sector are
lagging behind. A study of the impact of HIV and AIDS on
the SME sector in
Zimbabwe revealed that ‘there was a general lack of workplace HIV and AIDS
programs in the SME sector as
67% of them did not have anything in
The same study
revealed that no written policies on HIV and AIDS were found in 74 per cent of
SMEs. The study attributed these gaps
to lack of capacity on the part of SMEs to
develop policies and programs. There also appears to be lack of appreciation of
the benefits
that can accrue to SMEs through mounting prevention programs.
While workplace programs are common in southern Africa, Zimbabwe’s
position is unique in that it is experiencing serious macroeconomic
because of its political problems and the resultant international isolation.
Businesses are struggling to survive and can
hardly afford to earmark resources
for the prevention and treatment of HIV and AIDS. This is confirmed by Nyika
Mahachi, the HIV
and AIDS program advisor at the Zimbabwe AIDS Prevention
Support Organisation, when he says that:
We are meeting real challenges in carrying out HIV and AIDS programmes at
workplaces, and this inevitably comes from the macro-economic
problems the
country is going
I. Prevention
Workplace initiatives on prevention focus on information dissemination,
education and promotion and distribution of
Information is
disseminated through posters, printed material and drama and workplace
prevention programs make use of peer education
and voluntary counselling and
testing. Workers also benefit from national prevention programs which use both
the print and electronic
media for the dissemination of information. It is
generally accepted that HIV and AIDS awareness has increased as a result of
HIV and AIDS prevention programs. Success in the area of behaviour
change is, however, mixed. Overall, prevention programs have begun
fruit. A study by Katzenstein et al (1998) revealed that there was a 34 per cent
reduction in the rate of new HIV infections
in 40 factories that participated in
workplace programs.
The reduction was attributed to the impact of a peer education program that
was run alongside a voluntary counselling and testing
program. Factories which
did not have a peer education program did not show a reduction in new HIV
infections. A study of a workplace
HIV and AIDS prevention and support program
at Tobacco Processors Zimbabwe also revealed that 92 per cent of the workers
interviewed
indicated that their source of information on HIV and AIDS was the
workplace-based HIV and AIDS prevention program at their
The same study
attributed the success of the program to the existence of counselling services
at the workplace. The use of peer educators
was also reported to have
contributed to this success.
II. Treatment and Care
The issue of treatment is critical for the management and control of HIV and
AIDS at the workplace. Whilst there is no law that compels
employers to provide
health care to their employees or assist them to access health care, employers
are, however, encouraged to do
so. A few employers, however, provide health care
to their employees, thereby making it easier to treat and control opportunistic
infections. Tobacco Processors Zimbabwe contracted a medical doctor to provide
health care to workers free of
Not surprisingly,
workers identified this as a strength of the workplace-based HIV and AIDS
prevention and support program as they
were able to access health care of good
quality which they would not have been able to afford on their own.
The bulk of employers, in particular the smaller ones, do not have clinics at
the workplace. However, they allow their workers to
join private medical aid
schemes where both the employer and employees contribute. A few employers pay
100 per cent of the contributions
but the majority share the contributions with
their workers. However, membership to medical aid schemes is increasingly
meaningless as patients are often asked to pay cash first and claim
from the medical aid scheme later. Furthermore, the out-of-pocket
expenses that
are paid in order to access medical care have become so burdensome that they are
now a barrier to accessing health
care. This impacts negatively on the
management and control of HIV and AIDS.
The provision of anti-retroviral drugs is an important component of the
treatment and care component. Whilst the government is not
able to provide free
anti-retroviral drugs, some employers have seen fit to assist their workers to
access anti-retroviral drugs.
Some of the employers meet the total cost whilst
others subsidise the cost of anti-retroviral drugs. However, it should be
out that only a few employers are providing anti-retroviral drugs to
their workers. Consequently, many infected workers have no access
anti-retroviral drugs. Such workers have to rely on other initiatives outside
the workplace or they have to access the drugs on
the open market where the cost
is prohibitive. In the end, infected workers who are unable to access the drugs
continue to fall prey
to opportunistic infections, resulting in increased
absenteeism at work. These workers will eventually die, resulting in a loss of
skilled employees. Ultimately, employers must recruit and train new workers,
thereby forcing them to incur additional costs.
As part of the support arrangements, employers often reassign infected
workers to do lighter duties if they are unable to continue
in their present
positions on account of their health. This is often the case in large
enterprises where it is possible to redeploy
workers. Workers in SMEs are,
however, disadvantaged as there is little room for the redeployment of workers.
When the illness progresses
to invalidity, infected workers are forced to
withdraw from the workplace. This is the point at which most of them require
care. When this happens, the burden of care shifts from the employer
to the family.
III. Compensation
The issue of compensation in the context of HIV and AIDS is critical for the
wellbeing of workers and their families. There are two
social security schemes
that provide protection to workers against exposure to risks or contingencies.
These are the Pensions and
Other Benefits Scheme and the Accident Prevention and
Compensation Scheme, both administered by the National Social Security
The Accident
Prevention and Compensation Scheme, which is funded through employers’
contributions, provides protection against
work-related injuries and diseases.
Thus workers who are injured at work or who contract diseases in the course of
their duties are
entitled to compensation from the National Social Security
Authority. However, domestic workers and the self-employed are not covered.
AIDS is generally not considered as a work-related disease. There are few
instances in which workers can contract HIV in the course
of their duties.
Consequently, the Accident Prevention and Workers Compensation Scheme does not
normally provide compensation to
workers who have HIV and
There are a few categories
of workers, such as nurses, who may claim compensation provided the procedures
are adhered to. For instance,
if a nurse suffers a needle prick, she must be
tested immediately for HIV and AIDS to determine her status. If she is negative
eventually tests positive, the new status would be attributed to a work
injury and only then can the nurse receive compensation.
This procedure suggests
that it is not easy to attribute HIV and AIDS to a work-related injury or
Workers exposed to the risk of HIV and AIDS, even though not work-related,
can claim invalidity benefit under the Pensions and Other
Benefits Scheme. The
Pensions and Other Benefits Scheme provides four benefits, namely retirement
benefit, invalidity benefit, survivors
benefit and a death
In the context of HIV and
AIDS, invalidity benefit is payable when members are no longer able to continue
working on account of their
health, suggesting progression to full-blown AIDS.
This invalidity status is determined by a medical board.
Workers who have contributed for a minimum period of 10 years receive an
invalidity pension whilst those who have contributed for
less than 10 years
receive an invalidity grant which is a one-off lump-sum
Most workers who are
HIV-positive find it difficult to satisfy the contribution requirement for an
invalidity pension and, therefore,
end up receiving a lump-sum payment.
Consequently, such beneficiaries and their dependants are likely to suffer long
periods of income
insecurity. The biggest drawback, however, is that workers
operating outside formal employment are not covered by these compensation
arrangements.
D. CONCLUSION
Workplace initiatives have succeeded in creating awareness about the HIV and
AIDS pandemic and are contributing towards the prevention
of HIV and AIDS.
Whilst some employers are involved in the treatment and care of infected
workers, the majority of employers are
not providing treatment and care to
infected workers and their families. This is particularly true of SMEs which are
constrained
not only by the costs of running workplace HIV and AIDS programs but
also by lack of capacity. The biggest challenge facing workplace
HIV and AIDS
programs is a lack of financial resources, given Zimbabwe’s deepening
macroeconomic problems. Under this environment,
it makes little sense for
employers to provide funds for workplace HIV and AIDS programs when their
businesses are on the brink of
collapse. It is thus imperative for Zimbabwe to
address its political and macroeconomic problems in order to create an enabling
environment
for sustainable workplace HIV and AIDS programs.
BIBLIOGRAPHY
1. International Labour Organisation (ILO),
HIV and AIDS: A Threat to
Decent Work, Productivity and Development
, ILO, Geneva, 2000.
An ILO Code of Practice on HIV and AIDS and the World of Work
ILO, Geneva, 2001.
3. Integrated Regional Information Networks (IRIN),
Workplace AIDS Programmes Feel the Pinch
http://www.irinnews.org/report.aspx?ReportID=75459
at 23 February 2009.
4. Jackson, H,
AIDS Africa: Continent in Crisis
, SAFAIDS, Harare,
5. Kaseke, E, ‘HIV/AIDS and Social Protection: Towards Socio-economic
Integration and Development in SADC — A Social Policy
Perspective’
(Paper presented at the Conference on HIV/AIDS and Social Protection, Lusaka,
1–2 December 2003).
6. Moyo, G,
Workplace-based HIV and AIDS Prevention and Support Programme:
A Study at Tobacco Processors Zimbabwe
(BSW Dissertation, University of
Zimbabwe, 2001).
7. Southern African Development Community (SADC),
SADC Code of Conduct on
HIV and AIDS and Employment
, SADC, Gaborone, 1997.
8. Southern Africa HIV and AIDS Information Dissemination Service (SAFAIDS),
Children and AIDS: Fact Sheet
, SAFAIDS, Harare, 2001.
9. United Nations Programme on HIV/AIDS (UNAIDS),
HIV and AIDS, Human
Resources and Sustainable Development
, UNAIDS, Geneva, 2002.
10. Zimbabwe Labour Relations (HIV and AIDS) Regulations, 1998
11. Zimbabwe, Government of, National HIV and AIDS Policy, Ministry of Health
and Child Welfare, Harare, 1999.
12. Zimbabwe, Government of,
Zimbabwe National Strategic Framework for the
Private Sector response to HIV and AIDS — Responding to HIV and AIDS in
of Work: 2007–2010
, Government of Zimbabwe and ILO, Harare,
13. Zimbabwe, Government of and ILO,
The Impact of HIV and AIDS on SME
Sector in Zimbabwe
, Government of Zimbabwe, ILO, Harare, 2006.
DPhil, Professor of Social Work
and Director, School of Social Work, University of Zimbabwe.
United Nations Programme on
HIV/AIDS (UNAIDS),
HIV and AIDS, Human Resources and Sustainable
Development
, UNAIDS, Geneva, 2002.
Government of Zimbabwe and
International Labour Organization (ILO),
The Impact of HIV and AIDS on SME
Sector in Zimbabwe
, Government of Zimbabwe, ILO, Harare, 2006 at iii.
E Kaseke, ‘HIV/AIDS and
Social Protection: Towards Socio-economic Integration and Development in SADC
— A Social Policy
Perspective’ (Paper presented at the Conference on
HIV/AIDS and Social Protection, Lusaka, 1–2 December 2003).
Southern Africa HIV and AIDS
Information Dissemination Service (SAFAIDS),
Children and AIDS: Fact
, SAFAIDS, Harare, 2001.
AIDS Africa:
Continent in Crisis
, SAFAIDS, Harare, 2002 at 15.
HIV and AIDS: A Threat
to Decent Work, Productivity and Development
, ILO, Geneva, 2000.
HIV and AIDS, Human
Resources and Sustainable Development
, UNAIDS, Geneva, 2002 at 16.
Government of Zimbabwe,
National HIV and AIDS Policy, Ministry of Health and Child Welfare, Harare,
HIV and AIDS: A
Threat to Decent Work, Productivity and Development
, ILO, Geneva, 2000 at
Government of Zimbabwe and
International Labour Organization (ILO),
The Impact of HIV and AIDS on SME
Sector in Zimbabwe
, Government of Zimbabwe, ILO, Harare, 2006 at 21.
HIV and AIDS: A
Threat to Decent Work, Productivity and Development
, ILO, Geneva, 2000 at
Zimbabwe Labour Relations
(HIV and AIDS) Regulations, 1998
Zimbabwe Labour Relations
(HIV and AIDS) Regulations, 1998
Zimbabwe Labour Relations
(HIV and AIDS) Regulations, 1998
Zimbabwe Labour Relations
(HIV and AIDS) Regulations, 1998
Government of Zimbabwe,
Zimbabwe National Strategic Framework for the Private Sector response to HIV
and AIDS — Responding to HIV and AIDS in the World
, Government of Zimbabwe and ILO, Harare, 2007 at 1.
Government of Zimbabwe and
International Labour Organization (ILO),
The Impact of HIV and AIDS on SME
Sector in Zimbabwe
, Government of Zimbabwe, ILO, Harare, 2006 at 31.
Integrated Regional
Information Networks (IRIN),
Zimbabwe: Workplace AIDS Programmes Feel the
http://www.irinnews.org/report.aspx?ReportID=75459
at 23 February 2009.
Government of Zimbabwe,
Zimbabwe National Strategic Framework for the private sector response to HIV and
— Responding to HIV and AIDS in the World of Work:
, Government of Zimbabwe and ILO, Harare, 2007.
H Jackson, AIDS Africa:
Continent in
, SAFAIDS, Harare, 2002 at 330.
Workplace-based
HIV and AIDS Prevention and Support Programme: A Study at Tobacco Processors
(BSW Dissertation, University of Zimbabwe, 2001).
E Kaseke, ‘HIV/AIDS
and Social Protection: Towards Socio-economic Integration and Development in
SADC — A Social Policy
Perspective’ (Paper presented at the
Conference on HIV/AIDS and Social Protection, Lusaka, 1–2 December
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (73.1 KB)
PDF format (89.4 KB)
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter