URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/journals/MelbJlIntLaw/2024/14.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 15:17:29
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Zhou, Weihuan; Crochet, Victor --- "Attribution to the State: A Critique of Cross-Border Subsidies" [2024] MelbJlIntLaw 14; (2024) 25(2) Melbourne Journal of International Law 383
I INTRODUCTION
II STATE ATTRIBUTION UNDER ART 11
III STRETCHING THE RULES OF ATTRIBUTION
A ILC art 11
B ASCM art 1.1(a)(1)
C Worrisome Implications
IV CONTEMPLATING ALTERNATIVES
A Working around “Jurisdiction” under ASCM
B Developing Non-Violation Claims
V CONCLUSION
ATTRIBUTION TO THE STATE:
A CRITIQUE OF CROSS-BORDER SUBSIDIES
Attribution to State
While industrial policy and subsidies proliferate worldwide, the emergence of
cross-border subsidies is intensifying legal and policy
debate on how the rules
of the World Trade Organization (‘WTO’) can be applied to address
the spillover effects of such
subsidies. Amid this debate, this paper tackles a
relatively more fundamental, yet underexplored, issue relating to attribution of
state responsibility. We argue that the European Commission’s approach to
attributing subsidies provided by one government
to another government has
overstretched the attribution rules under public international law and the WTO
subsidy rules, setting a
harmful precedent for similar abuses beyond subsidies.
We propose non-violation claims as a viable and more balanced response to
challenges posed by cross-border subsidies. We call upon governments to retreat
from unilateralism and resolve these challenges
cooperation.
I INTRODUCTION
Subsidies are one of the most controversial issues in the world trading
system. While governments rely on all kinds of subsidies in
pursuit of preferred
policy objectives, they are also concerned about the spillover effect of
subsidies on international economic
activities.
Driven by post-COVID
economic recovery, geopolitical tensions and strategic competition among major
powers, development interests
and an array of emerging challenges, industrial
policy has returned to the centre of domestic economic policy-making worldwide,
to a fast-developing global subsidy
Some of these policies and
subsidies are adopted for shared legitimate goals (such as environmental
protection and climate action),
whereas others are employed to foster select
industries or entities to outcompete foreign counterparts or even gain global
in strategic sectors, critical supply chains, advanced technologies,
How subsidies may be disciplined is thus a global challenge, requiring a
collective response by all governments
The fundamental
difficulty, as witnessed in the development of World Trade Organization
(‘WTO’) rules on industrial subsidies,
concerns a balancing act
between constraining trade-distortive subsidies and preserving policy space for
legitimate use of subsidies.
strike a balance, the WTO
Agreement on Subsidies and Countervailing
’) prohibits only two types of subsidies
(ie export and local content subsidies), hence leaving room for governments to
These other subsidies are “actionable” only, which means that
although they may be successfully challenged by an importing
country through the
WTO, the subsidising government is not required to withdraw such WTO-unlawful
subsidies but can decide to remove
their adverse effect instead. The other way
for an importing country to address an adverse effect is through countervailing
investigations,
which often lead to the imposition of countervailing measures,
typically in the form of import tariffs, on subsidised imports. Compared
litigation, countervailing measures are much more frequently used by governments
to offset the distortive effect of
Despite the controversies over subsidies and the relevant WTO rules,
subsidies have long been perceived as a tool to support domestic
industries, and
it is domestic-based subsidies that have been the subject of countervailing
actions and WTO disputes for
With the emergence of
so-called “cross-border subsidies” in recent times, however, this
situation has changed dramatically.
In essence, cross-border subsidies are
subsidies provided by governments to support economic activities of entities in
an overseas
market, as opposed to a domestic market. As a typical case, where
subsidies are provided by the government of country A to support
the production
of goods in country B, these subsidies may lead to the sale of these goods at
lower prices when exported to country
C, thereby affecting the domestic
import-competing producers in country
Thus, like traditional subsidies, cross-border subsidies may generate the same
negative spillovers.
The European Commission (‘EC’) has led the battle against
cross-border subsidies through a series of countervailing investigations
a few years, targeting subsidies provided by the Chinese government for its
firms’ investment in overseas markets,
especially projects related to the
Belt and Road Initiative (‘BRI’). In these investigations, the EC
decided to impose
countervailing measures on goods imported into the European
Union that were produced by firms receiving Chinese subsidies in Egypt
The EC’s actions have further complicated and intensified the debate over
international regulation of industrial subsidies.
A growing body of work has
criticised the legality of these actions under the
One of the EC’s measures even triggered a WTO dispute, which is similarly
focused on the WTO-legality of countervailing cross-border
A more fundamental yet underexplored issue, however, concerns the EC’s
application of the doctrine of “attribution”
as part of the public
international law on state responsibility. This doctrine is codified in the
Draft Articles on
Responsibility of States for Internationally
Wrongful Acts
, adopted by the International Law Commission
(‘ILC’) at its 53
session in 2001 (‘
The doctrine sets forth principles and criteria for determining ‘whether
the conduct of a natural person or other such intermediary
can be considered an
“act of state”, and thus be capable of giving rise to state
responsibility’.
The EC’s countervailing actions against cross-border subsidies relied
exclusively on art 11 of the
ILC Articles
, which provides that:
‘Conduct which is not attributable to a State under the preceding articles
shall nevertheless be considered
an act of that State under international law if
and to the extent that the State acknowledges and adopts the conduct in question
as its own.’
In essence, the EC decided that the governments of the exporting countries
(ie Egypt and Indonesia)
acknowledged
provided by the Chinese government, and therefore the conduct of the Chinese
government — ie the provision of WTO-unlawful
subsidies — was
attributable to the other two
governments.
The practical
effect of this decision was that the EC could then treat the Chinese subsidies
as being provided by the governments
of Egypt and Indonesia themselves so as to
enable the countervailing actions against subsidised imports from these two
Relying on art 11 of the
ILC Articles
was necessary because
under art 3 of the
EU Anti-Subsidy Regulation
, a subsidy exists only when
it is provided by ‘a government in the country of origin or
This paper criticises the EC’s application of the
attribution
rules contemplated in art 11 of the
ILC Articles
. Part II briefly reviews
the development of this article, focusing on its intended function and the
condition of
acknowledgement
. In light of the
findings in Part II, Part III discusses the extent to which the EC’s
decisions have overly stretched the attribution
rules under both public
international law and the WTO
. This Part also expounds some
worrisome implications of the EC’s approach, which essentially penalises
common practices of
international trade and investment cooperation through
unilateral measures that are likely to provoke tit-for-tat actions. Faced
the mounting concerns about the adverse effect of cross-border subsidies, Part
IV offers two alternative options for addressing
such effect, both within the
parameters of the WTO rules and without the need to stretch the attribution
rules in unjustifiable ways.
In particular, we show how ‘non-violation
complaints’ can offer a more viable and rational approach to tackle
cross-border
subsidies. Part V concludes.
II STATE ATTRIBUTION UNDER
Under art 2 of the
ILC Articles
, a state is held accountable for an
internationally wrongful act only if the act can be attributable to it under
international law.
Accordingly, the doctrine of attribution sets forth the rules
and criteria for establishing whether an act of state organs or non-state
entities can be treated as that of the state. The different categories of
attribution, codified in arts 4–11 of the
ILC Articles
, distinguish
between general rules applicable to standard circumstances and special rules for
exceptional circumstances. The former
involve the conduct of state organs and
agencies exercising government authority (arts 4–7) and de facto organs
under the direction
or control of a state (art
The latter deal with conduct
by non-state entities exercising certain government authority (art 9), in an
insurrectional movement
(art 10) or ‘acknowledged and adopted by a State
as its own’ (art 11).
Thus, it can be observed that the attribution rules target primarily the
conduct of state organs or non-state actors rather than that
of another state.
Some commentators have even opined that art 11 targets non-state entities having
no official capacity only as a
major distinction between the general and
exceptional rules.
important observation is that although art 11 has been described as a
‘residual category’, it was not intended
to cover all circumstances
which are not captured by the other
Quite the contrary,
its intended function is narrowly focused on addressing ex post ratification of
conduct, ie where such conduct
is not or cannot be attributed to the state at
the time of the conduct but is only
subsequently
acknowledged and adopted
The key problem that art 11 aims to address came out of two cases,
Lighthouses
States Diplomatic and Consular Staff in
as documented in the
relevant drafting record and the
Responsibility of States for Internationally
Wrongful Acts: General Commentary
Commentaries
The former case involved a situation where a new state explicitly endorsed and
continued the conduct of its predecessor after the
state succession. In the
latter, the Iranian state was found to have adopted the wrongful act of Iranian
militants, ie the seizure
of the United States embassy, through policies and
statements which continued the act. Thus, both cases concerned an ex post
of a past act.
Lighthouses
did attribute the conduct of one
state to another state, but this occurred in the specific context of state
succession. It was concerns
addition of art 11 to the attribution rules.
In addition, the drafting record of art 11 shows that ‘acknowledgement
and adoption’ is intended to be a single, cumulative
condition which
entails a high evidentiary
Commentaries
draw a clear distinction between this condition and cases
‘where a State merely acknowledges the factual existence of conduct
expresses its verbal approval of
Thus, the condition
can be established only based on ‘clear and unequivocal’ acts of a
state amounting to an adoption
of the conduct in question as its
In applying art 11 in
Prosecutor v Nikolić
’), the International Criminal Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia
found that merely being a ‘beneficiary’ of illegal
acts of non-state
actors was insufficient to establish an ‘adoption’ or
‘acknowledgement’.
Bosca v Lithuania
, Lithuania created a state entity to undertake the
privatisation of state property.
The wrongful act arose from the entity’s privatisation of a state-owned
wine company and its decision to annul the successful
bid by the claimant
Italian company, allegedly in breach of the bilateral investment treaty
(‘BIT’) between Lithuania
and Italy. The Permanent Court of
Arbitration attributed the act of the entity to the government of Lithuania
based on evidence showing
that the government explicitly approved the
, the alleged wrongful act concerned the rejection of the claimant
companies’ investment proposal in Nova Scotia, Canada, which
contravened
Canada’s obligations under the
North American Free Trade
This rejection
was based on environmental grounds pursuant to the recommendations of a Joint
Review Panel. The Permanent Court of
Arbitration held that even if the panel was
not treated as an organ of the Canadian government its findings and
recommendations were
unequivocally accepted by the government in its decision to
dismiss the investment.
Saint-Gobain Performance Plastics Europe v Venezuela
the respondent’s expropriation of the claimant’s subsidiary in
Venezuela in violation of the France-Venezuela
The tribunal, composed
under the arbitration rules of the International Centre for Settlement of
Investment Disputes, found that
while the government of Venezuela did not
empower the union members concerned to carry out a plant takeover as part of the
expropriation,
it subsequently adopted this act as its own by, inter alia,
making it an integral part of the government’s nationalisation
Makuchyan v
, the European Court of Human Rights considered whether the
wrongful act of a member of the Azerbaijani army was subsequently acknowledged
and adopted by the Azerbaijani
government.
The Court observed
that art 11 ‘sets a very high threshold for State responsibility for an
act otherwise non-attributable to
a State at the time of its
commission’.
It held that
attributing the conduct to the state required evidence showing that ‘the
Azerbaijani authorities “acknowledge”
and “adopt” them
as acts perpetrated by the State of Azerbaijan — thus directly and
categorically assuming responsibility
The Court found that
the state did subsequently approve and endorse the act by promoting the person
as a national hero and in the
military ranks, and awarding him salary arrears
and a flat.
However, it was not
convinced that these acts of the state amounted to ‘clear and
unequivocal’ ‘acknowledgement’
and ‘adoption’ of
the wrongful act as its own.
WTO tribunals have considered the attribution rules only briefly in a few
United States — Definitive Anti-Dumping and Countervailing
Duties on Certain Products from China
United States —
Definitive Anti-Dumping
’), the Appellate Body discussed the role of
arts 4, 5 and 8 of the
ILC Articles
in assessing whether China’s
state-owned commercial banks were public bodies within the meaning of art
1.1(a)(1) of the
The Appellate Body did not comment on art 11 specifically but merely used art 5
ILC Articles
to support its interpretation of the term
‘public body’.
Saudi Arabia — Measures concerning the Protection of Intellectual
Property Rights
, the panel opined that art 11 ‘only applies to conduct
that is not otherwise attributable to a state’ under the general
circumstances involving government organs or
In summary, the development and application of art 11 of the
ILC Articles
has confirmed three core features of the attribution rules in a rather
consistent manner. First, art 11 addresses the conduct of non-state
without governmental authority and does not cover the attribution of conduct
between states except in case of state successions.
Here, it is worth noting
that the relationship between states for their respective actions is governed
separately under ch IV of
ILC Articles
, titled ‘Responsibility
of a State in Connection with the Act of Another State’. Given the general
principle of ‘independent
responsibility’, ch IV confines itself to
providing responsibility (rather than attribution) for acts by one state to
state only in a handful of exceptional
One of the cases, perhaps
the most relevant for our purpose, allows responsibility for conduct of one
state by another state only
where the conduct is
by the latter (art 17). The terms ‘[d]irection and
control’ require actual domination of the conduct as opposed to mere
influence, incitement or
suggestion.
Thus, ch IV provides
supportive context for the observation that art 11 does not apply to attribution
of conduct between states.
Second, art 11 targets conduct which cannot be attributed to a state at the
time of commission but which is subsequently accepted
by the state. This means
that art 11 does not apply to conduct that can be attributed to a state when the
conduct takes place based
on the other
ILC Articles
(ie arts 4, 5,
Third, art 11 imposes a high standard for justifying attribution of conduct
that is non-attributable under the general rules, evidently
to confine the
applicability of art 11 to limited circumstances. Thus, the condition of
“acknowledgement and adoption”
requires acts of a state
unequivocally accepting the wrongful conduct of non-state actors as its own,
hence assuming responsibility
for the conduct.
III STRETCHING THE RULES OF
ATTRIBUTION
The boundaries of art 11 of the
ILC Articles
discussed above are
critical for our assessment of the EC’s attribution of the conduct of the
Chinese government to other governments
in three consecutive countervailing duty
investigations:
Commission Implementing Regulation (EU) 2020/776 of 12 June
Egypt Glass Fibre Fabrics (GFF) Decision
Commission Implementing Regulation (EU) 2020/870 of 24 June 2020
Egypt Filament Glass Fibre Products (GFR) Decision
Commission Implementing Regulation (EU) 2022/433 of 15 March 2022
Indonesia Stainless Steel Cold-Rolled Flat Products
involved highly similar facts and findings in relation to the attribution of
conduct. They concerned a wide spectrum of
subsidies provided by the Chinese
government, including through state and non-state banks and other entities, in
the form of grants,
policy loans, export credits, government provision of goods
and services, tax reduction and exemption, etc. These subsidies were
provided to
Chinese companies investing in designated areas of the host countries from
Chinese public bodies either directly to the
foreign subsidiaries or indirectly
via their holding/parent companies in China. The designated areas included,
respectively, the
China-Egypt Suez Economic and Trade Cooperation
(‘SETC’) Zone and the Indonesian Morowali Industrial Park
Park’), which were established to promote cooperation
between the host governments and China. Such cooperation served the strategic
and economic needs of both sides. Egypt and Indonesia relied on Chinese
investment for capital, know-how and technologies to foster
specific domestic
industries and economic growth more generally. For Egypt, the main goal was to
promote the development of the Suez
Canal Area, one of its poorest regions. For
Indonesia, it was to build domestic smelters or processing capabilities in the
sector to capitalise on its abundant nickel ore reserves. On the other
side, China sought to promote its “Go Global”
policy and the BRI,
thereby expanding exports of high-tech products (such as glass fibre fabrics and
glass fibre products), further
advancing technological capabilities and moving
up value chains or, in the case of Indonesia, securing the necessary supply of
The EC’s findings were predominantly based on cooperative instruments
(such as memoranda of understanding and written agreements)
and joint or
individual policies, actions and statements developed gradually by the host
governments and China over a long period
This collection of
evidence, in the EC’s view, amply demonstrated that the host governments
were not only fully aware of the
Chinese subsidies, but they welcomed and
expected (Egypt) or actively encouraged and sought (Indonesia) China’s
to provide the subsidies, as well as facilitated their implementation
in the designated areas. Adding to this was also evidence showing
that Egypt and
Indonesia recognised the SETC Zone and Morowali Park respectively as designated
overseas trade and investment areas
for Chinese companies. Accordingly, the EC
concluded that the host governments endorsed (Egypt) or unequivocally
acknowledged and
adopted (Indonesia) the Chinese subsidies as their own.
The EC’s application of art 11 of the
ILC Articles
overstretched
the boundaries of the attribution rules, precisely in terms of the three key
parameters discussed in Part II. First,
the EC attributed the conduct of one
state to another state, which is beyond the scope of art 11 of the
and covered by other articles (ie those in ch IV).
Second, the cooperative documents and actions identified by the EC show
clearly that the provision of subsidies occurred after a series
of negotiations
that led to the conclusion, implementation and further development of the
relevant cooperative initiatives/projects.
Therefore, the alleged welcoming,
encouraging or seeking of Chinese subsidies generally predated the provision of
the subsidies,
contrary to situations of
ratification which art
11 is designed to cover. The EC’s reasoning offered no substantive
evidence or analysis to specifically
identify Chinese subsidies which were
subsequently
adopted by acts of the host governments.
Third, welcoming or expecting Chinese subsidies or acknowledging their
benefits for the pursuit and accomplishment of either the cooperation
strategic goals of the host governments is insufficient to pass the high
evidentiary bar embedded in the condition of “acknowledgement
adoption”. These acts were mere acknowledgement or, at most, approval of
the subsidies. Being a beneficiary of the subsidies
did not constitute
“acknowledgement and adoption” either (as shown in the
Sušica Camp
decision). Nor could actively seeking the subsidies be
treated as acknowledging and adopting the subsidies as if they were provided
the host governments themselves. Although the host governments arguably endorsed
the subsidies, there was no evidence to suggest
that they unequivocally assumed
responsibility for the provision of the subsidies. Rather, what is manifest from
the evidence on
record was the host governments and China joining forces to
co-develop select projects/industries in the formers’ markets through
formal cooperative arrangements. Such arrangements are common among all
economies, as further discussed below. The point to make
here is that under
these arrangements, the host governments and China made
independent
commitments to promote the cooperation including through subsidies, hence
assuming responsibility for the provision of their own
In short, art 11 of the
ILC Articles
cannot be stretched to the
situation of attribution of cross-border subsidies as the EC has done. Moreover,
accepting the EC’s
line of reasoning would amount to treating the
as an international treaty, the provisions of which can be extended
through legal interpretation. This is not the case. The
ILC Articles
constitute, at most, a codification of customary international law and can, as a
result, only be applied to situations for which
there is previous state practice
Besides art 11 of the
ILC Articles
, the EC also stretched the
attribution rules envisaged in art 1.1(a)(1) of the
. In other words,
the EC’s approach to attribution is not permitted under the
determining the existence of subsidies, which is a precondition for the
application of countervailing measures. Where a ‘financial
contribution’ is granted by a ‘government’ of a WTO Member (ie
state organs) or a ‘public body within the
territory of a Member’,
art 1.1(a)(1) allows for attribution of the conduct of these actors to the
government. As regards private
entities, art 1.1(a)(1)(iv) requires that the
provision of subsidies is entrusted or directed by a government. Indeed, the
to ‘a government’ and ‘within the territory of a
Member’ do not provide a definitive answer for whether art
provides scope for consideration of cross-border
Nevertheless, it is
abundantly clear that the options for attribution under art 1.1(a)(1) are
confined to the conduct of state organs,
public bodies or private entities,
hence excluding attribution between states.
Furthermore, even assuming that the EC’s approach was justifiable under
art 11 of the
ILC Articles
, it still cannot be reconciled with
’s attribution rules. The latter, as
lex specialis
should prevail to the extent of such inconsistencies. In this regard, art 55 of
ILC Articles
states that the
ILC Articles
‘do not apply
where and to the extent that the conditions for the existence of an
internationally wrongful act ... are governed
by special rules of international
ILC Commentaries
on this article contemplate WTO
agreements as such special
This principle of
would therefore allow WTO tribunals to exclude the application of
art 11 if it was interpreted to allow attribution between states.
Finally, it is worth noting that whether art 11 constitutes customary
international law remains
controversial.
States — Definitive Anti-Dumping
, the Appellate Body did not resolve
this issue either. As noted earlier, while the Appellate Body used art 5 of the
ILC Articles
to assist its interpretation of ‘public body’,
it stressed that the attribution rules being applied are those set out
The Appellate
Body’s consideration of art 5 was based on its observation of
‘similarities in the core principles and
functions’ between that
provision and art 1.1(a)(1) in terms of
attribution.
Thus, WTO tribunals
have maintained a certain latitude in deciding whether and how to use the
attribution rules under the
ILC Articles
. Since art 1.1(a)(1) does not
contain rules of attribution in case of adoption and acknowledgment, it does not
share similarities
with art 11 of the
ILC Articles
, so that WTO tribunals
may not consider the latter in interpreting the former.
Implications
The EC’s approach to tackling cross-border subsidies by interpreting
in light of art 11 of the
ILC Articles
has significant
policy and practical ramifications. It effectively and unjustifiably penalises
common and legitimate practices of
governments. For home countries, such
practices involve fostering outbound investment through financial and
non-financial support
for strategic policy and economic goals. For host
countries, especially emerging economies, these involve using foreign investment
to promote industrialisation and economic development. It is also the sovereign
right of these countries to pursue these objectives
through mutually beneficial
joint initiatives or arrangements which are standard ways of international
economic cooperation. The
fact that China’s outbound investment policies
have been remarkably ambitious does not justify linking the underlying problems
overwhelmingly or even solely to China.
Statistics have shown that all major advanced economies have maintained
incentive schemes in a variety of forms to promote outbound
investment in
developing economies since the
As the authors have
discussed elsewhere, such investment is a necessary, rational response to the
need for internationalising production
operations in foreign markets to exploit
low labour, environmental and other production and compliance costs, and
redeploy home resources
to more advanced sectors and higher value-added
activities, amongst other policy and commercial
motivations.
US and EU firms led
this internationalisation process, followed by those in Japan and South
Furthermore, China is not
the only emerging economy that has taken similar approaches. Russian, Saudi
Arabian and Indian firms, for
example, have also been walking in the footsteps
of their predecessors.
Today, all kinds of subsidies, including those employed to promote outbound
investment, are found in both state-dominated economies
and more market-based
ones. The US, the EU and China each have resorted to subsidies not only for
internal policy and economic needs
but also as an external, strategic response
to subsidies adopted among
themselves.
The scale and
detrimental effect of US and EU subsidies are no less significant compared to
Chinese ones.
Well-known recent
examples are the US’s
Inflation Reduction Act of 2022
the EU’s Global Gateway initiative. The
commits billions of
dollars to promote manufacturing, advancement and deployment of technologies in
clean energy industries.
strategic goal of the
is to reshore electric vehicle
(‘EV’) supply chains within the US and its allies while decoupling
from China, including
the supply of critical minerals for EV
production.
Similarly, the
Global Gateway brings together EU Member States and their financial and
development institutions, including the European
Investment Bank and the
European Bank for Reconstruction and Development, as well as private capital, to
develop new projects (particularly
infrastructure) in third
As such, this
initiative is widely perceived as the EU’s global investment strategy that
borrows from China’s approaches,
particularly the BRI, in order to compete
with China. Both the
and the Global Gateway initiative involve
economic and strategic cooperation among existing and potential partners,
including through
formal agreements. For instance, to include allies originally
ineligible for the
subsidies, the US and Japan entered an
Agreement on Strengthening Critical
Minerals Supply
The US is also
negotiating similar arrangements with other allies including the
An increasing number of
partnerships with governments around the globe have also been pursued and
established under the Global Gateway
initiative.
Thus, the EU’s actions against cross-border subsidies are essentially a
unilateral punishment imposed on a longstanding, global
phenomenon that remains
significant and continues to evolve in policy-making and commercial decisions
worldwide. In particular, the
common practices of governments subsidising
outbound investment mean that they all can become a target of countervailing
Indeed, the EC’s application of art 11 of the
ILC Articles
may well hurt itself or its trusted partners. For example, can China use the
negotiation and conclusion of a cooperative arrangement
between the US and its
allies to activate the latter’s eligibility for the
as evidence of attribution of the
subsidies to US allies? The same
can be applied to the EU’s Global Gateway program, which resembles
China’s BRI and hence
offers a convenient target for any tit-for-tat
anti-subsidy actions that China may contemplate. In addition, it should be noted
countervailing actions against cross-border subsidies affect home and host
governments, both of which may therefore retaliate.
Moreover, it is possible to apply the EC’s interpretation of art 11 to
other WTO rules, trade and investment policies and cooperative
arrangements. One
example relates to the
Economic and Trade Agreement between the Government of
the United States of America and the Government of the People’s Republic
, or the so-called US-China Phase One trade deal, which was
concluded in 2020 to prevent further escalation of their bilateral trade
since 2017.
To the extent that
this Agreement imposed predominantly one-sided obligations on China, including a
massive shopping list for China
to prioritise the purchase of US goods and
services over imports from other WTO Members, it entailed actions that could
violate the
most-favoured-nation principle codified in art I(1) of the
General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade
China would have not undertaken such burdensome, non-reciprocal commitments in
the absence of US pressure, can the US be held
accountable for China’s
implementation of these commitments where a breach of WTO rules occurs? The
EC’s approach under
art 11 would suggest a positive answer because the
US’s inducement of the Chinese commitments and actions could constitute
“acknowledgement and adoption” according to the evidentiary standard
applied by the EC. A more recent example concerns
the deal reached by the US and
the Netherlands to restrict China’s access to critical technologies,
particularly advanced chips.
Could China now argue that the Dutch export restrictions are attributable to the
US and thus bring a WTO dispute against the US based
The key point here is that the EC’s approach sets a harmful precedent for
how the attribution rules may be (ab)used
in broader contexts beyond subsidies.
It generates a risk of governments attacking others’ economic cooperation
based on state-to-state
attribution via unilateral measures.
Finally, it is worth iterating the legitimate interests of host governments
in incentivising and using foreign investment as a major
avenue to promote
industrialisation and economic development. The positive effects of foreign
investment on host economies, particularly
emerging ones, have been well
documented.
Despite the
widespread concerns about the BRI, Chinese investment has brought enormous
benefits (eg capital, skilled labour, know-how
and advanced technologies) to a
range of BRI-participating developing economies, which are evidenced
voluminously, including in the
EC’s countervailing investigations
discussed in Part II.
developing economies should be encouraged to make use of Chinese investment
(including Chinese subsidies) to foster chosen
industries, projects and regions
which they do not have the resources and capabilities to fund and develop by
themselves. This legitimate
right is acknowledged explicitly under art 27.1 of
. It states that ‘Members recognize that subsidies may play
an important role in economic development programmes of developing
Members.’ This suggests that the application of the
attention to the development interests of emerging economies, including their
use of foreign investment and subsidies.
Although art 27.1 does not impose a
binding obligation, applying countervailing measures to penalise subsidies
provided by a foreign
government goes sharply against the spirit of this
provision. In any event, as discussed earlier, in working with China under or
beyond the BRI, developing economies merely seek to reap the benefits of Chinese
investment and subsidies and cannot be regarded
as also taking responsibility
for such subsidies provided by a foreign government. While aimed at China, the
EU’s countervailing
actions rendered developing countries casualties in
the crossfire between world superpowers.
IV CONTEMPLATING
ALTERNATIVES
As noted in Part I, cross-border subsidies can generate similar adverse
effects on trading partners as those generated by traditional
Concerns about this underlying problem not only drove the EC’s creative
use of the attribution rules in the countervailing
actions but also led the
General Court of the European Union (First Chamber) to rule in favour of the
EC’s approach in the
Egypt Glass Fibre Fabrics (GFF) Decision
Egypt Filament Glass Fibre Products (GFR) Decision
. The Court found that
the EC’s application of the attribution rules was consistent with the
EU Anti-Subsidy Regulation
, without having to rely on
art 11. In reaching these rulings, the Court stressed that:
[I]t cannot be accepted that an economic and legal construct such as that of
the SETC-Zone, conceived in close collaboration between
the Government of China
and the Government of Egypt at the highest level, is not covered by the basic
anti-subsidy regulation, without
this undermining that regulation’s
effectiveness or its purpose and
objectives.
On appeal, while the Court of Justice of the European Union has not delivered
its judgment yet, the Advocate General agreed with the
General Court that
attribution was possible under the
EU Anti-Subsidy Regulation
because the term “by a government” itself allows
state-to-state attribution so that recourse to art 11 is
unnecessary.
This is also the
approach adopted by the US.
as explained in Part III(2) above, art 1.1 of the
already provides
for an exhaustive list of entities whose conduct can be attributed to a
government. Reading the term “by a
government” as encapsulating in
and of itself all possible attribution scenarios would render the
contemplated in art 1.1 meaningless. Moreover, this interpretative
approach contradicts other provisions of the
, as discussed
While the negative spillovers of cross-border subsidies require attention by
the international community, unilateral actions based
on unjustified attribution
of state responsibility are not a desirable approach to address a systemic
problem. Do governments have
better options under the current WTO rules? We
offer two suggestions below.
Working around
“Jurisdiction” under ASCM
As foreshadowed in Part III(2), art 1.1 of the
provides scope for
considering cross-border subsidies without needing to invoke the EU’s
attribution methodology.
provision does not require that the recipient of a financial contribution be
located within the territory of the subsidising
WTO Member, an interpretation
also endorsed by WTO tribunals.
The reason why the EU had to rely on legal gymnastics by attributing the
financial contribution of one Member to another is because
Anti-Subsidy Regulation
departs from the text of art 1.1 of the
by requiring that the financial contribution be granted by ‘the country of
origin or export’.
The major textual constraint under WTO law is, instead, art 2 of the
, which requires a financial contribution to be
‘specific’ to constitute an actionable subsidy. Thus, for a
cross-border
subsidy to be actionable, it must be specific to certain
enterprises ‘within the jurisdiction of the granting
authority’.
This quoted
text arguably imposes a territorial limitation on the location of the recipient
of the subsidy. This understanding finds
contextual support in other provisions
, as discussed in more detail below. It is further confirmed
by the negotiating history of the
which indicates that the
territorial scope of the agreement is limited to subsidies benefitting entities
producing goods in the territory
of the subsidising
government.
According to Gary
Horlick, who was involved in the negotiations of the agreement, this was
intended to exclude situations such as
World Bank loans, war reparations or aid
from the coverage of the
However, this line of interpretation is not set in stone. Two
counterarguments can be developed. First, the text of art 2.1 itself
can be read
in a way that if a subsidy meets the principles enshrined in the sub-paragraphs
of that provision, it would be found
to be specific to certain enterprises
within the jurisdiction of the granting authority regardless of the location of
the recipient.
This seems logical because art 2 is not concerned about imposing
an outward limit on the scope of which subsidies can be found to
be specific but
is rather concerned about imposing an inward assessment to ensure that subsidies
generally available throughout an
economy are not
Second, the concept
of jurisdiction could be interpreted as covering situations of extraterritorial
at hand. For example, in the case of China,
when the recipient of a cross-border subsidy is located in a special economic
up abroad under the cooperation of the local government and that of
China, it might be argued that China’s jurisdiction extends
to entities in
Moreover, legal workarounds to avoid the hurdle of ‘within the
are also available. Article 2.3
provides that prohibited subsidies contemplated in art 3 shall be deemed
specific. Similarly, art
10.2 of the protocol on
Accession of the
People’s Republic of China
to the WTO provides that subsidies granted
to Chinese state-owned enterprises are deemed specific within the meaning of art
if these enterprises are the predominant recipients of, or
receive disproportionately large amounts of, such
These approaches would avoid the problems of the EC’s methodology in
terms of stretching the rules of attribution to international
trade law while
allowing governments to act against cross-border subsidies within the ambit of
WTO rules. Nevertheless, they carry
their own problems or limitations. For
example, the interpretation of a special economic zone as being within
China’s extraterritorial
expansive interpretation of “jurisdiction” in similar or other
circumstances,
hence leading to “overreaching” problems similar to
those associated with the EC’s attribution methodology. Moreover,
application of the “deemed specificity” provisions can address only
some types of subsidies.
At the same time, these approaches can be subject to interpretative
constraints under other provisions of the
beyond art 2. For
instance, arts 13 and 22 of the
, which impose requirements of
consultation, notification, etc on an investigating authority, refer to the
targeted Member consistently
as the Member ‘the products of which may be
subject to’ or ‘the products of which are subject to’ a
countervailing
investigation. Articles 11.2(ii) and 11.8 of the
made it clear that this textual reference to the targeted Member necessarily
means ‘the country or countries of origin
or export in question’. By
granting the rights of consultation, notification etc solely to the government
of the country of
origin or export, the
arguably excludes a
financial contribution by a WTO Member that is not the country of origin or
export from its coverage. This seems
to be rational because, in the context of
cross-border subsidies, the exporting Member would have no power to provide
information
on subsidies granted by another government (ie the subsidising
Member), while the subsidising Member would lose its procedural rights
. Similarly, art 18.1(a) of the
envisages the possibility
for a targeted Member to offer undertakings in response to countervailing
investigations. Here, the targeted
Member refers to the ‘government of the
exporting Member’ only. This is another piece of evidence clearly
demonstrating
treats the government of the exporting Member
and that of the subsidising Member as one and the same. This interpretation
finds further
support in n 63 to para 2 of annex IV of the
states that ‘[t]he recipient firm is a firm in the territory of the
subsidizing Member’. Similarly, art 25.2 requires
WTO Members to notify
subsidies ‘granted or maintained within their territories’ only.
As a result, while creative interpretation of the concept of
‘jurisdiction’ in art 2 of the
may provide a way to
address cross-border subsidies, it faces major legal hurdles and may create
similar problems of overly stretching
the current rules on industrial subsidies
and hence provoke abuses.
Non-Violation Claims
A more, and perhaps the only, sensible option is to bring non-violation
claims (‘NVCs’) pursuant to art XXIII:1(b) of
provision came out of the original
negotiations in the
It was applied and
clarified by several
panels and was further negotiated in the
Uruguay Round before it was also codified in art 26.1 of the WTO’s
Understanding on Rules and Procedures Governing the Settlement of
Article XXIII:1(b) of the
and art 26.1 of the
the avenue for governments to challenge measures which are not in breach of any
WTO rules but which ‘nullify or impair
benefits under, or impede the
attainment of objectives of the relevant covered
agreement(s)’.
It is clear
from the historical development of these provisions that governments saw the
importance of NVCs in addressing the issue
of an incomplete
contract where the outcomes of tariff negotiations may be undermined by acts
which were not foreseen at the time of the negotiations
and hence were not
captured by the
At the same time, however, governments have resorted to NVCs with caution and
generally accepted the interpretative approach taken
/WTO panels
to confine the application of NVCs to limited circumstances. Thus, governments
brought and won NVCs only in a few disputes
throughout the life of the
/WTO. These disputes were predominantly concerned about action taken
by an importing Member subsequent to the negotiation of its tariff
concessions
with an exporting Member leading to the nullification or impairment of benefits
(ie market access opportunities) derived
from the concessions for the
Japan — Measures Affecting Consumer Photographic Film and Paper
Japan — Films
’), the WTO panel summarised the
legal conditions for an NVC: (1) the existence of a governmental measure, (2) a
benefit accruing
to the complaining Member from the relevant tariff concession
or agreement and (3) the benefit is nullified or impaired as the result
application of the
The panel also iterated that ‘the non-violation remedy should be
approached with caution and should remain an exceptional
/WTO panels have developed a restrictive interpretation of
we argue that their
interpretation still provides room for establishing an NVC against cross-border
subsidies. At a general level,
there are at least three reasons for that
optimistic observation. First, the legal conditions for NVCs remain unsettled.
In the Uruguay
Round negotiations, governments deliberately left out the
conditions developed by
panels from the text of art 26.1 of the
arguably leaving the
flexibility for WTO tribunals to further develop or refine these conditions. In
a handful of disputes where
NVCs were raised, WTO panels seem to have maintained
panels’ restrictive
However, WTO panels also recognised that NVCs must be assessed on a case-by-case
basis and can be applied to benefits unrelated to
a tariff concession but
stemming from a WTO agreement.
Second, a majority of the past NVCs, including the few successful ones, involved
subsidy schemes, hence providing a solid precedent
for applying NVCs to
cross-border subsidies which, as shown in Part III, are typical forms of
financial contributions contemplated
. Third, in adjudicating
/WTO panels have focused on assessing whether a measure
frustrated the competitive opportunities generated by tariff concessions rather
than the impact on actual trade
This means that an NVC may be brought even before cross-border subsidies have
caused an increase of subsidised imports into adversely
affected countries.
Thus, more specifically, affected Members like the EU can argue that the
cross-border subsidies provided by the Chinese government
to its investors
overseas have the effect of upsetting the competitive opportunity that EU
producers should have enjoyed in their
must be interpreted broadly,
comes out of the EU’s right to seek multilateral remedies or impose
countervailing measures pursuant to
art VI, as elaborated by the
. Two complications can arise in this claim of “benefit”.
One pertains to the fact that the benefit is related to the
tariff concessions. This presents an atypical situation compared to past NVCs,
which consistently involved a tariff
concession of a responding Member that
created more favourable market access for the relevant exports of a complaining
The other complication involves the EU’s evidentiary burden to show that
the Chinese subsidies were not reasonably anticipated
at the time when the
concessions were made,
essentially during China’s WTO accession negotiations.
These hurdles, however, are not so difficult to overcome. A plausible
argument would be that when the EU offered reciprocal tariff
concessions, there
was a legitimate expectation that it would have access to WTO-permissible
remedies to offset the impact of subsidised
imports to maintain a certain degree
of market opportunities for domestic industries. That China now provides harmful
subsidies not
captured by
art VI or the
nullifies or
impairs the benefit that the EU should have enjoyed via these
Here, it should be
noted that the ‘adverse effects’ claims under art 5 of the
would not apply as it requires the existence of a subsidy within the
meaning of the
in the first
On the question of whether the subsidies could have been reasonably
anticipated during China’s accession negotiations, the
Report of the
Working Party on the Accession of China
’) suggests
that Members were unaware of issues related to cross-border subsidies. The
discussions recorded in the
focussed on how the relevant economic
policies, regulations, conduct of state entities and industrial subsidies may
affect imports
or investments into China or on how subsidised exports from China
may impact trading partners.
follows that Chinese cross-border subsidies, which only became prominent after
the launch of the BRI 12 years after China’s
WTO accession, were not
reasonably foreseeable by WTO Members.
Not only is an NVC against cross-border subsidies viable, but it also
provides a more balanced approach to tackle such subsidies for
three reasons.
First, a successful NVC does not require the removal of the contested measure
but merely requires the disputing parties
to reach a mutually satisfactory
adjustment (art 26.1(b) of the
). This provides the flexibility for
the subsidising government to maintain the subsidies in pursuit of its policy
goals and for the
affected government to take action to rebalance the relevant
rights and obligations under the WTO framework. Such action may involve
withdrawal of tariff concessions (which would lead to an outcome similar to what
a countervailing measure can achieve), compensation
or even cooperation between
the parties in other areas of trade and investment. NVCs therefore provide a
better avenue for the subsidising
and aggrieved governments to negotiate a
compromise that would work for both without causing a decision on whether the
are WTO-unlawful. Second, an NVC can leave developing countries
outside the battle between big powers because withdrawal of tariff
concessions,
compensation and other forms of adjustments can be applied directly to the
subsidising government. In doing so, it leaves
room for emerging economies to
use foreign subsidies for industrialisation and economic development without
having to face countervailing
actions. Third, compared to a violation claim, an
NVC can be adjudicated more efficiently. As some have proposed in the context of
using NVCs to address security-based measures, a ‘shortened and simplified
dispute settlement procedure’ can be developed
to determine
‘nullification or impairment of benefits’, and the actual level of
benefits can be agreed upon by the parties
or decided by an arbitrator under art
21.3(c) of the
NVC therefore can facilitate the settlement of disputes and the provision of
for the affected
Member in a more timely fashion.
V CONCLUSION
As governments worldwide turn to unilateralism, including by way of
industrial policy and subsidies, the international economic legal
order is under
severe attack. The WTO, as the backbone of the global trading system, is losing
influence on domestic policy-making
of individual Members, which has become
overwhelmingly inward-looking to prioritise national interests over
international rules and
obligations. Against this broader context, we have
offered a thorough analysis of the EC’s approach to enable the imposition
of countervailing measures against cross-border subsidies by attributing
subsidies provided by one government to another government.
This application of
the attribution rules between states is unjustifiable and highly problematic and
adds fuel to the ongoing crisis
in globalisation and international trade
cooperation.
More specifically, we have shown that the EC’s approach has
overstretched the attribution rules under public international law
and the WTO
. More than that, it also has the effect of penalising common and
legitimate practices of governments in economic cooperation, particularly
rights and interests of emerging economies in using foreign investment for
industrialisation and development. As such, the EC’s
approach may provoke
retaliation by targeted governments as well as similar abuses of the attribution
rules beyond subsidies.
Cross-border subsidies do create real and systemic challenges for the global
trading system. However, unilateral measures can only
exaggerate the problems.
The sensible solution lies in international cooperation based on credible,
transparent and inclusive platforms
and systems. Thus, governments are
encouraged to work out a solution under the WTO framework. As negotiations take
time, we have
proposed NVCs as a viable and balanced way to address the
spillovers of cross-border subsidies and to avoid unilateral actions that
unjustifiably stretch the subsidy rules, jeopardise the development interests of
emerging economies and further undermine the international
economic legal
Towards this end, we are fully aware of the reality that even if governments
start using NVCs, countervailing actions will likely
remain their preference in
practice. Indeed, given the deep concerns about cross-border subsidies, it would
only be realistic to
anticipate that more countervailing actions will be
deployed going forward. Nevertheless, faced with a weakening rules-based
multilateral
trading system, it falls upon us, who believe in the utility of the
system, to remind governments of options based on agreed rules,
associated with unilateral measures and benefits of continuous cooperation.
Weihuan Zhou is
Associate Professor and Co-Director of the China International Business and
Economic Law (‘CIBEL’) Centre,
Faculty of Law and Justice, UNSW
Sydney. Email: weihuan.zhou@unsw.edu.au. This author acknowledges support by the
Nankai University
Humanities Development Fund Project “Research on Legal
Regulation of Transnational Subsidies and China’s Response”
ZB22BZ0328) and excellent research assistance provided by Haoxue Wang.
Victor Crochet
practices international and European trade law at Van Bael & Bellis. He is
also a PhD student at the University
of Cambridge. Victor regularly advises
governments in countervailing investigations initiated by the EU and other third
He also represents governments before the WTO. He has been and is
involved in some of the cases mentioned in this paper. Email:
vcrochet@vbb.com.
Lorenzo Rotunno and Michele
Ruta, ‘Trade Spillovers of Domestic Subsidies’ (Working Paper No
WP/24/41, International
Monetary Fund, March 2024).
Simon Evenett et al,
‘The Return of Industrial Policy in Data’ (Working Paper No WP/24/1,
International Monetary Fund,
January 2024) 5 <
https://www.imf.org/en/Publications/WP/Issues/2023/12/23/The-Return-of-Industrial-Policy-in-Data-542828
archived at <
https://perma.cc/EZM3-N2G2
Ilyina, Ceyla Pazarbasioglu and Michele Ruta, ‘Industrial Policy Is Back
but the Bar to Get It Right Is High’,
(Blog Post, 12 April
https://www.imf.org/en/Blogs/Articles/2024/04/12/industrial-policy-is-back-but-the-bar-to-get-it-right-is-high
archived at <
https://perma.cc/9YAY-8S3Q
International Monetary Fund et
al, ‘Subsidies, Trade, and International Cooperation’ (Research
Paper No 2022/001, April
https://www.wto.org/english/res_e/booksp_e/repintcoosub22_e.pdf
archived at <
https://perma.cc/Q9MN-7BG6
John H Jackson,
World Trade
and the Law of GATT
(Bobbs-Merrill, 1969) 367–9; Patrick J McDonough,
‘Subsidies and Countervailing Measures’ in Terence P Stewart
The GATT Uruguay Round: A Negotiating History (1986–1992)
Law and Taxation Publishers, 1993) vol 1, 803, 833–84.
Marrakesh Agreement
Establishing the World Trade Organization
, opened for signature 15 April
1994, 1867 UNTS 3
(entered into force 1 January 1995) annex 1A
Agreement on Subsidies and Countervailing Measures
’). There was also a category of non-actionable
subsidies, including certain subsidies for research and development,
environmental
protection and regional development, which were permitted under
. However, this category expired as WTO Members failed to reach a
consensus to renew it by 31 December 1999: at arts 8, 31; World
Organization, Committee on Subsidies and Countervailing Measures,
the Special Meeting Held on 20 December 1999
, WTO Doc G/SCM/M/22 (17
February 2000).
Statistics are available and
regularly updated on the WTO website: ‘Trade Remedies Data Portal’,
Trade Remedies Data Portal
(Web Page) <
https://trade-remedies.wto.org/en
archived at <
https://perma.cc/H4A9-CP5S
See generally Marc Benitah,
The WTO Law of Subsidies: A Comprehensive Approach
(Wolters Kluwer,
This is the focus of this
article. Another emerging case concerns subsidies provided to support
investment, production of goods or
provision of services by entities of country
A in country B, thereby affecting competition in country B. This category is the
of the European Union’s foreign subsidies regulation enacted in
Regulation (EU) 2022/2560 of the European Parliament and of the
Council of 14 December 2022 on Foreign Subsidies Distorting the Internal
[2022] OJ L 330/1. This regulation is beyond the scope of this paper. For
discussions, see Victor Crochet and Marcus Gustafsson, ‘Lawful
Illegal Response? Resolving the Issue of Foreign Subsidization under WTO
(2021) 20(3)
World Trade Review
; Csongor István
Nagy, ‘The EU’s New Regime on Foreign Subsidies: Has the Time Come
for a Paradigm-Shift?’
(2023) 57(6)
Journal of World Trade
Commission Implementing
Regulation (EU) 2020/776 of 12 June 2020
[2020] OJ L 189/1 (‘
Glass Fibre Fabrics (GFF) Decision
Commission Implementing
Regulation (EU) 2020/870 of 24 June 2020
[2020] OJ L 201/10 (‘
Filament Glass Fibre Products (GFR) Decision
Implementing Regulation (EU) 2022/433 of 15 March 2022
[2022] OJ L 88/24
Indonesia Stainless Steel Cold-Rolled Flat Products
Victor Crochet and Vineet
Hegde, ‘China’s “Going Global” Policy: Transnational
Production Subsidies under
the WTO SCM Agreement’
(2020) 23(4)
of International Economic Law
; Luca Rubini, ‘Are Transnational
Subsidies Regulated by EU and WTO Law? The General Court Has Spoken (Case
T-480/20 and Case
T-540/20)’ (RSC Policy Paper 2023/09, Robert Schuman
Centre for Advanced Studies, European University Institute, September
Ding Ru and Xiang Yiqian, ‘Emerging Rules on Cross-Border Subsidies: A
Typological Analysis and Proposals for China’s
Approach’ (2022)
Journal of WTO and China
European Union —
Countervailing and Anti-Dumping Duties on Stainless Steel Cold-Rolled Flat
Products from Indonesia
, WTO Doc WT/DS616/2 (18 April 2023) (Request for the
Establishment of a Panel by Indonesia).
International Law
Commission,
Report of the International Law Commission on the Work of Its
Fifty-Third Session
, UN GAOR, 56
sess, Supp No 10, UN Doc
A/56/10 (2001) ch IV(E) (‘
ILC Articles
’). See also Kaj
Hobér, ‘State Responsibility and Attribution’ in Peter
Muchlinski, Federico Ortino and Christoph
Schreuer (eds),
The Oxford Handbook
of International Investment Law
(Oxford University Press, 2008) 549,
James Crawford,
Responsibility: The General Part
(Cambridge University Press, 2013) 113.
See above n
and discussion in Part III below.
Regulation (EU)
2016/1037 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 8 June 2016 on
Protection against Subsidised Imports from
Countries Not Members of the European
[2016] OJ L 176/55 (‘
EU Anti-Subsidy Regulation
This is different from the definition of subsidies under the
further discussed in Parts III(2) and IV(1) below.
Crawford (n
Marko Milanović,
‘State Responsibility for Acts of Non-State Actors: A Comment on Griebel
and Plücken’
(2009) 22(2)
Leiden Journal of International Law
Crawford (n
‘Responsibility of
States for Internationally Wrongful Acts; General Commentary’ (2001) 2
Yearbook of the International Law Commission
Commentaries
Lighthouses (France v
Greece) (Judgment)
[1934] PCIJ (ser A/B) No 62.
United States Diplomatic
and Consular Staff in Tehran (United States of America v Iran) (Judgment)
[1980] ICJ Rep 3.
ILC Commentaries
) 52–3; ‘State
Responsibility (
): First Report of the Special Rapporteur
)’ [1998] I
Yearbook of the International Law
246, 249; ‘State Responsibility (
Report of the Special Rapporteur (
)’ [1998] I
of the International Law Commission
249, 251. See also Crawford (n
Responsibility (
): First Report of the Special Rapporteur
)’ [1998] I
Yearbook of the International Law
268, 268 [48].
ILC Commentaries
Prosecutor v
Nikolić (Decision on Defence Motion Challenging the Exercise of
(International Criminal Tribunal for the
Former Yugoslavia, Trial Chamber II, Case No IT-94-2-PT, 9 October 2002);
Materials on the Responsibility of States for Internationally Wrongful Acts
UN Doc ST/LEG/SER.B/25/Rev.1 (2023) 173–5. See also Simon Olleson,
‘The Impact of the ILC’s Articles on Responsibility
of States for
Internationally Wrongful Acts: Preliminary Draft’ (Research Paper, British
Institute of International and Comparative
Law, 2007) 96–9.
Bosca v Lithuania
(Permanent Court of Arbitration, Case No 2011-05, 17 May 2013).
Clayton v Canada (Award
on Jurisdiction and Liability)
(Permanent Court of Arbitration, Case
No 2009-04, 17 March 2015).
Ibid [321],
[323]–[324].
Saint-Gobain Performance
Plastics Europe v Venezuela (Decision on Liability and the Principles of
(ICSID Tribunal, Case No ARB/12/13, 30 December 2016).
Ibid [447]–[464].
Makuchyan v Azerbaijan
(European Court of Human Rights, Fourth Section, Application
No 17247/13, 26 May 2020).
Ibid [113].
[115]–[117].
Ibid [118].
Appellate Body Report,
United States — Definitive Anti-Dumping and Countervailing Duties on
Certain Products from China
, WTO Doc WT/DS379/AB/R (11 March 2011)
[308]–[313] (‘
United States — Definitive
Anti-Dumping
Ibid [310]–[311].
Panel Report,
Arabia — Measures concerning the Protection of Intellectual Property
, WTO Doc WT/DS567/R (16 June 2020) [7.161].
ILC Commentaries
The summary of the key
facts below is based on
Egypt Glass Fibre Fabrics (GFF) Decision
) [647]–[659], [678]–[683];
Egypt Filament Glass Fibre Products (GFR) Decision
) [35]–[48];
Indonesia Stainless
Steel Cold-Rolled Flat Products Decision
) [304]–[323], [544], [594].
The summary of the key
findings is based on
Egypt Glass Fibre Fabrics (GFF) Decision
) [676]–[697];
Egypt Filament
Glass Fibre Products (GFR) Decision
) [71]–[85];
Indonesia Stainless
Steel Cold-Rolled Flat Products Decision
) [568]–[677].
See generally Fernando Lusa
Bordin, ‘Reflections on Customary International Law: The Authority of
Codification Conventions
and ILC Draft Articles in International Law’
(2014) 63(3)
International and Comparative Law Quarterly
For a detailed discussion,
see Crochet and Hegde (n
ILC Commentaries
Carlo de Stefano,
Attribution in International Law and Arbitration
(Oxford University
Press, 2020) 12–15; Bordin (n
United States
— Definitive Anti-Dumping
) [310]–[316].
Ibid [311].
Karl P Sauvant et al,
‘Trends in FDI, Home Country Measures and Competitive Neutrality’ in
Andrea K Bjorklund (ed),
Yearbook on International Investment Law &
Policy 2012–2013
(Oxford University Press, 2014) 3, 12–16.
Victor Crochet and Weihuan
Zhou, ‘Preventing the Anti-Circumvention Instrument from Undermining
Development through Investment’
(2023) 72(3)
International and
Comparative Law Quarterly
Simon J Evenett and
Johannes Fritz,
Subsidies and Market Access: Towards an Inventory of
Corporate Subsidies by China, the European Union and the United States
(Global Trade Alert Report No 28, 2021) 6–7.
Inflation Reduction Act
, Pub L No 117-169, 136 Stat 1818.
The White House,
Building a Clean Energy Economy: A Guidebook to the Inflation Reduction
Act’s Investments in Clean Energy and Climate Action
(January 2023)
https://www.whitehouse.gov/wpcontent/uploads/2022/12/Inflation-Reduction-Act-Guidebook.pdf
archived at <
https://perma.cc/UWK6-JR86
Chad P Bown,
‘Industrial Policy for Electric Vehicle Supply Chains and the US-EU Fight
over the Inflation Reduction Act’
(Working Paper No 23-1, Peterson
Institute for International Economics, May 2023).
European Union, European
Commission,
Joint Communication to the European Parliament, the Council, the
European Economic and Social Committee, the Committee of the Regions
European Investment Bank: The Global Gateway
(Joint Communication
JOIN/2021/30 final, 1 December 2021). For a detailed discussion of the
EU’s strategies on critical minerals,
see generally Victor Crochet and
Weihuan Zhou, ‘Critical Insecurities? The European Union’s Strategy
for a Stable Supply
of Minerals’
(2024) 27(1)
Journal of International
Economic Law
Office of the United States
Trade Representative, ‘United States and Japan Sign Critical Minerals
Agreement’ (Press Release,
28 March 2023) <
https://ustr.gov/about-us/policy-offices/press-office/press-releases/2023/march/united-states-and-japan-sign-critical-minerals-agreement
archived at <
https://perma.cc/JUQ9-YBWJ
US-Japan Critical Minerals Agreement
(Report No IF12517,
Congressional Research Service, United States Congress, 2024) <
https://crsreports.congress.gov/product/pdf/IF/IF12517
archived at <
https://perma.cc/9N89-U9XE
European Commission,
‘EU Moves forward with Critical Minerals Agreement Negotiations with the
US’ (Press Release IP/23/3214,
14 June 2023) <
https://ec.europa.eu/commission/presscorner/detail/en/ip_23_3214
archived at <
https://perma.cc/MWJ3-XEL9
European Commission,
‘Global Gateway: Flagship Projects’ (Web Page) <
https://international-partnerships.ec.europa.eu/policies/global-gateway/global-gateway-flagship-projects_en
archived at <
https://perma.cc/Y7JP-JPUW
Economic and Trade
Agreement between the Government of the United States of America and the
Government of the People’s Republic
, signed 15 January 2020
(entered into force 14 February 2020) <
https://ustr.gov/sites/default/files/files/agreements/phase%20one%20agreement/Economic_And_Trade_Agreement_Between_The_United_States_And_China_Text.pdf
archived at <
https://perma.cc/D4P6-UT8V
General Agreement on
Tariffs and Trade
, signed 30 October
1947, 55 UNTS 187
(entered into force 1
January 1948) 194. For a summary of this deal, see Weihuan Zhou and Henry Gao,
‘US-China Phase One Deal:
A Brief Account’,
Regulating for
Globalization
(Blog Post, 22 January 2020) <
https://regulatingforglobalization.com/2020/01/22/us-china-phase-one-deal-a-brief-account/
archived at <
https://perma.cc/3BQG-ZA6N
Pieter Haeck, Brendan
Bordelon and Mark Scott, ‘US, Netherlands Strike Deal on Blocking Chip
Exports to China’,
(online, 27 January 2023) <
https://www.politico.eu/article/us-dutch-officials-meet-to-hammer-out-chips-control-deal-export-blocks-china/
archived at <
https://perma.cc/58EX-CP66
See, eg, Organisation for
Economic Co-operation and Development,
Foreign Direct Investment for
Development, Maximising Benefits, Minimising Costs
(Report, 24 September
https://www.oecd-ilibrary.org/finance-and-investment/foreign-direct-investment-for-development_9789264199286-en
archived at <
https://perma.cc/3DGS-FWML
See also Christoph Nedopil,
China Belt and Road Initiative (BRI) Investment Report 2023
February 2024)
<https://www.griffith.edu.au/__data/assets/pdf_file/0033/1910697/Nedopil-2024-China-Belt-Road-Initiative-Investment-report.pdf>;
Maggie Xiaoyang Chen and Chuanhao Lin, ‘Foreign Investment across the Belt
and Road: Patterns, Determinants and Effects’
(Policy Research Working
Paper No 8607, October 2018) <
https://documents1.worldbank.org/curated/en/394671539175518256/pdf/WPS8607.pdf
archived at <
https://perma.cc/YU4H-TWW2
Jushi Egypt for
Fiberglass Industry SAE v European Commission
(General Court of the European
Union, T-540/20, 1 March 2023) [59];
Hengshi Egypt Fiberglass Fabrics SAE v
European Commission
(General Court of the European Union, T-480/20, 1 March
2023) [92].
Hengshi Egypt Fiberglass
Fabrics SAE v European Commission
(Court of Justice of the European Union,
C‑269/23 P and C‑272/23 P,
16 May 2024) [43], [55] (Advocate
General Ćapeta).
Regulations Improving
and Strengthening the Enforcement of Trade Remedies through the Administration
of the Antidumping and Countervailing
, 19 CFR § 351 (2024);
‘Third Party Submission of the United States of America’,
European Union — Countervailing and Anti-Dumping Duties on Stainless Steel
Cold-Rolled Flat Products from Indonesia
(World Trade Organization Dispute
Settlement Body, DS616, 2 February 2024) [14]–[17], <
https://ustr.gov/sites/default/files/enforcement/DS/DS616/US.3dPty.Sub.fin.pdf
archived at <
https://perma.cc/YJN4-D43X
For a detailed discussion,
see Crochet and Hegde (n
Panel Report,
— Export Financing Programme for Aircraft
, WTO Doc WT/DS46/R (14 April
1999) [2.1]–[2.6], [4.19]–[4.20]. This is also confirmed by Annex I
regarding the illustrative list of export subsidies which
covers export financing provided to a foreign buyer.
Gary N Horlick, ‘An
Annotated Explanation of Articles 1 and 2 of the WTO Agreement on Subsidies and
Countervailing Measures’
(2013) 8(9)
Global Trade and Customs
Panel Report,
States — Subsidies on Upland Cotton
, WTO Doc WT/DS267/R (8 September
2004) [7.1143]; Panel Report,
United States — Measures Affecting Trade
in Large Civil Aircraft (Second Complaint)
, WTO Doc WT/DS353/R (31 March
2011) [7.1237].
Accession of the
People’s Republic of China
, WTO Doc WT/L/432 (23 November 2001)
(Decision of 10 November 2001) art 10(2).
Frieder Roessler,
‘The Concept of Nullification and Impairment in the Legal System of the
World Trade Organization’ in
Ernst-Ulrich Petersmann (ed),
International Trade Law and the GATT/WTO Dispute Settlement System
(Kluwer Law International, 1997) 125.
Marrakesh Agreement
Establishing the World Trade Organization
, opened for signature 15 April
1994, 1867 UNTS 3
(entered into force 1 January 1995) annex 2
Understanding on Rules and Procedures Governing the Settlement of
Ibid art 26.1.
A detailed review of the
historical development of the NVCs is beyond the scope of this paper and has
been undertaken in a series
of scholarly work: see, eg, Robert E Hudec,
‘The GATT Legal System: A Diplomat’s Jurisprudence’
Journal of World Trade
; Armin von Bogdandy, ‘The
Non-Violation Procedure of Article XXIII:2, GATT: Its Operational
(1992) 26(4)
Journal of World Trade
Williams, ‘Non-Violation Complaints in the WTO System’ in Paolo
Mengozzi (ed),
International Trade Law on the 50
Anniversary of
the Multilateral Trade System
(A Giuffrè, 1999) 675; James P Durling
and Simon N Lester, ‘Original Meanings and the
Dispute: The
Drafting History, Textual Evolution, and Application of the Non-Violation
Nullification or Impairment Remedy’
(1999) 32(2)
George Washington
Journal of International Law and Economics
; Graham Cook, ‘The
Legalization of the Non-Violation Concept in the GATT/WTO System’
(Article, 2018) <
https://papers.ssrn.com/sol3/papers.cfm?abstract_id=3272165
archived at <
https://perma.cc/9NF3-6WKY
discussion of the issue of incomplete contract and under-utilisation of NVCs,
see Robert W Staiger and Alan O Sykes, ‘How
Important Can the
Non-Violation Clause Be for the GATT/WTO?’ (2017) 9(2)
Economic Journal: Microeconomics
GATT Working Party Report,
The Australian Subsidy on Ammonium Sulphate
, GATT Doc GATT/CP.4/39 (31
March 1950); GATT Panel Report,
Treatment by Germany of Imports of Sardines
, GATT Doc G/26 (30 October 1952); GATT Panel Report,
Community — Tariff Treatment on Imports of Citrus Products from Certain
Countries in the Mediterranean Region
, GATT Doc L/5776 (7 February 1985);
GATT Panel Report,
European Economic Community — Production Aids
Granted on Canned Peaches, Canned Pears, Canned Fruit Cocktail and Dried
, GATT Doc L/5778 (20 February 1985); GATT Panel Report,
Economic Community — Payments and Subsidies Paid to Processors and
Producers of Oilseeds and Related Animal-Feed Proteins
, GATT Doc L/6627 (14
December 1989) (‘
EEC – Oilseeds I
’). There were also a
number of unsuccessful NVCs during the
Non-Violation
Complaints under GATT Article XXIII:2
, GATT Doc MTN.GNG/NG13/W/31 (14 July
1989) (Note by the Secretariat); Cook (n
Panel Report,
— Measures Affecting Consumer Photographic Film and Paper
Doc WT/DS44/R (31 March 1998) [10.41]–[10.89] (‘
Ibid [10.37].
See, eg, Williams (n
) 723–51. See generally Durling
and Lester (n
See Williams (n
); Panel Report,
Korea — Measures Affecting Government Procurement
WT/DS163/R (1 May 2000) [7.84]–[7.126] (‘
Procurement
’); Panel Report,
European Communities — Measures
Affecting Asbestos and Asbestos-Containing Products
WT/DS135/R (18 September 2000) [8.276]–[8.304] (‘
’); Panel Report,
United States — Certain Country of
Origin Labelling (COOL) Requirements
, WTO Docs WT/DS384/R and WT/DS386/R (18
November 2011) [7.900]–[7.901] (‘
Requirements
Japan — Films
Procurement
[7.84]–[7.87];
EC — Asbestos
[8.283]. See also Durling and
) [144], [148];
Korea — Procurement
[7.98]; Panel Report,
United States — Certain Country of Origin
Labelling (COOL) Requirements
WTO Docs WT/DS384/RW and WT/DS386/RW
(20 October 2014) (Recourse to Article 21.5 of the DSU) [7.689] (‘
— COOL, Article 21.5
’). See also Hudec (n
) 617; Durling and Lester (n
Article 21.5
[7.682]–[7.688].
Thomas Cottier and Krista
Nadakavukaren Schefer, ‘Non-Violation Complaints in WTO/GATT Dispute
Settlement: Past, Present and
Future’ in Ernst-Ulrich Petersmann (ed),
International Trade Law and the GATT/WTO Dispute Settlement System
(Kluwer Law International, 1997) 145, 148 (noting that NVCs were mainly
supported and used by exporting countries).
This is an established
legal test as part of the “benefit” claim. See, eg,
COOL, Article 21.5
One of the anonymous
reviewers observed that ‘the “benefit” of resorting to
remedies is nullified or impaired by
the limited scope of
than the provision of Chinese subsidies’. While this observation is
interesting, it overlooks the underlying function
of NVCs. As discussed earlier
in this section, NVCs are designed precisely to address the issue of
incompleteness of WTO rules and
actions that could not have been anticipated at
the time of negotiations of the relevant concession(s) or agreement(s). The
approach would potentially preclude governments from relying on
any WTO agreement for NVCs because a respondent can always argue
claimed nullification or impairment is caused by a lack of rules. Our argument
finds support in
US — COOL, Article 21.5
) [7.689]. Moreover, the reviewer also
observed that ‘[w]hile the benefit of tariff concessions is easily
observed and calculated,
the benefit of “potential remedies” is much
harder to measure’. In our view, an NVC against cross-border subsidies
concerns the same spillover effects of such subsidies when they are provided
within the territory of the subsidising government.
Therefore, the calculation
of the magnitude of subsidies and benefits conferred can be based on the
standard methodologies contemplated
While art 5(b) incorporates
the ‘nullification or impairment of benefits’ language, it is a rule
or an obligation which
gives rise to violation claims, and hence different from
NVCs. See Cook (n
) 13. See also
Cottier and Schefer (n
) 155 (noting
that this provision was meant to be an equivalent NVC against non-actionable
subsidies under the
Report of the
Working Party on the Accession of China
, WTO Doc WT/MIN(01)/3 (10 November
2001) [41]–[49], [155]–[176].
Nicolas Lamp, ‘At
the Vanishing Point of Law: Rebalancing, Non-Violation Claims, and the Role of
the Multilateral Trade Regime
in the Trade Wars’
(2019) 22(4)
of International Economic Law
, 739–41; Warren Maruyama and Alan W
Wolff, ‘Saving the WTO from the National Security Exception’
(Working Paper
No 23-2, Peterson Institute for International Economics, May
2023) 19–20 <
https://www.piie.com/sites/default/files/2023-05/wp23-2.pdf
archived at <
https://perma.cc/8FJ4-4SGD
) art 26.1(c).
It is worth noting that
such remedies are not necessarily economically beneficial for an affected,
importing Member of subsidised
goods. Standard economic theories suggest that
producers and consumers in the importing Member tend to benefit from
lower-priced
input/goods due to the subsidisation. For a detailed economic
analysis of subsidies, see Alan O Sykes, ‘The Economics of WTO
Subsidies and Countervailing Measures’ (John M Olin Program in Law and
Economics Working Paper No 186, University
of Chicago Law School, May 2003)
https://chicagounbound.uchicago.edu/cgi/viewcontent.cgi?article=1515&context=law_and_economics
archived at <
https://perma.cc/GS3E-SHLP
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (553 KB)
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter