URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/journals/IntTBLawRw/2004/5.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 15:05:16
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Roth, Marianne --- "International Contract and Competition Law in Internet Matters" [2004] IntTBLawRw 5; (2004) 9 International Trade and Business Law Review 95
International Contract and Competition Law in Internet Matters
Presentation of problem and legal sources
International jurisdiction
Applicable law
International Contract law in the business-to-business context
International jurisdiction
General place of jurisdiction at the defendant’s seat or residence
(a) Autonomous Austrian law
(b) European law
(i) Brussels Convention and Lugano Convention
(ii) Brussels I Regulation
Choice of forum agreement
Applicable law
Choice of law
Objective connecting factor
International contract law in the business-to-consumer context
Protection of consumers under jurisdiciton and conflict of laws provisions General
Contract for private purposes
Brussels Convention and Lugano Convention: ‘passive’consumer
Brussels I Regulation: directing professional or commercialactivities to the consumer’s country
Choice of forum agreement and choice of law
IV International jurisdiction and applicable law from a US point of view
Personal jurisdiction
Choice of forum
US legal position
Need for reform in Europe?
Choice of law
Scope of internet activities
Restrictions of a website by language and subject matter
Interactive websites with an invitation to enter into a distance sales contract
International competition law
Special jurisdiction (‘fliegender gerichtsstand’) of the place where the harmful event occurred
Applicable law
IPRG: marketplace rule
E-Commerce Directive and E-Commerce Act: principle of the country of origin
Conclusion and Outlook
International Contract and Competition Law in Internet
Marianne Roth
Presentation of problem and legal
The internet enables products and services to be marketed worldwide, to an
extent never previously experienced. Today, even small
enterprises regard it as
important to present themselves on their own websites, while at the same time,
more and more individuals
are using the internet from their computers at home.
Accordingly individuals can easily obtain information, choose from a wide range
of goods and services and then, with a mouse click, enter into a contract,
without being restricted by national borders. And this
is precisely where the
problem often arises. Together with the increase in international business
activities on the internet, the
potential for conflict in this area is also
increasing. What should the buyer do if the foreign seller either fails to
deliver, or
delivers defective goods or engages in unfair business practices? In
the last instance, as elsewhere in business life, the only course
left is legal
Of course, the question that arises is which court is competent for these
proceedings? Who may sue at home and who will be obliged
to go through the
arduous process of commencing litigation abroad? Then, when this question has
been answered, the next stage is
to determine the applicable law: what
substantive law must the court apply in practice, the
lex patriae
party or the law of the other party, or perhaps a third legal system?
In the following, I will pursue these questions. First, I shall consider
electronic contracts entered into between enterprises (business-to-business)
and, secondly, I shall discuss the special features of consumer contracts
(business-to-consumer). The questions that arise are dealt
with from a European
and, in particular, from an Austrian point of view, while the subject of
international jurisdiction also offers
the chance for a comparative-law
perspective on US law. On the basis of the attempts here described to restrict
the legal reach of
internet activities, I will finally address the question of
the universal nature of the internet in European consumer transactions
parallel problems with regard to electronic competitive practices.
International jurisdiction
In Austria, international jurisdiction in matters involving the member states
of the European Union (EU), with the exception of Denmark,
is governed by the
Brussels I Regulation, which entered into force on 1 March 2002.
This replaced the European Convention on Jurisdiction and Enforcement
(Brussels Convention),
which was in force before that date and now
only applies in relation to Denmark.
In dealings with the European
Free Trade Association (EFTA) states, Iceland, Liechtenstein, Norway and
Switzerland, international
Convention,
which is almost identical in content to the Brussels
Convention.
Outside the international area of application of the Brussels I Regulation
and the two European Conventions, for example in relation
to the internet market
leader USA, relations are governed by the respective autonomous rules of the
state where legal action is sought.
In Austria, for example, local jurisdiction
is governed by the rules of the Austrian Jurisdiction Act (Jurisdiktionsnorm,
to below as JN), which also apply to international jurisdiction with
necessary changes.
The Hague Conference on Private International Law
has for a considerable time been endeavouring to extend the area of application
of the European Conventions, the Brussels Convention and the Lugano Convention,
by creating a worldwide Hague Jurisdiction and Enforcement
of Judgments
Convention.
To date these efforts have failed, above all as a result
of resistance from the US.
I will discuss this problem area in
connection with the comparative treatment of US law later.
Applicable law
The substantive law applicable to internet contracts, in Austria and in the
EU in general, is determined by the EC Convention on the
Law Applicable to
Contractual Obligations (also known as the Rome Convention on the Law Applicable
to Contractual Obligations) which
contains uniform conflict-of-laws
provisions for all matters with a foreign element. Thus, the Rome Convention
applies regardless of whether the foreign connection
is to a contracting state
or to a non-contracting state.
Since the implementation of the
Electronic Commerce Directive, however, in business-to-business contracts
within the EEA (EEA),
the conflict-of-laws principle of the
country of origin contained in Article 3(1) and (2)
has overridden
the applicable Rome Convention rules for determining the proper law.
As a result, it is now necessary in business-to-business contexts to
distinguish between matters outside and those within the EEA.
However, this will
not play a big role in practice, since the main conflicts provision of the Rome
Convention in the business-to-business
context, the standard reference to the
seller’s law of establishment, largely overlaps with the connecting factor
under Article
3(1) and (2) of the E-Commerce Directive; only in exceptional
cases, there may be certain deviations.
In Austria the E-Commerce Directive was implemented by the E-Commerce Act
(E-Commerce-Gesetz, referred to below as ECG),
which came into
force on 1 January 2002; s 20 ECG is almost identical word for word to Article
3(1) and (2) of the E-Commerce Directive.
The principle of the country of origin as a conflict-of-laws provision in the
E-Commerce Directive and the Austrian ECG is of crucial
importance, on the other
hand, in the international law of fair trading. Here too a distinction must be
made: internet sellers with
their place of business inside the EEA are subject
to the country-of-origin rule in Article 3(1) and (2) of the E-Commerce
and s 20 of the ECG, with regard to their competitive behaviour within
the EEA; while in other respects for EEA sellers in outside
markets and for
sellers from non-EEA countries the relevant conflict-of-laws rule is found in
the autonomous law of the state where
legal action is sought. In Austria, for
example, the relevant rule is located in the Act on Private International Law
(Internationales
Privatrechtsgesetz, referred to below as IPRG), which differs
markedly from the ECG.
International Contract law in the
business-to-business context
International jurisdiction
The question as to jurisdiction may appear at first sight to be merely a
formal matter, but it is very important for those affected.
Above all in
international dealings, it makes a great difference and may even decide the
outcome of the case whether a party can
institute legal proceedings in its home
country or whether it has to litigate in a foreign court whose language it does
not understand,
whose rules of procedure it does not know and which may perhaps
use a different substantive law than the domestic court would. So
what options
are available to the parties for disputes relating to internet contracts that
they enter into in the course of their
professional or commercial activities?
General place of jurisdiction at the
defendant’s seat or residence
Claims under internet contracts may in all events be pursued at the general
place of jurisdiction of the defendant, that is, at the
residence of a natural
person or at the seat of a juristic person.
Under autonomous
Austrian law, even habitual residence of a party in Austria establishes
However, in practice this general place of
agreement in advance and thus exclude it from the outset.
In contrast, the jurisdiction of the place of performance is of great
practical importance. Both European legal sources and autonomous
Austrian law
provide for this jurisdiction as an alternative to the general place of
(a) Autonomous Austrian law
Under s 88 JN, to create a jurisdiction of the place of performance, it is
necessary for the parties to the contract to agree on the
in the case of sales of goods between businesspersons, the unilateral
declaration of the seller on the invoice, which must be supplied
at the latest
together with the goods, is sufficient.
The place of performance is
then determined by the agreement or by the place stated in the invoice. The
courts of the place of performance,
determined in this way, have jurisdiction
for all actions for a declaratory judgment as to the existence or non-existence
contract, its termination and compensation for nonperformance or
defective performance.
There are no formal requirements for the agreement on a place of performance.
It may be entered into electronically, but in the case
of dispute, or if in
exceptional circumstances an official review of jurisdiction is
admissible,
it must be ‘proved by documentary evidence’
to the court.
In principle, a paper printout of the relevant
electronic texts, incorporating the ideas in writing, would satisfy the
of a document (Urkunde).
However, case law requires the
least the party that
is disputing in court the agreement on the jurisdiction of
the place of performance.
The requirement of a personal signature
in e-commerce, however, is satisfied only by a special encoding technology that
fulfils particular
security standards with regard to the authenticity and
integrity of electronic data (s 2(3) of the Signature Act 1999). In addition,
the Signature Act (Signaturgesetz, referred to below as SigG)
refers to a safe electronic signature and expressly states that it is
equivalent to a personal handwritten signature (s 4(1) SigG).
If, therefore, case law requires the signature of one party to prove the
existence of an agreement on jurisdiction, it will probably
require such a
securely signed electronic document in the case of internet transactions. In
these cases, however, ‘documentary
proof’ of the agreement cannot be
a mere printout of the securely signed electronic document, for the printout
embodies not
a document that has actually been signed, but an encoded
which must therefore be treated as an unsigned
Instead, the electronic document itself must be presented
to the court, for instance stored on a disk. Electronic documents are actually
seen as items of visual evidence,
because they are not embodied in
a physical medium (such as paper, clay, wood or metal), although s 4(3) SigG
expressly extends the
particular evidentiary value of signed private documents
to include securely signed electronic documents. As a consequence, under
of the Code of Civil Procedure, these documents are considered to present the
full proof, binding the court, of the genuineness
of their contents and are
therefore treated as equal in value to signed private documents in the law of
evidence in civil procedure.
(b) European law
Unlike the autonomous Austrian law, provisions of the European jurisdiction
grant the jurisdiction of the place of performance by
operation of law, that is,
irrespective of any agreement between the parties.
However, if the
parties have entered into an agreement on the place of performance, the
by the agreement of the
Failing this, the following distinctions must be made,
depending on the applicable law.
(i) Brussels Convention and Lugano Convention
Under the Brussels Convention and Lugano Convention, the place of performance
is determined by the law that is applicable to the contract
in question, under
the provisions of private international law.
Without anticipating
the question of what law is applicable, it can be stated that internet contracts
are normally governed by the
legal system of the country in which the seller has
his or her normal residence on the date when the contract was entered into or,
if the seller is a juristic person, its establishment.
For example,
if an Austrian internet user takes up the offer of goods or services of a
foreign seller on the internet, the transaction
is normally governed by foreign
law, and that foreign law usually decides where the place of performance is.
Under most legal systems, unless otherwise agreed, goods are obligations to
be performed at the place of business or residence of
the seller, as is the case
under s 905 Austrian Civil Code and ss 269 and 270 German Civil Code.
The same is true if the UN Convention on Contracts for the International
Sale of Goods applies and is the uniform substantive law,
thus removing the need
for a connecting factor under conflicts law:
If the contract does
not require the goods to be shipped, there is an obligation to be performed at
the place of business or residence
of the seller. Where the buyer purchases
goods provided online by downloading,
the place of performance is
therefore the place where the seller had its establishment when the contract was
entered into.
In contrast, orders on the internet necessitating
conventional shipping are to be performed at the place where the seller
the goods to the first independent carrier for transport.
In both cases, whether with or without contractually agreed shipping, the
place of performance is normally not in the country where
the internet user has
his or her residence or establishment. Thus even if the UN Convention on
Contracts for the International Sale
of Goods is applied, the internet user will
not have access to domestic jurisdiction.
Under those legal systems most usually encountered, services are to be
performed at the place determined by agreement of the parties
or the nature of
the service. Although the internet user calls upon the services from his or her
computer, the real service consists
in entering the data, and this is usually
done at the residence or establishment of the seller.
As a result,
even those who enjoy services via the internet will normally not have a domestic
If the internet seller wants to sue for payment, its jurisdiction under
Article 5(1) of the Brussels Convention and the Lugano Convention
will be based
on the place of performance where the obligation to pay money arises. Where the
UN Convention on Contracts for the
International Sale of Goods applies, art 57
provides for a place of performance favourable to the plaintiff, in the case of
with regard to the purchase price, at the seller’s place of
business, in our context at the internet seller’s place of
Furthermore, the place of performance of the obligation
to pay money must also be determined under conflicts of laws provisions.
Depending on which national law applies in the individual case, payment
obligations must be performed at the debtor’s place
of business (as is the
case in Germany, Austria, France, Belgium, Luxembourg and Greece) or at the
creditor’s place of business
(as is the case in Switserland, the
Netherlands, Denmark, Sweden, Italy and the United Kingdom).
result, the courts have jurisdiction both at the internet user’s place of
business or those at the seller’s place
of business.
(ii) Brussels I Regulation
In order to avoid such a laborious procedure for establishing the place of
performance under conflict of laws provisions, Article
(5)(1)(b) of the Brussels
Regulation now contains an independent definition of the place of performance
for the purposes of determining
the contrary, the place of the performance is the place where, under the
the goods were delivered or should have been delivered. In the case of
services, the place of performance is the place where, under
the contract, the
services were provided or should have been provided. So here, reference is made
to a purely factual criterion,
that is, performance in conformity with the
contract, without having to have resort to any national law. The place of
performance
established in this way also applies to all kinds of claims,
including the agreed financial consideration and any secondary claims,
genuine simplification in contrast to the Brussels and Lugano
Conventions.
Apart from this, the new provision for internet contracts brings scarcely any
changes. Where, in internet contracts, conventional
shipping of the goods
ordered is agreed on as an ancillary obligation, the seller fulfils its
obligation in the meaning of art 5(1)
of the Brussels Regulation when it
delivers the goods to the postal service, railway or other transporter. Thus the
place of performance
is normally the seller’s place of business.
The situation is to be judged in the same way if the goods ordered online are
to be delivered by way of the internet, such as by downloading
the desired
software. The seller feeds its performance into the internet from its place of
business by handing the goods to the transporter
internet, from which the
customer receives them by downloading them via his or her terminal, in the same
way as he or she collects
postal consignments from the mailbox. Here it makes no
difference, in my opinion, whether the seller, when it performs its side of
contract, has to take into account the specific customer data (that is, the
seller’s performance is given with reference
to the client’s system,
as in the case of browser software to access an online service) or whether the
seller makes standard
contract packages available to be called on.
In both cases, the seller acts exclusively from its place of business.
Services that are rendered over the internet, for example information on
timetables or directory enquiries, are also normally fed
into the internet at
the service provider’s place of business, and this feeding into the
internet constitutes the service.
The user then makes use of the services from
his computer, but the actual performance consists in the seller entering the
therefore the place of performance here is also to be seen as at the
internet seller’s place of business.
In summary, it can be stated that the various sources of law, despite all
their differences, do at least agree in their result when
they establish the
place of performance: the internet user, who buys goods or services over the
internet, will not normally have
access to a domestic jurisdiction.
Choice of forum agreement
In addition to the places of jurisdiction named above, the parties also have
the possibility of agreeing between themselves upon the
court with jurisdiction
over their case. In their general terms of business, internet sellers often
include a choice of jurisdiction
clause that provides for a particular court, or
at least for courts of a particular country to have jurisdiction and usually
is the country where they have their place of business.
admissibility of such a choice of jurisdiction clause is to be examined under
the procedural law applying at the place of the
court. In Austria, this occurs
under Article 23 of the Brussels Regulation or Article 17 of the Brussels
Convention and the Lugano
Convention and in relation to nonmember countries this
occurs under s 104 of the JN.
Under European law, a choice of forum agreement must normally be in writing
or at least confirmed in writing;
although the declaration need not
In addition to this, Article 23(4) of the Brussels
Regulation expressly states that electronic communications which make it
to record the agreement in a permanent form are treated in the same way
as agreements in writing.
In contrast, autonomous Austrian law, which applies in relation to countries
that are not EU or EFTA member states, is stricter. Section
104 of the JN
requires only an express declaration by the parties, which is subject to no
formal requirements. However, this declaration,
just like the agreement on a
in the case
of dispute or in the course of an official review of jurisdiction, ‘must
be evidenced by documents’.
Since signatures are important in
the law of evidence, it is also the unanimous opinion here that the declaration
of the parties
to be evidenced must be supported by the personal signature of at
least the later party disputing this.
However, as stated above, in
e-commerce only a secure electronic signature satisfies the requirement of a
personal signature.
Where electronic choice of forum agreements
have to be documented in legal proceedings, they are therefore recognised only
contents are confirmed by a secure electronic signature.
Choice of forum agreements, however, as a general rule also give rise to
international jurisdiction in the country of the internet
seller’s place
of business. Overall, in the case of legal relations without consumer
involvement, it can be stated that only
as an exception will places of
country. In business dealings between business persons,
however, this result is quite acceptable.
Applicable law
Choice of law
Similarly to international jurisdiction, the parties may, as a general rule,
freely decide on the law governing their contract.
This freedom of
choice of law also applies to EEA matters which are principally governed by the
E-Commerce Act (see above). Section
21(5) of the E-Commerce Act expressly
excludes the freedom of the parties to a contract to choose the governing law
from the principle
of the country of origin of the E-Commerce Act.
Sellers who operate globally have an interest in maintaining all their
transactions on a uniform legal basis and therefore general
terms of business
often contain such choice-of-law clauses.
In cross-border internet
dealings, in particular, it is quite customary to provide that the law of a
third country shall apply and
such a choice of law is also valid.
It is only if both parties to the contract have their establishments in
Austria that the agreement is to apply foreign law. However,
in the opinion of
some this is regarded as invalid.
Objective connecting factor
Since the E-Commerce Act entered into force, where the parties have made no
choice of law, a distinction must be made between matters
faced by member
countries and non-member countries. Article 4 of the Rome Convention provides
that the contract is governed by the
law of the country with which it has the
closest connections. Article 4(2) of the Rome Convention assumes that these
connections
are closest with the country in which the party owing the
characteristic performance has its habitual residence, or place of business,
the date when the contract is entered into. The characteristic performance,
however, is normally that of the internet seller,
whereas the customer is
obliged only to make the payment; one need only think of the contracts of sale
or for services that are common
on the internet. In consequence, Article 4 of
the Rome Convention normally refers to the law of the internet seller and in the
of transactions with foreign sellers this will be the foreign law in
Article 4(5) of the Rome Convention offers a possibility to correct this
fundamental principle. It provides that the assumption described
above is deemed
to have been refuted if the totality of the circumstances suggests a closer
connection to another country. In internet
transactions, such a closer
connection to another country will exist only as an exception, but at least the
notion is conceivable.
Let us assume that a seller has its place of business in
Germany, but advertises in Austria using an Austrian internet address containing
the letters ‘at’. This Austrian website does not create a place of
business in Austria, but if, for example, by the use
of appropriate sales and
delivery restrictions they are directed solely at the Austrian market,
then by way of the escape clause in Article 4(5) of the Rome Convention,
one could possibly assume that the contract was more closely
connected to
Austria and thus achieve the application of Austrian law.
virtual shops merely make use of domestic suppliers or transport enterprises,
however, this does not affect the basic assumption
applicable law remains that of the residence or place of business of the
internet seller. Similarly, the installation of
automatically downloaded
programmes, such as browser software to connect to an online service, does not
justify assuming a closer
connection to the customer’s country of
residence or place of business. This is the case even if the automatic
downloading
needs to be specifically adapted to the customer’s
Admittedly, the seller had to adapt the individual customer
computer so it can be connected to the online service, but it provides
service over the internet, that is, from its own place of business. The
situation here is therefore no different from the situation
in other cases where
an enterprise provides individual services at the request of a specific
customer. The basic principle of choice
of the law of the seller’s place
of business therefore remains here as well.
Where the Rome Convention refers to the law of the seller’s place of
business, therefore, the result coincides with the principle
of the country of
origin in the E-Commerce Act, which applies to transactions inside the
Unlike Article 4 of the Rome Convention, the principle of the
country of origin of the ECG is not a connection to the rebuttable
presumption
of closest connection, but a strict reference to the law of the country of
origin, which is applicable even if the particular
circumstances of the
transaction indicate a closer connection to another country. This is because s
20 of the ECG has no escape clause
comparable with Article 4(5) of the Rome
Convention.
In conclusion to the investigation above, it can be stated that: in the
business-tobusiness context, where there is no agreement to
the contrary between
the parties, it is the courts at the place of business of the internet seller
that normally have jurisdiction
over any litigation. In substance too, the
dispute is decided under the law at the seller’s place of business.
However, this
only applies when substantive uniform law, such as the UN
Convention on Contracts for the International Sale of Goods, does not displace
it in advance, removing the need for a connecting factor under conflict of laws
provisions.
International contract law in the
business-to-consumer context
Protection of consumers under jurisdiciton and
conflict of laws provisions General
In contrast to business persons, the situation is different when a private
consumer uses the internet as a medium, given that consumers
automatically be expected to conduct legal proceedings abroad. Furthermore, the
application of foreign law occasionally appears
problematic regarding consumer
contracts. At least in the European context, such contracts are subject to
special provisions which
grant the consumer a special jurisdiction in the
country of his or her residence
and, with regard to substantive
law, declare that the law of his or her normal residence applies.
Unlike the objective connecting factor under the Rome Convention, which
also applies in relationships to non-member states, the consumer’s
of the European jurisdiction provisions applies only if the enterprise has its
place of business in an EU or EFTA country,
or at least has an agency or branch
Autonomous Austrian law, which governs the international jurisdiction of
disputes with enterprises from non-member states, has no
comparable consumer
At first glance, this appears to be a serious gap in
legal protection. However, if one considers that a judgment obtained in the
consumer’s country may possibly be unenforceable in the enterprise’s
country for lack of an enforcement convention, this
puts the deficiency into
perspective. In the following, it will be considered how far the provisions of
private international law
and international procedural law can be relied on for
internet transactions.
Contract for private purposes
Both the consumer jurisdiction and the special conflict rule for consumer
matters presuppose a contract entered into by a person for
a purpose that cannot
be attributed to its professional or commercial activities. In order to assume
that a consumer contract exists,
therefore, the performance under the contract
must serve private purposes of the consumer.
This is not decided
solely by the intention of the consumer. Instead, the specific circumstances are
important for consideration,
in particular, the private purpose must be
recognisable to the other party to the contract.
If the enterprise
cannot recognise that the buyer’s intention is to use the performance only
privately, then there is no consumer
contract in the legal sense. An enterprise
that clearly directs its website only towards commercial customers need
therefore not
defend itself against any accusations that it fails to uphold
consumer protection provisions, even if in the last instance a customer
performance for the customer’s private purposes.
Brussels Convention and Lugano Convention:
‘passive’consumer
Not all contracts that are entered into for private purposes justify special
treatment in jurisdiction and applicable law. Under the
European Brussels
Convention/Lugano Convention and the Rome Convention, this applies to contracts
in connection with internet transactions,
which relate to the performance of a
service or the delivery of movable property. This is the case provided that the
making of the
contract in the consumer’s country was preceded by an
express invitation or advertising by the enterprise and that the consumer
undertook the legal acts necessary to enter into the contract in this same
Under these provisions the consumer protection, with
regard to the provisions of jurisdiction and conflict of laws, benefits only
what is known as the ‘passive’ consumer, who
is addressed by an enterprise or the advertising of that enterprise in his or
her home country and thus enters into a contract, without
going to a foreign
country to enter into the contract. The courts of such a passive
consumer’s own country have jurisdiction
in this case, and therefore must
apply the law of the consumer’s own country.
The terms ‘invitation’ and ‘advertising’ respectively
refer not only to binding offers to enter into a contract
and invitations to
treat, but in general to all acts promoting sales made by the seller in the
consumer’s country,
including setting up a website that can
be accessed from the consumer’s country, with information on the
enterprise and the
products on offer. A consumer surfing the internet will
typically travel the world only virtually, that is, he or she will make a
contract declaration (an offer or acceptance) online from a computer at
and therefore all the elements of the European Conventions
are similarly satisfied in internet transactions.
However, the revised text of the Brussels Convention in the form of the
Brussels I Regulation does now have slightly altered elements,
specifically
relevant with regard to internet technology. It is in fact quite clear that the
internet, by its nature, is not merely
ubiquitous, present everywhere, but also
aterritorial, that is, not specially established in one particular country. The
distinction
between ‘active’ and ‘passive’ consumers is
therefore not really appropriate in the case of internet transactions.
Brussels I Regulation: directing professional or
commercialactivities to the consumer’s country
For the area of application of the Brussels I Regulation, there is a consumer
contract that gives rise to jurisdiction at the consumer’s
residence if
the enterprise exercises professional or commercial activities in the
consumer’s country of residence or at least
directs such activities in
some way to this country (or to more than one country, including the
consumer’s country) and the
contract is within the scope of these
activities.
If one compares the wording of the European Conventions - the Brussels
Convention, Lugano Convention, but also the Rome Convention
- with the text of
the new regulation, the first striking point is that two requirements have been
omitted without replacement: first,
the restriction to contracts whose subject
is providing a service or delivering movable property; and, secondly, the
requirement
that the consumer must have undertaken the legal acts necessary to
enter into the contract in his or her home country, that is, that
the consumer
must have made a contract declaration in his or her home country.
These extensions of the area of application were made specifically in view of
the new technologies. It is true that the requirement
that the contract
declaration be made in the consumer’s home country is normally fulfilled
without difficulty in the case of
internet contracts, for a consumer surfing the
internet will typically travel the world only virtually, making contract
declarations
online from a computer at home.
However, in times of
increasing personal mobility, there are more and more often situations in which
the consumer makes the contract
declaration while travelling, for example from
his or her laptop computer, when the consumer is not in the home country at the
of making the relevant legal act, nor in the seller’s country, but in
a different country. Such situations, without justification,
escape the consumer
protection of the European Conventions, which make no difference with regard to
the need for consumer protection,
whether the consumer is at home or travelling
in countries outside Europe. Admittedly, the broad wording of the text of the
new regulation
extends its protection to all contracts, without a geographical
restriction, including contracts entered into in the seller’s
thus protecting the ‘active’ consumer. The criticism based on
must, however, be rebutted with the fact that on the internet
it is sometimes difficult or even impossible to determine the place
the consumer has made its legal acts relevant to entering into the contract,
with the result that these acts are not capable
of creating a connection between
the contract and the consumer’s country. Article 15(1)(c) of the Brussels
Regulation rightly
uses, as a sole basis, the directing of the
enterprise’s activities to the consumer’s country.
The second extension of the text of the regulation relates to the types of
contract covered by consumer protection. Under the Brussels
Convention, the
Lugano Convention and the Rome Convention, if the types of contracts covered are
only contracts for the performance
of services and contracts for the delivery of
movable property, then this restriction has now been removed in the Regulation,
any type of contract entered into to give rise to a consumer
extension appears advisable, above all, in regard to the various opinions on the
legal classification of online deliveries.
In saying this, the only point on
which there is agreement relates to standardised online deliveries, such as the
delivery of standard
software and the confirmed view today is that these
constitute movable property.
On the other hand, in the case of
individualised online deliveries that have to be specially adapted to the needs
and circumstances
of the customer, it is heatedly disputed whether these are
property. They are generally regarded as not being property in the case
is known as information downloading, that is, making use of online information
which can be used even without being stored
on a hard disk.
course, those who are not prepared to classify online services, that are not
embodied in a concrete form, as movable property
ought to consider subsuming
them under the category of services, and in this way the European consumer
protection provisions would
nevertheless apply.
The new regulation,
with its deliberately broad wording, rightly avoids all these points of dispute,
particularly since the consumer
seems no less worthy of protection in the case
of individualised services or supply of information over the internet.
However, I turn now to the real core of the European consumer protection
provisions, ‘directing professional or commercial activities’
consumer’s country or,
as the Brussels Convention, the Lugano
Convention and the Rome Convention put it, the requirement of an
‘invitation’
or ‘advertising’, which must have preceded
the conclusion of the contract in the consumer’s country. Just as running
a website with information on the enterprise and the products on offer is an
‘invitation’ or ‘advertising’,
in the meaning of
European Conventions, so too does it also constitute the element of
‘directing professional or commercial
activities’ at the
consumer’s country.
Websites on the internet can be accessed globally and therefore an internet
seller, on an objective reading of the above provisions,
does indeed offer its
goods for sale and advertise them all over the world,
last instance directs its commercial activities to all states in the world in
which its website can be accessed. By reason
of this omnipresence of the World
Wide Web, the internet seller is confronted with an incalculable multitude of
consumer jurisdictions
and consumer legal systems. Nevertheless, many
enterprises use the internet precisely because it is global, in order to
their customers, both internationally and at home. This raises the
question as to whether, in view of the technologically unrestricted
internet offers and advertisements, it is in fact to be assumed the enterprises
that use the World Wide Web within the area
of application of the above
location and comply with
all consumer legal systems? Before I return to this
question, I would like to deal with the possibility of agreements between the
parties. Indeed, if the parties could freely exclude the above consumer
protection provisions relating to jurisdiction and applicable
law, this would
considerably modify the problems indicated.
Choice of forum agreement and choice of law
The European international civil procedure law, however, regards as
inadmissible agreements on jurisdiction that, before legal proceedings
commenced, exclude a jurisdiction that exists to protect the consumer.
Autonomous Austrian law also places restrictions on choice of forum
agreements for actions against consumers whose residential or
habitual residence
is in Austria or who are employed in Austria. In these cases, a choice of forum
agreement is admissible only to
the extent that the jurisdiction agreed on is
one in which the consumer has his or her residential or habitual residence or
his or her employment.
As with choice of forum agreements, choice-of-law clauses to protect the
consumer are not admissible without restriction. A choice
of law may not lead to
a situation where mandatory legal provisions, at the habitual residence of the
consumer, are excluded to the
consumer’s detriment.
Furthermore, the choice of the law of a country that is not in the EEA is
to be disregarded if this law, in a number of points specifically
laid down, is
more disadvantageous to the consumer than the law of a country in the EEA that
would apply were it not for the choice
of law (Austrian Consumer Protection Act,
Konsumentenschutsgesets, KSchG).
Finally, the Austrian provisions
on the admissibility of particular contract clauses, above all those in general
terms of business,
apply as statutory requirements for
intervention, notwithstanding the law otherwise invoked, if the contract arose
in connection
with an activity of the seller that was exercised in Austria and
directed towards entering into such contracts.
As an intermediate conclusion, it can thus be stated that neither a choice of
forum agreement nor a choice of law give the seller
a sufficient possibility to
escape the consumer protection provisions under private international law and
international procedural
law. For international jurisdiction and the applicable
law, therefore, the key question remains: in what states does the internet
seller advertise, or to what states does it direct its commercial activities?
Consumer protection, that is, jurisdiction in the consumer
country and the
application of the consumer’s legal system, depends on the answer to this
question. Before I turn to this question
in the European context, it is useful
to take a look at US law, particularly since the wording of the Brussels I
Regulation was specifically
chosen on the basis of US law.
IV International jurisdiction and applicable law
from a US point of view
Personal jurisdiction
Under US law, natural or juristic persons who are outside the territory of
the forum state may be sued in the courts of a US state
if in the individual
case there are specific minimum contacts between these persons and the forum
state, this is called personal
Such minimum contacts
to the forum state are necessary in order that the jurisdiction of the court
appears reasonable in view of
the constitutional requirement of due process,
that is, in view of fair proceedings. These rules are laid down in many US
as long-arm statutes, but over the years they have become more
specifically defined and further developed by way of case law.
Thus the Supreme Court, in the well known decision
Worldwide Volkswagen
Corporation v Woodson
, stated with regard to personal jurisdiction that acts
give rise to jurisdiction above all if their object is ‘purposeful
activities in the forum state’.
This decision was
the starting point for the varied US case law on electronic commerce, which
admittedly is not quite uniform but
nevertheless allows
tendencies to be identified.
At first the American courts were liberal in granting jurisdiction where
there was an internet presence in the forum state,
however they
have now changed their approach and examine very strictly whether the defendant
had directed its commercial activities
to a particular extent at the forum
Above all, a distinction is made between purely passive
websites and interactive websites.
Whereas the seller with a purely
passive website is not normally exercising any business activities that are
directed at specific
individual states,
running an interactive
website, above all combined with the exchange of goods or other digital
services, may very well give rise
to jurisdiction in those states where the
website can be accessed.
In specific cases, however, the courts take a very cause-based approach. The
acceptance of orders,
the shipping of software packages
or passwords,
but also communication by email
have all been regarded as sufficient connecting factors to create
fact that a website is interactive is not in itself enough to create
in addition, for
inhabitants of this state actually to use the website.
effect, for example, a court in Virginia held that it did not have jurisdiction
for a lack of special relations of the defendant
to the forum state, although
the defendant had a website with contact information, such as a toll-free 1-800
telephone number, a
commentary section, a hyperlink for direct email and an
interactive form for any orders.
It is striking that the American approach does not distinguish between
consumer contracts and other transactions when determining
contrary, the general practice today is extremely restrictive. US courts are
less and less willing to accept
that is accessible in the forum state. What is increasingly important is whether
defendant had particularly directed its business activities to the forum
state. This is considered the case if the website has a
certain amount of
interactiveness. While contact information and hyperlinks alone probably are not
sufficient to establish jurisdiction
in a consumer state, address and order
forms that can be filled out are far more likely to do so, above all if the
seller does in
fact supply the orders. A European internet seller that sells its
products in the USA by way of a website with interactive elements
must therefore
certainly expect a US court to be granted jurisdiction.
Choice of forum
US legal position
In order to exclude the remaining risk of being sued in foreign countries, US
law does permit the internet seller to avoid foreign
entering into a choice of forum agreement.
This possibility of
agreeing freely in advance on the international jurisdiction for any disputes is
in principle also available
in the business-to-consumer context in the US, that
is, in the case of transactions with consumers. This is an attitude that is
at odds with European consumer protection.
However, US law does recognise limits to the admissibility of choice of forum
agreements, and these apply above all in the consumer
context. Thus, choice of
forum agreements are regarded as invalid if they violate the constitutional
concepts of fairness and notice.
This has been assumed above
all where the balance of power between the parties is unequal or the agreement
is unjustifiably disadvantageous
to a party in another way, in particular if the
agreement de facto deprives a party of the possibility of asserting its claims
However, this is subject to the strict requirement that
the party must prove that the agreed forum is indeed unacceptable.
When weighing the various interests, the US courts also take into account
the procedural certainty of the law that normally accompanies
choice of forum
agreements and, above all the interest of sellers in a uniform jurisdiction for
all disputes arising from their business
activities and the associated saving of
costs, which also benefits customers in the shape of lower prices.
Need for reform in Europe?
There are indeed considerable differences in opinion between the USA and
Europe, specifically in the law of jurisdiction and enforcement.
These were in
part responsible for work coming to a stop on the planned global Hague
Convention on Jurisdiction and Recognition and
Enforcement of Foreign Judgments
in Civil and Commercial Matters.
The discussion was particularly
heated when it came to the question of an exclusive consumer jurisdiction in
internet contracts,
as is provided by Article 7 of the draft Hague
Convention,
following the Brussels Convention and the Brussels I
Regulation.
In order to bring the different viewpoints closer together, there has
recently been talk in Europe of permitting choice of forum agreements
consumer contracts. For, so the argument goes, what is the use to the consumer
of convenient proceedings in the consumer’s
the absence of a relevant convention, cannot enforce a judgment in his or her
favour against the seller
with a place of business outside the EEA? Moreover, a
mature consumer is said to be adequately protected against thoughtless
statements,
provided the permission for choice of forum agreements is subjected
to strict formal requirements. In particular, the consumer is
required to make a
separate declaration expressly accepting the jurisdiction outside the state of
his or her domicile.
For example, the consumer might be required
to enter a preformulated clause manually into a particular text field.
However, this argument must be countered with the fact that a consumer who
wants to take advantage of an enticing offer on the internet
will accept every
choice of forum clause without reservation, regardless of the formal
requirements. The consumer will simply not
expect ever to need to take legal
action with regard to this purchase because the seller offers the consumer a
faultless, high-quality
product. As in every form of advertising, website offers
suggest only the best, and therefore even strict formal requirements are
sufficient to protect the consumer effectively against a hasty choice of forum
agreement. However, the consequence of a validly
agreed choice of forum clause
would be that in the case of dispute the consumer would have to take legal
proceedings at a foreign
court, a fact that in practice normally presents an
insurmountable obstacle on account of the associated costs and effort. In the
last instance, therefore, choice of forum agreements would often lead to a
situation where the consumer would lose all legal protection.
If, on the other hand, we consider the position of the seller, it is one of
its typical tasks to weigh up the cost and benefit of
opening up new markets.
However, this also includes carefully considering the legal circumstances of the
sales area in question.
If the seller has the impression that a foreign judicial
and legal system is not trustworthy enough, it will have to avoid transactions
with consumers in that country. However, if the profit attainable from
deliveries to this area proves to be greater than the associated
seller will and can become involved in transactions in such areas. This very
cost-benefit analysis, however, is typical
of enterprises and should therefore
not be taken away from the internet seller who consciously makes use of the most
cost-effective
sales possibilities of the new medium.
In Europe, therefore, we would be well advised to hold on to our previous
consumer protection, even if the provisions are different
in the US. The
enforcement problems mentioned would have to be overcome by alternative methods
of resolving conflicts, which I will
discuss below.
Choice of law
As with jurisdiction, the law applicable to the case can also be freely
agreed in the US. This also applies to electronic legal relations.
exchange of information and software, this is expressly codified in the Uniform
Computer Information Transactions Act
However, in the business-to-consumer context
such a choice of law cannot be enforced to the extent that it would violate
mandatory law of the legal system that would apply, if
there had been no choice
of forum agreement.
If there is no choice of law, this Act provides that, in the case of online
deliveries, the law to be applied is that of the state
in which the seller had
its place of business at the date when the contract was entered into.
A consumer contract for the delivery of a physical data medium, on the
other hand, is subject to the law of the state in which the
goods were delivered
to the consumer or should have been delivered to the consumer.
all other cases, the governing law is that of the state with which the contract
has the closest connection.
The individual circumstances of the
conclusion of the contract, such as the location of the contract negotiations or
the conclusion
or performance of the contract and the domicile or place of
business of the parties, play an important role.
Where these
provisions result in the application of foreign law, however, it is applied only
if the degree of protection is substantively
equal to that of US law to the
person, not resident, or having a place of business in the territory of this
foreign law.
Therefore, unlike choice of forum agreements, choice of law clauses are
subject to a certain degree of consumer protection even under
US law, at least
where the exchange of information and software is concerned. In the case of the
above business-to-consumer transactions,
although choice of law is in fact
possible, it is restricted by the priority of the mandatory provisions of the
legal system objectively
invoked. The latter is, at all events in contracts
relating to physical data media, the legal system in the consumer’s
Scope of internet activities
Following this excursion into US law, if we return to the question of where
the internet seller advertises, this being the element
relied on by the European
Conventions,
or to what states the internet seller directs its
business activities, as in the
Brussels I Regulation
it can be established that in Europe there are also endeavours legally to
restrict the scope of internet activity. This in itself
is technically
unrestricted, in order to protect internet sellers from an unmanageable
multitude of consumer jurisdictions and consumer
legal systems.
Restrictions of a website by language and subject
In the literature, the argument is frequently encountered that often the mere
design of a website, such as the language used and the
nature of the product
offered for sale, support the assumption that the offer is intended only for a
restricted group and therefore
the elements of European consumer protection with
regard to jurisdiction and applicable law are satisfied only for the states so
The following case serves as an example.
A German holidaymaker
who speaks Portuguese buys a Portuguese domestic train ticket over the internet
for his next visit to Portugal
by filling out a web form in Portuguese. From a
technical point of view it is clear that the Portuguese seller must expect its
to become known in Germany too, but the law provides that this is not
enough to satisfy the element of prior advertising in the consumer’s
state (in the meaning of the Brussels Convention, the Lugano Convention and the
Rome Convention) or of directing business activities
(in the meaning of the
Brussels Regulation). The German customer, in such a case, is therefore not able
to rely on jurisdiction in
Germany, nor on German consumer law, if something is
not in order with regard to the purchased ticket. The Portuguese-language
advertising
for transport services to be rendered only in Portugal, it is
argued, is directed clearly only to interested persons who are actually
Much as I agree that the technically universal scope of websites may be
regionally restricted, I do equally disagree with the suggested
solution, which
assumes in advance, on the basis of language and subject of a contract made
through a website alone, that there is
a particular limited number of
addressees. In our global communication and information society, cases are
scarcely conceivable in
which only a restricted circle of persons is to be
addressed solely on the basis of language and subject of contract. The example
given also shows this very clearly; there may be many people outside Portugal
who speak Portuguese and can be addressed by Portuguese
websites. In addition,
the subject of the contract, a train ticket for a journey inside Portugal, may
be of interest to a number
of people outside Portugal. Why should one not save
the costs of travel agents and book one’s next holiday trip via the
At a time when, thanks to modern means of transport, it is possible to
reach foreign countries and cultures easily, such services
intended for a
particular area may be of interest to everyone, no matter where they usually
live. This applies both to Portuguese
train tickets and to Austrian ski boots
that are ordered via the internet by a purchaser who lives in the
Thus, it is unanimously accepted that when a seller deliberately seeks
advertising for this purpose in the states in question.
example, tickets for the Salzburg Festival are offered over the internet, it is
plain that such an offer is directed to all
those interested, irrespective of
their normal residence and their nationality, even if the offer is in German and
the performances
can be attended only in Salzburg. However, how is this example
to be distinguished from that of the Portuguese railway? How is a
consumer to
know whether the internet seller only wants to address customers in a particular
region or also other interested persons?
The Portuguese railway may perhaps be
offering the tickets in Portuguese only because it has no translator and has
therefore not
yet had a German or English version of its website prepared. How
are we to decide if the railway route is a popular tourist attraction?
potential holidaymaker then not assume that the Portuguese railway company also
wants to sell tickets to him?
Indeed, in our society no item that is the subject of a contract can be found
that justifies a legal assumption that the group of
persons addressed is
restricted in advance.
The same applies to the remainder of the
design of a website, above all for the language used, but also the currency
listed there,
for with the payment methods customary on the internet debts in
foreign currency can be paid without difficulty. I therefore take
the view that
the technically universal scope of the internet in principle also entails
universal legal consequences with regard
to jurisdiction and applicable law.
Interactive websites with an invitation to enter
into a distance sales contract
The view I express above that rejects a presumed restriction of the scope of
internet sites on the basis of criteria regarding content,
such as language,
currency or subject of contract, is confirmed by a the Joint Declaration of the
Council and the Commission of the
EU on Article 15 of the Brussels
Regulation.
Supporting the promotion of electronic commerce, which
is recognised as serving economic growth, the Council and the Commission
that only particular interactive websites give rise to the use of the
consumer’s jurisdiction. At the same time they expressly
point out that
the language used in a website or the currency quoted are not significant in
this context. From this point of view,
the accessibility of a website alone does
not constitute directing business activities to particular consumer states.
Instead, it
is necessary that the ‘website also invites [the consumer] to
enter into a distance sales contract’, that is, that it
is an interactive
website and that ‘such a distance sales contract has in fact been entered
into, by whatever means’
, for example using a telephone
number given on the website.
This restrictive interpretation of directing business activities at the
consumer’s state sufficiently defines the scope of internet
activities in
the business-toconsumer context. There is no need for a further restriction of
the group of persons addressed by way
of language, currency or subject of the
contract, even from the declared intention of the European legislator.
This interpretation of Article 15(1)(c) of the Brussels Regulation must,
in my opinion, also have an effect on the interpretation
of the relevant
consumer protection provisions in the Brussels Convention, the Lugano Convention
and the Rome Convention.
As for the Rome Convention, in the course
of the planned revision, which will also put the European conflict of laws
provisions into
the form of a Regulation, the wording of the special conflict of
laws provision (at present Article 5 of the Rome Convention) will
be adapted to
the wording of Article 15 of the Brussels Regulation.
Notwithstanding this, the entrepreneur is at liberty expressly to restrict
the regional scope of its interactive web pages if it wishes
to address only a
specific group of consumers with its products. For example, it can make remarks
such as ‘this offer applies
only for Austria and Germany’ or
‘no delivery outside the EEA’ and thus easily restrict the
territorial application
of its website and thus avoid undesired jurisdictions
and unknown law.
However, if the seller fails to do so or does not
do it in a way that is recognisable to the customer, then its interactive
will have universal validity. An entrepreneur who places advertisements
or invitations on the World Wide Web knows that these can
be accessed all over
the world. Often, it will actually want to reach potential customers all over
the world; at least it willingly
accepts this possibility. So those who use such
a universal medium must in principle permit the whole of the area of
dissemination
of this medium to be seen as the location of their sales
activities in the meaning of Article 15(1)(c) of theBrussels Regulation,
13(1)(3) of the Brussels Convention and the Lugano Convention and Article 5(2)
Alternative 1 of the Rome Convention.
It is therefore incumbent on the internet seller to prove in the proceedings
that it did not advertise to a particular state and that
this was recognisable
to the consumer, for example because of a sales restriction. However, even if
the seller can rely on such a
restrictive statement on its website, the consumer
is at liberty, for example as part of evidence in rebuttal, to submit that the
seller, despite its verbal restrictions, has already entered into contracts with
other customers in the consumer’s state. In
these circumstances a mere
rhetorical restriction would appear to be an invalid protest that is at variance
with the facts (
protestatio facto contraria
However, the
consumer need not provide full evidence of the contracts he or she claims were
entered into; he or she need only arouse
doubts in the judge as to the
restricted application of the website. It is then the task of the seller to
prove that it did actually
comply with the postulated sales restrictions. If
this is not successful any remaining doubts as to the scope of the
internet activities will be held against the seller. In order to
avoid such difficulties in evidence, the internet seller should
be advised to
ask its customers where they are domiciled before it enters into any
for example by use of a form integrated in the
If, however, it happens that a customer deceives the
seller as to the customer’s true residence, this may not be permitted
work to the detriment of the seller, since such conduct is outside the
seller’s control.
In summary, it can therefore be established that the technically universal
scope of the internet in the business-to-consumer context
also has universal
legal consequences with regard to jurisdiction and applicable law. Exceptions to
the global reach of an interactive
website must be proved by the seller and the
organisation of the internet activities lies in the seller’s sphere of
The burden of proof is therefore borne by the person in whose sphere
the evidence is and who is therefore in a position to give evidence.
International competition law
In the following I will investigate how far the legal universality of the
internet in the law of international consumer contracts
described above also
shapes international competition law. One of the topics here is that of Austrian
sellers whose internet activities
violate foreign competition law; the other is
foreign sellers who come into competition with Austrian sellers in Austria.
These foreign
competitions normally fulfil the legal requirements of their
country of origin, but frequently they violate stricter competition
in Austria.
In such a situation, the question arises whether the Austrian competitors and
customers involved have the possibility of a jurisdiction
in Austria where they
can take legal action against the foreign entrepreneur. In addition, the
question arises as to what legal system
governs any claims to damages or for an
injunction under competition law, that is, whether Austrian or foreign
competition law will
be applied to substantive questions. If one considers that
the substantive law of fair trading protects not only competitors acting
market, but also customers and consumers against unfair practices of individual
sellers, then the questions as to international
law are particularly important, just as they are in international consumer
contract law.
Special jurisdiction (‘fliegender
gerichtsstand’) of the place where the harmful event occurred
Under European jurisdiction law, a person with a seat or residence in an EU
member country may, in the case of a delict or quasi-delict
which includes
violations of competition law, be sued before the court of the place where the
harmful event occurred.
For proceedings based on unfair
competition on the internet this wording creates a practically universal
in whose area of jurisdiction the unlawful website
can be accessed. In this connection the term ‘flying’ jurisdiction
of the place of effect is used.
This universal reach of the internet is new, even if the problem that there
may be a discrepancy between technical reach and addressees
for whom it is
intended also arises in a rudimentary form in the case of traditional
In connection with the use of publications, the Court of
Justice of the European Community held that there was a jurisdiction under
Article 5(3) of the Brussels Convention in the state in which the publication
was distributed in accordance with its intended use
and not merely by
As a result, those states in which the individual printed
works arrive completely unpredictably, for example because they are brought
holidaymakers, are excluded as a location for the proceedings. However, it is
enough to establish dissemination in accordance
with intended use if the
publication reaches a place where the publisher must expect it to be
distributed.
The same applies to acts of infringement via
television. When the seller knows how far the broadcasts are transmitted, it can
be presumed that the products were distributed in accordance with their
intended use in the broadcasting areas involved.
The internet now
extends the technical possibilities to a universal reach. A seller who uses the
World Wide Web must expect its websites
to be seen in every state in the world.
In consequence, therefore, there is jurisdiction for competition matters in
every state where
the offending web page can be called up.
The same also applies under autonomous Austrian law. Section 83c(3) of the JN
makes the international jurisdiction of Austrian courts
available for all
competition-law actions relating to a statement published via internet in
Austria. If an anti-competitive practice
‘is effected by the contents of
writings or printed works or by other items that are sent from abroad to
Austria, then for
purposes of jurisdiction every place in Austria where the item
arrived or was delivered or distributed shall be deemed the place
where the tort
was committed’. Here too, the defendant’s mere knowledge of the
distribution in Austria is sufficient
to create jurisdiction under s 83c(3) of
However, the literature requires further elements creating jurisdiction apart
from the possibility of the offending web page being
called up in Austria: for
example, it must be recognisable that the anti-competitive behaviour was
directed at and influenced one
or more particular national markets. In this
case, jurisdiction is created no longer by the act, but by the location of the
which also serves as a connecting factor for applicable law in other
connections.
To the extent, therefore, that sellers or customers feel they have been
harmed by websites of foreign competitors, specifically including
those outside
Europe, that can be called up in Austria, they may assert their claims before
Austrian courts under the law of fair
trading under Article 5(3) of the Brussels
Regulation or Article 5(3) of the Brussels Convention/Lugano Convention or s
Applicable law
IPRG: marketplace rule
The competent court must examine, under its private international law, what
competition law it is to apply in the matter. As in the
international
the place of effect or, to put it more
precisely, on the place ‘on whose
market the competition takes effect’.
Claims based on
competitive behaviour in relation to a market
are therefore
governed by the legal system of the place where the market is located. This
marketplace rule or principle of effect
is followed by Austria and
and also by most of the other European states
and the unofficial draft of an EU Regulation on the Law Applicable to
Non-Contractual Obligations, known as the Rome II Regulation.
The prerequisite for the application of the marketplace law is that the
competitive behaviour is capable of ‘perceptibly’
disadvantaging the
interests of the competitors, customers and consumers in a particular national
Consequently, it is the only place where the competitive
struggle for customers and market shares actually takes place that are
sufficiently
suited to make their
competition law, and according to some also their courts,
available for competition law disputes.
Evidence that
electronic competitive practices are directed at and influence particular
markets include for example, as in international
consumer contract law, the
language used, payment and shipping arrangements, the scope of the products on
sale and log files.
However, in e-commerce, as set out above in connection with international
consumer contract law, it is often impossible to determine
a particular market
to which the marketing is directed, and therefore the seller is normally
confronted by a multitude of applicable
competition laws with dauntingly diverse
legal consequences.
In order to advertise its products on the
internet with a good conscience despite this, the seller must review all
potentially affected
competition law systems and as a result base its conduct on
the strictest law in each case.
In particular for small
enterprises, therefore, an internet presence entails high costs and considerable
Admittedly, an internet seller can adapt its competitive behaviour by region
by making appropriate restrictions on sale and delivery
and in this way, as in
international consumer contract law, avoid undesired jurisdictions and undesired
From the point of view of fair trading law too, the internet
seller should therefore be advised to ask its customers interactively
their domicile is,
and enter into no contracts with customers from
undesired states.
Above all in the case of online deliveries, however, as set out above, the
seller is not protected against its customers obtaining
goods or services
surreptitiously by making false statements in relation to their domicile. Since
internet sellers have no influence
over statements made by their customers, such
contracts entered into on false pretences cannot be allowed to work to the
of the seller from the point of view of either jurisdiction or
conflict of laws: individual business contracts which the seller has
prevent by the use of reasonable means can therefore have no relevant market
Although the possibility of controlling the internet seller ’s
competitive behaviour by region is certainly not too arduous
for the seller, the
marketplace rule is often attacked as anti-seller. In particular on the
internet, it is said to prevent cross-border
offers and thus to stop a global
internet market coming into being.
In addition, it is said that
where offers are made in several countries, this normally leads to an
inadmissible restriction of fundamental
rights in the EU single market.
E-Commerce Directive and E-Commerce Act: principle
of the country of origin
It is quite in the interests of business, therefore, that the E-Commerce
Directive, and the E-Commerce Act which was passed to implement
it, break open
the marketplace rule in the European single market: where sellers active online
have their place of business in a
state in the EEA, their competitive practices
in markets in the EEA are subject to the law of their place of
establishment.
This principle of the country of origin makes the situation easier for EEA
sellers in contrast to the marketplace rule that would
otherwise apply, but it
disadvantages competitors and consumers who will often find it difficult to
determine that seller’s
place of business and, even if they succeed in
doing so, have difficulty estimating what claims they have under foreign
In addition, the principle of the country of origin leads to
distortions of competition: it clearly favours sellers in member states
lenient competition law, while those in states with a strict law, which includes
Austria, are at a disadvantage. Such states
with a strict competition law
therefore become increasingly unattractive as a location for industry. However,
in order to prevent
an exodus of enterprises to countries with a more lenient
law, these states will have a tendency to adjust their legal systems in
direction of the more lenient competition laws: what is known as a
is inevitable.
Apart from this, it cannot be justified that violations of competition via
the internet should have a special privileged position
in contrast to other
multinational competitive practices. The associated disregard of consumer
protection in electronic competition
stands in contrast to the previous consumer
policy of the EU and is also suspected of being in violation of equality of
opportunity.
While the EU Council and Commission state quite
clearly in the Brussels I Convention that internet contracts also enjoy full
protection,
the interests of the consumers using the
internet are largely neglected in international competition law.
In addition, the introduction of the principle of the country of origin by
the E-Commerce Directive is criticised for a number of
other reasons:
in view of the
starkly diverging national protection standards in substantive fair trading
law, the country of the marketplace cannot be expected
to recognise foreign law.
The conflict of laws principle of the country of origin also makes it harder to
enforce rights, because
the competent court in the place of effect or the
marketplace is obliged to apply foreign law. Finally, the E-Commerce Directive
principle of the country of origin leads to a multiple fragmentation of law: for
the question of applicable law it is necessary to
distinguish not only between
e-commerce and conventional transactions, but also between facts in the EEA and
facts in other countries.
Even within the EEA, electronic commerce is subject to
the country of origin principle only in specific areas of law, for example
trading law and other tort law, but not, for example, with regard to product
liability, the violation of industrial property
rights or of copyright; the
situation therefore remains that a large number of legal systems are applicable.
The dispute between country of origin principle and marketplace rule, which
is also pursued vehemently within the EU Commission,
should from
the point of view of future statute law be given a uniform comprehensive
solution covering all multinational conduct
and the whole of tort law. The final
version of the planned Rome II Regulation on the international law applicable to
non-contractual
obligations, known as the Rome II Regulation, is therefore
awaiting with excitement.
In addition, there is a need for action on the level of substantive
At least inside the EEA, the protection standards under fair
trading law should be harmonised as far as possible;
should be taken to ensure that the uniform level of protection to be achieved is
appreciably higher than the present minimum
protection. Only subject to this
condition could the principle of the country of origin be accepted in fair
trading law at all.
Conclusion and Outlook
If, in summary, we compare the US and European legal position with regard to
they are not very
different. In the US, the element especially relied on is
‘directing’ business activities to the state
where the court is
located, a formulation that is included in the new Brussels I Regulation.
However, on closer investigation it
becomes clear that the courts in the US,
when they examine personal jurisdiction, do not distinguish between consumer
contracts and
other transactions. In Europe a jurisdiction arises in the
internet user’s state of domicile only if the user enters into the
contract for private purposes, that is, as a consumer. If this is not the case,
the internet user may have to take legal action abroad
and, in this case, it is
normally foreign substantive law that applies.
The lack of consideration for consumers in the USA explains the different
treatment of the elements of ‘directing’ business
activities, an
element that both systems share. While US case law links jurisdiction strictly
to an accessible interactive website
that has already been visited by more than
one customer from the state where the court is located, the European Council and
the European
Commission favour a somewhat broader interpretation. For them, the
requirement for a special consumer jurisdiction (and by analogy,
application of the consumer’s law) is also the existence of an interactive
web page, which invites the consumer to
enter into a distance contract, but
consumer protection will be given if
such distance contract has
been entered into, without any requirements for further customer contacts.
Moreover, the contract need
not even have been entered into via the internet;
the use of any other distance selling medium named on the website is sufficient.
Some Austrian and German academics additionally attempt to restrict the
universality of the internet presence of a seller by way of
other content
criteria, mainly regarding the language and subject of the web page used. This
criterion, like the practice of the
US courts, which is not uniform in practice,
cannot be employed in a uniform way and thus leads to a fragmentation of law and
uncertainty.
An entrepreneur who benefits from the international marketing of its products
must in principle also accept the risk of foreign proceedings
based on foreign
substantive law. If the entrepreneur does not want this, it can protect itself
against the undesired legal consequences.
This can be achieved by restricting
the validity of its website by designing the website to make this restriction
quite clear, for
example, by stating express restrictions on delivery. However,
if the internet seller does not take any such precautions, and if
every order no matter where it comes from, then it is not unjust that it should
be subjected to a foreign jurisdiction
and the application of foreign law.
Unlike under international contract law, the consumer in internet matters
enjoys general protection under international competition
law only with regard
to the jurisdiction. With regard to the applicable law, a distinction must be
made as to whether the entrepreneur
has its place of business in a state in the
EEA or one outside it. Entrepreneurs in the EEA need not take any account of the
competition
law of the consumer’s state, that is, the marketplace law,
their conduct will be judged, under the principle of the country
exclusively on the basis of their own legal system. The situation is different
when it comes to entrepreneurs from outside
states. They must adapt their
competitive conduct to the law of the marketplace involved. Thus, in the case of
business activities
on the internet, they are confronted by a large number of
competition law systems. If, in such a situation, internet sellers do not
to adapt their competitive behaviour to satisfy the strictest legal system, then
they are well advised to restrict their competition
by region to avoid this.
Only in this way can they avoid undesired law such as international consumer
contract law and also undesired
The introduction of the principle of the country of origin for particular
aspects of electronic business dealings, even within the
EEA, has led to an
unjustifiable fragmentation of law which in future laws should be countered by a
unified drafting of international
tort law, including international competition
law. In addition, the already visible beginnings of a substantive-law
harmonisation
of the various protection standards in fair trading law of the
individual member states must be developed further, not least for
consumer policy.
The real weak point of international consumer protection in internet matters,
however, lies in the fact that it is usually necessary
to enforce a judgment
abroad. There are difficulties at the enforcement stage not only, as already
mentioned, in relation to the
US and other states outside Europe, but certainly
also within Europe. The European law of jurisdiction and enforcement guarantees
mutual recognition and enforcement of judgments from EU and EFTA states, but
carrying out enforcement proceedings often fails because
of the associated
costs. In consumers matters the probable enforcement costs are often many times
the actual value in dispute. This
cost gap is particularly great in internet
transactions, which make it possible to satisfy even small everyday needs by
cross-border
business. In order, therefore, to make consumer protection more
effective, above all in internet transactions, the European Council
has already
considered providing for costs alleviation in the enforcement of disputed low
value consumer matters.
In addition, however, alternative methods of dispute resolution such as
online mediation and online arbitration
should be developed
further and in particular made available for fair trading disputes. In the law
of fair trading, the parties do
not have the kind of contractual relationship
with each other that would suggest the agreement on a mediation and or
arbitration
clause at the date when they enter into the contract, but the
parties here are also at liberty to agree on an extrajudicial form
resolution at the time when the dispute occurs. In order to make such a step
attractive, however, forms of dispute resolution
proceedings
specially adapted for electronic competition disputes, online or using
conventional procedures, must be established.
An improvement in consumer protection is also made by the certification
models of various providers, which are also voluntary. These
encourage the
enterprises registered with them to observe certain consumer protection
standards and sanction disregard of these standards.
Using such providers acts
as a kind of stamp of quality for the internet seller that consumers can rely
All these alternative methods of dispute resolution and dispute avoidance
have in common the fact that they offer solutions that need
no judicial
enforcement; on the contrary, they are normally carried out voluntarily. It is
therefore urgently necessary for the present
beginnings in this area to be
Only effective legal protection systems can strengthen
the trust of market participants in the internet medium and thus do justice
the globally increasing significance of electronic commerce.
* Doctor Juris, LLM (Harvard), Vice-Dean and Professor of Law, Paris Lodron
University Salzburg, Austria.
Council Regulation (EC) 44/2001 of 22 December 2000 on jurisdiction and the
recognition and enforcement of judgments in civil and
commercial matters, [2001]
1968 Brussels Convention on jurisdiction and the enforcement of judgments
in civil and commercial matters, [1968] OJ C027, in Austria
in force since 1
December 1998 as amended by the 4th treaty of accession, Federal Law Gazette
Bundesgesetzblatt
, referred to below as BGBl) BGBl III 1998/167 (treaty
of accession) and BGBl III 1998/209 (consolidated version).
Preamble 21 and 22, Brussels Regulation.
(Parallel) Convention on jurisdiction and the enforcement of judgments in
civil and commercial matters, [1988] OJ L319, in Austria
in force since 1
September 1996, BGBl 1996/448. On the differences between the Brussels
Convention and the Lugano Convention, see
, Ein Vergleich
zwischen EuGVÜ und LGVÜ, ÖJZ 1999, 41 (41ff);
,Abgrenzung und Unterschiede zwischen EuGVÜ und LGVÜ,
ecolex 1999, 679 (679ff).
Since the Erweiterte Wertgrenzennovelle 1997 (statute raising limits of
value in dispute giving right to appeal), this has been
the general opinion.
, Die Neuregelung der inländischen Gerichtsbarkeit durch die
WGN 1997, JBl 1998, 488;
Simotta in Fasching
, Kommentar zur ZPO, Band I2
(2000) § 83c JN marg no 38;
Rechberger/Simotta
Zivilprozessrecht
(2000) marg no 64ff.
On the existing draft of 30 October 1999, see Hague Conference on Private
International Law, Preliminary Draft Convention on Jurisdiction
and the Effects
of Judgments in Civil and Commercial Matters,
http://www.hcch.net/e/workprog/jdgm. html.
In the first instance, therefore, it is intended that a convention
restricted to certain central points will be drawn up. On this,
see the working
paper of August 2002,
Preliminary Document No 19
http://www.hcch.net/e/workprog/jdgm. html.
1980 Rome Convention on the law applicable to contractual obligations,
[1980] OJ C027, ABl
1998 Nr C 27
, S 34 (re-announcement); in force in Austria
since 1 December 1998, BGBl I 1999/18.
Consumer contracts are expressly excluded from the principle of the
country of origin (s 21 no 6 ECG). On the relevant provision
of the Directive,
see Article 3(3) in conjunction with the annex to the E-Commerce Directive.
The decisive factor is that the entrepreneur has its place of
establishment within the EEA and offers goods or services in another
EEA country
(ss 1(2), 3 no 7 in conjunction with s 20 ECG). See also Explanatory Notes to
the Parliamentary Bill (Erläuternde
Bemerkungen zur Regierungsvorlage,
referred to below as EBzRV) (817 BlgNR XXI GP) on s 1 ECG point 2.
Directive 2000/31/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council of 8
June 2000 on certain legal aspects of information society
services, in
particular electronic commerce, in the Internal Market (Directive on Electronic
Commerce) [2000] OJ L178/1.
On the view of these provisions as a conflict-of-laws rule, see the
detailed account in
Lurger/Vallant
, Die österreichische Umsetzung
des Herkunftslandprinzips der E-Commerce-Richtlinie, MMR 4/2002, 203 (207ff)
with further references.
Federal Act containing provisions on particular legal aspects of
electronic commerce and legal transactions, BGBl I 2001/152.
Articles 2 and 3 Brussels Regulation and Articles 2 and 3 Brussels
Convention/Lugano Convention, sections §§ 66, 75 JN;
E-Commerce in der Europäischen Union (1999) 256;
Köhler/Arndt
Recht des Internet2 (2000) 136; Härting, Internetrecht (1999) 39.
Section 66(2) JN.
Article5(1)1 Brussels Regulation, Article 5(1) Brussels Convention/Lugano
Convention, s 88
Section 88 (1) JN.
Section 88 (2) JN, Jurisdiction of the invoice.
For more detail see, for example,
Kommentar zur ZPO2 (2000) § 88 JN
marg no 1, 5, 8 with further references.
See s 41(2) JN. Cf OLG Innsbruck EvBl 1988/136.
Section 88(1) last sentence JN.
The concept of an ‘Urkunde’ does not require a signature by
the declarant. See also EBzRV (1999 BlgNR XX GP) on s 4
SigG point 3. But cf AG
Bonn 25 October 2001, JurPC Web-Dok 332/2002,
http://www.jurpc.de/rechtspr/20020322.htm
, which does not attach any
probative value to the printing out of exchanged emails in view of the fact that
the text of the emails
may have been subsequently altered.
OGH ZBl 1912/163, EvBl 1968/306 = JBl 1969, 563 (
47/146, RZ 1977/135, JUS Z/514 = RdW 1990, 408; OLG Innsbruck EvBl 1988/136 ua.
In force since 1 January 2000, BGBl I 1999/190; implementation of
Directive 1999/93/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council
December 1999 on a Community framework for electronic signatures (Signature
Directive), [2000] OJ L13/12.
Mayer-Schönberger/Pilz/Reiser/Schmölzer
, Signaturgesetz
(1999) 10ff.
EBzRV (1999 BlgNR XX GP) on s 4(3) SigG at the end. On this problem area
in general seeKuhn, Rechtshandlungen mittels EDV und Telekommunikation
EBzRV (1999 BlgNR XX GP) on s 4(3) SigG at the end.
Elektronische Signaturen (2000) 170.
EBzRV (1999 BlgNR XX GP) on s 4(3) SigG; JAB (2065 BlgNR XX GP);
Mayer-Schönberger/Pilz/Reiser/Schmölzer
, Signaturgesetz (1999)
78. Cf, on the other hand,
, Elektronische Signaturen (2000) 171ff,
which proceeds from the basis that safe electronic signatures are only partly
to signatures on private documents, since s 4(2) SigG expressly
refers only to s 294 ZPO, but not in addition to s 312 ZPO. Here,
proceeds on the incorrect assumption that s 312 ZPO - just like s
294 ZPO - contains a shifting of the burden of proof. But this is
not the case:
it is universally believed that s 312 ZPO does not contain a statutory
presumption of genuineness, but restricts the
court’s free assessment of
evidence only to the extent that, if the opposing party does not challenge the
genuineness of the
document or of the signature thereon (under s 298(3) ZPO, the
party opposing the party presenting evidence is called upon to make
statement), the court regards this failure to challenge as equivalent to
admission. The court will then as a general rule have
no further occasion to
doubt the genuineness of the document (eg
, Kommentar zur ZPO [2000], § 312 ZPO marg no 1). But if,
exceptionally, there are doubts, the court could certainly require
submitting evidence - as part of the normal distribution of the burden of proof
- to supply proof that the document or
signature is genuine.
Even if, with
, one assumes that s. 312 ZPO is not applicable to
safely signed electronic documents, the allocation of the burden of proof with
regard to the genuineness of the signature is no different from that in the case
of signed private documents. The assessment of the
genuineness of an electronic
signature is then admitedly subject to the
unrestricted
free evaluation
of evidence of the court. However, if the other party fails to contest the
evidence, the court will in general have
no reason to doubt its genuineness: it
is precisely the characteristic of the safe electronic signature that it permits
conclusion as to the signatory (see s 2(3) SigG; EBzRV [1999 BlgNR XX
GP] on s 4 (3) and (4) SigG). However if in the individual
case there are doubts
as to the genuineness of the signature (for example, if there are indications
that the signature creation data
were compromised), then, as in the case of
signed private documents, the usual rules as to burden of proof come into play.
The question as to whether s.312 ZPO applies (by analogy) to safely signed
electronic documents, is not of great practical importance,
in view of what has
been said above. However, the history of the legislation indicates that there is
an unintended gap in s 4(3)
SigG, which states that only s 294 ZPO applies to
safely signed electronic documents, but not s 312 ZPO. For the bill originally,
in s 4(3) SigG, even contained a (rebuttable) presumption of the genuineness of
safe electronic signatures. However, in the last
instance, at the intervention
of the Austrian Federal Supreme Court, this provision was omitted, in order that
safe electronic signatures
were not put in a better position than handwritten
signatures (in the case of which there is no such presumption). But it was most
certainly intended to put safely signed electronic documents on the same footing
as signed private documents. (EBzRV [1999 BlgNR
XX GP] on s 4(3) SigG). The
unintended gap in the legislation must therefore be closed by way of analogy, as
a result of which s
312 ZPO applies also to safely signed electronic documents.
Note, however, Luxembourg’s reservation to the jurisdiction of the
place of performance (Article I Additional Protocol to
the Brussels convention
and Article I Protocol no 1 to the Lugano Convention); the Swiss reservation to
Article 5(1) Luxembourg Convention
ended on 31 December 1999 (Article Ia
Protocol no 1 to the Lugano Convention);
Burgstaller/Ritzberger
Burgstaller
, Internationales Zivilverfahrensrecht (2000) marg no 2.56;
Geimer/Schütze
Europäisches Zivilverfahrensrecht (1997) Article
5 marg no 100f.
The mere abstract agreement on a ‘place of performance’, where
there is no intention actually to perform, is not sufficient
if this serves only
to establish the place of jurisdiction. Instead, the agreed place of performance
must have a connection to the
reality of the contract, or else there is an
inadmissible circumvention of Article 17 of the Brussels Convention; European
of Justice 20.2. 1997, C-106/95 -
Mainschifffahrts-Genossenschaft/Les
Gravières Rhénanes
- Slg 1997 I, 911 = EuZW 1997, 209;
, DerErfüllungsgerichtsstand im Lugano-Übereinkommen,
AnwBl 1996, 426 (427);
Czernich/Tiefenthaler
, Die Übereinkommen von
Brüssel und Lugano (1997) Article 5 marg no 11;
Burgstaller/Ritzberger
Burgstaller
(fn 25) marg no 2.60.
The place of performance is not therefore to be decided independently
under the BrusselsConvention/Lugano Convention; Tiefenthaler,
Gerichtsstand am Erfüllungsort desBereicherungsanspruchs?, ÖJZ 1998,
544 (545); Czernich, Der Erfüllungsgerichtsstand
Übereinkommen, AnwBl 1996, 426 (428);
Burgstaller/Ritzberger
Burgstaller
(fn 25) marg no 2.59f;
, Das Übereinkommen
von Lugano: Internationales Zivilverfahrensrecht für den Europäischen
Wirtschaftsraum, RZ 1993,
192 (195); but see Jayme in Gerichtshof der EG (ed),
Internationale Zuständigkeit und Urteilsanerkennung in Europa (1993) 68;
, Internationales Zivilverfahrensrecht3 (2002), marg no 269ff with
further references.
Art 4 Rome Convention
Czernich/Tiefenthaler
, Die Übereinkommen von Brüssel und
Lugano (1997) Article 5 marg no 17ff;
Geimer/Schütze
Europäisches Zivilverfahrensrecht (1997) Article 5 marg no 91f;
, Internationale Zuständigkeit für die
Durchsetzung von Ansprüchen aus Geschäfts- und Wettbewerbshandlungen
Internet, JurPC Web-Dok 108/1998, para 23, can be downloaded at
http://www.jura.uni-sb.de/jurpc
United Nations CISG, Convention on Contracts for the International Sale of
Goods of 11 April 1980, in force in Austria since 1 January
1989, BGBl 1988/96;
, Europäisches Zivilprozessrecht, Kommentar zum EuGVÜ
und Lugano-Übereinkommen
(1998) Article 5 marg no 22.
It is the prevailing opinion that software that is not stored on a data
medium is also covered by the CISG definition of goods;
UN-Kaufrecht (1991) 21;
, Anwendbarkeit des Wiener Kaufrechts auf
Softwareüberlassungsverträge, RdW 1993, 441; cf also OLG Koblenz 17
1993, 2 U 1230/91,
http://www.jura.unifreiburg.de/ipr1/cisg/urteiletext/91.htm
, which, with
reference to the concept of goods, which must be interpreted broadly, applied
CISG to a contract for the creation and
supply of a logo. Contra
, Rechtsanwendungsprobleme im internationalen Kaufrecht (1988)
Article 31(c), CISG.
Article 31(a) CISG;
, UN-Kaufrecht (1991) 108ff;
, UN-Kaufrecht (1993) 13.
, Internet und besondere Aspekte des Internationalen
Vertragsrechts (Teil
1), CR 1999
, 512 (515) with further references, on the
problems of the ‘closest connection’ in private international law,
similar in nature. See also below.
Czernich/Tiefenthaler
, Übereinkommen, Article 5 marg no 31;
, EuGVÜ und EVÜ (1999)135; Neumayr, EuGVÜ,
LGVÜ: Österreich und die europäischen Zuständigkeits-
Vollstreckungsabkommen (1999) 31.
Burgstaller/Ritzberger
Burgstaller
(fn 25) marg no 2.62f;
Czernich, Erfüllungsgerichtsstand, AnwBl 1996, 426 (428);
Übereinkommen, RZ 1993, 192 (195); but see Schack, IZVR3, marg no 272 with
further references.
Czernich/Tiefenthaler
, Übereinkommen, Article 5 marg no 26ff.
Commission of the European Communities, Analysis of the draft rules for a
Council Regulation (EC) on jurisdiction and the recognition
and enforcement of
judgments in civil and commercial matters, of 14 July 1999, 99/0154 (CNS).
, Internet und besondere Aspekte des Internationalen
Vertragsrechts (Teil
1), CR 1999
, 512 (515) with further references. Contra
Koch, Internet-Recht (1998) 52 on the similar question in private international
which state has the contract the closest connection? On this, see also
below at fn 51.
, Die Einbeziehung von AGB bei
Internet-Geschäften, NJW 1997, 1688;
, Internationale
Zuständigkeitskonflikte im internet, CR 1996, 453 (457).
On the area of application of Article 17 of the Brussels Convention/Lugano
Convention and s 104 of the JN, see
Burgstaller
, Probleme der Prorogation
nach dem Lugano-Übereinkommen, JBl 1998, 691 (691f). On Article 17 of the
Brussels Convention/Lugano
Convention, see
Burgstaller/Ritzberger
Burgstaller
(fn 25) marg no 2.147;
,Internationale
Gerichtsstandsvereinbarungen nach EuGVÜ und LugÜ, ZZP 1997, 477 (485);
, EuGVÜ (1996) Article 17 marg no 19.
Article 23(1)(a) Brussels Regulation, Article 17(1)(a) Brussels
Convention/Lugano Convention.
Geimer/Schütze
, Europäisches Zivilverfahrensrecht (1997)
Article 17 marg no 105, 109 with further references;
Verbraucherschutz im internet, K&R 1998, 129ff (132).
Section 88 of the JN.
On the requirement of documentary proof, see above in connection with
agreeing on a jurisdiction of place of performance under s
Simotta in Fasching
, Kommentar zu den Zivilprozessgesetzen I
(2000) s 104 JN marg no 55, 60, 68 with further references; Fasching, Lehrbuch
des österreichischen
Zivilprozessrechts2 (1990) marg. no. 196;
, Kommentar zur ZPO (2000) s 104 JN marg no 6 with further
references; OGH EvBl 1975/644; OGH ZBl 1931/45. This is overlooked by
, Zivilrechtliche Aspekte des E-Commerce unter Einschluss des
Verbraucherrechts und des Kollisionsrechts, VR 2001, 14 (17ff).
In particular, for an agreement on a jurisdiction under s 104 of the JN -
unlike under the Brussels Regulation, Brussels Convention
and Lugano Convention
- a general reference to general terms of business that are merely enclosed is
not to be sufficient, even between
business persons. Instead, case law requires
that the general terms of business containing the jurisdiction clause should be
by a handwritten signature. OGH EvBl 1963/488 = RZ 1963, 1999; OGH
EvBl 1951/19;
Mayr in Rechberger
, Kommentar zur ZPO (2000) § 104 JN
marg no 6 with further references.
Section 4(1) SigG.
Article 3 of the Rome Convention.
The authority for this in the Directive is in Article 3(3) in conjunction
with the Annex to the
E-Commerce Directive.
, E-Commerce in der Europäischen Union (1999) 113ff;
, Internet-Verträge und internationales Vertragsrecht, CR
1998, 613 (615). The law governing the form of such agreements is determined
under Article 9 of the Rome Convention.
, EuGVÜ und EVÜ in Kraft getreten, ecolex 1998,
Czernich/Heiss
,EVÜ, Das Europäische
Schuldvertragsübereinkommen, Kommentar (1999) Article 3 marg no
, Internationales Privatrecht einschließlich
Europarecht
(2001) 104 with further references. Contra
Czernich/Heiss
, EVÜ (1999) Article 3 marg no 4 and the
prevailing opinion in Germany arguing in favour of validity, eg
EuGVÜ und EVÜ in Kraft getreten, ecolex 1998, 903 (906);
, Internet-Verträge, CR 1998, 613 (616). However, domestic
enterprises cannot agree between themselves on the application of
since this presupposes that parties have their establishments in different
countries (Article 1 CISG).
, Kauf- und Dienstleistungsverträge im Internet,
ecolex 1996, 82 (84);
, Internet-Verträge, CR 1998, 613
(617). There are special provisions for contracts relating to the transportation
of goods and
to real property (Article 4(3) and (4) of the Rome Convention).
On the difficulty in establishing that a website is directed to a
particular market, in the absence of express restrictions on sale
and delivery,
, Internet-Verträge, CR 1998, 613 (617);
, Die Entwicklung des internationalen Vertrags-, Schuld- und
Sachenrechts in den Jahren 1995/96, NJW 1997, 1207 (1214).
, Internet (Teil
1), CR 1999
, 512 (516).
, 515 emphasising the work of organisation and controlling that
the seller carries out from its seat. Contra
, Internet-Recht (1998)
52, who states that the seat of the seller can be decisive only for a
standardised object of performance such
as a text file, a work of music or a
standard software programme. In other cases in which performance has to be
adapted to the individual
circumstances of the customer, in particular to the
customer’s computer, the focus of the activity is, according to
, at the customer’s seat, even if the seller in reality
operates from its computer.
Section 20 in conjunction with s 1(2) of the ECG.
The exceptions from the principle of the country of origin contained in ss
21 and 22 of the ECG have other purposes: s 21 ECG excludes
certain areas of law
- in contract law above all the freedom of choice of law and consumer contracts
- from the principle of the
country of origin from the outset, and s 22 of the
ECG - observing a precisely prescribed notification procedure (s 23 ECG) -
exceptions in individual cases to protect general interests such as
public order, health or consumers. On the authority for this
in the Directive,
see Article 3(3), (4) and (5) and Annex of the E-Commerce Directive.
Articles 15 and 16 Brussels Regulation, Articles 13 and 14 Brussels
Convention/Lugano Convention. The consumer need only allow himself
to be sued in
his country of residence (mandatory jurisdiction, Article 16(2) of the Brussels
Regulation or Article 14(2) of the
Brussels Convention/Lugano Convention). If
the consumer appears as the claimant, however, he has the choice between
conducting litigation
in his country of residence or in the country of residence
of the internet seller (Article 16(1) of the Brussels Regulation or Article
14(1) of the Brussels Convention/Lugano Convention). In addition, he can also
sue the seller at the site of a branch establishment,
agency or other
establishment, provided the litigation relates to the operations of this
(Article 15(2) in conjunction with Article
5(5) of the Brussels Regulation,
Article 13(2) in conjunction with Article 5(5) of the Brussels Convention/Lugano
Convention).
Article 5(2) and (3) of the Rome Convention.
Articles 2, 3, 15(2) and 60 of the Brussels Regulation and Articles 2, 3,
13(2) and 53 of the Brussels Convention/Lugano Convention.
Czernich/Tiefenthaler
, Neue Aspekte im internationalen
Verfahrensrecht durch den BeitrittÖsterreichs zum EuGVÜ, JBl 1998, 745
, Die Zuständigkeit für Verbrauchersachen nach
europäischem Zivilverfahrensrecht des Brüsseler und des
LuganeÜbereinkommens
(EuGVÜ/LGVÜ) (Teil 2), JBl 1998, 767
(770ff). The same applies to autonomous German law;
Verbraucherschutz im Internet, K&R 1998, 129 (133);
Verbrauchergerichtsstand nach EuGVÜ und örtliche Zuständigkeit,
IPRax 1994, 426ff; LG Konstanz 24 August 1992, IPRax
1994, 448ff.
The concept of the consumer must be defined within the context of the
contract and be restricted to private end users; it largely
corresponds to the
definitions of consumers in Article 5(1) of the Rome Convention and s 1 KSchG;
cf. EuGH 19 January 1993 -
Shearson/TVB
- NJW 1993, 1251;
Czernich/Tiefenthaler
, Übereinkommen, Article 13 marg no 6;
, Europäisches Zivilprozessrecht, Kommentar zu EuGVO und
LuganoÜbereinkommen
(2002) Article 15 marg no 4ff;
, EuGVÜ (1996) Article 13 marg no 3ff;
Zuständigkeit (Teil 1), JBl 1998, 700 (704).
Czernich/Tiefenthaler
, Übereinkommen, Article 13 marg no 7;
, Internet-Verträge, CR 1998, 613 (617ff).
Article 13(3) of the Brussels Convention/Lugano Convention, Article 5(2)
alternative 1 of the Rome Convention; The other alternative
requirements in
Article 13 of the Brussels Convention/Lugano Convention and Article 5 of the
Rome Convention are of no practical
relevance to the internet area. However,
some authors want to apply Article 5(2) alternative 2 of the Rome Convention to
contracts too; this provision applies the law of the consumer’s
country even if the entrepreneur (or the entrepreneur’s
agent) received
the consumer’s order in the consumer’s normal country of residence.
To this effect see, for example,
, Internet-Verträge, CR
1998, 620, if the consumer was able to rely on being protected by his domestic
law as a result of the
concrete initiation of the transaction by the other party
to the contract (by reason of language, currency, naming of domestic service
providers etc). However, it is not necessary to take such a broad interpretation
of this provision, which was passed with trade fairs
and similar sales events in
mind. The cases that may possibly fall under this provision may as a general
rule be subsumed under Article
5(2) alternative 1 of the Rome Convention - the
requirement that an offer or advertising has already been made (on this, see
immediately
below in text). See
, Electronic Commerce und
Europäisches Verbrauchervertrags-IPR, RIW 1996, 988, who rejects the
application of Article 5(2) alternative
2 of the Rome Convention to internet
contracts putting particular emphasis on the fact that the receiving of the
order in the meaning
of Article 5(2) alternative 2 of the Rome Convention
requires the seller to be physically present.
The exception provided in Article 5(4) of the Rome Convention for services
that are to be performed exclusively outside the consumer’s
normal state
does not fit services by internet, which typically cannot be allocated to any
particular place ‘exclusively’.
, Das Internet im
internationalen Vertrags- und Deliktsrecht, RabelsZ 63 (1999) 203 (254ff);
, ‘The applicable law to consumer contracts made over the
internet - consumer protection through private international law?’,
International Journal of Law & Information Technology
5 (1997) 192
Czernich/Tiefenthaler
, Übereinkommen, Article 13 marg no 17
with further references;
Czernich/Heiss
, EVÜ (1999)
Article 5 marg no 29ff with further references.
, Internationale Zuständigkeit für die
Durchsetzung von Ansprüchen aus Geschäfts- und Wettbewerbshandlungen
Internet, JurPC Web-Dok 108/1998, para 23,
http://www.jura.uni-sb.de/jurpc
, Internet-Verträge,
CR 1998, 613 (619) referring to the fact that the location of the server is not
Article 15(1)(c) of the Brussels Regulation.
, Internationale Zuständigkeit für die
Durchsetzung von Ansprüchen aus Geschäfts- und Wettbewerbshandlungen
Internet, JurPC Web-Dok 108/1998, para 23,
http://www.jura.uni-sb.de/jurpc
, Internet-Verträge,
CR 1998, 613 (619) with reference to the fact that the location of the server is
not decisive.
Boele-Woelki
, Internet und IPR: Wo geht jemand ins Netz?, in
(ed), Völkerrecht und Internationales Privatrecht in einem
sich globalisierenden internationalen System -Auswirkungen der Entstaatlichung
transnationaler Rechtsbeziehungen (2000) 31ff, 33 ff;
Revision des Brüsseler und des Luganer Übereinkommens über die
gerichtliche Zuständigkeit und die Vollstreckung
gerichtlicher
Entscheidungen in Zivil- und Handelssachen - Generalia und
Gerichtsstandsproblematik, in
(ed), Revision desEuGVÜ -
Neues Schiedsverfahrensrecht (2000) 1 (20). See also
Jayme/Kohler
Europäisches Kollisionsrecht 1999 - Die Abendstunde der
Staatsverträge, IPRax 1999, 401 (405ff) with further references,
on the criticism from the seller’s point of view.
Proposal for a Council Regulation (EC) on jurisdiction and the recognition
and enforcement of judgments in civil and commercial
matters (COM (1999) 348
final, pp 17-18.
, Internet (Teil
1), CR 1999
, 513 (515) with further
references, who rightly undertakes an interpretation comparing the conventions,
including CISG;
Kaiser/Voigt
, Vertragsschluss und Abwicklung des
Electronic Commerce im Internet - Chancen und Risiken, K&R 1999, 445 (451);
, Verbraucherschutz bei Verträgen im Fernabsatz, IPRax 1999, 1
Klimeck/Sieber
, Anwendbares Recht beim Vertrieb digitalisierbarer
Waren über das Internet am Beispiel der Softwareüberlassung, ZUM 1998,
902 (904, 906ff) with a descriptive summary of the state of the arguments.
, Internet-Recht (1998) 53;
Czernich/Heiss
, EVÜ (1999) Article 5 marg no 16, who, like the
prevailing opinion on s 90 of the German Civil Code, requires that the software
be incorporated on a physical data medium; cf Heinrichs in Palandt, BGB61 (2002)
§ 90 marg no 2; Junker/Benecke, Computerrecht2
(2000) 113 with further
references. However, as Heiss too shows, the concept of movable property in
Article 5 of the Rome Convention
and in Article 13 of the Brussels
Convention/Lugano Convention is to be defined within the context of the
, Internet-Recht (1998) 53 with further references.
Non-physical online transfers are regarded as services, for example in
England and Finland and in some communications and legal
acts of the EU (eg
E-Commerce Directive, [2000] OJ L178/1). See Cox, ‘Chaos versus
uniformity: the divergent views of software
in the International
community’, 4
The Vindobona Journal of International Commercial Law and
Arbitration
To quote the wording of the Brussels I Regulation.
, Das Internet im internationalen Vertrags- und
Deliktsrecht, RabelsZ 63 (1999) 203 (234ff) with further references;
, Internet-Verträge, CR 1998, 613 (619); Kronke, Electronic
Commerce, RIW 1996, 985 (988);
, Quo vadis elektronischer
Geschäftsverkehr?, CR 2000, 61 (65). Prevailing literature requires
advertising directed specifically
at the consumer’s country; in the case
of the medium of the Internet, this is in general satisfied for all countries,
those who use the World Wide Web at least accept the risk that their
advertising will be read all over the world (on this, see below).
requirement of directed conduct, see
Guiliano/Lagarde
, Bericht zum
Übereinkommen über das auf vertragliche Schuldverhältnisse
anzuwendende Recht, ABl
1980 Nr C 262
in Soergel, BGB,
10. Band, EGBGB (1996) Article 29 EGBGB marg no 18 with further references.
Article 17 of the Brussels Regulation, Article 15 of the Brussels
Convention/Lugano Convention
Section 14 (1) KSchG;The consumer has a general place of jurisdiction in
these locations in any event. For more detail, see
, ABGB-Praxiskommentar
(1997) § 14 KSchG marg
Article 5(2) of the Rome Convention;
Czernich/Heiss
, EVÜ (1999) Article 5 marg no 58ff.
For details, see s 13a(1) of the Austrian Consumer Protection Act,
Konsumentenschutzgesetz, KSchG.
Section 6 KSchG and ss 864a, 879(3) Austrian Civil Code.
Section 13a(2) KSchG;
, Internationales Privatrecht
einschließlich Europarecht3 (2001) 125ff;
Holzhammer/Roth
Einführung in das Bürgerliche Recht mit IPR
(2000) 398ff.
The minimal contacts test, developed by the US Supreme Court in its
International Shoe v Washington
[1945] USSC 158
interlocal relationship between the US states, is subject to particularly strict
requirements in the international context,
that is, in relationship to other
countries. On international jurisdiction, see also sections 401, 421(1) and (2)
Restatement Third of the Foreign Relations La; Rau
auswärtige Gesellschaften im Cyberspace 2000,
761 (765ff).
For more detail, see
, Der lange Arm amerikanischer
Gerichte: Personal Jurisdiction im Cyberspace, GRUR Int 1998, 660ff;
, Internationale Gerichtszuständigkeit und Internet, CR 1999,
121 (125ff); Developments in the Law - The Law of Cyberspace, Harvard
112 (1999) 1575 (1697ff);
, ‚Personal Jurisdiction’
über ausländische Firmen nach amerikanischem Zivilprozessrecht, RIW
, Litigation im Cyberspace,
http://www.perkinscoie.com/aba/usjuris.htm; Kaufmann-Kohler
Boele-Woelki/Kessedjian
(ed), Internet - Which Court Decides?, Which Law
Applies? (1998) 136 above all on the practice of American courts with regard to
[1980] USSC 12
See above fn 7.
However, this is quite typical of the American procedural system, in
particular since the individual states have both federal courts
and also their
own state courts, and since the long-arm statutes vary in detail from state to
Inset Systems v Instruction Set Inc
937 F Supp 161
1996), for example, the court stated that it had jurisdiction because the
defendant could reach all the internet users in
the forum state with its
internet advertising, and moreover, the defendant’s website gave a
toll-free 1-800 telephone number.
Contra Rannoch, Inc v The Rannoch
Corporation
, 1999 WL 450824 (ED Va 30 June 1999); on this, see below in text
Millennium Enterprises, Inc, dba Music Millennium and
Millennium Music v Millennium Music, LP, Millennium Music, Inc
33 F Supp 2d
, Civ No 98-1058-AA (D Or 4 January 1999),
http://www.bna.com/e-law/cases/millen.html
, the court denied its
from any state, because the
‘purposefully directed at this
was missing. See also
Hanson v Denckla
[1958] USSC 165
‘purposeful availment’
Asahi Mental Industries Co
v Superior Court
[1987] USSC 18
‘purposeful
; for a critical view of this, see
Amerikanische Praxis und europäische Übereinkommen, in
Basedow/Hopt/Kötz
(eds), Festschrift für Ulrich Drobnig zum
siebzigsten Geburtstag (1999) 299ff.
Kunert, Internationale Zuständigkeitskonflikte im Internet, CR 1996,
, Internationale Gerichtszuständigkeit und Internet, CR
1999, 121 (126); eg,
Millennium Enterprises Inc, dba Music Millennium and
Millennium Music v Millennium Music LP, Millennium Music Inc
33 F Supp 2d
, Civ No 98- 1058-AA (D Or 4 January 1999),
http://www.bna.com/e-law/cases/millen.html; Bernhard M Resnick, V Angel
Manfredy, John Manfredy, Jeffrey H Brown and D’Ancona
1999 WL 257751, 4 (ED Pa 22 April 1999),
http://www.bna.com/e-law/cases/resnick.html
CompuServ, Inc v
, Case No. C2/94/91, (SD Ohio 11 August 1994).
Cybersell Inc v Cybersell, Inc
[1997] USCA9 3689
44 USPQ 2d 1928
(9th Cir, 2
December 1997),
http://www. bna.com/e-law/cases/cybersell.html
American Network Inc v Access American/Connect Atlanta Inc
(SDNY, 1997),
http://www. bna.com/e-law/cases/amnet.html;
CompuServ Inc v Patterson
, Case No C2/94/91, (SD Ohio, 11 August 1994).
Mieczkowski v Masco Corp
, No 5: 96cv 286, 1998 WL 125, 678 (ED Tex,
18 March 1998).
American Network Inc v Access American/Connect Atlanta, Inc
(SDNY, 1997),
http://www. bna.com/e-law/cases/amnet.html
Zippo Manufacturing Comp v Zippo Dot Com Inc
952 F Supp 1119
http://www.bna.com/e-law/cases/zippo.html
Resuscitation Technologies Inc v Continentanl Health Care Corp
1997 US Dist LEXIS 3523, 17, 1997 WL 149567,
http://www.bna.com/e-law/cases/resus.html; Cody v Ward
954 F Supp 43
(D Conn, 1997),
http://www.bna.com/e-law/cases/cody.html; Edias Software Int
LLC et al v Basis International Ld
947 F Supp 413
, 420 (D Ariz, 1996),
http://www.bna.com/e-law/cases/edias.html; Hall v LaRonde
66 Cal Rptr 2d
, 402 (Cal Ct App, 1997).
Advanced Software Inc v Datapharm, Inc
, Case No CV 98-5943 DDP (CD
Cal, 11 March 1998);
Archdiocese of St Louis and Papal Visit 1999 v Internet
Entertainment Group Inc
, Case No 4:99CV27SNL (ED Mo, 1999),
http://www.bna.com/e-law/cases/pope99.html; International Star Registry of
Illinois v Bowman-Haight Ventures Inc
, 1999 WL 300285, 6 (ND, III), No
98C6823, May 6, 1999,
http://www.bna.com/e-law/cases/starreg.html; Zippo
Manufacturing Comp v Zippo Dot Com Inc
952 F Supp 1119
(WD Pa, 1997),
http://www.bna.com/e-law/cases/zippo.html; Maritz Inc v Cybergold Inc
947 F Supp 1328
, 1334 (ED Mo, 1996),
http://www.bna.com/e-law/cases/cybgold.html
The Hearst Corp v
Ari Goldberger
, No 96 Civ 3620, 1997 WL 97097 (SDNY, 26 February 1997),
where the court took the view that neither the website that could be accessed
New York nor the emails sent to selected customers constituted ‘doing
business’ in the meaning of the New York long-arm
Rannoch Inc v The Rannoch Corporation
, 1999 WL 450824 (ED Va, 30
June 1999).
Arter/Jörg/Gnos
, Zuständigkeit und anwendbares Recht bei
internationalen Rechtsgeschäften mittels Internet unter
Berücksichtigung
unerlaubter Handungen, AJP/PJA 3/2000, 277 (282ff).
Bremen v Zapata Offshore Co
, 10 (1972);
CompuServ v
89 F 3d 927
(6th Cir, 1996).
Perkins v. CCH Computax, Inc
106 NC App 210
415 SE 2d 755
Lauro Lines v Chasser
[1989] USSC 98
Sterling Forest
Assoc Ltd v Barnett-Range Corp
[1988] USCA4 329
840 F 2d 249
(4th Cir, 1988). Provisions to
this effect are also found in some American model codes, for example in a
planned addition to the
Uniform Commercial Code for software contracts and
information licences (Article 2B, Section 108 UCC,
http://www.law.uh.edu/ucc2b
) and for the purchase of software and
information in the Uniform Computer Information Transaction Act (section 110
UCITA), which
has already come into force in Maryland (1 October 2000) and
Virginia (1 July 2001) and the implementation of which has already commenced
a number of other states (Arizona, District of Columbia, Illinois, Maine, New
Hampshire, New Jersey, Oregon, Texas),
http://www.ucitaonline.com
similar provision in the bill for the Uniform Electronic Transactions Act
(section 108 UETA) was deleted without replacement in
the final version on 25
November 1997, after a detailed discussion;
http://www.uetaonline.com
Carnival Cruise Lines, Inc v Shute
111 S Ct 1522
‘so inconvenient as to deprive a party of its day in court’
, US Supreme Court: Zur Wirksamkeit
grenzüberschreitender Gerichtsstandsklauseln in Verbraucherverträgen,
IPRax 1993, 42f;
, Prorogation Clauses in the United States after
the Carneval Cruise Line Cases, IPRax 1993, 421ff;
Bonny v Society of
, 3 F 3d 156 (7th Cir, 1993).
Carnival Cruise Lines Inc v Shute
111 S Ct 1522
(1991) with
further references.
See above fn 8.
See above fn 7.
However, the Hague Convention on Recognition of Jurisdiction and
Enforcement of Judgments failed not only because of the question
of consumer
protection in consumer contracts. There are plainly unsurmountable differences
in other areas too, such as the protection
of intellectual property and the
relevance of human rights in civil proceedings.
, The Hague
Guidelines for a Cure, IPRax 2000, 465
(466) with further references.
, Die Revision des Brüsseler und des Luganer
Übereinkommens, in Gottwald (fn 62) 1 (34 fn 137).
Arter/Jörg/Gnos
, Zuständigkeit und anwendbares Recht bei
internationalen Rechtsgeschäften mittels Internet unter
Berücksichtigung
unerlaubter Handungen, AJP/PJA 3/2000, 277 (292).
This Act can be downloaded at
http://www.ucitaonline.com
Such a provision is also contained in the planned addition to the Uniform
Commercial Code (Article 2B, s 107 UCC),
http://www.law.uh.edu/ucc2b
Section 109(a) UCITA; similarly s 2B-108(a) UCC (Draft).
Section 109(b)(1) UCITA; similarly s 2B-108(b)(1) UCC (Draft).
Section 109(b)(2) UCITA; similarly s 2B-108(b)(2) UCC (Draft).
Section 109(b)(3) UCITA; similarly s 2B-108(b)(3) UCC (Draft).
Reporter’s Notes, section 109 note 5,
http://www.ucitaonline.com
Section 109(c) UCITA; similarly s 2B-108(c) UCC (Draft).
Article 13(1)(3) of the Brussels Convention/Lugano Convention and Article
5(2) alternative 1
of the Rome Convention.
Article 15(1)(c of the Brussels Regulation.
A good survey of the various suggestions in the literature for
restriction, all of which, however, must in the last instance be
rejected, can
be found in
, Internet, Internationales Privatrecht und
europäische Rechtsangleichung, in Gruber (ed), Die rechtliche Dimension des
(2001) 69 (75f) with further references.
, Zuständigkeit, JurPC Web-Dok 108/1998,
http://www.jura.unisb.de/jurpc
Wettbewerbshandlungen, K&R 1998, 422 (424);
Arter/Jörg/Gnos
Zuständigkeit und anwendbares Recht bei internationalen
Rechtsgeschäften mittels Internet unter Berücksichtigung
unerlaubter
Handungen, AJP/PJA 3/2000, 277 (289);
Reich/Nordhausen
, Verbraucher und
Recht im elektronischen Geschäftsverkehr (2000) 91ff, 94; cf
, Kauf- und Dienstleistungsverträge, ecolex 1996, 82 (84)
holding a more cautious view;
, E-Commerce in der
Europäischen Union (1999) 113.
, Zuständigkeit, JurPC Web-Dok 108/1998,
para 48ff, can be downloaded at
http://www.jura.uni-sb.de/jurpc
, Kauf- und Dienstleistungsverträge, ecolex
1996, 82 (84), who denies prior business activities by the Internet seller in
consumer’s country in such a case, with reference to the obvious
divergency between the intended market and the market found.
Köhler/Arndt
, Recht des Internet
(2000) 143;
, Zuständigkeit, JurPC Web-Dok 108/1998, para 52,
http://www.jura.uni-sb.de/jurpc
Dienstleistungsverträge, ecolex 1996, 82 (84),
Internet-Verträge, CR 1998, 613 (620); on international competition law see
Dieselhorst
, Anwendbares Recht, ZUM 1998, 294.
, Zuständigkeit, JurPC Web-Dok 108/1998,
http://www.jura.uni-sb.de/jurpc
, gives an example of a cleaning
company in Saarbrücken in which nobody in Munich will be interested, but
this example is not
convincing in the last instance. Why should a person who
owns a house in Munich, or even Salzburg, not be addressed by the cleaning
services of a company in Saarbrücken advertised on the web, unless the web
advertising makes it clear that the services offered
can be carried out only in
the Saarbrücken area? The Saarbrücken company could be a logistics
headquarters that organises
cleaning services in the most varied locations.
Annex II, contained in a Memorandum of the Secretariat-General of the
Council of the EU for the COREPER/Council of 14 December 2000
(in the corrected
version of 20 December 2000) (14139/00 and 14139/00 COR2(de)-JUSTCIV 137), which
was accepted in the Brussels I
Regulation, printed in German in IPRax 2001,
259ff (261).
This addition, which broadens the requirement of directing business to a
particular consumer state, is overlooked by
Mayr/Czernich
europäische Zivilverfahrensrecht (2002) 83; contrary to the clear wording
of the declaration, they proceed on the
basis that the contract must be entered
into on the website too. Such a restriction to contracts entered into online
would indeed
have to be rejected as an arbitrary restriction. See
Internet, Internationales Privatrecht und europäische Rechtsangleichung, in
(fn 105) 69 (78) contra
, Die Revision des
Brüsseler Übereinkommens von 1968 - Teil I: Internationale
Zuständigkeit, European Legal Forum 2000-01,
(ed), E-Commerce-Gesetz (2002) 328, who,
however, fails to appreciate the significance of the restriction to interactive
when he states that the mere possibility of accessing a website is a
sufficient connection to the consumer’s country of residence,
irrespective
of whether the website allows ordering online or not. In contrast to that,
prevailing literature still bases its arguments
on restriction on the basis of
the content of the site, such as language, currency and subject of contract. Eg,
Mayr/Czernich
, Das neue europäische Zivilverfahrensrecht (2002) 83.
, Internet, Internationales Privatrecht und europäische
Rechtsangleichung, in
(fn 105) 69 (77);
, Grenzenlose
Geschäfte bei grenzenlosem (Prozess-)Risiko? Wer weiß schon, welches
Recht am Ende zur Anwendung kommt? in
(ed), ‚eBusiness
versus Recht Behindert Recht den Markt - ohne einem dringenden
Schutzbedürfnis zu dienen?’ (2003)
, Internet, Internationales Privatrecht und europäische
Rechtsangleichung, in
(fn 105) 69 (77), who, however, correctly
points out that it would be worth considering drafting provisions on
international jurisdiction
more broadly than the equivalent rule in private
international law.
, Internet, Internationales Privatrecht und europäische
Rechtsangleichung, in
(fn 105) 69 (78);
Internet-Verträge, CR 1998, 613 (620);
, Kauf- und
Dienstleistungsverträge, ecolex 1996, 82 (84); on international competition
law, Dieselhorst, Anwendbares Recht,
ZUM 1998, 293 (295); Hoeren, Cybermanners,
WRP 1997, 993 (998); Ubber, Rechtsschutz, WRP 1997, 497 (503).
, Internet-Verträge, CR 1998, 613 (619);
, E-Commerce und internationales Verbraucherschutzrecht, MMR
2000, 22 (23ff);
, Das Internet im internationalen Vertrags- und
Deliktsrecht, RabelsZ 63 (1999) 203 (234ff);
, Internet,
Internationales Privatrecht und europäische Rechtsangleichung, in
(fn 105) 69 (77); see also von Hoffmann in Soergel, BGB, 10. Band, EGBGB
(1996) Article 29 marg no 18 on the distribution of foreign
television stations
via domestic cable channels. Cf
, Electronic Commerce, RIW 1996,
985 (988) on teleshopping and
, Kauf- und
Dienstleistungsverträge, ecolex 1996, 82 (84).
Of this opinion, on international competition law, see
Cybermanners, WRP 1997, 993 (998);
Wettbewerbsverstöße im Internet - Grenzen einer kollisionsrechtlichen
Problemlösung, ZVglRWiss 99 (2000) 278 (293ff);
, Rechtsschutz,
WRP 97, 497 (502 f); Dieselhorst, Anwendbares Recht bei Internationalen
Online-Diensten, ZUM 1998, 293 (294f).
On the existing possibilities of restricting access to a website by the
use of passwords, top-levels domains or IP addresses, see
E-Commerce in der Europäischen Union (1999) 113;
Internet im internationalen Vertrags- und Deliktsrecht, RabelsZ 63 (1999) 203
Tribunal de Grande Instance de Paris
, Beschluss vom 20 November
), K&R 2001, 63; on this case, see
Internet, Internationales Privatrecht und europäische Rechtsangleichung, in
(fn 105) 69 (99f).
This procedure is also recommended by
, Internationales
Verbraucherschutzrecht im Internet - Auswirkungen der geplanten neuen Verordnung
des Rates über die gerichtliche
Zuständigkeit und die Anerkennung und
Vollstreckung von Entscheidungen in Zivil- und Handelssachen, MMR 2000, 18 (21)
, Internet, Internationales Privatrecht und europäische
Rechtsangleichung, in
(fn 105) 69 (78f). Contra Brenn in
(ed), E-Commerce-Gesetz (2002) 329.
(ed), E-Commerce-Gesetz (2002) 329; however,
for this reason he advocates not asking customers their residence at all. On
below VI B 1 at fn 143.
Article 5(3) Brussels Regulation, Article 5(3) of the Brussels
Convention/Lugano Convention. The concepts of delict and quasi-delict
interpreted autonomously within the context of the Regulation resp the
Convention. The ECJ includes all the cases of liability
for damage that are not
connected to a contract in the meaning of Article 5(1) Brussels
Convention/Lugano Convention, 27 September
1988, 189/87
Kalfelis/Schröder
NJW 1998, 3088. Also, the phrase ‘place
where the harmful event occurred’ is interpreted autonomously, ECJ 30
Bier/Mines des Potasse D`Alsace
- NJW 1977, 493: In the
case of delict committed at a distance, international jurisdiction under Art
5(3) of the Brussels Convention/Lugano
Convention is created both by the place
where the act was committed and the place where the harmful event took effect.
, Wettbewerbshandlungen im Internet
Internationale Zuständigkeit und anwendbares Recht, K&R 1998, 422
, Übereinkommen, RZ 1993, 192 (196).
Köhler/Arndt
, Recht des Internet (2000) 144f;
Dieselhorst
, Anwendbares Recht bei Internationalen Online-Diensten, ZUM
1998, 293 (294);
, Rechtsschutz bei Missbrauch von Internet-Domains,
WRP 1997, 497 (502);
, Zuständigkeit, JurPC Web-Dok
108/1998, para. 35ff,
http://www.jura.uni-sb.de/jurpc
ECJ 7 March 1995, C-68/93 -
Fiona Shevill ua/Presse Alliance SA
NJW 1995, 1881ff.
BGH NJW 1977, 1590.
OLG München, OLGZ 87, 217 for local jurisdiction; see also
, Internet und On-Demand-Dienste im IPR, ecolex 1997, 166 (168).
The most recent case law (OGH 9 October 1990, 4 Ob 91/90, JBl 1991, 800),
in contrast to older decisions, no longer mentions distribution
in accordance
with intended use.
Mayr in Rechberger
, Kommentar zur ZPO (2000) §
83c JN marg no 3 with further references.
, Der Gerichtsstand bei Wettbewerbsverstößen im
Internet, ÖJZ 1999, 754 (758);
, IZVR und IPR bei Internet
Domain Namen, in
Mayer-Schönberger/Galla/Fallenböck
, Das Recht
der Domain Namen (2001) 103 (130). On German law
Wettbewerbshandlungen, K&R 1998, 422 (424f).
Section 48(2) IPRG.
Behaviour exclusively related to business, eg bribery, on the other hand,
is governed by the general conflict of law regime in s
48(1) IPRG.
Koppensteiner
, Österreichisches und Europäisches
Wettbewerbsrecht3 (1997) § 21 marg no 19;
, ABGB II (1992) § 48 IPRG marg no 11). On German law
, Wettbewerbshandlungen, K&R 1998, 422 (425).
Von Hoffmann
, Internationales Privatrecht, 431f with reference to
Article 41(1)
Introductory Act
to the German Civil Code (Einführungsgesetz
zum Bürgerlichen Gesetzbuche, referred to below as EGBGB);
, Internet und Internationales Privatrecht, GRURInt 1999, 909f
with further references, with the help of a corrective interpretation
Grandpierre
, Herkunftsprinzip kontra Marktortanknüpfung
(Frankfurt/M, 1999) 18f.
Draft of a regulation on the law governing extra-contractual obligational
relationships of 21 June 1999 (unpublished). The preliminary
draft on which this
was based, by the
groupe européen de droit international privé
is published in IPRax 1999, 286. See also
, Enwurfeines
EU-Übereinkommens über das auf außervertragliche
Schuldverhältnisse anwendbare Recht, IPRax 1999,
neuer Anlauf zur Vereinheitlichung des IPR für außervertragliche
Schuldverhältnisse auf EU-Ebene, EuZW 1999,
E-Commerce-Richtlinie: Politische Einigung in Brüssel erzielt, K&R
2000, 59 (61);
, Europäisches Kollisionsrecht des unlauteren
Wettbewerbs, JZ 2000, 179.
, Wettbewerbsverstöße im Internet - Grenzen
einer kollisionsrechtlichen Problemlösung, ZVglRWiss 99 (2000) 278 (293ff)
with further references;
, Internet und Internationales
Privatrecht, GRURInt 1999, 909 (916);
, Marketing im Internet und
Internationales Wettbewerbsrecht, NJW 1998, 1596 (1600);
, Wettbewerbshandlungen, K&R 1998, 442 (425). Cf
, Die Anwendbarkeit des deutschen Wettbewerbsrechts auf
Werbemaßnahmen im Internet, CR 1997, 676 (680), who rejects the requirement
of noticeability, taken over from European antitrust law, but in the last
instance comes to the same conclusion.
, IZVR und IPR bei Internet Domain Namen, in
Mayer-Schönberger/Galla/Fallenböck
(fn 129) 103 (121); probably
, Wettbewerbsrechtliche Aspekte des Internet, ÖBl
1999, 267 (268f); see generally
, Kommentar zur
ZPO, Band I
(2000) s 83c JN marg. no 38ff without dealing with
Internet circumstances. Contra Thiele, DerGerichtsstand bei
Wettbewerbsverstößen
im Internet, ÖJZ 1999, 754 (755f), who
denies the principle of effect in the law of international jurisdiction.
, Das Internationale Wettbewerbs- und
Immaterialgüterrecht nach der EGBGB-Novelle, WRP 2000, 269 (278) confirms
that there is
a perceptible influence on the market at the place of distribution
in accordance with intended use. The Higher Regional Court (Oberlandesgericht,
OLG) Frankfurt am Main, 138 note
, also defines the marketplace
for Internet offers - clearly in conformity with the case law on international
place where the website can be accessed as it is intended
, Wettbewerbshandlungen, K&R 1998, 422
, Zuständigkeit, JurPC Web-Dok 108/1998,
http://www.jura.uni-sb.de/jurpc; Härting
, Internetrecht
(1999) 21f;Hoeren, Cybermanners und Wettbewerbsrecht - Einige Überlegungen
zum Lauterkeitsrecht im Internet,
WRP 1997, 993 (998);
Dieselhorst
Anwendbares Recht, ZUM 1998, 293 (295); Ubber, Rechtsschutz, WRP 97, 497 (502f);
Loewenheim/Koch
, Praxis des Online-Rechts (1998) 376f.
However, an unfair internet seller can be ordered only to remove the
market effects on the market in question - eg to cease operations
in one region
- but not to stop selling worldwide. To this effect, see OGH GRURInt 1999, 1062
) with regard to selling TV programme magazines;
Playboy Enterprises Inc v Chuckleberry Publishing Inc, Tattilo Editrice
939 F Supp 1032
(SDNY 1996). On this restriction of the competence to
Einschränkung der Kognitionsbefugnis
Internet, Internationales Privatrecht und europäische Rechtsangleichung, in
(fn 105) 69 (92f, 99f) with further references;
, Wettbewerbsverstöße im Internet - Grenzen einer
kollisionsrechtlichen Problemlösung, ZVfgRWiss 99 (2000) 278 (298ff)
further references.
Dieselhorst
, Anwendbares Recht, ZUM 1998, 293 (294);
, Kollisionsrecht, JZ 2000, 179 (181);
Köhler/Arndt
Recht des Internet (2000) 143f.
, Internet, Internationales Privatrecht und europäische
Rechtsangleichung, in
(fn 105) 69 (92f, 99f);
Internet und Internationales Privatrecht, GRURInt 1999, 909 (919);
Dieselhorst
, Anwendbares Recht, ZUM 1998, 293 (294f);
Cybermanners, WRP 1997, 993 (998);
, Rechtsschutz, WRP 1997, 497
, Die Anwendbarkeit des deutschen Wettbewerbsrechts auf
Werbemaßnahmen im Internet, CR 1997, 676 (677).
On such possibilities as exist apart from this of restricting access to a
website by the use of passwords, top-level domains or
IP addresses, see the
references in fn 119.
Here too - just as in international contract law - the seller has the
burden of proving that its internet activities are regionally
restricted; see
, IZVR und IPR bei Internet Domain Namen, in
Mayer-Schönberger/Galla/Fallenböck
(fn 129) 103 (131).
, Europäisches Kollisionsrecht des unlauteren
Wettbewerbs, JZ 2000, 179 (183);
, Marketing im Internet und
Internationales Wettbewerbsrecht, NJW 1998, 1596 (1598f);
Anwendbarkeit des deutschen Wettbewerbsrechts auf Werbemaßnahmen im
Internet, CR 1997, 676 (677);
, Cybermanners undWettbewerbsrecht -
Einige Überlegungen zum Lauterkeitsrecht im Internet, WRP 1997, 993 (998);
, Wettbewerbsrechtliche Aspekte des Internet, ÖBl
1999, 267ff;
, Deliktsrechtliche Haftung im Internet - nationale
und internationale Rechtsprobleme, ZUM 1996, 539 (560f).
, Europäisches Kollisionsrecht des unlauteren
Wettbewerbs, JZ 2000, 179 (183). Contra
, Internet und
Internationales Privatrecht, GRURInt 1999, 909 (913ff). On the state of the
discussion see
, IZVR und IPR bei Internet Domain Namen, in
Mayer-Schönberger/Galla/Fallenböck
(fn 129) 103 (131f) with
further references;
, Internationales Deliktsrecht und Internet -
ein Ausgangspunkt für grundlegende Umwälzungen im Internationalen
Privatrecht?,
Basedow/Drobnig/Ellger/Hopt/Kötz et al
Aufbruch nach Europa (Tübingen 2001) 479 (482f) with further references,
correctly pointing out that it is not the marketplace
principle itself that
violates fundamental freedoms, but only the relevant provision of marketplace
competition law, whose contents
turn out to be disproportionate. Similarly
Koppensteiner
, Österreichisches und
europäisches Wirtschaftsprivatrecht, Teil 6/2: Wettbewerbsrecht - UWG
(1998) 144f with further references.
Article 3(1) and (2) E-Commerce Directive and s 20 of the ECG. For
particular areas of television advertising, the Television Directive,
Directive 89/552/EEC of 3 October 1989 on the co-ordination of certain
provisions laid down by Law, Regulation or Administrative
Action in Member
States concerning the pursuit of television broadcasting activities, [1989] OJ
L298/23, amended by Directive 97/36/EC
also refers to the law of the country of
origin (‘state of transmission principle’). Similarly in the
Satellite Directive
93/83/EEC of 27 September 1993 on the co-ordination of
certain rules concerning copyright and rights related to copyright applicable
satellite broadcasting and cable retransmission , [1993] OJ L248/15 for
questions of copyright law.
(ed), E-Commerce-Gesetz (2002) 310. See on
this in detail
, Internet, Internationales Privatrecht und
europäische Rechtsangleichung, in
(fn 105) 69 (82ff) with
further references;
, Internationales Deliktsrecht und Internet, in
Basedow/Drobnig et al. (fn 145) 479 (480f) with further references;
/Vallant, Grenzüberschreitender Wettbewerb im Internet, RIW
See Proposal for a regulation to remove restrictions on sales promotions
in the Internal Market COM (2001) 546 final,
http://www.europa.eu.int/comm/internal_market/comcom/unfair/
index.de.htm
, which contains provisions on information and transparency for
discounts, free gifts, premiums, promotional contests and promotional
thus is intended to do away with national prohibitions of such selling
practices. In this way, the liberalisation of competition
law that has already
begun in some member states is advanced further. See also the abolition of
discount and premium provisions in
Austria in 1992 (by the Deregulation of
Competition Law Act - Wettbewerbsderegulierungsgesetz, BGBl 1992/147) and in
Germany in 2001.
In addition, Austria is at present considering repealing the
prohibition of premiums, which is still contained in s 91 of the Act
Unfair Competition - Bundesgesetz gegen den unlauteren Wettbewerb, UWG.
, Internationales Deliktsrecht und Internet, in
Basedow/Drobnig et al
(fn 145) 479 (492);
, Internet,
Internationales Privatrecht und europäische Rechtsangleichung, in
(fn 105) 69 (93). Cf
, Internet und Internationales
Privatrecht, GRURInt 1999, 909 (915).
See also Council Resolution of 19 January 1999 on the Consumer Dimension
of the Information Society ([1999] OJ C23/01), printed
in part in German in
IPRax 1999, 291, which,
, provides for the preservation and
strengthening of the ‘laws with regard to the applicability of the legal
provisions of the
state of residence and of easy access to the national
Article 3(4)(a)(i) of the E-Commerce Directive permits member states to
deviate from the country of origin principle in individual
cases for the sake of
consumer protection, but measures of this kind are in principle governed by a
precisely prescribed notification
process (Article 3(4)(b), (5) and (6); see
also s 22(2)(5) and s 23 of the E-Commerce Act). How far the states will make
use of this
rather laborious exception remains to be seen.
, Internationales Deliktsrecht und Internet, in
Basedow/Drobnig et al
(fn 145) 479 (486ff) with further references;
, Internet, Internationales Privatrecht und europäische
Rechtsangleichung, in
(fn 105) 69 (88ff);
Lurger/Vallant
Grenzüberschreitender Wettbewerb im Internet, RIW 2001, 188 (194f).
To date, the differences have prevented an official proposal by the
Commission for the planned regulation on the law governing extra-contractual
obligational relationships. For a general discussion on the dispute between the
marketplace as a connecting factor and the country
of origin principle, see
, Das Herkunftslandprinzip als Internationales Privatrecht der
e-commerce-Richtlinie, ZVglRWiss 100 (2001) 137 (176ff);
Vorschlag für eine Richtlinie über den elektronischen
Geschäftsverkehr (KOM [1958] 586 endg), European Law Reporter
1999, 74ff;
, Telemarketing und Internationales Recht des Verbraucherschutzes,
Jahrbuch des Schweizerischen Konsumentenrechts 1998, 151ff.
, Internationales Deliktsrecht und Internet, in
Basedow/Drobnig et al
. (fn 143) 479 (93) with further references;
, Internet, Internationales Privatrecht und europäische
Rechtsangleichung, in
(fn 105) 69 (93f);
Die österreichische Umsetzung des Herkunftslandprinzips der
E-Commerce-Richtlinie, MMR 4/2002, 203 (208). But see
EG-Richtlinie über den elektronischen Geschäftsverkehr und das
internationale Privatrecht des unlauteren Wettbewerbs,
IPRax 2001, 15 (22), who
too hastily assumes that the country of origin principle of the E-Commerce
Directive will also be taken
over in the Rome II Regulation.
Fritze/Holzbach
, Die Electronic-Commerce-Richtlinie - Ende oder
Chance für das deutsche Wettbewerbsrecht, WRP 2000, 872 (876);
, Vom Cassislikör zur E-Commerce-Richtlinie: Auf dem Weg zu
einem europäischen Mediendeliktsrecht, ZEuP 2001, 837 (868);
Karenfort/Weißgerber
, Lauterkeit des Wirtschaftsverkehrs in Gefahr?
Die Konsequenzen der E-Commerce-Richtlinie für RabattG und ZugabeVO,
MMR-Beilage
H 7/2000, 38 (39).
See, e.g., green paper on European Union consumer protection, COM (2001)
http://www.europa.eu.int/comm/consumers/index_de.html
/Vallant, Grenzüberschreitender Wettbewerb im Internet,
RIW 2001, 188 (201f);
, Die österreichische Umsetzung des
Herkunftslandprinzips der E-Commerce-Richtlinie, MMR 4/2002, 203 (208f).
This is also admitted by
Arter/Jörg/Gnos
, Zuständigkeit
und anwendbares Recht bei internationalen Rechtsgeschäften mittels Internet
unter Berücksichtigung
unerlaubter Handungen, AJP/PJA 3/2000, 277 (292),
but they still adhere to the restriction of the scope of websites on the basis
of content criteria.
, Internationales Verbraucherschutzrecht im Internet, MMR
1/2000, 18 (25).
, Grenzenlose Geschäfte bei grenzenlosem
(Prozess-)Risiko? Wer weiß schon, welches Recht am Ende zur Anwendung
(ed), ‚eBusiness versus Recht. Behindert Recht
den Markt - ohne einem dringenden Schutzbedürfnis zu dienen?’ (2003)
107 (113), requiring certain provisos. See generally
Aspects of International Commercial Arbitration Administered Online, in Roth
(ed), Rechtsstudium in Großbritannien (2001)
103 ff with further
references; specifically on the Austrian legal situation see
Alternative Streitbeilegung bei Internetstreitigkeiten, in
E-Commerce-Gesetz (2002) 151ff with further references.
A model for this might be the Virtual Magistrate Arbitration Program of
the Chicago-Kent College of Law, which provides a cost-effective
arbitration procedure for all kinds of claims based on Internet activities,
including tortious conduct such as unfair business
practices, violations of
business secrets, copyright or trade mark law;
http://www.vmag.org
also the arbitration for violations of trade mark law by domain names that
already exists under the ICANN Uniform Dispute Resolution
Policy, based on the
contractual relationship between the ICANN domain name allocation agency and the
domain owners;
http://www.icann.org
In detail, see
, Alternative Streitbeilegung bei
Internetstreitigkeiten, in Brenn (ed), E-Commerce-Gesetz (2002) 157f.
Joint Declaration of the EU Council and the Commission on Article 15 of
the Brussels Regulation, Annex II, point II 2, contained
in a memorandum of the
Secretariat-General of the Council of the EU for COREPER/the Council of 14
December 2000 (in the amended version
of 20 December 2000; 14139/00 and 14139/00
COR2 (de)- JUSTCIV 137), which was accepted in the Brussels I Regulation,
printed in German
in IPRax 2001, 259ff (261).
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (301 KB)
PDF format (236 KB)
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter