URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/journals/HRD/2007/23.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 15:01:35
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Montell, Jessica --- "Freedom of movement: The case of Palestinians in the West Bank and Gaza" [2007] HRightsDef 23; (2007) 16(3) Human Rights Defender 10
Piercing the Vacuum: Domestic Remedies as a Means of Bringing Transnational Corporations to Account for International Infringements
of Economic, Social & Cultural Rights
The Legal Framework
Existing Case Law
Occidental Petroleum
Piercing the Vacuum:
Domestic Remedies as a
Means of Bringing Transnational Corporations to Account for International
Infringements of Economic, Social
& Cultural Rights
Luke Taylor
The responsibility, and indeed liability, of corporations
their international operations is an area of increasing concern in human
rights discourse. The opprobrious implications of negligent
corporate practices
are especially apparent in developing nations. While much of the discourse and
litigation dealing with corporate
(ir)responsibility focuses on civil and
political rights, this article considers the liability of transnational
corporations (TNC)
for contraventions of economic, social and cultural rights
(ESCR). It specifically focuses on the manner in which victims of such
infringements have invoked private domestic remedies (ostensibly in tort) as a
means of seeking redress for the wrongs inflicted
against them. The article
concludes with a case study of the recently launched litigation in the United
States against Occidental
Petroleum (Oxy) in which it is alleged that Oxy bears
direct responsibility (and liability) for violating the ESCRs of the Achuar
minority in Peru.
The Legal Framework
International human rights law has little to say regarding corporations. The
obligations that currently exist ostensibly hold states
indirectly liable for
the conduct of other non-state actors.
Articles 29 and 30 of the
Universal Declaration of Human Rights
(UDHR) indirectly include corporate
entities in providing that ‘everyone has duties to the community’
and in prohibiting
‘any State, group or person’ from undermining the
rights contained in the UDHR.
It is however, unclear at this stage
whether these articles have attained the status of customary international law.
International Covenant on Civil and Political
(ICCPR) and the
International Covenant on Economic,
Social and Cultural Rights
(ICESCR) do not expressly address the
human rights responsibilities of corporations.
The UN Human Rights
Committee (HRC) has indicated that adherence to the ICCPR implicitly requires
that private entities are held
accountable for infringements of the rights
contained therein. According to the Committee on Economic, Social and Cultural
(CESCR), States’ duties to protect citizens from infringements of
rights codified in ICESCR encompasses protection from such
abuse by business
enterprises. According to the CESCR, a State could violate the ICESCR by failing
to adequately regulate and/or
adjudicate corporate activities.
the provision of an effective remedy for violations of ESCRs is not expressly
included in ICESCR, the CESCR stresses that
this is an essential element of
States’ duties to take steps towards the full realisation of the rights
contained in the ICESCR.
However, given that corporations are not
directly bound by the ICESCR, the ‘legal and practical consequences
violation of business responsibilities’ (whether in the
form of rights protection or realisation) remains uncertain.
While in theory there is nothing to prevent domestic legal regimes holding
miscreant corporations criminally or civilly liable for
their human rights
infringements, the disproportionate fiscal and political
influence TNCs wield in developing nations makes accountability difficult
given the potential economic and legal repercussions.
Joseph notes, ‘there are too many instances where local remedies are
simply not available, or are illusory’.
This combined lack of
domestic and international legal regulation has allowed TNCs to operate in a
legal vacuum, accountable only
insofar as the protests of the abused manage to
reach the world’s media.
Nevertheless, in the past three decades, following the finding of the
International Court of Justice in the
Barcelona Traction case
that the nationality of a corporation is to be determined by the state
in which it is incorporated, another means for holding TNCs
liable for human
rights abuses has emerged: the prosecution of civil claims against TNCs, for
wrongs committed internationally, in
a TNC’s home jurisdiction.
Existing Case Law
Doe v Unocal
the District Court for the Central
District of California took the momentous step of recognising the liability of
domestically-registered
TNCs for human rights abuses. In finding that the
Alien Tort Claims Act
28 USC § 1350 (ATCA) enables claims by
non-citizens against American corporations for complicity or direct involvement
in offshore
human rights abuses, the Court paved the way for suites of
subsequent litigation by international plaintiffs alleging infringements
their human rights by American-based TNCs. However,
civil and political rights. In
Sosa v Alvarez-Mechain
emphasised that ATCA is only enlivened when contraventions of the law of nations
can be established; this essentially requires
the establishment of a clear
breach of an international
norm such as torture. ESCRs,
therefore, appear at this stage to fall outside of the ambit of ATCA.
However, a number of cases have established domestic tort law in various
corporate human rights
abuses. While domestic tort law does not generally invoke the language of human
rights, it is clear that cases
alleging, for instance, massive environmental
degradation leading to wide-scale human suffering, ‘have a qualitatively
human rights dimension to ordinary personal injury cases’ and
therefore can be seen as indirectly invoking the standards of
international
human rights law.
In the infamous
Union Carbide Gas Plant Disaster at Bhopal
Indian victims of the gas leak sought redress in
the US courts. While demonstrating the possibility of transnational tort claims,
the case unfortunately also established the ability of defendants to have such
claims dismissed on the ground of
forum non conveniens
Aguinda v Texaco
the defendant successfully
avoided liability for its irresponsible waste disposal practices in Ecuador by
arguing that Ecuador was
a more appropriate forum, in spite of class actions
being unavailable under Ecuadorian law.
Joseph notes that judgments
adverse to plaintiffs on FNC grounds tend to dispose of a claim once and for
all, claims rarely being
‘re-litigated in the putative available foreign
forum after FNC dismissal’.
Plaintiffs in
Martinez v Dow
fared better than their counterparts in
, with the US District Court for the Eastern District of Louisiana
finding that no available alternative forum existed in which to
litigate the
claims by the Costa Rican, Honduran and Filipino workers that chemicals produced
by Dow to treat banana plantations
had caused their infertility.
The UK has adopted a similar ‘most appropriate forum’ approach,
although in
Lubbe v Cape Plc Afrika
plaintiffs were
successful in establishing that England was the most appropriate forum because
of the number of plaintiffs joined
in the suit and the difficulties in obtaining
legal aid in South Africa. It should be noted, though, that the European Court
recently cast doubt on the ability of English courts to refuse to
hear claims on FNC grounds because of the operation of the
Convention on Jurisdiction and the Enforcement of Judgments in Civil and
Commercial Matters 1968
In Australia the doctrine of FNC has been construed more favourably to
plaintiffs, defendants being required to prove that Australia
‘clearly inappropriate forum’.
This test, though
criticised by Briggs as ‘naked and open chauvinism’,
meant that the plaintiffs in
did not have to
clear the FNC hurdle in bringing an action against BHP because of the
determination in
Voth v Manildra Flour Mill
that Australian
courts can (and will, in the right circumstances) hear claims for damages based
on the geographical base of the defendant
corporation, irrespective of the
the impugned defendant
would be ‘harassed’ by the case being brought
in Australia.
However, as Joseph notes, the ‘flipside of
Australia’s generosity to plaintiffs regarding FNC is its strictness
the issue of choice of law’.
Occidental Petroleum
In 2007 Californian law firm Schonbrun, DeSimone, Seplow, Harris &
Hoffman lodged a claim against Oxy in the Superior Court of
California on behalf
of victims of the US-based corporation’s allegedly destructive practices
Oxy’s putative liability arises from its alleged
environmental abuse in the Achuar region,
including the apparent
dumping of approximately 850,000 barrels of toxic oil byproducts into the Achuar
basin every day. On this
basis Oxy would appear to bear responsibility for
ravaging the local environment and preventing local communities fishing and
in, and drinking from, the surrounding rivers.
In addition,
Earthrights argues that the use of earthen pits (clearly prohibited under US
law) to store toxic material has led to
such an extreme degradation in the
quality of the soil in the region that farming is now a virtual
impossibility.
According to the plaintiffs:
Oxy knew that the contamination, which continues today, would cause and has
caused severe health problems and other injuries to the
Achuar indigenous
communities, including death, epidemic lead and cadmium poisoning, exposure to
carcinogens and mutagens, substantial
harm to their livelihoods, contamination
to their streams and fields, and continuing trespass on their lands.
The prayer for relief includes claims in tort for
compensatory and punitive damages, injunctive, declaratory and equitable relief,
and restitution and disgorgement of profits.
The plaintiffs contend that the Court has personal jurisdiction over the
matter because Oxy’s headquarters are in California.
This argument,
similar to that which was accepted by the Supreme Court of Victoria in
, clearly delineates the potential for extending domestic remedies
beyond state lines to those affected by corporate practices by
basing the issue
of an appropriate legal forum on the geographical base of the accused, rather
than confining it to the national
rights infringement occurred. The plaintiffs have attempted to forestall
arguments based
on FNC by alleging that the case could not be adequately
litigated in the Peruvian courts on the basis of the endemic corruption
Peruvian judiciary, to which Oxy has allegedly contributed.
While the claim does not invoke the language of ESCRs or international human
rights law, it is clear that if the damage alleged by
Earthrights and the Achuar
people is in fact the responsibility of Oxy, the corporation has contravened the
rights of the Achuar
people in several ways. The poisoning of the Corrientes and
Macusari Rivers and their tributaries has irrevocably infringed the ability
local populations to drink or fish from or bathe in those waters without running
the risk of ‘skin rashes, aches and pains,
gastrointestinal problems
including vomiting blood, harm to the kidneys, and death’.
addition, the ability of the Achuar to sustain themselves from the local
environment has been substantially, and in certain areas
irrevocably, reduced,
with some waters ‘so highly contaminated that all fish and aquatic life
have disappeared’. This
has also had implications for crop yields because
of irrigation with contaminated waters. In addition, agricultural production has
been rendered impossible in certain areas because of contamination. These
offences arguably contravene articles 11 and 12 of the
ICESCR, which
respectively recognise ‘the right of everyone to an adequate standard of
living for himself and his family, including
adequate food, clothing and
housing, and to the continuous improvement of living conditions’ and
‘the right of everyone
to the enjoyment of the highest attainable standard
of physical and mental health’. The United Nations Economic, Social and
Cultural Committee’s
General Comment No 15
that implicit in the aforementioned articles is the right to water; if the
allegations against Oxy are borne out at trial
there can be little doubt that
Oxy has therefore fundamentally infringed this right, however nebulous its
current form. There is
also scope to argue that Oxy’s alleged practices
contravene the emerging right to development. While the scope and content
this right remains unclear, it is suggested that potentially irreversible
environmental fundamentally inhibits the development
potential of communities.
While it appears clear from the assertions made by the CESCR that
States’ duties under the ICESCR encompass the provision of
frameworks for
preventing and remedying corporate infringements of ESCRs, it remains the case
that TNCs are not directly liable for
their actions under international law. The
emergence of litigation challenging TNC impunity for international human rights
infringements
through domestic causes of action (primarily through the
application of tort principles
) suggests that, in spite of this
vacuum at international law, mechanisms exist by which human rights-abusing
corporations can, to
some extent, be held to account. Unfortunately, the ruling
narrowed the scope for claims under ATCA, which had hitherto been
the primary conduit for domestic claims alleging international
wrongs. In this
context it is to be hoped that the current litigation against Oxy does not end
with a further restriction of the
ability of international victims of corporate
human rights abuses to bring oppressive TNCs to account through the application
common law tort principles, particularly given the absence of an ATCA
equivalent in jurisdictions outside the USA.
Luke Taylor is a student at the Faculty of Law, University of New South
Wales. He is the student editor and intern for Human Rights
Defender and the
editor of the Australian Indigenous Law Review.
David Kinley and Junko Tadaki, ‘From Talk to Walk: The Emergence of
Human Rights Responsibilities for Corporations at International
(2003-04) 44
Virginia Journal of International Law
Adopted 10 December 1948, GA Res 217 A (III), UN GAOR,
sess, UN Doc A/810 (1948). 3 Opened for signature 16 December
1966, 999 UNTS 171
(entered into force 23 March 1976).
Opened for signature 16 December
1966, 999 UNTS 3
(entered into force 3
January 1976).
Business and Human Rights: Mapping International Standards of
Responsibility and Accountability for Corporate Acts
, Report of the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General (SRSG) on the issue of human rights and
transnational corporations
and other business enterprises, UN Doc A/HRC/4/035
(2007) [41]
http://www.business-humanrights.org/Documents/SRSG-report-Human-Rights-Council-19-Feb-2007.pdf
at 30 September 2007.
State Responsibilities to Regulate and Adjudicate Corporate Activities
under the United Nations’ core Human Rights Treaties
, Individual
report on the International Covenant on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights:
Report No 2 Prepared for the Special Representative
of the Secretary-General on
Human Rights and Transnational Corporations and Other Business Enterprises
http://www.reports-and-materials.org/Ruggie-report-ICESCR-May-2007.pdf
at 25 October 2007.
For example, in response to the case launched against it in the Australian
courts alleging the company had engaged in negligent
mining practices in the Ok
Tedi mine in Papua New Guinea, the PNG Government (allegedly with the support of
BHP) enacted legislation
preventing affected PNG citizens joining the class
action: see, eg, Aviva Imhof, ‘The Big, Ugly Australian goes to Ok
The Multinational Monitor
http://multinationalmonitor.org/hyper/mm0396.05.html
at 25 September
Sarah Joseph,
Corporations and Transnational Human Rights Litigation
(2004) 149.
Case concerning the Barcelona Traction, Light and Power Company Ltd
(Belgium v Spain) [1970] ICJ Rep 4.
Schutter notes that ‘the limits which public international law is
generally considered to impose on States in the exercise
of prescriptive
territorial jurisdiction generally will not constitute and obstacle to the use
of this tool in order to impose that
transnational corporations comply with
internationally recognized human rights in their operations abroad. Typically,
the exercise
of the such extraterritorial jurisdiction will take the form of the
State where the parent company is incorporated, and which therefore
considered to have the ‘nationality’ of that State’: Olivier
de Schutter, ‘Extraterritorial Jurisdiction
as a tool for improving the
Human Rights Accountability of Transnational Corporations’, Report
prepared as a background paper
to the seminar organized in collaboration with
the OHCHR on 3-4 November 2006 within the mandate of UN Special Representative
the Secretary-General on the issue of human rights and transnational
corporations and other enterprises, John Ruggie
http://www.businesshumanrights.org/Links/Repository/775593/jump
October 2007.
963 F Supp 880 (CD
2003 US LEXIS 8572 (SCt 2003) (‘
Aquinda v Texaco
945 F Supp 625 (SDNY
1996). It is worth noting
also that claims under ATCA generally require proof of state involvement,
although in rare instances corporate
involvement in international human rights
abuses will be sufficient to ground a case: Joseph, above n 10, 18.
Joseph, above n 10, 76. It is beyond the scope of this article to
interrogate whether bringing claims in tort for acts that contravene
reduces the gravitas of the claim against an offending TNC, or whether such
action should simply be viewed as a pragmatic resolution
of the issue.
[1987] USCA3 92
634 F Supp 842 (SDNY
In this case the District Court for the Southern District of New York
found that India was a more appropriate forum than the US
for the claim. This
finding was affirmed on appeal by the US Court of Appeals for the 2
[1987] USCA3 92
809 F 2d 195
(2d Cir 1987).
945 F Supp 625 (SDNY
’). See also
Aguinda v Texaco
142 F Supp 2d 534 (SDNY
2001) in which the court again
refused the plaintiffs’ case on the ground of FNC.
Sequihua v Texaco
847 F Supp 61 (SD
Texas 1994), in which
the plaintiffs’ claim was dismissed for the same reason. Cf
Chemicals Co v Castro Alfaro
(1990) 786 SW 2d 674
, in which the motion to
dismiss on grounds of FNC was denied because Texas had abolished the doctrine by
Joseph, above n 10, 88.
219 F Supp 2d 719 (ED
[2000] 1 Lloyd’s Rep 139. See also
Lubbe v Cape plc
[2000] UKHL 41
in which the House of Lords dismissed an appeal against the finding
in the Court of Appeal that the UK was an appropriate forum to
hear the matter.
Andrew Owusu v NB Jackson , trading as ‘Villa Holidays
Bal-InnVillas’ and Others
[2005] ECR I-1383.
According to
the ECJ, the Brussels Convention ‘precludes a court of a Contracting State
from declining to exercise jurisdiction
on the ground that a court in a
non-Contracting State would be a more appropriate forum for the trial of the
action even if the jurisdiction
of no other Contracting State is in issue or the
proceedings have no connecting factors to any other Contracting State’: at
[37]. This indicates that the ruling applies to all signatories to the
Convention, not just the UK. For a strong critique of this
and other judgments
of the ECJ see Adrian Briggs, ‘The Impact of Recent Judgments of the
European Court on English Procedural
Law and Practice’ (2005)
Zeitschrift fur Schweizerisches Recht
The High Court in
Oceanic Sun Line Special Shipping Company Inc v Fay
[1988] HCA 32
(1988) 165 CLR 197
Voth v Manildra Flour Mill
[1990] HCA 55
(1990) 171 CLR 538
established the test of ‘clearly inappropriate forum’.
Adrian Briggs, ‘Wider Still and Wider: The Bounds of Australian
Exorbitant Jurisdiction’ (1989) 2
Lloyd’s Maritime and Commercial
Law Quarterly
[1995] 1 VR 428
[1990] HCA 55
(1990) 171 CLR 538
was eventually settled out of court, foreclosing the
possibility of judicial analysis of the liability of BHP for its harmful
in the region. Nevertheless, the case demonstrates the manner in which
domestic law can be invoked by international persons to hold
corporations liable
for violations of ESCRs:
Joseph, above n 10, 124. See
Regie Nationale des Unises Renault SA v
[2002] HCA 10
(2002) 210 CLR 491in
which the High Court held that in cases brought
against corporations alleging responsibility for damage or injury which occurred
overseas, the law of the forum in which the damage occurred is likely to apply
even when heard by an Australian court, meaning that
legislation such as that
passed by the Government of PNG following allegations of BHP’s liability
could potentially prevent
the case being heard by Australian courts irrespective
of their status as appropriate forums.
Class Action Complaint for Damages, Injunctive and Declaratory Relief,
Restitution and Disgorgement of Profits, Tomas Maynas Carijano
Occidental Petroleum Corporation; Occidental Peruana, Inc (‘Achuar
Complaint’). See Earthrights International,
Maynas v Occidental
Official Complaint
http://www.earthrights.org/legaldocs/maynas_v._occidental_official_ complaint.html
at 28 August 2007.
See especially Earthrights International, Racimos de Ungurahui and Amazon
A Legacy of Harm: Occidental Petroleum in Indigenous Territory in the
Peruvian Amazon
A Legacy of Harm
In its 2006 Social Responsibility Report, Oxy made the dubious claim that
it ‘is committed to conducting its business in a
manner that observes the
law, respects the cultural values of the communities in which we operate and
reflects a high standard of
http://www.oxy.com/Social%20Responsibility/sr_annual_ report.htm
October 2007. In light of the damage willfully inflicted upon the Peruvian
environment and local populations, Oxy’s
claim that it supports the
the Voluntary Principles on Security and Human Rights and the
Global Sullivan Principles appears somewhat disingenuous.
A Legacy of Harm
, above n 32, 19.
Achuar Complaint, above n 31, 1.
Presumably the case was not brought under ATCA because of the restrictive
interpretation in
and the requirement of state involvement.
While ‘[a]rguments based on the alleged corruption of alternative
forums … have an unsuccessful history in FNC cases
in the US’, the
Presbyterian Church of Sudan v Talisman Energy
244 F Supp 2d 289
2003) took a common-sense approach to the issue, finding that it would be
perverse to hold a trial alleging genocide in the subject
State. Whether the
alleged corruption in the Peruvian judiciary will provide a sufficient defence
to a FNC claim (if raised by Oxy)
is yet to be seen, though the finding of
Rakoff J in
does not augur well. In this respect it is apparent
that claims under ATCA currently stand a greater chance of withstanding a FNC
objection. See Joseph, above n 10, 90-91, 147.
Achuar Complaint, above n 31, 8.
United Nations Committee on Economic Social and Cultural Rights
Comment No 15 The Right to Water (Arts 11 and 12 of the International Covenant
on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights)
(2002) E/C.12/2002/11.
Joseph notes that abortive attempts have been made in the UK (
v Government of Kuwait
(1996) 107 ILR 536)
and Canada (
Bouzari v Islamic
Republic of Iran
[2002] OJ No 1624) to bring actions against TNCs based on
customary human rights law: Joseph, above n 10, 146.
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (55.6 KB)
PDF format (164 KB)
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter