URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/journals/DTLJ/2003/2.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 14:54:42
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Padget, Luke --- "Computer Programs and Copyright: An Australian Perspective" [2003] DigTechLawJl 2; (2003) 4(1) Digital Technology Law Journal 2
Programs and Copyright: An
Australian Perspective
Student Murdoch University
Introduction
1. The Act of Anne
1709 introduced the first form of copyright protection,
being “An Act for the Encouragement of Learning,
Copies of Printed Books in Authors or Purchasers of Such Copies, during
therein Mentioned.”
The Act of Anne provided for the
protection of printed material to prevent authors and their families
from ruin, and for the "encouragement
of learned men to compose and
write useful books". Thus, commercial incentive and protection in
literary works was
the cornerstone of copyright that the expression
of ideas increases and enriches the stock of human knowledge.
characteristics of a work. For example, in Australia there is a split
protection scheme given to designs; designs are considered artistic
works and have
ornamental and functional characteristics. To
protect functional
characteristics, the design must be registered under the
1906 (Cth). However, the
) protects only ornamental
contrast to designs, the function and expression of computer programs
are arguably inseparable and yet they enjoy protection as literary
This has lead to debate over two competing principles:
1) to ensure
authors (in this case computer programmers) have their labour protected
and to maintain economic incentive for innovation;
and 2) to ensure
that there is not a monopoly over functional objects and
5. This paper
discusses the
protection of
computer programs. It begins by discussing what constitutes a computer
program and how computer programs are defined
in case law and
legislation. The paper analyses the impact of legislative protection
measures by examining Australian, United States
(US) and United Kingdom
(UK) approaches to computer program
protection.
Computer Programs and Legal
Development
Computer Programs
Computer programs
consist of program text and behaviour and therefore have literal and
non-literal components. The literal component
is called source code or
object code and is the subject of copyright. Source code is composed of
collection of routines and sub-routines
(algorithms) written in the
form of a set of instructions, which serves as a programmer's
“architectural blueprint”.
Through a process called compilation, source
code is converted into object code so that the end user has as little
information as
possible about the details of the architecture of the
program to prevent copying. Almost all computer programs
are distributed in
object code and not in source code. Object code is
the machine- readable information used to bring about a certain result
or behaviour.
The text and behaviour components of a computer program
are generally independent such that the behaviour of two programs can
identical from completely different code and code structure.
value of a program lies in its behaviour.
That is, it exists as a machine or utility for the performance of a
useful result. Source
code that does not serve to map behaviour
has arguably no use. If there
is no instructional value and no inherent aesthetic value one may argue
that it is not
– there is no
or form. This argument also applies to object code. There is further
that as object
code is a predominantly machine-readable form of
information consisting of a binary language system, it cannot be
considered literary
as it does not have value in its expression or
form. Arguably, this is an antiquated interpretation of a literary work
age of rapid technological advancement one must dehumanise
notions of literature at least where intellectual property protection
However, computer programs should not have to be crammed on either the
literary or non-literary shelf. Programs are machines
in the form of
text (or perhaps more suitably
labelled as code). Programs act like any other machine consisting of
(algorithms) and
“wheels” (data
and may be added to other machines to perform specific results. They
assembled and disassembled, modified and made interoperable with
machines both real and virtual. At a fundamental level, code
textual, is in fact closer to a material that may be used to construct
machines. In terms of classification a computer program
by its nature and should not be classified by its
medium of construction. They are virtual machines.
Development of Multilateral
Computer program protection has been approached under two mutually
exclusive legal schemes: copyrights and patents. Copyright protection
in the international arena developed under the Berne
Convention for the Protection of Literary and Artistic Works
(“Berne Convention”),
whereas patent rights developed
under the Paris Convention for the
Protection of Industrial Property (“Paris
Convention”).
Convention has developed to protect literary
and artistic works and audio and visual expressions. Holders of
in literary and artistic works have exclusive rights to
translate, adapt, communicate, perform publicly and recite their
11. Computer
software is a relatively
recent creation and has been notably absent from development by the
Berne Convention. Instead,
in parallel on a national basis. One of the earliest
in the US in the 1960’s.
were two separate areas of
reasoning for questioning the suitability of copyright protection.
there was uncertainty
as to the inherent nature of a computer program
that starkly contrasts with traditional “literary”
there was a general conflict between ensuring economic
incentive for computer programmers to develop software and not
monopolising
functional characteristics of programming and programming
language. A computer program is a utility-based creation with
in its function or the result it achieves. As a program
exists in a
dual component form of text and behaviour it falls
purview of patent and copyright regimes.
In response to
a lack of development throu gh the Berne Convention and a growing need
for a suitable regulatory scheme, the World
Intellectual Property
Organisation
(“WIPO”) developed a
sui generis
of protection for computer programs. Countries such as France enacted
legislation using the WIPO form of protection.
The US and the European Union
both rejected the WIPO protection for computer programs, instead opting
to retain protection
under the traditional copyright guise
of “literary
work”. Both
source and object codes were included for protection as literary
Due to a lack of sanctions for noncompliance, US and EU
interests became dissatisfied with the WIPO and the Berne Convention
The view of the US copyright industry was that the national
laws of developing countries were inadequate or not enforceable, and
the limited
agreement and signatories to the Universal Copyright Convention
diminished the effectiveness of the international protection
WIPO and the Berne Convention. Further, there was a lac k of dispute
resolution mechanisms in place to remedy
international level.
Under the Berne Convention, disputes over the interpretation or
application of its provisions are submitted to the International
Australia both governmental
and non-governmental commentators voiced concerns about including
computer programs as literary
works. This prompted the Copyright Law Review Committee’s
Report on Computer Software Protection
recommended that computer programs should remain literary works.
Interestingly,
it noted a preference for a
sui generis
for copyright protection of computer software but acknowledged the
growing international recognition for computer programs
as literary
works. Ultimately, US-led trade related pressure saw an end to the
development of
sui generis
protection for computer
GATT and the TRIPs AGREEMENT
A lack of faith
in the WIPO and Berne Convention solutions to protection of computer
software motivated the US and other members
of the Organisation for
Cooperation and Development (“OECD”) to seek
alternative
multilateral forms of protection
through trade relations. The
development of intellectual property as a valuable commodity warra nted
protection as
an article of
international trade under the General Agreement on
Tariffs and Trade (“GATT”).
Dissatisfaction with global protection offered for intellectual
property rights – in particular
enforcement of rights and dispute
resolutions mechanisms –
prompted the negotiation of a suitable scheme at the Uruguay Round
negotiations.
This resulted in the Agreement on Trade Related Aspect of Intellectual
Property Rights (“TRIPS”).
The TRIPS agreement, through appropriate enforcement and resolution
machinery, provides protection of intellectual property rights
specifically,
computer programs.
Expressly provided in Article 10(1) of the
TRIPS agreement is that: “Computer programs, whether in
object code, shall
be protected as literary works under the Berne
Convention of
The TRIPS agreement effectively placed
computer programs on the library shelf next to books and other
writings. In essence, the
TRIPS drafters defined computer programs
pre -existing regulatory scheme for works of a separate nature. This
inconsistency in computer copyright protection.
Judicial Systems Interpreted Legislation Derived from
Introduction
Prior to TRIPS-derived legislation there were numerous cases which
that object code was a difficult expression to define
the copyright regime. In
Computer Edge Pty Ltd v Apple
Computer Inc
Australian High Court held that copyright did not vest in object code.
Doubts were
also expressed at first instance in the US case
Computer v Franklin
that object code could be subject to
object code was accepted as literary works.
Yet courts still struggled to
determine copyright infringement.
The formation of multilateral agreements
on computer software
regulation and subsequent national legislation resulted in computer
programs being protected primarily as literary
works. In Australia,
defines a literary
including: “a table, or compilation, expressed in words,
symbols and a computer program
or compilation of computer
refined the
definition of ‘computer program’: “A
computer program
means a set of statements or instructions to
be used directly or
indirectly in a computer in order to bring about a certain
In the UK, s3(1) of the
(“CDPA”) clearly labels computer
programs as literary works and s101 of the
United States
1976 (“USCA”) incorporates
computer programs as literary works by inference.
The definitions of
“computer program” in the Australian and US
legislation are identical and stem from an intention
to comply with the
WIPO Copyright Treaty.
As there is no
definition for computer programs in the CDPA, UK courts have
considerable latitude to define
technologies as they
arise. However, UK drafters had to overcome the
of “preparatory design material” by the EC software
the scope of “computer programs”. UK drafters have
preparatory design material as a separate class of
literary work under
s3(1)(c) of the CDPA. The inclusion of pre paratory design material
recognised the labour, skill and judgment
expended producing
specifications, flowcharts, layouts and other materials relating to the
design and production of computer programs.
This inclusion traps ideas
within expressions and runs counter to the fundamental basis copyright.
The separation of preparatory
design material from computer programs in
the CDPA may mean monopolies over logical processing information are
by judicial
interpretation.
Australian, US and UK Cases in
Data Access
Corporation v Powerflex Services Pty Ltd
Data Access Corporation (“Data Access”) claimed
computer program “PFXplus”
created by Powerflex
Services Pty Ltd (“Powerflex”)
customise database applications infringed its copyright in its Dataflex
program. The
PFXplus program used 192 “reserved
commands that the
Dataflex program used out of a total of 254 to achieve
function. However, the source code, and most likely the object code
underlying each word used in the PFXplus program was
Powerflex developed the PFXplus program through reverse engineering
so that there would be language compatibility between
both programs and
there could be a smooth transition from one to the other.
Data Access v Powerflex
can a singular reserved word be considered a computer program for
purposes?; and
can a collocation of
reserved words form a
substantial part
of a literary work?
a singular reserved
word be considered a computer program for the purposes of copyright
protection: the separation of ideas and
expressions
The High Court’s answer to this first question was
equivocally
"no". A reserved word is usually an expression of an instruction
as “page break” or “enter”)
which is intended
to cause a computer to perform a particular function
or achieve a
result. For example, when using word-processing software, pressing
“enter” on a computer keyboard
has the effect of
cursor to a lower line. Underlying that function is a set of
instructions in
a separate language to
represents that function to the user. For
singular reserved words to receive protection they must express a
of instructions intended either directly or indirectly (by
conversion to
another language or code) to cause a computer to perform
a particular
function or achieve a particular result.
Essentially, a set of
instructions must be expressed by the reserved word before and after
conversion to another language, code
or notation. Thus, for the word
“enter” to receive protection as a computer program
express a set of instructions.
Data Access v Powerflex
High Court concluded that each reserved word could not be the subject
of copyright protection. However, source code underlying
reserved words
subject of copyright protection.
Court stated that “it
is the skill of the programmer in a particular language which
determines the expression of
the programmer in that
High Court distinguished the expression and idea. It is the expression
the set of instructions that may receive copyright
protection and not
idea in the expression of the set of instructions that drive the
computer to
perform the
High Court’s decision maintained the rule that a single word
a subject of protection.
Data Access argued
that each reserved word was
a set of instructions due to the meaning and syntax of the word. The
that the meaning and syntax was separate from the word and
in the underlying language (source code). Further, any word or
character could be used in association with the source code. The High
Court noted that only the source code and not the reserved
intended to express a logical or algorithmic relationship between the
computer function and the physical capabilities of
the computer.
Court stated that the
words were chosen so that the
people using the program could associate the word with the function
the computer to achieve, but for the purposes of determining what
constitutes a computer program, the word must mean something
computer, not the people using it.
Essentially, this suggests
that a literary work does not have to be "literary" to humans.
A list or ‘collocation’ of reserved words was also
determined not to be a computer program as it was not a set of
instructions. The list of
words did not independently cause a computer to perform a particular
function. There was no interrelationship
of the instructions with one
“which is an expression of a logical or algorithmic
relationship
between an identifiable
function and the physical capabilities of the
Further, the High Court emphasized that the intended func tion must
the computer and not the programmer.
with US and UK
Section 102(b) USCA provides “in no case does
procedure, process, system, method of operation, concept,
principle or discovery, regardless of the form in which it is
explained, illustrated or embodied in such work”.
derives from a well-settled principle that systems and their
constituent parts,
even when embodied in a specific pattern or word arrangement cannot be
the subject of copyright protection.
Section 102(b)
USCA is replicated in part in Article 2 of the WIPO Treaty (1996):
protection does not extend to any “idea,
procedures, methods
operation or mathematical concepts”.
It appears that the
decision in
Data Access v Powerflex
on the subject
of reserved words is
in keeping with US and multilateral trends. Australian and UK
legislation does
not have an equivalent
of s102(b) USCA however copyright jurisprudence
in Australia (for example,
Data Access
favours strict adherence to the idea/expression dichotomy. US and
Australian legislation has similar conceptual conflict in that
adherence to the
idea/expression dichotomy necessarily involves dehumanising the
conception of literary work. It is submitted
that once this is done,
all further legislative steps must separate traditional literary works
from computer
Computers Ltd v Barclays Mercantile Finance
Jacob J considered US legislation and
jurisprudence inconsistent with UK
of s102(b) USCA and no
definition of
"computer program", Jacob J refused to be limited by US methodology and
Honour chose to categorise ideas as
and “specific” with the latter only being suitable
through copyright.
This approach does little to set a predictable legal guide for
Computers Ltd v Barc lays Mercantile Finance
still represents good law in the UK however one must note
strict adherence to the idea/expression dichotomy appears in the WIPO
and it is difficult to
see UK legislators’ continuing to ignore the growing
international
trend towards
scènes à faire.
Can a collocation of
reserved words form a ‘substantial part’ of a
literary work? The test for infringement
infringement of the exclusive rights of the author/ owner of literary
works under
provides that copyright infringement will
occur where a ‘substantial part’ of literary work
reproduced,
copied without authorization of the copyright holder. In the
UK and US the tests for infringement are also grounded in
substantiality.
In all three jurisdictions, the determination of
literal copying requires a
line by line comparison of source code to find points
of similarity and
is a qualitative rather than a quantitative test.
The determination of a
‘substantial part’ of a
computer program has resulted in conflicting reasoning in each
and complete renunciations of previous judgments in Australia.
Autodesk Inc v Dyason
(No. 1 and 2)
a program called Widget
C was the subject of infringement. Widget C operated in conjunction
a simple piece of hardware called
an AutoCAD lock. Dyason had created
form of lock that operated in conjunction with the Widget C program,
reacting to electronic
challenges made by Widget C. To create the lock
reproduced a 127 bit sequence (16 bytes) of data from the Widget C
That data consisted of a look-up table which was not itself
computer program as it was not a set of instructions. It was held in
cases that the 127 bit sequence (the look-up table) was an
‘essential and
critical’ component of the Widget C program
and therefore
infringed the plaintiff's copyright.
The High Court in
Access v Powerflex
reviewed its previous decision in
likening its test for determining a 'substantial part' to a
for’ test. But for the part taken (the look-up table)
the Widget C program would not operate and therefore was a substantial
High Court decided that this was unacceptable, noting
that even 1 bit of information could be essential however this does not
constitute a “substantial production of the human
The High Court recognised that 1 bit of computer information is not
original and not human
expression. They rejected the majority
decis ion in
adopting instead Chief Justice Mason's dissenting judgment that a
substantial part of a computer program is an
‘essential’
‘material’ feature of that program. Whether a part
essential is determined by considering the
originality
The High Court held that source code was
protected by copyright however the structure, commands and user
interface were not. The
High Court suggested that only literal and near
literal components of a computer program was protected by copyright.
The Australian
Competition and Consumer Commission (ACCC)
applauded the
High Court's near literal approach, stating that it
promoted "healthy competition"
and had shown continued vigilance in supporting competition in the
computer software and hardware
US Approach
A more refined
process for establishing infringement has evolved in the US.
Non-literal
components of computer programs have been
included for copyright
within certain limits. The first notable case that held non-literal
components could be the subject
of copyright protection was
Associates v Jaslow Dental Laboratories
(“Whelan”).
it was established that a computer
program’s structure, sequence and more generally its
organisation could be
has received strong criticism for over-protecting ideas and
functional aspects of programs, as any
abstractions above the literal
code can be regarded as merging idea and
expression.
39. User interfaces
been considered subject to copyright protection
Lotus Development Corp v Paperback Software International
a sliding scale
was devised
running between “most generalised conception” and
“most particularised” conception
at either end of
determine the position of the conception on the scale, one must choose
a definition of the idea for
the purposes of distinguishing between the
idea and the expression.
The second step
was to determine the essential elements of the expression of the idea
or inversely identify elements of expression
not essential to every
expression of the idea. Once identified one could ask whether those
essential elements form a substantial
part of the alleged copyrightable
work. Although more refined than the
this test for copyright protection of non-literal elements suffers
criticism: the generalisation of a computer program
as the expression
of one idea rather than a composite.
creates danger of over-protection
of ideas and functional
decisions suffered from
misconceptions as to the nature of computer programs. However, in
Associates v Altai
) a more constructive test in
formulating infringement was given with a better appreciation of the
nature of a computer program and
technology.
The case concerned
the creation of a compatibility sub-program known as ADAPTER contained
job-scheduling program entitled
CA-SCHEDULER. ADAPTER worked to make
CA-SCHEDULER work with an operating system. The defendant developed a
the compatibility
sub-program called OSCAR 3.4 using 30% of
source code. This was found to be infringing the plaintiff's copyright.
defendant then developed OSCAR
which contained none of the original source code of ADAPTER but
replicated the function and interfaces (the non-literal elements).
Walker J considered previous cases and accepted that copyright
protection does
extend to non-literal elements of computer programs.
However, he
rejected the
conception taken in
relied on the overall purpose of
a computer program as expressed to determine infringement. Walker J
distinguished interacting
sub-routines as computer programs of
themselves,
each capable of containing expressions of ideas designed for an overall
A computer program was considered as containing numerous ideas
expressed in sub-routines that interact for an overall purpose. On
basis of this conception Walker J formulated a 3 step
test (“abstraction-filtration-comparison”) to
the non-literal elements of two computer programs were
substantially similar and whether one may infringe copyright.
Court separated the computer program into levels of abstraction.
Firstly, it isolated and artic ulated all structural components
and identified each component’s function. The code, modules,
routines and sub-routines were identified and defined,
as well as the
ultimate purpose of the computer program. Secondly, the Court sifted
through each level of abstraction and filtered
out expressions that
unprotectable. These are expressions which: 1) involve ideas that can
only be expressed in limited ways
thus the expression and idea are said
to merge; or 2) are required for reasons external to the program;
or 3) reside in the public
these three forms of expression are filtered from each level of
abstraction, the Court
considered a core of select expressions
protected by copyright.
Finally, the Court compared the two computer programs to determine
whether the core
expressions were copied
and whether the two programs could be
substantially similar
. Substantial
similarity is an assessment of
the copied core expressions relative importance to the overall
infringed program’s
Subsequent cases
have followed the Altai judgment however some courts have formulated
different tests
Ibcos v Barclays Mercantile Finance
as a maverick in the international jurisprudence on
computer program copyright protection. The case concerned the alleged
copying of a “suite” of computer programs
“Agriculture Dealing System” by a former partner of
plaintiff. Jacob J held that there were 28 infringing programs in
the defendant’s UNICORN suite out of a possible 55. The
infringements were generally identified as program structure, sub-
programs, and design features.
Jacob J formulated a general test for infringement stating
question of degree where a good guide is the notion of
overborrowing of
labour and judgement which went into the copyright work”.
Justice Jacob's test relied heavily on judicial discretion rather than
the technical nature of computer software. Jacob J chose
not to follow
approach due to the differences
in the development of copyright jurisprudence in the US. In the UK
no equivalent of s102(b)
USCA and no rule that forbids copyright
protection of an expression of an idea where there is only one way of
expressing it. Jacob
J decided that the filtration test in
was inappropriate in the UK due to differing statutory and
development.
Commentators,
however have noted that Jacob J concurred with the earlier judgment of
that computer programs consist of varying levels of abstraction in
comparison to traditional literary works. Both contain literal
(source code; words) and further structure (design features; plot,
subplot). The further levels of abstraction are noted as
key components
in the success of the work. Conceptually, the decision in
compatible with
decision related to alleged
infringements dating from
1986. The decision made no mention of the 1991 EC directive on
computer software
and alt hough representing good law is out of step
European and International developments in software
protection.
Comparisons with the US and UK
In Australia the exclusion of non-literal elements of computer programs
from copyright protection was evident in the
Data Access
There has also been strong governmental support for the encouragement
of market competition. However, the popularity for
has gathered momentum, providing non-literal protection only for those
elements that provide an expression of an idea that can
be represented
various ways and outside the public domain. As both Australian and US
legislation have identical definitions of
computer program and
fundamental approaches to what is protectable under
Australia could adopt
a similar restrictive approach to the protection of non-literal
elements of computer
filtration test in
some way to remedying the dilemma of appropriate protection. A computer
program does not exist as a literary
work as traditionally
conceived in copyright law. A computer program
consists of text and behaviour that are theoretically discrete but
inseparable for
the purposes of appropriate protection. Where the
creativity of the programmer lies in the text, the productive value
behaviour. If one restricts protection to the text then the value
escapes without protection, giving little monetary incentive to
programmer. If protection is extended to abstractions above the primary
text (source code or object code), the behaviour and
its functional
in danger of being monopolised for the term of the copyright. In many
software, the result or
function can only be represented in limited
ways and language. Thus, determining a “substantial
of infringement will never be certain and gaps in judicial
reasoning will always occur.
One of the main concerns
forwarded by industry specialists is the greatly reduced protection the
test affords.
By separating the elements before any comparison the Court bars from
consideration judgment, skill and labour expended on organisation
structural combination of core
expressions with others defined as in the public domain, merged or
governed by external considerations.
Thus, the overall structure and
substructures within a computer program are still unprotected. To offer
any further protection would
collapse the idea/ expression dichotomy.
test although having merit by offering a
theoretical
basis for determining infringement, still leaves substantial latitude
gaps in judicial reasoning and therefore uncertainty in assessing
claims of infringement. It also offers a level of protection that
unpalatable to the programming community.
Reproduction of Computer Programs in RAM: Problems for the future?
54. Recently, the Full
Court of the Federal Court in
Kabushi Kaisha Sony
Entertainment Inc & Ors v Stevens
No. 2) upheld on appeal that there is no reproduction of computer
programs in the Random Access Memory (“RAM”) of
PlayStation console
when a game is played.
("Sony No. 1") concerned the provisions
introduced by the
Digital Agenda Act
to protect works and subject
matter from
counterfeiting devices.
The second issue raised in
the storage of a substantial part of a computer program
in the random access memory (RAM) of a device such as the Playstation
Gaming Console. The question raised was whether a work or substantial
part of a work when stored in RAM is in material form. Material
relation to a work or an adaptation of a
work: “includes any form (whether visible or not) of storage
from which the
work or adaptation, or a substantial part of the work
or adaptation can be reproduced.”
When a program
is loaded into RAM it arguably cannot be
“reproduced” as envisaged
. It can be reproduced in
object code which is only comprehensible to humans through
manipulation. In
Data Access v Powerflex
noted that such reproduction is enough for
which introduced the definition of
"material form". Sections 21(1A) and 21(5) of the
clearly express that infringement will occur whether
reproduction is
in source or object code. Despite this, Sackville J decided that
reproduction could be made in material form from the RAM of a
Playstation 2
Console. The object code could be retrieved from the
console but could
done so through “ordinary operation”.
upheld the decision of Sackville J, stating: “I think it an
unrealistic and strained construction to treat the words
reproduced’ at the end of the definition of
widely as to encompass ‘could
be reproduced if an additional
device, not supplied with the console and not yet available, were to be
manufactured and attached
to it’ or ‘could be
produced if
the RAM under consideration formed part of a future modified
Lindgren J distinguished UK and US case law and
legislation from that of Australia. In the UK case
Kaisha Sony
Computer Inc & Others v Edmunds
the importation of a
“mod chip” was held to contravene s296
which provides for copyright infringement by
means of any device or means specifically designed or adapted to
copy-protection.
The Mod Chip was of a similar design to the Mod Chip
. Both Mod Chips enabled copied or counterfeit CD- ROMs
and others from
different regional zones to play on the Playstation 2 console.
Sony v Edmunds
noted that the CDPA provides
reproduction in any
material form includes storing the work in any medium by electronic
is a fundamental difference to the provisions of the Australian
and was readily
distinguished by the majority in
Through an historical perspective, the majority judgment in
notes that the deeming of computer programs as literary works
raised difficulties which arguably continue. Lindgren J offered his
that the electronic impulses in RAM do not constitute a material form
according ordinary English usage.
This is the precise conception that stunts the maturation of a proper
protection scheme for comput er programs. The dissenting judgment
Finkelstein J usefully
describes that nature of computer technology and RAM. This is integral
proper formulation of protection
as stated in
information storage medium. The information is stored in the form of
impulses, which does
not lend itself
to the traditional conception of material form.
However, the information may be reproduced (or perhaps more
appropriately
to information subject to copyright protection (object
code). There is conflict in terms of traditional copyright
jurisprudence;
medium (RAM and electrical impulses) of storage is not an
as traditionally conceived, but there is no doubt as to
whether expression (object code) can be reproduced.
We have reached the point where copyright protection ends and circuit
layout protection begins. A computer program stored in the
Playstation console
cannot in the ordinary course of operation be retrieved and so receives
no copyright protec tion in
Australia. It also receives no protection
circuit layout legislation. Commentators
have suggested
that “it would be a foolish computer program copyright owner
elect to store software in silicon chip
memory, as the
created an absolutely arbitrary distinction between software in one
form of storage, disk or tape, and another, silicon chip.”
this comment leads is to the conclusion that neither the
Circuit Layouts Act
offer protection to
RAM stored software that cannot be "ordinarily" retrieved. The question
remains unanswered is what
is ordinary retrieval and how will it be
interpreted in the future?
The nature of fixation is discussed
RAM stored information
is not permanent but it may be considered 'fixed'. That is, it will not
disappear or be removed without a
separate action such as loading
further information or turning off the computer. Much industry based
machines today such as computers
servers are seldom ever turned off
with information being held for long periods.
RAM stored software and the nature of computer programs in general is
As Finkelstein J noted, there is no clear answer to the
question whether downloading a computer program (or, more accurately,
object code) into a console’s RAM amounts to a
reproduction
object code: “[w]hatever approach is taken is likely
controversy.”
While the final result of reproduction can infringe copyright,
the nature with whic h we associate expression is missing. The majority
upheld the decision that as there
could be no
reproduction of the computer program through the ordinary operation of
the Playstation
console, there was no "reproduction" as defined under
. This decision relies upon legislative
“material form” which serves little to reinforce
for computer
programs unlike those contained in the CDPA. With the rapid advancement
of computer based technology we wil l likely
see further cases
issues of ordinary operation.
infringement
One may argue that software cases will be determined fairly by judicial
reasoning on the facts of each case, prompting legislative
redefine 'computer program’, ‘material
‘ordinary operation’. This is an uncertain
offers cold comfort to programmers who seek adequate copyright
protection.
Adding artificial literal components to complex
utilitarian devices for
the purpose of protection inevitably leads courts to challenge the
boundaries of
interpretation.
Exceptions to Infringement
and Technological Protection
Introduction
Australia, the US and the UK have developed exceptions to computer
program infringement of copyright. The nature of computer programs
an almost arbitrary distinction between the exceptions to
infringement of computer programs as literary works and traditional
literary works. Whereas traditional literary works such as books are
read and comprehended macroscopically, a computer program is
creation with hidden protectable expression (primarily the code). In
addition, computer programs can be “locked”
protection to both the protectable expression
characteristics of the work.
The only way to retrieve ideas that lie
within the program expression is by reverse engineering. Reverse
engineering can be performed
in several ways, however two particular
methods have caused
consternation.
testing” involves obtaining
a computer program and studying its various behaviours then writing a
that performs the same behaviours. A programmer may write an
identical program with only a slim chance of having been found to
the original program. However, one may infringe upon the
of the original.
Potentially more
damaging to the programming industry is “clean room
testing” which involves two independent
The first stage involves a programmer or group of programmers
identifying, listing and mapping every aspect of a computer
behaviour. The second stage is to forward this information to a second
independent set of programmers who write a program to perform
behaviours mapped in the first stage. Thus, they may write a literal
of the first program but there will be no conscious
copying of the code
or structure and therefore no copyright infringement.
infringement in the US and UK
US Approach: reverse engineering
and fair use
In the US there are two general provisions in the
USCA to allow reverse engineering of computer programs
. Section 117 USCA provides that reproduction or adaptation of a
computer program is permissible if created for the specific purpose
the utilisation of the original program. This provision was created to
prevent infringement where a computer necessarily
makes a copy of a
in the process of installation and utilisation. Arguably, this
provision could extend to reverse engineering
for the purpose of using
original program.
67. Section 107 USCA
states that
reproduction or adaptation of a work, or a substantial part of the work
interest of furthering
knowledge will not infringe copyright.
Section 107 provides 4 factors to
determine whether “use” of a work is fair. The
first factor is
whether the use of the
work is for a commercial or non-profit
educational purpose; most commercial purposes are
unless there is the element of
criticism or review.
The second factor require s an
analysis of whether the work is factual or non-factual. A non-factual
as a fictional novel
is less likely to attract the fair use exception.
substantiality of the part taken is the third factor. The fourth factor
the effect of the use on the potential market or the value
Sega Enterprises v Accolade Inc
Atari Games Corp v Nintendo of America Inc
the defendants reverse engineered
the plaintiff’s game cartridges so that they could create
compatible cartridge.
The object code of the software devolved into
assembly code. In both cases it was held that reverse engineering was
fair use as the
purpose of the use was to understand the ideas and
functional elements of the original work in order to create a separate
independent
machine console compatible game cartridge. However, in the
the defendant also copied elements of the original work to aid future
compatibility. The Court held that future features did
not constitute
functions and so was not fair
generality of the fair use exception to infringement allows
substantial judicial freedom to determine infringement. Both
added to the general policy
propounded in
protection is limited to favour 'healthy’ competition. Apart
from the criticism already outlined in the discussion on
Lai notes the damaging effect the decision had upon Sega’s
licensing agreements.
Reverse engineering of computer
programs is generally undertaken for a commercial end unrelated to
criticism or review. The nature
of technology markets is somewhat
different to that of traditional works requiring more scrutiny to avoid
loss. Future integration
of software and hardware components where each
has been created by different authors and owned or licensed to
different entities
does not lend itself to the "market competition"
approach espoused in
In contrast to the US approach, the European Community
provides a more restrictive approach to reverse engineering exceptions.
5(3) of the EC Software Directive provides that a program user is
entitled to
examine a program in the ordinary course of
operation. Article 6
provides that decompilation of a program is permitted to obtain the
information necessary for interoperability,
but that information cannot
be used to develop a substantially similar program. Sections 50A to 50C
of the CDPA incorporate provisions of the EC Software Directive which
Charlton states are “exhaustive and leave no room for
concept of fair use or fair dealing in relation to computer
codified nature of ss50A to 50C render s29 CDPA (the fair
dealing exception) inapplicable to computer programs.
Reverse engineerin g is acceptable if the strict criteria set out in
met however there is little room for general defences
of fair dealing.
Arguably, s50B allows decompilation only for the purpose of
interoperability at the expense of trapping ideas and
functions within
Australian exceptions to
infringement
In Australia, regimes that are more restrictive exist. Division 4A of
reproduction of a computer program for purposes including: program
interoperability, error correction, security testing, making
and reproduction for normal use.
Section 47D
that reproduction
or adaptation of a computer program
made by or on behalf of the owner or licensee of a copy of the program;
made for the purposes of obtaining
information necessary to
enable the owner or licensee to independently make a new program or
to interoperate with the original program or any other
program; and
that information is not
readily available from
another source at the time; and
made only to the extent necessary to obtain that information; and
program created reproduces the original program only to the extent
necessary to
enable it to operate with the original program
or other program; then
reproduction is permitted.
The inclusion of s47D ensures new original and compatible products are
However, this
inclusion also highlights that functional aspects of a work are
protected and
to gain access to these functions, one
is required to meet an onerous
Nonetheless, s47D allows reverse engineering (decompiling object code
into source code) of a computer program to determine how
program works. Section 47AB complements this section, providing that s
47D applies to
all literary works
are incorporated in or
associated with
a computer program and essential to its effective operation. This means
non-program data
which is a literary work of itself such as a table,
which is essential to the functioning of the original program may also
be reproduced
or adapted for the purposes of s47D.
A problem arises where an essential table or other data, which may be
a literary work of itself, can only be used to
the extent that it
enables the new program to interoperate with the original or other
program. There is no definition of ‘interoperate’
however the CLRC has defined this to mean “the ability of
computer systems to exchange information and mutually to use the
information which as been exchanged”.
programs would have to use the
of the literary work (for example a table). Thus, a new program could
not independently include an essential literary work. Section
to protect a person who reverse-engineers a computer program to create
an independent
competitive program where its function
requires an essential form of
literary work such as a table. Again, this demonstrates the impossible
task of separating function
and expression for the purposes of
computer programs as literary works.
Comparisons
with the US and
Section 47B(3)(a)
provides that
reproduction of a computer program made
in the course of
running a copy
the program for the purpose of studying the ideas behind the
program and the way in which it functions is an exc eption to
infringement.
It is arguable that “in the course of running a
copy” does not extend to reverse engineering. The fact that
exists creates some doubt that s40
(general fair dealing exception for research and study) has any
application.
Section 50B(2)(a) of the CDPA suffers from similar criticism although
differences in phrasing.
There is no express provision in the CDPA
for research and study of computer programs thus it may be argued that
reverts to the
general fair dealing exception in section 29 CDPA. In
contrast, the US fair use exception arguably allows decompilation to
functional aspects (algorithms) and ideas at the expense of the
economic interests of the original programmer.
Technological
Protection Measures
To ratify the
World Intellectual Property Organisation (WIPO) treaties and to address
threat posed by the digitisation of
intellectual property the Federal
Government passed the
Digital Agenda Act
introduced a
revamped definition of ‘computer program’. Further,
Digital Agenda Act
introduced amendments
concerning technological
protection measures, circumvention devices and electronic rights
information.
79. A technological
protection measure is
‘a device or product, or a component incorporated into a
process, that is
in the ordinary course of its operation, to prevent or
inhibit the
infringement of copyright in a work
subject-matter’.
This includes a device preventing access to
a work through encryption (an access code or key) or a copy control
a person from copying digital works. The nature of digital
media means that technological protection devices are easily
circumvented.
To combat infringement the
Digital Agenda Act
manufacture and general supply of circumvention devices.
circumvention device is a device which has ‘only a limited
commercially significant purpose or use, or no such purpose or
other than the
circumvention, facilitating circumvention, of an effective
technological protection measure’.
Personal use
of circumvention devices, and the manufacture and supply of
circumvention devices with independent commercial purposes
prohibited under
. Clearly, Parliament’s
intention was not stifle
Sony v Stevens No. 1
the Judge at first
instance offered a
restrictive construction of the anti-circumvention protection afforded
The Australian Competition and Consumer
Commission (ACCC) were given leave to appear in the case to advance the
of consumer
welfare by strict interpretation of the protection
provisions. The Federal Court held that the Sony Playstation 2 (PS2)
incorporated
protection measures did not prevent copying or access to a
means of an access code or process as defined in the
The recent decision in
Sony v Stevens No. 2
the decision in
decision was unanimous
on this issue, preferring to support “deterrence and
discouragement”
of copyright infringement over any
post-evaluation of alleged infringement. The Court held that the PS2
code inhibited access
to infringing copies of Playstation games and was
protected subject to any express exceptions.
Millennium Copyright Act
(DMCA) provides for exemptions for circumvention of access control
measures in certain circumstances.
Sections 1201(1) and (2)
allow circumvention to achieve
interoperability
with other independent computer prog rams. Section 1201(3) provides for
the information
gathered during circumvention to be made available to
provided that the information is
purpose of achieving
interoperability of an independently created computer program with
programs to the extent it does
not constitute infringement.
submitted that a similar result to
also occur in the
US. The information gathered through circumvention must be solely for
purposes of achieving interoperability
independently
which do not infringe; Stevens’ modified chip allowed
infringement of Sony Playstation games as well as the
foreign formatted information.
Considerations in Australia
The exemptions under Division 4A of the
so a technologically protected program
may be reproduced or adapted (with
the use of a circumvention device or not) for the
purposes of
interoperability, error correction, security testing, making back-ups
and reproduction for normal use. Where a technological
protection measure is applied, s116A(3)(b)(vi) provides that the
exemptions will
not apply if the program is ‘readily available’.
166A(4) states that a work or subject-matter will not be readily
if it is not in a form allowing a person to exercise
a right under
Division 4A
and Division 5.
If a user buys a computer program with a protection device and that
program has a defect or an error, a reproduction
is permitted
under s47E of the
correct the error in limited circumstances.
However, if the version of the original program is available in an
unprotected form (without a technological protection measure)
download or to purchase, it may be considered ‘readily
available’ for the purposes of s166A(4). The scope of
available’ is
uncertain as this potentially means readily available in shops
regionally or
internationally, or available for
download in any form (such as code or
as an operating system).
86. Sections 47D to
impose stringent
requirements before computer program can be reproduced or adapted.
ss116A(3) and 116A(4) combine to create
preconditions for the
reproduction or
adaptation of a protected computer program which may be impossible to
meet with certainty.
Permitted uses inserted by the
(Computer Programs) Act
(Cth) are effectively redundant
in operation
Digital Agenda Act
technological
provisions. Arguably, it is the open textured interpretation of
‘readily available' that allows courts
some latitude to
outcome in harmony with the intention of the
legislation.
Technological protection
measures: relevance to computer
Gamertsfelder
notes that when applying
ss116A(3) and 116A(4) to the permitted use of other forms of digitally
stored works, such as encyclopaedic
the desired outcome is acceptable: “Parliament has drafted
ss116A(3) and 116A(4) with traditional copyright matter in mind,
photographs and text as opposed to computer programs. In fact, the
‘readily available’ requirement makes perfect
applied to traditional copyright material such as books and
photographs.”
This highlights the
constant agitation suffered
by the inclusion of c omputer programs as literary works. Applying the
reproduction or adaptation of
computer programs under Division 4A to general provisions introduced
for the protection of works and
other subject matter under s116 creates
tension. The nature of a computer program is functional: a user needs
to operate or ‘run’
a computer program rather than
comprehend it.
This paper has discussed the
nature of computer programs as consisting of text (source and object
code) and behaviour. For the
purpose of legal protection, the
combination of behaviour and text becomes relevant. There has been
international impetus to separate
text and behaviour in order to
protect copyright in computer programs. The lack of dispute resolution
and enforceme nt mechanisms
at an international level has prompted the
EU and the US to seek
an alternative trade related approach to protect intellectual property
rights. This approach has led to
inconsistency in protection for computer programs in the jurisdictions
Furthermore, the dehumanisation of literary
works for computer programs has caused a split system of protection
programs and traditional literary works. This is apparent in
the Australian copyright infringement exceptions, whic h are overtly
complex and
difficult to comply with.
highlights the problems encountered in providing appropriate copyright
protection for computer programs without stifling
further development.
The legal protection that exists for computer pro grams under the
additional reform so that the public and the software industry have
legal certainty as to various obligations and rights
regarding the use
and development of computer programs. This requires recognition of the
nature of computer programs and creation of an
independent
legal regime disassociated from literary
This first form of copy protection
was limited
by registration for an initial term of fourteen years.
This paper uses
the terms “computer program” and
interchangeably.
“Patent and Copyright Protection
of Computer Programs”
(2002) 2 IPQ 172
Samuelson P et al,
“A Manifesto Concerning the Legal Protection of Computer
(1994) 94 Columbia L. Rev. 2308;
Koo, above, n4, 188.
Koo, D, above,
n4, 189; Nimmer, David, "Brains and Other Paraphernalia of the Digital
(1996) 10 Harv JL & Tech 1
Convention first established in 1886 and is currently titled The Berne
Convention for the Protection of Literary and Artistic
Works (July 24
http://www.wipo.int/clea/docs/en/wo/wo001en.htm
The Paris Convention for the
Protection of Industrial Property
(March 20 1883)
<www.wipo.int/clea/docs/en/wo/wo020en.htm> (12
See McManis C R, “Taking
Trips on the Information
Superhighway: International Intellectual Property Protection and
Computer Technology”,
(1996) 41 VILL. L. Rev. 207
See European Commission Directive
91/ 250 (May 1991) on the Legal
Protection of Computer Programs
International
Intellectual Property
Alliance, US Government Trade Policy: Views of the Copyright
Industries, (1985),
13-14, quoted
in Frederick M Abbott, Protecting First World Assets in
World: Intellectual Property Negotiations in the GATT Multilateral,
Transnat’l l, 689, 704 (1989)
Committee, Computer Software Protection: Final Report, (Office of
Legal Information and Publishing, A-G’s
Dept., Canberra April
Abbot, above, n 13, 689
“Uruguay Round”
was initially held in 1986 in Punta del Este (Uruguay) and was a
of GATT members.
For an analysis
of the dispute resolution machinery
provided through the TRIPS agreement see Tuan N Sarnahon,
Dispute Settlement After the Transition and Moratorium:
Nonviolation
and Situation Complaints Against Developing Countries, (2000)
Pol’y Int’l Bus, 1051; Aaron D Charfoos,
“How Far Have We
Come, and Where Do We Go From Here: The
Status of Global Computer
Protection Under the TRIPS Agreement”,
(2002) 22 Northwestern
Journal of International Law & Business 261
[1986] HCA 19
(1986) 161 CLR 171
see also Apple
Computer Inc v Computer
Edge Pty Ltd
(1983) 50 ALR 581
This decision
was later amended by
454 F.Supp 812 (C3
[1983] USCA3 1033
714 F.2d 1240 (C3
See also the UK case Sega
Enterprises v Richards
For example, Thrustcode Ltd v WW
Computing Ltd
[1983] FSR 502
(Megarry VC)
Art. 1 European
Commission Directive 91/ 250, (May 1991)
on the Legal Protection of Computer Programs; Art 10(1) TRIPS
4 WIPO Copyright Treaty 1996.
Under the USCA
Works” are defined as works, “other than
audiovisual works,
expressed in words, numbers,
or other verbal or numerical symbols or
regardless of the nature of the material objects, such as books,
periodicals,
manuscripts,
phonorecords, .lm, tapes, disks, or cards, in which they
For further
discussion on the protection of ancillary
material see Bainbridge, Intellectual Property (1992), 172
[1999] HCA 49
(1999) 45 IPR 353
[1999] HCA 49
(1999) 45 IPR
, 365 (Gleeson CJ, McHugh, Gummow
& Hayne JJ)
[1999] HCA 49
(1999) 45 IPR
, 365 (Gleeson CJ, McHugh, Gummow &
Rule established in Exxon Corp v
Exxon Insurance
Consultants International
[1982] 1 Ch 119
[1999] HCA 49
(1999) 45 IPR
(Gleeson CJ, McHugh, Gummow & Hayne JJ)
[1999] HCA 49
(1999) 45 IPR
(Gleeson CJ, McHugh, Gummow & Hayne JJ)
[1999] HCA 49
(1999) 45 IPR
(Gleeson CJ, McHugh, Gummow & Hayne JJ)
Baker v Seldon
[1994] FSR 275
[1994] FSR 275
291 - 292 (Jacob
Art. 2 WIPO Copyright Treaty
(1996) and Art 9(2) TRIPS.
Accounting Systems 2000 v CCH Australia; Ibcos Computers Ltd v Barclays
Mercantile Finance
[1994] FSR 275
; Cantor Fitzgerald International v
Tradition (UK) Ltd
[2000] RPC 95 (Pumfrey
[1992] HCA 2
(1992) 173 CLR
(1993) 176 CLR 300.
[1999] HCA 49
(1999) 45 IPR
, 372 (Gleeson CJ, McHugh, Gummow
& Hayne JJ)
[1999] HCA 49
(1999) 45 IPR
, 372 referring to an article by
Prescott, “Was Autocad Wrongly Decided?”
14(6) EIPR 191
[1999] HCA 49
(1999) 45 IPR 353
, 373 (Gleeson
CJ, McHugh, Gummow &
The ACCC is a Australian
government agency given extensive
powers to ensure fair competition and consumer protection.
Intellectual
Property & Competition Review Committee Interim Report (April
In Kabushi Kaisha Sony Computer
Entertainment Inc. v Stevens
(26 July 2002) the ACCC were granted leave to appear amicus
to ensure no detriment to competition and consumer welfare.
[1986] USCA3 976
confirmed that the structure of a record-keeping
program could be protected through copyright:
797 F. 2d 1234 (C3
For example Gage,
[1987] Wisconsin Law Review 859
“The Copyrighta
bility of Non-Literal Elements of Computer Programs”,
User interfaces are those elements
of the program used to
communicate information to the end- user by representations of buttons
on a computer screen.
740 F.Supp 37
51 (D Mass 1990)
Keeton disregarded attempts to distinguish individual elements of the
1-2-3 software and instead awarded protection to
the whole user
Paperback, above, n50.
[1992] USCA2 1158
982 F2d 693
Nintendo of America 975 F.2d 832 (C Fed 1992); Sega v Accolade
[1993] USCA9 19
see Brown Bag Software v Symantec
[1992] USCA9 874
960 F.2d 1465 (C9
“bifuricated test”
[1994] FSR 275
, 305-14 (Jacob J)
[1994] FSR 275
302 (Jacob J)
Stone P “Lessons From America: Filtration of Functionality
From Software
(1997) 13(1) Computer Law & Security
The Copyright Protection of Computer Software in the United Kingdom
Hart 2000), 31-34
Richardson v
[1993] FSR 497
discusses s102(b) USCA (Supra) stating that such
a provision is not
required in
(Cth) (AUS) as “the fundamental nature of
is that it does not protect ideas as such”.
“Square Pegs in Round Holes”
(1993) 4 Journal of
Law and Information
Science 142
[2003] FCA 157
(30 July 2003)
[2002] FCA 906
The Full Court of the Federal
Court considered three issues
on appeal. They rejected Sackville J’s Decision on the
Sony’s Playstation Console did not contain a Technological
Measure for the purposes of copyright protection
designed to prevent or inhibit post-access infringement of copyright.
Court held it sufficient that
Sony’s device inhibits
infringement by
rendering the resulting unauthorised copies unusable. The second and
issues were
whether there was a reproduction of the computer programs
Random Access Memory (“RAM”) of the PlayStation
game is played; and whether a copy of the game is regarded as a
“cinematograph film”, made in RAM when a game
played. In both of
these latter issues the Full Court Agreed with Sackville J (Finkelstein
dissenting).
This decision was
made on the strength of the previous decision in APRA v Warner
Kaisha Sony Entertainment Inc
& Ors v Stevens
[2003] FCAFC 157
(30 July 2003), [170] (Lindgren J)
http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/cases/cth/FCAFC/2003/157.html
[2002] EWHC 45(CH)
s296(4) of the
CDPA 1988 states:
“References in this section to copyright include any device
intended to prevent or
restrict copying of a work or to impair the
copies made.”
Lindgren J,
Sony v Stevens No. 2, above, n62,
¶168 (Lindgren
Knight P, ‘The
Layouts Act 1989
delivered at the 4th Copyright Law and Practice Symposium, Sydney,
1989; Avel Pty Ltd v Wells
[1991] FCA 590
(1991) 22 IPR 305.
Sony No. 2.
¶196 (Finkelstein J)
Refer also to
NEC Corporation v Intel
Corporation 10 UAPQ 2d (1989); Stern R “Reverse Engineering
Compatibility”
(1994) EIPR 175.
[1988] USCA5 922
847 F. 2d 255
Cir 1988) it was held that reproducing a program using aspects of
engineering can fall within the exception of s 117(1).
For broader
refer to McManis “Intellectual Property Protection and
Engineering of Computer Programs in the
United States and the European
(1993) 8 High Technology Law Journal 25
first part of s107 states “Notwithstanding the provisions of
106A, the fair use of a copyrighted work, including
such use by
reproduction in
copies or phonorecords or by any other means specified by that section,
purposes such as criticism,
comment, news reporting, teaching
multiple copies for classroom use), scholarship, or research, is not an
infringement
of copyright.
Established in
Sony Corporation America v
Universal City Studios
[1984] USSC 14
464 US 417.
In Campbell v
(1994) a rap version of Roy Orbison’s “Pretty
judged a parody and in line with First Amendment values
released for
commercial purposes.
977F.2d 1510
975 F.2d 832 (CF
Lai, above, n58, 111
s50A(1) states “It is not
an infringement of copyright for a lawful user of a copy of a computer
to make any back up
copy of it which it is necessary for him to have
purposes of his lawful use.” .
s50B contains an exception to
infringement for reverse engineering in certain
circumstances.
s50C provides that
there is no infringement
of copyright where a program is copied or adapted for the purpose of
correction.
However, the end use must be lawful.
For an analysis
ss50A – C see Lai, above, n58, 103-106, 136-139.
“Implementation of the Software Directive in the United
Kingdom: The
Effects of the Copyright (Computer Programs)
Regulations
In Mars United
Kingdom Ltd v Tecknowledge Ltd, June 11,
1999, Patents Court Jacob J stated that “the European
Community had
clearly considered the position as to the defences and had provided a
statutory code”, ¶17
Lai, above,
documented in Intellectual Property
and Competition Review Committee Final Report, September (2000),
CLRC, Final Report on Computer
Software Protection
There is no mention of
“interoperability” in 50B
instead the drafters chose “can be operated with”
the program
decompiled or with another program.
result in Sega
Enterprises v Accolade Inc 977F.2d 1510 (C9 1992).
For a complete
of the changes made, and the effects of those changes on technological
protection measures, circumvention devices
and electronic rights
information , refer to Gamertsfelder L, “Digitising Copyright
Australian Perspective”,
(December 2001-February
2002), 15(4)
Commercial Law Quarterly , 3-17
Kabushi Kaisha
Sony Entertainment Inc
& Ors v Stevens (Sony v Stevens)
[2003] FCAFC 157
¶138 (Lindgren J)
Refer also to
Universal City Studios Inc v
Reimerdes, unreported, Civ 0277 (LAK), US DCt, Sth District NY, August
states that a program can be
reproduced or adapted
if: (a) the reproduction or adaptation is made by, or on behalf of, the
or licensee of the copy of the program (the original copy) used
making the reproduction or adaptation; and (b) the reproduction
adaptation is made for the purpose of correcting an error in the
original copy
that prevents it from operating (including in conjunction
programs or
with hardware): (i) as intended by its author; or (ii) in accordance
any specifications or other documentation
supplied with the original
and (c) the reproduction or adaptation is made only to the extent
reasonably necessary to correct
the error referred to in paragraph (b);
and (d) when the reproduction or adaptation is made, another copy of
program that does
operate as mentioned in paragraph (b) is not
available to the
owner or licensee within a reasonable time a t an ordinary commercial
Gamertsfelder, above, n91, 6
Gamertsfelder,
above, n91,
For example, where libraries
reproduce or communicate journals from
an encrypted database for other libraries:
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
No downloadable files available
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter