URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/journals/CanLawRw/2021/12.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 14:51:36
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Walker-Munro, Brendan --- "'You Don't Need to Know': The Australian Experience of Criminal Intelligence as Evidence" [2021] CanLawRw 12; (2021) 18(2) Canberra Law Review 36
“You Don’t Need to Know”: The Australian Experience of
Criminal Intelligence as Evidence
Walker-Munro
Criminal intelligence, the synthesis of information and trained analysis to
inform decision-making, has formed the cornerstone of
policing and national
security investigations for the last century. However, since 9/11 the
traditional lines between “spies
and cops” has become blurred, and
Federal and State laws have become more permissive of the use of criminal
intelligence as
evidence in proceedings, often in circumstances where the
parties are not allowed to view the evidence, test its strength or even
exists. This article intends to engage with this paradigm, not only to expose
its weaknesses but also to identify positivist
mechanisms where such material
– usually probative as to the facts in issue – might be used in ways
that do not offend
constitutional or common law
principles.
Introduction
Australia, the Australian Federal Police (AFP) are considered the “major
instrument of Commonwealth law enforcement”,
with an ambit to enforce
Commonwealth criminal laws and protect Australia’s national interests both
domestically and internationally.
Yet over the past ten years this scope of the AFP’s investigative and
prosecutorial activities has expanded dramatically. Following
the terrorist
attacks of 9/11, the AFP took centre stage for much of the national security
reform that occurred to consolidate counter-terrorism
On 20 December 2017,
Parliament established the Department of Home Affairs, bringing together the
AFP, the Australian Border Force
(ABF), Australian Criminal Intelligence
Commission (ACIC), the Australian Transaction Reports and Analysis Centre
(AUSTRAC) and the
Australian Security Intelligence Organisation (ASIO) into a
“super-department”.
This new body has investigative authority over a wide swathe of criminal conduct
including counter-terrorism and money laundering,
foreign interference and
espionage, significant fraud, cybercrime, Customs, drugs, transnational
organised crime and child
exploitation.
State and Territory
Police forces equally are experiencing expansions and deepening of their powers
and remit in the investigation
of ever-broader classes of
Concomitant with this
expansion of jurisdiction has been the growth in the use of “criminal
intelligence” as a form
of policing product. As will be explored later,
the term criminal intelligence is one of contention, differing as to whether it
defined by statute or by policy. Criminal intelligence has, by Byzantine
loops and knee-jerk policy positions, become embedded as
a form of “secret
evidence” that may be relied upon by Courts and Tribunals in numerous
Australian jurisdictions to make
a host of decisions across the domains of
occupational regulation, security, employment and asset confiscation
interjurisdictional treatment of “secret evidence” under statute and
common law has only been the subject of
limited examination.
The purpose of this article is, in four parts, to add to existing scholarship
on the increase in secrecy in Australia since 9/11,
the intelligence/evidence
overlap, and the growing migration of national security paradigms into other
legal spheres. For my purposes,
“secret evidence” is defined as the
use of (predominantly) criminal intelligence in furtherance of a party’s
where that evidence is not supplied as a matter of right to the
contradicting party, that party’s legal representatives, or
the public at
large. Part 1 will examine the frameworks in Commonwealth and State legislation
that permit the use of criminal intelligence
as secret evidence in proceedings.
In Part 2, we will identify some of the challenges and dangers under the current
Australian jurisprudential
experience of criminal intelligence as secret
evidence. Part 3 will benchmark Australia’s experience with that of the
Kingdom. I will conclude with Part 4 by suggesting some policy and legal
proposals that might the Courts to make better and more
robust decisions on
secret evidence.
I: The Australian experience of secrecy
The concept of an open and transparent proceeding is integral to the
fundamental legal tradition of fairness and
Not only does a
fundamental requirement of proceedings involve the disclosure to the parties of
all evidence intended to be relied
upon in reaching a judicial decision, but
each party must be vested with rights to test and confront all of that
The idea that a Court
might, on the application of an organ of the State, entertain legal argument and
the filing of evidence in
the absence of any of the parties (especially the one
whom the proceedings may be about) is ‘antithetical to that
tradition’.
This is not to say that the traditional tests of relevance and admissibility
reflected in the uniform
Evidence Acts
have not been modified to preclude
information of a sensitive nature from reaching an open courtroom. Law
enforcement and intelligence
agencies have always had recourse to the public
interest immunity (PII) to resist production of material that, although relevant
and admissible, would be ‘injurious to the public
, the names of police
, and the records of
security operations
been recognised as falling within the scope of the immunity.
Nor is PII solely limited in Australia to the common law. Section 130 of the
Evidence Acts
enshrines the test in
to exclude admitting into evidence something
that relates to matters of
, unless the public
interest in admission and the administration of justice outweighs the public
interest in preserving the secrecy
or confidentiality of the evidence because of
its potential damage to the nation or public
Irrespective of the
scope of the immunity, the Court may, in determining whether or not the immunity
has accrued, may examine the
material, but only to determine whether the public
interest attaches.
objection is not upheld, and the evidence is relevant and otherwise admissible,
there is no scope for the evidence to be further
withheld from the
A second statutory doctrine of secrecy was then created by the passing of the
National Security Information (Criminal and Civil Proceedings) Act 2004
(Cth). This Act modified many of the rules of evidence relating to federal
criminal and civil proceedings, defining “national
information” (NSI) as any information that related to national security,
or the disclosure of which might affect national
“national security” is likewise broad, and covers Australia’s
interests in defence, security, international
relations and law
enforcement.
The law enforcement
interests include specific reference to criminal intelligence: the interests of
the Commonwealth are in ‘avoiding
disruption to national and international
efforts relating to... criminal intelligence’, ‘protecting the
technologies
and methods used to collect, analyse, secure or otherwise deal
with, criminal intelligence’ and ‘protection and safety
informants and of persons associated with
informants’.
The process of dealing with NSI will feature later in this article, but for
present purposes an obligation is placed on the parties
to notify the
Attorney-General if national security information may be revealed in a criminal
or civil proceeding.
Attorney-General must then determine whether such a disclosure might prejudice
national security. The Attorney-General may then
proceed to intervene and be
heard in the proceedings
a non-disclosure certificate
prevent witnesses from answering
or otherwise affect
various aspects of the admission of evidence in an open Court to all of the
Despite these inherent interferences with the long common law traditions of
open courts
(and the cluster of
human rights associated with
), there now appears to be
an increasing reliance in Commonwealth and State law involving a third statutory
doctrine of secret evidence:
criminal intelligence. The mechanics of this
species of secret evidence are illustrated by reference to the
Serious and
Organised Crime (Control) Act 2009
The Act permits the
Commissioner of Police to make application to the Supreme Court to make a
declaration that ‘members of
the organisation associate for the purpose of
organising, planning, facilitating, supporting or engaging in serious criminal
and ‘the organisation represents a risk to public safety
and order’, or for control orders for individuals to prevent
consorting.
These application
may be supported by the admission of criminal intelligence, being
‘information relating to actual or suspected
criminal activity...the
disclosure of which could reasonably be expected to prejudice criminal
investigations, to enable the discovery
of the existence or identity of a
confidential source of information relevant to law enforcement or to endanger a
person's life or
The Commissioner
of Police is responsible for making a determination whether or not such
information is indeed criminal intelligence,
a determination that is not
reviewable and may indeed be made retrospectively (in the case of public safety
The Court also has
various duties associated with receiving and handling this evidence, such as
maintaining confidentiality of the
intelligence as well as hearing arguments and
receiving evidence in the absence of the
Nor are these provisions solely the province of South Australian
jurisprudence. Table One shows a listing of all Australian legislation
currently refers to, or deals with, the various uses of secret evidence.
Table 1: Australian legislation containing references to “criminal
intelligence”
Legislation
Commonwealth
Auscheck Act 2007
Australian Citizenship Act 2007
Australian Crime Commission Act 2002
Australian Passports Act 2005
Competition and Consumer Act 2010
Criminal Code
(Cth), Div 104
Foreign Passports (Law Enforcement and Security) Act 2005
Migration Act 1958
Narcotics Drugs Act 1967
(Cth), ss 4 and 15M
National Security Information (Criminal and Civil Proceedings) Act
Public Interests Disclosure Act 2013
(Cth), s 41
Criminal Code
Judicial Review Act 1991
(Qld), Schedule 2
Liquor Act 1992
Motor Dealers and Chattel Auctioneers Act 2014
, and Schedule 3
Police Service Administration Act 1990
(Qld), Schedule 1
Racing Integrity Act 2016
Second-Hand Dealers and Pawnbrokers Act 2003
, and Schedule 3
Security Providers Act 1993
Tattoo Industry Act 2013
, and Schedule
Tow Truck Act 1973
, and Schedule
Weapons Act 1990
, and Schedule 2
New South Wales
Betting and Racing Act 1998
Combat Sports Act 2013
Commercial Agents and Private Inquiry Agents Act 2004
Crimes (Criminal Organisation Control) Act 2012
(NSW), Part 3B
Crime Commission Act 2012
Drug Supply Prohibition Order Pilot Scheme Act 2020
(NSW), s 10
Explosives Act 2003
Firearms Act 1996
Government Information (Public Access) Act 2009
(NSW), Schedule
Independent Commission Against Corruption Act 1988
Law Enforcement Conduct Commission 2016
(NSW), s 189
Law Enforcement (Powers and Responsibilities) Act 2002
Liquor Act 2007
Motor Dealers and Repairers Act 2013
National Disability Insurance Scheme (Worker Checks) Act 2016
ss 30, 33 and 44, and Schedule 1
Paintball Act 2018
Pawnbrokers and Second-Hand Dealers 1996
(NSW), ss 8A(2A) and
Police Act 1990
Poppy Industry Act 2016
Security Industry Act 1997
Tattoo Parlours Act 2012
, Division 3
Terrorism (Police Powers) Act 2002
Tow Truck Industry Act 1998
Weapons Prohibition Act 1998
Australian Capital Territory
Crimes (Sentencing) Act 2005
Security Industry Act 2003
Liquor Act 2010
Construction Occupations (Licensing) Act 2004
Division 5A.2
Northern Territory
Associations Act 2003
Firearms Act 1997
Information Act 2002
Serious Crime Control Act 2009
Criminal Organisations Control Act 2012
Firearms Act 1996
Registration to Work with Vulnerable People Act 2013
(TAS), ss 3,
28, 30, 50, 51 and 53
Right to Information Act 2009
Security and Investigation Agents Act 2002
(TAS), ss 8 and 37
Sex Industry Offences Act 2005
South Australia
Casino Act 1997
Child Safety (Prohibited Persons) Act 2016
Child Sex Offenders Registration Act 2006
Controlled Substances Act 1984
Correctional Services Act 1982
Criminal Investigation (Covert Operations) Act 2009
Disability Inclusion Act 2018
Firearms Act 2015
Freedom of Information Act 1991
(SA), Schedule 1
Gambling Administration Act 2019
Hydroponics Industry Control Act 2009
Industrial Hemp Act 2017
Labour Hire Licensing Act 2017
Liquor Licensing Act 1997
Parliamentary Committees Act 1991
Police Act 1998
Second-Hand Dealers and Pawnbrokers Act 1996
Security and Investigation Industry Act 1995
Serious Organised Crime (Control) Act 2008
(SA), ss 3, 5A, 7, 9, 29,
39Y and 42A
Serious Organised Crime (Unexplained Wealth) 2009
(SA), ss 3, 6, 34
Summary Offences Act 1953
Tattooing Industry Control Act 2015
Western Australia
Criminal Organisations Control Act 2012
Freedom of Information Act 1992
(WA), Schedules 1 and 2
Table One shows us that the largest proportion of Acts that purport to deal
with criminal intelligence as a form of secret evidence
are in the NSW,
Queensland and South Australian jurisdictions – perhaps unsurprising given
these States were the key battlegrounds
for policymakers and law enforcers
struggling to contain outlaw motorcycle
Western Australia and
Victoria have the least, followed by the ACT and NT, though all of these states
have had demonstrated issues
controlling organised crime in the last
Criminal intelligence in Australian jurisprudence is also distinguishable
from the concept of PII and NSI on four bases:
The use of the evidence:
PII and NSI resist admission of
otherwise relevant and admissible
, forcing Courts to make
a decision on ‘less than the whole of the relevant
materials’.
intelligence on the other hand is often relied on to directly inform
decision-makers and withheld from all of the
The role of the Court:
in PII and NSI cases the role of the
Court is exclusionary, determining potential admissibility of the evidence by
determining the
truth of possible damage to the public
or Australia’s
national security.
objection is upheld ‘they are not available to either [party] and the
court may not use them. There is no question of
unfairness or
inequality’.
criminal intelligence, the Court’s discretion is inclusionary – it
must not only determine if the evidence is
criminal intelligence, but also
whether it may be admitted, and the purposes and limits for such
If it does so, the
Court will be statute barred from making that material available to
The nature of the evidence:
PII may attach to items or classes
of evidence that may or may not go facts in issue, but otherwise have contents,
or are within
a class of documents, that offend the PII principle. NSI are
likewise of a “class”, generally being documents or oral
from the security agencies of
On the other hand,
criminal intelligence – as the ‘insights and understanding obtained
through analysis of available
information and data’ – essentially
constitutes the opinion of the analyst and/or hearsay of the informer and would,
but for the enabling Acts, be more limited in its
Nature of proceedings:
Claims for PII are usually determined
on a certificate or affidavit evidence from the public officer or Minister
having responsibility
or authority over the evidence that is the subject of the
Criminal intelligence
proceedings involve the State producing the evidence to the Court
and in the absence of the other parties, and seeking that the Court
make a decision on that material without the other parties viewing,
or testing it. Though NSI proceedings adopt
hearings, the
parties are at least seized of awareness of the NSI and may be heard and/or make
submissions in respect of the Attorney-General’s
assertions as to that
Thus we can say with some confidence that, although criminal intelligence
might be evidence or a class of evidence to which PII and/or
NSI could properly
attach, the current statutory treatment of criminal intelligence is a wholly new
paradigm, supported by a statutory
framework that sits ill-at-odds with the
Court’s traditional approaches to public and adversarial battles informed
the evidence. Challenges to strike down the principles of these Acts
as unconstitutional (usually by reference to
) have been mostly
unsuccessful.
Ananian-Walsh
summed up secret evidence thus:
The cases set up three necessary conditions for secret evidence to be
acceptable in court proceedings. Secret evidence is permitted
if the court: has
the capacity to reassess the classification of the information; is not being
forced to take particular steps with
respect to the evidence; and retains
sufficient discretion to potentially counteract any unfairness (for example, by
attributing
less weight to the evidence or ordering a stay of
proceedings).
The above exposition of the current state of Commonwealth and State law does
not readily lend itself to a dissection of the challenges
facing the use of
criminal intelligence. This is because the enabling Acts often create a process
enabling receipt of the evidence
by the Court to prove certain facts in issue,
but without notifying the other parties the evidence exists or permitting them
II: The challenges of criminal intelligence
Nomenclature
The first of the challenges to any meaningful scholarly and policy debate
definition between the Commonwealth, States and Territories. Take for example
the definitions as they are applied in policy
and statute. The South Australian
Act (as discussed earlier) defines criminal intelligence as ‘...
information relating to
actual or suspected criminal activity (whether in this
State or elsewhere) the disclosure of which could reasonably be expected to
prejudice criminal investigations, to enable the discovery of the existence or
identity of a confidential source of information relevant
to law enforcement or
to endanger a person's life or physical
However the
definition used by the ACIC – Australia’s frontline criminal
intelligence agency – is vastly different:
‘... insights and
understanding obtained through analysis of available information and data on
complex offending patterns,
serious organised crime groups, networks or
syndicates and individuals involved in various types of criminal
activities.’
While both definitions draw out the connection between actual or potential
criminal offending and the identities of offenders, the
contrast of these
definitions demonstrates one of the serious misunderstandings in law
enforcement: confusing or conflating the disparate
and overlapping concepts of
information and intelligence.
Information (sometimes called data) is raw input – detail about a
person’s whereabouts, phone calls, or online browser
history; whereas
intelligence is the result of a reasonable and informed analysis and processing,
drawing inferences from that data
that supports or guides an investigative
decision or outcome.
Yet despite
the yawning chasm separating these two concepts, both
information
intelligence
are referred to as
a “national asset” by the Commonwealth.
At common law, the two concepts of information and intelligence are equally
murky. The High Court considers information according
to its ordinary meaning:
[w]ithout necessary relation to a recipient: that which inheres in or is
represented by a particular arrangement, sequence, or set,
that may be stored
in, transferred by, and responded to by inanimate
This does not stop the Commonwealth and States from legislating the term
information without a degree of sufficient
Further, although the
definition of criminal intelligence in the State “serious crime”
Acts are the same across Queensland,
ACT, NSW, SA and
, these definitions do
not always seem to flow into the Acts that have been amended to rely on criminal
intelligence for decision-making.
Take for example the following
further definitions of criminal intelligence: ‘in relation to a person,
means any information
criminal activity’
even ‘information that relates to criminal activities and is obtained from
... the Commissioner of Police; or ... any other
entity, or body, responsible
for the enforcement of laws of the Commonwealth or of this or any other State or
of a Territory’.
Australia, numerous Acts permit the Commissioner of Police to
“classify” evidence as criminal intelligence through
non-reviewable decision-making process, at which point all the protections of
criminal intelligence will
Ironically, there are
finally various laws across Australian jurisdictions which rely on criminal
intelligence as evidence and yet
definition.
These concerns around nomenclature are not simply abstract, academic or
theoretical, and may have profound outcomes on the parties
that are the subject
of criminal intelligence that may be faulty, patchy, incomplete or simply wrong.
For some, they may be blocked
from undertaking otherwise legitimate or lawful
professional activities or
, or face deportation
from Australia
for reasons they
will never be allowed to know. In no other case is the danger of flawed criminal
intelligence more profound in the
case of Dr Haneef – arrested, charged,
stripped of a visa and subjected to significant pre-trial detention in
circumstances
where ASIO’s own security assessments did not deem him a
security threat.
The roots of criminal intelligence provisions
As we have already covered, the second difficulty with criminal intelligence
is that its current statutory and common law treatment
differs significantly to
that of NSI and PII claims because they derive from substantially different
legal traditions. It is to be
remembered that PII involves only a balancing
between the public interest in protecting the Executive and the public interest
the open administration of
This protection derives
from the idea that ‘proper decisions can be made at high levels of
government only if there is complete
freedom and candour in stating facts,
tendering advice and exchanging views and
The protection of NSI, though seemingly capable of being a sub-set of PII,
essentially ‘tilts the balance’ in favour of
the protection of that
Though the effect of
the enabling legislation may place a hand on the scale and affect the
Court’s assessment of NSI, this
does not make it unconstitutional or
affect the integrity of the Court conducting the
assessment.
The protection of
NSI was deemed necessary because ‘[t]he existing rules of evidence and
procedure do not provide adequate
protection for information that relates to, or
the disclosure of which may affect, national
However this
suggestion – given the lengthy history of successful PII claims – is
perhaps disingenuous; instead, it is
perhaps more correct to suggest that NSI
was introduced to permit prosecutions (and subsequently civil suits) for
national security
issues to proceed apace:
A court which has found that sensitive security related information should
not be disclosed will have an alternative to simply dismissing
the charge. It
will be able to admit documents and information in a redacted form that protects
national security but preserves the
essence of the information. Consequently,
the Commonwealth will no longer have to choose between risking the disclosure of
information that relates to national security and protecting this
information by abandoning the prosecution, even when the prosecution
alleged crimes that could have grave consequences for our national
The roots requiring the protection of criminal intelligence derive,
coincidentally, from the two classes of information deemed expedient
covered by the protection in the WA and NT definitions of criminal intelligence:
that is, a.) the protection of sources of
intelligence as well as existing or
future investigations; and b.) the general secrecy of Police methodologies and
tactics. Police
informers have been protected by a long line of authority on
, subject to the
qualification that informers’ identities and evidence
disclosed if it could tend to show the innocence of the
And the secrecy of
methodologies and tactics is perhaps not that surprising, as these in turn
appear to have derived from patent
cases (which also prohibited publication of
certain matters in decisions).
Thus criminal intelligence provisions could, on one viewing, be seen as
codifying the common law rules of
However much criminal intelligence that feeds into investigations is the
result of a
of information receipt, digestion, analysis and
formulation – it is as much an outcome of art than mere
“information”
in the terms referred by the High
Thus what is unique about
criminal intelligence material is a capacity to be not only
or hearsay, but also
suggestive (even probative) of certain tendencies in circumstances where the
usual restriction on admitting
or challenging such evidence is unavailable. This
makes the various purposes to which criminal intelligence might be put a shaky
proposition on which to base judicial or administrative decision-making.
Use for which criminal intelligence may be put as evidence
We come then to the principal danger attendant with using criminal
intelligence as evidence; that is, the possibility that untested
hearsay and tendency evidence may be deemed admissible to and considered by the
Court in circumstances where the respondent
has no capacity to view or challenge
the material, or even know such material exists. Though speaking of the
difficulties in dealing
with PII claims, the dicta of Hampel J is
instructive:
Establishment of a legitimate forensic purpose, or apparent relevance is ...
a difficult exercise for the defence, as they do not
have access to the material
over which Public Interest Immunity is claimed. The defence cannot refer to the
actual content of the
documents when submitting there is a legitimate forensic
purpose in seeking access to the documents sought, or that they have apparent
relevance to an issue in the trial. The defence is, of necessity, restricted to
broad or general assertions about legitimate forensic
purpose or apparent
Mason J (as he then was) made point irresistibly clear in
, saying ‘It would
be inconsistent with basic notions of fairness that a judge should take into
account, or even receive, secret
or private representations on behalf of a party
or from a stranger with reference to a case which he has to decide.’ It
for this reason – that the provisions
permitting the
use of criminal intelligence were ‘unnecessary, excessive and
disproportionate’
the Queensland industry regulation framework no longer allows for criminal
intelligence to be considered as evidence in making
administrative
These amendments were
made pursuant to the
Serious and Organised Crime Legislation Amendment Act
(Qld), in turn following a Taskforce report into the efficiency of the
legislative measures to combat outlaw motorcycle
Of course, Mason J’s comments in
were prefaced with the
words ‘unless Parliament otherwise provides’, and ironically, just
prior to the repeal of the Queensland
legislation the High Court in
settled the issue
that Parliament can (and in that case did) exercise a legitimate source of
constitutional power to allow for criminal
intelligence to be utilised
So the substantive
challenge to criminal intelligence as evidence remains; as Churches puts it, the
effect of the line of High Court
is the creation of a
constitutionally valid, legislative framework where ‘evidence that
formerly would not have been available
to the affected party, pursuant to public
interest immunity, on which basis it was not utilised by the court, may now
still not be
available to the affected party, but
be used by the
court’ (emphasis in the
The third doctrine of secrecy and “curial” fairness
It follows logically that where a party cannot use, contest or even be aware
of evidence that may go against their position or interests,
the principles of
open justice and procedural fairness become
compromised.
Such compromises
are not unknown to Australian jurisprudence; for example, in
Applicant VEAL
of 2002 v Minister for Immigration and Multicultural and Indigenous
Court described that the Court, in dealing with PII claims, may ‘mould
their procedures to accommodate’ the immunity.
It was not until
that the High Court
has since applied this same moulding principle to the acceptance and
consideration by a Court of criminal intelligence
evidence. In vitiating the
usual procedural safeguards, Australia’s highest court appears to have
formulated the concept of
safeguard for the interests of the opposing parties.
Curial fairness appears distilled as a synthesis of the Court’s
inherent jurisdiction
interpretation of the statutory provisions permitting the admission of criminal
intelligence.
Reliance on
statutory authority seems absolutely necessary – as was laid bare in
Cameron v Cole
Court’s inherent jurisdiction may be altered by clear statutory
However where the
statute makes such an alteration, the principles of statutory interpretation
also require that any operation of
a power conferred by statute (i.e. to receive
secret evidence) be exercised with procedural fairness to those whose interests
be adversely affected by the exercise of that power (i.e. those to whom the
secret evidence may refer).
There is also the danger that a respondent, keen to defend their position,
overcompensates or makes admissions against their interests
to defend or
counter evidence they don’t know or
understand.
procedural fairness may be extinguished, especially in circumstances invoking
doctrines of secrecy
must be some form of protection exercised in respect of the respondent’s
In cases involving criminal intelligence therefore, the Court has stood as
necessary protector of the rights of respondents, by invoking
the Court’s
inherent jurisdiction and viewing the material said to constitute criminal
intelligence. There appear several good
policy reasons for this.
One aspect of the necessity is because of the risk that Police may
misclassify criminal intelligence (benignly or negligently) and
thus deny the
respondent crucial information relevant to their
proceedings.
Another is the
fact that secret evidence may be constitutionally valid but still offends the
justiciable principles at the heart
of the common
A third aspect allows
the Court, having viewed the material and confirmed the nature of its secrecy
and potential injury to the public
interest, may then undertake its usual
function of attributing what weight (if any) to assign to the criminal
intelligence evidence.
Fourthly and lastly,
clear authority that the Court retains control of its procedures to protect the
respondent’s interest, whether by
staying the proceedings indefinitely or
rejecting any use of the evidence for want of relevance or credibility.
These various aspects contributing to the role of the Court in
Australia’s third doctrine of secrecy have corollaries in international
jurisprudence. This article will now examine the United Kingdom’s
experience with handling secret criminal intelligence as
evidence, through the
evolution of its closed material procedures (CMP) and the use of special
III: The United Kingdom’s experiences with
The origin of CMPs is an evolution from the enactment of the Special
Immigration Appeals Commission (SIAC), a body constituted to
consider appeals of
migration cases decided by the Home Secretary on the grounds of national
SIAC proceedings
and involved the appointment of a
special advocate for the appellant with an appropriate security clearance to
consider national security
information.
proceedings special advocates fulfil two functions: to test the
executive’s case for non-disclosure (the disclosure
function) and to
represent the interests of the person in the proceedings (the representative
Despite widespread
criticism in both academia and
the enactment of the
Prevention of Terrorism Act 2005
(UK) and the
Counter-Terrorism Act
(UK) sought to permit Courts to hold
hearings to
accept and consider law enforcement or security service information which could
not be provided to the accused in criminal
proceedings.
The conceptual vehicle of CMPs and special advocates existing as a creature
of both statute and the Court’s inherent jurisdiction
to control its own
civil proceedings was challenged in in
There, the UK
Supreme Court ruled that CMPs might have a legitimate basis in determining PII
claims, but could not be used in civil
proceedings without a specific statutory
authority. Indeed as Lord Dyson put it ‘subject to certain exceptions and
qualifications, the right to be confronted by one's accusers is such a
fundamental element of the common law right to a fair trial
that the court
cannot abrogate it in the exercise of its inherent power. Only Parliament can do
Lord Dyson was not alone in his criticism of the CMP and special advocates.
The European Court of Human Rights determined that even
the appointment of a
special advocate is insufficient protection, as the accused does not know the
nature of the allegations against
them and so cannot instruct the advocate
appropriately.
Supreme Court held that a CMP did not violate the human rights of the appellant
because ‘the demands of national security
may necessitate a system for
determining complaints under which a claimant is, for reasons of national
security, unable to know the
secret material by reference to which his complaint
is determined’ and held that the CMP system was both necessary and
sufficient safeguards. Despite this, the judiciary considered that
even with statutory authority the rule of law required disclosure
of sufficient
information about the allegations against
This is ultimately because the special advocate’s role derives not from
a protection of the accused’s interests, but a
protection of the public
interest, i.e. to verify that the non-disclosure by the State to the other party
has been exercised appropriately.
Given this is the root of the relevant
principle for CMPs, it is unsurprising that special advocates cannot adduce
evidence to rebut
the contents of the intelligence
Nor are the
provisions of CMPs immutable – in
hearing was conducted entirely in the absence of both the parties and the
special advocate, where the Court heard evidence of secret
surveillance and law
enforcement activities.
The House of Lords called these arrangements
‘Kafkaesque’
‘the stuff of
nightmares’.
Later, the UK Supreme Court held that in considering a CMP, a Court needed to
ensure the excluded party received as much information
as possible about the
closed evidence, efforts should be made by the parties to minimise the extent of
closed material, and that
the court should consider whether it is possible to
avoid a closed hearing.
with these conditions, the majority of the court viewed CMPs with
‘distaste and
Sweeping away these concerns of the Supreme Court, UK Parliament subsequently
Justice and Security Act 2013
(UK) (“the JSA”)
which specifically authorised the use of CMPs and special advocates in civil
proceedings, and codified
the earlier judgments allowing the use of CMPs in
lower Tribunals and Courts.
In the years since the passing of the JSA, CMPs have been adopted in other
proceedings with varying levels of judicial support and
CMPs have, most
recently, even been used in interlocutory proceedings where the State has
resisted orders for production of applications
IV: What can Australia learn?
Quite separate from the challenges outlined by the Supreme Court, House of
Lords and European Courts of Human Rights, the CMP and
special advocates
frameworks face further unique difficulties in being “copied across”
to the Australian legislative
context, even in circumstances where CMPs have
already been found to be valid exercise of the Court’s inherent
summarised special
advocates cannot adduce contradictory evidence against criminal intelligence,
find difficulties in government
objections to disclosure (such as by PII), and
limitations on the ordinarily free and frank discussions that could be had
special advocates and their
the provisions for special advocates in Canada, held up as ‘the
[law’s] best means at our
in handling
secret evidence, have not been capable of solving these
complexities.
Rather than a special advocate existing as a rule of common law, the statutes
themselves might be modified to insert a statutory officer
to protect the rights
and interests of the accused or respondent. In Queensland this mechanism was
typified by the Criminal Organisation
Public Interest Monitor
The COPIM was
authorised as a ‘statutory
amicus curiae
’ to monitor and file
submissions in respect of proposed declarations and control
In particular, the
role of the COPIM was to ‘to test, and make submissions to the court
of the monitored
application’.
Similarly, the Independent National Security Legislation Monitor (INSLM) is an
independent statutory officer with functions to review
Australia’s
national security and counter-terrorism
legislation.
Yet both the COPIM and INSLM are not an exemplar of the kind necessary to
mitigate issues with the special advocate system. Firstly,
statutory office
holders may be subject to conditions on the terms of their appointment, somewhat
diluting their independence.
Secondly, the functions of the COPIM are monitoring in nature – whilst
this might discharge the “disclosure
advocates, it fails to deliver a representative function. In effect the COPIM
protected the public interest residing in
not disclosing criminal intelligence,
rather than the public interest in protecting the rights of the accused or
respondent.
Thirdly, in
practice the COPIM was not the protection the legislature may have hoped it
would be – it ‘... doubtless
adds to the integrity of the process.
But it cannot cure a want of procedural
Roach discussed other options available under the Canadian system, including
reviews of intelligence declarations by Canada’s
intelligence watchdog
(Security Intelligence Review Committee) and disclosing secret evidence to
counsel for the affected party on
undertakings that the counsel will not share
that evidence with his or own
This approach was
criticised in the UK Court of Appeal in
as requiring
an unacceptable severance of the duty owed by defence counsel to their clients;
however, some scholars disagree, suggesting
that counsel’s duty to the
Court is superior to that of the client, and that counsel will strive to
preserve the secrecy on
pains of serious professional misconduct, financial
penalty or even
imprisonment.
The review of criminal intelligence by a watchdog or ombudsman type body does
carry some force in an Australian context. Both the
Commonwealth Ombudsman and
Inspector-General of Intelligence and Security have significant powers of
inspection and review
coupled with a lengthy history of frank and robust engagement with contentious
matters of national policy.
Either these bodies could receive criminal intelligence monitoring functions or
a “criminal intelligence monitor” could
be established as a separate
statutory office holder.
In either event, the monitoring powers must be exercisable in a manner that
is explicitly not subject to Ministerial
These powers
should be exercised by a quorum of qualified individuals, including at least one
current or former Judge of a
but also a former
Police officer of senior rank with experience in the handling and treatment of
criminal intelligence and a legal
practitioner with specific experience in civil
rights or PII/NSI claims. These areas of expertise are important in bridging the
of what constitutes criminal intelligence between legalistic/formal
definitions and those employed “at the coalface”
of intelligence
operations.
This body should
also be given the specific, statutory function of protecting the common law
rights of the accused or respondent
(as opposed to preserving the public
interest in the secrecy of the criminal intelligence information).
When criminal intelligence is sought to be used in a proceeding, the statute
should require a notice to be given to this criminal
intelligence monitor, who
may then appear as
amicus curiae
in the proceeding, including any parts
. The criminal intelligence monitor must
be capable of being served all of the information provided to the Court, subject
to any anonymization
of informant identities (such as was the case with the
). The person leading
the criminal intelligence evidence should also be compelled to give the criminal
intelligence monitor a short
statement explaining what aspects of the evidence
offend the public interest against disclosure. In making submissions and
before the Court in respect of criminal intelligence evidence, the
criminal intelligence monitor must have a statutory requirement
to prioritise
its “representative function” over the “disclosure
the rights of the parties that cannot view that evidence. The criminal
intelligence monitor should also – subject
to appropriate orders of
secrecy or non-disclosure – be capable of cross-examining the witnesses
who generated the intelligence,
i.e. intelligence officers. Such a distinction
is important, as often intelligence staff are not called as witnesses to
proceedings
to protect their operational capability, yet they are the people who
make the “informed guesswork” which forms the bedrock
intelligence practice.
Finally, and perhaps most importantly, there will need to be a specific
provision for any criminal intelligence monitor to be capable
of receiving
instructions from the (co-)accused or respondent(s). Not only must these
communications be given the highest imprimatur
of protections from disclosure,
but such communications must be deemed inadmissible in all forms of proceedings
or exercise of statutory
Whilst the criminal
intelligence monitor should rightly be prohibited from
“on-disclosing” the nature or content of the
material given to it by
, it nonetheless
will be seized of an awareness of both the reasons for the secrecy of the
evidence (from its exercise of the test
function) but also its application to
the (co-)accused or respondent(s) subject to that evidence. In effect, the
criminal intelligence
monitor must be the circuit breaker between operational
intelligence officers and the parties about whom that intelligence has been
generated, whilst providing the Court with the best possible method for
admitting, weighting and then using that evidence to determine
inter partes
V: Conclusion
In the 2005 House of Lords case of
, Lord Steyn made numerous
deliberate references to the position of the appellant and the fictional
character Joseph K in Franz Kafka’s
. Though speaking of
autocratic and authoritarian European regimes in the early 20
century, some of Kafka’s words might ring disturbingly in the ears of
those subject to criminal intelligence evidence:
the legal records of the case, and above all the actual charge-sheets, were
inaccessible to the accused and his counsel, consequently
one did not know in
general, or at least did not know with any precision, what charges to meet in
the first plea; accordingly it
could be only by pure chance that it contained
really relevant matter ... In such circumstances the Defence was naturally in a
ticklish and difficult position. Yet that, too, was intentional. For the
Defence was not actually countenanced by the Law, but only
tolerated, and there
were differences of opinion even on that point, whether the Law could be
interpreted to admit such tolerance
Australia thus finds itself in a unique position, possessing the statutory
frameworks of three doctrines of secrecy. In criminal,
civil and even
administrative proceedings, there now exists fundamental potential for Joseph
K’s “secret legal records”
to have a foundation in reality.
Unsurprisingly, such blanket secrecy skews the needle of fairness too far in
favour of the State.
On the other hand, there exists a good policy position for
protecting police and security agencies ability to operate covertly, identifying
and neutralising threats to good public order and the safety of the body
politic. What is needed is an appropriate balance, and not
one determined by the
Judges of the land. What we have argued for here is the establishment by
Parliament of a criminal intelligence
monitor, who have the ability to achieve
this balance by reference to both law enforcement and law preservation.
In concluding, we would encourage further debate and research on this domain
of State secrecy and achieving sound policy by the legislature.
The rights to be
balanced are not equal, are highly complex, and constantly in a state of flux.
Yet, as Table 1 shows, Parliaments
are not likely to slow in their use of
criminal intelligence as a lever of control against offenders and lawbreakers.
catastrophic police state of which even Kafka would be ashamed, we
must strive to achieve the balance that properly permits the
Courts to assess
what we all – were we in the shoes of Joseph K – might “need
Dr Walker-Munro is a Senior
Research Fellow with the University of Queensland’s Law & the Future
of War research group.
Australian Federal Police,
Case Categorisation and Prioritisation Model (CCPM)
, 12 December 2020
<https://www.afp.gov.au/sites/default/files/PDF/ccpm-dec-2020.pdf>.
Gregory Rose, Diana
Nestorovska, ‘Terrorism and National Security Intelligence Laws: Assessing
Australian Reforms’
LawAsia Journal
; Anthony Reilly,
‘The Processes and Consequences of Counter-Terrorism Law Reform in
Australia: 2001-2005’
[2007] FlinJlLawRfm 1
The Flinders Journal of Law Reform
Australian Federal Police,
‘Home Affairs Portfolio established’ (Media release, 20 December
<https://www.afp.gov.au/news-media/media-releases/home-affairs-portfolio-established>.
Consistent with the Ministerial
Direction issued under
section 37(2)
Australian Federal Police Act
(Cth); see Australian Federal Police,
Ministerial Direction
December 2020)
<https://www.afp.gov.au/sites/default/files/PDF/MinisterialDirection-2020.pdf>.
Greg Martin, ‘No worries?
Yes worries! How New South W ales is creeping towards a police state’
Alternative Law Journal
, 163-167; Greg Carne, ‘Beyond
Terrorism: Enlarging the National Security Footprint Through the
Telecommunications Interception and Intelligence Services Legislation
Amendment Act 2011
(Cth)’ (2011) 13
Flinders Law Journal
177-239; Penny Crofts, Jason Prior, ‘The Proposed Re-Introduction of
Policing and Crime into the Regulation of Brothels
in New South Wales’
(2016) 28 Current Issues in Criminal Justice 1
, 209; Vicki Sentas, Michael
Grewcock, Criminal law as police power: Serious crime, unsafe protest and risks
to public safety (2018)
International Journal for Crime, Justice and Social
3, 75-90. DOI: 10.5204/ijcjsd.v7i3.554; Luke McNamara, Juliea
Quilter, Russell Hogg, Heather Douglas, Arlie Loughnan, David Brown,
‘Theorising Criminalisation: The Value of a Modalities Approach’
International Journal for Crime, Justice and Social Democracy
See for example Anna Talbot,
‘The use of secret evidence in civil and criminal proceedings’
Scott v Scott
R v Sussex Justices, Ex p McCarthy
[1923] EWHC KB 1
[1924] 1 KB 256
Lee v The Queen
195 CLR 594, 32.
Assistant Commissioner
Michael James Condon v Pompano Pty Ltd
[2013] HCA 7
Sankey v Whitlam
[1978] HCA 43
(1978) 142 CLR 1
Australian National
Airlines Commission v The Commonwealth
[1945] HCA 41
(1945) 71 CLR 29
Lanyon v the
Commonwealth
(1974) 129 CLR 650
R v Lewes Justices; Ex parte Home
[1972] 2 All ER 1057
Marks v Beyfus
[1890] UKLawRpKQB 125
Spargos Mining NL v Standard Chartered Aust Ltd
Attorney-General for New South Wales v Stuart
(1994) 34 NSWLR
ASIC v P Dawson Nominees Pty Ltd
[2008] FCAFC 123
(2008) 169 FCR 227.
Allister v R
[1984] HCA 85
154 CLR 404.
Evidence Act 1995
Evidence Act 2011
Evidence Act 1995
Evidence (National Uniform Legislation) Act 2011
Evidence Act
Evidence Act 2008
See for example
Elucidating the balance
described in
Conway v Rimmer
[1973] AC 388
[2013] HCA 7
(2013) 252 CLR
Al Rawi v Security
[2011] UKSC 34
[2012] 1 AC 531
, 580, 586, 592 and 595;
HT v The Queen
National Security
Information (Criminal and Civil Proceedings) Act 2004
Dan Meagher, ‘The
Common Law Principle of Legality in the Age of Rights’
[2011] MelbULawRw 16
Melbourne University Law Review
Anthony Gray,
‘Constitutionally Protecting the Presumption of Innocence’
[2012] UTasLawRw 1
University of Tasmania Law Review
, 132; Anthony Gray,
‘Constitutionally Heeding the Right to Silence in Australia’
Monash University Law Review
; Anthony Davidson Gray,
‘Forfeiture Provisions and the Criminal–Civil Divide’
New Criminal Law Review
; Anthony Gray, ‘Freedom of
Association in the Australian
Constitution
and the Crime of Consorting’
University of Tasmania Law Review
, 149. Internationally the
United Kingdom’s system was struck down in
A v United Kingdom
[2009] II Eur Court HR 137, 234 for being in contravention of art. 6 of the
Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms
(opened for signature 4 November
1950, 213 UNTS 221
, entered into force 3
September 1953).
See also Greg Martin,
‘Outlaw Motorcycle Gangs and Secret Evidence: Reflections on the Use of
Criminal Intelligence in the
Control of Serious Organised Crime in
Sydney Law Review
Serious and Organised
Crime (Control) Act 2009
(SA), ss 9 and 11.
Ibid, ss 5A, 9, 29 and 39Y.
Ibid, s 5A.
Martin, n 29.
See for example Bob Gosford,
‘Is the NT’s Hells Angels ban unlawful?’ (2013)
<https://blogs.crikey.com.au/northern/2013/04/08/is-the-nts-hells-angels-ban-unlawful/>;
Glynis Quinlan, ‘Police association:
Bikie gangs mocking Government and
putting Canberrans in “incredible danger” (2018)
https://the-riotact.com/police-association-bikie-gangs-mocking-government-and-putting-canberrans-in-incredible-danger/265188>;
Margaret White, Andrew Cappie-Wood,
Review of Victorian Criminal Organisation
Laws – Stage One
(Report to Victorian Parliament, 30 June 2020).
Marconi’s Wireless Telegraph Co Ltd v Commonwealth (No 2)
Rogers v Home Secretary
[1973] AC 388
[2006] NSWCCA 101
R v Collaery (No 7)
[2020] ACTSC 165.
Graham v Minister for
Immigration and Border Protection; Te Puia v Minister for Immigration and Border
[2017] HCA 33
, [33]; citing
Gypsy Jokers Motorcycle Club Inc v
Commissioner of Police
(2008) 234 CLR 532
Commissioner of Police
New South Wales v Gray
[2009] NSWCA 49
K-Generation Pty Ltd v Liquor
Licensing Court
[2009] HCA 4
(2009) 237 CLR 501
International Finance Trust Co Ltd v
New South Wales Crime Commission
[2009] HCA 49
(2009) 240 CLR 319
South Australia v
[2010] HCA 39
(2010) 242 CLR 1
ainohu v New South Wales
(2011) 243 CLR
Robinson v State of South
Australia (No 2)
[1931] AC 704.
R v Khazaal
[2006] NSWSC 1353
R v Collaery (No 7)
[2020] ACTSC 165.
[2019] HCA 40
See also the former
Criminal Organisation Act 2009
(Qld), s 59.
South Australia v
[2010] HCA 39
(2010) 242 CLR 1
ainohu v New South Wales
(2011) 243 CLR
Thomas v Mowbray
[2007] HCA 33
Al Rawi v Security Service
[2011] UKSC 34
[2012] 1 AC 531.
See for example the
exclusion of opinion evidence under the uniform
Evidence Acts
, Parts 3.2
and 3.3, though noting that the evidence of intelligence analysts are likely to
satisfy the ‘specialised knowledge
based on the person's training, study
or experience’ criterion to otherwise qualify as “expert
evidence” under
section 79.
Barton v Csidei
[1979] 1 NSWLR 524
Alister v R
[1984] HCA 85
(1983) 154 CLR 404
R v Rusmanto
[1997] NTSC 29
(1997) 6 NTLR 68
Woodroffe v National Crime
(1999) 168 ALR 585.
See generally
Security Information (Criminal and Civil Proceedings) Act 2004
Division 3 of
and Division 3 of
Kable v Director of
Public Prosecutions
[1996] HCA 24
(1996) 189 CLR 51.
Kirk v Industrial Court
(2010) 239 CLR 531.
K-Generation Pty Ltd v
Liquor Licensing Court
[2009] HCA 4
(2009) 237 CLR 501
South Australia v Totani
[2010] HCA 39
(2010) 242 CLR 1
Wainohu v New South Wales
(2011) 243 CLR 181;
Assistant Commissioner Michael James Condon v Pompano Pty Ltd
Rebecca Ananian-Welsh,
‘Knowing the case against you: secrecy is eroding fair process’
The Conversation
<https://theconversation.com/knowing-the-case-against-you-secrecy-is-eroding-fair-process-22686>.
See for example
Organised Crime (Control) Act 2008
(SA), s 5A.
Serious and Organised
Crime (Control) Act 2008
Australian Criminal
Intelligence Commission,
Australian Criminal Intelligence Management Strategy
(Australian Criminal Intelligence Commission, 2020).
Celine C Cocq,
‘“Information” and “intelligence”: The current
divergences between national legal systems
and the need for common (European)
notion’ (2017) 8
New Journal of European Criminal Law
3, 352-373.
<https://doi.org/10.1177/2032284417723098>
Adapted from United Nations
Office on Drugs and Crime,
Criminal Intelligence. Manual for Front-Line Law
Enforcement
(New York, United Nations, 2010), 1; United Nations Office on
Drugs and Crime,
Criminal Intelligence. Manual for Analysts
United Nations, 2011), 1.
Lyria Bennett Moses,
‘Who Owns Information? Law Enforcement Information Sharing as a Case Study
in Conceptual Confusion’
UNSW Law Journal
citing Department of the Prime Minister and Cabinet,
Australian Government
Public Data Policy Statement
(Policy Statement, 7 December 2015).
D'Arcy v Myriad Genetics
(2015) 258 CLR 334
For a comprehensive review,
see Bennett Moses, n 48, 615.
Criminal Organisation Act
, s 59 (now repealed);
Criminal Code
(Qld), s 86(3);
Organisations Control Act 2012
Crimes (Sentencing) Act
Crimes (Criminal Organisation Control) Act 2012
(NSW), s 3. WA and NT’s contribution to criminal intelligence adds the
disclosure or prejudicing of Police investigative, surveillance
information-gathering methods and procedures:
Criminal Organisations Control
Serious Crime Control Act 2009
Weapons Act 1990
(Qld), Schedule 2.
Registration to Work with
Vulnerable People Act 2013
(TAS), ss 3, 28, 30, 50, 51 and 53;
and Investigation Agents Act 2002
(TAS), ss 8 and 37.
Casino Act 1997
Child Safety (Prohibited Persons) Act 2016
Disability Inclusion Act 2018
Freedom of Information Act 1991
(SA), Schedule 1;
Gambling Administration Act 2019
Hydroponics Industry
Control Act 2009
Liquor Licensing Act 1997
Parliamentary Committees Act 1991
Serious Organised Crime
(Unexplained Wealth) 2009
Betting and Racing Act
Combat Sports Act 2013
Drug Supply Prohibition
Order Pilot Scheme Act 2020
Explosives Act 2003
Firearms Act 1996
Paintball Act
Tattoo Parlours Act 2012
(NSW). See also
Associations Act 2003
Firearms Act 1996
Sex Industry Offences Act 2005
K-Generation Pty Limited
v Liquor Licensing Court
[2009] HCA 4
Commissioner of Police v Sleiman
& AVS Group of Companies Pty Ltd & Ors
[2011] NSWCA 21
John Clarke,
the Inquiry into the Case of Dr Mohamed Haneef: Volume 1
Alister v The Queen
[1984] HCA 85
(1984) 154 CLR 404.
Sankey v Whitlam
[1978] HCA 43
(1978) 142 CLR 1
National Security
Information (Criminal and Civil Proceedings) Act 2004
Faheem Khalid Lodhi v
[2007] NSWCCA 360
, [66]-[68].
Explanatory Memorandum,
National Security Information (Criminal Proceedings) Bill 2004
Commonwealth,
Parliamentary Debates
, Senate, 30 November 2004, 80 (Christopher
Ellison); see also the example of the “Alan Johns” matter –
Independent
National Security Legislation Monitor,
Current Reviews
(Australian Government, 2020),
<https://www.inslm.gov.au/current-review-work>.
State Tr 199
Attorney-General v Briant
(1846) 15 M & W 169
[1890] UKLawRpKQB 125
(1890) 25 QBD 494
, 498 and 500;
Royal Women's Hospital v Medical
Practitioners Board of Victoria
[2006] VSCA 85
(2006) 15 VR 22.
D v National Society for
the Prevention of Cruelty to Children
[1978] AC 170
Alister v R
[1984] HCA 85
(1984) 154 CLR 404
AB v CD & EF
[2017] VSCA 338
(the “Lawyer
Aktiebolaget Hassle v
Commissioner of Patents (No 2)
(1989) 96 FLR 175
; applied in
Gypsy Jokers
Motorcycle Club Incorporated v Commissioner of Police
[2008] HCA 4
See for example Lord Diplock
, n 67, where he called the protection of informers a ‘rule of
Irrespective of whether this
opinion is deemed “expert” or not; see n 42.
[1986] HCA 39
(1986) 161 CLR 342
Explanatory Notes,
Serious and Organised Crime Legislation Amendment Bill 2016
Security Providers Act
ss 11(3)(b)
Liquor Act 1992
Motor Dealers and Chattel Auctioneers Act 2014
Racing Integrity Act 2016
Second-Hand Dealers and Pawnbrokers Act 2003
Tow Truck Act 1973
Weapons Act 1990
(Qld) still permits criminal intelligence to be
used, as the regulation of firearms and other weapons is restricted solely to
Explanatory Notes,
Serious and Organised Crime Legislation Amendment Bill 2016
(Qld), 1 and
[1986] HCA 39
(1986) 161 CLR 342
Assistant Commissioner
Michael James Condon v Pompano Pty Ltd
[2013] HCA 7
(2013) 252 CLR 38.
Russell v Russell
(1976) 134 CLR 495
Gypsy Jokers Motorcycle
Club Inc v Commissioner of Police
(2008) 234 CLR 532
K-Generation v
Liquor Licensing Court
[2009] HCA 4
(2009) 237 CLR 501
Assistant Commissioner Michael
James Condon v Pompano Pty Ltd
[2013] HCA 7.
Steven Churches,
‘Paradise Lost; But the Station is Always There’ (2010) 12
Flinders Law Journal
Russell v Duke of
[1949] 1 All ER 109
Re v K (Infants)
[1963] Ch 381
Nicholas v The Queen
[1998] HCA 9
(1998) 193 CLR 173
Re Nolan; Ex parte Young
[1991] HCA 29
(1991) 172 CLR 460
Grollo v Palmer
[1995] HCA 26
(1995) 184 CLR 348
[1996] HCA 18
(1996) 189 CLR 1
Bass v Permanent Trustee Co
[1999] HCA 9
(1999) 198 CLR 334
Wainohu v New South Wales
(2011) 243 CLR 181;
[2005] HCA 72
(2005) 225 CLR 88
Gypsy Jokers
Churches, n 81, 10.
For a comprehensive review,
see Rebecca Ananian-Welsh, ‘The Inherent Jurisdiction of Courts and the
Fair Trial’
Sydney Law Review
See Table 1.
[1944] HCA 5
(1944) 68 CLR 571
R v Carroll
[2002] HCA 55
(2002) 213 CLR 635.
Hussain v Elonex
[1999] EWCA Civ 1009
[1999] IRLR 420
where their Lordships said that a Court must act and
receive evidence in the open and that ‘[n]o custom or practice may
that basic principle’. Yet their Lordships said nothing of
Parliament’s power to do so.
Plaintiff S10/2011 v
Minister for Immigration and Citizenship
(2012) 246 CLR 636.
Greg Martin,
‘Jurisprudence of Secrecy: Wainohu and Beyond’ (2012) 14
Law Journal
Director-General of Security
[2005] FCA 1576
, [88]; this reasoning was not
disturbed on appeal:
Leghaei v Director-General of Security
[2007] FCAFC
, [51]-[55]. See also
Plaintiff M47/2012 v Director General of Security
(2012) 251 CLR 1.
Gypsy Jokers
34; see also Rebecca Ananian-Welsh, George Williams, ‘The New Terrorists:
The Normalisation and Spread of Anti-Terror Laws
in Australia’
Melbourne University Law Review
George Williams, David
Human Rights under the Australian
Constitution
(Oxford University
Press, 2013), 325-328.
Special Immigration
Appeals Commission Act 1997
(UK); an Act itself passed because of criticism
of the Home Office by the European Court of Human Rights in
Chahal v United
(1996) 23 EHRR.
Ibid, s 6 and
Immigration Appeals Commission (Procedure) Rules 2003
(UK), r 35.
Evan Nanopolous,
‘European Human Rights Law and the Normalisation of the “Closed
Material Procedure”: Limit or
, 913-944; see also
M v Secretary of State for the Home
[2004] EWCA Civ 324
[2004] 2 All ER 863
Charkaoui v Canada (Citizenship and
Immigration)
[2007] 1 SCR 350.
Rebecca Scott-Bray, Greg
Martin, ‘Closing down open justice in the United Kingdom’
Alternative Law Journal
, 126-127; Katherine Biber, ‘In Crime's
Archive - The Cultural Afterlife of Criminal Evidence’
British Journal of Criminology
Roberts (FC) v Parole
[2005] UKHL 45
; Mark Rix, ‘Counter-Terrorism and Information:
The NSI Act, fair trials and open, accountable government’ (2011) 25
Continuum: Journal of Media and Cultural Studies
Al Rawi and others v
The Security Service and others
[2011] UKSC 34
[2012] 1 AC 531.
Ibid, [35]; see also
Adrian Zuckerman, ‘Closed Material Procedure – Denial of Natural
Justice: Al Rawi v Security Service
[2011] UKSC 34
’ (2011) 30
A v United Kingdom
[2009] ECHR 301
[2011] UKSC 35
[2012] 1 AC 452.
Rebecca Scott Bray,
‘Executive Impunity and Parallel Justice? The United Kingdom Debate on
Secret Inquests and Inquiries’
(2012) 19(1)
Journal of Law and
Adam Tomkins,
‘National Security and the Due Process of Law’
Legal Problems
Kennedy v United
(2011) 52 EHRR 4.
AF v Secretary of
State for the Home Department
[2009] UKHL 28
, [38]; see also
Secretary of State for the Home Department
[2013] 3 CMLR 46
, 1274-1275.
Bank Mellat v Her
Majesty’s Treasury [No1]
[2013] 4 All ER 495.
Justice and Security
(UK), Part 2.
R (British Sky
Broadcasting Ltd) v Central Criminal Court
[2014] UKSC 17
Gulamhussein
and Tariq v the United Kingdom
(Application Nos 46538/11 and 3960/12)
unreported, 8 May 2018;
Director of Public Prosecutions
[2018] UKSC 33
; see also Mark Pope,
‘The UK Justice and Security
Bill 2012–2013: Using secrecy to legitimize the securitization of the
law’ (2019) 12
Media, War and Conflict
R (on the application
of Haralambous) v Crown Court at St Albans
[2018] UKSC 1
; for a fuller
analysis, see Daniella Lock, ‘A New Chapter in the Normalisation of Closed
Material Procedures’
Modern Law Review
AVS Group of Companies Pty Limited and Ors v Commissioner of
Police and Anor
[2010] NSWSC 109.
Martin, n 29, 501.
See also Adam Tomkins,
‘National Security and the Due Process of Law’
Legal Problems
Graham Hudson, Daniel
Alati, ‘Behind closed doors: Secret law and the special advocate system in
Canada’ (2018) 44
Queen’s Law Journal
Kent Roach, ‘Secret
Evidence and its Alternatives’, in Aniceto Masferrer (Ed.),
and the State of Permanent Legal Emergency: Security and Human Rights in
Countering Terrorism
(Springer, 2012), 179-200.
Pursuant to Part 7 of the
now-repealed
Criminal Organisations Act 2009
Queensland, Legislative
Assembly, Explanatory Notes to the
Criminal Organisation Bill 2009
Criminal Organisations
(Qld), s 86(c).
Though this does not
extend to making submissions to, or appearing before, a Court:
Independent
National Security Legislation Monitor Act 2010
Though noting that once
appointed the INSLM is subject only to limited direction by either the Prime
Minister or Attorney-General;
Independent National Security Legislation
Monitor Act 2010
Criminal Organisations Act 2009
(Qld), s 83.
Evan Nanopolous, n 100,
Talbot, n 7, 30; see also
, n 10, [54].
Roach, n 121, 186.
[1995] 1 WLR 613.
Lucy Line, David Plater,
‘Police, Prosecutors and Ex Parte Public Interest Immunity Claims: The Use
of Special Advocates in
University of Tasmania Law
Ombudsman Act 1976
(Cth), Division 1 of Part II;
Inspector-General of Intelligence and Security
(Cth), Division 3 of
See for example Richard
Centrelink’s automated debt raising and recovery system
(Commonwealth Ombudsman report, April 2017); Vivienne Thom,
Inquiry into
the attendance of legal representatives at ASIO interviews, and related
(Inspector-General of Intelligence and Security report, January
Cf. the limited powers of
influence over the INSLM.
Similar to, and subject
to the same “private practice” restrictions imposed on the COPIM in
Criminal Organisation Act 2009
Talbot, n 7.
Criminal Organisation
(Qld), s 88(1) cf. s 88(2).
Nanopolous, n 100.
‘“Intelligence Led Policing or Policing Led Intelligence?”
Integrating Volume Crime Analysis into Policing’
Journal of Criminology
, 188-203; Shane Holmquist,
Incorporating
Intelligence-Led Policing in Integrated Cross-Border Maritime Law Enforcement
Operations in British Columbia
(PhD Thesis, University of the Fraser Valley,
2017); David Bright, Chad Whelan, ‘On the relationship between goals,
and network design in multi-agency “fusion”
centres’ (2019) 42
Policing: An International Journal
Including by specific
enactments in the State and Territory
Evidence Acts
legal-professional privilege to communications with the criminal intelligence
monitor; see also Ian Dennis, ‘The Human
Rights Act and the Law of
Criminal Evidence: Ten Years On’
Sydney Law Review
See for example
Australian Law Reform Commission,
For Your Information: Australian Privacy
Law and Practice
(ALRC Report No 108, August 2008), 28.4.
Roberts, n 102, 95.
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (602 KB)
PDF format (494 KB)
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter