URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/journals/UNSWLawJlStuS/2025/32.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 15:46:44
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Willetts, Katherine --- "Mind the Gap: Protecting the Extended Mind Under the General Data Protection Regulation" [2025] UNSWLawJlStuS 32; (2025) UNSWLJ Student Series No 25-32
II CONTEXTUALISING THE PROTECTION OF THE (EXTENDED) MIND
MIND THE GAP: PROTECTING THE EXTENDED MIND UNDER THE
GENERAL DATA PROTECTION REGULATION
KATHERINE S WILLETTS*
I INTRODUCTION
The nature of the human mind has been a topic of inquiry, investigation, and
cultural imagination for millennia.
As the site of our thoughts and subjective experience of the world and
ourselves, the mind has accrued a special moral
At the same time, the mind
has been understood as being brain-based, residing internally within our
As such, its internality
has been a feature of its protection from scrutiny or interference.
However, conventional understandings of the mind are increasingly unsettled
by developments in neurotechnology and philosophy. Neurotechnologies
‘tools, methods and their associated devices for recording or modifying
neural signals’.
neurotechnologies increasingly blur boundaries between mind and machine,
philosophical perspectives such as the extended mind
thesis are drastically
reconfiguring where we understand the mind stops ‘and the rest of the
world begin[s]’.
particular, the extended mind thesis proposes that rather than being internal,
the mind is embedded and constituted by elements
of the external
environment.
Such a view vastly
expands what we could consider part of the mind, and consequently, expands what
should be protected as such.
The aim of this article is to examine the implications of the extended mind
thesis, assuming it is true, on the
General Data Protection Regulation
’) as a legal protection of mental data in the European
Surprisingly, despite being
‘the toughest privacy and security law in the
there has been
relatively little consideration of how the
will protect neural or
brain data,
let alone mental data
as understood according to the extended mind thesis. This article contributes to
the emerging literature on
this topic by assessing the
in light of
the extended mind thesis. This article specifically focuses on the legal
categorisation of mental data as ‘personal
and ‘special
categories of personal
as the gateways to
enlivening protection under the
This article is structured as follows. In Part II, I contextualise
conventional approaches to understanding the mind and its protection
necessary to appreciate the legal and normative implications of the extended
minds thesis. Part II also includes an introduction
to the extended mind thesis
and how this changes what is meant by mental data in the context of data
protection. In Part III, I analyse
the implications of the extended mind thesis
on the effectiveness of the
with a focus on the definitions of
personal data and special categories of personal data. In Part IV, I look more
closely at the
interactions between the extended mind thesis, the normative
status of the mind, and the gaps emerging in the
technologically neutral approach to data protection. Here, I consider how
extended mental data can be better protected
moving forward in the
and consider other legal approaches that can support the
safeguarding the extended mind.
II CONTEXTUALISING THE PROTECTION OF THE (EXTENDED)
To appreciate the implications of the extended mind thesis on the protection
of the mind under the
, an understanding of the relevant socio-legal
context is essential. This section contextualises popular understandings of the
how these views are challenged by neurotechnological and theoretical
developments, and finally, introduces what the extended mind
thesis entails in
the context of understanding mental data.
A Conventional Understandings of the Human Mind
Questions about the nature of the human mind has been a fundamental topic of
philosophical enquiry since
‘Western’ tradition, conjectures in philosophy of mind have been
shaped by Aristotelian dualisms that understand
the world in terms of
Accordingly, a topic
of discussion in philosophy of mind is where the mind ends and the rest of the
world begins, with a popular
position being that the mind resides internally
(ie, is brain-based) in contrast to the external
At the same time, there
is general agreement that the mind maintains a special status worth protecting:
the mind is tied to notions
of the self, privacy, personal integrity, freedom of
thought, and freedom of expression, notions which underpin fundamental human
rights and ideas of human
It is important to appreciate that the special status of the mind has also
been connected to ideas of the mind as being fundamentally
internal or
brain-based. Sjors Ligthart et al describe:
[The] information residing in an individual’s mind and brain is
potentially more sensitive and subjectively relevant to them
compared to
non-mental information, as it is otherwise inaccessible to others. The mind and
the brain are thus, even in comparison
with the difficulty in keeping other data
confidential, the ultimate seats of personal information and the
individual’s refuge
of privacy, to which special protection is to be
attributed.
As such, how we understand the mind (and what it is) influences how we choose
to protect it. This relationship is particularly important
sociotechnological landscape characterised by challenges and changes to our
historic understandings of ourselves and the world.
B Challenges and Changes
Conventional understandings of the human mind have been increasingly
challenged by developments in neurotechnology. Neurotechnologies
offer immense
medical and non-therapeutic benefits while simultaneously posing significant
threats to the privacy of the human mind.
For instance, brain-computer
interfaces (‘BCI’) collect and use neural data to action
BCI’s are able
to translate brain signals into various forms including language-based
communication as well as into gameplay
Neurotechnologies such
as these enable potentially unprecedented access to the collection and
processing of more mental data than
Some neurotechnologies
are also able to send data back into the brain, thereby potentially affecting
Such capabilities
suggest that once fictional stories about ‘mind control’ or mental
exploitation may underpin increasingly
and have been
considered by some to be a ‘greater threat to liberty than genetic
intervention’.
there has increasing concern for the impacts of the development of
neurotechnology on the privacy of the
Additionally, new technologies challenge our understanding of what
constitutes the mind. In short, neurotechnologies challenge historic
separations
between mind and machine, between human and
between ‘flesh
and bone’ and ‘bits and
This is most
poignantly demonstrated by way of example. In 2010 and 2011, the medical device
company NeuroVista Corporation funded
a trial on the use of BCIs to alert users
of oncoming epileptic seizures which would enable users to take preventative
In 2013, the trial was
terminated due to the company’s financial situation and devices were
explanted from users.
patient experienced ‘mourning’ at the removal of her
with her husband
willing to re-mortgage their house to be able to buy
She expressed that
‘[i]t was a part of
Such instances
highlight the blurring of boundaries between human and machine, thus challenging
our understanding of what the mind
is and where it stops. With the proliferation
of consumer health and tracking products combined with the growth of the
of Things’, we can expect that such instances of
human-machine symbiosis may become increasingly common such that ‘it
be increasingly hard for anyone to deny that such devices and the information
they contain are proper parts of our
However, it is important to appreciate that most approaches to the protection
of the mind in law proceed on an assumption that the
mind is purely internal and
brain-based. To illustrate this point, I highlight the introduction of bills to
protect ‘neural
data’ in 2024 under amended versions of state-based
of the mind focused on ‘neural data’; that is, brain-based and
nervous system-based data.
Although, as aforementioned, neurotechnologies are challenging the historic
boundaries of the brain, emphasising the need for more
appropriate
methodological and legal approaches to protecting the mind.
Fortunately, there is growing interest in understanding the human as
‘distributed and networked rather than centred’ in
research such as science and technology
Such approaches are
reflexive and actively investigate the ways in which there are different
understandings of ‘our place as
humans beings in the
Such paradigms
appreciate that humans are fundamentally physical beings within networks of
physical objects, things, and elements
environment.
Margaret Davies
notes that such views reflect historic feminist thought as well as First Nations
ontologies which have understood
humans as being fundamentally connected to each
other and the earth for thousands of
The growing interest in
these understandings of the world in Western thought marks a shift with
significant ramifications for understandings
of ourselves and our place in the
world. This includes changing understandings of what the mind is, as exemplified
by the extended
mind thesis.
C The Extended Mind Thesis
Put forward most famously by philosophers Andy Clark and David Chalmers, the
extended mind thesis (‘EMT’) claims that
the ‘mind extends
into the world’
the environment has an active role in driving cognitive processes, thereby
constituting the mind.
central premise of the EMT is that ‘if a part of the world functions as a
process which, were it done in the head, we would
have no hesitation in
recognizing as part of the cognitive process, then that part of the world is ...
part of the cognitive process’
and, therefore, part of the
Under the EMT, for something to be part of the mind there must be a
‘high degree of trust, reliance, and accessibility’
between a human
and a feature in the external
environment.
Chalmers’ explanatory example of how this works focuses on Otto, a man who
lives with Alzheimer’s disease and
carries a notebook with him
everywhere.
Otto adds new
information to his notebook as he learns it, and then looks it up when he needs
it such that ‘the notebook plays
the role usually played by a biological
Under the EMT,
Otto’s notebook is actually a part of his mind; a part of his mind
constituted by the external environment.
More contemporary examples of extended
mind elements may include smartphones, apps, and elements of the digital world,
on how they are used. While Otto’s notebook in Clark’s and
Chalmers’ example refers to pen and paper, there is
no reason why
Otto’s notebook (a substitute for biological memory) could not be digital.
Evidently, the EMT drastically expands
what we understand to constitute the
It follows then that a definition of mental data, according to the EMT,
includes not just neural or brain data, but any data in the
external environment
that constitutes, at least part of, of a cognitive process. This definition is
markedly more extensive than
definitions of neural data provided in the examples
of the state-based legal protections introduced in California and Colorado that
attempt to protect the contents of the human mind. This expansion of the mind
obviously has implications for any attempt to protect
mental data. It is these
implications, with a specific focus on the
, that I now consider.
III THE PROTECTION OF MENTAL DATA UNDER THE
This section analyses the implications of the EMT on the protection of data
. This section investigates whether extended mental data
can pass the gateway into
protection, and additionally, whether the
protections afforded are adequate.
A Mental Data as Personal Data
At present, the protection of data of any kind in the
the characterisation of data under particular categories which invoke special
protections. In the
, the technologically-neutral gateway for data
protection is the characterisation of data as ‘personal data’.
data is defined as:
[A]ny information relating to an identified or identifiable natural person
... an identifiable natural person is one who can be identified,
directly or
indirectly, in particular by reference to an identifier such as a name, an
identification number, location data, an online
identifier or to one or more
factors specific to the physical, physiological, genetic, mental, economic,
cultural or social identity
of that natural
If data is categorised as personal data, this kicks article 5 into gear to
provide protections for the processing of personal data.
Processing is defined
[A]ny operation or set of operations which is performed on personal data or
on sets of personal data, whether or not by automated
means, such as collection,
recording, organisation, structuring, storage, adaptation or alteration,
retrieval, consultation, use,
disclosure by transmission, dissemination or
otherwise making available, alignment or combination, restriction, erasure or
destruction
Article 5 protections mandate that, among other things, personal data
processing must be: lawful, fair, and transparent in relation
to the data
subject; collected and processed for specific, explicit, and legitimate
purposes; and that the data is processed in a
way that ensures appropriate
security of the data.
Thus, the key elements of data protection under the
simplified into three elements. First, data must be ‘personal data’
per the definition in article 4(1). This is
the gateway for protection under the
. Second, that data must be being ‘processed’ per the
definition in article 4(2). Third, if the data is personal data
processed, then under the
this data must be processed in compliance
with article 5 mandates.
The central question regarding the protection of extended mental data is thus
whether the definition of ‘personal data’
is flexible and wide
enough to cover the components of the extended mind. The EMT does not make clear
categorical delineations between
what the mind is and what it isn’t. Clark
and Chalmers acknowledge that they ‘do not think that there are
categorical
answers to all of these questions, and will not give
In thinking about
smartphones, for instance, certain data on these devices that may be part of the
extended mind will likely be protected
at some level. However, the question here
is whether apps, such as note-taking or calendar apps (ie, apps with information
for non-professional
or non-commercial use), ‘with their increasing
ability to contribute to the calculation, encoding, storage and retrieval of
detailed beliefs, memories, plans and desires’, also count as personal
In the face of such
uncertainty, it seems the determination of whether extended mental data will be
personal data must be addressed
on a case-by-case basis. However, the broader
the scope of what personal data covers, the more we can anticipate will be
Fortunately, the scope of personal data is promisingly wide. The European
Court of Justice has determined that personal data is a
broad concept intended
to capture a variety of data.
Nowak v Data Protection Commissioner
, the Court expressed
that the term ‘any information’ in the definition of ‘personal
data’ reflects:
[The] aim of the EU legislature to assign a wide scope to that concept, which
is not restricted to information that is sensitive or
private, but potentially
encompasses all kinds of information, not only objective but also subjective, in
the form of opinions and
assessments, provided that it ‘relates’ to
the data subject.
The requirement that something ‘relates’ to an individual is also
a broad concept as something ‘relates’ to
the data subject if
‘the information, by reason of its content, purpose or effect, is linked
to a particular person’.
It has also been clarified that the provision is about protecting the
‘content of the
This is encouraging
as if the focus is more on the content of data rather than its form, the scope
could capture external features of the mind like Otto’s
notebook so long as the information in these elements ‘relates
an individual. On this evidence, it seems that extended mental data could
constitute personal data.
The next consideration is whether the extended mental data as personal data
is processed, and thereby subject to article 5 protections.
Like the definition
of personal data, ‘processing’ has a wide scope. The definition of
processing is also technologically
neutral but offers a practical delineation
between data which ought to be protected and that which should not under the
based on processing purposes and contexts. Under article 5,
Otto’s notebook may not be protected in his own hands but would
protected in the hands of an investigator working to figure out where he lives.
This is because the data in Otto’s notebook
is no longer for his personal
use, but re-contextualised as data processed as part of a professional
investigation.
example, processing could protect against Neurovista’s BCI gathering
information about the mind that goes beyond
its stated purpose to alert users of
oncoming epileptic seizures. In these examples, the mental data in question is
no longer merely
personal but indeed being processed for commercial or
professional purposes.
However, the emphasis on purpose and context poses challenges for the
protection of mental data, which we generally take to be worth
irrespective of the context or purpose of its use. The European Commission has
explicitly stated that the
‘does not apply to data processed
by an individual for purely personal reasons or for activities carried out
means that unless elements of the processing of the extended mind elements are
connected ‘to some professional or commercial
activity’ they will
not be protected.
While a very practical approach to technologically-neutral data protection
that ultimately applies to all kinds of data to be protected,
it seems morally
unsatisfactory to leave mental data without a baseline protection. In theory, I
could read Otto’s notebook
for personal reasons – say, out of
interest – and the
would offer no protections or recourse for
Otto. Under the EMT, this is morally equivalent to saying that I could
(hypothetically)
read Otto’s biological, brain-based memory for personal
reasons, and that the
would offer no protections despite being one
of the leading data protection laws in the world. There is clearly a normative
in the way the purposive and context driven elements of the personal data
processing provisions under Article 5 and the protection
of personal data
interact with the moral implications of the EMT. As such, it is necessary to
consider whether better protections
may be afforded under the
through the characterisation of extended mental data as a special category of
personal data which are ordinarily prohibited from
processing.
Mental Data as a Special Category of Personal
There is an additional level of protection the
affords to more
sensitive types of data under the classification of ‘special categories of
personal data’. Recital 15
specifically states that a high
level of protection for sensitive data is regarded as necessary since these data
‘are, by their
nature, particularly sensitive in relation to fundamental
rights and freedoms’.
acknowledged earlier in this paper, the mind, and thus mental data, is
fundamentally connected to rights and freedoms related
to privacy, freedom of
thought, freedom of expression, and human dignity. The classification of mental
data as a special category
of personal therefore represents a promising route to
the protect extended mind at a baseline level.
The question here, therefore, is whether mental data falls within this
classification. To qualify, data must be ‘personal data’
article 4(1) and then considered in light of article 9. Under article 9,
processing of data is outright prohibited if: (a)
processing the data reveals
information about racial or ethnic origin, political opinions, religious or
philosophical beliefs, or
trade union members; (b) the data is genetic data; (c)
the data is biometric data for the purpose of uniquely identifying a natural
person; (d) the data concerns health; or, (e) the data concerns a natural
person’s sex life or sexual
orientation.
According to these provisions, extended mental data may be captured by (a),
(c), (d) or (e). With regard to (a) and (e), Marcello
Ienca and Gianclaudio
Malgieri highlight:
For what concerns data revealing information related to data subjects’
[an individual in question’s] thoughts or memories,
these data are not
automatically sensitive data just because they refer to the ‘mental
sphere’ of the subject. However,
if –considering their content and
the context and purpose of the data processing it is likely that these kinds of
reveal information about religious beliefs, political opinions, and
sex life or sexual orientation, they are sensitive data under
Article 9(1)
Unfortunately, this means that we run into the same issue as above: the
protection of mental data under situations in (a) and (e)
is therefore context
and purpose dependent. Considering (c), some parts of the extended mind could be
considered biometric data.
Neurodata, for example, could be considered sensitive
data if collected through biometric tools for the purposes of
identification.
However, this
leaves out non-biometric data, such as Otto’s notebook, that may well
constitute the mind, and again is purpose
and context dependent. Finally,
extended mental data maybe captured if it is considered data concerning health.
Data concerning health
is defined as personal data ‘related to the
physical or mental health of a natural person...which reveal information about
his or her health status’.
This provides some promise. Stephen Rainey et al identify that this could
capture neurotechnological devices working with brain data
used in healthcare
and research settings.
many aspects of the mind may be too far from indicating mental health to be
captured and are not necessarily brain-based,
or indeed used in medical or
research settings. Again, the protection of mental data generally is hindered by
purpose and context
considerations.
Furthermore, it is worth considering how the protection of data may look even
if mental data is considered a special category of personal
data. Even if the
extended mind was captured in some instances by this category, the prohibitions
in article 9 may not apply due
to the exceptions in article 9(2). The most
interesting exception in the context of the extended mind is the exception
relating to
‘personal data ... manifestly made public by the data
This provision
has not been interpreted in case law or further defined in the regulation. Lack
of clarification around what is precisely
meant by ‘public’ here
creates significant complications for the extended mind where aspects of the
mind may indeed be
public in the sense they are out in the world. However, there
is some (promising) indication that not such a wide view will be taken
courts. The
Handbook on European Data Protection
provides that
this exception ‘must be construed strictly and as requiring the data
subject to deliberately make his or her
personal data public’ which is to
say the data subject would need to make a ‘deliberate, affirmative act to
personal data
If the data of
the mind is public by nature, this is unlikely to amount to a deliberate,
affirmative act; rather, it would be a given
by nature of its existence. On this
evidence then, it seems promising this exception would not apply to undermine
mental data that
is captured under the article 9(1) prohibition. It is worth
emphasising though, that even if it was considered public under this
protections in article 5 will still apply as the threshold for personal data is
met. However, as previously discussed,
this is not so reassuring. Where does
this leave us then?
IV ADDRESSING GAPS IN THE
Evidently, the approach in
taken to defining personal data and
special categories of personal data reflects a technologically-neutral
methodology accompanied
by a purpose and context-driven determination of whether
data and processing activities warrant protection under the
technologically-neutral approach benefits the EMT in some ways. The adaptability
and flexibility afforded by the
’s technological neutrality and
focus on content of information (rather than form) creates a wide scope that
adapts to changing
technologies and
understandings.
This creates
allows for the elements of extended mind to be potentially captured, regardless
of the form of data that the mind’s
contents may take.
However, difficulty emerges in considering the purpose and context-driven
protection of data in the
, especially with regard to the
characterisation of processing and the associated article 5 and article 9
protections. That is, even
if data is considered personal data and thus passes
the gateway into the
, this may be insufficient to adequately protect
the extended mind. It is morally concerning that mental data, considered some of
the most sensitive data, is subject to protection based on purpose and context.
Thus, the weakness of the
approach in the context of the extended
mind is that it loses out on the expression of normative values in the
protection of mental
data. In short, there is a ‘clear conceptual and
normative gap: even though most people would agree that mental data are the
intimate and sensitive ... not all mental data are protected under the strict
regime of sensitive data’.
Indeed, the importance of normative considerations in the protection of mental
data cannot be understated given that if people gained
access to elements of our
extended mind, ‘such as our smartphones or laptops, they would not be
committing a typical violation
of privacy – they would be looking into our
‘the greater the extent to which the skull as a natural barrier of the
mind becomes permeable’, the greater
the impetus to configure boundaries
around the mind to protect it.
Thus, to preserve mental privacy as we know it, mental data should be equally
inaccessible as the contents of our
currently support this.
There are a few considerations regarding where we can go from here. First,
the normative gap in the
highlights the need for further
consideration of mental data under the
has capacity
to recognise the inherent value and protection of specific types of data –
for example, genetic data. One option
is to draw analogies to the special status
of genetic data in the
and create comparable protections for mental
For instance, article 9
prohibitions apply to genetic data not because of its use or purpose context,
but by virtue of being genetic
data; that is, by virtue of the type of data it
is. However, no such protection exists for mental data. Perhaps what we need is
technologically-neutral approach with a data-specific approach for mental
data. Such an approach is also supported by analogy, as
there is significant
similarity between genetic and mental data as highly individualistic and morally
valuable types of human data.
Indeed, the protection of genetic data as a
specific type of data has developed in the face of the Biotechnology Revolution
century, and we are comparably facing the revolution
of neuroscience and data today.
Such a prohibition on the processing of mental data akin to that for genetic
data would therefore better reflect the implications
of the EMT.
However, the
has limitations that cannot be specifically overcome
by data-specific protection for mental data alone. Under the EMT, the very
technologies
threatening the mind could become protected as constituents of the
mind. That is, some of the technologies criticised for being for
invasive on the mind, such as certain BCIs, would then become protected
themselves.
Additionally, there
are questions about who owns extended mind data in the context of digital mind
elements. This is especially the
case if extended mental data is stored or
created on applications or subscription services operated by private companies.
individual own the contents of their mind if it is on an app owned by a
company? Could it be the case that people might not even
own aspects of their
own minds? These are highly problematic implications of the EMT, and relying on
alone does nothing to address these issues. This is because this
discussion of the protection of the mind is situated within broader
our understanding of how we relate to machines and devices, such as the blurring
of boundaries between human and device,
as discussed in Part I of this paper.
Thus, any attempt to better protect the mind must also involve a deeper
reflection on the ‘formal
constitution’ of the law itself, and a
consideration of ‘the cultural imaginaries and symbolisms that shape
and are shaped by it.
As such, only focussing on legal protections under the
current or potential future states, will do little do address these pressing
In light of these circumstances, the
seems ill-equipped to be
tasked with providing exhaustive protection of the extended mind. As such, we
will need to look elsewhere
for additional or complimentary legal regulations.
Indeed, the genetic data provisions in the
are also situated within
a context of both additional international and domestic laws protecting genetic
information as well as its
As such, protections for the contents of the extended mind could also be
afforded by other, even new, regulatory approaches. Neurorights
are one such
emerging legal modality with the potential to protect mental
There is even a specific
neuroright to mental privacy which states that ‘[i]ndividuals must have
the ability to keep data about
their mental activity protected from unwanted
disclosure’.
further research in this space is required, and must be informed by how these
emerging legal approaches interact with our
changing understanding of the human
as more-than, and more specifically, the idea of the mind as extended. Of
course, there is also
scope for non-legal regulatory measures to be considered
in this context, such as protection by design. Such options are beyond the
of this paper but further emphasise that there is no shortage of questions and
concerns regarding the protection of the extended
mind to be investigated.
V CONCLUSION
On the available evidence, the
therefore fails to provide
adequate and convincing protection of mental data as understood according to the
EMT. Mental data may
constitute personal data and thereby pass the gateway of
consideration under the
. However, the purposive and context-driven
approach to technologically-neutral data protection in the
ultimately undermines effective data protection for mental data that is
consistent with moral and normative understandings of the
mind. Such a normative
gap in the protections afforded by the
is highlighted by the
operation of the personal data protections, considerations for processing, and
special categories of personal
data provisions. In looking forward, alternative
regulatory approaches both within the
, such as data-specific
provisions for mental data analogous to those for genetic data, and outside the
, such as emerging neurorights frameworks, ought to be considered. As
the sociotechnological landscape continues to change in this
context, continued
research and vigilance will be essential to protecting the mind if we indeed
hold it so dear.
* Bachelor of Science/Bachelor of Laws, University of New South Wales,
Sydney. The author would like to thank Associate Professor
Kayleen Manwaring at
the Faculty of Law & Justice of the University of New South Wales for their
Rajeev Lochan Tripathi, ‘What is Mind in Philosophy: An
Introduction’ (2024) 8(6)
International Journal of Scientific Research
in Engineering and Management
Philosophy of Mind
(Westview Press, 3
Sjors Ligthart et al,
‘Minding Rights: Mapping Ethical and Legal Foundations of
“Neurorights”’ (2023) 32(4)
Cambridge Quarterly of
Healthcare Ethics
461, 466; Tripathi (n 1) 4–5, 11.
Rafael Yuste,
‘Advocating for Neurodata Privacy and Neurotechnology Regulation’
(2023) 18(10)
Nature protocols
2869, 2869.
Andy Clark and David Chalmers,
‘The Extended Mind’ (1998) 58(1)
Regulation (EU) 2016/679 of
the European Parliament and of the Council of 27 April 2016 on the Protection of
Natural Persons with
Regard to the Processing of Personal Data and on the Free
Movement of Such Data, and Repealing Directive 95/46/EC
General Data
Protection Regulation
) [2016] OJ L 119/1 (‘
Ben Wolford, ‘What Is
, the EU’s New Data Protection Law?’,
Page) <https://gdpr.eu/what-is-gdpr>.
See Marcello Ienca and
Gianclaudio Malgieri, ‘Mental Data Protection and the GDPR’ (2022)
Journal of Law and the Biosciences
1; Spyridon Orestis
Palermos, ‘Data, Metadata, Mental Data? Privacy and the Extended
Mind’ (2023) 14(2)
AJOB Neuroscience
84; Stephen Rainey
et al, ‘Is the European Data Protection Regulation Sufficient to Deal with
Emerging Data Concerns Relating
to Neurotechnology?’ (2020)
Journal of Law and the Biosciences
Ibid art 9(1).
Tripathi (n 1) 3.
Donna Haraway,
Cyborgs, and Women: The Reinvention of Nature
(Routledge, 1991)
It is beyond the scope of
this article to detail the development of the concept of the mind in Western
thought. For a review of
the construction of the mind in philosophy of mind, see
generally Rajeev Lochan Tripathi, ‘What Is Mind in Philosophy: An
Introduction’
(2024) 8(6)
International Journal of Scientific Research
in Engineering and Management
Australian Human Rights
Commission,
Protecting Cognition: Background Paper on Human Rights and
Neurotechnology
(Background Paper, March 2024) 11–12;
Declaration of Human Rights
, GA Res 217A (III), UN GAOR, UN Doc A/810 (10
December 1948) arts 1, 3;
International Convention on Civil and Political
, opened for signature 16 December
1966, 999 UNTS 171
(entered into
force 23 March 1976) art 18, art 19.
Ligthart et al (n 3) 466.
Frederic Gilbert, Marcello
Ienca and Mark Cook, ‘How I Became Myself after Merging with a Computer:
Does Human-Machine Symbiosis
Raise Human Rights Issues?’ (2023)
Brain Stimulation
See Ujwal Chaudhary et al,
‘Spelling Interface Using Intracortical Signals in a Completely Locked-in
Patient Enabled via Auditory
Neurofeedback Training’ (2022)
Nature Communications
1236; Salvador Dura-Bernal,
‘Introduction to Part I: State of the Art and Challenges of
Neurotechnology’ in UNESCO,
University of Milan-Bicocca: Department of
Business and Law, and State University of New York,
The Risks and Challenges
of Neurotechnologies for Human Rights
(UNESCO Open Access, 2023) 10,
10–11; Lewis Gordon, ‘Brain-Computer Gaming Exists, though Ethical
Questions Loom over
The Washington Post
(Web Page, 16
December 2020)
<https://www.washingtonpost.com/video-games/2020/12/16/brain-computer-gaming/>.
Morse, ‘Neuroethics: Neurolaw’ (2017) in
The Oxford Handbook
of Topics in Philosophy
(Oxford Academic, 2014) 19.
Sonja van Wichelen and Marc
Biolegality: A Critical Introduction
Macmillan, 2024) 129.
Morse (n 19) 20.
See Panel for the Future of
Science and Technology, and European Parliamentary Research Service Scientific
Foresight Unit,
The Protection of Mental Privacy in the Area of Neuroscience:
Societal, Legal and Ethical Challenges
(Study, July 2024); Jared Genser,
Stephen Damianos and Rafael Yuste,
Safeguarding Brain Data: Assessing the
(Report, April
2024); Australian Human Rights Commission,
Protecting Cognition: Background
Paper on Human Rights and Neurotechnology
(Background Report, March
Margaret Davies,
‘Distributed Cognition, Distributed Being, and the Foundations of
Law’ in Marc de Leeuw and Sonja van
Wichelen (eds)
Personhood in the
Age of Biolegality
(Palgrave Macmillan, 2019) 205, 206.
Adrian F Ward,
‘Supernormal: How the Internet Is Changing Our Memories and Our
Minds’ (2013) 24(4)
Psychological Inquiry
Mark J Cook et al,
‘Prediction of Seizure Likelihood with a Long-Term, Implanted Seizure
Advisory System in Patients with
Drug-Resistant Epilepsy: A First-in-Man
Study’ (2013) 12(6)
Lancet Neurology
Gilbert, Ienca and Cook (n
Spyridon Orestis Palermos,
‘Data, Metadata, Mental Data? Privacy and the Extended Mind’ (2023)
AJOB Neuroscience
See Colorado House Bill
24-1058 2024 (CO);
Colorado Privacy Act 2017
(CO); California Senate Bill
1223 2024 (CA);
California Consumer Privacy Act 2018
Davies (n 24) 206.
Ibid 206, citing: Mary
Graham, ‘Some Thoughts about the Philosophical Underpinnings of Aboriginal
Worldviews’ (2008)
Australian Humanities Review
181; Ambelin
Kwaymullina and Blaze Kwaymullina, ‘Learning to Read the Signs: Law in an
Indigenous Reality’ (2010) 34(2)
Journal of Australian Studies
Bawaka Country et al, ‘Co-becoming Bawaka: Towards a Relational
Understanding of Place/Space’ (2016) 40(4)
Progress in Human
455; Kirsten Anker, ‘Law as ... Forest: Eco-Logic, Stories
and Spirits in Indigenous Jurisprudence’
Law Text Culture
Clark and Chalmers (n 5)
Ibid art 4(2).
Ibid art 5.
Clark and Chalmers (n 6)
Palermos (n 31) 87.
Peter Nowak v Data
Protection Commissioner
(Court of Justice of the European Union, C-434/16,
ECLI:EU:C:2017:994, 20 December 2020) [33] (‘
College van burgemeester en wethouders van Rotterdam v M. E. E.
(Court of Justice of the European Union, C-553/07,
EU:C:2009:293, 7 May 2009) [59].
Richie Koch, ‘What Is
Considered Personal Data under the EU GDPR?’
<https://gdpr.eu/eu-gdpr-personal-data/>.
This hypothetical situation
is inspired by examples used to explain the purposes of processing and personal
data under the
. See Koch (n 51).
‘Data Protection
Explained’,
European Commission
<https://commission.europa.eu/law/law-topic/data-protection/data-protection-explained_en>.
(n 6) recital
Ibid art 9(1).
Ienca and Malgieri (n 9)
(n 7) recital
Stephen Rainey et al,
‘Is the European Data Protection Regulation Sufficient to Deal with
Emerging Data Concerns Relating
to Neurotechnology?’ (2020)
Journal of Law and the Biosciences
European Union Agency for
Fundamental Rights, European Court of Human Rights and European Data Protection
Supervisor, Handbook on
European Data Protection Law (Publications Office of the
European Union, 2018) 162, cited in Edward S Dove and Jiahong Chen, ‘What
Does it Mean for a Data Subject to Make Their Personal Data ‘Manifestly
Public’? An Analysis of
Article 9(2)(e)’ (2021) 11(2)
International Data Privacy Law
(n 7) recital
Lyria Bennett Moses,
‘Recurring Dilemmas: The Law’s Race to Keep Up with Technological
Change’ [2007]
University of New South Wales Faculty of Law Research
Ienca and Malgieri (n 9)
Palermos (n 31) 84, citing
Peter B Reiner and Saskia K Nagel, ‘Technologies of the Extended Mind:
Defining the Issues’
in Judy Illes (ed)
Neuroethics: Anticipating the
(Oxford University Press, 2017) 108; Clark and Chalmers (n 5) 18.
Ibid 656, quoting
Jan-Christoph Bublitz, ‘The Nascent Right to Psychological Integrity and
Mental Self-Determination’
in Andreas von Arnauld, Kerstin von der
Decken and Mart Susi (eds)
The Cambridge Handbook of New Human Rights:
Recognition, Novelty, Rhetoric
(Cambridge University Press, 2020)
Palermos (n 31) 90.
(n 7) recital
van Wichelen and de Leeuw
Vera Tesink et al,
‘Right to Mental Integrity and Neurotechnologies: Implications of the
Extended Mind Thesis’ (2024)
Journal of Medical Ethics
Davies (n 24) 207.
Convention on
Human Rights and Biomedicine
opened for signature on 4 April 1997
(entered into force 1 December 1999); Françoise Baylis et al,
‘Human Germline and Heritable Genome Editing: The Global
Landscape’ (2020) 3(5)
CRISPR Journal
See Marcello Ienca and
Roberto Andorno, ‘Towards New Human Rights in the Age of Neuroscience and
Neurotechnology’ (2017)
Life Sciences, Society and
The Neurorights Foundation,
‘Mission: The Five Neurorights’
The Neurorights Foundation
(Web Page) <https://neurorightsfoundation.org/mission>.
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (87.5 KB)
PDF format (297 KB)
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter