URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/journals/IntJlCrimJustSocDem/2025/21.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 15:02:59
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Maihi, Natalie Heni --- "Justice for the Invisible, Unspeakable and Inevitable: An Abolition Feminism Analysis of Sexual Violence and the International Criminal Court" [2025] IntJlCrimJustSocDem 21; (2025) 14(2) International Journal for Crime, Justice and Social Democracy 143
Flat-Pack Reintegration? National Ownership, Promises and Flaws in
Cameroon’s Disarmament and Demobilization Program for Ex-Boko
Lydie C. Belporo
Université de Montréal, Canada
DDR program; violent extremism; appropriation; Boko
Introduction
escalation of extremist violence in recent years has necessitated the
development of numerous public policies, particularly in
an international
context, where programs aimed at managing the reintegration of former combatants
have gained prominence. In the
African setting, where extremist groups like Boko
Haram operate, efforts to structure the return and reintegration of individuals
who have disengaged from violence are still to be explored. Boko Haram has
played a central role in destabilizing the Lake Chad Basin
region. The group has
inflicted persistent high-intensity violence, contributing to a 33% rise in
terrorist attack casualties across
several Sahelian and Lake Chad Basin
countries over the past year (Institute for Economics & Peace, 2024). The
ongoing violence
has killed over 30,000 individuals, while conflict, extreme
poverty, and climate change have displaced millions. Designated as a
organization by the United Nations Security Council on May 22, 2014, Boko Haram
further entrenched its international notoriety
by pledging allegiance to the
Islamic State in 2015.
Against this backdrop, Cameroon introduced a Disarmament, Demobilization, and
Reintegration (DDR) program as an institutional response
to reintegrate former
Boko Haram affiliates into civilian life. DDR programs, historically implemented
in post-conflict settings,
aim to facilitate the reintegration of ex-combatants.
According to a 2022 report by the United Nations (UN) Secretary-General, DDR
efforts must align with national support mechanisms while adhering to relevant
UN Security Council resolutions and international
counterterrorism instruments.
This alignment reflects the evolving nature of DDR, moving beyond conventional
frameworks to accommodate
the complexities of contemporary armed conflicts.
DDR programs have evolved significantly, adapting to the growing complexities
of post-conflict transitions. Traditionally, they focused
on post-civil war
reintegration, consisting of three key stages: disarmament, the collection and
disposal of weapons; demobilization,
the formal discharge of combatants from
armed groups; and reintegration, the social, economic, and political
incorporation of ex-combatants
into their communities. However, despite relative
successes and although nearly two-thirds of African nations have implemented DDR
programs, many have struggled to enhance security and rehabilitate combatants
effectively (Muggah, 2010). Scholars such as Pugel
(2009); Verkoren et al.,
(2010) have examined the effectiveness of these programs, with some arguing that
standardized approaches
often neglect local sociopolitical contexts (Munive,
2013). A growing body of research emphasizes the need for DDR programs to go
beyond technical disarmament measures and incorporate broader social
reintegration mechanisms. A major critique of DDR efforts is
their rigid,
standardized approaches that fail to address the nuances of hybrid and
asymmetric violence (Munive & Stepputat,
2015; Sharif, 2018). In conflicts
without peace agreements, defectors still need to be reintegrated, so DDR
frameworks that are tailored
to the specific situation are very important.
Public instruments must also be able to adapt to these needs. While these
studies highlight
DDR’s evolving role, the million-dollar question
remains: how can national ownership of DDR instruments aimed at reintegration
effectively ensured for persons associated with extremist and violent armed
groups? To address this challenge, a deeper examination
is necessary. According
to the terms of the Integrated Standards (Interagency Working Group on
Disarmament, Demobilization, and Reintegration
(2019), national ownership of DDR
processes implies their alignment with national strategies but, above all,
support from a wide
range of actors at all levels—national, regional, and
local. This article examines the realities of national ownership in the
implementation of DDR programs. Criminology offers insights into disengagement,
particularly through desistance theories (Maruna,
2001; Shover, 1996), which
describe the gradual process by which individuals cease engaging in criminal or
deviant behaviour through
identity shifts, structural opportunities, and social
bonds that encourage reintegration. However, an integrated approach is needed
understand the processes of exiting violent groups (Walker et al., 2013). An
effective framework can therefore integrate criminology,
sociology, and
political science to account for the broader institutional and policy dynamics
that shape reintegration processes.
Anchored in the sociology of public action,
this study considers DDR as a public policy instrument: a technical and social
that structures specific relationships between the state and its
recipients, shaped by underlying representations and meanings (Halpern
2014). This instrument-based approach fosters dialogue with Southern
epistemologies and embraces the decolonial option rooted
in pluriversality and
alternative narratives (Dimou, 2021; Carrington et al., 2016). It also
deconstructs the universalist logic
of certain public policy instruments, often
shaped by paradigms imported from the Global North, which reinforce coloniality
and marginalize
the endogenous practices of conflict-affected communities. After
presenting the study’s methodology, I examine how DDR constructs
category of ex-combatants, before analyzing how national ownership can be
redefined to enhance effectiveness in the context of
combating violent
Methodology
This research focused on Cameroon due to its strategic role in regional
security and its unique DDR structure operating outside of
a UN peacekeeping
mission (Non-Mission Settings; NMS). As a key actor in Central Africa, it
continues to face Boko Haram incursions,
making it a critical case for examining
the intersection of DDR and counterterrorism. The findings have implications for
contexts in the Lake Chad Basin and beyond, where DDR programs must
balance security concerns with community reintegration. From
December 2020 to
January 2022, I conducted 37 interviews across three major cities in Cameroon,
engaging with former combatants and
administrators of the DDR program. My sample
comprised seven women and 30 men, ensuring a diverse range of perspectives by
incorporating
participants from different sub-groups. The first group consisted
of 15 ex-combatants, aged 20 to 35 years, who were supported under
program (ExCo). The second group included 22 institutional actors from civil
society and officials responsible for implementing
the program. This
heterogeneous selection facilitated a comprehensive understanding of both the
institutional mechanisms of DDR professionals
and the lived experiences of
reintegrated individuals.
Participants were selected based on various criteria, including age,
religion, personal trajectories, confirmed association with Boko
marital status. However, certain exclusions were necessary for ethical and
methodological reasons. Minors, individuals
under judicial investigation, and
those suffering from severe post-traumatic stress or psychological disorders
linked to their involvement
with Boko Haram were omitted from the study. While
these exclusions were implemented to ensure ethical research practices and avoid
another traumatization, they also present a potential limitation by omitting
perspectives that could further enrich the analysis
of reintegration
challenges.
Given the complexity of reintegration processes, my research employed an
iterative approach to data collection and analysis, allowing
for flexibility in
examining emerging themes over time (Bischoping & Gazso, 2015). The thematic
analysis provided a rigorous
and systematic framework for identifying,
categorizing, and critically analyzing recurring themes within the dataset
& Mucchielli, 2012).
Program Ambitions
In the Cameroonian context, the DDR program is not implemented as part of a
peace mission under the aegis of the UN. The National
Commission for DDR (NCDDR)
was established on November 30, 2018 (Presidency of the Republic of Cameroon,
2018). It is implementing
a third-generation DDR program that is intended to
operate in contexts where conflict is still ongoing and where there is not
necessarily
a peace agreement. This committee is responsible for dealing with
ex-combatants of Boko Haram and armed groups operating in the English-speaking
regions of the country. In terms of disarmament, Decree no. 2018/719 states that
the NCDDR's mission is to receive and disarm former
Boko Haram combatants and to
collect, classify, and store weapons and ammunition voluntarily surrendered by
former combatants (Presidency
of the Republic of Cameroon, 2018). Secondly,
regarding demobilization, the committee is responsible for setting up and
cantonment sites for ex-combatants, supervising ex-combatants, and
providing multidimensional assistance to ex-combatants as part
preparation for a return to civilian life. Finally, in terms of
reintegration, the committee's mission is to take the necessary
de-radicalize ex-combatants; raise awareness and provide multidimensional
assistance to communities of origin in order to
facilitate the reintegration of
ex-combatants; and help ex-combatants reintegrate into civilian life, in
particular through organization,
training, the provision of tools or means of
production, and assistance with the creation of income-generating activities. In
case of Boko Haram defectors, the reintegration process is further
complicated by the ambition to deradicalize former combatants.
While deradicalization entails cognitive and behavioral shifts away from
extremist ideologies, its implementation varies across sociopolitical
and remains contested. The goal is to neutralize or transform beliefs and
behaviors linked to religious extremism or armed
struggle deemed illegitimate.
Deradicalization programs, implemented in countries like Saudi Arabia and
Indonesia, aim to reshape
individuals’ belief systems by steering them
away from extremism and toward mainstream values (Rambourg & Brie, 2015).
Research on radicalization and disengagement underscores that both cognitive
shifts away from extremist ideologies and strong community
support are crucial
for effective disengagement strategies (Horgan, 2009). Expanding DDR frameworks
to include deradicalization remains
highly contested, with numerous obstacles
hindering implementation and limiting national ownership of such programs,
particularly
in contexts like Cameroon. Here, deradicalization is framed as the
inculcation of republican values and the recognition of state
symbols as key to
fostering national integration (Kahjum, 2020). However, the implementation of
DDR activities, which primarily focus
on economic reintegration, encounters
numerous challenges.
Findings and Discussion
DDR as an Instrument Reframing Ex-Combatant Experiences: Navigating
Tensions and Rationalities
With the implementation of the DDR program, individuals leaving Boko Haram
are officially and systematically referred to as ex-combatants.
classification effectively turns the DDR program into a tool for assigning
ex-combatants a de facto normative identity. Decree
no. 2018/719 does not
specifically define the term ex-combatant. While at the outset, defectors were
described as “returnees”,
“defectors”,
“ex-jihadists”, “former hostages”,
“repentant”, or “lost children”,
the program’s
underlying ambition was to make them normal, with a transition from combatant
identity to (re)accession to civilian
status. Looking at the combat experience,
the interviews I conducted illustrate the difficult dichotomy between combatants
and non-combatants,
as well as the overlapping and blurring of boundaries
associated with involvement with Boko Haram. DDR instruments impose a normative
identity that often contradicts the lived experiences of defectors and
communities. I will discuss the notion of ex-combatants here
before proposing in
the next articulation a terminology that emerges from the data analysis and
better reflects the reality on the
In the fight against Boko Haram, repressive approaches rooted in
counter-terrorism policies have had counterproductive effects, particularly
terms of stigmatization. The measures implemented to neutralize individuals
suspected of having joined the organization have led
the security forces to have
tense interactions in localities close to the border with Nigeria. The
interviewees often expressed the
feeling that they had no choice but to join
Boko Haram, sometimes seeking protection or, paradoxically, to distance
themselves from
the violence, as Oumarou put it:
When I joined Boko Haram, you could say it was by force. Boko Haram used to
come and gather in the village. They would say: you can’t
stay here, one
day we’re going to come and kill you all. If you don’t join us,
we’ll come back and kill you. On
the other hand, the Cameroonian soldiers
also accused us of having the same mouth with ‘the Boko Haram’. They
said: ‘We're
going to finish you off’. In the end, being threatened
from both sides, I opted to flee and join Boko Haram, because I could
they would come back to kill those who didn't follow them! (Interview 24, ExCo,
male, Méri)
Against a backdrop of financial drought and a lack of economic prospects,
personal motivations, often stimulated by financial gain,
have driven some young
individuals to become involved in the activities of the terrorist group. Moussa
decided to take his first
steps in what seemed a promising career:
My friends told me that instead of suffering here, it would help me and my
family to join Boko Haram, that not everyone had to fight.
My life didn’t
work here, that’s why I left. I didn’t expect to be Islamised and to
have to learn about the Koran.
But deep down it was my choice. (Interview 36,
ExCo, male, Méri)
The category of individuals who turn to the authorities after leaving Boko
Haram includes women who are collateral victims, particularly
those from the
families of men suspected of having links with the terrorist groups or those who
have voluntarily joined these groups.
The field interviews revealed that, far
from the image of women as victims or sexual objects in the clutches of Boko
Haram, not all
women were “passive radicals”. Social norms of
masculinity and gender dynamics could shape their association with violent
extremist organizations. In some cases, women protected themselves from the
insecurity fueled by violent extremist groups. In others,
the women who joined
the group often did so out of coercion or marital duty, and in others to improve
their living conditions. Being
a good wife means following your husband, because
in this cultural context and in marriage, certain roles are assigned to the
who is submissive to her husband (many did not even know their age and
had no birth certificate). An interview with an institutional
agent revealed
that in these groups there were also:
‘Passive radicalizers’, especially women, in accordance with the
popular conception that a loyal wife follows her husband
at all costs,
it’s a question of submission as a wife. (Interview 32, Institutional
stakeholder, male, Maroua)
Some women had been forced to follow their husbands who had become fighters,
while others had been abducted and forced into marriage
within Boko Haram to
serve as breeders or bargaining chips. An exchange with Annette, a widow,
clearly illustrates the complexity
of these journeys, which sometimes involve
kidnapping and a need for survival, protection, security, or opportunities:
In my family, my father tried to force me into marriage. He offered me men
twice, but I refused, and in the meantime my father became
radicalized and
joined Boko Haram with my younger brother. Then I was kidnapped and taken there,
where I was introduced to my father
and brother. And my father told me that, as
I had refused to get married here, I would see what I could do. So, the day
after I arrived
they celebrated my marriage to someone. (Interview 8, ExCo,
female, Méri)
Domestic violence motivated Awa’s desire to join the group, making her
case particularly striking:
I was so badly treated by my husband that I ran away from home to join the
group, and I remarried there. I left voluntarily; nobody
forced me. When I came
back here, they took me to the chiefdom and asked me to go back to my old home,
but I refused. (Interview
28, ExCo, female, Méri)
Other interviewees highlighted the fact that the association with Boko Haram
was the result of a well-thought-out family project to
start a new life, thanks
to the offer proposed by this group. The financial opportunity and the prospect
of improving their quality
of life by joining the group also motivated some
women to join or to convince their husbands to join the group as part of a plan
to immigrate to another country:
Some Cameroonian women left, and it was really organized with their husbands,
and they ended up on the battlefield, which means that
it was really
premeditated. Others who arrived in Sambisa through marriage once their husbands
had died in the fighting then became
the property of the group. (Interview 5,
traditional chief, male, Maroua)
Dia, who fled after two years with Boko Haram, explained why she and her
husband joined up:
Madam, you yourself can see the living conditions here, compared to the
Centre. I followed my husband, but first we talked to each
other, we agreed
together. When we saw the money that the individuals who were with Boko Haram
managed to find. We have nothing here,
no schools, no future for our children.
Even when we were protected from Boko Haram, some areas were completely
abandoned, we couldn’t
work the fields. So, we simply followed what was
good for us. On the other hand, at first it was acceptable, a little better. But
with time and the threats on the Nigerian side too, and my husband having to go
and fight, we got discouraged and here we are. (Interview
20, ExCo, female,
The involvement of some women in Boko Haram, driven by the pursuit of
economic stability, can be seen as a quest for financial emancipation
mobility through various positive power hierarchies (Okech, 2021). This is
particularly prominent amongst those from the
most disadvantaged backgrounds.
Although they were not “active” combatants, their current status as
ex-combatants failed
to account for the roles they played within the group or
the benefits they derived from the reconfiguration of gender relations and
Unlike other contexts where rigid admission criteria have limited
women’s access to DDR programs, such as in Liberia, Cameroon’s
inclusive approach represents progress. However, social and material barriers
persist. MacKenzie (2016) highlights that the
reintegration of female
ex-combatants in Sierra Leone, Liberia (2003-2009) and South Kivu in the
Democratic Republic of Congo (2004)
has been hindered by the lack of tailored
training programs, fear of stigma, threats of retaliation, and social exclusion
et al., 2008). Despite women’s significant involvement in
conflicts, disengagement, disassociation, reintegration, and reconciliation
(DDRR) programs in Liberia failed to provide adequate tools to capitalize on
their skills or offer sufficient psychological support
in cases of trauma
(Basini, 2015). More broadly, persistent gender stereotypes and biases regarding
their role in terrorism continue
to marginalize their place in DDR policies,
limiting the effectiveness of their reintegration. My field research illustrates
paradoxes. While Cameroon adopted a National Gender Strategy in 2022, the
International Organization for Migration (IOM) and UN Women
received funding
from the United Nations Peacebuilding Fund (PBF) in February 2023 to launch a
project dedicated to women.
Questioning the Status of Ex-combatants: Complexities and Aporias in
the DDR Program
While categorizing all DDR participants as ex-combatants legitimizes the
development of a public policy instrument aligned with regional
international counterterrorism efforts, the program simultaneously functions as
a mechanism that obscures the understanding/ordinary
aspect of violence.
According to Decree 2018/719 establishing the DDR program, individuals who have
left the Boko Haram group are
indiscriminately considered to be ex-combatants.
The term “ex-combatant” traditionally refers to individuals who have
participated in armed hostilities, typically between state or non-state armed
groups, whether in international or non-international
armed conflicts. However,
under international humanitarian law, the legal status and qualification of
those engaged in non-international
armed conflicts remain ambiguous. This
ambiguity is particularly evident in asymmetric or insurgency contexts, where
government armed
forces are confronted with non-state, rebel, or dissident armed
groups or militias (Aivo, 2013). In the joint Lake Chad Basin Commission
and African Union strategy developed in 2018, the term “combatants”
is not defined. However, the document specifies
that it refers to individuals
“who have participated in battles and know how to use and handle
weapons” (CBLT - AUC 2018:
13). The Decree establishing the DDR program in
Cameroon designates all participants solely under the official category of
“ex-combatant,”
regardless of their individual backgrounds or roles.
This war rhetoric used as terminology in the Decree, which by default
attributes the label of ex-combatant, has several implications.
Firstly, it has
the effect of standardizing the reality of lived experience and ignoring the
complexity and diversity of the trajectories
of involvement in Boko Haram. As a
result, it contributes to the reification of status and fails to consider the
fluidity of the
fighting experience. In other contexts, however, numerous
studies have highlighted the wide diversity of the fighting experience,
can be diluted and reconstituted between different statuses, such as hero,
patriot, resistance fighter, liberator, spoiler,
or intermediary. This diversity
is also mentioned by Duclos (2010) and Muggah (2010). According to my data, it
also seems that the
career paths of the individuals I met reveal major
differences in terms of temporality. Some had sporadic contact, while others had
longer periods of professionalization in an organization with structured
leadership. These individuals were recruited through forced
mobilization or
voluntary commitment, because they espoused an ideology or for financial
reasons. The interviews also show the non-linearity
and complexity of the
commitment and the conditions of these exits. What started as forced recruitment
can later become a voluntary
commitment, and vice versa.
Research on Boko Haram in Nigeria and other jihadist armed groups operating
in the Sahel, particularly in Mali, Niger, Nigeria, and
Burkina Faso, highlights
how recruits’ criminal experience is integrated into terrorist activities
(Akinola & Ramontja,
2023). This process relies on operational and
logistical transfers, including extortion, theft, and kidnapping, which serve
as financing mechanisms and as instruments of terror. Rather than
undergoing a strict ideological radicalization process, many individuals
in these groups to repurpose their criminal capital (Tanner, 2010). Unlike other
African conflict settings, those disengaging
from Boko Haram in Cameroon exhibit
a more distant relationship with weapons, a less structured ideological
commitment, and the absence
of a clear political project. This contrasts with
Chad, where the relationship between combatants and weapons resembles a
and even forms a pillar of governance (Debos, 2013), and Côte
d'Ivoire, where the ex-combatant status serves as a political
mechanism (Berriault, 2019). However, the standardized application of DDR
programs fails to account for the diversity
of individual trajectories. This
calls for a deeper examination of the logic underpinning the classification of
violent actors as
combatants.
An Innovative Conceptual Alternative: Dissociation
The concept of dissociation—severing formal social and psychological
ties with a group—is used to give meaning to the
participants' experience
exiting of Boko Haram in the context of this research. In this section, I return
at length to the arguments
justifying the choice of this terminology and its
relevance in the context of extreme violence. As the field interviews indicate,
the DDR program also creates the status of ex-combatant, which has little or no
resonance with the experiences in the Far North.
The implementation of a formal
conceptualization of disaffiliation from a terrorist group is complex due to the
absence of a formal
process of “organizational disaffiliation”,
which would allow the phenomenon to be situated more within the logic of
disaffiliation. Dissociation is an interesting concept for (re)conceptualizing
the process of leaving terrorist organizations. It
puts into words the reality
experienced by the interviewees in the field, who did not share the feeling of
being demobilized ex-combatants,
let alone disarmed ones. This is an intentional
break in the association with the group (IOM, 2022, p. 9). It may be either an
dissociation or the community’s perception of the
individual’s dissociation from the group. The concept of dissociation
useful for understanding the process of leaving violent groups. The varying
intensity of an individual’s commitment should
influence how public action
is appropriated and implemented. The figure of the dissociated is relevant in
the context of violent
extremism, to encapsulate the reality experienced by
individuals who leave the Boko Haram group. In my view, the dissociated can
considered as individuals who have been voluntarily or involuntarily involved
with a terrorist group and who undertake a process
of rupture, deliberate
withdrawal, and disidentification. Enacted with a view to definitive
emancipation and a return to life in
the community, this takes place within a
well-defined timeframe and is articulated according to the level of
participation.
Already used in other contexts in the fight against terrorism, dissociation
is the fruit of an Italian legal invention that the government
made official
through legislation on February 18, 1987 (Sommier, 2000). In a way, this
category was intended to reward and encourage
individuals who distanced
themselves from their organization, acknowledging all the crimes and offences
attributed to them and undertaking
to moderate or prevent the next ones within
the Red Brigades. At the end of the leaden years, between 1960 and 1980 in
new figures emerged to initiate reconciliation. These were the
, who could have their sentences reduced or forgotten in
exchange for information about their organization. The
dissociated
individuals, for their part, agreed to admit to all the offences they were
accused of and renounce violence as a means of political
struggle in exchange
for a reduced sentence. It is interesting to note that in the context of
Operation Safe Corridor in Nigeria—an
initiative designed to reduce the
threat posed by Boko Haram—the program aligns with the
Action Plan for Demobilization, Disassociation, Reintegration, and
Reconciliation (DDRR)
. Adopted in December 2017 with support from the IOM,
this framework guides the reintegration of individuals formerly associated with
Boko Haram (IOM, 2019). Similarly, in Niger, the return program is structured
around DDRR (Akum et al., 2021; Morier, 2019;). Cameroon,
however, remains the
only state in the sub-region that focuses solely on a DDR program, without
incorporating a disassociation component
or traditional community-based
practices that foster reconciliation. The data analysis reveals that the DDR
program, in both its
pragmatic orientation and its instrumentalization,
functions as a technology of power that organizes and classifies the actors,
and logics that shape responses to the disengagement of members from
armed groups labelled as terrorist organizations.
If I develop a similar analysis to understand the conditions under which the
Boko Haram exits were supervised, the dissociated figure
will represent the
normative category that best characterizes the exit experience. The data from my
research highlight the different
degrees of association with Boko Haram and
indicate the group’s integration into individuals’ lives at primary,
and tertiary levels, to better reflect the diversity of experiences.
Inspired by the public health prevention model:
Prevention can target the general population not identified as being at risk
(primary prevention), individuals or groups considered
to be at risk or who find
themselves in the initial stages of this process (secondary prevention) or
individuals or groups who are
already involved in this process in the final
stages, who belong to an extremist group or who have committed acts of
radicalization
and violent extremism (tertiary prevention). (Bencherif et al.,
2022, p. 14)
The levels of prevention are therefore established according to the specific
group targeted by radicalization prevention initiatives
and programs. Similarly,
by transposing the levels of intervention, the process of dissociation can take
place at different scales.
At the primary level, it can be designed for
individuals who have been led to join Boko Haram by coercion, by a desire for
or to protect themselves and their families. These individuals would
benefit from primary dissociation measures focused on developing
psychological
resilience to address the traumas they have experienced. In contrast, secondary
level dissociates who voluntarily joined
Boko Haram through opportunism, family
pressure or network influence would require measures centered on creating
economic opportunities.
Finally, the tertiary level dissociates would be the
ideological individuals committed to Boko Haram in the service of the cause
decide to break with the armed groups due to changes in ideologies, value
systems, or internal disagreements within the organization.
Levels of Dissociation, According to the Level of Engagement with Armed
Group Designated as a Terrorist Group in NMS
Consistent with the analysis of Lascoumes and Le Galès (2005), this
study also supports the argument that the instrument does
more than merely shape
a specific problematization of the issue. It also establishes a hierarchy of
variables and defines a particular
sequence of public action that does not
always align with on-the-ground realities.
Policy Implications to Decolonize Reintegration Instruments: The
Principles and Operational Model for Genuine National Ownership
Interviews have shown that the issue of national ownership lies at the very
heart of the process of supervising exits from violent
extremist groups.
Questioning the ways in which the role of combatant is defined led us indirectly
to highlight the performative
properties of the system and its ability to
structure power relationships. It is therefore essential to analyze the
strategies and
allow the actors mobilized in these local contexts room to
maneuver within the logics of appropriation. The concept of local appropriation
is widely invoked in the implementation of public policies shaped by
international influence. Von Billerbeck’s research (2017)
on the evolution
and discourse of local ownership demonstrates that international actors often
view it to enhance the legitimacy
and sustainability of peacekeeping efforts.
However, they often see it as a technical solution and therefore neglect the
normative beliefs. The overused local concept has been criticized for
its application in the field of peacebuilding. Mac Ginty criticizes
the excesses
of a “romanticization” and suggests that “the local is remade
and negotiated through the daily actions
of inhabitants, but also those of
exogenous and institutional actors” (2015, p. 851). In this respect, to
get a more sophisticated
view of the local, there is a need to look at the
perceptions and expectations of individuals on the ground.
The UN Integrated DDR Standard 3.30 state that, at local levels, ownership
implies the buy-in and participation of local authorities,
communities,
women’s groups, religious leaders, and other local non-state actors in the
implementation of DDR processes. In
addition, these standards define the guiding
principles that apply to national, provincial, and local ownership of DDR
in both mission and non-mission contexts. More specifically, these
principles include unconditional release and protection of children;
sensitivity and inclusiveness; conflict sensitivity; adaptation to the specific
context; and flexibility, accountability,
and transparency. At the regional
level, the African Union Commission’s DDR Capacity Building Program of
2014 emphasizes that
national ownership ensures an intervention informed by an
understanding of the local context, conflict dynamics, and relations between
ex-combatants and the local population. Building on this foundation, this
research proposes a model for ownership of DDR programs.
Based on its research
objectives and findings, this study recommends adopting a conceptual model of
national ownership to reframe
DDR as a dynamic and context-sensitive process.
This requires strategically mobilizing local tools and engaging with
community-driven
mechanisms to enhance the effectiveness and adaptability of
reintegration strategies in complex security environments. I propose
apprehend appropriation, in the context of exiting a terrorist group, as a
process of reception and implementation of public action.
This involves an
organic and contextual translation (domestication) of policies aimed at
rebuilding social links between dissociated
individuals and communities through
the active involvement of intermediary actors and the use of local practices.
The study states
three key components that can make national appropriation more
effective: the actors, the practices, and the spaces defined while
considering
the geopolitical context.
The players and individuals who are still on the periphery of power
(considering their different levels of involvement—primary,
secondary, and
tertiary) should be placed at the heart of the system. Their commitment must be
ensured not only at the design stage
but also during implementation. These
results suggest that ownership of the instrument transcends economic needs and
extends to the
community. This community-based approach to social reaction
offers a way out of the individualism that underpins punishment and towards
response that involves the community. Criminologist Nils Christie has already
defended the idea that the state system takes advantage
of conflicts, rather
than allowing citizens to seize the opportunity to change and develop by taking
responsibility and ownership
of their conflicts and personal history (1977). The
instruments used to manage the emergence of groups from violent extremism must
therefore go beyond this paradigm. The community violence reduction approach is
a DDR tool that aims to manage the presence of active
or former members of armed
groups. It promotes activities aimed at security and stability, both for
ex-combatants and for the communities
in which these programs take place. Over
the past three years, the LCBC has engaged local Civil Society Organizations in
implementing
the Regional Strategy for Stabilization, Recovery, and Resilience
through political advocacy and UN Peacebuilding Commission (PBC)
engagement.
This has culminated in the Council of Ministers endorsement of the LCBC
Community-Based Reconciliation and Reintegration
Policy in February 2025 for
individuals associated with Boko Haram. However, its integration remains
fragmented and as indicated,
the centralization of institutional actors limits
the real inclusion of the intermediary actors that were specifically identified.
Intermediary actors can be considered as individuals who are likely to have an
indirect impact on the process of dissociation from
terrorist groups.
Traditional chiefs, religious authorities, and mothers play crucial roles in
disengagement from Boko Haram. Mothers,
as seen in the case of Moussa and
others, have helped publicize the DDR program and advocate for their children to
abandon violence
and pursue peace (Belporo, 2025). The communion approach that
emerged specifically from the analysis of the interviews shows that
group exits must be developed and implemented from a perspective that
materializes the (re)positioning of the community
at the centre. The damage
caused by violence is collective, and healing is an act of communion (hooks,
2000). Etymologically, the
notion of communion refers to deep agreement. Thus,
the importance of the community, such as faith leaders and mothers, and the
indispensable
role of traditional leaders in community policing (Zikhali, 2019)
must be considered. Furthermore, the community’s therapeutic
emerge in the analysis of the interviews, even as the marginalization of these
same local actors becomes apparent. This
article therefore highlights the need
for any instrument aimed at dissociation in the context of terrorist group exits
to be built
around a system of inclusive, collaborative social control through a
bottom-up approach. This will encourage the restoration of social
ties at both
individual and community levels.
The results of my fieldwork highlight the potential for local approaches to
be overshadowed by the DDR system, particularly in terms
of spirituality and
beliefs. As the spiritual and ritual dimension is inherent to the context
studied, it seems appropriate to include
it among the key variables for the
appropriation of this type of system. The symbolic capital of religious and
traditional actors
is crucial for better appropriation of the system. The
interviews carried out in the field showed that spirituality is a key factor
resilience, in an exit program with unclear procedures and an uncertain future.
This need for connection around spirituality also
emerged from the communities.
spiritual (re)communion or connection
, a community commits itself
to rebuilding positive links by drawing on ritual or spiritual principles and
local practices prior to
the introduction of formal approaches to exiting
terrorist groups. From the point of view of the individuals dissociating from
Haram, there is a need for a meeting place to rebuild broken links and to
receive forgiveness from the victims. Although it is undeniable
presence in the areas where Boko Haram was operating does not automatically
guarantee their involvement in the violence,
they feel the need to seek
forgiveness from the affected communities. Cases of violence, summary and
extra-judicial executions, torture,
and murder have left a deep mark on the
communities, as described by the interviewees. Boko Haram's strategy for
retaining its clientele
and maintaining the loyalty of its members also involved
inciting them to attack their villages. Several interviewees who had left
Haram expressed these needs:
You can’t know what’s in someone’s heart. If we are
released even today to stay in the community, we can also go
and see the village
chief and ask if it’s possible to hold a meeting with the whole village
population? Or even go and see
the canton chief if he can even give us soldiers
to accompany village by village to ask for their forgiveness too. That’s
we said, to ask for forgiveness. The past is the past, you must forgive us!
It’s true that we did bad things, but we must be
forgiven. (Interview 36,
male ExCo, 30, Méri)
Now if there was even someone who had a problem with me, as I spent time here
in the DDR program, himself can now forgive me. But
to be sure, I need to meet
these individuals first so that they can see me and so that I can talk to them
too. We hear that activities
are carried out in the villages to raise
individuals’ awareness, but it’s not others who have to go and
speak, it’s
ourselves. My mother advises me to be patient, but it
isn’t easy. (Interview 21, male ExCo, 23, Méri)
It should be noted that, on the ground, initiatives related to the DDR
program are funded by certain UN agencies. These include awareness-raising
activities, educational talks, and capacity-building workshops on reintegration
and peace in certain communities. Despite these efforts,
there is a widespread
feeling that these activities are perceived as secondary, and therefore less
important than the official DDR
components. This lack of integration of a
forgiveness and reconciliation component leads to a lack of national ownership
The interviews revealed that the mystical/spiritual dimension is a
missing component that leads to limited appropriation of the terrorist
exit strategies. A local traditional chief whose village had seen several
incursions by the group recruiting young individuals
backed up his comments by
recounting key events:
In 2009, when the first elements of Boko Haram came back after their first
attempts to recruit young individuals in 2007, this time
they came with
suitcases, clothes, they shared, shared with individuals and money at the same
time. They say that even when you wear
this outfit, your mind changes.
(Interview 5, Traditional Chief, Maroua)
This limited incursion can be explained, according to the players on the
ground, because of the import of an approach to dealing with
crime that is not
specific to the societies where these processes are established. In addition to
these approaches, other actors
involved in community outreach have developed
strategies to circumvent the rigidity of the DDR program. These actions revolve
the use of biblical principles to raise awareness of forgiveness and
reconciliation in communities, whether predominantly Christian
residents are often unfamiliar with the DDR program, in part because it has not,
for example, been translated into local
languages. Before the official
launch of the DDR process, public forgiveness ceremonies were held before
administrative and traditional
authorities. During these sessions, former
combatants were required to swear on the Quran to seek forgiveness and be
reintegrated
into their communities. These ceremonies provided an opportunity
for former members to demonstrate their sincerity and formally renounce
collaboration with Boko Haram. However, these initiatives were discontinued
following the official introduction of the DDR program.
Overall, the
marginalization of these practices and actors necessitates reflection on the
means needed to promote national, or even
local, ownership of the program to
disengage terrorist groups in NMS.
An institutional actor and a community mobilization agent described in their
own terms the marginalization of practices caused by
the introduction of the DDR
The DDR is part of a very Western approach to ending the crisis. But we have
our own customs and means that could enable us to move
forward more quickly.
Many of the individuals who joined the extremists were manipulated by marabouts.
We therefore need to take
these variables fully into account if we want DDR to
be effective and rooted in our realities
(Interview 30, Institutional
stakeholder, Cameroon and Chad)
The spiritual dimension and faith leaders or even traditional practitioners
are rarely considered or formally integrated in this process
in Cameroon because
this would not attract the funding, we so covet from the donors we know. The
consequence is that we don't do
things our own way. Many important players are
not really considered in this highly centralized DDR model. All decisions are
in the capital, leaving others as mere executors. (Interview 25, Community
engagement officer, Maroua)
Colonial approaches to justice can therefore be critiqued for devaluing and,
in some cases, co-opting African spirituality. This observation
reinforces the
criticism made by Tauri (2016) in the context of settler-colonial states. He
highlights the negative impacts of the
omission of the omnipresent spiritual
aspect in indigenous restorative practices by Western capitalism and the justice
system. The
results of this research show that the communion approach also makes
it possible, in an original way, to deconstruct the compartmentalized
boundaries between economic approaches and the real needs of the communities in
which these returns must take place. This
analysis calls for a rethinking of
institutional frameworks and intervention instruments for exiting radicalization
to ensure they
do not replicate global hierarchies (Agozino, 2004). Integrating
the ritual and spiritual dimensions, which are central to the studied
enables the “de-Westernization” of such a framework.
Lastly, this research supports the argument that the instrument for exiting
terrorist groups should be better owned through the creation
of a meeting place
that establishes circles of restorative dialogue. Dialogue generally refers to a
framework of exchange in which
the restoration of social ties and the resolution
of conflict are encouraged. As it occurs at the same time as dissociation, it
relevant for transcending violence and creating the conditions for
dialogue, forgiveness, and peace for community cohesion. The integration
ritual and spiritual dimensions, central to the context studied, makes it
possible to “de-Westernize”/decolonize
such a system. The meeting
places for restorative dialogue should not be set up after the DDR program but
at the same time and in
coordination with it. The fragmentation of DDR
initiatives, which remain scattered, accentuates the absence of a strategic
in terms of both practices and the structuring of spaces. Restorative
approaches have already been used in the fight against terrorism.
For example,
meetings have taken place between families or between representatives of Jewish
and Muslim communities in Israel or
in the Basque Country (Soulou, 2018). In the
context of terrorist group exits, these spaces could both create the conditions
dialogue and give new meaning to
togetherness
by reaffirming the role
of community practices and players. It is in this interstice that we must look
for the keys to a new foundation
by proposing that the various components of the
appropriation model be integrated to operationalize terrorist group exits in a
of violent extremism.
Proposed Model for National Ownership in the NMS Terrorist Group Exit
In post-transition contexts, particularly in NMS, restoring national
ownership is essential. This requires careful consideration of
who participates
in shaping and implementing policy and the continued integration of marginal
practices in these tense environments.
DDR instruments must be adapted through
strategic and transformative rationality to ensure they contribute meaningfully
Rather than confining public action within the formal DDR framework in
NMS, these approaches should be embedded in the dynamics of
surrender, allowing
for greater flexibility and responsiveness to local realities.
Standardized IKEA peace models, flat-packed prepackaged template-based
interventions, are ill-suited to addressing the complex, context-specific
dynamics of violent extremism. Instead, DDR programs must create space for
alternative and reflective approaches that incorporate
organic, local,
traditional, or indigenous contributions (Mac Ginty, 2008, p. 145). While DDR is
not a foolproof remedy, it has the
potential to reduce delays and costs, foster
reintegration at both individual and community levels, and mobilize a wide range
actors to support sustainable transitions. Positioned at the intersection of
community needs and peacebuilding aspirations, such
an instrument in the context
of violent extremism offers an opportunity to enhance reintegration processes
and ensure long-term stability.
This reflection is particularly timely given the
increasingly complex security landscape, shaped by the rivalries between Boko
and the Islamic State’s West Africa Province (ISWAP), which directly
impacts both the surrender of combatants and broader reintegration
This study reinvests in debates surrounding Southern epistemologies and
criminology, which call for alternatives to dominant
paradigms. Furthermore,
this innovative framework offers a valuable opportunity to enrich discussions on
criminology and alternative
peacebuilding approaches in the Global South. The
proposed model of national ownership, with its multiple dimensions, requires
empirical testing and refinement. By proposing this model, this research
contributes to the development of more nuanced and context-sensitive
programs that address the specific challenges of societies in the Lake Chad
Basin and beyond. The proposed reconceptualization
moves beyond an
economic-centric approach to reintegration, shifting the focus from mere
citizenship restoration through civilian
reintegration to a more holistic
framework that acknowledges diverse reintegration pathways. Within the volatile
context of the Lake
Chad Basin, where security concerns intersect with
transitional justice and community reconciliation, this research underscores the
need to develop locally anchored DDR strategies for a paradigm shift that
prioritizes national ownership, cultural relevance, and
sustainable
reintegration.
Acknowledgments
I am deeply grateful to my thesis supervisor, Samuel Tanner, whose guidance
and critical insights have been instrumental in shaping
the theoretical
framework of this article. I also sincerely thank Chantel, Grace and Joshua, as
well as the editors of the Journal,
for their careful review and constructive
Correspondence:
Lydie C. Belporo, Ph.D, École de criminology,
Université de Montréal, Canada.
lydie.belporo@gmail.com
B. (2004). Imperialism, crime and criminology: Towards the decolonisation of
criminology.
Crime, Law and Social Change, 41
https://doi.org/10.1023/B:CRIS.0000025766.99876.4c
Aivo, G. (2013).
The status of combatants in non-international armed
. Bruylant.
Akinola, A. O., & Ramontja, N. (2023). Violent conflict in the Sahel:
Causes, dynamics, and actors. In
Contemporary issues on governance, conflict
and security in Africa
(pp. 157–174). Palgrave Macmillan.
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-031-29635-2_8
Akum, F., Hoinathy, R., & Samuel, M. (2021, March 30).
Managing the
journey out of violent extremism in the Lake Chad Basin
. Institute for
Security Studies.
https://issafrica.org/research/west-africa-report/managing-the-journey-out-of-violent-extremism-in-the-lake-chad-basin
Basini, H. (2015). Gender mainstreaming unraveled: The case of DDRR in
Liberia. In
Gender, peace and security
(pp. 43–61). Routledge.
Belporo, L. (2025). “Talk to their mothers and forget about
justice!” Reconfigurations of actors and practices in preventing
extremism through the DDR program in Cameroon.
Criminologie, 58
Bencherif, A., Belporo, L., & Morin, D. (2022).
International study on
prevention mechanisms for radicalization and violent extremism in the
Francophone area
. UNESCO Chair in the Prevention of Radicalization and
Violent Extremism.
Berriault, T. E. (2019).
Ex-combatant political engagement in
post-conflict Côte d'Ivoire
(Doctoral dissertation, University of
Edinburgh).
http://hdl.handle.net/1842/35732
Bischoping, K., & Gazso, A. (2015).
Analyzing talk in the social
sciences: Narrative, conversation and discourse strategies
Publications.
Carrington, K., Hogg, R., & Sozzo, M. (2016). Southern criminology.
British Journal of Criminology, 56
https://doi.org/10.1093/bjc/azv083
Christie, N. (1977). Conflicts as property.
The British Journal of
Criminology, 17
https://doi.org/10.1093/oxfordjournals.bjc.a046783
Coulter, C., Persson, M., & Utas, M. (2008).
Young female fighters in
African wars: Conflict and its consequences
. Nordiska Afrikainstitutet.
https://urn.kb.se/resolve?urn=urn:nbn:se:uu:diva-261419
Council for the Lake Chad Basin Commission & African Union Commission.
(2018, August).
Document on the pillars of the LCBC and the AUC: Triage,
prosecution, rehabilitation and reintegration
https://www.peaceau.org/uploads/annexe-3-document-relatif-pour-le-triage-poursuites-rehabilitation-et-reintegration.pdf
Debos, M. (2013).
Le métier des armes au Tchad: Le gouvernement de
l’entre-guerres
. Karthala.
Dimou, E. (2021). Decolonizing Southern criminology: What can the
“decolonial option” tell us about challenging the modern/colonial
foundations of criminology?
Critical Criminology, 29
(3), 431–450.
https://doi.org/10.1007/s10612-021-09579-9
Duclos, N. (2010). Introduction. In N. Duclos (Ed.),
L’adieu aux
armes? Parcours d’anciens combattants
(pp. 11–26). Karthala.
Halpern, C., Lascoumes, P., & Le Galès, P. (2014).
L’instrumentation de l’action publique. In
L’instrumentation de l’action publique
(pp. 493–516).
Les Presses de Sciences Po.
hooks, b. (2000).
All about love: New visions
. William Morrow.
Horgan, J. G. (2009).
Walking away from terrorism: Accounts of
disengagement from radical and extremist movements
(1st ed.). Routledge.
https://doi.org/10.4324/9780203874738
Institute for Economics & Peace. (2024).
Global Terrorism Index
. Institute for Economics & Peace.
https://www.economicsandpeace.org/wp-content/uploads/2024/02/GTI-2024-web-290224.pdf
Interagency Working Group on Disarmament, Demobilization, and Reintegration.
(2019). Module 2.10 & 3.30: The UN approach to DDR.
Integrated DDR
https://www.unddr.org/the-iddrs/
International Organization for Migration (IOM). (2019).
Disengagement,
disassociation, reintegration and reconciliation: Eligibility conditions and
https://publications.iom.int/books/disengagement-disassociation-reintegration-and-reconciliation-eligibility-conditions-and-practices
International Organization for Migration (IOM). (2022).
New contexts of
persistent conflict and violent extremism: Disengagement, disassociation,
reintegration and reconciliation
https://publications.iom.int/books/nouveaux-contextes-de-conflit-persistent-et-dextremisme-violent-desengagement-dissociation
International Organization for Migration (IOM), & UN Women. (2022).
Stratégie genre du Comité national de désarmement, de
démobilisation et de réintégration
du Cameroun
(2021–2025)
https://www.iom.int/sites/g/files/tmzbdl486/files/documents/2024-09/strategie-genre-du-comite-national-de-desarmement-de-demobilisation-et-de-reintegration-du-cameroun-2021-2025.pdf
Kahjum Takor, N. (2020). Domestiquer la violence armée dans la
région agitée du Nord-Ouest du Cameroun: Ordre
Comité national de désarmement, démobilisation et
réintégration.
Bulletin d’Analyse Stratégique et
Prospective de l’EIFORCES, 008 & 009
Lascoumes, P., & Le Galès, P. (2005).
Gouverner par les
instruments
. Presses de Sciences Po.
MacKenzie, M. H. (2016). Disarmament, demobilization, and reintegration and
the poetics of slavery in Sierra Leone. In
Women, gender equality, and
post-conflict transformation
(pp. 146–259). Routledge.
https://doi.org/10.4324/9781315546872
Maruna, S. (2001).
Making good: How ex-convicts reform and rebuild their
. American Psychological Association.
https://doi.org/10.1037/10430-000
Morier, F. (2019). The screening process of disengaged Boko Haram associates
Journal for Deradicalization, (21)
Muggah, R. (2010).
Innovations in disarmament, demobilization and
reintegration policy and research: Reflections on the last decade
Paper No. 774). Norwegian Institute of International Affairs.
Munive, J. (2013).
Disarmament, demobilisation and reintegration in South
Sudan: The limits of conventional peace and security templates
(DIIS Report
2013:07). Danish Institute for International Studies.
Munive, J., & Stepputat, F. (2015). Rethinking disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration programs.
Stability: International Journal
of Security & Development, 4
(1), Article 48, 1–13.
https://doi.org/10.5334/sta.go
Okech, A. (2021). Governing gender: Violent extremism in Northern Nigeria.
Africa Development, 46
(3), 1–19. Council for the Development of
Social Science Research in Africa.
Paillé, P., & Mucchielli, A. (2012).
L'analyse qualitative en
sciences humaines et sociales
(3rd ed.). Armand Colin.
Presidency of the Republic of Cameroon. (2018).
Decree No. 2018/719 of 30
November 2018 on the creation of the National Committee for Disarmament,
Demobilization, and Reintegration
https://www.prc.cm/fr/multimedia/documents/6764-decret-no-2018-719-du-30-11-2018-cnddr
Pugel, J. (2009). Measuring reintegration in Liberia: Assessing the gap
between outputs and outcomes. In R. Muggah (Ed.),
Security and post-conflict
reconstruction: Dealing with fighters in the aftermath of war
70–102). Routledge.
Rambourg, C., & Brie, G. (2015).
Radicalisation: Analyses
scientifiques versus usage politique: Synthèse analytique
ÉNAP, CIRAP.
Sharif, S. (2018).
A critical review of evidence from ex-combatant
re-integration programs
. Politics of Return, Social Science Research
Shover, N. (1996).
Great pretenders: Pursuits and careers of persistent
. Westview Press.
Sommier, I. (2000). Repentir et dissociation: La fin des “années
de plomb” en Italie?
Cultures & Conflicts, 40
Soulo, K. (2018). The restorative approach to crime and its application to
terrorism cases.
Les Cahiers de la Justice, 2
(2), 341–359.
https://doi.org/10.3917/cdlj.1802.0341
Tauri, J. M. (2016). Indigenous peoples and the globalization of
restorative justice.
Social Justice, 43
(3), 46–67.
http://www.jstor.org/stable/26405722
Verkoren, W., Kleingeld, J., Willems, R., & Rouw, H. (2010). From DDR to
security promotion: Connecting national programs to community
initiatives.
International Journal of Peace Studies, 15
von Billerbeck, S. B. K. (2017).
Whose peace?: Local ownership and United
Nations peacekeeping
. Oxford University Press.
Walker, K., Bowen, E., & Brown, S. (2013). Psychological and
criminological factors associated with desistance from violence:
A review of the
literature.
Aggression and Violent Behavior, 18
(2), 286–299.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.avb.2012.11.021
Zikhali, W. (2019). Community policing and crime prevention: Evaluating the
role of traditional leaders under Chief Madliwa in Nkayi
District, Zimbabwe.
International Journal for Crime, Justice and Social Democracy, 8
https://doi.org/10.5204/ijcjsd.v8i4.1179
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (1.13 MB)
PDF format (516 KB)
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter