URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/journals/UNSWLawJl/2025/34.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 15:45:14
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Yates, Ben --- "Defending Academic Freedom for the Uncivil Scholar" [2025] UNSWLawJl 34; (2025) 48(3) UNSW Law Journal 1070
II ACADEMIC FREEDOM, NORM-BREACHING EXPRESSION AND LAW
A How Academic Freedom Became Law
1 Historical Development
B Juridification and Codification
1 Statutory Context
2 Industrial Context
C Norm-Breaching Expression
(b) Anderson
(c) Analysis
2 Why FMC Terms Apply
3 FMC and Norm-Breaching Expression
D Conclusion
A Deliberative Systems and Universities
B Deliberative Systems and Academic Freedom
C Deliberative Systems and Norm-Breaching Expression
1 Participation
2 Distortion
3 Information
D Conclusion
A Harm Claims
B Systemic Balancing
C Applying the FMC
D Revisiting Ridd
E Conclusion
DEFENDING ACADEMIC FREEDOM FOR THE
UNCIVIL SCHOLAR
Does academic freedom protect uncivil, offensive and abrasive scholarly
expression? With universities under social and political scrutiny,
this question
is pivotal. In Ridd v James Cook University, the High Court regarded a
requirement of civility as incompatible with
the purpose of academic freedom.
This article develops the Court’s view, defends the uncivil scholar and
designs a framework
for disputes over ‘norm-breaching expression’.
Most university enterprise agreements do not require scholars to be civil
exercising academic freedom. However, this legal position requires a normative
foundation. This article applies deliberative systems
theory to argue that an
entitlement to turn to incivility may support the scholar’s democratic
function. However, uncivil scholarly
expression faces a powerful objection: that
it is harmful to colleagues, students, the university or communities more
broadly. This
article suggests a framework for parsing these disputes under the
terms of the Model Code on Freedom of Speech and Academic Freedom.
I INTRODUCTION
When the High Court had the opportunity in
Ridd v James Cook University
’) to consider what academic freedom entails in
Australian universities, the Court denied the existence of any
of others to respect or courtesy’ from
A scholar is not obliged to be polite. Whether disrespectful or uncivil
expression is compatible with academic freedom was not determinative
. Nonetheless, the Court held that ‘the purpose’ of
academic freedom ‘must permit of expression that departs from
those civil
This article develops
the Court’s view, defends the uncivil scholar and designs a principled
framework for disputes over uncivil
scholarly expression.
Following codification in recent years, academic freedom rules do not require
civility of the scholar per se. However, with the social
and political role of
universities under
a doctrinal justification for scholarly incivility is insufficient. I employ
deliberative systems theory to argue that uncivil scholarly
expression honours
the democratic purpose of academic freedom. I then apply this framework to work
through the powerful objection
that uncivil exercises of academic freedom tend
to face: that these expressions cause harms that override the interest in
This article provides a timely treatment of the claimed trade-off between
academic freedom and prevention of harm. In particular,
the conflict in Gaza has
seen elevated global political interest in university responses to claims of
In Australia, this has seen,
for example, the University of Sydney (‘USYD’) accept in principle a
recommendation to introduce
a ‘New Civility Rule’ that would require
‘each person utilising a word or phrase ... to identify to the audience
the context in which it is
Universities have
faced heightened public and political scrutiny for their management of claims of
Academic freedom – the freedom afforded to scholars and their
institutions and activities – attracts broad rhetorical
universities.
However, scholars are
often scrutinised for instances of inflammatory speech. Universities are
frequently criticised for being hotbeds
radicalism,
out of touch ivory
or purveyors of censorious
sanctimony.
universities pick up claims of harm and offence and use them to pillory
universities either for permitting this speech
and tolerating the harm this
speech causes, or for punishing this speech and siding with censorship. Academic
freedom – as
phrase, concept or totem – haunts these debates.
I term these boundary cases of uncivil scholarly speech ‘norm-breaching
expression’: communicative acts done with an intention
to communicate an
earnestly held scholarly perspective, but made in forms contrary to social and
scholarly norms. This speech genre
has proven uniquely capable of provoking harm
claims. I consider the legal and moral implications of this speech.
Academic freedom in Australia has received only modest recent scholarly
limited mostly to a
smattering of commentary on
Claims of harm have
gone largely unaddressed in the literature despite their dominant role in public
Powerful arguments
made by American scholars have limited doctrinal significance in Australia given
variations in protection for
freedom of expression and general employment law
between American and Australian
My argument has three parts. In Part II, I develop the doctrinal claim,
alluded to in
, that academic freedom protects norm-breaching
expression. I pay particular attention to the emerging role of the ‘French
Code’ (‘FMC’) on academic freedom and freedom of speech
produced by former Chief Justice Robert
I argue that codification of academic freedom has brought norm-breaching
expression inside the ambit of academic freedom. I also
examine two recent
superior court decisions that considered whether norm-breaching expression is a
protected exercise of academic
freedom: the
of Sydney v National Tertiary Education Industry Union
In Part III, I make a normative argument that the democratic purpose of
academic freedom requires protecting norm-breaching expression.
deliberative systems theoretical frame. This frame considers that legitimacy in
a political system arises from the synergies
between the interconnected
components of a democracy. I argue that academic freedom enables broader
deliberative conditions. Academic
freedom, therefore, is not an individual or
bilateral matter between scholar and university. Scholarship is a public
activity with
implications for
I build an analogy to
deliberative approaches to civil disobedience and produce a framework to justify
norm-breaching expression.
This frame exposes how academic freedom and
norm-breaching expression are not minor issues of university governance; they
have broader
democratic significance.
In Part IV, I apply my doctrinal and normative findings to the ‘harm
objection’: the argument that norm-breaching expression
may cause harms
that override any other normative interest in the scholar’s freedom. I
argue that harm objections should be
analysed with the democratic role of
norm-breaching expression and academic freedom in mind. Norm-breaching
expression should be
subject to sanction only when the interests of deliberation
demand it. I demonstrate that the FMC favours this form of analysis.
In summary, this article provides a legal then theoretical justification for
norm-breaching expression before turning to address the
harm problem.
Conceptualised in another way, this article replies to three leading objections
to norm-breaching expression: that
in positive legal terms, it is not an
exercise of academic freedom (Part II); that in normative terms, it should not
merit the protection
of academic freedom (Part III); and lastly, that in policy
terms, it is too harmful to be an exercise of academic freedom (Part IV).
II ACADEMIC
FREEDOM, NORM-BREACHING EXPRESSION AND LAW
In 1931, John Anderson, Challis Professor of Philosophy at the University of
Sydney, set the patriotic sensibilities of interwar New
South Wales
(‘NSW’) alight. He described the aphorism ‘your King and
Country need you’ as superstitious.
He argued war memorials were
idolatrous monuments that served to quash critical discussion of
The Opposition Leader, Lieutenant Colonel Bruxner, moved a resolution in the NSW
Parliament to censure the comments, stating that
the Opposition intended to
‘get him out’.
University’s Chancellor described the Professor’s views as ‘a
distinct breach of his obligations’ and
‘opposed to what is
considered to be Christian and customary’, rendering him ‘wholly
unfit to occupy his
Vice-Chancellor opposed censure but conceded that the views were
‘unnecessarily
provocative’.
In declining
to issue any censure, the University Senate resolved that they
in the past relied, and must continue to rely, on the intellectual integrity,
and the good taste and the good sense of its staff to
approach all problems in
an objective, disinterested, and scientific a spirit as possible, and so to
state and argue them so as not
to inflame people's minds to no good
The absence of legal arguments in the debate is striking when compared to
academic freedom debates today. In Australia today, academic
freedom is framed
as a set of ‘legal freedoms’ that ‘may be conditioned in
certain circumstances by other legal
freedoms, rights and
Abroad, academic
freedom has often resisted codification and juridification. Essayist Louis
Menand describes academic freedom in
the United States as ‘an
understanding, not a law. It can’t just be
In this Part, I chart the arc of Australian academic freedom from abstraction
to law and show that the High Court’s comments
on norm-breaching
expression in
are not restricted to that case. I make three
arguments to this end. First, I demonstrate that academic freedom in Australia
become a codified and juridified ‘right’. Second, I define
norm-breaching expression and show how courts have struggled
to reconcile this
norm-breaching speech and academic freedom. Finally, I demonstrate that
codification opens the possibility that
norm-breaching expression increasingly
will be treated as a protected exercise of academic freedom.
Academic Freedom Became Law
1 Historical
Development
Academic freedom is intertwined with the history of the university. The
modern Australian university traces its lineage to institutions
of medieval
Europe. Higher education existed across societies, from Islamic madrasas to
Imperial China’s Confucian
However, from the
century onwards, a new species of scholarly institution appeared
in Europe, characterised by autonomy. The term ‘university’
universitas
’, a guild, either of ‘masters’
or of students.
These guilds
operated to limit clerical and political intervention in scholarly
The concept of the research university only took hold in the early
century. Following the Napoleonic Wars, Prussian King Frederick
William III initiated a radical program of reform premised on Enlightenment
thinking. It troubled Prussians that ‘while France had undergone almost
two decades of revolutionary change, their state and
society had remained
relatively static’ or even ‘hopelessly
antiquated’.
In 1810, the
King appointed Wilhelm von Humboldt to reform the Prussian education system. The
higher education institutions that
Humboldt’s reforms produced were
characterised by governing autonomy from the state and unity of teaching and
However, a contradiction plagued these institutions. They were autonomous but
dependent upon the state for funding. In a preliminary
sense, academic freedom
can initially be seen as a concept to broker this state–university
relationship: a state guarantee
of non-interference.
In the modern era, academic freedom is widely accepted to have a central
place in universities. It is described as the ‘defining
characteristic of
universities’.
Copland, the first Vice-Chancellor of the Australian National University
(‘ANU’), described ‘the establishment
and maintenance of
academic freedom’ as ‘more important than the actual research and
teaching done inside the walls of
university’.
Yet despite near-universal acclaim, as French noted, ‘[a]cademic
freedom has ... apparently no settled
definition’.
Barendt argues, ‘[a]cademic freedom seems to be different from ...
established rights’ as ‘[d]oubts are
expressed not only in respect
of borderline claims, as with freedom of speech or personal privacy, but with
regard to its central
Few principles of academic freedom are uncontested. Academic freedom is a
‘defining characteristic’ but it lacks defining
characteristics of
With few global exceptions, academic freedom does not usually derive from
bills of rights or other superior legal
Australia is still
one of the few jurisdictions where academic freedom has found its way into
documents that courts interpret (such
as enterprise agreements), and even then
only in recent decades.
Therefore, the judiciary of the common law world has had limited opportunity to
refine academic freedom into a cohesive concept capable
of definition. Moreover,
in the absence of refined legal definition, academic freedom has become tethered
to the professional values
of academia, taking on a totemic significance as a
‘north star’ for the social and political aspirations of academic
Academic freedom has variously been said to include freedoms of:
• the institution from
interference;
• academic staff to teach and
• academic staff to govern academic affairs and to critique university
governance;
• academic staff to comment
• staff to engage in professional and representative
• students to learn and debate in
The FMC definition of academic freedom provides an inclusive definition of
academic freedom, including:
● the freedom of academic staff and
students to engage in intellectual inquiry, to express their opinions and
beliefs, and to
contribute to public debate, in relation to their subjects of
study and research;
● the freedom of academic staff and students to express their opinions
in relation to [their] higher education provider
For the purposes of this article, I adopt the FMC definition of academic
freedom as suitable.
B Juridification
and Codification
In the past decades, academic freedom has shifted from a social norm to a
matter of law capable of judicial consideration. Juridification
has been driven
by three key factors: the statutory context, the industrial context and, most
recently, codification following the
Australia’s 37 public universities were created by statutes of state,
territory and federal parliaments. These are, in form,
state institutions. Yet
‘the idea that universities should be collectively governed by
academics’ was a feature of the
German and Oxbridge traditions
‘which influenced Australian universities in
This legacy sees
Australian universities act as quasi-democratic bodies, with a residual
attachment to their
Governments retain substantial influence. First, the legislature can alter
the university’s governing act. Second, the governing
acts permit
ministers to appoint members to the governing
Third, universities
are subject to a regulatory regime: the
Tertiary Education Quality and
Standards Agency Act 2011
(Cth) established the higher education regulator
– the Tertiary Education Quality and Standards
Higher Education
Support Act 2003
Higher Education Support Act
and its regulations create a set of standards against which universities must
report and accredit.
proposed Australian Tertiary Education Commission would expand this
If academic freedom
encompasses institutional autonomy, in Australia, this autonomy exists beneath
the possibility of state intervention.
Academic freedom is strung through this web of regulation. Under the
Higher Education Support Act
, a higher education provider ‘must
have a policy that upholds freedom of speech and academic
Education Standards Framework (Threshold Standards) 2021
requires that universities take ‘steps to develop and maintain an
institutional environment in which freedom of speech and academic
freedom are
upheld and protected’.
However, these regulations provide negligible rights of relief to scholars who
feel their academic freedom has been restrained. Enforcement
is limited to
discrete actions by the regulator or intervention by
government.
‘Soft law’ plays a more dominant role. Universities maintain
community policies on general conduct and public
Policies typically are
binding on the university, staff members and
While these policies
vary in form, the substance is comparable. These policies typically set out
principles endorsing
‘integrity’
denouncing ‘bullying’, ‘harassment’ and
‘discrimination’.
Public comment policies typically encourage academic staff to make comments
within their expertise,
praising professionalism and
In practice, we might doubt how many scholars are aware of these policies and
their particulars. Perhaps these policies are largely
descriptive of the social
and professional norms that most scholars would accept.
2 Industrial
Enterprise agreements become salient at the point of a dispute arising
between the university and a staff member. All Australian public
universities
have enterprise agreements negotiated with the National Tertiary Education Union
agreements contain provisions on academic freedom. There is variety in these
clauses, but some agreements include academic freedom
clauses that mimic the FMC
or substantially draw an FMC-style policy into the operation of the
A managerial decision that breached these clauses would represent a breach of
Fair Work Act 2009
While the clauses vary, there is a sectoral trend towards increased
enterprise agreement protection for academic
The NTEU historically
operated a national strategy of ‘leading sites’ and
nationally-integrated demands where the Union
negotiated to align agreement
clauses to the national ‘high watermark’ established at another
university (a ‘leading
coordination remains evident in NTEU
Generally, there is
substantial commonality between university enterprise agreements and where there
is discrepancy, clauses will
often trend towards uniformity over time.
On 14 November 2018, Minister for Education, Dan Tehan, announced that former
Chief Justice Robert French would review the ‘rules
and regulations
protecting freedom of speech on university
followed events that conservative commentators framed as a free speech crisis at
Australian universities.
included protests at USYD against Bettina
a commentator who
disputes the prevalence of sexual violence, and the decision of ANU to reject a
donation to advance the study of
Civilisation.
The review ultimately focused on academic
French proposed a
‘model code’, covering academic freedom and freedom of
It was left to
universities to incorporate the French Model Code into their internal policies.
While adoption of the FMC was not
required, Universities Australia indicated
that universities would adopt
A review of implementation conducted in 2020 found that 33 universities had
implemented the code while eight had yet to implement
Since then, seven
remaining universities appear to have implemented the code in substantial
measure. I call these academic freedom
and freedom of speech policies that
universities have adopted ‘FMC policies’. They typically adopt the
terms of the FMC
with minimal changes.
The FMC comprises:
• an objects section stating that academic freedom is
‘paramount’;
• a definitions section, defining academic freedom and ‘the duty
to foster the wellbeing of staff and students’;
• an operation section that instructs on how the code is to operate in
relation to other governing documents; and
• a principles section that provides the substantial mechanisms of the
The principles provide that the exercise of academic freedom shall not
attract a penalty, except according to law and in service of
reasonable and proportionate regulation of conduct’ necessary to discharge
named purposes.
These permitted
purposes are the university's teaching and research activities, its duty to
foster the wellbeing of students and
staff and its legal duties. The FMC
functions as a backstop against incursion upon academic freedom, including by
universities’
own policies.
The FMC gives academic freedom specific content while freedom of speech
appears to take its content from common law heritage. Academic
defined but freedom of speech is not. In the report, French canvasses the
traditional common law position that freedom
of speech is both a presumption and
Unlike academic
freedom, freedom of speech is enjoyed by all, inside and outside universities.
The role of freedom of speech in the
FMC might be to protect the legacy of
universities as spaces for public debate, for instance with respect to the
history of universities
as sites of
Despite the term ‘academic freedom’ seemingly placing the concept
alongside more established ‘rights’, it
is in a formal sense nothing
more than a commitment by universities to fetter their powers as employers.
Academic freedom grants
no special immunity from prosecution or civil suit. No
constitutional norm restrains government from encroaching on the expression
scholars more than other citizens. Academic freedom has no formal content
outside the scholars’ employment relationship.
As compared to freedom of
speech, this is the distinguishing quality of academic freedom and the essence
of its fragility. Where
another employer might discipline an employee for wading
into public controversy or bringing the employer into disrepute, the university
commits to restraint. The protection of academic freedom is flimsy. This
underscores the urgent need to build strong normative arguments
to match legal
arguments for academic freedom. If the case in favour of academic freedom is not
overwhelming, it is only too easy
C Norm-Breaching
In this section I define ‘norm-breaching expression’, a dominant
but under-examined class of academic freedom boundary
cases. I then introduce
cases, where courts determined whether
norm-breaching expressions were protected exercises of academic freedom. I
conclude this section
by setting out the emerging position of norm-breaching
expression under university policies and enterprise agreements.
As noted previously, I define norm-breaching expression as communicative acts
done with an intention to communicate an earnestly held
scholarly perspective,
but made in forms contrary to social and scholarly norms. Some examples of
norm-breaching expression might
include invective critique of colleagues’
research (the
case); inflammatory and provocative expressions of the
scholar’s expertise (the
case); use of unprofessional or
obscene language in academic or public debates or while engaging in intramural
speech or; use of
terminology regarded as insensitive.
We can immediately distinguish norm-breaching expression from some
impermissible speech genres. Norm-breaching expression is distinct
from bullying
or harassment in that it is an expression of a scholarly opinion, that is, an
informed opinion with some connection
to the scholar’s expertise or to the
governance of the scholar’s institution. Expertise is difficult to
Scholarly and political
opinions may blur.
This demands
further research.
scholar who knowingly propagates misinformation or disinformation will surely
have a weak claim to be expressing an earnest
scholarly opinion. Similarly, a
scholar who makes a comment with no rational connection to their expertise will
only enjoy the protections
of freedom of speech. I readily concede that there
will be boundary cases where the scholarly nature of the opinion is in dispute.
These cases are currently ambiguous in respect of academic freedom.
This can be understood through a form and content distinction. I address this
article towards expressions that broadly contain scholarly
content but where the
form of expression is said to exclude the protection of academic freedom. Future
research might consider cases
where the content itself is said to be
unscholarly. To chart a path through the form question, I defer the question of
content for
future inquiry.
For my immediate purposes, it suffices to say that there may be extreme cases
that could not sensibly be described as scholarly opinions.
Norm-breaching
expression also does not extend to unlawful expression, for instance
vilification or incitement. As noted earlier,
academic freedom has no legal
content beyond the employment relationship, so it cannot licence criminality or
civil offences.
, the High Court and Federal Court
respectively ruled on whether courtesy and respect are conditions of enjoyment
of academic freedom,
or ‘intellectual freedom’ as it was termed in
both cases.
High Court found academic freedom’s purpose demands tolerating
norm-breaching.
decision underscores that enterprise agreements remain critical.
Both cases precede the FMC however provide insight into how courts
contemplate
academic freedom and norm-breaching expression.
Peter Ridd was a marine geophysicist employed at James Cook University
In 2015 and
2017, Ridd made a series of abrasive comments to journalists regarding his
colleagues at JCU and the Great Barrier Reef
Marine Park
These comments
disputed research on the impact of anthropogenic climate change on the Great
Barrier Reef.
The legal question before the High Court was whether the JCU Enterprise
Agreement’s (‘JCU Agreement’) protection
for staff to express
unpopular and controversial views prevailed over undertakings in the
University’s Code of Conduct regarding
acting with respect and
The Court held that
the enterprise agreement protections for academic freedom prevailed over the
Code of Conduct undertakings regarding
social norms.
The High Court observed that the academic freedom clause in the JCU Agreement
provided a number of exceptions to academic freedom
for harassment, bullying,
vilification and intimidation, all of which were similarly prohibited by the
Code of Conduct.
The Court also
observed that the Code of Conduct contained a number of further prohibited
behaviours that were omitted from the JCU
Agreement’s academic freedom
All conduct prohibited
by the JCU Agreement was prohibited by the Code of Conduct but the reverse was
not true. The Court found the
JCU Agreement ‘was drafted specifically to
preserve’ academic freedom subject to narrow
restrictions.
Moreover, the JCU
Agreement expressly provided that the Code of Conduct was not intended to
detract from the academic freedom
provisions.
The Court also weighed the historical and normative content of academic
freedom. This was possible as enterprise agreements are interpreted
reference to their meaning in their industrial
This gave the Court a
means – perhaps an excuse – to embed the decision in a less textual
analysis. The Court briefly
noted two arguments for academic freedom: an
instrumental argument about enabling truth-seeking and an ethical argument in
of truth-telling.
Court considered that ‘however desirable courtesy and respect might be,
the purpose of intellectual freedom must permit
of expression that departs from
those civil norms’.
The Court refuted the suggestion that the academic freedom provisions did not
conflict with the code of conduct provisions, observing
that ‘[t]he
content of speech that expresses an opinion will often be inseparable from the
strength of conviction ... which
is tied to the manner of
expression’.
Tim Anderson was a political economist at USYD. In 2017 and 2018, he made a
number of provocative social media posts and presented
a slide in a seminar on
‘[r]eading [c]ontroversies’ that depicted an Israeli flag overlaid
with a swastika as a commentary
on media coverage of the Palestinian
The USYD Enterprise Agreement clause qualified ‘intellectual
freedom’ by a requirement that its exercise be ‘responsible’
and ‘in accordance with the highest ethical, professional and legal
standards’.
These concepts
are absent from the FMC and were more weakly phrased in the JCU Agreement
interpreted in
Anderson’s superimposition of the swastika upon the Israeli flag was,
in Lee J’s view, ‘self-evidently offensive’
and therefore
‘could not amount to an exercise of intellectual freedom which was ...
“responsible”’.
In contrast, in
, the provision Ridd was alleged to have breached was
outside the JCU Agreement, in the policy-level Code of Conduct. Anderson
could not benefit from the same argument about construction of
enterprise agreements.
The courts ruled against both Ridd and Anderson. The final outcomes are not
of central importance for present purposes as the decisions
turned on matters
peripheral to academic freedom. Following the commencement of disciplinary
proceedings, Ridd and Anderson each
disclosed confidential information and
antagonised the disciplinary
latter conduct was sufficient to give a lawful justification for his
However, following the FMC, the cases are important as indications of how
courts reason through academic freedom. The
decision confirms two
pivotal matters. First, code of conduct provisions provide no valid basis for an
allegation of misconduct unless
the enterprise agreement intends as much.
Second, the court can consider the historical and normative purpose of academic
in constructing clauses of the enterprise agreement. Anderson was
disadvantaged by an agreement less favourable to norm-breaching
expression,
demonstrating the primacy of enterprise agreements. The insights from
reveal how norm-breaching expression may be
treated by a court applying an FMC policy. FMC provisions, which treat
norm-breaching
expression favourably, appear poised to govern academic freedom
issues going forward.
FMC Terms Apply
Three factors will likely see rules mimicking the FMC increasingly determine
academic freedom disputes.
First, there is a trend towards greater protection for academic freedom in
university enterprise
agreements.
clarified, the greater the contemplated protection for academic freedom in the
enterprise agreement, the less likely restrictive
code of conduct clauses will
be enforceable.
universities lead the sector with academic freedom clauses that mirror the text
of the FMC.
Others have
clauses that commit to exercising powers under the agreement in accordance with
FMC policies.
Over time, the
sector will likely shift towards FMC academic freedom clauses. The NTEU’s
‘leading sites’ strategy
discussed earlier will tend to align the
sector over time. Moreover, there is every incentive for universities to
harmonise enterprise
agreement clauses with FMC policies to avoid conflicts of
authority. Disputes about inconsistency between policies and enterprise
agreements can produce expensive, time-consuming litigation – indeed,
was such a case.
Second, the university codes of conduct, which provide a foundation for
adverse action against employees, are interpreted to be consistent
policies. The FMC provides that it prevails over non-statutory policies to the
extent of any inconsistency.
An allegation of misconduct founded in a university code of conduct would be
without basis to the extent that the code of conduct
is inconsistent with the
FMC policy. Consider a claim of misconduct for norm-breaching expression
premised on a code of conduct clause
prohibiting staff from engaging in
‘unruly’ behaviour. The decision-maker could only rely on a code of
conduct to penalise
the alleged breach if the prohibition on unruly behaviour
was ‘reasonable and proportionate regulation of conduct’ necessary
to discharge the university’s teaching and research activities or its duty
to foster the wellbeing of students and
As I discuss in Part
IV, the FMC definition of the latter duty is favourable to norm-breaching
expression. The FMC ‘filters’
codes of conduct to advantage academic
Last, FMC policies contain a clause requiring that the university have regard
to FMC compliance in reviewing and drafting policies
and/or statutory
instruments.
If honoured,
this would align university policies to FMC principles over time.
These factors are complementary. For a prohibitive rule in a code of conduct
to support an allegation of misconduct, the rule in the
code of conduct and its
application must not be inconsistent with the FMC policy. The rule must then be
‘picked up’ by
the text of the enterprise agreement. With more
favourable agreements and FMC policies adopted across the sector, only rules
prohibiting
extreme forms of misconduct will survive this interpretative
The trend I have identified is also subject to political and administrative
interference. As I observed, the protection of academic
freedom is flimsy.
Building a normative case – as I do in Part III – is necessary to
buttress the political case for
generous academic freedom.
and Norm-Breaching Expression
If FMC-style instruments will increasingly govern academic freedom disputes,
the next question is how the FMC treats norm-breaching
expression. The FMC
drafting favours norm-breaching expression being treated as a protected exercise
of academic freedom.
The FMC recognises that universities have a duty to protect staff and student
wellbeing and the university may make ‘reasonable
and proportionate
regulation’ of academic freedom to achieve
However, the FMC
from the definition of the duty to protect staff and student
wellbeing ‘protect[ing] any person from feeling offended or shocked
insulted by the lawful speech of
This drafting
places the emphasis on objective harms – such as ‘unfair adverse
discrimination’ and behaviour ‘likely
to humiliate or
intimidate’ other
– and avoids
consideration of less serious or subjective claims of harm such as offence and
shock. Lee J’s reasoning
that Anderson’s comments’ offensive
quality made them an irresponsible exercise not protected by academic freedom
not be possible in an FMC environment because ‘offence’ is not
per se an actionable harm under the Code.
The FMC also gives limited credence to operational or reputational concerns
that university administrators might weigh against the
interests of the scholar.
Norm-breaching expression can provoke protest or media interest that
administrators may resent. The Code
recognises a right to impose
‘reasonable and proportional regulation’ of academic freedom but
only in favour of the ‘discharge
of the university’s teaching and
research activities’ and ‘to give effect to its legal
Critical media
coverage, for example, may not impose on teaching, research or legal duties. An
act might be unfavourable to the reputation
of a university’s teaching or
research, such as Ridd’s critique of his colleagues’ research, while
not preventing
the university ‘discharging’ those activities. The
boundary French sets is that academic freedom cannot obstruct that
academic freedom exists to protect – teaching and research. Norm-breaching
expression is unlikely to create operational
Last, there is an absence of terms in the Code that have been used to impose
upon norm-breaching expression. The key provision in
exercises of academic freedom to honour the highest professional and scholarly
indicates these terms bear negatively upon norm-breaching expression. This
language is absent from the Code. Similarly, there is
no language requiring
civility, collegiality or restraint.
D Conclusion
Norm-breaching expression has emerged as an exercise of academic freedom
protected by the FMC. This appears to be a deliberate drafting
decision as
French commented that it ‘does not require much imagination’ to
understand how requirements of respect and
civility could impose upon
expression.
In the next Part, I propose that this is an incomplete justification. True as
it may be that civility is an uncertain and invidious
standard, the more
compelling argument against civility conditioning academic freedom comes from
the essence of the deliberative
democratic system.
III DELIBERATIVE
SYSTEMS SCHEMATIC
Might norm-breaching expression be normatively justifiable? Might tolerance
of an uncivil scholar enable their democratic role? In
Part II, I demonstrated
that norm-breaching expression is a protected exercise of academic freedom. In
this Part, I argue that this
legal position is necessary and desirable. I frame
this argument through deliberative systems literature on civil disobedience, a
comparable prosocial norm-breaching activity. I demonstrate that norm-breaching
expression is justifiable when deliberation has failed.
This Part has three sections. First, I define deliberative systems theory and
defend its application to universities. Second, I make
a novel argument that
deliberative systems theory can justify academic freedom as improving broader
deliberation. Third, I build
an analogy to the deliberative literature on civil
disobedience to present three deliberative justifications for a scholar’s
use of norm-breaching expression: exclusion from participation, distortion and
information failure.
This Part serves three purposes. First, the
decision confirmed
that courts consider a broader normative perspective in interpreting the meaning
of academic freedom in enterprise
agreements.
A more complete
normative case could advance the protection of academic freedom. Second, as
demonstrated in the previous Part, the
legal protection for academic freedom
– and certainly norm-breaching expression – is tenuous and exists at
the pleasure
of legislatures and university administrators. It is therefore
imperative to build a normative political case for academic freedom
norm-breaching expression within it. Third, a compelling justification for
norm-breaching expression as an exercise of academic
freedom has yet to be made
in the Australian context, nor has deliberative systems theory been applied to
academic freedom in
A Deliberative
Systems and Universities
The power of reason animates deliberative democratic theory and motivates
universities. Deliberative systems theory is an insightful
theoretical lens for
universities, and grounds my novel deliberative argument for academic freedom.
Deliberative systems theory is a strand of deliberative democratic theory.
Deliberative democracy provides an account of how democracy
might embody the
‘will of the
Rather than finding democratic legitimacy solely in the tallying of
voters’ preferences, deliberative democrats argue that
‘legitimate
lawmaking issues from the public deliberation of
Deliberative
democrats prize ‘political autonomy based on the practical reasoning of
citizens’ – that is,
deliberation.
Deliberation is
understood as ‘a more specific kind of communicative action, involving the
public use of reason to diagnose
complex issues and resolve shared
As deliberative approaches moved from ‘theoretical statement’ to
‘working theory’ with practical
application,
deliberative
theory took a ‘systemic’
This systemic turn
developed an approach to understanding deliberative democracy in
‘macro’ forms. At scale, a deliberative
democracy is not a set of
perfected institutions but ‘a complex and dynamic pattern of human
practices which are not themselves
deliberative
democracy’,
also picked up by some who preceded the systems
A system in this
context means ‘a set of distinguishable, differentiated, but to some
degree interdependent parts ... connected
in such a way as to form a complex
Deliberative systems scholars see a democracy as such a system. Deliberative
qualities ‘[emerge] from the interactions’,
rather than being
something ‘injected’ into democracy through ‘relatively elite
or management-controlled
processes’.
deliberative systems insight shows that deliberative norm-breaching in one part
of the system can correct a deficiency in another
part of a system: ‘[T]wo
wrongs can make a
legitimating function of deliberation is diffused through the system and its
interacting parts.
Why apply deliberative approaches to universities? Deliberation is at the
heart of the commonly accepted objectives of the modern
university, to
‘further human endeavour through the distribution of
knowledge’.
Disciplined
reason-giving and open-minded exchanges of ideas might produce outcomes that
benefit society. The systems strand of deliberative
democracy permits taking
into account ‘not only a particular forum or innovation but also the role
of that forum or innovation
in the larger deliberative
Deliberative
systems theory accounts for universities in relation to a broader polity.
B Deliberative
Systems and Academic Freedom
How does deliberative systems theory conceive of academic freedom? I argue
that academic freedom is essential to deliberative systems
because scholars have
a social function to mediate the social and political regulation of truth. This
role can only be done with
substantial expressive freedom and implies an
entitlement to turn to norm-breaching expression.
Deliberativists have often admitted a role for state intervention in matters
of truth and mistruth, particularly when mistruth has
negative social and
political consequences.
instance, deliberative scholars are often sympathetic to truth in political
advertising laws as tools to improve failures of
deliberation. This tolerance
for regulating speech flows from the proposition that the force of rational
argument is undermined when
that force is built on insincerity or
dishonesty.
Deliberative democrats admit that while some things are uncertain, many things
are known with high degrees of certainty to be true
and untrue. Wilful dissent
from known certainties can be restricted when it causes social or political
harm, for example, false claims
The deliberative position contrasts with the ‘absolutist’
position on expressive freedoms that predominates in United
States First
Amendment jurisprudence. In
United States v Alvarez
, the Supreme Court of
the United States struck down an act criminalising making knowingly false claims
to military honours.
Court preferred that speech be self-regulated by the citizenry with a
‘common understanding that some false statements
are inevitable if there
is to be an open and vigorous expression of
preferred that citizens, not the state, decide what they credit and discredit in
public debate.
The absolutists have at least one argument opposing deliberative democrats
that has substantial force. This argument is a form of
Hayekian knowledge
problem. Knowledge in a society is dispersed and ‘every individual has
some advantage over all others in
that he possesses unique information of which
beneficial use might be made, but of which use can be made only if the decisions
on it are left’ to that
individual.
A quintessential
example is Copernicus and Galileo promoting the heliocentric (sun-centred) model
of the universe to the chagrin
of the Catholic Church which defended a
geocentric (earth-centred) model. If regulation of truth and mistruth in various
is permitted, a future Galileo may be so persecuted as to prevent their
‘unique information’ gaining deserved attention.
Academic freedom provides a compelling means for deliberative democrats to
respond to the absolutists’ knowledge problem argument.
I argue that
deliberative democrats should defend unique liberties for scholars on the
grounds that they have a social function to
prove and disprove certainties.
Scholars should enjoy ‘special’ expressive freedoms to test received
wisdom and enable
a society to know more things with more certainty. Scholarly
methods operate as a further counterbalance. The scholar enjoys greater
expressive freedoms but is trained to use this freedom judiciously and under the
collective supervision of their
colleagues.
As an example, the deliberative democrat might favour restrictions on false
claims of medical injury from vaccination. However, the
deliberative democrat
would also admit that a medical researcher should be at liberty to test these
claimed injuries and, if they
were to validate the concerns, ‘sound the
alarm’ on the given vaccine.
Elsewhere, social and political liberties and courtesies are granted to and
withdrawn from professions to fulfil their democratic
role. Journalists can show
curiosity that would be condemned as intrusive from another profession.
Politicians are deprived of the
courtesy not to be subjected to heated
professional criticism in public. Similarly, scholars are (or should be)
tolerated when they
frustrate things we believe to be true.
My argument provides a novel deliberative systems justification for academic
freedom. However, it is consonant with other deliberative
justifications for
academic freedom. Deliberativist Michael Lynch argues that research plays a
‘“supply-side” role
in the space of
‘supply’ reasons by producing new or better-tested reasons. Lynch
also argues that universities function as
an ‘engine of dissent’ to
elevate ‘diversity of opinions and minority
viewpoints’.
Contained within my argument are the seeds of a case for norm-breaching
expression. Ideally, new information or views that the scholar
elevates will be
dutifully incorporated into deliberations. Yet, as I will explore next, the
social role of challenging certainties
may demand that the scholar breach norms
in order to get attention.
C Deliberative
Systems and Norm-Breaching Expression
When can a scholar justify reaching for norm-breaching expression? I argue
that when deliberation fails, the scholar is released from
fidelity to some
social and formal norms governing expression. This may be necessary to achieve
their social role of testing certainties.
I make this argument through an
analogy to civil disobedience, relying especially on the work of deliberative
theorist William Smith
who has extensively mapped civil disobedience in
deliberative democracy.
Smith names three normative principles that characterise successful
democratic deliberation: participation, distortion and
information.
He argues that civil disobedience may be justified when one or more of these
criteria fail. Disobedience is not justifiable until
conventional methods are
spent, a principle deliberative democrat Archon Fung calls
‘exhaustion’.
Civil disobedience is ‘a constrained, communicative protest, contrary
to law, that people engage in to support a change in governmental
nongovernmental
practices’.
While civil
disobedience is restricted to unlawful acts, norm-breaching expression only
breaches soft law or social norms. The difference
is insignificant; the essence
is that the act is done with a willingness to bear consequences. Deliberative
theorist Kimberley Brownlee
describes this experience of sanction as a principle
of ‘non-evasion’ where ‘we bear the risks of honouring our
convictions’.
behavioural norms, both codified and uncodified, are comparable to law in this
Disobedience in the deliberative frame contests deliberative failures that
cannot be corrected using conventional deliberative
communication.
disobedience stimulates
deliberation.
Smith describes
civil disobedience as ‘deliberative contestation’ in that it aims to
contribute to continued public deliberation
while also contesting the failures
of the deliberation.
labels this perspective ‘fidelity’, a commitment by the disruptor to
the value of deliberative process. Disobedience
is a prosocial act in the sense
of being productive and socially
beneficial.
The failure of a
criterion of successful deliberation gives rise to an attached justification for
civil disobedience.
I note that these failures may occur in systems of different scales. While
the discussion lends itself to contemplation of deliberative
failure in a
political community at large, the failure may occur within an academic
discipline, a university community or potentially
even within a university
faculty or department.
I will now set out Smith’s states of failed deliberation that justify
civil disobedience. Throughout, I make an argument for
how these criteria
analogise to norm-breaching expression.
1 Participation
A deliberative democracy should be inclusive. Public deliberation
‘should include all members of the relevant political
community’.
Smith notes
a tension between whether deliberation must include all who are
by the relevant democratic institutions or whether, as Iris Marion Young argues,
it must include all those
The latter is
impractical, for instance, in domestic deliberation over foreign affairs, where
it would be impossible to include all
those affected by decisions. Smith
proposes a compromise that deliberative democracy must include all those
by a democratic institution and account for the
of all those affected by decisions in the course of
deliberation.
For example,
deliberation in Country A about a matter of foreign affairs affecting Country B
must account for the interests of the
inhabitants of Country B.
The inclusivity principle yields the first justification for disobedience.
Where deliberation has excluded people who are governed
or has failed to account
for the affected interests of those outside the deliberative community, a moral
justification for disobedience
This category of
failure extends from clear cases of disenfranchisement to more oblique value
judgements about consideration of interests.
What would a non-inclusive debate be in a scholarly context? If
discriminatory deliberation marginalised the views of certain peoples,
would be non-inclusive. In the
case, his presentation contended
that media coverage of the Israel–Palestine conflict systematically
discarded Palestinian
This might justify
some departure from conventional academic expression as Anderson appears to
consider that the Palestinian interest
is neglected in deliberations. In effect,
he contends that deliberation has failed to be inclusive.
The case for norm-breaching expression will be weaker in defending the
scholarly consensus or political mainstream. This intuition
has a synergy with a
traditional rationale for academic freedom as providing the means to test and
challenge ‘received
apparent that a scholar can defend a consensus while critiquing the deliberative
process that has privileged that view.
Consider the following example of a participation failure. In 2020, security
studies scholars Alison Howell and Melanie Richter-Montpetit
published an
article with the provocative title ‘Is Securitization Theory
They conclude that the dominant ‘Copenhagen School’ of security
studies is ‘structured ... by civilizationism,
methodological whiteness,
and antiblack racism’.
This publication is closer to the core of academic norms than many examples
discussed in this article. However, it was deliberately
inflammatory and some
scholars implied the title was reckless and
A deliberative
lens however suggests that if, as Howell and Richter-Montpetit contend, security
studies is shaped by ‘methodological
and normative whiteness’ and
non-white perspectives are systematically
norm-breaching
expression is likely justifiable to challenge this exclusion.
The deliberative systems prediction was apparently validated. The publication
led to a cathartic outpouring over race in security
studies in leading
It seems it took a
provocative and arguably ‘uncollegial’ article title to spur renewed
deliberation.
2 Distortion
Democratic deliberation is characterised by persuasion, not
Smith concedes that
absolute political equality is likely unachievable and favours a ‘fair
opportunity to influence democratic
deliberation’, or as a negative
freedom, deliberation free from
If there are
dominant political actors who coerce or intimidate other political actors, Smith
argues this ‘frustrates the sense
in which decisions are made on the basis
of reasons’.
The distortion principle justifies civil disobedience when ‘powerful
groups are able to manipulate or bias the course and outcome
deliberation to promote their own
interests’.
influences disparage reason-giving and abrogate public deliberation. For
example, a political donor threatening to withdraw
donations to a politician
unless they oppose a policy is not engaged in reason-giving.
Applied to norm-breaching expression, the scholar will be morally justified
to use this speech form if they reasonably conclude deliberation
is distorted.
Examples that might readily found such a conclusion could be managerial
pressure, philanthropic
influences,
university–private sector
partnerships,
interference
Consider the following example of a distortion failure. In December 2020,
University of Mississippi Professor of History Garrett Felber
Felber’s research focuses on racialised incarceration in the United
States. Two months earlier, the University had blocked
a USD42,000 grant Felber
had been awarded for a program called ‘Study and Struggle’ which
promoted a ‘political
education project on mass incarceration and
immigrant detention’.
In the preceding year, journalists had revealed the efforts the University had
undertaken to appease explicitly racist
Soon after the grant
was blocked, Felber tweeted that the University ‘prioritizes racist donors
over all else’ and that
‘this antiracist program threatens racist
donor money’.
dismissal followed soon after.
Felber’s comments plausibly did contravene scholarly norms through
invective directed towards donors, particularly in United
States higher
education context where philanthropy has an integrated
Regardless,
norm-breaching expression is justified by his earnest and reasonable view that
the management of the University was driven
by a policy of appeasing the views
of a conservative donor class. Financial power distorts the deliberative
process, in this case,
apparently restraining deliberation to political ends.
The deliberative systems hypothesis was validated as Felber’s choice
speak out spurred civil society interest and caused considerable scrutiny over
the University’s
3 Information
Democratic deliberation should incorporate relevant information and data into
the process of deliberation.
Smith describes this principle as capturing the ‘intuition ... that a full
defence of democratic deliberation will include
some reference to the epistemic
deliberation’.
Deliberation is legitimising because it produces reasonable decisions, and
reasonable decisions rest on assessment of accurate information
and data. Smith
argues that in conditions of wide circulation of information, deliberation will
usually yield more informed
When deliberation is uninformed or misinformed, a justification for civil
disobedience might arise. Smith is more hesitant about this
justification; taken
to extremes, it justifies technocratic rule which is distinctly opposed to
deliberative principles. However,
he emphasises deliberation being
sufficiently
For example,
where deep-seated assumptions frustrate the consideration of information and
opinions that support a different view,
disobedience might be justifiable. This
resolves to a concern for ‘open-mindedness’, where unwillingness to
alternative information and views frustrates the reason-giving force of
deliberation.
Analogised to norm-breaching expression, this criterion may apply when the
scholar holds an opinion that runs contrary to a substantial
scholarly or
popular consensus. If their perspective or new information was simply ignored
rather than excluded (participation) or
suppressed (coercion), this represents
closed-mindedness that could justify norm-breaching expression. Equally, this
justification
will arise where a scholar discloses information of substantial
public interest that would not gain commensurate interest if communicated
through conventional channels.
Consider the following example of an information failure. In 2019, Murdoch
University physicist Gerd Schröder-Turk gave public
comments on an episode
of the Australian Broadcasting Corporation’s
Four Corners
alleged that the University was neglecting the welfare of international students
by admitting students who did not meet
the University’s English language
Critique of
university governance is a recognised, albeit persecuted, exercise of academic
Murdoch University attempted to remove Schröder-Turk from his membership
of the University Senate and sued for damages. Schröder-Turk’s
conduct was norm-breaching in that he departed from internal disclosure
Schröder-Turk
had earlier written to the Chancellor, but his concerns had not been
His conduct is
justifiable because he drew concerns about the University’s recruitment
practices into the ‘spotlight’.
If Schröder-Turk felt internal
controls and oversight had failed, breaching professional norms and procedures
appears to be
justifiable.
D Conclusion
A deliberative systems frame embeds academic freedom in its social and
political context. When deliberative conditions satisfy certain
norm-breaching can be seen as a democratic necessity rather than an
indiscretion. However, this analysis leaves undisturbed
the question of how far
the disobedient scholar can go, and at what cost to others. In the next Part, I
ask what negative consequences
of norm-breaching can be tolerated.
THE HARM OBJECTION
The moral and legal question facing university administrators and,
eventually, courts as they parse disputes over norm-breaching expression
‘at what cost should we permit norm-breaching expression?’ Further,
do claims of harm arising from norm-breaching
expression override the legal and
moral arguments I have made? In Part II, I presented a doctrinal argument that
norm-breaching expression
is a protected exercise of academic freedom. In Part
III, I presented a normative argument that justified norm-breaching expression
as a protected exercise of academic freedom that contests failures in the
deliberative system. In this Part, I synthesise these doctrinal
and normative
arguments to address a key objection in public debate and scholarly debate. That
objection is the broad concept of
Addressing this objection also addresses the counterargument contemplated by
John Rawls that ‘encouraging everyone to decide
for himself’ when
disobedience is justified might ‘invite anarchy’ in a ‘nearly
just’ democracy.
Addressing the harm objection concedes that norm-breaching expression is subject
I argue in this Part that administrators must take an approach I term
‘systemic balancing’ to considering the harms of
norm-breaching
expression. Systemic balancing tethers the weighing of interests between scholar
and the individual claiming harm
to a higher value of deliberation because
academic freedom has systemic importance. This approach refuses to accept
zero-sum framing
between freedom and harm. Sanctions can be justified through
systemic balancing but are treated with caution. I will demonstrate
that the FMC
permits a systemic balancing approach and apply this method to the
facts to yield an arguably superior outcome.
As norms are breached, the occasion arises for claims of harm to be made.
Similar to the
case, scholars subjected to invective scholarly
criticisms may complain of distress or embarrassment. The Federal Court found
superimposition of Nazi symbolism on the flag of Israel to be
‘deeply offensive and insensitive to Jewish
The lecturer
who swears while expressing a contentious point or the researcher who publishes
an article ridiculing a colleague’s
work are all vulnerable to such claims
from their students or colleagues, however trivial or profound. Sometimes these
harm claims
describe harm actually experienced. In other cases, including
, decision-makers rely on assumptions about what would be likely
to harm particular classes of
There is lengthy theoretical and empirical literature that debates harm
Theories of
stochastic terror posit that hateful language or misinformation can inspire
unpredictable acts of political
Moreover, for
almost half a century, there has been a prolific view that hateful words may
represent an actual harm comparable to
physical injury. This was powerfully set
out in Richard Delgado’s seminal article ‘Words that Wound’,
argued that the harms of racial hate are of a tangible type that a tort
action could recognise.
suffices to say, the ‘sticks and stones’ aphorism attracts less
sympathy today.
Harm claims and norm-breaching expression, admittedly, are not always
coupled. Some harm claims arise from conventional academic expression,
instance, a student distressed by instruction on confronting topics. Similarly,
not all norm-breaching expressions produce harm
claims. For instance, the
lecturer who swears in the course of their lecture only to humorous effect may
cause no harm. However,
I think it matters little to exclude these cases from
the analysis.
In this section I will show why conceptual balancing – a
‘zero-sum form of reasoning about political
deficient in reasoning through the harm objection and that systemic balancing
should be preferred. There is a temptation
when faced with seemingly conflicting
interests to place them on scales and to favour the weightier concern. However,
weighing the
interest of the scholar in free expression against the interest of
an individual in their wellbeing obscures the systemic implications
question. A systemic insight reminds us that the scholar and harmed person
cohabit in the same deliberative environment and
have shared interests. Even a
person alleging harm has an interest in healthy deliberation.
The scales metaphor that characterises conceptual balancing does not
accommodate shared interests. A vibrant culture of academic freedom
norm-breaching expression may improve democracy more broadly. The interests of
the person making the harm claim are not
wholly divisible from the positive
externality of academic freedom. They cohabit in the same political space. Even
when a student
complains of harm arising from comments made by their lecturer,
the student also has some interest in the protection of that scholar;
student benefits from the epistemic functions of a deliberative democracy.
The deliberative literature on civil disobedience has generally failed to
provide a satisfactory answer to this problem. Young acknowledges
extent of ‘[m]orally acceptable [civil disobedience] tactics are much
disputed’ but decides to avoid ‘enter[ing]
open the question of how far activists can go in breaking norms and law. Fung
favours proportionality analysis: ‘the
choice of means should be scaled
according to the extent to which political adversaries and opponents reject the
procedural norms
deliberation’.
Fung’s approach has more substance than Young’s, but remains
difficult to apply to a complaint of harm and could, in
a case of immense
deliberative failures, justify profoundly harmful norm-breaching expression.
I respond to the deficiencies of conceptual balancing by supplying a concept
I call ‘systemic balancing’ where the analysis
of the dispute
foregrounds the deliberative and systemic implications of any
Where conceptual
balancing sees the disruptive scholar and harmed person as irredeemably opposed
with rivalrous interests (illustrated
in Table 1), systemic balancing identifies
shared interests arising from a shared deliberative system (illustrated in Table
How does a systemic balancing approach operate? We first recognise that there
are values to be ‘balanced’ that are shared
between the conflicting
parties. I have already explained that the interest in a free academic community
is shared. However, the
safety of participants is also shared as we recognise
that deliberation cannot take place in conditions of coercion. We may
acknowledge
non-systemic interests, such as feelings of discomfort, however not
when they are incompatible with deliberative values. A systemic
analysis might consider whether sanctioning the norm-breaching scholar would
improve the quality of deliberation and whether
the harm claimed is of a type
that represents a coercion or exclusion from participation in deliberation. Many
of the interests that
conceptual balancing would regard as partisan interests
are incorporated into systemic analysis. For instance, the interests of the
harmed person in avoiding discrimination represent a systemic interest in
non-coercion.
Systemic balancing requires discounting interests incompatible with
deliberative values. A university administrator might feel apprehension
public criticism should a disciplinary decision fall one way or another. Fear of
scrutiny cannot square with the higher value
of deliberation – indeed, it
is counterposed. A concern of philanthropic reprisal in response to a decision
is similarly incapable
of recognition; it is coercive.
Table 1: Balancing under ‘Conceptual Balancing’
Norm-breaching scholar’s interests
Harmed person’s interests
Academic freedom
Advancement of teaching and knowledge
Academic and personal reputation
Pecuniary interest in on-going employment
Personal dignity / psychosocial interests
Collective interests (dignity of identity group)
Prevention of future harm
Desire for harm to be recognised through sanction
Table 2: Balancing under ‘Systemic Balancing’
Norm-breaching scholar’s interests
Systemic interests
Harmed person’s interests
Academic and personal reputation
Pecuniary interest in ongoing employment
Health of the deliberative system (including safety of participants and
conditions for ongoing deliberation)
Desire for harm to be recognised through sanction
There will undoubtedly be cases of norm-breaching expression where the
systemic balance favours sanctions. Incitement of violence,
implications aside, jeopardises the deliberative system by introducing an
extreme form of coercion. The systemic interests
favour sanction. Similarly,
abusive language towards marginalised students in a class may create a further
deliberative failure.
However, there may be cases where the earnest feelings of
the person claiming harm cannot be validated by sanction. A scholar’s
expression may cause outrage but to punish it would chill deliberation more
Consider the following example. In 2022, Erika López Prater was
teaching her class on global art history at Hamline University
in the United
sensitivities in depictions of religious figures, she warned in the class
syllabus that images of holy figures, including
the Prophet Muhammad would be
shown. Before showing an image of the Prophet, she warned students again in case
students with concerns
wished to leave. After she showed the 14
century painting to the class, some Muslim students complained. The display of
the image was, they argued, an attack on their faith.
Other Muslim scholars
later defended Prater. The University sided with the complainants and terminated
Prater’s employment,
saying that the Muslim students’ interests
should have ‘superseded academic
Conceptual balancing compares Prater’s interest in her reputation and
career with the students’ claimed faith-based interests.
balancing approach acknowledges deeper interests. Certainly, there is a
potential chilling effect on the teaching of religious
art. More than that,
surely Muslim students, a religious minority, themselves have an interest in the
maintenance of pluralistic
expressive conditions. Few need expressive freedoms
as much as a marginalised religious minority. A conceptual balancing approach
insensible to the democratic consequences of academic freedom while a systemic
balancing approach brings a richer perspective.
The FMC permits, if not prefers, a systemic balancing approach to determining
claims of harm. The FMC provides that scholars enjoy
academic freedom subject
only to restrictions imposed by law and the ‘reasonable and proportionate
regulation necessary’
to discharge a discrete set of purposes, most
relevantly, the university’s ‘duty to foster the wellbeing of
and staff’ (‘wellbeing
This is best
seen as a presumption in favour of the freedom of the scholar, rebuttable by a
contrary duty in university policy that
is reasonable and proportionate in
service of the wellbeing duty. The wellbeing duty is given an open definition in
the FMC. It:
• includes the duty to ensure that no member of staff and no student
suffers unfair disadvantage or unfair adverse discrimination
on any basis
recognised at law including race, gender, sexuality, religion and political
• includes the duty to ensure that no member of staff and no student is
subject to threatening or intimidating behaviour by
another person or persons on
account of anything they have said or proposed to say in exercising their
freedom of speech;
• supports reasonable and proportionate measures to prevent any person
from using lawful speech which a reasonable person would
regard, in the
circumstances, as likely to humiliate or intimidate other persons and which is
intended to have either or both of
those effects; and
• does not extend to a duty to protect any person from feeling offended
or shocked or insulted by the lawful speech of
I draw attention to three characteristics of this definition. First, the
named categories map to criteria for successful deliberation.
Second, the
objective construction favours systemic balancing. Third, the final excluded
category gestures towards a systemic taxonomy
of harm claims.
The objective to prevent ‘unfair disadvantage or unfair adverse
discrimination’ based on protected characteristics points
deliberative criterion that successful deliberation ‘should include all
members of the relevant political
community’.
Discrimination inhibits participation. ‘[T]hreatening and intimidating
behaviour’ and humiliation or intimidation is
coercive conduct that
undermines the deliberative value of a ‘fair opportunity to influence
deliberation’.
recognises deliberative harms as legitimate objects of prohibitive
regulation.
The humiliation and intimidation criteria appear more concerned with
deliberation at a systemic level than a bilateral level. The
clause recognises
objective conduct rather than subjective claims about conduct. Regulation made
under this head of the definition
can only prohibit lawful speech to the extent
reasonable person
would regard [the speech], in the
circumstances, as
to’ humiliate or intimidate the other
person and that the speech is ‘
’ to intimidate and/or
If the FMC were
concerned with subjective experiences of harm as an equal or greater interest to
systemic interests in deliberation,
this criterion would use subjective terms:
lawful speech that causes another person to feel humiliated or intimidated. The
framing prevents ‘egg shell skull’ reasoning that a person
who is unusually (or unreasonably) vulnerable to intimidation
or humiliation
could validate a greater encroachment on the freedom of the
The reasonable
person test is invariably a gesture towards some sense of ‘ordinariness or
normalcy’, the sensibilities
of citizens in
The FMC seeks to
avoid the scholar self-censoring because they do not know how vulnerable their
audience is. This is a concern for
the systemic value of deliberation.
Similarly, the excluded category of ‘feeling offended or shocked or
insulted’ by another person’s lawful speech
points to the
FMC’s objective instincts. Offence, shock and insult are named, I think,
because they defy objective application
and have uncertain systemic impacts. Why
not construct the final clause like the penultimate, referencing some concept of
a reasonable
person and intent? Although offence, shock and insult are not words
entirely unknown to the law,
it is possible that French doubted the ability of the non-judicial
decision-makers to make the fine-grained distinction between what
offend/shock/insult a reasonable person (an objective test) and what did, it is
claimed, offend/shock/insult an actual person
(a subjective test). Perhaps
humiliation and intimidation, being more extreme, are easier to apply in
objective terms. Even if this
speculation is wrong, I think the clause may
manifest the legacy of the intellectual tradition to which I have referred
through this
article, that universities have a disruptive function. Negative
subjective feelings that issue from scholarly disruption cannot justify
restrictions or else the prosocial function of the disruptive scholar is
D Revisiting
In this section I will revisit the
case to examine how it could
be determined today under the FMC with a systemic balancing approach. I reduce
the facts of
to eliminate the subsequent breaches of
confidentiality. I assume that the relevant enterprise agreement clauses and
academic freedom
policy mimic the FMC text, the emerging trend I identified in
Following Ridd’s comments to the media, JCU claimed he had failed to
act in a ‘collegial way’ and he was directed
that future comments
must be made ‘in a collegial manner that upholds the University and
individuals [sic]
University further claimed that his criticism was not made ‘in the
collegial and academic spirit of the search for knowledge,
understanding and
truth’ and was not ‘respectful and
courteous’.
claims of harm to the University and its staff through disrespect and a lack of
collegiality.
Does a systemic balancing analysis under the FMC identify a countervailing
interest rebutting academic freedom? University policies
that may penalise such
speech operate only if it is an interest capable of recognition under a head of
the wellbeing duty. Otherwise,
the university policies are inoperative as the
FMC policy prevails to the extent of the inconsistency.
We start by identifying the systemic interests in balance: deliberation and
the conditions that enable deliberation. There are also
personal interests: the
reputations, comfort and livelihood of Ridd and the people he criticised. The
University’s claims stopped
short of an implausible claim that
Ridd’s comments were threatening, intimidating or discriminatory, and
rightly so. The question
reduces to whether Ridd’s comments were
humiliating. Understanding the description of humiliation in the FMC text as an
test, with a concern for deliberation conditions, we ask whether there
was deliberative exclusion or coercion. Sharp, scholarly critiques
foreclose a ‘fair opportunity to influence democratic
deliberation’.
Moreover, mutual critique is essential to scholars fulfilling their democratic
function of testing truth claims. Applying a deliberative
lens, his comments
cannot be ‘humiliation’. Moreover, a sanction against Ridd plausibly
has a systemic chilling effect
on academic expression, weighing further against
The FMC’s wellbeing duty invites the decision-maker to consider whether
any person claiming to be humiliated by Ridd’s
comments is
‘humiliated’ or ‘offended’. The answer is surely that
they are offended. Given that no head of
the wellbeing duty applies, the FMC
would invalidate the JCU Code of Conduct to the extent of the inconsistency.
E Conclusion
The harm objection is powerful and must not be dismissed out of hand.
However, claims of harm equally must not be treated as perfunctory
academic freedom. In the emerging ‘FMC world’, Ridd’s comments
would be protected exercises of academic
freedom. This conclusion is compatible
with disdain for his methods and scepticism towards his substantive views. A
systemic balancing
approach means we do not have to pick sides. Interests are
shared because we cohabit in a political community.
V CONCLUSION
The controversies that universities face seem indomitable. I side with Joan
Wallach Scott’s observation that the scholarly vocation
‘knowledge production ... critical of prevailing norms’ will
invariably ‘[incur] the wrath of partisans of those
norms, who seek to
defend their integrity and their
freedom is the principle that governs these conflicts and the positive argument
in favour of freedom.
However, the norm-breaching expression case is particular. It challenges
conventional theories of academic freedom because flouting
norms exposes the
differences in how scholars think about their social role. Few would deny that
scholars have a role to bring new
information and perspectives before society.
However, admitting a role for norm-breaching expression admits something more
confronting:
that information and ideas might only have limited independent
locomotion. The norm-breaching scholar recognises that their ideas
may need to
be put out into the world with a push.
As a theoretical insight, this is a recognition that deliberation is not a
perpetual motion machine. Deliberation can stall and be
obstructed. Jürgen
Habermas’s ‘forceless force’ of the better argument appears
enfeebled in an environment
A systems approach
permits a deliberative lens to survive the frictions of democracy-at-scale. It
furnishes us with a moral justification
for the equal and opposite force that is
required to sustain deliberation at the systemic level.
The harm objection looms over these conversations. This article moves beyond
dealing with this objection as a perfunctory caveat to
academic freedom. Without
a principled method to engage with harm claims, these claims may corrode
academic freedom. I have presented
a method to integrate recognition of harm
claims into the general justification for academic freedom.
This article is as much as anything an attempt to defend universities and the
principles that govern them. These institutions –
lauded and denounced,
sheltered then pilloried – are part of the infrastructure of our
democracy. With this perspective, the
norm-breaching scholar might just be doing
their civic duty.
* LLB (Hons I), BA (ANU). This article is based on an Honours thesis
completed at the Australian National University. I am especially
grateful to
Professor Ron Levy for his thoughtful supervision of this research. I am also
indebted to the reviewers who provided
most insightful comments. Errors are mine
[2021] HCA 32
(2021) 274 CLR 495
(Kiefel CJ, Gageler, Keane, Gordon and Edelman JJ)
Carolyn Evans and Adrienne
Open Minds: Academic Freedom and Freedom of Speech in Australia
(La Trobe University Press, 2021) ch 1. Government intervention is increasingly
pronounced: see, eg, Australian Universities Accord
Universities Accord
(Final Report, 25 February 2024) 32–3,
<https://www.education.gov.au/australian-universities-accord/resources/final-report>.
In the United States, the
presidents of several prestigious universities resigned over alleged mishandling
of harm claims arising
from protests: ‘A Look at College Presidents Who
Have Resigned under Pressure over Their Handling of Gaza Protests’,
Associated Press
(online, 16 August 2024)
<https://apnews.com/article/college-president-resign-shafik-magill-gay-59fe4e1ea31c92f6f180a33a02b336e3>.
Bruce Hodgkinson,
University of Sydney External Review Report
(Report, November 2024)
Note for instance,
observations by the Vice-Chancellor of the Australian National University that
the University had been called
to testify before the Senate for only the third
time in its history: Evidence to Education and Employment Legislation Committee,
Parliament of Australia, Canberra, 7 November 2024, 109 (Genevieve Bell).
Glyn Davis, ‘Special
Pleading: Free Speech and Australian Universities’,
The Conversation
(online, 4 December 2018)
<https://theconversation.com/special-pleading-free-speech-and-australian-universities-108170>.
Evans and Stone (n 3)
Evan Smith, ‘50 Years
of Snowflakes’,
8AM Playbook
(online, 4 November 2018)
<https://www.researchresearch.com/news/article/?articleId=1378065>.
Evans and Stone (n 3)
represents a thorough consideration of the issue; however, it predates the
(n 1) decision.
See, eg, Pnina Levine and
Rob Guthrie, ‘The
Case and the Model Code for the Protection
of Free Speech and Academic Freedom: Wins for Academic Freedom or Losses for
Codes of Conduct and Respectful and Courteous Behaviour?’
[2020] UWALawRw 11
(2020) 47(2)
University of Western Australia Law Review
Philip Mendes,
‘Academic Freedom Is a Red Herring when Discussing Antisemitism’,
The Jewish Independent
(online, 5 March 2024)
<https://thejewishindependent.com.au/feedback-academic-freedom-is-a-red-herring-when-discussing-antisemitism>;
Emily Johnson and Stephanie Zhang, ‘Academic Freedom to Hate’ [2019]
14–15, 14. The question of civility is briefly
addressed in Evans and Stone (n 3) 94.
See generally Reshmi
Dutt-Ballerstadt and Kakali Bhattacharya (eds),
Civility, Free Speech, and
Academic Freedom in Higher Education: Faculty on the Margins
(Routledge,
2021) <https://doi.org/10.4324/9780429282041>.
Robert S French,
Independent Review of Freedom of Speech in Australian Higher
Education Providers
(Report, March 2019) 295–300.
[2024] FCAFC 57
Evans and Stone (n 3)
Jim Jackson, ‘Legal
Rights to Academic Freedom in Australian Universities’ (PhD Thesis,
University of Sydney, March
2002) 120 (‘Legal Rights to Academic
Ibid 121, quoting New South
Parliamentary Debates
, Legislative Assembly, 14 July 1931, 4267
(Lieutenant Colonel Bruxner, Leader of the Opposition).
Jackson, ‘Legal
Rights to Academic Freedom’ (n 18) 124.
Anthony Connolly,
‘Academic Freedom at ANU: Balancing Rights and Responsibilities’,
ANU Reporter
(online, 27 June 2024)
<https://reporter.anu.edu.au/all-stories/academic-freedom-at-anu-balancing-rights-and-responsibilities>.
Louis Menand,
‘Academic Freedom under Fire’,
The New Yorker
(online, 29
April 2024)
<https://www.newyorker.com/magazine/2024/05/06/academic-freedom-under-fire>.
Harold Perkin,
‘History of Universities’ in Philip G Altbach (ed),
International
Higher Education: An Encyclopedia
(Garland Publishing, 1991) vol 1, 169,
Marion W Gray,
‘Prussia in Transition: Society and Politics under the Stein Reform
Ministry of 1808’
(1986) 76(1)
Transactions of the American
Philosophical Society
1, 1 <https://doi.org/10.2307/1006408>.
See Ian McNeely, ‘The
Unity of Teaching and Research: Humboldt’s Educational Revolution’
[2002] (Fall)
Oregon Humanities
French (n 15) 114.
SG Foster and Margaret M
The Making of The Australian National University: 1946–1996
(ANU Press, 2009) 113 <https://doi.org/10.22459/MANU.08.2009>.
French (n 15) 18. See also
Edmund L Pincoffs, ‘Introduction’ in Edmund L Pincoffs (ed),
Concept of Academic Freedom
(University of Texas Press, 1975) vii
<https://doi.org/10.7560/710160-001>.
Eric Barendt,
Freedom and the Law: A Comparative Study
(Hart Publishing, 2010) 16.
Grundgesetz für
die Bundesrepublik Deutschland
[Basic Law for the Federal Republic of
Germany] art 5(3).
Jim Jackson, ‘Express
Rights to Academic Freedom in Australian Public University Employment’
[2005] SCULawRw 5
Southern Cross University Law Review
(‘Express Rights to Academic Freedom’).
See, eg, American
Association of University Professors,
1915 Declaration of Principles on
Academic Freedom and Academic Tenure
(1915) principles 2, 3 (‘
Declaration
Bill Swannie,
‘Protection from Institutional Censorship: An Essential Aspect of Academic
[2022] UNSWLawJl 47
(2022) 45(4)
University of New South Wales Law Journal
, 1491 <https://doi.org/10.53637/DHIC5747>; Adrienne Stone, ‘The
Meaning of Academic Freedom: The Significance of
Ridd v James Cook
[2021] SydLawRw 10
(2021) 43(2)
Sydney Law Review
, 253; Committee
on Freedom of Expression, University of Chicago,
Report of the Committee on
Freedom of Expression
(Report, 2015).
1915 Declaration
Education Reform Act 1988
(UK) s 202(2).
Stone (n 37) 25. See
generally Leon Trakman, ‘Modelling University Governance’ (2008)
Higher Education Quarterly
<https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1468-2273.2008.00384.x>.
(n 16) cases both are in this class. See, eg, Australian
National University, ‘Policy: Academic Expertise and Public Debate’
(Policy, 15 November 2022) principle 2 (‘ANU Academic Expertise and Debate
Policy’); University of Sydney, ‘Public
Comment and Social Media
Policy 2025’ (Policy, 2 June 2025) cls 2.1(1), (3) (‘USYD Public
Comment Policy’); Evans
and Stone (n 3) 101.
French (n 15) 119, quoting
United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization,
Recommendation Concerning the Status of Higher-Education Teaching
sess (11 November 1997) 10 [27]; University of
New South Wales, ‘Code of Conduct and Values’ (17 May 2024);
National University, ‘Policy: Academic Freedom and Freedom of
(Policy Statement, 28 October 2021) 2;
National University Enterprise Agreement 2023–2026
cl 20.2(d).
Evans and Stone (n 3)
Sally Walker,
Adoption of the Model Code on Freedom of Speech and Academic Freedom
(Report, December 2020) 49.
Evans and Stone (n 3)
Foster and Varghese (n 31)
National University Act 1991
s 10(1)(q).
Tertiary Education
Quality and Standards Agency Act 2011
Department of Education
(Cth), ‘Australian Tertiary Education Commission: Implementation
Consultation Paper’ (Paper,
17 June 2024).
Higher Education Support
(Cth) s 19-
Higher Education
Standards Framework (Threshold Standards) 2021
(Cth) standard 6.1.4.
Deloitte Access Economics,
Review of the Impact of the TEQSA Act on the Higher Education Sector
(Report, March 2017) pt 2.2.3.
See, eg, ‘ANU
Academic Expertise and Debate Policy’ (n 40) principle 2; ‘USYD
Public Comment Policy’ (n
See, eg, Australian
National University, ‘Policy Governance’ (Policy Statement, 30
November 2023) 2 (definition of ‘policy’).
See, eg, University of
Queensland, ‘Staff Code of Conduct Policy’ (Policy, 4 May 2023) s
Ibid s 10(b).
Ibid s 10(c).
Ibid s 10(g).
‘USYD Public Comment
Policy’ (n 40) cl 2.1(1)(a).
Ibid cl 2.1(2)(d)(i).
National Tertiary Education Union
<https://www.nteu.au/NTEU/About.aspx>.
UWA Academic Employees
Enterprise Agreement 2023
Curtin University Enterprise Bargaining
Agreement 2022–2025
Charles Darwin University and Union
Enterprise Agreement 2022
Macquarie University
Academic Staff Enterprise Agreement 2023
University of Melbourne
Enterprise Agreement 2024
Fair Work Act 2009
Jackson, ‘Express
Rights to Academic Freedom’ (n 35) 125–32. See also the less
expansive academic freedom protections
in the previous agreements that the
agreements in above n 62 replaced:
The University of Western Australia
Academic Employees Agreement 2017
Curtin University Academic,
Professional and General Staff Agreement 2017–2021
Darwin University and Union Enterprise Agreement 2018
Melissa Slee,
‘Learning to Navigate Enterprise Bargaining: The Process of Innovation and
Adaptation in the Union Movement’
(2014) 24(3)
Labour and Industry
217, 225 <https://doi.org/10.1080/10301763.2014.961679>.
Ibid. See also ‘Log
of Claims: Who Decides What Goes in It?’,
National Tertiary Education
<https://www.nteu.au/branch/Bargaining_FAQ/Bargaining_FAQ_items/Log_of_Claims_what_goes_in_it.aspx>
Dan Tehan, ‘Review
into University Freedom of Speech’ (Media Release, 14 November 2018)
<https://webarchive.nla.gov.au/awa/20210630075543/https://ministers.dese.gov.au/tehan/review-university-freedom-speech>.
Matthew Lesh, Institute of
Public Affairs,
Free Speech on Campus Audit
(Report, December
<https://ipa.org.au/wp-content/uploads/2018/12/Free-Speech-on-Campus-Audit-2018.pdf>.
Millie Roberts,
‘Protestors Confront Attendees at Bettina Arndt Talk’,
(online, 11 September 2018)
<https://honisoit.com/2018/09/protest-breaks-out-at-controversial-bettina-arndt-talk/>.
Gareth Evans and Brian
Schmidt, ‘ANU Stood Up for Academic Freedom in Rejecting Western
Civilisation Degree’,
The Conversation
(online, 30 June 2018)
<https://theconversation.com/anu-stood-up-for-academic-freedom-in-rejecting-western-civilisation-degree-99189>.
French (n 15)
Ibid 229. Minor changes
were made to the draft Code by the University Chancellors’ Council
(‘UCC’), including
French in his capacity as Chancellor of the
University of Western Australia. These changes can be found in markup in
appendix B to
Walker (n 43): at 48–54. The UCC version was implemented
(subject in some cases to further revisions) by universities. Save
clearer distinction was made between academic freedom and freedom of speech, the
differences between the drafts are not especially
material for the purposes of
this article.
Walker (n 43) 1.
French (n 15)
Ibid 100–2.
Sirianne Dahlum and Tore
Wig both canvas the cultural history of universities as sites of protest and
establish a possible causal
link between universities and political activity:
Sirianne Dahlum and Tore Wig, ‘Chaos on Campus: Universities and Mass
(2021) 54(1)
Comparative Political Studies
<https://doi.org/10.1177/0010414020919902>.
Evans and Stone (n 3)
Cf Pnina Levine and Haydn
Rigby’s discussion of reasonableness in cases of intramural criticism:
Pnina Levine and Haydn Rigby,
‘To What Extent Should Academic Freedom
Allow Academics to Criticise Their Universities?’
[2022] MonashULawRw 5
(2022) 48(1)
University Law Review
The Court confirmed nothing
turned on any difference between the two terms:
(n 1) 518 [29]
(Kiefel CJ, Gageler, Keane, Gordon and Edelman JJ).
Ibid 518–20
Ibid 506 [1].
Ibid 523 [42]–[43],
524–5 [48].
Peter Ridd had raised a
‘reproducibility crisis’ in this research: Piers Larcombe and Peter
Ridd, ‘The Need for
a Formalised System of Quality Control for
Environmental Policy-Science’ (2018) 126
Marine Pollution Bulletin
449 <https://doi.org/10.1016/j.marpolbul.2017.11.038>.
[17]–[18] (Kiefel CJ, Gageler, Keane, Gordon and Edelman JJ).
Ibid 517 [25].
Ibid 516–17
City of Wanneroo v Australian Municipal, Administrative, Clerical and
Services Union
[2006] FCA 813
(2006) 153 IR 426
, 440 [57] (French J).
(n 1) 519 [31]
(Kiefel CJ, Gageler, Keane, Gordon and Edelman JJ).
[85] (Kennett J).
French (n 15)
(n 1) 511–12 [13] (Kiefel CJ, Gageler, Keane,
Gordon and Edelman JJ).
33 [54] (Lee J).
(Kennett J).
529–30 [65] (Kiefel CJ, Gageler, Keane, Gordon and Edelman JJ).
Jackson, ‘Express
Rights to Academic Freedom’ (n 35) 125–32.
516–17 (Kiefel CJ, Gageler, Keane, Gordon and Edelman JJ).
See above n 62.
See above n 63.
Cf University of Sydney,
Charter of Freedom of Speech and Academic Freedom
(9 December 2019)
French (n 15) 298.
22 [12] (Perram J).
French (n 15) 218.
518–20 [28]–[33] (Kiefel CJ, Gageler, Keane, Gordon and Edelman
Deliberative scholars
have long addressed the role of universities in democracy. For example,
Jürgen Habermas identified universities
as among institutions on the
‘inner periphery’ of deliberative decision-making in society:
Jürgen Habermas,
Between Facts and Norms: Contributions to a Discourse
Theory of Law and Democracy
, tr William Rehg (MIT Press, 1996) 355
Between Facts and Norms
’). Less attention has been given to
the potential for deliberative theory to guide the internal decisions of the
university.
Roger Mourad examines deliberative democracy in questions of higher
education pedagogy and research organisation, however, does not
address academic
freedom substantially: Roger Mourad, ‘Deliberative Democracy in Higher
Education: The Role of Critical Spaces
across Universities’ (2022) 18(1)
Journal of Deliberative Democracy
<https://doi.org/10.16997/jdd.954>.
James Bohman and William
Rehg, ‘Introduction’ in James Bohman and William Rehg (eds),
Deliberative Democracy: Essays on Reason and Politics
(MIT Press, 1997)
ix, ix <https://doi.org/10.7551/mitpress/2324.003.0002>.
Ibid. See also Ron Levy
and Hoi Kong, ‘Introduction: Fusion and Creation’ in Ron Levy et al
The Cambridge Handbook of Deliberative Constitutionalism
(Cambridge University Press, 2018) 1, 1
<https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108289474.001>.
Bohman and Rehg (n 118)
William Smith,
‘Deliberative Democratic Disobedience’ in William E Scheuerman (ed),
The Cambridge Companion to Civil Disobedience
(Cambridge University
Press, 2021) 105, 106 <https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108775748.005>.
Simone Chambers,
‘Deliberative Democratic Theory’ (2003) 6
Annual Review of
Political Science
<https://doi.org/10.1146/annurev.polisci.6.121901.085538>.
John S Dryzek and Simon
Niemeyer, ‘Deliberative Turns’ in John S Dryzek (ed),
Foundations
and Frontiers of Deliberative Governance
(Oxford University Press, 2010) 3,
6–8 <https://doi.org/10.1093/acprof:oso/9780199562947.003.0001>.
John Parkinson,
‘Deliberative Systems’ in Andre Bächtiger et al (eds),
Oxford Handbook of Deliberative Democracy
(Oxford University Press, 2018)
432, 432 <https://doi.org/10.1093/oxfordhb/9780198747369.013.8>
(‘Deliberative Systems’).
Facts and Norms
(n 117) 354.
Jane Mansbridge et al,
‘A Systemic Approach to Deliberative Democracy’ in John Parkinson
and Jane Mansbridge (eds),
Deliberative Systems: Deliberative Democracy at
the Large Scale
(Cambridge University Press, 2012) 1, 4
<https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139178914.002>.
‘Deliberative Systems’ (n 124) 440–1.
Mansbridge et al (n 126)
John Parkinson,
Deliberating in the Real World: Problems of Legitimacy in Deliberative
(Oxford University Press, 2006) 6–8.
Universities
‘Strategic Plan 2017–2021’ (Plan) 2
<https://universitiesaustralia.edu.au/wp-content/uploads/2021/09/Universities-Australia-Strategic-Plan-2017-2021.pdf>.
Mansbridge et al (n 126)
See, eg, Simone
Chambers, ‘Truth, Deliberative Democracy, and the Virtues of Accuracy: Is
Fake News Destroying the Public
(2021) 69(1)
<https://doi.org/10.1177/0032321719890811>.
Ron Levy and Graeme Orr,
The Law of Deliberative Democracy
(Routledge, 2017) 99
<https://doi.org/10.4324/9781315890159>.
Ibid 718 (Kennedy J,
Roberts CJ, Ginsburg and Sotomayor JJ joining). See also Levy and Orr (n 133)
FA Hayek, ‘The Use
of Knowledge in Society’
(1945) 35(4)
American Economic Review
On scholarly methods in
academic freedom, see Evans and Stone (n 3) 79–81.
Michael P Lynch,
‘Academic Freedom and the Politics of Truth’ in Jennifer Lackey
Academic Freedom
(Oxford University Press, 2018) 23, 32
<https://doi.org/10.1093/oso/9780198791508.003.0002>.
William Smith,
‘Democracy, Deliberation and Disobedience’
(2004) 10(4)
<https://doi.org/10.1007/s11158-004-2327-5>.
Archon Fung,
‘Deliberation before the Revolution: Toward an Ethics of Deliberative
Democracy in an Unjust World’ (2005)
Political Theory
403 <https://doi.org/10.1177/0090591704271990>.
‘Deliberative Democratic Disobedience’ (n 121) 106.
Kimberley Brownlee,
Conscience and Conviction: The Case for Civil Disobedience
University Press, 2012) 37
<https://doi.org/10.1093/acprof:oso/9780199592944.001.0001>.
‘Deliberative Democratic Disobedience’ (n 121) 107.
Smith, ‘Democracy,
Deliberation and Disobedience’ (n 140) 363.
Mark Diaz et al,
‘Accounting for Offensive Speech as a Practice of Resistance’ in
Kanika Narang et al (eds),
Sixth Workshop on Online Abuse and
Harms: Proceedings of the Workshop
(Association for Computational
Linguistics, 2022) 192 <https://doi.org/10.18653/v1/2022.woah-1.18>.
Smith, ‘Democracy,
Deliberation and Disobedience’ (n 140) 356 (emphasis omitted).
Iris Marion Young,
Inclusion and Democracy
(Oxford University Press, 2000) 23.
Smith, ‘Democracy,
Deliberation and Disobedience’ (n 140) 357.
Ibid 364–5.
40–1 [85] (Kennett J).
Statute XII: Academic
Staff and the Visitatorial Board
University of Oxford (at 15
February 2017) s 1(1);
Education and Training Act 2020
Alison Howell and
Melanie Richter-Montpetit, ‘Is Securitization Theory Racist?
Civilizationism, Methodological Whiteness,
and Antiblack Thought in the
Copenhagen School’ (2020) 51(1)
Security Dialogue
<https://doi.org/10.1177/0967010619862921>.
Lene Hansen, ‘Are
“Core” Feminist Critiques of Securitization Theory Racist? A Reply
to Alison Howell and Melanie
Richter-Montpetit’ (2020) 51(4)
378, 379–80
<https://doi.org/10.1177/0967010620907198>.
Richter-Montpetit (n 154) 11.
See, eg, Mark B Salter
et al, ‘Race and Racism in Critical Security Studies’ (2021)
52(Suppl 1)
Security Dialogue
<https://doi.org/10.1177/09670106211038787>.
Smith, ‘Democracy,
Deliberation and Disobedience’ (n 140) 359.
Evans and Stone (n 3)
Ibid 143–6.
Ibid 129–34.
See, eg, Barendt (n 33)
Christian Middleton,
‘UM Fires History Professor Who Criticizes “Powerful, Racist
Donors” and “Carceral
Mississippi Free
(online, 15 December 2020)
<https://www.mississippifreepress.org/um-fires-history-professor-who-criticizes-powerful-racist-donors-and-carceral-state/>.
Ashton Pittman,
‘“The Fabric is Torn in Oxford”: UM Officials Decried Racism
Publicly, Coddled it Privately’,
Mississippi Free Press
August 2020)
<https://www.mississippifreepress.org/the-fabric-is-torn-in-oxford-um-officials-decried-racism-publicly-coddled-it-privately/>.
Middleton (n 167).
See generally Andrew G
Bonnell, ‘Corporate Power and Academic Freedom’ (2021) 63(1)
Australian Universities’ Review
Henry Reichman,
‘Faculty, We Have Met the Enemy, and It Is Us’,
The Chronicle of
Higher Education
(online, 9 August 2021)
<https://www.chronicle.com/article/faculty-we-have-met-the-enemy-and-it-is-us>;
John K Wilson, ‘Open
Letter to University of Mississippi Chancellor Boyce
in Support of Garrett Felber’,
Academe Blog
(Blog Post, 16 December
<https://academeblog.org/2020/12/16/open-letter-to-university-of-mississippi-chancellor-boyce-in-support-of-garrett-felber/>.
Smith, ‘Democracy,
Deliberation and Disobedience’ (n 140) 359–60.
Ibid 368 (emphasis
Levy and Orr (n 133)
Christopher Knaus,
‘Murdoch University Sues Whistleblower after Comments on International
The Guardian
(online, 11 October 2019)
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2019/oct/11/murdoch-university-sues-whistleblower-after-comments-on-international-students>.
Public Interest
Disclosure Act 2003
Elise Worthington,
Sharon O’Neill and Naomi Selvaratnam, ‘When Large Numbers of
Students Started Failing, Alarm Bells
Started Ringing for Academics’,
(online, 6 May 2019)
<https://www.abc.net.au/news/2019-05-06/uni-academics-risk-jobs-to-speak-about-international-students/11082640>.
Smith, ‘Democracy,
Deliberation and Disobedience’ (n 140) 373, quoting John Rawls,
Theory of Justice
(Oxford University Press, 1972) 389.
National Tertiary
Education Industry Union v University of Sydney
(2021) 309 IR 159
, 227 [268]
(Jagot and Rangiah JJ).
See, eg, Andrea Millwood
Hargrave and Sonia Livingstone,
Harm and Offence in Media Content: A Review
of the Evidence
(Intellect Books, 2
James Angove,
‘Stochastic Terrorism: Critical Reflections on an Emerging Concept’
(2024) 17(1)
Critical Studies on Terrorism
<https://doi.org/10.1080/17539153.2024.2305742>.
Richard Delgado,
‘Words That Wound: A Tort Action for Racial Insults, Epithets and
Name-Calling’
(1982) 17(1)
Harvard Civil Rights-Civil Liberties Law
See also from a feminist perspective: Catharine A MacKinnon,
(Harvard University Press, 1993)
<https://doi.org/10.2307/j.ctvjk2xs7>.
Levy and Orr (n 133) 13,
Iris Marion Young,
‘Activist Challenges to Deliberative Democracy’ (2001) 29(5)
Political Theory
<https://doi.org/10.1177/0090591701029005004>.
Fung (n 141) 403.
Inspired by
‘accommodative balancing’ in Levy and Orr (n 133) 58–61,
Vimal Patel, ‘A
Lecturer Showed a Painting of the Prophet Muhammad. She Lost Her Job.’,
The New York Times
(online, 20 June 2023)
<https://www.nytimes.com/2023/01/08/us/hamline-university-islam-prophet-muhammad.html>.
French (n 15) 297.
Smith, ‘Democracy,
Deliberation and Disobedience’ (n 140) 356 (emphasis omitted).
French (n 15) 297
(emphasis added).
Nader v Urban Transit
Authority of NSW
(1985) 2 NSWLR 501
, 536–7 (McHugh JA).
Mayo Moran, ‘The
Reasonable Person: A Conceptual Biography in Comparative Perspective’
(2010) 14(4)
Lewis and Clark Law Review
Discrimination Act 1975
s 18C(1)(a).
James Cook University,
‘Chronology’, Submission in
Ridd v James Cook University
B12/2021, 15 April 2021, 3.
[50] (Kiefel CJ, Gageler, Keane, Gordon and Edelman JJ).
Smith, ‘Democracy,
Deliberation and Disobedience’ (n 140) 359.
Joan Wallach Scott,
‘Academic Freedom and the Politics of the University’ (2024) 153(3)
149, 150 <https://doi.org/10.1162/daed_a_02095>.
Facts and Norms
(n 117) 24.
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (229 KB)
PDF format (412 KB)
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter