URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/journals/UNSWLawJlF/2020/4.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 15:45:41
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Jacobi, Tonja; Robinson, Zoe; Leslie, Patrick --- "Querying The Gender Dynamics Of Interruptions At Australian Oral Argument" [2020] UNSWLawJlF 4; (2020) UNSW Law Journal Forum No 4
I THE FINDINGS AND THE BASIS FOR THE CLAIM OF THE GENDER EFFECT AT THE HIGH COURT
II HIGH COURT ORAL ARGUMENT OVER A QUARTER OF A CENTURY
Figure 1: Average Interruptions of Justices by Advocates per Case, by Justice Gender, US Supreme Court 1997–2018 Terms
Figure 2: Average Interruptions of Justices by Advocates per Case, by Justice Gender, High Court of Australia 1995–2019 (Seven-Justice
Panels Only)
Figure 4: Average High Court Interruptions of Justices by Advocate per Case, by Advocate Gender, High Court of Australia 1995–2019
(Seven-Justice Panels Only)
III BEYOND GENDER: EXAMINING MULTIPLE CAUSES OF INTERRUPTIONS AT ORAL ARGUMENT
: Descriptive Statistics, Oral Argument, High Court of Australia 1995–2019 (Seven-Justice Panels Only)
: Poisson Regression of Interruptions per Justice per Case, by Justices and Advocates, High Court of Australia 1995-2019 (Seven-Justice
Panels Only)
Figure 5: The Effect of Experience on the Rate of Interruptions of Male and Female Justices per Case, High Court of Australia 1995–2019
(Seven-Justice Panels Only) (Model 5)
IV CONCLUSION
QUERYING THE GENDER DYNAMICS OF INTERRUPTIONS AT AUSTRALIAN
ORAL ARGUMENT
TONJA JACOBI,
** & PATRICK LESLIE***
In a recent study, ‘Female Judges, Interrupted: A Study of Interruption
Behaviour during Oral Argument in the High Court of
Australia’, Amelia
Loughland presents findings that interruptions during oral argument in the High
Court of Australia show
gendered patterns, with female justices interrupted more
often than male justices.
finds that over 90% of interruptions were committed by male advocates, with
female advocates very seldom
interrupting.
The study replicates
findings by one of us that female justices at United States (‘US’)
Supreme Court oral arguments
are interrupted between two and three times as
often as the male justices,
male justices and male advocates; in contrast, female advocates interruption
rates were undifferentiable from
Examining gender dynamics in the High Court of Australia is important for
many reasons. Given the importance of oral arguments in
the High Court’s
decision-making process,
opportunity for a justice to be heard at oral argument is particularly
If women are being
systematically interrupted at oral argument, that will affect their relative
degree of influence on the Court.
As others have noted, the discussions at oral
argument serve many purposes, including: focusing the justices’
information to reach decisions as close as possible to their desired
informed decisions,
and providing
an opportunity to communicate and persuade their
colleagues.
As Jacobi and
Schweers explained:
When a justice is interrupted during her questioning, her point is often left
unaddressed. Without being able to ask her question,
and without receiving an
answer, the interruptee may be inhibited from using this point to persuade her
colleagues ... At the very
least, a woman’s unequal opportunity to ask
questions and complete statements during oral arguments could make it far more
difficult for women to gather their thoughts, engage with the advocates, and
clarify points that were disputed in the
Showing that the same dynamics exist in Australia’s apex court as in
the US Supreme Court contributes to the mounting evidence
that even women in
high positions of power remain subject to gendered expectations and gendered
behaviours,
and counters some
studies suggesting that positions of authority diminish gender
As some of the intense
media response to the initial US study on gendered interruptions expressed the
matter: ‘It Doesn’t
Get Better – Women Supreme Court Justices
Get Interrupted Too’.
this phenomenon of gendered engagement with apex judges is international, then
this adds to the growing body of evidence of institutionalised
and robust gender
discrimination. Further, evidence of gendered behaviour on the High Court may
demonstrate that gendered dynamics
transcend differences in institutional
design. The Australian and American apex courts are different in many ways: the
High Court’s
oral argument last for days, rather than the single hour of
Supreme Court arguments; the High Court sits with panels that vary in
and personnel, ranging from between three and seven justices, whereas the US
Supreme Court always sits with its full complement
of nine justices; and the two
Chief Justices have markedly different
If, despite these
institutional differences, the same gender dynamic continues to rear its head,
then the problem is cross-institutional
as well as international.
Loughland describes her findings as evidence of ‘an embedded bias
towards male judicial authority’ on the High Court of
She proposes
solutions that include implicit bias training and, more controversially,
equipping ‘male judges as agents of change’,
suggesting that male
Chief Justices may be preferable to female Chief Justices, given ‘[t]he
challenges that would face a female
Chief Justice in addressing gendered
interruption behaviour’.
Understandably then, Loughland’s findings and her conclusions have
garnered significant attention amongst commentators and
Loughland’s study has a limited sample size of 45 cases across two and
a half Terms of the Court. In this comment, we explore
whether Loughland’s
conclusions hold when looking beyond her sample, and examine 25 years of oral
argument in the High Court,
from 1995–2019. We also employ more formal
statistical methods to test whether there is a gender effect at High Court oral
argument, or whether the effects that Loughland identifies may be a product of
other factors relevant to interruption behaviour,
such as experience, the length
of oral argument, the amount that a justice speaks, and the role of the Chief
Justice. Contrary to
Loughland, we find that there is no bias against female
High Court justices;
find no support for the claim that male Chief Justices reduce the rate of
interruption of female justices. We show this first
using simple graphs,
illustrating that the small sample that Loughland examined is not representative
of the overall trends occurring
at High Court oral argument. Finally, we use
multivariate regression to more formally test our findings.
I THE FINDINGS AND THE BASIS FOR THE CLAIM OF THE
GENDER EFFECT AT THE HIGH COURT
To determine whether female justices on the High Court of Australia are
interrupted more than their male counterparts, Loughland hand
codes transcripts
from oral arguments where the Court sat
from June 2015 until the
end of 2017, for a total of 45
Loughland finds that in
the period 2015–16, collectively the three female justices received 52% of
interruptions, and in 2017
the three female justices received 69% of the
interruptions.
Further, she
determines that over 90% of those interruptions were committed by male
Loughland also notes
that ‘the Chief Justice in both periods received the highest number of
interruptions ... [suggesting]
that, because the Chief Justice intervenes to
regulate oral argument in their “chairperson” capacity, they have a
chance of being interrupted by
advocates’.
Excluding the
Chief Justice as ‘atypical’, Loughland concludes that in the period
2015–16, the three female puisne
justices received 71% of interruptions
and in 2017 the two female puisne justices received 56% of
interruptions.
Loughland considers possible explanations for her finding that male advocates
interrupt female justices more than male justices. She
considers and disregards
volubility as an explanator for interruptions, presenting the percentage of
speaking time for each justice
and concluding that there is no
‘correlation between female justices’ volubility and their higher
rate of interruption’.
This is contrary to robust findings in US literature showing that the more
justices speak, the more they are likely to be interrupted,
which makes sense:
increased speaking time increases exposure to potential
interruption.
Loughland also
rejects seniority and the female register (ie, polite language) as factors that
might explain the disparities she
Once again, this
conclusion is contrary to that established in the American
literature.
Loughland specifies
that ‘[i]f ... we eliminate the judges’ own behaviour, the remaining
explanation for these interruption
patterns is that advocates perpetuate
gendered norms during oral
She endeavours
to validate this claim by classifying each interruption as either neutral,
affirmatory, clarifying, or pre-emptive,
and determines that female justices
suffered more pre-emptive interruptions than male justices, concluding that is
evidence of gendered
patterns in oral
Loughland concludes by
recommending two solutions: greater regulation of oral argument by the Chief
Justice and training on unconscious
bias for male
II HIGH COURT ORAL ARGUMENT OVER A QUARTER OF A
Examining a small sample of cases can be a practical solution if gathering
data is resource intensive, but it is vital that the sample
is representative of
the whole. For instance, looking only at cases in 2015–17 may allow
inferences about the contemporary
court, but if norms change over time, or
different Chief Justices conduct oral arguments differently – as Chief
Justices themselves
say they do
– then generalising from only 45 cases could lead to misleading
Jacobi and Schweers’ foundational US study on the impact of gender at
oral argument first closely examines three Terms of the
US Supreme Court, for a
total of 156 cases, with 422
interruptions.
The study hand
codes for issues that are hard to test in large databases, such as how often a
justice defers to another justice who
interrupted him or her. They find not only
that men are more likely to interrupt women, but they are then less likely to
acknowledge
the fact or to cede the floor to a woman than to a
To be sure that the effect
is systematic, Jacobi and Schweers deploy a computational algorithm to identify
all interruptions over
12 Terms, confirming the results of the smaller
In a subsequent study,
Jacobi and Sag expand the sample further, covering Terms 1998–2018. They
confirm the gender effect,
although the ratio is slightly lower farther back in
time, when fewer female justices were on the
The importance of the
broad data sample is illustrated in Figure 1, which shows the average rate of
interruptions of the justices
by advocates, per case, from 1997 to
Figure 1: Average Interruptions of Justices by
Advocates per Case, by Justice Gender, US Supreme Court 1997–2018
In Figure 1, and throughout this comment, female justices are represented by
the solid line and male justices by the dotted line.
The figure demonstrates the
variation by Term, showing that the effects found by Jacobi and Schweers did not
occur every Term; if
Jacobi and Schweers had happened to choose the 2001 and
2013 Terms to examine in depth, for example, they would have concluded,
incorrectly,
that advocate interruptions of justices had no association with
justice gender. Equally, if they selected the 2007 and 2009 Terms
sample, the conclusion would have been that advocate interruptions of justices
were gendered, but it would have overestimated
the extent of that bias. By
looking at more than a decade, instead the authors are able to show a quite
consistent bias of advocates
to interrupt female justices more than male
justices, albeit with year-to-year variation as to the extent of that bias.
Turning to the High Court of Australia, we see how the issue of sample
selection plays out in Loughland’s study once we take
a broader analysis
of advocate interruptions of justices by gender, looking at every High Court
oral argument from 1995–2019
where the argument was heard
(ie, by seven justices). The transcripts of oral arguments are freely available
from both Austlii and Jade,
are recorded and compiled by the High Court’s own internal reporting
The transcripts are
consistent in format and identify the case name(s), case number(s), and
participating justices.
Interruptions are indicated by the presence of three dashes (---) at the end of
a speech episode.
Figure 2 shows the average number of interruptions of justices by advocates,
delineated by justice gender, in all High Court oral
arguments with
seven-justice panels between 1995–2019 inclusive.
Figure 2: Average Interruptions of Justices by
Advocates per Case, by Justice Gender, High Court of Australia 1995–2019
(Seven-Justice
Panels Only)
As is evident from the figure above, although female justices are indeed
interrupted by advocates more frequently than male justices
between 2015 and
2017 – the period of Loughland’s study – it is not the
case that female justices are interrupted
more than male justices in most years.
In fact, there are more years in which male justices are interrupted at higher
female justices by
Loughland’s pilot study had chosen at random any two and half Terms
between 2005 and 2013 to study instead of those
coming after 2014, the initial
results would have suggested gender bias against male justices. That finding
would be unreliable for
the same reason as the conclusion that female justices
are disproportionately interrupted looking only at 2015–2017.
Has Loughland nevertheless identified a recent phenomenon of bias against
female justices? To answer that question, it is important
to examine the scale
of any effect: Loughland compared part of 2015 and all full panel cases in 2016
and 2017. Here we see that even
in those Terms, where the gender difference was
as predicted, with women interrupted more, it was far smaller than, for
the reverse effect that occurred in 2006 and 2007, when men were
interrupted more than women at higher rates than women were more
interrupted
after 2015. The small size of the effect Loughland identifies means that it is
very unlikely to be meaningful, but rather
a product of natural variation. We
find the same lack of a gender effect when we consider justice to justice
interruptions, but of
note the Terms in which the justice to justice gender
difference is at its highest are 1999–2003, which all occur during the
Gleeson reign – ie, under a male Chief
One natural response to our finding that there is no significant gender
effect in oral argument on the High Court is that there has
not been equality in
representation by gender on the High Court. But if female justices are being
targeted for interruptions because
they are female, then we should expect to see
a large disparity between the rate at which women and men are interrupted versus
much they interrupt, as was found at the US Supreme
To address this question,
Figure 3 looks at interruptions
the justices of both justices and
advocates, to see if there is a similar gender pattern in female to male
interruption rates as
there is in rates of being interrupted.
Figure 3: Average Interruptions of Advocates and Justices by Justices per
Case, by Justice Gender, High Court of Australia 1995–2019
(Seven-Justice
Panels Only)
Figure 3 displays almost the identical pattern to Figure 2 above: female
rates of interruption were disproportionately high during
the early Gleeson
years and during the Kiefel years, closely mirroring the Terms in which female
justices were disproportionately
interrupted. This suggests that Loughland may
have been wrong to reject the ‘exposure’ thesis, whereby justices
are interrupted
more when they talk more, since the same gender differentials
occur in terms of women being interrupted and women interrupting. We
this possibility by controlling for the number of speech episodes by each
justice in our regressions in the next section.
Finally, Figure 4 examines the effect of gender in shaping interruption
behaviour among the advocates, comparing the interruptions
of justices by male
and female advocates.
Figure 4: Average High Court Interruptions of
Justices by Advocate per Case, by Advocate Gender, High Court of Australia
(Seven-Justice Panels Only)
In contrast to the previous results, Figure 4 shows a clear and striking
gender effect: male advocates interrupt more than female
advocates in every
single Term of the last 25
Whereas female advocates
consistently interrupt at almost zero in an average case, male advocates
interrupt as much as between three
and four interruptions per case on average in
the high Terms between the late 1990s and the early 2000s. This emphatically
Loughland’s finding of a gender effect in the identity of
interrupting advocates.
However, Figure 4 also shows, once again, that significant information can be
missed by looking at just three Terms or less. While
the gender effect of who
interrupts is consistent in that men consistently interrupt more than women, it
is importantly inconsistent
in another respect: there is a very distinct
downward time trend from 1997 onward. As such, while there is a clear gender
among the advocates, it is one that is dissipating over time. And of
equal note, the reduction in the gender effect plateaued during
the male Chief
Justice French’s reign, and then the gender difference began to reduce
again during the female Chief Justice
Kiefel’s reign. This is contrary to
Loughland’s controversial claim that male Chief Justices, as exemplified
Justice French, better improve gender equality than female Chief
Justices, as exemplified by Chief Justice
The next Part probes these findings more deeply, using more sophisticated
statistical techniques.
III BEYOND GENDER: EXAMINING MULTIPLE CAUSES OF
INTERRUPTIONS AT ORAL ARGUMENT
In this section, we utilise multivariate regression to more rigorously
examine the relationship between not only gender and interruptions,
but also to
explore other potential explanatory factors, including seniority, volubility,
length of oral argument, and the role of
the Chief Justice. Regression is a
statistical tool used to examine the relationship between two variables of
interest – here,
gender and interruptions – while holding constant
(ie, ‘controlling for’) other factors that potentially affect
relationship between those variables (ie, other potential explanations or
confounding influences).
For instance, in examining the effect of gender on interruptions at oral
argument at the US Supreme Court, it is important to account
for the fact that
two of the three women currently serving on the Supreme Court are relatively
Women may be interrupted
more, but could that be a product of the relative lack of seniority of two
thirds of the current female
justices? Jacobi and Schweers use regression
analysis to control for the effect of seniority on
interruptions.
experience to be significant, not just because it was in the American context
but because greater expertise or seniority
may increase confidence, and so a
senior person might be likely to talk more, and the more a person talks the more
they might be
interrupted. Seniority could work the other way: more senior
justices might get more deference, and so junior justices are more likely
find themselves interrupted, even if they talk less.
Loughland attempts to account for the potential for other factors, including
seniority: her study compares the rate of interruption
of one male and one
female justice of similar
However, this raises
the same concern about unrepresentativeness as examining a limited number of
Terms; for instance, if the comparators
happen to be a very disruptive senior
male justice and a very quiet junior female justice, or vice versa, the results
could be very
misleading. And, importantly for Loughland’s recommendation
Loughland’s comparison of the final Term of Chief Justice French’s
reign to the first Term of Chief Justice Kiefel’s
rule raises similar
Like experience, we expect volubility to be an important control variable, as
some justices talk more than others, even controlling
for seniority, and that
creates more opportunities to be interrupted. Similarly, if more speaking leads
to more interruptions, then
we would expect more interruptions to occur in oral
arguments that last longer, so we must also account for the length of argument
for any given case. And, of course, we need to account for the presence of the
Chief Justice on a panel, to see if he or she influences
the rate of
interruptions, as Loughland’s study claims. Table 1 outlines our key
variables and the related descriptive data
for all oral arguments with
seven-justice panels from 1995 to 2019.
: Descriptive
Statistics, Oral Argument, High Court of Australia 1995–2019
(Seven-Justice Panels Only)
Justice Case Interrupted
Number of interruptions of a justice per case
Chief Justice
If the justice is Chief Justice (yes/no)
If the justice is female (yes/no)
Justice years on court at oral argument
Hours Argument
Hours of oral argument per case
Justice Case Speeches
Number of speaking turns per justice per case (ie, volubility)
Table 1 shows the means, standard deviations, minimums, and maximums of the
variable we are trying to explain and predict –
the occurrence of
interruptions, at top – as well as our five potential explanatory
variables. It shows that there is a high
level of variance in many of the
variables. Importantly, interruptions in a given case range between 0 and 30,
suggesting that many
factors might go into shaping interruptions, not just
gender. Our variables for Chief Justice and Female are both dichotomous; as
such, the means of those variables simply illustrate the prevalence of each
– one in seven for the Chief Justice, and just
under one in four for
female justices since 1995. In terms of experience, the average justice serves
approximately seven years, with
some justices having as much as 17 years of
experience on the Bench. Australia has highly variable length of oral arguments:
mean oral argument lasts 6.23 hours but ranges from approximately one hour
up to a whopping 27 hours.
Finally, justice speech episodes vary considerably, which is unsurprising given
the high variation in the length of oral arguments.
Using these variables, we conduct multivariate poisson regression analysis to
examine how (or whether) interruptions vary once we
account for each of these
factors in all cases with a full seven-justice
Table 2 shows our
results. It provides five different models to predict interruptions, with each
model including a different subset
of variables to enable us to test different
theories of what drives interruptions at oral argument.
Regression of Interruptions per Justice per Case, by Justices and Advocates,
High Court of Australia 1995-2019 (Seven-Justice
Panels Only)
Chief Justice
Female × Chief Justice
Female × Experience
Justice Speeches
Hours Argument
Log Likelihood
Model 1 is the simplest test of any gender effect, looking only at the impact
on interruptions of being female. This is the most generous
Loughland’s theory because it does not allow any other possible
explanation to enter into the equation. Nonetheless,
it shows that being female
is not associated with being interrupted more. In fact, the coefficient is
negative, which implies the
opposite conclusion that, if anything, men are
interrupted more than women.
However, that conclusion is also not supported because gender is not
statistically significant at any level of confidence –
the p-value of 0.4
means that gender does not come even close to statistical significance, which
standard social science requires
be less than 0.05, at
This shows, quite simply,
that a justice’s gender is not a good predictor of who will be interrupted
at Australian High Court
Model 2 tests another of Loughland’s claims: that the gender of a
justice and the gender of the Chief Justice interact in a
meaningful way in
predicting interruptions of High Court oral argument. The results of this model
also do not support Loughland’s
conclusion. Neither being Chief Justice
nor being a female justice is a statistically significant predictor of whether a
will be interrupted, or even close to achieving significance. Of
critical importance, the interaction between gender and Chief Justice
negative, indicating that, if anything, being a male Chief Justice is predictive
of female justices being interrupted more;
but it is also insignificant, meaning
that the gender of the Chief Justice has not been shown to have any effect.
Model 3 provides the simplest test of the role of seniority: it examines the
effect of the gender of the justice, the experience of
the justice, and a
variable that captures the interplay between gender and experience – ie,
the difference between being a
junior male justice and a senior female justice,
and the various permutations thereof. Model 3 is the only model where gender
is a statistically significant predictor of whether a justice will be
interrupted, but the coefficient is negative, meaning that,
if there is a gender
effect in seven-justice panels, it is that male High Court justices are
interrupted disproportionately more
than their female colleagues, directly
contradicting Loughland’s findings. But that does not mean male justices
are interrupted
more: we have to interpret the three experience and gender
variables together. Model 3 also shows that experience is highly statistically
significant, with a p-value below 0.001 – ie, an effect we can have
considerable confidence in – for both the experience
variable and the
interaction between gender and experience. Together, these three results show
that more senior justices are interrupted
more, that senior female justices are
particularly prone to being interrupted, but that otherwise female justices are
interrupted
less. This means that female justices with five or more years of
experience will be interrupted more than their similarly situated
colleagues, but more junior female justices will be interrupted less than their
junior male colleagues. This suggests that the
exposure effect – the fact
that more senior justices talk more – might be what is driving some of the
results. To test
this comprehensively, in Models 4 and 5, we include rates of
judicial speech.
In both Models 4 and 5, we include a measure of how many speech episodes a
justice has in each case. In both models, judicial speech
is highly significant
and positive. This shows quite clearly that the exposure explanation is highly
influential at High Court argument:
the more a justice speaks, the more
will be interrupted. This is true even accounting for the variation in
the number of hours involved in the oral argument, which is
unsurprisingly, positive and statistically significant. Thus, the exposure
effect is not simply that justices talk more in
longer oral arguments: even
accounting for length of argument, the more a justice speaks, the more
interruptions he or she will face.
Turning to the interplay of experience of the justice and the Chief Justice,
in Model 4, we include all of our variables except the
interaction between
Female and Experience, and in Model 5, we do the same but exclude the
interaction between Female and Chief
Considering the two
models together, we see that, once again, gender is not significant. Further, we
see that the interactions between
gender and experience is significant but that
gender interacting with the role of Chief Justice is not significant. In Model
Chief Justice coefficient is significant, as is the interaction between
gender and experience. This suggests that there is an important
gender element
here, but it does not operate simply by female justices being interrupted more;
rather, there is an interplay between
experience and gender and Chief Justice
and gender. That is, interruptions of female justices occur more as a product of
than gender.
Since the coefficients of the regression model cannot be interpreted
directly, Figure 5 shows what the substance of the effect of
interacting with gender is.
Figure 5: The Effect of Experience on the Rate of
Interruptions of Male and Female Justices per Case, High Court of Australia
(Seven-Justice Panels Only) (Model 5)
Figure 5 shows how interruptions of male justices (represented by the dotted
line) remain flat even as the justice’s experience
goes from 0 to 20
years. In contrast, interruptions of the female justice (represented by the
solid line) actually start off slightly
lower than interruptions of male
justices in their first five years on the Bench, then increase with time,
becoming noticeably higher
after a decade on the Bench. However, the shaded
regions represent the respective (overlapping) confidence intervals for each
the fact that the shaded area covers the entire range of the data
means that although this interaction is more established than any
simple gender
effect on interruptions, it, too, cannot be ascertained with standard levels of
confidence.
IV CONCLUSION
Loughland’s study of interruption behaviour at the Australian High
Court raises many valuable lines of inquiry, including on
the importance of
equal participation on the
the constructive symbolic
value of having women on the
and the role of that
representation in educating men away from gendered assumptions and
But with only two and
a half Terms, these conclusions were always preliminary. When examining 25 years
of data, it is not possible
to confirm those findings. None of our models,
including the simplest test of the relationship between gender and
interruptions,
establish a gender effect: the only time the gender variable
reaches standard levels of statistical significance, it points in the
direction. This does not mean there is gender bias against male justices;
rather, once we account for the role of the Chief
Justice, the experience of the
justice and the Chief Justice, the gender of both the justice and the Chief
Justice, the extent of
judicial speech participation at oral argument, and the
length of the oral argument, it becomes clear that these other variables
more significant in predicting interruptions at oral argument in the High Court
than is any gender pattern.
Of equal importance to the finding that there is no discrimination against
female justices of the High Court are two other findings.
The first result
supports one of Loughland’s findings: there is a clear gender difference
in advocate interruption behaviour.
This is an unfortunate pattern, suggesting
that male and female advocates face different expectations at the High Court;
but importantly,
we show that this difference is dissipating significantly over
time. The second result undermines Loughland’s claim that the
best way to
ensure gender equality in High Court oral argument is to prefer male judges as
Chief Justice.
In fact, our
results show that her conclusion arises because experience is a highly
statistically and substantively significant factor
in shaping interruptions, and
it is the experience of the Chief Justice, not their gender, that shapes
interruptions at High Court
oral argument.
Loughland deserves credit for being one of the early interrogators of
empirical questions that have become vital to legal scholarship
elsewhere and
applying them in the Australian legal context. And the fact that only one of her
three results holds does not in any
way mean that Loughland was not right to
question whether gender equality exists at the Australian High Court: although
her finding
that female justices are interrupted more than male justices since
2015 cannot be confirmed as a statistically meaningful result,
it is nonetheless
a phenomenon that we should pay close attention to. This is particularly in
light of other signs of gender bias
associated with the High Court: within the
century, the High Court had zero representation of women for
multiple years, and it still shows evidence of stark gender differences
advocate interruption behaviour. But the findings that the High Court does not
display any significant evidence of bias in terms
of female justices being
interrupted disproportionately, at least in seven-justice panels, or any
evidence whatsoever that men make
better Chief Justices than women in ensuring
gender equality, are results we should celebrate.
* Stanford Clinton and Zylpha Kilbride Clinton Research Professor,
Northwestern University Pritzker School of Law.
** Professor of Political Science, School of Politics and International
Relations, Australian National University.
*** Lecturer and Research Fellow, School of Politics and International
Relations, Australian National University.
We are grateful for the financial support of the Australian National
University Future Fellowship Scheme. Thanks to Russell Smyth
for helpful
comments. We thank Benjamin Durkin, Kate Johnston, Matthew Putt, Jonathan
Tjandra and Indira Wrigley for their outstanding
research assistance.
Amelia Loughland, ‘Female Judges,
Interrupted: A Study of Interruption Behaviour during Oral Argument in the High
[2020] MelbULawRw 10
(2019) 43(2)
Melbourne University Law Review
Ibid 825 n 9. See also Russell Smyth and
Vinod Mishra, ‘Barrister Gender and Litigant Success in the High Court of
(2014) 49(1)
Australian Journal of Political Science
13 (finding that when the appellant is represented by a female advocate in the
High Court of Australia, the appellant is between
38.3% and 42.3% less likely to
receive the vote of a justice in the majority).
Tonja Jacobi and Dylan Schweers,
‘Justice Interrupted: The Effect of Gender, Ideology and Seniority at
Supreme Court Oral
(2017) 103(7)
Virginia Law Review
See, eg, Michael Kirby, ‘Rules of
Appellate Advocacy: An Australian Perspective’
(1999) 1(2)
Appellate Practice and Process
, 241 (‘[Orality] was the tradition
that we all originally inherited from England’); Anthony Mason, ‘The
Counsel and Appellate Advocacy’
(1984) 58(10)
Australian Law
, 539 (‘The Court expects the oral argument, conforming to
the written outline of submissions, to be presented succinctly, and
in a lengthy
case ... will require the presentation of detailed written submissions’)
(citations omitted).
Oral arguments have been shown to
influence outcomes in the American context also: see Timothy R Johnson, Paul J
Wahlbeck and James
F Spriggs II, ‘The Influence of Oral Arguments on the
US Supreme Court’
(2006) 100(1)
American Political Science Review
, 107–8; Timothy R Johnson, ‘Information, Oral Arguments, and
Supreme Court Decision Making’ (2001) 29(4)
American Politics Research
See, eg, David M O’Brien,
Center: The Supreme Court in American Politics
(W W Norton, 7
ed, 2005) 241.
See, eg, Stephen L Wasby, Anthony A
D’Amato and Rosemary Metrailer, ‘The Functions of Oral Argument in
the US Supreme
Court’ (1976) 62(4)
Quarterly Journal of Speech
See, eg, Barry Sullivan and Megan
Canty, ‘Interruptions in Search of a Purpose: Oral Argument in the Supreme
Court, October
Terms 1958–60 and 2010–12’
Jacobi and Schweers (n 3)
See, eg, Lyn Kathlene, ‘Power
and Influence in State Legislative Policymaking: The Interaction of Gender and
Position in Committee
Hearing Debates’
(1994) 88(3)
American Political
Science Review
, 573 (showing that interruption rates are gendered in the
state legislative context, despite the relatively powerful position of
state legislators, and finding that as the proportion of women increases in a
legislative body, men become more verbally aggressive
with interruptions and
tend to control the hearings); Hanna Bäck, Marc Debus and Jochen
Müller, ‘Who Takes the Parliamentary
Floor? The Role of Gender in
Speech-Making in the Swedish Riksdag’
(2014) 67(3)
Political Research
, 514 (arguing that women are expected to focus on
‘softer’ policy issues that receive less debating time, leading to
their marginalisation in legislative debate); Hanna Bäck and Marc Debus,
‘When Do Women Speak? A Comparative Analysis
of the Role of Gender in
Legislative Debates’
(2019) 67(3)
Political Studies
(using role
incongruity theory to argue that ‘women take the parliamentary floor less
often because of the gender stereotypes
that are likely to guide the behaviour
of party representatives’: at 576).
See, eg, William M O’Barr and
Bowman K Atkins, ‘“Women’s Language” or “Powerless
in Sally McConnell-Ginet, Ruth Borker and Nelly Furman
Women and Language in Literature and Society
(Praeger, 1980) 93,
94 (arguing that women are interrupted more because of their position of
relative powerlessness in society at
large); Janet E Ainsworth, ‘In a
Different Register: The Pragmatics of Powerlessness in Police
Interrogation’
(1993) 103(2)
Yale Law Journal
(‘Women’s language developed as a way of surviving and even
flourishing without control over economic, physical,
or social reality’:
at 284, quoting Robin T Lakoff,
Talking Power: The Politics of Language in
(BasicBooks, 1990) 205).
Kathryn Rubino, ‘It
Doesn’t Get Better: Women Supreme Court Justices Get Interrupted
Above the Law
(Blog Post, 6 April 2017)
http://abovethelaw.com/2017/04/it-doesnt-get-better-women-supreme-court-justices-get-interrupted-too/
Similarly, Prachi Gupta, ‘Even Ruth Bader Ginsburg Gets Interrupted
(Blog Post, 5 April 2017)
<https://theslot.jezebel.com/even-ruth-bader-ginsburg-gets-interrupted-by-men-1794051337>.
itself concluded: ‘Our findings that female Justices are
consistently interrupted more than their male counterparts in this
setting show
that gender dynamics are robust enough to persist even in the face of high
levels of power achieved by women’:
Jacobi and Schweers (n 3) 1484.
On the institutional difference in
oral argument between Australia and the US see Tonja Jacobi, Zoë Robinson
and Patrick Leslie,
‘Comparative Oral Argument: What Australia Can Teach
Us about the US Supreme Court (and Vice-Versa)’ (Working Paper,
2020) (‘Comparative Oral Argument’), available from the authors. See
also David Bennett, ‘Argument Before
the Court’ in Michael Coper,
Tony Blackshield and George Williams (eds),
The Oxford Companion to the High
Court of Australia
(Oxford University Press, 2001) 31; Sir Anthony Mason,
‘Chief Justice, Role of’ in Michael Coper, Tony Blackshield and
George Williams (eds),
The Oxford Companion to the High Court of
(Oxford University Press, 2001) 91; Benjamin Alarie and Andrew J
Commitment and Cooperation On High Courts: A Cross-Country Examination
Of Institutional Constraints On Judges
(Oxford University Press, 2017).
Loughland (n 1) 822.
See, eg, Julia Hare, ‘Girl
Interrupted: Talking over the Top of Female Judges’,
BroadAgenda
(Blog Post, 12 February 2020)
http://www.broadagenda.com.au/home/girl-interrupted-if-it-happens-to-high-court-judges-rude/
Michaela Whitburn, ‘Female High Court Judges “Far More Likely”
to Be Interrupted than Male Peers: Study’,
The Sydney Morning
(online, 5 February 2020)
<https://www.smh.com.au/national/female-high-court-judges-far-more-likely-to-be-interrupted-than-male-peers-study-20200204-p53xjw.html>;
‘Overcoming Disproportionate Interruptions Faced by Female Judges’,
The Lawyers Weekly Show
(Lawyers Weekly, 6 March 2020)
<https://www.lawyersweekly.com.au/podcast/27645-overcoming-disproportionate-interruptions-faced-by-female-judges>.
Note however that Loughland examines
cases where all seven justices sit on the panel, which are
the exception at the High Court, accounting for only 33% of cases between
and 2019. In a working paper, we find that panel size is an important
consideration for advocate and justice behaviour at oral
argument; we do find
evidence of gendered interruption effects when looking beyond seven-justice
panels: see Jacobi, Robinson and
Leslie, ‘Comparative Oral Argument’
(n 15) 69, 73, 80–1. However, in order to accurately and directly respond
Loughland’s claims, we present findings only relating to seven-justice
Loughland (n 1) 825.
Ibid 825 n 9.
Ibid 827–8.
Tonja Jacobi and Kyle Rozema,
‘Judicial Conflicts and Voting Agreement: Evidence from Interruptions
at Oral Argument’
(2018) 59(7)
Boston College Law Review
2297–8, 2300 (showing that ‘exposure’ through talking more is
a significant predictor of being interrupted). See
also Jacobi and Schweers (n
3) 1437 (showing that the claim that female Supreme Court justices are
interrupted more cannot be explained
by the inaccurate trope that women talk
Loughland (n 1) 830–3.
See Jacobi and Schweers (n 3) 1442
(showing that female justices learn to speak less politely and more like men
over their tenure
on the Court), 1444 (showing that seniority has a
statistically significant impact on interruption rates).
Loughland (n 1) 833.
Ibid 834–6.
Ibid 844–5.
Bennett (n 15) 31 (providing Chief
Justice Mason’s account of how his Honour changed oral argument from Chief
Justice Dixon’s
Jacobi and Schweers (n 3) 1457.
Ibid 1461 (showing that both men and
women are significantly more likely to recognise when they have interrupted a
man than a woman
and almost 30% more likely to defer to a man than a woman,
ceding the floor to him rather than her).
Tonja Jacobi and Matthew Sag,
‘Can Supreme Court Culture Change? Interruptions at Oral Argument,
Continued’ (Working
Paper, 2020) available from the authors on request.
See also Tonja Jacobi and Matthew Sag, ‘October 2018 Term in Review: Part
III (Interruptions)’,
(Blog Post, 14 May 2019)
<https://scotusoa.com/2018term-interruptions/>.
All figures shown exclude
‘conversational overlaps’ – interruptions that happen within
one second of another justice
starting to speak: Jacobi and Rozema (n 26) 2307,
who show that these overlaps are not associated with vote disagreement.
‘High Court of Australia
Transcripts’,
http://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdb/au/cases/cth/HCATrans/
‘High Court of Australia: Transcripts (HCATrans)’,
http://jade.barnet.com.au/c/HCATRANS
Lex Howard, ‘Transcripts of
Argument’ in Michael Cooper, Tony Blackshield and George Williams (eds),
The Oxford Companion to the High Court of Australia
(Oxford University
Press, 2001) 682, 683.
Using statistical and computational
methods, we extracted metadata from each transcript (including case name and
number, start and
end times of argument) and we identify the relevant
‘chunks’ of text representing the speaking events of all speakers
during oral argument, delineated both broadly (ie, between justice and advocate
speaking turns) and specifically (ie, where a speaking
turn is identified by
speaker name).
Replicating the method outlined in
Jacobi and Sag (n 36) n 5. An audit of the text of the transcripts, as well as a
sample of the
audio files of oral argument indicates that the ‘---’
accurately denotes an interruption of one speaker by another speaker
than, for example, an abrupt end to a speech.
The break in the data – the
missing squares in the female interruption lines – arise because there
were no women on
the Court for the majority of 2003, after Gaudron J retired at
the end of January 2003, and no women at all in 2004. While Crennan
seat on the Court on 1 November 2005, she did not participate in oral argument
until 2006, thus there are no data for
female interruptions in 2005.
Tonja Jacobi, Zoë Robinson and
Patrick Leslie, ‘What Explains Interruptive Behavior on the High Court of
Australia?’
(Working Paper) (finding no gendered propensity for justices
to interrupt one another, examining all cases from 1995 to 2019). Loughland
mentions justice to justice interruptions in her appendix, as she notes,
correctly, that Australian High Court justices do not
interrupt each other much:
Loughland (n 1) 825 n 9, 848 (‘Interruptions by male advocates represented
96.8% of interruptions
in 2015–16 and 90% in 2017’: at 825 n 9).
Jacobi and Schweers (n 3) 1437; Tonja
Jacobi and Matthew Sag, ‘Justice-to-Justice Interruptions: Gender versus
, (Blog Post, 3 August 2018)
<https://scotusoa.com/justice-to-justice-interruptions-gender-versus-ideology/>.
However, caution must be
exercised in drawing inferences from these descriptive data. As Loughland notes,
there are very few female
advocates who appear in a speaking role before the
High Court in oral argument on the merits: Loughland (n 1) 825 n 9. Indeed, in
our dataset of oral argument before seven-justice panels, the ratio of male to
female advocates is 18.8% (ie, between 1995 and 2019
9,560 male advocates appear
before the court versus 1,797 female advocates).
Loughland (n 1) 845.
Justice Sotomayor was appointed in
2009 and Justice Kagan was appointed in 2010. At the time of the Jacobi and
Schweers study, 2017,
which included data up until 2015, the average judicial
tenure was more than 25 years.
Jacobi and Schweers (n 3) 1450,
1479–82 (showing seniority has a small but statistically significant
effect, and still identify
a larger gender effect).
Loughland also examines volubility as
a possible explanator for her findings: Loughland (n 1) 828–30.
We calculate the length of oral
argument for each case using the start and finish times indicated in each
transcript, accounting
for any breaks (eg, lunch) as indicated by the
transcript.
These regressions were estimated using
a mixed-effects multilevel model equation with random intercepts grouping
observations for
each justice and year (20 Justices over 24 years). This
formulation allows us to account for clustering of observations which under
regression assumptions are assumed to be independent from one another. For a
full explanation of this model, see Andrew Gelman and
Jennifer Hill,
Analysis Using Regression/Multilevel Models
(Cambridge University Press,
2006) ch 15.
The poisson regression coefficient
predicts changes in the count of interruptions experienced by justices of the
High Court. Positive
coefficients indicate a greater number of interruptions
per-justice per-case. More precisely, coefficients are associated with the
logarithm of the mean of the poisson distribution, which means that we cannot
interpret coefficients directly as with an ordinary
least squares regression.
For a prediction of the number of interruptions conditional on an explanatory
variable, we calculate predicted
values and graph them (see Figure 5). The
female coefficient is negative but not significant in most cases, meaning that
of gender is not distinguishable from zero. This coefficient is
negative and significant in Model 3 for reasons explained in the
below. Note, however, that if we look beyond the seven-justice panels that
Loughland uses as her test, we find that the
coefficient is positive, but still
not significant: see Jacobi, Robinson and Leslie, ‘What Explains
Interruptive Behavior on
the High Court of Australia?’ (n 43).
At p <.05 level, we can have 95%
confidence that the results are not the product of a random effect. At the .01
significance
level, the confidence is 99%, and at p <.001, the confidence
level is 99.9%. 95% confidence is the standard social science measure,
considered the minimum test to make any statistical claim. See, eg, Michael
Lewis-Beck, Alan Bryman and Tim Futing Liao,
The SAGE Encyclopedia of Social
Science Research Methods
(Sage Publications, 2004).
We also included a variable that
accounted for the proportion of women on the panel in order to control for any
possible effect
of more or less women at any given time. We found that there was
no association between the number of women on the panel and an increase
decrease in interruptive behaviour. Details available from the authors.
We cannot include both in one
regression given the limited number of female Chief Justices.
The confidence intervals become wider
as experience increases because fewer justices serve for between 10 and 20
Loughland (n 1) 841 (female
justices’ ‘lack of full participation in the institution’s
most important deliberative
process [due to being interrupted] casts doubt over
their substantive equality’).
Ibid 842 (‘almost equal
representation of female judges ... is not enough to overcome subtle gender
discrimination’).
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (791 KB)
PDF format (1.13 MB)
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter