URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/journals/AULegHist/2007/13.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 14:35:59
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Reynolds, Henry --- "The Judges Judged: MABO and the Disaffected Historians" [2007] AULegHist 13; (2007) 11(2) Legal History 231
The Judges Judged: Mabo and the disaffected historians
The Judges Judged:
disaffected historians
On 3 June 1992 the High Court delivered its judgement in the case
Queensland (No 2).
of the seven judges found for the Meriam plaintiffs – Mabo, Rice and Passi
with Brennan J memorably declaring that the Meriam
people were entitled
‘as against the whole world to possession, occupation, use and enjoyment
of the islands of Mer ...’.
More significant still was the short statement of Mason CJ and McHugh J
concurring with Brennan, but indicating that the principles
which underpinned
the judgement applied not just to the Murray Islands but to Australia as a
whole. Six members of the Court were
in agreement that,
the common law of this country recognizes a form of native title which, in cases
where it has not been extinguished, reflects the
entitlement of the indigenous
inhabitants, in accordance with their laws or customs, to their traditional
was one of the most dramatic, controversial and widely discussed
cases in the history of the Court most of which receive little public
It was extensively reported both in Australia and overseas. There was an early
appreciation that it represented a turning
point in Australian jurisprudence.
For some there was exhilaration; for others a sense of shock and consternation.
The judgement
was unexpected. It turned on the principles of native title which
were little known or understood in Australia even in the legal
profession. It
was followed by months of intense discussion, angry disputation, serious
consideration in specialist forums. People
who had rarely, if ever, adopted a
view about a legal judgement were drawn into the debate – corporate
leaders, churchmen,
politicians, industry lobbyists and farmers. There was an
intense period of research in the legal profession as cases from Canada,
Zealand, the United States and the Privy Council were opened often for the first
The debate continued while the federal government sought ways to respond to
the judgement with legislation which eventually passed
at the end of 1993 after
tense negotiations with interested parties and contention within the ALP caucus.
The controversy over native
title was abating by the time that the concomitant
Wik case of 1996 was decided with the Court determining, by a 4/3 majority, that
elements of native title had been preserved on the vast lands held under
pastoral lease. Controversy flared again with even greater
intensity, the
judgement confounding the many jurists who had assumed that a lease would,
judging by the Court’s own definition
, extinguish native
Seen from the perspective of 2007 the
judgements have not
diminished in significance. The overturned, traditional view that Australia had
been both a territorium nullius,
a land without government and a terra nullius,
a land without laws or land tenure, might have been regrettable but it seemed
settled and certain. Among the minority of commentators who had followed
the progress of the case through the courts the most notable
feature was the
courage – some would say the audacity – of the Court in applying
principles enunciated for the particular
circumstances of Murray and Darnly
Islands to the whole continent.
Australian historians participated in the debate from the start. They
appreciated the importance of the judgement and realized that
the Court had
re-interpreted the legal history of settlement which would inescapably impact on
the way they would henceforth have
to tell their stories. There were, after all,
dramatic changes involved. The Court had determined that traditionally the
had a form of land tenure. They were owners and occupiers of
territory. Their tenure wasn’t extinguished as an automatic consequence
annexation but rather in a slow piecemeal fashion over a long period of time as
the settlers pushed into tribal territory. The
squatters were not pushing out
into vacant, or waste, crown land. Aboriginal resistance was, on the face of it,
legitimate defence
of property. The common law of the late C18th and early C19th
had been capable of according recognition to native title but failed
Justices Deane, Toohey and Gaudron argued that in the absence of clear and
unambiguous statutory provision to the contrary
‘extinguishment of native
title by the Crown by inconsistent grant’ was ‘wrongful and gave
rise to a claim for
compensatory
It was a large agenda of re-interpretation which impinged on almost every
aspect of Australian historiography, upsetting many long
held beliefs while
arousing a sense that the Court had intruded into intellectual territory where
they lacked both knowledge and
legitimacy. Deane and Gaudron JJ were more
forthright about their historical perspective than their colleagues referring
the conflagration of oppression and conflict which was, over the following
century, [after 1788], to spread across the continent
to dispossess, degrade and
devastate the Aboriginal peoples and leave a national legacy of unutterable
In a coda to their judgement Deane and Gaudron JJ returned to their
historical interpretation indicating that they had been influenced
researches of many scholars who had written in areas ‘into which this
judgement has necessarily ventured’ and
that their own research had been
directed to sources which the historians had already identified. In explaining
the historical reflection
in their joint judgement they explained that they
conscious of the fact that, in those parts of this judgement which deal with the
dispossession of the Australian Aborigines, we have
used language and expressed
conclusions which some may think to be unusually emotive for a judgement in this
That High Court judges would refer to a legacy of unutterable shame was seen
by many people as an inexcusable attack on the legitimacy
of the nation. It was
one thing for such views to be proclaimed by radical academics in little-read
journals or private post-graduate
seminars but to have them put so bluntly by
the leading judicial figures in the country was another matter altogether.
The prominent historian, Geoffrey Blainey, mounted a sustained and vociferous
counter attack both as conservative commentator and
eminent scholar. A crusade
among intellectuals and journalists for compensation to the Aborigines had, he
observed, infected the
High Court and while it was a crusade among
intellectuals, it was not an intellectual
was, in fact, ‘startling’ illustrating ‘deep divisions and
wide confusion within Australia’. If
a Menzies era politician or
commentator had predicted what had happened the public ‘would have been
astonished’.
Gaudron JJ were his principal targets. They had made erroneous statements about
Australian history. They were ‘noteworthy
in their ignorance’ and
had based their views ‘partly on prejudice and misguided
It was strange,
he declared,
to find at least two judges making rash statements about Australian history, and
specifically giving an erroneous explanation of
why Aborigines were wiped
Some historians, after reading the judgements will express surprise that the
majority of justices have built their case for restitution
of lands to
Aborigines on an interpretation of history which they might not easily be able
The most striking feature of the Blainey onslaught was that he dealt with the
judgements as though he was marking history essays written
by wilfully radical
undergraduates and in the process greatly exaggerated the importance of his own
discipline and of his capacity
to critically evaluate the judgement. The judges,
he believed, had built their case on faulty interpretations of the past; bad
made bad law. We can clearly see that some of the judges – notably
Deane, Gaudron and Toohey JJ – had read widely in
recent historiography
and it may well have shaped their understanding of settler-Aboriginal relations.
But their historical comments
are strictly obiter dicta and have little direct
bearing on the meticulous legal arguments that advanced case by case, precedent
by precedent. Like many critics of the Court, Blainey gave no indication that he
followed the legal argument or had read the relevant
case law. At no point did
he address the legal reasoning on which the case turned and there was no
indication that he was familiar
with relevant case law in Canada, the United
States and New Zealand or with the judgements of the Privy Council.
Blainey voiced common concerns and popular prejudices, declaring that the
Court had imposed contemporary values on events of 200 years
ago. The judgement
looked back ‘through modern blinkers’. The judges had applied
‘supposedly dominant moral values’
of the 1990s to 1788 and had
‘reversed the legal thinking of long
In this, Blainey had
a moot point but it was not the historiographical views of the judges that
mattered most but contemporary developments
both in the law itself and in
anthropology to which he had been a notable contributor.
Anthropology was significant because a central question to be resolved was
the nature of Aboriginal society. Such a question had been
dealt with many times
in courts in the white settler societies since the beginning of colonization.
Many relevant cases had reached
the Privy Council in London, none more important
In re Southern Rhodesia
in 1919 which was necessarily addressed in
case, and in particular, a critical passage in Lord
Summer’s judgement cited by both Toohey and Brennan JJ which read:
The estimation of the rights of Aboriginal tribes is always inherently
difficult. Some tribes are so low in the scale of social organization
usages and conceptions of rights and duties are not to be reconciled with the
institutions or the legal ideas of civilized
society. Such a gulf cannot be
bridged. It would be idle to impute to such people some shadow of rights known
to our law and then
to transmute it into the substance of transferable rights of
property as we knew
Historically the Aborigines had been judged to be a unique and primitive
people, their society a relic from the Stone Age. Their stage
of evolution was
thousands of years removed from modern civilization. They were clearly among the
tribes ‘so low in the scale
of social organization’ who were to be
found on the wrong side of Lord Sumner’s ‘unbridgeable gulf’.
a native title case to be won in C20th Australia, Aboriginal traditional
rights had to be transmuted from shadow into substance.
Either the Aborigines
had to be seen as people who had crossed the ‘unbridgeable gulf’ or
belief in the gulf itself had
to be superseded. Both of these developments
resulted from the emergence of anthropology and the concomitant reassessment of
traditional
societies. Several generations of Australian anthropologists
contributed to this profound change in the country’s intellectual
Many of the new ideas were both summarized and popularized by Geoffrey Blainey
in his 1975 book
The Triumph of the
which may, indeed,
have been more pertinent to the Mabo judgement than the historians he so
vigorously attacked.
The High Court looked for its assessment of traditional society to the 1972
judgement of Blackburn J in the Northern Territory Supreme
Court case,
Milerrpum v Nabalco
, which in turn was based on extensive evidence
presented by both anthropologists and Aboriginal elders. In a key passage in his
Toohey J cited the passage where Blackburn had considered the
relevance of
In re Southern Rhodesia
which read:
The social rules and customs of the plaintiffs cannot possibly be dismissed as
lying on the other side of an unbridgeable gulf. The
evidence shows a subtle and
elaborate system highly adapted to the country in which the people led their
lives, which ... was remarkably
free from the vagaries of personal whims or
influence. If ever a system could be called ‘a government of laws, and not
it is that shown in the evidence before
The same passage was cited by Brennan J in his judgment.
In his address to the Court, the counsel for the plaintiff, A. R. Castan,
grasped the pivotal importance of the question arguing that
the bench should
reject the ‘two kinds of society’ or the ‘unbridgeable
gulf’ theory espoused by Lord
The correct approach was
to determine the way in which the society functioned and how it regulated the
use and inheritance of land.
But Castan’s focus was on the Murray Islands
and their distinctive form of land use and tenure. Both popular and expert
in the past had judged the Torres Strait Islanders as being more
‘civilized’ than the Aborigines, more advanced in an
evolutionary
sense. The Court had at its disposal the extensive findings of fact provided by
Moynehan J of the Queensland Supreme
Court. It is likely that even in the past
the Murray Islanders would have been seen by Europeans to be on the right side
of the unbridgeable
gulf. But what of the very different society on mainland
Australia? Should the same principles by applied?
It was Brennan J who supplied the answer. The Court, he explained, could
apply the existing authorities and proceed to inquire whether
the Meriam people
were higher ‘in the scale of social organization’ than the
Australian Aborigines or that the Court
could over-rule the authorities,
discarding the distinction between inhabited colonies that were terra-nullius
and those which were
could the circumstances which might be thought to differentiate the Murray
Islands from other parts of Australia ‘be invoked
as an acceptable ground
for distinguishing the entitlement of the Meriam people from the entitlement of
other indigenous inhabitants
to the use and enjoyment of their traditional
In a passage which illustrated the fundamental importance of modern
assessment of traditional societies Brennan declared:
The theory that the indigenous inhabitants of a settled colony had no
proprietary interest in the land thus depended on a discriminatory
denigration
of indigenous inhabitants, their social organization and customs ... the basis
of the theory is false in fact and unacceptable
If modern anthropology was more important than historiography in the
judgement, developments in jurisprudence were more significant
again. Once the bench had determined that indigenous Australians were
uniquely primitive people then the full weight of native title law could be
applied to their circumstances. Any reader of the
judgement will be immediately
aware of the critical importance of cases decided from the early C19th onwards
in the United States,
Canada and New Zealand along with relevant colonial cases
which had reached the Privy Council in London. It was these leading cases
provided the intellectual stepping stones marking out the progress of Brennan,
Toohey, Gaudron, and Deane JJ towards their
recognition of native title in
Australia. Without abundant precedents in common law jurisdictions they could
not have undertaken
their pilgrimage.
Few of the critics of the judgement gave any indication that they had read
the cases on which
rested. However, they were on firmer ground when
they attacked the Court for applying modern standards to past decisions. This
was central to Blainey’s public assault and it was the one which
appeared to resonate most persistently in the community. Brennan
colleagues made no secret of this aspect of their decisions, explaining that
they had responded to contemporary opinion,
to human rights documents and to
decisions of the International Court and in particular its reasoning in the
Advisory Opinion on
Western Sahara of 1975. Brennan argued that if it had been
permissible in the past to keep the common law in step with international
was imperative that in the modern world that it should not be seen ‘to be
frozen in an age of racial
discrimination’.
Australia’s accession to the Optional Protocol to the International
Covenant on Civil and Political Rights had brought to bear
a powerful influence
on domestic law. Whatever the justification ‘in earlier days’ for
refusing to recognize the rights
and interests in land of indigenous people,
‘an unjust and discriminatory doctrine of that kind’ could no longer
be accepted.
The expectations of
the international community accorded in this respect with the contemporary
values of the Australian people. With
his eye set firmly on the modern world
Brennan J declared that,
no case can commend unquestioning adherence if the rule it expresses seriously
offends the values of justice and human rights (especially
equality before the
law) which are aspirations of the contemporary Australian legal system. If a
postulated rule of the common law
expressed in earlier cases seriously offends
those contemporary values, the question arises whether the rule should be
In 2004 and 2005 controversy about
flared anew. Historians were
again in the front rank of combatants, their concern with the provenance of the
term terra-nullius and
with the actual attitudes and policies employed by the
British authorities at the time of annexation of Eastern Australia in 1788.
Although related these two questions will be considered in turn.
The first shots in the campaign were fired by Michael Connor in an essay
‘Error Nullius’ published in
The Bulletin
in August 2003 in
which he argued that the term terra- nullius was unknown in the late C18th and
was, indeed, a modern coinage which
was adopted into Australian discourse
following the International Court of Justice’s opinion on the
Sahara Case
It had been
taken up by historians, and in particular, by Henry Reynolds in his 1987 book
The Law of the Land
. From there the term was adopted by the High Court
who were ‘misled’ by the historian undermining the validity of the
judgement. The Reynolds version of our history
‘underpinned’ the
judges’ decision. When they
rejected the doctrine that Australia was a terra-nullius ‘they were
paraphrasing his book
and accepting questionable historiography about
The controversy intensified in 2004 with the publication of Connor’s
The Invention of Terra
and the intervention
by Bain Attwood with his article ‘”The Law of the Land”:
History, Law and Narrative in a Settler
Society’ in the electronic
History Compass
and more particularly with his ‘Myth, history and the law of the
land’ in the
Australian Financial
It is not possible
to consider in any detail the complex arguments in Attwood’s long article
History Compass
but one passage, in particular, had an electrifying
effect on public debate. In discussing the ‘myth of terra-nullius’
he argued that while the discussion he found in
The Law of the Land
‘in some senses true’ this truth was ‘rather different to the
truths that academic history usually seeks to
advance and in those terms it can
be regarded as a lie’.
Attwood may have been surprised by the reaction to this assertion but during
the middle of 2004 controversy reached fever pitch. An
exchange between Michael
Duffy and Michael Connor on the ABC radio’s ‘Counterpoint’
will illustrate the mood of
: The revelation of this error [regarding terra-nullius] has
shocked the history profession ... And since Michael Connor blew the
another historian, Monash University’s Professor Bain Attwood has come out
and acknowledged the Henry Reynolds’
story of terra-nullius is actually a
: I’ve been going round saying this is an error, et cetera,
but suddenly the Attwood version is, Reynolds has told a lie.
Christopher Pearson, the columnist in
The Australian
, followed up with
two long articles explaining that the work of Attwood and Connor represented a
‘parade gun shift’ in
Australian history. ‘Thanks to
Reynolds’, Pearson declared,
High Court judges and most of the commentariat imagined that the Mabo decision
had overturned the doctrine of terra-nullius, when,
in fact, it had never been
part of the law relied on to justify white
settlement.
But the height of the controversy was reached when Emeritus Professor of Law,
David Flint, asked rhetorically in an opinion piece
The Australian
‘Is it time to sue over
?’ and declared that those
farmers and miners who had ‘paid for
, and are still paying,
may have a case’.
In retrospect the intense controversy about terra-nullius seems to be a storm
with very little substance but several issues remain
to be discussed. The most
obvious one is that at no point did anyone argue that terra-nullius was a term
that was used in 1788. But
it came to be used as a convenient way to refer to
territory that was acquired on the assumption that resident tribes did not
own the land or exercise sovereignty over it. Brennan J referred to an
‘enlarged’ concept of terra-nullius which related
circumstances apparent in 1788 when the Crown was thought to have acquired both
the sovereignty and the beneficial ownership
of the land. In one sense the
debate about the term was pointless. Its adoption by the High Court sanctioned
its use in legal argument
in Australia regardless of the provenance of the term.
Henceforth it had the imprimatur of the highest court in the land. In so acting,
the Court was doing nothing new or unusual. New terms are adopted by courts all
the time and known terms are used in novel ways.
In this the law is no different
from any other discipline which, while dealing with the past, addresses a
contemporary audience in
words that have meaning for them. A comparison of the
Court’s discussion of early Australia, with the treatment of the same
period by scholars in other disciplines, is instructive. In his discussion of
the economy of early New South Wales, the doyen of
economic historians, N. G.
Butlin, employed a plethora of modern terms unknown to those whose activities he
was analysing. In just
three pages we read of ‘business cycle
performance’, ‘vertical social mobility’, ‘gross
domestic product
per unit of factor input’, ‘internal production
function’, annual input series’, ‘systematic exchange
pricing’, ‘land resource ratios’, Kuznet’s building
cycle’, ‘marginal
Such usages pass
without comment or criticism. They have never been the cause of controversy.
The provenance of terra-nullius has recently been outlined in impressive
detail by Andrew Fitzmaurice in his article ‘The Genealogy
But it is still
necessary to return to the controversy arising from the work of Attwood and
Connor which was based on a series of
misconceptions. Having first come across
the term in historical works, and in particular
The Law of the Land,
made two quite erroneous assumptions. One was that it was given currency by
historians rather than jurists; the other is that
the High Court adopted it from
them. But there is no evidence for either proposition. When he first uses the
term terra-nullius Brennan
J refers to classic 1926 book R. H. Lindley’s
The Acquisition and Government of Backward Territory in International
while Toohey cites the
Western Sahara
of the International Court of Justice.
There is clear evidence that
‘terra-nullius’ was employed by Australian jurists well before it
was taken up by historians.
The distinguished scholar, D. P. O’Connell,
observed in 1965 in his
International Law
that Australia was treated as a
terra-nullius because the Aborigines were ‘held incapable of intelligent
transactions with
an interpretation
followed by Elizabeth Evatt in 1968 and James Crawford in
The first use of the term
by an historian appears to have been Allan Frost in his article of 1981
‘New South Wales as Terra
Nullius. The British Denial of Aboriginal Land
and by the time it
was used by Reynolds in
The Law of the Land
in 1987 it was commonly
understood by jurists and used to apply to the circumstances associated with the
settlement of Australia.
Linked to discussion of the provenance of the term terra-nullius was the
concomitant question of the actual application of the law
in 1788. The issue was
raised by David Ritter who argued in 1996 that when Australia was originally
claimed by the Crown ‘neither
terra-nullius or any other legal doctrine
was used to deny recognition of traditional Aboriginal rights to land under
common law’.
Such a doctrine would not ‘have appeared necessary to
the colonists’ because the Aborigines were seen, and defined by
intrinsically barbarous and without any interest in land. The colonists
‘required no legal doctrine’ to explain
why land rights were not
recognized under the law because no legal doctrine was required for what was
axiomatic’.
Both Attwood and Connor followed in Ritter’s wake. Attwood argued that
the law ‘had no causal role’ in the dispossession
which resulted
from the actual ‘process of colonization’. The law and government
‘did not really begin to tell
a story about the rights of British
possession until the
Connor had a
similar view, best illustrated during an exchange on radio with Michael
: And so – I suppose it’s rather an obvious question
– how did the British justify the settlement of 1788, if it
terra-nullius?
: Well I think this is one of the problems, Michael, that in the
period we’re looking at they didn’t really need to justify
there was a nice, clear- cut reason in the archives, we would have all grabbed
it. I think later on, into the nineteenth century
people started looking around
and saying, well how did we get control of this? What did happen? And they start
inventing different
stories. But I think really in the eighteenth century they
weren’t so concerned with it.
: They came, they liked what they saw, and they conquered ...
Ritter, Attwood and Connor approach the subject from different directions and
write with varying degrees of sophistication. However
they share some common
assumptions about the law and Australian settlement – that no legal
doctrine was involved because one
wouldn’t have appeared necessary, indeed
the law had no causal role in the process of annexation, nor was there any need
justify the proceedings in 1788. Common assumptions emerge from shared
misconceptions about C18th British society, about the rule
of law, about
colonization and, perhaps most surprisingly, about the
It is highly improbable that the officials who planned the expedition to
Botany Bay were ignorant of the law or thought it unimportant.
The British had
been dealing with colonies in America and the Caribbean for more than a century
and the relevant legal principles
had been thoroughly construed in the courts
both in the metropolis and at the periphery. The authorities had to decide whose
was to apply in the new antipodean colony – that of the colonists or
that of the host society until changed by the interlopers.
It was a question
that could not be avoided or left to some time in the future. Eighteenth century
British society – even an
overseas enclave – could not operate with
legal uncertainty or with arbitrary power. Few societies in history have been as
dependent on the rule of law as Britain at the time of Australian settlement.
‘Turn where you will’, E. P. Thompson observed,
‘the rhetoric
of C18th England is saturated with the notion of law’. Indeed law
‘assumed unusual pre-eminence in
The decision was made prior to the departure of the First Fleet that the
common law would become the only law in the new colony and
that the Aborigines
would become subjects amenable to that law. British property law would prevail.
There would be no recognition
of indigenous tenure. Australia was to become a
colony of settlement. Far from lacking jurisprudential doctrine the proceedings
securely anchored in the authoritative writing of William Blackstone as
Brennan J made clear in his judgement citing the great jurist’s
description of those colonies,
where lands are claimed by right of occupancy only, by finding them desert and
uncultivated.
Brennan J observed that this view was upheld by Stephen, C. J. in the
Supreme Court of New South Wales in 1847 and by Lord Watson
in the Privy Council
in 1889 who declared that Australia had been at the time of settlement ‘a
tract of territory practically
unoccupied, without settled inhabitants or
settled law’.
The line of legal reasoning is straight and clear as Brennan J observed when
he described what he meant by terra-nullius:
The view was taken that, when sovereignty of a territory could be acquired under
the enlarged notion of terra-nullius, for the purposes
of municipal law could be
treated as a “desert uninhabited” country. The hypothesis being that
there was no local law
already in existence in the territory, the law of England
became the law of the territory. The indigenous people of a settled colony
thus taken to be without laws, without a sovereign and primitive in their social
organization.
Brennan J’s explanation of terra-nullius is clear, his use of the term
justified and his explanation of why it should be overturned
convincing.
The High Court was sharply criticised for the decision in
judges’ grasp of Australian history was challenged. Blainey, in
particular, argued that bad history had produced erroneous
law. His views were
influential. On reflection the reverse appears to be true. Those historians who
have attacked the Court have
all too often got the law wrong either through
misunderstanding or, in some cases, a willing suspension of comprehension.
Professor, History and
Aboriginal Studies, University of Tasmania
Mabo v Queensland (No
[1992] HCA 23
For an excellent survey of the
controversy see the publication of the Commonwealth Parliamentary Library,
The Mabo Debate: A Chronology
, 14 October 1993.
Wik Peoples v Queensland
(1996) 187 CLR 1
Cited by Mason, C.J. and
McHugh, J. in
[1992] HCA 23
‘Land Rights for
(Melbourne)
10 November 1993.
‘Sitting in Judgement
on History’,
Australian Business Magazine
, August 1993.
Cited by B. Goff in
Townsville Daily Bulletin
, 13 November 1993.
Australian Business
above n 10.
The Australian,
, 10 November 1993.
(1919) AC 211
Geoffrey Blainey,
Triumph of the Nomads
[1992] HCA 23
, 39 and 186.
The Bulletin
August 2003.
Michael Connor,
Invention of Terra Nullius
Vol. 2, 2004, 1-30.
11 June, 2004.
Connor, ‘The Law of
the Land’, above n 27, 18.
12 July 2004.
The Weekend
, 10-11 July 2004.
21 March, 2006.
N G Butlin,
Colonial Economy
, (1994) 198-9.
Australian Historical
, No. 129, 2007, 1-15.
[1992] HCA 23
Ibid, 180-2.
2 vols., (1965), vol I, p.
E. Evatt, ‘The
Requisition of Territory in Australia and New Zealand’,
Grotian Society
, 1968, 16. J. Crawford,
The Creation of States in International
(1979) 179.
(1980-1) 19
David Ritter, ‘The
“Rejection of Terra-Nullius” in
: A Critical
Analysis’, (1996) 18
Sydney Law Review
Connor, ‘The Law of
the Land’, above n 27, 23 footnote 36.
Counterpoint
above n 30.
For two recent and
important considerations of the question see: S. Banner, ‘Why
Terra-Nullius? Anthropology and Property
Law in Early Australia’, (2005)
Law and History Review
95; M. Borch, ‘Rethinking the Origins of
Terra Nullius’, (2001) 117
Historical Studies
E P Thompson,
Hunters: The Origin of the Black Act
, (1975) 263-5, 267-9.
Brennan J in
[1992] HCA 23
(1992) 175 CLR 1
Ibid 26-7, 37.
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (124 KB)
PDF format (398 KB)
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter