URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/journals/IntJlSSWC/2009/1.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 15:04:42
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Zimmer, Stefan; H�ffer, Eva-Marie --- "The Challenge of Occupational Diseases in Developing Countries: Exemplary Observations and Good Practice Proposals from a Cycle of Seminars in Four Continents" [2009] IntJlSSWC 1; (2009) 1(1) International Journal of Social Security and Workers Compensation 1
A. INTRODUCTION
B. ARE OCCUPATIONAL DISEASES A ‘GLOBAL’ CHALLENGE?
C. GLOBAL DATA
D. RECOGNITION, REPORTING AND COMPENSATION OF OCCUPATIONAL DISEASES
E. CHALLENGES POSED BY THE INFORMAL SECTOR
F. CONCLUSION
I. Ensure Sound Reporting, Motivate to Report
II. Strengthen Diagnostic Quality
III. Follow Up on Exposed Workers
IV. Review/Update Lists on Occupational Diseases
V. Foster Prevention of Occupational Diseases
VI. Offer Incentives
G. BIBLIOGRAPHY
THE CHALLENGE OF OCCUPATIONAL DISEASES IN DEVELOPING
EXEMPLARY OBSERVATIONS AND GOOD PRACTICE PROPOSALS FROM A
CYCLE OF SEMINARS IN FOUR CONTINENTS
AND EVA-MARIE
Occupational diseases (OD) in their various forms and facets pose a special
challenge to social security systems around the world.
While a common
international definition of occupational diseases does not exist, social
insurance systems face certain common problems
arising, for instance, from the
complex multi-causality of OD as well as from a continuously changing world of
work. Legal, administrative,
environmental and geographical factors influence
prevention and social insurance coverage of occupational diseases. This article
highlights outcomes of a seminar cycle of the Technical Commission on Insurance
against Employment Accidents and Occupational Diseases
of the International
Social Security Association (ISSA). It presents key findings from three seminars
held in Latin America, Asia
and Africa between 2005 and 2007. In this context,
it deals in particular with the recognition, reporting and compensation of
occupational
diseases as well as the challenge posed by the informal sector. The
paper concludes with a summary of practical solutions proposed
A. INTRODUCTION
Recognition, prevention and insurance of occupational diseases (OD) have been
subjects of comparative research for many years. There
is wide agreement in
international publications that a common way to insure against and prevent
occupational diseases does not
Different countries follow different strategies: some strategies comprise a
list system; others use a general clause or a system
of proof. Countries with a
list system may even combine it with an additional open clause (resulting in
so-called mixed systems).
There are, however, certain recommendations for the
implementation of common minimum standards of an insurance scheme against OD,
stemming largely from international organisations such as the International
Labour Organization (ILO). Such recommendations can be
found, for example, in
Employment Injury Benefits
and the ILO
Recommendation Concerning the List of Occupational Diseases and the Recording
and Notification of Occupational Accidents and
For member states of
the European Union (EU), the Commission Recommendation (2003/670/EC) of 19
September 2003 concerning the
European Schedule of Occupational Diseases
suggests ways to improve knowledge at the European level, foster prevention and
provide assistance to workers by enabling them to
apply for compensation. It is
stipulated in this context that the EU member states introduce into their
national legislation a special
law on compensation for occupational
Despite these efforts to introduce certain common parameters, even in the EU
there are as many systems of OD coverage as there are
member states.
This was especially highlighted in the first of the International Social
Security Association (ISSA) seminars on the challenges of
occupational diseases,
held in Cyprus in 2003, which focused primarily on European
It would certainly be futile attempting to summarise most of the roughly 70
technical presentations on challenges and good practices
in preventing,
rehabilitating and insuring against occupational diseases in Latin America, Asia
and Africa, which were presented
in the course of the seminar cycle. However, at
least some key findings of the latest three seminars shall be presented, which
held in Argentina in 2005, the People’s Republic of China in 2006 and
Cameroon in 2007.
B. ARE OCCUPATIONAL DISEASES A ‘GLOBAL’
It was at least the hypothesis of the Technical Commission that, despite
regional particularities, certain commonly shared problems
could be found,
challenging social insurance in all regions of the world alike, and that, in the
end, some practically relevant methods
and practices should be derived in order
to propose — preferably simple — strategies to answer these
challenges.
In itself, occupational diseases are not a new risk insured by social
security. In fact, occupational diseases have been covered by
many systems
throughout the world for several decades. However, today more so than in the
past, this type of disease — in all
its multiple forms and facets —
poses a special challenge to social insurance. Problems already begin when
attempting to define
the subject at hand.
What is an occupational disease? Definitions
of occupational diseases
are diverse and vary according to jurisdiction. After all, ‘occupational
disease’ is a legal
and not a medical term. In the broader sense,
occupational diseases can be defined as diseases caused by exposure to factors
with work, a trade or an occupation. Other more restrictive
definitions characterise occupational diseases as such chronic ailments
occur in a given body of workers in a given industry, and at a rate
significantly higher than occur in the general population.
This also includes
diseases that are only known to occur among workers in a given industry and
nowhere else (such as black lung disease
among coalminers). In these cases,
where work-related factors are the only cause of a disease, its acceptance as an
occupational
disease generally does not cause any problem.
Another question is how to distinguish occupational diseases from
occupational accidents or work-related injuries. This depends on
the definition
and jurisdiction in a country. Occupational diseases may also fulfil the
requirements of work-related accidents or
injuries according to a
country’s legislation whilst in another country occupational diseases are
inconsistent with occupational
accidents or injuries. Moreover, an
‘occupational disease’ in one country might be recognised as an
‘occupational
accident’ in another country.
Even more complex than the definition are possible causes of occupational
diseases. In many cases (and increasingly so), work-related
factors increase the
risk of a disease, together with other non-work-related factors. Work-related
factors also often aggravate an
already established disease. It is this complex
multi-causality of occupational diseases which makes them not only difficult to
and record, but also highly difficult to prevent and insure
In summary, legal, administrative, environmental and geographical factors all
influence the way occupational diseases are prevented
and insured against in the
various regions of the world. The definitions of OD and the ways to insure
against and prevent OD, differ
from country to country. However, the question is
whether there are some globally shared characteristics which social security
around the world have to deal with.
One clear result of all seminars in the cycle was the recognition that
administrators, work safety specialists, medical practitioners,
workers and
employers in all parts of the world are challenged alike by the growing
of the issue. The multi-causality of OD, new and emerging
migrant workers in a globalised economy are all problems and challenges
associated with OD which demand special attention in the
early 21st century.
In the three seminars between 2005 and 2007, two challenges clearly demanded
most attention and shall therefore be described in the
1. The first challenge is marked by the difficulties relating to
occupational diseases, especially
those with long latency periods. This problem is complicated by certain new or
emerging (so-called
‘contentious’) diseases which are difficult to
attribute to the workplace (like work-related mental disorders).
2. The second challenge, aggravated by economic globalisation, is posed by
the attempt to expand the scope of coverage of social (in
particular accident)
insurance to risks formerly left uncovered in the
sector — informal sector workers in India, for instance, have almost no
access to statutory social
protection.
How can workers in the
informal economy (in many cases the vast majority of the national workforce) be
included in the system? How
can these workers be granted access to occupational
medical checkups, primary occupational health care, rehabilitation and
compensation
in case of a disease? This problem also has a flip side: in case of
successfully expanding the coverage, how can a system prepare
for future claims
by formerly uncovered workers without straining its financial resources? Claims,
especially for diseases with long
latency periods, might build up a large
financial burden for accident insurers in the not so distant future, especially
in currently
developing countries.
C. GLOBAL DATA
According to estimates by the ILO for occupational accidents and diseases,
there are globally about 2.2 million work-related deaths
By far, the largest share
of work-related fatalities is attributable to fatal diseases: between 1.7
million and 2 million deaths
per year. Global statistics and estimations of this
kind are methodologically questionable, but are probably the only way to at
come close to the reality of occupational diseases today. At least they
offer an idea of the magnitude of the problem. However, they
do not offer any
information as to what kinds of occupational diseases are most prevalent in
various countries. The concept of occupational
diseases and the method of
recording them both depend upon legal and administrative decisions in each
country. This makes comparing
national statistics on occupational diseases
difficult, if not impossible.
It was confirmed more than once in the cycle of seminars that a commonly
recognised disease in country A might not even be recognised
as an occupational
disease in country B, even though it might claim a similar number of victims.
From a comparison of the two respective
national statistics on occupational
diseases, any uninformed reader might draw the impression that country B
provides healthier working
environments with regard to the specific disease,
simply because no cases are recognised and compensated. Consequently, figures
workers compensation insurers show that in different countries very
different occupational diseases top the claims statistics. It
would be a great
error if one would draw any quick conclusions from this data on the reasons for
their prevalence. For instance,
whether or not a country recognises relatively
more cases of hearing loss than another might simply be the result of different
and administrative conditions rather than greater exposure of workers to
noise at the workplace. The following table exemplifies
the diversity of
‘most frequent’ occupational diseases across different
Most frequent claims
Second most frequent claims
Hearing loss
Respiratory diseases
China, People’s Republic
Pneumoconiosis (official share: 80% of all OD)
Acute and chronic poisoning
Skin diseases
Back diseases/hearing loss
Korea, Republic of
Musculoskeletal diseases
Pneumoconiosis
Hearing loss
Diseases due to other physical factors
Respiratory diseases
Musculoskeletal diseases
Musculoskeletal diseases
Diseases due to chemical substances
Sprains, strains (*)
Back injuries/diseases (*)
Pneumoconiosis
(*) claims include occupational
D. RECOGNITION, REPORTING AND COMPENSATION OF
OCCUPATIONAL DISEASES
In different countries, different work-related illnesses pose the greatest
challenges today. Results from a survey by the ISSA Technical
Commission in 2003
show that the main challenge in Zimbabwe
with regard to occupational
diseases, is pneumoconiosis, followed by anthrax and lead poisoning. In
it is silicosis, which also affects 37 per cent of miners in
Latin America. In the Syrian Arab Republic, cancer diseases are seen
biggest challenge for the next decade. Occupational cancer is also expected to
be the biggest challenge in Argentina, as are
back pain and occupational
diseases related to psychological factors. In Japan ‘karoshi’
— cases of suicide as
a consequence of harder working conditions (in a
good economy as well as in a bad economy) — have become a major concern,
for the higher echelons of management. Many of these diseases bear
the risk of going unrecorded and, consequently, without proper
treatment and
compensation.
The seminar circle showed that especially in developing countries,
underreporting is the biggest problem for insuring against OD.
The seminars
confirmed an observation in a publication from 1999 concerning the 11 countries
of southern Africa
(Botswana, Lesotho, Malawi, Mauritius, Mozambique,
Namibia, South Africa, Swaziland, Tanzania, Zambia and
specifically cites underreporting as a major problem in Africa. In the Southern
African Development Community there are
estimated to be two to seven times as
many cases of OD than are reported. The most extreme distortions occur with
respect to occupational
diseases and, within this, to chemical- and
mining-related illnesses. Both are prone to underreporting due to their
relatively long
latency periods and because of the large share of migrant
workers in respective sectors of the economy, for which statistical data
largely unavailable. ‘Here it is possible that the underestimate may be as
large as 50-fold.’
The seminars included reports from countries, like Gabon, which do not
maintain any statistics on occupational diseases for the period
since the time
the respective national insurance system was set up. Consequently, no
occupational diseases have so far been recorded.
Other countries do register
cases of OD, but in fact only very few. In the case of Cameroon,
three cases were reported in the last two
In Tanzania, since
2000, only one case of occupational disease was
compensated.
Similar examples
could be given in abundance. However, some systems recently stepped up their
processes for recording and handling
OD claims. In Gambia, for instance, exactly
one occupational disease case had been reported between the introduction of the
compensation scheme, in 1996, and 2003. The system was subsequently
reformed and, between 2004 and 2006, a total of 11 cases were
In the seminar for the
African continent, this fact was widely applauded as a great success, which says
a lot about the grade of
accuracy in reporting occupational diseases to which
experts are usually accustomed in this region.
When assessing possible causes for rampant underreporting, experts from
African and Asian
countries quickly pointed towards their outdated lists
of occupational diseases. In Cameroon, the list was last updated more than
years ago, in 1984. While this may seem a long time, in Gabon
the list is
exactly 40 years old and, in its current form, dates from 1967. In Mali, the
list has also remained unchanged since the
1960s. While the need for reforming
and updating old OD lists is obvious in these countries, it must be noted that
this alone will
not eliminate underreporting — perhaps not even to a
significant extent. Other reasons presented for underreporting point to
that even victims of diseases already on the lists were not identified
adequately. Additionally, insufficient diagnostics
due to too few or
insufficiently skilled doctors were indicated by experts from Latin America,
Asia and Africa
alike. Other reasons may be found in a general lack of
awareness, on the part of medical practitioners, of work-related causes of
diseases and their lack of diagnostic training in not only, but including, the
field of occupational medicine.
Sometimes, in addition to these reasons, the insurance system itself may be
the cause of severe structural and administrative hindrances.
What was reported
from Tanzania
in this respect may be seen as an example for many
countries in the developing world — not only in Africa. The medical
which assess cases of occupational disease,
usually take between
six and eight months before even meeting to deliberate a case. ‘These
lengthy procedures have discouraged
many to claim for workman’s
compensation.’
reasons were presented to explain why it was comparatively unattractive for
workers to follow up on their claims. In the
vast country of Tanzania (nearly
twice the size of France), transport to the capital can be so expensive that it
might simply be
financially unattractive for an injured or sick worker to invest
in a bus ticket in order to file a claim or follow up on it: ‘Sometimes
you find that the costs that a worker incurs in the process of claiming for
compensation are much higher than the compensation amounts
However, underreporting does not only concern developing or transition
countries; it is a general challenge with regard to compensation
prevention of OD. A survey on underreporting of occupational diseases in Europe
from 2002 showed that most of the countries
investigated acknowledged
underreporting. The most common reasons put forward were the lack of information
for employees, the lack
of information and training of general practitioners
industrial doctors. Other reasons mentioned in the survey report were long and
complex procedures, difficulties of providing proof
of exposure to risk (in open
proof systems) and poor knowledge of the legislation, particularly in small- and
medium-sized enterprises.
The deficient recognition of occupational diseases is further complicated by
the fact that more and more diseases tend to be not exclusively
caused by work,
but are ‘work-related’. This makes it even more difficult to
recognise any occupational causes. The term
‘work-related disease’
marks a broader concept than that of ‘occupational disease’ since it
refers to all
diseases where work is a contributory cause. This concept combines
work-related and non-work-related factors. The annual number of
work-related diseases has been estimated by the ILO to be 160 million. The World
Health Organization (WHO) estimates that
37 per cent of lower back pain, 16 per
cent of hearing loss, 13 per cent of chronic obstructive pulmonary disease, 11
per cent of
asthma and 8 per cent of injuries are related to work.
Musculoskeletal and respiratory illnesses are among the most common types
work-related diseases. It is seldom possible to prove that these illnesses arise
solely from work. Consequently, countries vary
greatly in their respective
methods of addressing these illnesses. Passive smoking, carpal tunnel syndrome,
post-traumatic stress,
depression and a few other potentially work-related
ailments currently dominate debates about new occupational diseases in many
particularly in Europe. Despite the fact that, in the European Union,
the focus of attention regarding work-related diseases currently
seems to be on
mental disorders, it would be wrong to believe that stress, burnout and
depression were only relevant to highly industrialised
or high-income countries.
Neuropsychiatric conditions are in fact the most important causes of disability
in all regions
of the world, accounting for 37 per cent of years of
healthy life lost as a result of disability (YLD) among adults aged 15 years
older. According to a study on global disease and risk factors between 1990 and
2001, depression is the leading cause of disability
for males and females around
the globe. The same study reveals that ‘more than 85 percent of disease
burden from nonfatal health
outcomes occurs in low- and middle-income countries,
and South Asia and Sub-Saharan Africa account for 40 percent of all
These countries are
generally the same countries with the lowest rates of workers covered by
accident insurance, which poses other
challenges.
E. CHALLENGES POSED BY THE INFORMAL SECTOR
As a legal term, ‘occupational disease’ only applies to
compensatable diseases caused by work. In order to be compensated
for any such
ailment, a worker by definition has to be covered by a workers compensation or
accident insurance scheme or the general
social security scheme,
respectively
. With respect to
compensation, diseases caused by work in the informal (thus uncovered) sector
usually do not appear in national
statistics on occupational safety and health.
There exists no unique definition and no consensus among researchers and
analysts on the term ‘informal sector’, in particular
conceptual and operational meaning. The Central Statistical Organisation of
India uses it interchangeably with the unorganized
sector which means ‘all
unincorporated enterprises and household industries … that are not
regulated by law and which
also do not maintain annual accounts or balance
restrictive attempt is to look at some characteristics shared by those employed
in the informal sector, which may include
the lack of security in many labour
dimensions (eg, job market security, occupational safety, employment stability,
income security).
In a broader meaning, the lack of social insurance may therefore be one key
characteristic of informal work. Workers in the informal
sector normally go
without coverage
compensation.
However, in many
countries they make up by far the largest share of the national workforce.
Especially in Asia, Latin America and
Africa, in many countries only a small
fraction of the workforce is covered by social accident insurance.
Percentage of workforce not covered by workers compensation system
Source: ILO (2006): Occupational safety and health: Country profiles,
Geneva, ILO.
While international studies estimate the informal workforce in industrialised
countries to be rarely larger than 10 per cent, it may
reach 70 per cent in the
developing world, sometimes even contributing the largest share to the gross
domestic product.
In the third
seminar on occupational diseases, in Buenos Aires in 2005, it was reported that
7 out of 10 new jobs in Latin America
are created in the informal
This estimate does, of
course, not apply to the entire continent. In Chile in 2001, a total of 3.4
million workers were affiliated
with the industrial accidents and work-related
illness insurance, equivalent to 57.3 per cent of the
In Brazil, the social security coverage of workers aged between 16 and 59
was 63.4 per cent of the workforce in 2005 and 64 per cent
The experience from Brazil
shows that formal work and social security
coverage do not necessarily correspond; workers in formal employment may not
necessarily
participate in the social security system. In Brazil, access to
social benefits is based on the contribution principle and supplemented
several programs including welfare elements. It is estimated that in Brazil in
2005 there were about 28.8 million people without
a contributive relationship to
social security. According to estimates by the Ministry of Social Security of
Brazil, out of these
28.8 million workers, 16.3 million could be social security
contributors because they have a suitable income and a position in the
The question arises — are workers who are not covered by a social
security scheme covered in other ways? In relation to countries
in southern
Africa, the term ‘informal social security’ is used ‘to refer
to social security arrangements that
fall outside social provisions’ or is
defined as ‘the counterpart of formal social security, covering social
mechanisms outside the formal social security
The need to
integrate informal social security into the formal systems derives from the
weakness of informal schemes and the lack
of adequate
Recognition,
compensation and prevention of occupational diseases are typical elements of
formal social security systems and should
be provided to the majority of workers
and not remain exclusive.
At the seminars, the following experiences concerning informal work and lack
of social insurance were reported from Africa. In Burundi,
the National Social
Security Institute insures only 8 per cent of the workforce, whereas 92 per cent
are estimated to be informal
and without any (formal) social security
In Tanzania
(population of 36 million people), the workforce is estimated to be 10 million.
Of these, only 1 million (10 per cent)
are in formal employment and only 400,000
are insured by the National Social Security
In Asia, various countries
encounter the same dilemma. In Vietnam, for instance, only 14.5 per cent of the
workforce is covered by
As was specifically addressed by experts from Latin America, the large share
of informal workers somehow needs to be included in the
(public) system of
healthcare services. It is estimated, that only 5 per cent to 10 per cent of
workers in Latin America have access
to adequate occupational healthcare
Accident insurance can
play a crucial role in providing general practitioners — not specialised
in occupational medicine —
with at least some guidelines on how to
recognise occupational diseases. By publishing and distributing ‘OD
of not more than 3−5 pages, at least the awareness of
doctors can be raised to inquire about potential links between a disease
exposure at the workplace.
Some countries are also working hard on expanding their coverage in the field
of social accident insurance. The People’s Republic
of China, for
instance, was already covering 90 million workers in 2006 (20 million more than
only two years ago) and it aims at
covering 140 million by 2010. Among the
officially covered 90 million workers are 19 million rural migrating workers who
a small fraction of the largest share of the informal sector in
The rapid expansion of
coverage is good news for workers, both formal and informal. However, the
growing potential of future claims
is also challenging the compensatory
capabilities of the social security system. China has to reckon with a growing
number of claims
for compensation of occupational diseases, especially by
workers who, until recently, have not fallen within the scope of the system.
Given that lung diseases have already become the most frequent occupational
diseases in China, and bearing in mind that some of them
may have a long latency
period (spanning even decades), it is very likely that in 10 or 20 years workers
who are currently exposed
to dust in coalmines or to asbestos in shipyards might
file claims for occupational diseases. Therefore, provisions must be taken
to build adequate reserves for future
China’s situation, with many millions of migrating and informal
workers, exemplifies what might be the greatest challenge for
compensation systems with regard to occupational diseases in the next decades.
In order not to be caught unprepared by rapidly
growing claims volumes, accident
insurance systems, especially in developing and transitional countries, should
take the necessary
precautions today.
F. CONCLUSION
Industrialised as well as developing and transition countries have to deal
with certain common challenges, most notably among them
the underreporting of
occupational diseases and the lack of coverage of people working in the informal
sector. There is no ‘one
size fits all’ answer to these challenges;
instead, countries must find their own solutions, tailored to their individual
security systems. The following conclusions and good practice solutions,
which were derived from the seminar cycle, met with the
broadest consensus among
experts attending the three seminars as globally applicable. They might be the
closest to an internationally
applicable toolkit and shall therefore be
I. Ensure Sound Reporting, Motivate to Report
The obligation to report occupational diseases should not rest exclusively
with workers and employers. All parties involved should
either be obliged (eg,
employers, doctors, health insurance) or allowed (workers, dependants) to file
their suspicion of an occupational
disease with the relevant authority. Also,
they need to be enabled to do so, eg, by filling out simple, one-page report
sheets. Doctors
might even receive a small remuneration in order to reward the
diligence required in diagnosing work-related ailments.
This might require legal changes, depending upon the type of social security
system, and should be accompanied by the supply of sufficient
information and
training for all parties concerned.
II. Strengthen Diagnostic Quality
Medical practitioners should be kept regularly informed about occupational
diseases. Even short information sheets (3−5 pages)
may be sufficient to
keep doctors up to date on new developments. These information sheets can be
made available to doctors in the
public healthcare system, summarising some key
features of all, or at least the most common, diseases on the national list.
enhances the doctor’s ability to detect any relationship between a
disease and the workplace and reduces the number of victims
going without
adequate diagnosis.
III. Follow Up on Exposed Workers
Accident insurance systems in several countries collect data on workers who
have been exposed to certain hazardous substances which
might lead to
occupational diseases after a long latency period (eg, asbestos-related
diseases). The Korean
mesothelioma surveillance system, run by the Korea
Occupational Safety and Health Agency (KOSHA), is only one (non-European)
In order to continuously monitor the health of workers exposed to dangerous
substances (even after they have left their job or retired),
post-exposure
medical exams are a most useful tool. The German
Central Registration
Agency for Employees Exposed to Asbestos Dust, for instance, collects data on
exposed workers and organises regular
medical exams. The agency registers
formerly or currently exposed workers, organises follow-up and post-exposure
examinations and
stores all relevant data. For workers, participation is
voluntary; expenses are borne by the German accident insurance institutions.
benefit lies in the reduction of underreporting of occupational cancers. Without
such a registry, fewer cases of occupational
cancers would be reported and
substantiated.
IV. Review/Update Lists on Occupational Diseases
Especially in Asian and African countries, the updating of OD lists should be
given high priority. If social insurance compensation
is limited exclusively to
diseases on an out-of-date list, workers will not be able to find adequate
compensation. This applies to
those countries using pure list systems (eg,
France, UK, India, Philippines, Malaysia, Cameroon and
A rather simple
solution for these schemes might be to regularly update their lists. Another
option would be a systematic and legal
change of the system into a mixed system.
Various countries, particularly in Europe, successfully apply such mixed systems
(eg, Germany,
Italy, Belgium, Austria and
Switzerland)
. These systems use
lists of occupational diseases combined with an open or complementary system.
This allows the recognition of diseases
not listed as occupational diseases.
Another alternative to regularly renewing OD lists could be to introduce a
general opening clause.
Some countries, among them the USA, Finland and
use a general clause or
system of proof instead of a list. This means that every disease can be
recognised as an occupational disease
if the causal link to work is proven.
V. Foster Prevention of Occupational Diseases
Another ‘good-’ if not ‘best-practice’ is prevention.
Prevention is definitely a universally adaptable way
to reduce cases of
occupational diseases. Even in countries with out-of-date disease lists,
prevention can play a crucial role in
reducing the number of victims of
diseases, not (yet) on the list. In various countries, where certain risks are
not subject to insurance
coverage, the same insurers may, nevertheless, engage
in preventing these very same risks. It can be deduced that prevention
even in these markets, since it contributes to averting
greater expenses to the society. In Germany, for instance, accident insurance
carriers are obliged by law to prevent all work-related health risks, which also
include risks not legally qualified either as ‘occupational
accidents’ or ‘occupational diseases’. This also benefits
other insurance systems, such as retirement and healthcare
insurance, since
— due to effective accident insurance prevention — fewer workers
fall ill or seek early retirement.
VI. Offer Incentives
Through a contribution system of rebates and premiums, accident insurers are
able to motivate employers to take prevention seriously.
An investment in safer
and healthier workplaces by the employer — subsidised by lower
contributions for accident insurance
— can be beneficial for both workers
and employers. Even young or newly reformed accident insurance systems adhere to
strategy, as the example of the People’s Republic of China shows. The
bottom line is that linking prevention to accident insurance
compensation
enables effective mechanisms which not only reduce work-related injuries and
diseases but also provide an incentive
for employers to boost preventive
activities in an enterprise. Incentives do not only foster prevention of
occupational accidents.
In Germany, for instance, occupational diseases are also
included in the incentive scheme of the social accident insurance. While
obvious that incentives are not likely to be effectively used for the prevention
of long latency diseases, they can be effective
in the prevention of diseases
with shorter latency periods (eg, hearing loss).
Thus, prevention not only pays, but it even pays double. It is the most
suitable strategy to cope with the growing challenges posed
‘old’ and ‘new’ occupational diseases, around the
G. BIBLIOGRAPHY
Bowen, Georges Eric, ‘The Compensation of Occupational Diseases in
Cameroon’ (Paper presented at the ISSA Seminar IV,
Kribi, Cameroon,
13−15 March 2007).
Fultz, Elaine and Pieris, Bodhi, ‘Compensation for Employment Injuries
in Southern Africa: An Overview of Schemes and Proposals
for Reform’
International Labour Review
Occupational Diseases in 15 European Countries
, Eurogip-01/E,
Paris, 2002.
Survey on Under-reporting of Occupational Diseases in Europe
Eurogip-03/E, Paris, 2002.
Examples for short OD bulletins (in German): Universität Rostock,
Medizinische Fakultät, Institut für Arbeitsmedizin
http://arbmed.med.uni-rostock.de/bkvo/mb_list.htm
at 18 February 2009
International Labour Organization,
Introductory Report: Decent Work
— Safe Work
, Introductory report to the XVIIth World Congress on
Safety and Health at Work, International Labour Organization, Geneva, 2005.
International Labour Organization (1999) 138(2)
International Labour
International Labour Organization, 155
Cinterfor Bulletin,
http://www.ilo.org/public/english/region/ampro/cinterfor/publ/boletin/155/index.htm
at 18 February 2009.
International Social Security Association (ISSA), Technical Commission on
Insurance against Employment Accidents and Occupational
III: Respiratory Diseases in Asia, Proceedings
, Shenzhen, China, 5−7
September 2006.
Kaseke, Edwin, ‘Social Security Provisioning in Southern Africa:
Developing a Framework for the Integration of Informal Social
Security into the
Formal Systems’ (2008) 22
Zeitschrift für ausländisches und
internationales Arbeits- und Sozialrecht (ZIAS)
Li Dehong, ‘Pneumoconiosis in China — Advances in Prevention and
Control’ (Paper presented at the ISSA Seminar III,
Shenzhen, China,
5−7 September 2006).
Lopez, Alan D et al, ‘Measuring the Global Burden of Diseases and Risk
Factors, 1990-2001’ in
Global Burden of Disease and Risk Factors
eds Lopez, Alan D et al, Oxford University Press and World Bank, Washington DC,
Mendy, Gabriel, ‘Occupational Safety and Health Monitoring: The Gambia
— Country Report’ (Paper presented at the
ISSA Seminar IV, Kribi,
Cameroon, 13−15 March 2007).
Ministry of Social Security Brazil,
Brazilian Social Security
, Brazil, February 2008.
Mtulia, Ali, ‘Compensation of Occupational Diseases: The Tanzanian
Experience’ (Paper presented at the ISSA Seminar IV,
Kribi, Cameroon,
13−15 March 2007).
MunichRe Group,
Occupational Diseases: How Are They Covered Under
Workers’ Compensation Systems?
, MunichRe, Munich, 2002.
Nguyen Thi An Tho, ‘Introduction to Occupational Diseases in
Vietnam’ (Paper presented at the ISSA Seminar III, Shenzhen,
5−7 September 2006).
Rosenstock, Linda, Cullen, Mark and Fingerhut, Marilyn, ‘Occupational
Disease Control Priorities in Developing Countrie
Jamison, Dean T et al, Oxford University Press and World Bank, Washington DC,
Rodríguez, Carlos A, ‘Challenges in Latin America’ (Paper
presented at the ISSA Seminar II, Buenos Aires, Argentina,
27−28 April
Saini Debi S, ‘Social Protection to Informal Sector Workers in India
through the Community-based Approach’ (2008) 22
Zeitschrift für
ausländisches und internationales Arbeits- und Sozialrecht (ZIAS)
Simbananiye, Béatrice, ‘The Procedures for the Recognition of
Occupational Diseases in Burundi’ (Paper presented
at the ISSA Seminar IV,
Kribi, Cameroon, 13−15 March 2007).
Zimmer, Stefan,
Problems and
Challenges of Statutory Accident
Insurance Schemes Related to Occupational Diseases: Reporting, Recording and
http://www.issa.int/pdf/GA2004/2zimmer.pdf
at 18 February 2009.
Stefan Zimmer studied political
sciences and economics in Munich (Germany) and Austin, Texas (USA). He has a
doctorate degree in
social sciences and is currently director of the Department
of International Relations of the German Social Accident Insurance (DGUV).
Eva-Marie Höffer studied
law in Gießen and Bonn (Germany) with a focus on labour and social law, and
is currently head
of the Division of International Social Law and European Law
of the German Social Accident Insurance (DGUV).
See, eg, Eurogip,
Occupational Diseases in 15 European Countries
, Eurogip-01/E, Paris,
2002; Eurogip,
Survey on Under-reporting of Occupational Diseases in
, Eurogip-03/E, Paris, 2002; MunichRe Group,
Occupational Diseases:
How Are They Covered Under Workers’ Compensation Systems?
, MunichRe,
Munich, 2002; International Labour Office,
Encyclopedia of Occupational
Health and Safety
ed), 1998, Part IV; the Canadian Centre
for Occupational Health and Safety (CCOHS),
Selected References for CCOHS
, with special regard to several International Labour Office,
Encyclopedia of Occupational Health and Safety
http://forum05.ccohs.ca/Webliography.html
at 18 February 2009.
Convention concerning
Benefits in the Case of Employment Injury,
8 July 1964, International Labour
Organization, C121 (entered into force 28 July 1967).
Recommendation concerning
the List of Occupational Diseases and the Recording and Notification of
Occupational Accidents and
Diseases, 20 June 2002, International Labour
Organization, R194.
For a summary and full text of
the Commission Recommendation 2003/670/EC, see
European Schedule of
Occupational Diseases <
http://europa.eu/scadplus/leg/en/cha/c11112.htm>
18 February 2009.
Problems and
Challenges of Statutory Accident Insurance
Schemes Related to Occupational Diseases: Reporting, Recording and
http://www.issa.int/pdf/GA2004/2zimmer.pdf
at 18 February 2009.
DS Saini, ‘Social
Protection to Informal Sector Workers in India through the Community-based
Approach’ (2008) 22
Zeitschrift für
ausländisches und internationales Arbeits- und Sozialrecht)
International Labour
Organization,
Introductory Report: Decent Work — Safe Work
Introductory report to the XVIIth World Congress on Safety and Health at Work,
International Labour Organization, Geneva, 2005.
Sources: MunichRe Group,
Occupational Diseases: How Are They Covered Under Workers’ Compensation
, MunichRe, Munich, 2002; Eurogip,
Occupational Diseases in 15
European Countries
, Eurogip-01/E, Paris, 2002; International Social Security
Association (ISSA),
Technical Commission on Insurance against Employment
Accidents and Occupational Diseases, Seminar III, Respiratory Diseases in Asia,
Proceedings
E Fultz and B Pieris,
‘Compensation for Employment Injuries in Southern Africa: An Overview of
Schemes and Proposals for Reform’
International Labour
GE Bowen, ‘The
Compensation of Occupational Diseases in Cameroon’ (Paper presented at the
ISSA Seminar IV, Kribi, Cameroon,
13−15 March 2007).
‘Compensation of Occupational Diseases: The Tanzanian Experience’
(Paper presented at the ISSA Seminar IV,
Kribi, Cameroon, 13−15 March
G Mendy, ‘Occupational
Safety and Health Monitoring: The Gambia — Country Report’ (Paper
presented at the ISSA
Seminar IV, Kribi, Cameroon, 13−15 March 2007).
‘Compensation of Occupational Diseases: The Tanzanian Experience’
(Paper presented at the ISSA Seminar IV,
Kribi, Cameroon, 13−15 March
Under-reporting of Occupational Diseases in Europe
, Eurogip-03/E, Paris,
AD Lopez et al,
‘Measuring the Global Burden of Diseases and Risk Factors,
1990-2001’ in
Global Burden of Disease and Risk Factors
Lopez et al, Oxford University Press and World Bank, Washington DC, 2006.
The Netherlands do not
provide special compensation for accidents at work or occupational diseases
(they have no accident insurance
scheme). Nevertheless, there exist studies on
occupational diseases, for example, by the Netherlands Centre for Occupational
a knowledge centre on OD.
Source: DS Saini,
‘Social Protection to Informal Sector Workers in India through the
Community-based Approach’ (2008)
International Labour
Organization, 155
Cinterfor Bulletin,
http://www.ilo.org/public/english/region/ampro/cinterfor/publ/boletin/155/index.htm
at 18 February 2009.
DS Saini, ‘Social
Protection to Informal Sector Workers in India through the Community-based
Approach’ (2008) 22
L Rosenstock, M Cullen and M
Fingerhut, ‘Occupational Health’ in
Disease Control Priorities in
Developing Countries
, eds DT Jamison et al, Oxford University Press and
World Bank, Washington DC, 2006.
CA Rodríguez,
‘Challenges in Latin America’ (Paper presented at the ISSA Seminar
II, Buenos Aires, Argentina, 27−28
April 2005).
Superintendencia de
Administradoras de Fondos de Pensiones,
The Chilean Pension System
ed), Chile, 2003 at 16: Chapter I — ‘The General Pattern of Social
Security in Chile’.
http://www.safp.cl/573/articles-3523_copyright.pdf
at 10 March 2009
Ministry of Social Security
of Brazil, ‘Social Security Coverage of Workers Aged between 16 and 59
— 1992 to 2006–08’
National Household Sample Survey
Brazil — Years 1992 to 2006, Elaboration SPS/MPS
, Ministry of Social
Security of Brazil, 2008.
Ministry of Social Security
Brazilian Social Security Overview
, Brazil, February 2008 at
See E Kaseke ‘Social
Security Provisioning in Southern Africa: Developing a Framework for the
Integration of Informal Social
Security into the Formal Systems’ (2008) 22
64 at 66 with further references.
E Kaseke ‘Social
Security Provisioning in Southern Africa: Developing a Framework for the
Integration of Informal Social Security
into the Formal Systems’ (2008) 22
B Simbananiye, ‘The
Procedures for the Recognition of Occupational Diseases in Burundi’ (Paper
presented at the ISSA
Seminar IV, Kribi, Cameroon, 13−15 March 2007).
AD Lopez et al,
‘Measuring the Global Burden of Diseases and Risk Factors,
1990-2001’ in
Global Burden of Disease and Risk Factors
Lopez et al, Oxford University Press and World Bank, Washington DC, 2006.
Nguyen Thi An Tho,
‘Introduction to Occupational Diseases in Vietnam’ (Paper presented
at the ISSA Seminar III, Shenzhen,
China, 5−7 September 2006).
CA Rodríguez,
‘Challenges in Latin America’ (Paper presented at the ISSA Seminar
II, Buenos Aires, Argentina, 27−28
April 2005).
The number of rural migrant
workers in China is estimated to range between 140 million and 190 million
‘Pneumoconiosis in China — Advances in Prevention and Control’
(Paper presented at the ISSA Seminar
III, Shenzhen, China, 5−7 September
Examples of short OD
bulletins (in German language) can be found at Universität Rostock,
Medizinische Fakultät, Institut
für Arbeitsmedizin
http://arbmed.med.uni-rostock.de/bkvo/mb_list.htm
at 18 February 2009.
MunichRe Group,
Occupational Diseases: How Are They Covered Under Workers’ Compensation
, MunichRe, Munich, 2002.
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (236 KB)
PDF format (242 KB)
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter