URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/journals/UNSWLawSocCConsc/2024/7.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 15:47:28
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Preston, Brian J --- "Beyond Recognition: Realisation of the Right to a Healthy Environment" [2024] UNSWLawSocCConsc 7; (2024) 18 UNSW Law Society Court of Conscience 41
BEYOND RECOGNITION: REALISATION OF THE RIGHT TO A HEALTHY
ENVIRONMENT
Brian J Preston Frsn Sc
I Introduction
As the world faces the triple planetary crises of climate change,
biodiversity loss and pollution, the human right to a clean, healthy
sustainable environment is being increasingly recognised by states and
international institutions. This right consists of three
components, a
substantive, a procedural and an intertemporal component. However, recognition
of this right is only one step towards
achieving full implementation of the
right; what is required beyond recognition is realisation of the right.
Realisation of the right
demands a tripartite obligation on the state to
respect, protect and fulfil the right. This correlative obligation comprises
substantive,
procedural and intertemporal components, as well as a special
obligation to the vulnerable. While court decisions can go some way
upholding and enforcing the recognition and realisation of the right to a
healthy environment, the judiciary’s role
will remain limited without
legislative and policy reform to ensure the right is fully realised.
II Recognition Of The Right To A Healthy Environment
Progress in Recognising the Right
A stand-alone right to a healthy environment has been recognised only
comparatively recently. Before this recognition, recourse needed
to be had to
well-established human rights, such as the right to life, to afford some degree
of protection of the environment for
However, the protection of
the environment provided by these existing human rights fell short of what would
be provided by a stand-alone
right to a healthy environment.
Recognition of this deficiency has catalysed action internationally and
nationally. Internationally, the United Nations Human Rights
Council adopted a
resolution in 2021 recognising the right to a clean, healthy and sustainable
environment.
The United Nations
General Assembly in 2022 recognised the right to a clean, healthy and
sustainable environment as a human
with 161 states voting in
favour, eight abstaining and zero votes against. Regional agreements, such as
the African Charter on Human
and Peoples’ Rights of 1981, also recognise
the human right to a ‘satisfactory’
environment’.
Nationally, states are increasingly recognising in domestic law the right to
a healthy environment. Today, a majority of states around
the world have
recognised in law the right to a healthy environment. As of 2022, 110 states
protected the right in their
constitution
and in 2019, more than
150 states recognised the right in legislation, agreements or court
Australia remains an outlier in this respect, with most jurisdictions not
recognising the right to a healthy environment. However,
there are some signs of
change. The Australian Capital Territory recently passed legislation to amend
its human rights legislation
to recognise the right to a clean, healthy and
sustainable environment.
South Wales, the right is indirectly recognised in the
Climate Change (Net
Zero Future) Act 2023
(NSW), which sets out in its guiding principles that
‘[a]ction to address climate change should be consistent with the right
a clean, healthy and sustainable
environment’.
In 2023, the
federal Attorney-General requested the Parliamentary Joint Committee on Human
Rights to review Australia’s human
rights framework. The report, handed
down in May 2024, does not go so far as to recommend the adoption of a right to
a healthy environment,
however it does recommend that:
... further consideration be given to the
drafting of the right to a healthy environment, including consultation with
Aboriginal and
Torres Strait Islander peoples on how best to recognise the
relationship between the right to a healthy environment and the rights
culture, health and self-determination for Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander
ontent of the Right
What is the right to a healthy environment that is being recognised? Although
environment can be seen to
have three separate components: a substantive, a procedural and an intertemporal
The substantive component can be viewed as being made up of four distinct
human rights, which relate to six physical elements put
forward by David Boyd,
the previous Special Rapporteur on human rights and the
environment.
The four human
rights are the right to life, the right to access and enjoy the necessities of
life, the right to access and enjoy
what is necessary for a quality life, and
the right to a functioning, healthy and flourishing
Four of Boyd’s
six physical elements relate to the necessities of life. These are clean air,
safe and sufficient water, healthy
and sustainable food, and a non-toxic
environment. The human right to a flourishing biosphere requires the remaining
two of Boyd’s
physical elements, being a safe climate and a healthy
ecosystem. Each of these six physical elements – and therefore the four
rights – are already being adversely impacted by the triple planetary
crises of climate change, biodiversity loss and pollution.
Two cases illustrate the substantive component. In Argentina, a claim brought
by Indigenous communities successfully challenged the
issuing of logging permits
for native forests on the basis that it contravened Constitutional rights,
including the right to a healthy
and balanced
environment.
In South Africa,
the High Court in Pretoria upheld a challenge to the government’s grant of
a licence for a new coal-fired
power station. The plaintiffs invoked the
constitutionally recognised right to a healthy environment, claiming that
climate change
‘presents a serious and imminent threat’ to this
The plaintiffs
connected the right to the state’s obligation to assess the environmental
impacts of projects, including the
climate change
The procedural component of the right to a
healthy environment encompasses three distinct rights: the right of access to
information
on the environment; the right to be able to participate in
decision-making related to the environment; and the right to access the
to uphold and enforce these and other related rights. These principles are
recognised in international and intra-national
and regional agreements such as
the Aarhus Convention (universal, but Europe in
particular),
Agreement (Latin America and the
and the Maputo
These procedural rights were identified by John Knox, the Special Rapporteur on
human rights and the environment prior to David Boyd,
in his Framework
Principles on Human Rights and the
Environment.
The third component of the right to a
healthy environment is the intertemporal component. This recognises the
principle of intergenerational
equity, in that not only should current adult
generations enjoy the right to a healthy environment, but so should younger
generations
and future generations. The right of future generations to a healthy
environment has been recognised by many courts, including in
The Australian case of
Sharma v Minister for the Environment
, led by youth plaintiffs seeking to
prevent a coal mine extension on the basis that the federal Environment Minister
has a duty of
care for young people, succeeded at first
but this decision was
overturned unanimously by the Full Federal Court of
In finding no such
duty exists, Allsop CJ stated that ‘A duty that calls up such questions
should not be imposed [by the judiciary]:
It is one of core, indeed high,
policy-making for the Executive and Parliament involving questions of
III Realisation Of The Correlative Duty
It is one thing to recognise a right to a healthy environment, it is another
to realise the right. Realisation of the right requires
identification and
implementation of the correlative duty. Indian civil rights campaigner Mahatma
Gandhi stated that, ‘The
true source of rights is a duty. If we all
discharge our duties, rights will not be far to
American jurist
Wesley Hohfeld argued that claim rights, being rights to have things done for or
to a person, give rise to a correlative
duty on someone else to respect and
protect that right.
correlative duty is what states must do to ensure the right is actually
realised. This is a step beyond enshrining the right
in legislation or
constitutions, or the right being recognised by the courts. The realisation of
the right to a healthy environment
is, therefore, dependent on the recognition
and enforcement of the correlative duty of the state. The correlative duty can
be explained
by examining both the general tripartite obligation with respect to
human rights and the content of the duty.
Tripartite Obligation
The duty that is correlative to the right to a healthy environment, as for
any human right, is the tripartite obligation to respect,
protect and fulfil the
This tripartite
obligation applies to human rights and is explicitly incorporated into
international human rights law
and is also contained in Knox’s Framework
Principles.
The obligation to
the right to a healthy environment necessitates
states not interfering with individuals’ enjoyment of the
The obligation to
necessitates states preventing any interference with the right.
Lastly, the obligation to
necessitates states taking measures to
ensure that all individuals enjoy the right. This tripartite obligation can be
achieved through
legislation, financial measures, judicial decisions and other
Content of the Duty
As with the content of the right, the content of the correlative duty is
comprised of substantive, procedural and intertemporal components.
In addition,
the duty has a fourth component, being obligations towards the vulnerable.
The substantive component of the duty requires states to uphold their
tripartite obligation to respect, protect and fulfil the substantive
of the right, discussed above. At a minimum, this requires states to address
Boyd’s six physical elements. States
must act by reducing air pollution,
ensuring access to safe and sufficient water and to healthy and sustainable
foods, taking measures
to detoxify the planet, taking action to protect and
restore biodiversity, and ensuring a safe climate including by phasing out the
use of fossil fuels.
The procedural component of the duty similarly reflects the procedural
component of the right: states must ensure people have access
to information
decision-making; and ensure there is access
to justice and effective remedies
for these and other rights.
Australia, the Federal Court has overturned administrative decisions approving
oil and gas exploration on the basis that a statutory
requirement for
consultation with relevant parties, in these cases Indigenous peoples, were not
satisfied. In both cases, this led
to the court setting aside the statutory
body’s approvals for oil and gas
exploration.
Ensuring access to justice requires tailoring to the specific needs of
individuals and groups. For example, in
Waratah Coal Pty Ltd v Youth Verdict
and Other (No 5)
Queensland Land Court allowed Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander witnesses to
speak on Country rather than being limited to
their written evidence statements.
The Court found that not allowing this would limit their cultural rights. In the
ongoing climate
Pabai Pabai & Anor v Commonwealth
‘Pabai Pabai’
), the Federal Court allowed evidence of
Indigenous witnesses to be given on Country in the Torres
Such decisions promote
access to justice.
The third component of the duty is the intertemporal component, which
requires states to act to protect the right of younger and future
generations to
a healthy environment. In
Waratah Coal v Youth Verdict (No 6)
, President
Kingham of the Queensland Land Court discussed the importance of considering
younger and future generations in environmental
decision-making, stating
The intergenerational aspect of climate
change risks makes the rights of children paramount. The year 2100 is the
reference point
for the Paris Agreement long-term temperature goal. My
generation of decision makers will be long gone, but a child born this year
be 78 years old in 2100. The principle of intergenerational equity places
responsibility with today’s decision makers
to make wise choices for
future generations. The children of today and of the future will bear both the
more extreme effects of climate
change and the burden of adaptation and
mitigation in the second half of this century. Their best interests are not
served by actions
that narrow the options for achieving the Paris Agreement
temperature goal.
The final component of the correlative duty is the special obligations of the
state to the vulnerable. Certain groups and individuals
are more vulnerable to
environmental harms, such as children, women, Indigenous people, older people,
displaced people and people
Australia’s
‘State of the Environment Report’ (2021) highlighted how vulnerable
persons are more likely to experience
harm from environmental events, such as
heatwaves and air pollution.
plaintiffs’ statement of claim in
Pabai Pabai
highlights the
vulnerability of Torres Strait Islanders due to the ‘extremely
significant’ degree of harm from climate
change to the Torres Strait
Islands as small and low-lying
IV Reform To Realise The Right
Whilst recognition and realisation of the
right to a healthy environment have progressed, in a comparatively short time
period, there
is still a long way to go. Judicial decisions explicating and
upholding a stand-alone right to a healthy environment are important
encouraged realisation of the right. But they are few and far between. Where the
right to a healthy environment is not recognised
in law, courts have had to
resort to interpreting existing human rights as having some environmental
content. But this may be difficult
and fall short of full protection of a right
to a healthy environment. Realisation of the right to a healthy environment will
therefore be achieved through the courts alone. The legislature and
executive must effect changes in law and governance, not only
to recognise the
right to a healthy environment but also to ensure the correlative obligations to
respect, protect and fulfil the
As noted earlier, this needed reform is resisted and slow in Australia. The
federal review of Australia’s human rights framework
did not recommend the
adoption of a right to a healthy
environment.
Independent Senator
David Pocock (working with Anjali Sharma, the lead plaintiff in the
cases) introduced a
Climate Change Amendment (Duty of Care and
Intergenerational Climate Equity) Bill 2023
to federal Parliament. This Bill
proposed to amend legislation to introduce a statutory responsibility for
decision-makers, who make
decisions on projects which result in greenhouse gas
emission, to consider the likely impact of the emissions on the ‘health
and wellbeing of current and future Australian
Senate Committee report delivered in June 2024 recommended that the Bill not be
The only progress is the
recent amendment of the ACT human rights legislation to add the right to a
healthy environment.
Legislative change is a necessary means of states realising the right to a
healthy environment, by enshrining the states’ correlative
duties in law.
States would be compelled to respect, protect and fulfil the right and
judiciaries would be granted a stronger basis
upon which to enforce such action.
V Conclusion
The right to a clean, healthy and sustainable environment is an inalienable
human right which comprises substantive, procedural and
intertemporal
components. As a claim right, the right to a healthy environment has an inherent
reflexive correlative duty. The duty
is a tripartite obligation to respect,
protect and fulfil the right, which must be fulfilled in order for the right to
be realised.
The obligation to respect, protect and fulfil the right must be
upheld and enforced by the legislature, executive and judiciary.
Without this,
recognition of the right as a human right only goes part of the way to fully
realising the right.
Brian J Preston FRSN SC is the Chief Judge of the Land and
Environment Court of New South Wales.
There are examples of court decisions which have recognised the
right to life as including or necessitating a healthy environment:
Leghari v Federation of Pakistan
(2015) W.P. No. 25501/2015 (4 September
2015) (Lahore High Court);
Subhash Kumar v State of Bihar and others
(1991) AIR SC 420 (Supreme
Court of India).
United Nations Human Rights
The Human Right to a Clean, Healthy and Sustainable Environment
48th sess, UN Doc A/HRC/RES/48/13 (18 October 2021, adopted 8 October 2021).
United Nations General
The Human Right to a Clean, Healthy and Sustainable
Environment
, 76th sess, UN Doc A/RES/76/300 (1 August 2022, adopted 28 July
African Charter on Human and
People’s Rights
, opened for signature 27 June
1981, 1520 UNTS 217
(entered into force 21 October 1986) art 24.
David R Boyd, Special
Rapporteur,
Report of the Special Rapporteur on the Issue of Human Rights
Obligations Relating to the Enjoyment of a Safe, Clean, Healthy and
Sustainable
Environment
, 77th sess,
UN Doc A/77/284 (10 August 2022) 11 [24].
John H Knox, ‘The Global
Pact for the Environment: At the Crossroads of Human Rights and the
Environment’ (2019) 28(1)
Review of European, Comparative &
International Environmental Law
Human Rights (Healthy
Environment) Amendment Act 2023
(ACT). See Chief Minister, Treasury and
Economic Development Directorate (ACT), ‘Right to Healthy Environment Now
in the ACT’s Human Rights Act’ (Media Release, 28 August
Climate Change (Net Zero
Future) Act 2023
Parliamentary Joint Committee
on Human Rights, Parliament of Australia,
Inquiry into Australia’s
Human Rights Framework
(May 2024) 22 [9.42].
United Nations Human Rights
Special Procedures and United Nations Environment Programme,
Healthy Environment: Good Practices
(Report, 19 October 2020) 23–45
Brian Preston, ‘The
Nature, Content and Realisation of the Right to a Clean, Healthy and Sustainable
Environment’ (2024)
Journal of Environmental Law
Salas, Dino and others v
Salta Province
(2009) CSJN (Arg), S1144.XLIV (26 March 2009) (Supreme Court
of Argentina).
Earthlife Africa NPC v The Minister of Environmental
(High Court of South Africa, 22 August 2016), cited in Pau de
Vilchez and Annalisa Savaresi, ‘The Right to a Healthy Environment
Climate Litigation: A Game Changer?’ (2023) 32(1)
Yearbook of
International Environmental Law
Convention on Access to
Information, Public Participation in Decision-Making and Access to Justice in
Environmental Matters
, opened for signature 25 June
1998, 2161 UNTS 447
(entered into force 30 October 2001) (‘
’). Although the Aarhus Convention is a European regional
Convention, accession is open to all United Nations member states
approval of the Meeting of the Parties to the Convention: art 19(3).
Regional Agreement on
Access to Information, Public Participation and Justice in Environmental Matters
in Latin America and the Caribbean,
adopted 4 March 2018, 3397 UNTS 195
(entered into force 22 April 2021).
Protocol to the African
Charter on Human and Peoples’ Rights on the Rights of Women in Africa,
adopted 1 July 2003, OAU Doc CAB/LEG/66.6 (entered into force 25 November
John Knox, Special Rapporteur,
Report of the Special Rapporteur on the Issue
of Human Rights Obligations relating to the Enjoyment of a Safe, Clean, Healthy
Sustainable Environment,
UN Doc A/73/188 (19 July 2018).
Future Generations v
Ministry of the Environment and Others
[2018] STC4360-2018 (Justice Luis
Armando Tolosa Villabona) [Supreme Court of Colombia].
Neubauer et al. v
[German Constitutional Court], 1 BvR 2656/18, 1 BvR 78/20, 1 BvR
96/20, 1 BvR 288/20 (24 March 2021) (‘
Sharma by her litigation
representative Sister Marie Brigid Arthur v Minister for the Environment
[2021] FCA 560
(2021) 391 ALR 1
Sharma by her litigation representative Sister Marie Brigid
Arthur v Minister for the Environment (No 2)
[2021] FCA 774.
Minister for the
Environment v Sharma
[2022] FCAFC 35
(2022) 291 FCR 311
Minister for the
Environment v Sharma
Minister for the
Environment v Sharma
(n 22) 320.
Mahatma Gandhi quoted in
Rene Provost,
International Human Rights and Humanitarian Law
Wesley Hohfeld, ‘Some
Fundamental Legal Conceptions as Applied in Judicial Reasoning’
Yale Law Journal
Mégret, ‘Nature of Obligations’ in Daniel Moeckli, Sangeeta
Shah and Sandesh Sivakumaran
International Human Rights Law
(Oxford University Press, 2017) 130.
General Comment No. 12:
The Right to Adequate Food
(Art. 11 of the Covenant), UN CESCR, 20th sess,
UN Doc E/C.12/1999/5 (12 May 1999) [15]; see also Adam McBeth et al,
International Law of Human Rights
(Oxford University Press, 2nd ed, 2017)
John Knox, Special Rapporteur,
Report of the Special Rapporteur on the Issue
of Human Rights Obligations Relating to the Enjoyment of a Safe, Clean, Healthy
Sustainable Environment
, UN Doc A/HRC/37/59 (24 January 2018) annex
Preston (n 11) 164.
Santos NA Barossa Pty Ltd
v Tipakalippa
[2022] FCAFC 193
(2022) 296 FCR 124
Tipakalippa v National Offshore
Petroleum Safety and Environmental Management Authority (No 2)
[2022] FCA 1121
Cooper v National Offshore Petroleum Safety and Environmental
Management Authority (No 2)
[2023] FCA 1158.
Waratah Coal Pty Ltd v
Youth Verdict Ltd & Ors
[2022] QLC 4.
Isabelle Reinecke, ‘A
Court Among the Coconut Palms: When Justice Came to Visit the Torres
The Guardian
(online, 9 October 2023)
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2023/oct/09/climate-change-class-action-world-first-australia-torres-strait-boigu-island>.
Waratah Coal Pty Ltd v
Youth Verdict Ltd & Ors (No 6)
[2022] QLC 21
[251]–[255], [261].
Kathryn M Emmerson and
Melita D Keywood,
Australia State of the Environment 2021
(Report, Commonwealth of Australia, 2021); Daniel J Metcalfe and
Oliver Costello,
Australia State of the Environment 2021
(Report, Commonwealth of Australia, 2021) 28.
Plaintiffs’ Further
Amendment Statement of Claim
Pabai Pabai & Anor v Commonwealth of
, VID 622/2021, 15 March 2021.
Minister for the
Environment v Sharma
(n 22) 320.
Explanatory Memorandum,
Climate Change Amendment (Duty of Care and Intergenerational Climate Equity)
Senate Environment and
Communications Legislation Committee,
Climate Change Amendment (Duty of Care
and Intergenerational Climate Equity) Bill 2023
(Commonwealth of Australia,
Report, 2024).
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (63.8 KB)
PDF format (219 KB)
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter