URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/journals/SydLawRw/2025/2.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 15:38:23
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Rodan, Debbie --- "The Legal Recognition of Animal Sentience: Principles, Approaches and Applications by Jane Kotzmann and Mb Rodriguez Ferrere (Eds) (2024) Hart Publishing, 360 Pp, Isbn 9781509970452" [2025] SydLawRw 2; (2025) 47(1) Sydney Law Review 21198
Book Review
The Legal Recognition of Animal Sentience:
Principles, Approaches and Applications
by Jane Kotzmann and
MB Rodriguez Ferrere (eds) (2024) Hart Publishing, 360 pp, ISBN
9781509970452
Debbie Rodan
‘Judge Rivera would have recognised [the elephant] Happy’s
rights on the basis that she is “a sentient being, who feels
and understands, who has the capacity, if not the opportunity,
self-determination”’.
The Legal Recognition of Animal Sentience
is an edited book offering
an extensive discussion about the state of legal recognition of animal sentience
in various international
Principles, Approaches and Applications
— cleverly delineates the
contexts in which those meanings of animal sentience manifest, the implications
and consequences
of which are worked through. The dissenting judgement of Rivera
referred to
above, is one example of developing judicial and common law arguments for future
decisions to follow in expanding the
rights of sentient animals held in
The most interesting aspect of the book is that it offers some clarity about
the state of animal law for readers who would like a
deeper understanding of how
the concept of sentience works in the common law. As the book’s co-editor,
Rodriguez Ferrere, points
out in the last chapter: ‘Often, the recognition
of animal sentience in legislative instruments is labelled as symbolic, broadly
meaning that such recognition was not intended to have any direct legal
consequences’.
Most citizens in liberal representative democracies tend to view legislation,
in the practice of the law, as being exact, and literal.
This is simply not the
case with regard to the legal recognition of animal sentience. Drawing on
Rodriguez Ferrere’s outline
of the advantages and disadvantages of such
symbolic legislation, I conclude, optimistically, that legislation of this kind
potential for protracted incremental change; however, pessimistically,
it remains ineffectual.
The chapters in this edited book, in large measure, explain why animals are
still managed under property law. Sadly, under property
law the recognition of
sentience makes little difference to the lives of living, breathing, embodied
creatures. This is not an introductory
book to the legal recognition of
sentience; however, for animal studies readers, the varied and nuanced
definitions of sentience
provided in each of the chapters and how these play out
in the law are well worth reading for the valuable insights they afford.
gained was a deeper understanding of how the law works in a wide range of
recognition of sentience. By
the end of the book, I was keen to pursue the question of where in the common
law it might be possible
to change the legal status of non-human animals.
Some contributions expand on how certain non-human animals — mainly
companion animals — in some jurisdictions potentially
‘third category’ under property
The first category deals with ‘animals as merely legal things, property of
the legal person’.
category makes a distinction between ‘“animals” on the one
hand’ and ‘“legal things”
or “goods”’
on the other.
The third category is
considered to be an ‘an unusual conceptual space as
possess unique animate
qualities’,
and that would
mean ‘of neither persons nor things’, but rather
“‘quasi-things’”.
Could such an expanded definition of property, as the editors suggest, unleash a
paradigm shift of how sentient animals’ interests
are spoken about,
debated, and ultimately recognised in the community and the courts? It is still
a long way from personhood and
which many animal
advocates are pushing for.
The overall purpose of the collection, as the editors explain, is to explore
four aspects:
the theoretical principles that might underpin the legal recognition of animal
sentience, the legal implications of sentience recognition,
the different
experiences of sentience recognition in diverse jurisdictions, and what
sentience recognition means for animals that
are frequently discriminated
against (if
a nutshell, this volume is concerned with ‘the effectiveness of the
recognition of animal
in the law and
it does indeed measure this in each of the book’s three parts.
The book also assesses whether animal sentience recognition in the law is
‘merely a trend’ or is the ‘beginning
of a paradigm
Perhaps some
readers might consider this an ambitious aim. The authors of each chapter, from
my reading, did not directly assess
this; they did, however, provide
clarifications, definitions, examples, and illustrations from the common law.
Some chapters were
more difficult in terms of understanding legal concepts, but,
crucially, I found several were a very useful starting point or building
in understanding the very limited rights of non-human animals in the law.
The book organises the 17 individual (co-)authored chapters under three
parts. To a certain degree, this supports the overall purpose
of the book. This
approach allows for theoretical ideas, legal cases, and the application of
legislation to become apparent. The
author contributions from legal scholars and
those who work in the courts might not seem to be clearly differentiated to some
However, the way the contributors weave across legal resources and
concepts is specifically how the book points to an array of legal
perspectives
Part One focuses on the first principles that inform the recognition of
animal sentience in the law. I saw Part One as setting the
scene or providing
the context for the other two parts of the book. Broader definitions of animal
sentience are provided and the
direct or indirect effects of the legal
recognition of animal sentience are outlined in Chapter 1. Chapter 2
discusses the connection
between sentience and empathy and how legal recognition
of sentience can enable humans to foster empathy. The relationship between
animal welfare science and animal welfare law is examined in Chapter 3 in the
context of drafting legislation. The value of recognising
animal sentience in
the law is deliberated in Chapter 4. Such a discussion might be beneficial to:
(a) animal advocacy organisations
wanting to change the legal status of animals;
and (b) community and concerned citizens wanting to debate how to advocate for
Part Two provides a survey of the legal frameworks of several countries or
beings in one form or
another. I found the case studies in chapters 5–13 engaging because they
illustrate several varied approaches
in trying to apply the recognition of
sentience in different jurisdictions. Each chapter begins with a short history
of when and
how the relevant Animal Welfare Act and animal sentience legislation
were introduced into the country. One of the strong points of
the book, for an
international audience, is that the main jurisdictions examined encompass a
variety of countries: European Union,
Brazil, India, Pakistan, New Zealand,
Québec (Canada), Spain, United Kingdom, and Oregon State (USA).
Part Three focuses on specific applications, limitations, and advantages of
sentience legislation. Chapter 14 investigates how legal
recognition of animal
sentience in the case of commercial farm animals has the potential to affect the
basic legal protection these
animals receive. Chapter 15 focuses on the
potential effects of applying the ‘legal precautionary principle’
aim of protecting sentient animals who are
invertebrates.
Chapter 16 delves
into how the legal recognition of sentient animals used in various kinds of
scientific and medical research may
have a bearing on public perceptions.
Chapter 17 outlines the advantages and disadvantages of the legal recognition of
in the law as mainly symbolic legislation.
One of the strengths of the book is that it presents varied definitions of
animal sentience as the authors of each chapter give ‘their
definition of sentience’.
Some readers might see this breadth as a flaw — that the definitions in
the book are too diffuse for lawmaking. What becomes
apparent after reading
several chapters is that legal scholars, judges, and the courts may interpret
the concept of sentience ‘in
several ways, some broader and others
Even when limited to biological needs, sentience can be interpreted in different
ways; the most limited is
‘pain-focused’.
relation to defining animal sentience, I found much to think about, especially
Readers already familiar with the broader interpretation of sentience and its
everyday meaning may come away with a much richer understanding
concept could be interpreted in the law — through judges, courts, and
legislators — and among scholars, which
has the potential to reshape human
and non-human animal relations.
Most readers of this kind of book will be well aware that currently, as noted
above, animals are still managed under property law.
Several chapters examine a
number of different countries’ legislative changes which explicitly
declare that non-human animals
are ‘not things’; however, such
changes exist within legal systems that continue to treat animals as property in
This goes some way to
seeing sentient animals as no longer being classified as part of the category of
things. So, in many common
law cases, animals have become a special category
under property law. Nevertheless, as Kotzmann and Ferdowsian note,
‘[r]ecognising
that animals are sentient does not necessarily change their
legal status as
For the general, educated reader (not legal scholars or those working in the
courts) — who is very much interested in how sentience
is applied to
non-human animals in the law — the language of the law might require some
readers to do a lot of work in order
to gain an in-depth insight into how animal
law works in various jurisdictions. I made a time commitment to understand how
works in relation to the three categories of animals: domesticated
(companion and farmed), wild, and animals used in
experiments.
Reading the book in this way highlighted for me the valuable and productive
insights it affords.
As is often the case with animal welfare, it is companion animals who most
benefit from legislation that recognises animal
Animals who are
used for scientific and
medical research
experiments,
and used for religious or cultural
hardly benefit at all
because the legislation has not led to ‘systemic
In the chapters
that analysed and gave specific examples of where the courts upheld animal
interests, it is mainly companion and
wild animals held in captivity that
benefited from the recognition of sentience in the law.
I very much welcome this book for its content on legal recognition of
sentience, which is ideal for gaining an overview of current
legal and scholarly
debates, issues, philosophical ideas, and critiques in animal law. The
particular appeal of the book is that
it is well-situated within a longer set of
conversations across several interdisciplinary fields of study, to name a few:
studies, critical animal studies, legal studies, environmental studies as
well as interpretative communities. As the authors document
how the issue of
animal sentience works in the law, this is a very important book right now for
animal advocates and concerned citizens
wanting to expand their knowledge and
vocabulary for the purpose of talking about the problems around animal sentience
in the law.
It is a book that I recommend to others interested in understanding how
animal sentience works in the law; it is also one I will pull
off the shelf to
re-read specific chapters, cite in my academic articles, and tell my colleagues
Please cite this book review as:
Debbie Rodan, ‘Book Review:
The Legal Recognition of Animal
Sentience: Principles, Approaches and Applications
by Jane Kotzmann and MB
Rodriguez Ferrere (eds)’ (2025) 47
Sydney Law Review
21198:1–5 <https://doi.org/10.30722/slr.21198>.
This work is licensed via CC BY-ND 4.0
https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nd/4.0. Unmodified content is free to
use with proper
attribution.
* Honorary Associate Professor, School of Arts and Humanities, Edith Cowan
University, Perth, Western Australia. Email: d.rodan@ecu.edu.au;
https://orcid.org/0000-0002-0770-1833.
Joe Wills, ‘Common Sense:
Animal Sentience and the Common Law’ in Jane Kotzmann and MB Rodriguez
Ferrere (eds),
The Legal Recognition of Animal Sentience: Principles,
Approaches and Applications
(Hart Publishing, 2024) 97, 112 , quoting Rivera
J (dissenting) in
In the Matter of Nonhuman Rights Project Inc v Breheny
197 NE 3d 921, 968 (NY, 2022) (‘
MB Rodriguez Ferrere,
‘The Utility (or Otherwise) of Symbolic Legislation’ in Jane
Kotzmann and MB Rodriguez Ferrere
The Legal Recognition of Animal
Sentience: Principles, Approaches and Applications
(Hart Publishing, 2024)
Eva Bernet Kempers,
‘Owning Sentient Beings: The Potential of Sentience Recognition in
Continental Law’ in Jane Kotzmann
and MB Rodriguez Ferrere (eds),
Legal Recognition of Animal Sentience: Principles, Approaches and
Applications
(Hart Publishing, 2024) 81.
Daniel Goldsworthy and Ian
Robertson, ‘Drafting and Interpreting Sentience Provisions: Incorporating
Modern Science in Animal
Welfare Law as a Legislative Requirement’ in Jane
Kotzmann and MB Rodriguez Ferrere (eds),
The Legal Recognition of Animal
Sentience: Principles, Approaches and Applications
(Hart Publishing, 2024)
47, 54 (emphasis in original).
Bernet Kempers (n
Jane Kotzmann and MB
Rodriguez Ferrere, ‘Introduction’ in Jane Kotzmann and MB Rodriguez
Ferrere (eds),
The Legal Recognition of Animal Sentience: Principles,
Approaches and Applications
(Hart Publishing, 2024) 1, 3.
Rodriguez Ferrere,
‘The Utility (or Otherwise) of Symbolic Legislation’ (n
Kotzmann and Rodriguez
Paulien Christiaenssen,
‘Err on the Side of Sentience: The European Precautionary Principle,
Article 13 of the
Treaty on the Functioning of the European Union
Invertebrates’ in Jane Kotzmann and MB Rodriguez Ferrere (eds),
Legal Recognition of Animal Sentience: Principles, Approaches and
Applications
(Hart Publishing, 2024) 261, 262.
Kotzmann and Rodriguez
Michaël Lessard,
‘A Field Trip into Québec Law: Exploring the Theoretical
Ramifications of Sentience Recognition’
in Jane Kotzmann and MB Rodriguez
Ferrere (eds),
The Legal Recognition of Animal Sentience: Principles,
Approaches and Applications
(Hart Publishing, 2024) 173, 185.
Jane Kotzmann and Hope
Ferdowsian, ‘Animal Sentience Recognition and Theoretical Connotations:
Possible Implications for Animals
in Research’ in Jane Kotzmann and MB
Rodriguez Ferrere (eds),
The Legal Recognition of Animal Sentience:
Principles, Approaches and Applications
(Hart Publishing, 2024) 281,
Vanessa Gischkow Garbini,
‘All Roads Lead to Sentience: The Past, Present and Future of Animal Legal
Protection in Brazil’
in Jane Kotzmann and MB Rodriguez Ferrere (eds),
The Legal Recognition of Animal Sentience: Principles, Approaches and
Applications
(Hart Publishing, 2024) 121, 125.
Gischkow Garbini (n
) 123–4. See also Rachel Dunn and
Joshua Jowitt, ‘The Animal Sentience Committee: Evolution or Revolution in
the Recognition
of Animal Sentience in the UK?’ in Jane Kotzmann and MB
Rodriguez Ferrere (eds),
The Legal Recognition of Animal Sentience:
Principles, Approaches and Applications
(Hart Publishing, 2024) 207,
Steven White,
‘Sentiency, Exceptionalism and Farm Animal Protection’ in Jane
Kotzmann and MB Rodriguez Ferrere (eds),
The Legal Recognition of Animal
Sentience: Principles, Approaches and Applications
(Hart Publishing, 2024)
Gischkow Garbini (n
MB Rodriguez Ferrere,
‘Legal Recognition of Sentience in New Zealand’ in Jane Kotzmann and
MB Rodriguez Ferrere (eds),
The Legal Recognition of Animal Sentience:
Principles, Approaches and Applications
(Hart Publishing, 2024) 155,
Hira Jaleel, ‘The
Judicial Recognition of Animal Sentience: Developments in Pakistan and
India’ in Jane Kotzmann and
MB Rodriguez Ferrere (eds),
Recognition of Animal Sentience: Principles, Approaches and Applications
(Hart Publishing, 2024) 135, 149–154.
Rodriguez Ferrere,
‘Legal Recognition of Sentience in New Zealand’ (n
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (121 KB)
PDF format (228 KB)
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter