URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/journals/SydUPLawBk/2011/10.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 15:40:22
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
O'Neill, Nick; Peisah, Carmelle --- "Chapter 8 - Administration (financial management) of the Estates of Incapable People" [2011] SydUPLawBk 10; in O'Neill, Nick; Peisah, Carmelle (eds), "Capacity and the Law" (Sydney University Press, 2011)
8. 1. Introduction
8. 2. Jurisdiction to appoint administrators
8. 3. New South Wales
8. 3. 1. Who has jurisdiction to appoint financial managers?
8. 3. 2. Who may apply for a financial management order?
8. 3. 3. Who may take part in the hearing as a party?
8. 3. 4. What has to be proved before an order can be made?
8. 3. 5. Appointing a financial manager
8. 3. 6. Joint/several/alternate financial managers
8. 3. 7. Types of financial management orders
8. 3. 8. The jurisdiction of the Mental Health Review Tribunal to make financial management orders
8. 3. 9. Powers and functions of NSW Trustee as financial manager
8. 3. 10. The supervisory role of the Supreme Court in the management of estates
8. 3. 11. The orders the NSW Trustee may give to private financial managers
8. 3. 12. Effect of a financial management order
8. 3. 13. Reviews of financial management orders
8. 3. 14. Dealing with the estate after revocation of the financial management order
8. 4. Queensland
8. 4. 1. Who has jurisdiction to appoint administrators?
8. 4. 2. Who may apply for an administration order?
8. 4. 3. Who may take part in the hearing as a party?
8. 4. 4. What has to be proved before an order can be made?
8. 4. 5. Appointing an administrator
8. 4. 6. Joint, several, alternate and successive administrators
8. 4. 7. Queensland administration orders
8. 4. 8. Powers and functions of an administrator
8. 4. 9. Reviews of administration orders
8. 5. South Australia
8. 5. 1. Who has jurisdiction to appoint administrators?
8. 5. 2. Who may apply for an administrator order?
8. 5. 3. Who may take part in the hearing as a party?
8. 5. 4. What has to be proved before an order can be made?
8. 5. 5. Appointing an administrator
8. 5. 6. Joint, several and alternate administrators
8. 5. 7. Types of administration orders
8. 5. 8. Powers of the Supreme and District Courts to make protection orders
8. 5. 9. Relationship between
Aged and Infirm Persons’ Property Act 1940
Guardianship and Administration Act 1993
8. 5. 10. Powers and functions of an administrator
8. 5. 11. Reviews of administration orders
8. 6. Tasmania
8. 6. 1. Who has jurisdiction to appoint financial managers?
8. 6. 2. Who may apply for a financial management order?
8. 6. 3. Who may take part in the hearing as a party?
8. 6. 4. What has to be proved before an order can be made?
8. 6. 5. Appointing a financial manager
8. 6. 6. Joint/several/alternate administrators
8. 6. 7. Types of administration orders
8. 6. 8. Powers and duties of an administrator
8. 6. 9. Administrators may seek advice
8. 6. 10. Reviews of administration orders
8. 6. 11. Parties to reviews of guardianship orders
8. 6. 12. Powers of the Board on review
8. 7. Victoria
8. 7. 1. Who has jurisdiction to appoint financial managers?
8. 7. 2. Who may apply for an administration order?
8. 7. 3. Who may take part in the hearing as a party?
8. 7. 4. What has to be proved before an order can be made?
8. 7. 5. Appointing an administrator
8. 7. 6. Joint/several/alternate administrators
8. 7. 7. Types of administration orders
8. 7. 8. The role of VCAT after making an administration order
8. 7. 9. Powers and duties of administrators
8. 7. 10. Effect of a financial management order
8. 7. 11. Requested rehearings
8. 7. 12. Reassessments of administration orders
8. 8. Western Australia
8. 8. 1. Who has jurisdiction to appoint administrators?
8. 8. 2. Who may apply for an administration order?
8. 8. 3. Who may take part in the hearing as a party?
8. 8. 4. What has to be proved before an order can be made?
8. 8. 5. Appointing an administrator
8. 8. 6. Joint/concurrent/alternate administrators
8. 8. 7. Types of administration orders
8. 8. 8. Obligations and functions of an administrator
8. 8. 9. The role of Tribunal after making an administration order
8. 8. 10. Reviews of administration orders
8. 8. 11. Powers of the Tribunal on review
8. 9. Australian Capital Territory
8. 9. 1. Who has jurisdiction to appoint financial managers?
8. 9. 2. Who may apply for a management order?
8. 9. 3. Who may take part in the hearing as a party?
8. 9. 4. What has to be proved before an order can be made?
8. 9. 5. Appointing a financial manager
8. 9. 6. Joint/several/replacement managers
8. 9. 7. Types of management orders
8. 9. 8. Injunctions to restrain dealings
8. 9. 9. Effect of a management order
8. 9. 10. The role of Tribunal after making a management order
8. 9. 11. Powers and functions of a financial manager
8. 9. 12. Reviews of management orders
8. 9. 13. Parties to reviews of management orders
8. 9. 14. Powers of ACAT on review
8. 10. Northern Territory
8. 10. 1. Who has jurisdiction to appoint financial managers?
8. 10. 2. Who may apply for an administration order?
8. 10. 3. Who may take part in the hearing as a party?
8. 10. 4. What has to be proved before an order can be made?
8. 10. 5. Appointing a manager
8. 10. 6. Joint/several/alternate financial managers
8. 10. 7. Types of financial management orders
8. 10. 8. Powers and functions of a financial manager
8. 10. 9. Effect of a protection order or management order
8. 10. 10. Reviews of financial management orders
8. 11. General matters
8. 11. 1. Purpose of administration orders
8. 11. 2. Who may apply for an order
8. 11. 3. Who should have notice of the hearing of the application?
8. 11. 4. Tests for making administration orders
8. 11. 5. The incapacity criterion
8. 11. 6. Deciding the incapacity issue
8. 11. 7. The need criterion
8. 11. 8. The best interests criterion
8. 11. 9. Onus of proof
8. 11. 10. Standard of proof
8. 11. 11. Who to appoint as administrator – a “checklist” of considerations
8. 11. 12. Appointing private managers
8. 11. 13. Effect of administration orders
8. 11. 14. Functions and powers of administrators
8. 11. 15. Reviews of administration orders
8. 12. The assessment of financial capacity: the role of the expert
8. 12. 1. Understanding the concept
8. 12. 2. The legal tests
8. 12. 3. The assessment of capacity
8. 12. 4. Report writing
Chapter 8 – Administration (financial management) of the estates of incapable people
8. 1. Introduction
Central to the modern guardianship and administration of estates systems in
Australia is the power given to guardianship tribunals
of the States and the
Australian Capital Territory to make orders appointing others to manage the
property and affairs of incapable
adults. These orders are known as
administration orders in all the States, except New South Wales where they are
called financial
management orders, if they are made by a tribunal. They may
have different names if made by courts. In New South Wales they are called
financial management orders, in the Australian Capital Territory, management
orders and in the Northern Territory they are management
orders if made by the
Local Court and protection orders if made by the Supreme Court.
However, as is already clear from other chapters of this book, the
guardianship and administration of estates systems in the different
Territories of Australia are essentially the same, but have sufficient
differences between them for it to be necessary
to deal with each State and
Territory’s system separately. Also, as many of the provisions that apply
to the making of administration
orders have already been discussed in Chapters 6
and 7 dealing with the appointment of guardians and their functions or powers,
particularly
Chapter 7, there will be appropriate cross references to those
chapters in this chapter.
This chapter sets out which bodies have jurisdiction to make administration
orders in each State and Territory. It also sets out how
applications for those
orders are made, by whom, who may be involved in the hearing process and what
the criteria are for making
such orders. The chapter deals with the processes
for reviewing administration orders and the criteria that are relevant to the
In New South Wales the Guardianship Tribunal makes the majority of
administration orders, but unlike its counterparts elsewhere in
Australia does
not give administrators their powers to carry out their functions and
responsibilities as administrators. Nor do administrators
report to it. Since
mid 2009 when the office of Protective Commissioner was abolished, the NSW
Trustee has been giving administrators
directions as to how they are to
administer the estates they have been appointed to manage, and administrators
have been accounting
to the NSW Trustee. In the other States and the two
Territories the relevant tribunal gives the administrators their powers either
directly by setting them out in the appointment order or by appointing
administrators whose appointment vests them with powers that
the tribunal
appointing them may be able to limit by conditions and limitation or add to in
the appointment order. In Victoria, Queensland
and Tasmania the administrators
report to the tribunal. In South Australia private administrators report to both
the Guardianship
Board and the Public Trustee while the Public Trustee reports
to the Guardianship Board. In Western Australia and the Australian
Territory, private administrators report to the Public Trustee, but there is no
provision for the Public Trustee to report
to the tribunal that appointed them
in either jurisdiction. In the Northern Territory,
a guardian appointed
by the Local Court as a manager is required, at least once a year, to give the
Executive Officer an account of
their management of the person's estate.
In this chapter the powers and functions that the NSW Trustee automatically
has when appointed as administrator in New South Wales
and the powers she may
give to private administrators are set out in detail together with the powers
that VCAT may give to administrators
it appoints in Victoria. The powers,
function and requirements imposed on family members and friends appointed as
administrators
in Queensland are set out in the general section of the chapter
referred to in the next paragraph as it is suggested that they apply
administrators appointed in the other States and Territories of Australia. The
powers and functions of administrators are not
dealt with in the same amount of
There are a number of issues common to each of the eight guardianship and
administration of estates systems in the country. Where
possible, these issues
are drawn out and discussed later in the chapter.
The chapter also discusses the role of health care professionals in the
making and reviewing of administration orders.
8. 2. Jurisdiction to appoint
administrators
As noted in Chapter 5, one of the key aims of the modern guardianship and
administration of estates systems in Australia has been
to make the seeking and
obtaining of administration orders much cheaper and more accessible to those who
need to get the orders than
previously. As a result, applications for
administration orders in the States and the Australian Capital Territory are
made to tribunals.
The situation in the Northern Territory is more complicated
as will be explained at 8. 8.
In New South Wales the Supreme Court not only retains its statutory as well
as its parens patriae jurisdiction, but regularly uses
it to make financial
management orders. In the Northern Territory, the Supreme Court may make
administration orders called “protection
orders” in relation to
those who meet the criteria set out in the
Aged and Infirm Persons’
Property Act
However, in Victoria, Morris J has doubted that the Supreme Court’s parens
patriae jurisdiction “should play any current
role in the day to day
administration of guardianship [and administration] matters” because of
Victoria’s comprehensive
laws in relation to those
The question of which
tribunals and courts are empowered to appoint administrators in each of the
States and Territories is discussed
in more detail below.
8. 3. New South Wales
8. 3. 1. Who has jurisdiction to appoint
financial managers?
In New South Wales the Supreme Court, the Guardianship Tribunal, and the
Mental Health Review Tribunal may, and regularly do, make
financial management
In addition to its
statutory jurisdiction under the
NSW Trustee and Guardian Act
, the Supreme Court retains the inherent, parens patriae jurisdiction
it has had since it came into existence in 1824. In a 1987 case
Powell J of the
Supreme Court of New South Wales noted that the jurisdiction of the Court to
make orders for the management of property
of a person with unsound mind or
incapable of managing their affairs may be found in a variety of sources
including the inherent
mind and the jurisdiction given to the Court by the
Protected Estates Act
which has now been superseded by the
NSW Trustee and Guardian
Guardianship Tribunal’s jurisdiction in relation financial management
issues is found in the
Guardianship Act
In June 2010, the Mental
Health Review Tribunal took over, from the magistrates, the jurisdiction to make
financial management (administration)
orders in relation to those who are going
through the process of being admitted to a mental health
In summary, the Guardianship Tribunal, the Supreme Court and the Mental
Health Review Tribunal have jurisdiction, arising from different
sources, to
make administration orders as follows:
1. Guardianship Tribunal, under the
Guardianship Act 1987
2. Supreme Court, under the
NSW Trustee and Guardian Act 2009
3. Supreme Court, under the parens patriae element of its inherent
4. Mental Health Review Tribunal conducting mental health inquiries under the
Mental Health Act
5. Mental Health Review Tribunal, in relation to those in mental health
facilities, under the
NSW Trustee and Guardian Act 2009
As the Guardianship Tribunal makes far more financial management orders than
the Supreme Court and the Mental Health Review Tribunal,
its role will be
discussed in more detail than those bodies. The jurisdiction of the Mental
Health Review Tribunal both when conducting
mental health inquiries and when
making financial management orders later during a person’s admission to a
mental health facility
is dealt with as a separate matter at 8. 3. 8. It should
be noted that the Guardianship Tribunal may deal with applications to make
financial management orders in relation to patients under the
Mental Health
8. 3. 2. Who may apply for a financial management
8. 3. 2. 1. Guardianship Tribunal
Similar to applications for guardianship orders, applications for financial
management orders may be made to the Tribunal by:
1. any person who, in
the opinion of the Tribunal, has a genuine concern for the welfare of the person
who the application is about,
2. the NSW Trustee.
8. 3. 2. 2. Supreme Court
Applications to the Supreme Court for management orders are made according to
the requirements of the Supreme Court
It is usual for the
applicant, the plaintiff, to be a relative; however it is not essential that the
applicant be a relative and
another person, often described in legal cases and
texts as a “stranger” may apply. This will be the case where there
are no relatives to bring the application or where it is alleged that family
members are mistreating the incapable person physically
or misusing their
8. 3. 3. Who may take part in the hearing as a
8. 3. 3. 1. Guardianship Tribunal
The automatic parties to an application to the
Tribunal for a financial management order are listed below. As parties they may
the hearing of the application, give evidence and make submissions to the
Tribunal as well as call witnesses and cross examine other
They may also appeal
against the decision of the
They may seek leave to
be represented by a lawyer or agent at the Tribunal
1. the applicant,
2. the person the application is about,
3. the spouse, if any, of that person, if their relationship with that person
is close and continuing,
4. the person, if any, who has care of that person,
5. the person, if any, appointed attorney by the person to whom the
application relates under a power of attorney that is in force,
6. the NSW Trustee.
The Tribunal may join others as parties to the
application.
Joined parties have
the same rights as automatic parties.
8. 3. 3. 2. Supreme Court
The parties to applications to the Supreme Court for management orders are
usually confined to the applicant as plaintiff and the
person the hearing is
8. 3. 4. What has to be proved before an order
can be made?
8. 3. 4. 1. Guardianship Tribunal
Before the Tribunal may make a financial
management order, it must conduct a hearing at which it considers the capability
of the person
the hearing is about to manage their own affairs and must be
satisfied as to the following matters, namely that:
1. the person is not capable of managing their own affairs,
2. there is a need for another person to manage those affairs on the
person’s behalf, and
3. it is in the person’s best interests that the order be
These criteria, and the criteria applied by the Supreme Court and courts and
tribunals around the country are discussed later in this
chapter at 8. 11. 5. to
8. 3. 4. 2. Supreme Court
The Supreme Court has a discretion to make an
order that a person’s estate be subject to management if it is satisfied
the person is incapable of managing their
The formal process of
the Court is:
1. to make a declaration that the person is incapable of managing their
financial affairs,
2. to order that their estate be subject to management under the
Trustee and Guardian Act 2009
3. by order appoint either a suitable person or the NSW Trustee as manager of
the estate of the incapable
As already noted, the criteria applied by the Supreme Court before making its
declaration and appointment order are discussed later
in this chapter at 8. 11.
5 to 8. 11. 8. The procedures of the Court to be followed in relation to an
application under section 41of
NSW Trustee and Guardian Act
are set out in the Supreme Court Rules and in the
8. 3. 5. Appointing a financial
8. 3. 5. 1. Guardianship Tribunal and the Supreme Court
When either the Tribunal or the Court makes
a financial management order, it must either:
1. appoint a suitable person as (private) manager of the estate, or
2. commit the management of that estate to the NSW
In the Supreme Court, but not the Guardianship Tribunal, unless it is
proposed that the estate of the person the hearing is about
is to be committed
to the NSW Trustee for management or to be managed by the applicant, the
proposed manager must consent, in the
prescribed form, to being appointed the
manager. Furthermore, unless the proposed manager is the NSW Trustee or a
trustee company,
affidavits must be given by at least two persons giving their
opinion of the proposed person’s character, their fitness to
details of their business
experience.
In the leading New South Wales Court of Appeal case on the matters to be
considered when deciding who to appoint as financial manager,
Kirby P noted that
the legislation provided first that a “suitable person” should be
appointed as manager of the estate
of a person the subject of a financial
management order and only secondly that the management of that estate should be
to the NSW Trustee.
described this as a sensible hierarchy of choices pointing out that:
In many estates of modest size it will be appropriate where there is no risk of
conflict of interest and duty, and where a relationship
of love or affection is
established, to reflect in the statutory appointment the form of management
which for millennia, in primitive
societies as in civilised communities, has
been followed when a family member is found to be incapable of managing his or
her affairs.
It is normal then for the family to step
Despite this limiting view of who should be appointed
manager, he insisted that the discretion to appoint and remove a financial
was a broad one that should not be confined “by rigid rules”
or even ‘guidelines’ expressed in general terms.
He then went on to
provide a checklist of considerations to be borne in mind when exercising the
discretion as to who to appoint
as manager, with the “abiding rule”
being the achievement of the best interests of the person the hearing is
A summary of the
checklist is set out below.
He also noted that, in earlier times and before the advent of the modern
guardianship and administration system, the courts conserved
their intervention
to cases where there was no family or where no family member was willing to act
or where for special reasons of
incompetence or conflict of interest it was
unsuitable to appoint a family member. He then pointed out that there was a
the administration of the legislation of overlooking not only that
this as the natural order of things but also that it was the way
parliament had
reflected the matter in the legislation by referring to the appointment of a
suitable person ahead of committing the
management of the estate to the NSW
It should be noted however, that the Tribunal deals with a significant number
of cases in which it is precisely because there is no
family or no family
willing to take on the role of financial manager that the Tribunal commits the
management of the estate to the
NSW Trustee. At other times, and often at the
request of or with the support of family members, the Tribunal appoints the NSW
in order to have a body outside the family managing the financial
affairs of the incapable person. At other times the appointment
is made for
reasons of incompetence or conflict of interest or intra-family conflict which
makes it not in the incapable person’s
best interests to appoint a family
Nevertheless, in a 2006 case the Appeal Panel of the Administrative Appeals
Tribunal stated that “if the Guardianship Tribunal
did not look first to
the possibility of appointing a suitable person to be the manager of the
protected person’s estate or
considered any potential conflict of interest
to be an "absolute bar" to [a family member’s] appointment as a manager,
it will have made an error of
While the Appeal
Panel did not find an error of law on the facts of the case, its statement of
the law reflects a rigidity of approach
that is inconsistent with the broad
discretion to be exercised in appointing financial managers and the abiding rule
of achieving
the best interests of the incapable person.
While care has to be taken to ensure that a financial manager will abide by
the limits of the authorities and directions as to the
management of the estates
they are appointed to manage, and will account annually to the NSW Trustee on
the management of those estates,
the Guardianship Tribunal occasionally appoints
as financial managers persons who are not resident in New South Wales if they
otherwise suitable for appointment.
Where a private person is appointed as manager, they may not begin to manage
the estate until the NSW Trustee has authorised them
to exercise functions
relating to the estate or, directions of the Supreme Court relevant to the
management of the estate have been
obtained. Nevertheless, a manager may take
such action as may be necessary for the protection of the estate, including
action specified
by the Tribunal, pending the directions of the Court or
authorisation by the NSW
8. 3. 6. Joint/several/alternate financial
8. 3. 6. 1. Guardianship Tribunal and Supreme Court
The Tribunal may, and sometimes does, appoint more than one financial
manager. When the Tribunal does this, those appointed must act
jointly and all
agree with the decisions made during the management of the estate. However, as
Powell J of the New South Wales Supreme
Court pointed out in a 1982 case, it is
the duty of the appointing authority to keep the administration of an estate
simple and inexpensive,
particularly if it is comparatively small and
uncomplicated. Hence the appointment of multiple managers is to be avoided,
if there is antipathy and mistrust between
Because it is appropriate for managers to have all the powers of a manager
and for all managers to be able to exercise all their powers
over all the
estate, or at least as much of the estate that is under management, it is not
sensible to appoint one manager with some
powers over some of the estate and
another with different powers. Nor is it sensible to appoint one manager for
part of the estate
and another manager for another part.
None of the Supreme Court, Guardianship Tribunal, Magistrates conducting
mental health inquiries and the Mental Health Review Tribunal
has statutory
power to appoint alternate financial managers. Consequently, if the financial
manager dies or becomes incapable, an
application has to be made for another
manager to be appointed.
8. 3. 7. Types of financial management
8. 3. 7. 1. Plenary orders
In New South Wales all financial management orders made by the Supreme Court
and most such orders made by the Guardianship Tribunal
are plenary orders
covering all of a person’s estate.
8. 3. 7. 2. Orders with part of the estate excluded
The Guardianship Tribunal may exclude a specified part of a person’s
estate from a financial management order. This is not the
same as deciding what
part of the person’s estate is placed under management. In New South Wales
a financial management order
applies to all of the person’s property and
affairs unless the Tribunal specifically excludes part of the person’s
from management and specifies, with precision, that part of the estate
that is excluded from management.
8. 3. 7. 2. Interim orders
The Guardianship Tribunal may make interim
financial management orders for specified periods, not exceeding 6 months,
pending the
Tribunal’s further consideration of the capability of the
person about whom the order is made to manage their own
This power is limited
intentionally. It is intended to be used where there is an urgent need to make
the order in a person’s
best interests, but where there has been
insufficient time to obtain a satisfactory level of evidence, through medical
examinations
or other sources of information, to show that the person lacks
capacity to manage their own financial affairs or where there is some
obtain that evidence.
The Tribunal may not make an interim financial management order unless it has
before it an evidential basis for believing that the
person may be incapable of
managing their own financial affairs and that they need an order. These orders
are not to be used as short
term financial management orders if the evidence of
the person’s incapacity is available. In that case, the proper course is
to apply the tests for making a final order, and, if the order is made, to
provide an early date for its review. It is not legitimate
to make an interim
financial management order where a short term order appears to be needed in the
knowledge that such an order will
be taken to have been revoked if the period
for which it is made expires and no further interim order or no final order has
While the wording of the legislative provision empowering the Tribunal to
make interim financial management orders does not preclude
the making of more
than one such order either through clear words or necessary implication, a
second interim order following immediately
upon a first order should not be made
unless there are legitimate difficulties in obtaining the evidence of the
person’s incapacity
and the evidence is likely to become available if the
further order is made.
While the legislation appears to limit the circumstances in which such an
order can be sought, interim financial management orders
can be sought:
1. during an application for either a guardianship or a financial management
2. for a person who is already under guardianship, whether just placed under
guardianship or having been under guardianship for some
3. during the review of an appointment of an enduring
4. during the review of an appointment of an enduring power of
Where an interim order is made, the usual practice is to adjourn the
application for a full financial management order or other relevant
application
so that the required evidence can be gathered and to bring the matter back on
for hearing before the time provided for
in the interim order has expired.
Interim financial management orders are taken to be revoked when the time for
their expiry is reached.
8. 3. 7. 3. Supreme Court
While the Supreme Court has no legislative power to make interim financial
management orders, it has inherent jurisdiction to make
interim orders to
protect the estates of, as noted by Lord Eldon in
Ridgeway v Darwin,
“all persons who were ‘unable to act with any proper and provident
management’ who were ‘liable to be robbed
by anyone’ whether
they were, strictly speaking, insane or not because the mischief called for as
much protection as actual
pointed out as he proceeded to appoint an interim receiver and manager on an
urgent summons that the judge proceeded to
hear without it being served on the
person the hearing was about, the requirement was that the applicant:
[M]ust then show that there is a strongly arguable case that the defendant is a
person who falls within the class specified by Lord
, at least in the short term. The evidence need not go so far as to
show that two medical practitioners or a medical practitioner
and a psychologist
consider that the defendant is incapable of managing his or her affairs, but the
evidence must at least show a
strongly arguable case that immediate protection
is needed to preserve the defendant's
8. 3. 8. The jurisdiction of the Mental Health
Review Tribunal to make financial management orders
8. 3. 8. 1. Mental health inquiries conducted by the Mental Health Review
When a person is taken to a mental hospital or other mental health facility,
they must be examined as soon as possible, and in any
event within 12 hours
after they arrive at the hospital or other facility. The same requirements for
examination apply if the person
has gone to the mental hospital or other mental
health facility as a voluntary patient and it is subsequently believed that they
should be detained there for treatment on an involuntary basis. The examination
must be carried out either by the medical superintendent
or a medical officer at
the hospital. Unless the examining doctor certifies that they are a mentally
ill or a mentally disordered
person, the person must not be detained after the
examination.
If the person is
certified to be either a mentally ill or mentally disordered person, they must
be examined by a second doctor and
that doctor must be a psychiatrist if the
first examining doctor wasn’t. There are further provisions about medical
examinations
and if the medical opinion is that the person is either a mentally
ill or mentally disordered person, then they must be brought before
Health Review Tribunal
for a mental health inquiry as soon as
practicable.
obligation of the medical officer who conducts the examination or causes other
doctors to conduct the examination to bring
the person before the Mental Health
Review Tribunal
for a mental health inquiry. The medical officer
must give the person written notice of the inquiry and that notice must advise
if the Mental Health Review Tribunal
considers that the
person should be detained, the Tribunal will also have to consider whether or
not the person is able to manage
This notice must be
given as soon as the medical officer is aware that the person is one for whom an
inquiry is required to be held.
The mental health inquiry must be
arranged by either the medical superintendent of mental hospital or other mental
health facility
or a doctor attached to that hospital or other facility and
authorised by the medical superintendent. The parties to such an inquiry
1. the applicant doctor,
2. the person the inquiry is about, and
3. their primary carer, if they can be
The doctor arranging the mental health inquiry must advise the person that
all reasonably practicable steps will be taken to give
notice of the inquiry to
the person’s primary carer and then take those
The primary carer of a
1. their guardian,
2. their parent if the person is a child, unless the child has made a
nomination referred to in 3,
3. if the person is over the age of 14 years and not under guardianship, the
person nominated by them as their primary carer,
4. if 1, 2 or 3 do not apply then,
(i) the person’s spouse of the, if any, if the relationship
between the person and their spouse is close and continuing,
(ii) any person who is primarily responsible for providing support
or care to the person (other than wholly or substantially on a
(iii) a close friend or relative of the
If, after holding the mental health inquiry, the Mental Health Review
directs that the person must be detained in a mental
hospital or other mental health facility as an involuntary patient, the Tribunal
must deal with the question of the person’s capability to manage their own
affairs under the
NSW Trustee and Guardian Act
That matter is dealt
8. 3. 8. 2. Mental Health Review
There are various situations in which the Mental Health Review Tribunal has
The first is where it is conducting a mental health inquiry, as discussed in
after conducting the inquiry, the Tribunal orders that the person the subject of
the inquiry is to be detained in a mental health
facility, the Tribunal must
consider whether or not the person is capable of managing their own (financial)
affairs and if satisfied
that the person is not capable of managing their own
affairs, must order that their estate be subject to management under the
Trustee and Guardian Act
and commit the management of the
person’s estate to the NSW
The parties to such a
hearing are:
1. the applicant doctor,
2. the person the inquiry is about, and
3. their primary carer if they can be served.
The second is where the Tribunal is reviewing a person’s case under
Mental Health (Forensic Provisions) Act 1990
Again if, after
conducting the review, the Tribunal orders that the person the subject of the
inquiry is to be detained in a mental
health facility, the Tribunal must
consider whether or not the person is capable of managing their own (financial)
affairs and if
satisfied that the person is not capable of managing their own
affairs, must order that their estate be subject to management under
Trustee and Guardian Act
and commit the management of the
person’s estate to the NSW
The third situation is where a person who, in the opinion of the Tribunal has
a sufficient interest in the matter, makes an application
to the Tribunal for a
financial management order to be made in relation to a patient in a mental
health facility.
Whether or not
it has previously considered the question, the Tribunal may consider a
person’s capability to manage their own
affairs. If the Tribunal is
satisfied that the person not capable, it must order that the person’s
estate be subject to management
Trustee and Guardian Act
and commit the management of the
person’s estate to the NSW
Where such an
application is made, the parties to the hearing would be:
1. the applicant, and
2. the person the hearing is about.
It is suggested that the language of
sections 44
NSW Trustee
and Guardian Act
makes it mandatory for the Tribunal to
consider the capacity to manage their (financial) affairs of a person it has
ordered to be
detained in a mental health facility immediately after it has made
the detention order in relation to them, and if the Tribunal is
satisfied that
the person is not capable of managing their (financial) affairs, it must make a
financial management order in relation
to them. There does not appear to be any
discretion in the Tribunal not to make the order if it finds the patient not
the grounds that the patient has put other arrangements in place,
like having appointed an attorney under an enduring power of attorney
their financial affairs when they, the patient with a mental illness, are unwell
and need someone to manage their financial
affairs for that time only. However,
it may make sense in most cases in which a patient is detained in a mental
health facility to
have the Public Trustee managing their financial affairs as
they, the patients, would usually, because of the state of their illness
physical reality of their detention, be unable to manage their affairs
themselves.
In relation to a subsequent application in relation to a patient, the
language of
indicates that the Tribunal has a discretion as to
whether or not it needs to consider the person’s capacity to manage their
(financial) affairs. However, if the Tribunal does consider the application, and
is satisfied that the person is not capable of managing
their affairs, the
section appears to require the Tribunal to make an order that the estate of the
person be subject to management
NSW Trustee and Guardian Act
and commit the management of the person’s estate to the
NSW Trustee even though there may have been no change in the person’s
capability to manage their own affairs since that capability was last considered
by the Tribunal or the Supreme
There appears to be a conflict between the mandatory requirements of
NSW Trustee and Guardian Act
which sets out applicable general principles.
These principles apply to the Mental Health Review Tribunal and require it, when
with a patient’s capacity to manage their (financial) affairs,
1. Give paramount consideration to the patient’s welfare and
2. Restrict the patient’s freedom of decision and freedom of action as
little as possible;
3. Encourage patients, as far as possible, to live a normal life in the
4. Take the views of the patient into consideration;
5. Recognise the importance of preserving family relationships and cultural
and linguistic environments;
6. Encourage the patient, as far as possible, to be self-reliant in matters
relating to their personal, domestic and financial affairs;
7. Protect the patient from abuse, exploitation or neglect.
These principles suggest that the Tribunal should exercise a discretion not
to make a financial management order in some situations
where the patient was
incapable of managing their financial affairs. For example, where to make an
order would so retard the patient’s
recovery because of their agitation
welfare and interests,
as well as their views, to make the order. Another
example of where it would be consistent with the principles not to make a
management order is where the person has already appointed an attorney
under an enduring power of attorney to handle their financial
affairs when they
are unwell and need someone to manage their financial affairs for the period of
their unwellness only.
8. 3. 8. 3. Interim financial management orders made by the Mental Health
Review Tribunal
The Mental Health Review Tribunal, when
exercising any of its financial management jurisdictions, may, if it appears to
necessary or convenient to do so, make an interim financial management
order appointing the NSW Trustee the manager of a person’s
estate for a
period of up to six months pending further consideration of that person’s
capability to manage their own
An interim financial
management order will expire six months after it is made if it is not reviewed
within that time. If a review
is begun within the six month period, the interim
order will expire at the end of the
However, the Tribunal
may, after further consideration of the patient’s capacity to manage their
(financial) affairs, be satisfied
that do not have that capacity and make a
financial management order or, not being so satisfied, revoke the interim
financial management
order and end the proceedings.
8. 3. 9. Powers and functions of NSW Trustee as
financial manager
Most financial management orders made in New South Wales by the Guardianship
Tribunal and the Supreme Court and all those made by
the Mental Health Review
Tribunal involve committing the management of the estate to the NSW Trustee
(appointing the NSW Trustee
as financial manager).
The NSW Trustee has and may exercise all the functions the person would have
had and could have exercised when or if they had
In addition, the NSW
Trustee may exercise all functions that are necessary for the management and
care of the estate as well as
any other functions given to her by the Supreme
Court or the Guardianship
The Tribunal’s
power to give extra functions is, for reasons that are unclear, limited to
situations in which the person whose
affairs were being managed was also under
guardianship.
The NSW Trustee
may also execute and sign any document on behalf of the incapable person while
managing their estate.
NSW Trustee and Guardian Act
sets out the
specific purposes for which the NSW Trustee may spend money from an estate under
management, namely:
1. the payment of the debts and engagements of the person and the repayment
of expenses chargeable to their estate,
2. the person’s funeral expenses, but only after their death,
3. the maintenance of the spouse of the person or any child, parent or other
person dependent upon the person, or for whose maintenance
the person provided
when not a managed person or would be expected to provide,
4. the payment of all proper costs incurred in or about the care, protection,
recovery, sale, mortgage, leasing, disposal and management
of the estate of the
5. the preservation and improvement of the estate of the person,
6. the taking up of rights to issues of new shares, or options for new
shares, to which the person may become entitled by virtue of
any shareholdings,
7. the maintenance (including future maintenance), clothing, medicine and
care, past and present, of the
Without restricting any of her other functions, the NSW Trustee may exercise
the following functions relating to the property of a
person when managing that
person’s estate:
1. receive money, rent, income and profit of real and personal property,
2. grant leases of property for a term not exceeding 10 years and give to a
lessee an option of renewal if the aggregate duration
of the lease and any such
renewal does not exceed 10 years,
3. enter into a share-farming agreement for a period not exceeding 3
4. surrender a lease and accept a new lease,
5. accept a surrender of a lease and grant a new lease,
6. execute a power of leasing vested in a person having a limited estate only
in the property over which the power extends,
7. buy, sell, realise and mortgage or charge (with or without a power of
sale) real and personal
8. pay interest secured by a
mortgage or charge out of capital, if income is insufficient,
9. postpone the sale, calling in and conversion of any property that the NSW
Trustee has a duty to sell, other than property that
is of a wasting,
speculative or reversionary nature,
10. settle, adjust and compromise a demand made by or against the estate,
11. exchange or join in a partition of property and give or receive money for
equality of exchange or partition,
12. carry on a business, so far as may appear desirable for the purpose of
more advantageously disposing of, or winding up, the business
or preserving the
business of a managed person until the managed person is able to carry it on,
13. agree to an alteration of the conditions of a partnership into which a
managed person has entered, for the purpose of more advantageously
disposing of
an interest in the partnership or terminating liability,
14. carry out a contract entered into before the appointment of the NSW
Trustee or enter into an agreement terminating the liability,
15. surrender, assign or otherwise dispose of, with or without consideration,
onerous property,
16. exercise a power, or give a consent required for the exercise of a power,
where the power is vested in a managed person for the
benefit of the person or
the power of consent is in the nature of a beneficial interest in the
17. sequestrate the estate under the bankruptcy laws,
18. take proceedings to cause a company to be placed in liquidation and vote
or act by proxy at meetings of creditors or shareholders,
whether the company is
in liquidation or not,
19. bring and defend actions, suits and other proceedings,
20. without limiting paragraph 19, take criminal proceedings touching or
concerning property,
21. pay rates, taxes, assessments, insurance premiums, debts, obligations,
costs and expenses and other outgoings,
22. without limiting paragraph 21, pay the reasonable costs of the erection
of a memorial or a tombstone over the grave of a deceased
person or, if a
deceased person is cremated, the reasonable costs of a memorial or any
arrangements for the preservation of the ashes
of the deceased person,
23. repair and insure against fire or accident any property, and
24. bring land under the
Real Property Act
8. 3. 10. The supervisory role of the Supreme
Court in the management of estates
Even though the evolutionary separation of the Supreme Court from the
management of estates placed under management by itself, the
Guardianship
Tribunal or the Mental Health Review Tribunal continues, the Court still retains
a supervisory role which it may exercise
from time to
In particular, the Court
may give the NSW Trustee directions about how she should exercise her functions
in relation to an estate
she is managing under a financial management order.
While the NSW Trustee may apply for such directions from time to time in
matters, the person whose estate is under management or a relative,
friend or debtor of that person may also apply to the Court.
Also the Court may
let any other person it considers has sufficient interest in the matter apply
for such directions.
Nevertheless, private managers, whether appointed by the Supreme Court or the
Guardianship Tribunal, except in exceptional circumstances,
receive their
detailed authorities to act in orders from the NSW Trustee to whom they have to
account annually.
8. 3. 11. The orders the NSW Trustee may give to
private financial managers
The NSW Trustee gives orders to private financial managers as to the
administration and management of the estates they have been made
responsible for
by either the Guardianship Tribunal or the Supreme Court. Those orders cover the
authorities and directions that
the NSW Trustee gives to private financial
managers, but may also cover enforcing the exercise of their
The NSW Trustee may make both general and particular orders. She may make the
orders that appear necessary:
1. for the payment of the debts and engagements of, or otherwise for the
benefit of the person whose affairs a private financial manager
is managing,
2. for the maintenance and benefit of the family of that person, or
3. otherwise as the Public Trustee thinks necessary or desirable for the care
and management of the estate of the incapable
The NSW Trustee may also make particular orders for particular purposes. She
may make orders relating to the mortgaging or otherwise
charging of the real
property or the sale, charging or otherwise dealing with or disposing of, in the
most expedient way, the real
and personal property of a person whose affairs are
managed by a private financial manager for the purpose of achieving one or more
of the following outcomes:
1. payment of the person’s debts or engagements,
2. discharge of any encumbrance on property of the person,
3. payment of any debt or expenditure incurred for the maintenance (including
future maintenance), or otherwise for the benefit, of
the person,
4. payment of the costs of any proceeding under this Act or of any sale or
other disposition made under this Act, and
5. payment of such other sum or sums to such person or persons as the NSW
Trustee thinks fit.
In addition the NSW Trustee may make orders authorising or directing the
application of money that may comprise either the whole or
a part of an estate
under private management for any of the following purposes:
1. the preservation and improvement of the person’s estate,
2. the taking up of rights to issues of new shares, or options for new
shares, to which the person may become entitled by virtue of
any shareholdings,
3. the investment of money not required for the time being for any of the
other purposes specified in 1 and 2 in such manner as the
NSW Trustee thinks
Further, the NSW Trustee may make orders authorising and directing private
financial managers as follows:
1. to exercise some or all of the functions as to property that the NSW
Trustee may exercise and which are set out above,
2. a manager to have all, or any specified, functions necessary and
incidental to the management and care of an estate,
3. to have and exercise such other functions as the NSW Trustee may
The NSW Trustee may also give a manager such directions relating to the
orders set out in 1, 2 and 3 as she thinks
These 2009 provisions continue the practice developed in New South Wales that
where the Guardianship Tribunal or the Supreme Court
appoints a private person
as financial manager for an incapable person, but, unlike in some other States
and Territories, it is the
NSW Trustee, rather than the Tribunal or Court making
the appointment, that gives the financial manager their functions. Indeed,
Guardianship Act
specifically states that the making of
a financial management order by the Guardianship Tribunal does not authorise the
person appointed
as manager to interfere in any way with the estate concerned
until the NSW Trustee has given the manager an order setting out the
that manager may exercise.
this is the normal procedure, it is possible for the Supreme Court, on request,
to give directions relevant to the management
Also since 2009, the Guardianship Tribunal has been able to include in its
financial management orders appointing the NSW Trustee
as financial manager,
functions for the NSW Trustee to exercise as
Orders made by the NSW
Trustee in relation to private financial managers are subject to any relevant
order the Guardianship Tribunal
However, the Guardianship
Tribunal may make such orders only when the person the financial management
order is about is also under
guardianship.
Nevertheless, the person appointed as manager may take such action as may be
necessary for the protection of the estate (including
action specified by the
Guardianship Tribunal) pending the NSW Trustee’s orders (or directions of
the Court).
Private financial managers provide the accounts of the estates they are
managing to the NSW Trustee and answer to the NSW Trustee
in relation to their
management of an estate.
8. 3. 12. Effect of a financial management order
The effect of a financial management order
made by the Guardianship Tribunal, the Supreme Court of the Mental Health Review
is that the power of a person whose financial affairs are placed under
management (a managed person) to deal with their estate is
suspended in relation
to so much of that estate as is placed under management of another person or
committed to the management of
Nevertheless, the private financial manager or the NSW Trustee when appointed
to manage the person’s estate may give a written
authorisation to the
person whose affairs are under management to deal with so much of their estate
as the manager considers appropriate
and specifies in the written
This authorisation
may be given at any time and, similarly, may be withdrawn, wholly or in part, at
However, if the
authorisation is to be given or taken away by a private financial manager, it
cannot be given or withdrawn without
the approval of the NSW
This statutory provision reflects the decision of the majority in the New
South Wales Court of Appeal case
David by her Tutor the Protective
Commissioner v David
that the effect of a decision by the Guardianship
Tribunal to make a financial management order was to suspend, during the
of the order, the right of the person the order was about to deal with
their property as well as to give effect to the issues raised
by the dissenting
judge, Kirby P, about retention of rights and a least restrictive alternative
The decision in the
applies also to an order of this kind made by the Supreme
Court if it were to exercise its residual parens patriae jurisdiction.
8. 3. 13. Reviews of financial management
8. 3. 13. 1. Requested and “own motion” reviews
Who may request a review?
The Guardianship Tribunal may conduct two kinds of review. These are:
1. a review of the whole order, and
2. a review of the appointment of the
In relation to the first, broad review of
an order, this may be initiated in a number of ways:
1. the Tribunal may order that a financial management order be reviewed
within a specified time in which case, the Tribunal must begin
the review within
the time specified in the
2. in any financial management that is either confirmed or varied as a result
of a review, the Tribunal may order that that order
be reviewed within a
specified time in which case the requirements set out in 1
3. by the Tribunal, at any time on its own
4. on an application for revocation or variation of an
A review of the appointment of the manager may be initiated by:
1. the Tribunal on its own motion,
2. a request from the NSW Trustee, or
3. a request from any other person who, in the opinion of the Tribunal, has a
genuine concern for the welfare of the
While the legislation does not empower the person the order was about to
request this kind of review, the Tribunal would be likely
to initiate the review
of its own motion if such a person was seeking a review, unless the Tribunal
considered that the review would
be futile in that there would be no chance that
it would result in it changing the manager or changing the order in any of the
open to the Tribunal on such a review.
Supreme Court
The Supreme Court does not review the financial management orders it makes,
but it may, on application by the person the order is
However, it should be
noted that Porter and Robinson suggest that once made management orders remain
in place until the death of
the person the order is about unless the Court
orders that the person has become capable of managing their
Nevertheless, the Court
has the inherent power to replace a manager it has appointed if to do so was in
the best interests of the
person whose affairs were under
management.
These matters are
dealt with below at 8. 3. 13. 2 and 8. 3. 13. 3.
A form of “own motion” review
by the NSW Trustee
When the Guardianship Tribunal was initially established, it could not make a
financial management order in relation to a person’s
estate unless it also
had before it an application to make a guardianship order in relation to that
person. A vestige of that time
remains in the legislation so that where a person
has been the subject of a guardianship order and a financial management order
the estate of the person to the NSW Trustee and the guardianship
order is revoked or lapses, the NSW Trustee has a discretion to
continue to
manage the property and affairs of that person until either the financial
management order is revoked, or the NSW Trustee
is satisfied that the person is
capable of managing their own
In practice, when the
Guardianship Tribunal is reviewing the guardianship order in relation to a
person whose estate is being managed
by the NSW Trustee, the NSW Trustee asks
the Tribunal, should it revoke the guardianship order, to express its views on
whether the
financial management order should continue or not. The NSW Trustee
usually acts on that advice, after considering it.
Also, even if the NSW Trustee is not satisfied that the person is capable of
managing their affairs, she must nevertheless do all
things that are reasonably
practicable to inform the person that they may apply to the Guardianship
Tribunal to revoke the financial
management order in relation to them. The NSW
Trustee is under the same obligation to a person who has ceased to be a patient
a mental health facility to advise them that they can make the same
application to the Mental Health Review Tribunal if it made the
management order in relation to
8. 3. 13. 2. Parties to reviews of financial management orders
Guardianship Tribunal
The following are parties to reviews by the Guardianship Tribunal of
financial management orders or the appointment of a manager of
1. the person who requested the review,
2. the person the order is about,
3. the spouse of that person, if the relationship between them is close and
continuing,
4. the person, if any, who has care of the person the order is about,
5. the manager of the estate,
6. the NSW Trustee, and any person whom the Tribunal has joined as a party
to the review.
Supreme Court
Only the person the order is about may make an application to the Supreme
Court under the
NSW Trustee and Guardian Act
order to be revoked.
Applications to change managers can be made by the person or
8. 3. 13. 3. Powers of the Tribunal to review orders and the Court to deal
with applications to revoke orders
Guardianship Tribunal
The Tribunal has, in effect, the same
powers whether it is dealing with what is, from the beginning a review of the
whole financial
management order or a review of the appointment of the manager.
However, it may review only those orders that it has made.
After a review of the whole order, the Tribunal has three options; it must
vary, revoke or confirm the order. However, it may revoke
the financial
management order only if it:
1. is satisfied that the person the order is about is capable of managing
their affairs,
2. considers that it is in the best interests of the person the order is
is not satisfied that
the person is capable of managing their
In addition, when reviewing its appointment of a manager, the Tribunal may
also review the financial management order under which
the manager was
appointed, and may take any of the actions set out in the last
If the Tribunal limits its review to
reviewing its appointment of the manager, then, after the review, the Tribunal
may revoke or
confirm that appointment. However, it may revoke the appointment
under review only if:
1. the manager themselves seeks the revocation, and
2. the Tribunal is satisfied that it is in the best interests of the person
the order is about that the appointment be
Those who seek to have the manager changed do not have to prove that the
manager acted incompetently, improperly or unlawfully. They
must show some
reason why the manager should be replaced. The Tribunal has a broad discretion
as to whether or not to replace the
manager, but must be satisfied that it is in
the best interests of the person whose estate is under management that the
manager should
be replaced before doing so. However, once so satisfied, it is
“duty bound” to replace the
If the outcome of the review is that the financial management order is
revoked, then the appointment of the manger also comes to an
end. However, if
the outcome of the review is that the appointment of the manager is revoked, the
Tribunal is required to appoint
another person as manager of the estate under
management to replace the manager whose appointment has been
The person whose
appointment as the manager of an estate is revoked must pay over or hand over
the estate to the new
In a 2002 case, the Tribunal reviewed the appointment of two daughters of a
woman with dementia, revoked their appointment and appointed
the then Protective
Commissioner (since replaced by the NSW Trustee) to manage their mother’s
estate. They had failed to provide
for their mother’s needs and had made
gifts of $10,000 dollars each to themselves. Their view was that they were
beneficiaries
of their mother’s estate and she had no use for the money in
her estate.
For a case in which the Tribunal reviewed a financial management order on the
basis of evidence that the person the subject of the
order was capable of
managing her affairs see,
[2009] NSWGT 7.
Supreme Court
When dealing with an application to revoke a
financial management order, if the Court is satisfied that the person the order
is capable of managing their affairs, it may:
1. revoke any declaration made that the person is incapable of managing their
2. revoke the order that the estate of the person be subject to management,
3. make such orders as appear to it necessary to give effect to the
revocation of the order, including the release of the estate of
the person from
the control of the Court, the NSW Trustee or a manager and the discharge of any
As already noted at 8. 3. 13. 1 above, because the Supreme Court has the
power to appoint a manager, it also has the power to remove
and replace a
Its discretion, and
that of the Guardianship Tribunal, to appoint and remove a financial manager is
a broad one, but Kirby P has
provided a checklist of considerations to be borne
in mind when exercising the discretion as to who to appoint as manager or
to revoke the appointment of a manager and appoint another person as
manager. He also noted that the “abiding rule” was
the achievement
of the best interests of the person the hearing was
A summary of the
checklist is set out
Dealing with the estate after revocation of the financial management
If the Guardianship Tribunal revokes a financial management order (or varies
it so as to exclude from the order a specified part of
the estate previously
subject to it), the person appointed as manager of the estate is to pay over or
hand over the estate (or the
relevant part of it):
1. to the owner of the estate, or
2. to a person designated by the Tribunal to receive the estate on behalf of
A person who pays over or hands over any part of an estate as a result of
decisions made by the Tribunal does not incur any liability
for doing so. Also,
the paying over or handing over of any part of an estate not operate to change
the ownership of the estate.
However, it would create a form of constructive trust with the person receiving
the estate being the trustee and the owner of the
estate being the beneficiary.
The Guardianship Tribunal has to be very careful when designating who is to
receive the estate. If the financial management order
is revoked because the
person the order was about has regained capacity to manage their own affairs,
the Tribunal should designate
them as the recipients of their own estate. The
Tribunal would have to have very good reasons for designating a person other
the owner of the estate to receive the estate if its owner had
The question of who to designate to receive the estate becomes more difficult
for the Tribunal if it revokes the financial management
order on the ground that
it is in the best interests of the person the order is about to do so even
though the Tribunal is not satisfied
that the person is capable of managing
their affairs. It may be able to designate an attorney under an enduring power
of attorney
that may have been revived by the revocation of the order.
Alternatively, it may be able to designate someone else who has demonstrated
the Tribunal that they have a relationship with the owner of the estate and have
a set of arrangements in place that will protect
the estate of the still
incapable person. An example would be a spouse or other long term life partner
who had a long established
joint bank account with the person.
8. 4. Queensland
8. 4. 1. Who has jurisdiction to appoint
administrators?
As noted in Chapter 10, in Queensland the Queensland Civil and Administrative
Tribunal (QCAT) has exclusive jurisdiction to appoint
administrators for
“adults with impaired capacity for (financial)
Guardianship and Administration Act
specifically states
that its provisions do not affect the Supreme Court of Queensland’s
inherent jurisdiction, including its
parens patriae jurisdiction, that general
provision does not prevail over the specific provision in the same
giving exclusive jurisdiction to appoint guardians to
Nevertheless, the
Supreme Court retains its specific jurisdiction under the
Public Trustee
to make protection orders appointing the Public
Trustee to manage all or those parts of the estate of a person under the age of
years as the Court
Also, the Court may transfer proceedings before it that are within
QCAT’s jurisdiction to QCAT. Also, the Court has acknowledged
that QCAT is
a specialist tribunal set up to determine issues relating to intellectually
disabled adults.
8. 4. 2. Who may apply for an administration
8. 4. 3. Who may take part in
the hearing as a party?
These matters are the same as for an application for the appointment of a
The application
must also include the proposed administrator’s written agreement to being
Also, unless QCAT
orders otherwise, a person who agrees to be appointed as administrator must give
management plan to QCAT, or its appropriately qualified nominee, for
8. 4. 4. What has to be proved before an order
can be made?
The same matters have to be proved for the appointment of an administrator as
for the appointment of a
In particular,
before QCAT may, by making an administration order, appoint an administrator for
the person the hearing is about,
it must be satisfied that:
1. the person the application is about has impaired capacity for the
(financial) matter,
2. there is a need for a decision in relation to that matter or the person is
likely to do something in relation to the matter that
involves, or is likely to
involve, unreasonable risk to their health, welfare or property, and
3. without the appointment of an administrator;
(a) the person’s needs will not be adequately met, or
(b) the person’s interests will not be adequately
A person has impaired capacity for a (financial) matter if they are incapable
1. understanding the nature and effect of decisions about the matter,
2. freely and voluntarily making decisions about the matter and
3. communicating the decisions in some
A financial matter for an adult, is defined in the
as, a matter
relating to the adult’s financial or property matters. It includes a
matter relating to one or more of the following:
1. paying maintenance and accommodation expenses for the adult and the
adult’s dependants, including, for example, purchasing
an interest in, or
making another contribution to, an establishment that will maintain or
accommodate the adult or a dependant of
2. paying the adult’s debts, including any fees and expenses to which
an administrator is entitled under a document made by
the adult or under a
3. receiving and recovering money payable to the adult,
4. carrying on a trade or business of the adult,
5. performing contracts entered into by the adult discharging a mortgage over
the adult’s property,
6. paying rates, taxes, insurance premiums or other outgoings for the
adult’s property,
7. insuring the adult or the adult’s property,
8. otherwise preserving or improving the adult’s estate,
9. investing for the adult in authorised investments,
10. continuing investments of the adult, including taking up rights to issues
of new shares, or options for new shares, to which the
adult becomes entitled by
the adult’s existing shareholding,
11. undertaking a real estate transaction for the adult,
12. dealing with land for the adult under the
Land Title Act
13. undertaking a transaction for the adult involving the use of the
adult’s property as security (for example, for a loan or
by way of a
guarantee) for an obligation the performance of which is beneficial to the
adult, a legal matter relating to the adult’s
financial or property
matters, and
14. withdrawing money from, or depositing money into, the adult’s
account with a financial
institution.
8. 4. 5. Appointing an administrator
The matters the Tribunal must be satisfied about before it may appoint a
person as an administrator are essentially those it must
be satisfied about
before it may appoint a person a guardian. These are set out in Chapter 6. 7. 5.
In addition, the proposed administrator
must not be a bankrupt or be taking
advantage of the laws of bankruptcy as a debtor under the
Bankruptcy Act
similar law of a foreign
The Tribunal may appoint the Public Trustee or a trustee company under
Trustee Companies Act
as the administrator of an
impaired adult.
8. 4. 6. Joint, several, alternate and successive
administrators
In relation to these matters, the same provisions apply as apply to
guardians. These are set out in Chapter 6. 7. 6. In addition,
the appointment of
an administrator ends automatically if the administrator becomes bankrupt or
8. 4. 7. Queensland administration orders
Guardianship and Administration Act 2000
administrators to exercise power in relation to all the financial matters of the
adult with impaired capacity they have
been appointed administrator for or in
relation to those financial matters of that adult set out in the order
appointing them. Administrators
may do anything in relation to the financial
matters that the incapable adult would have been able to do if they had had
In this sense
administration orders made by QCAT may be either plenary, covering all of the
estate of the adult with impaired capacity,
or limited in the sense of covering
only those financial matters specifically referred to in the administration
order. In this way
part of the person’s estate may not be covered in the
administration order leaving that part of the estate in their hands to
managed either by them or informally by others on their behalf.
8. 4. 7. 1. Interim orders
If QCAT is satisfied that urgent action is required because of a serious risk
to the financial affairs of an adult with impaired capacity,
it may make an
interim order appointing an administrator, for a maximum period of six months,
without having to conduct a full hearing,
provide notice of the hearing, or
otherwise comply with the requirements of the
Guardianship and Administration
procedure for dealing with applications for interim orders is set out in a
Presidential Direction.
8. 4. 8. Powers and functions of an
administrator
As already noted, Queensland administrators may do anything in relation to
the financial matters they have been appointed to administer
that the incapable
adult would have been able to do if they had had
Some of the powers
and functions of administrators are set out in the
Guardianship and
Administration Act
Those powers and
functions and the common law powers and functions of administrators are dealt
with later in this chapter at 8. 11.
Administrators of estates valued at less than $50,000, excluding the
principal place of residence or aged care facility bond of the
person whose
financial matters are being administered, account directly to QCAT. If the
estate is valued at $50,000 or more, with
the same exclusions, the administrator
must submit the accounts of the estate they are administering to one of a panel
of examiners
approved by QCAT.
8. 4. 9. Reviews of administration orders
QCAT must conduct a review its appointment of an administrator at least every
five years.
In addition to
these periodic reviews, QCAT may also review its appointment of an administrator
on its own initiative (own initiative
reviews) or on the application of certain
persons (requested reviews).
The provisions in relation to reviews of administration orders in Queensland,
including the parties to such reviews and the powers
of QCAT when conducting
such reviews, are the same as those for the reviews of guardianship orders.
These are set out in Chapter
It should be recalled that, having conducted its review, QCAT must revoke the
administration order unless it is satisfied it would
have made an appointment if
it had been dealing with a new application for an appointment of an
administrator.
The Tribunal
may replace administrators after conducting a
8. 5. South Australia
8. 5. 1. Who has jurisdiction to appoint
administrators?
In South Australia, both the Supreme Court and the District Court may make
protection orders and the Guardianship Board may make administration
orders. The
Supreme and District Courts may make protection orders under the
Infirm Persons’ Property Act
The Supreme Court
may retain its parens patriae jurisdiction to appoint administrators for the
estates of incapable people and the
District Court may also have the same parens
patriae jurisdiction.
Nevertheless, the
Aged and Infirm Persons’ Property Act
appears to give the Guardianship Board precedence over the two courts
in relation to the making of administration
Consequently, for the reasons set out in Chapter 6. 6. 1., the wise course is
to make applications for administration orders to the
Guardianship Board of
South Australia rather than to the Supreme or District Court, unless the court
has awarded damages to a person
who has a physical or mental infirmity which
renders them unable to manage their financial affairs. The role of the two
making protection orders will be returned to below at 8. 5. 8.
In summary, the Guardianship Board and the Supreme and District Courts have
administration
1. Guardianship Board, under the
Guardianship and Administration Act 1993
2. Supreme Court, under the
Aged and Infirm Persons’ Property
3. Supreme Court, under the parens patriae element of its inherent
4. District Court, under the
Aged and Infirm Persons’ Property
8. 5. 2. Who may apply for an administrator
Those who may make an application to the Guardianship Board for a
guardianship order or for the variation or revocation of such an
order may also
make applications for administration
This matter is dealt
with at 6. 6. 2.
8. 5. 3. Who may take part in the hearing as a
This matter is dealt with in Chapter 6. 6. 3. Those who may attend the
hearing of an application for a guardianship order for a particular
also attend the hearing of an application for an administration order for the
same person. It is common for applications
for both orders to be heard together.
8. 5. 4. What has to be proved before an order
can be made?
Before the Board may make an administration order it must be satisfied by the
evidence before it that the person the subject of the
application:
1. has a mental incapacity, and
2. should have an administration order made in relation to
The term “mental incapacity” and the considerations that the
Guardianship Board has to take into account before it can
make an administration
order are set out in Chapter 6. 6. 4 as they are the same as those that the
Board has to take into account
before it may make a guardianship
8. 5. 5. Appointing an administrator
The Guardianship Board may appoint any of the following as an
administrator:
1. the Public Trustee,
2. a trustee company under the
Trustee Companies Act 1988
3. any natural person who the Board considers suitable to act as
administrator of the estate of the person the hearing is about.
The Board cannot appoint anyone as an administrator unless they consent to
the appointment. However the Public Trustee’s consent
is not required
before the Board appoints
It is suggested that the
Public Trustee cannot refuse to accept an appointment as administrator by the
When determining the suitability of a person for appointment as a private
administrator, the Board must have regard to:
1. whether the potential appointee and the person with the mental incapacity
would be incompatible,
2. whether there is some existing family arrangement or relationship that
should be preserved or should not be disturbed,
3. whether the potential appointee would be competent to discharge the
functions of an administrator and would do so in accordance
with the principles
set out in the
Guardianship and Administration Act
4. whether the potential appointee would be readily available for discharging
those functions,
5. whether any conflict of interest would arise from the appointment. (The
fact that a proposed appointee is related to the person
with the mental
incapacity by blood or marriage is not, of itself, to be taken as giving rise to
a conflict of interest), and
6. such other matters as the Board considers
8. 5. 6. Joint, several and alternate
administrators
While the Public Trustee may only be appointed as a sole administrator, the
Guardianship Board may appoint more than one private administrator
to administer
the estate of a mentally incapacitated person. If that is done, the
administrators are joint administrators who must
concur with one another in
every act done and decision made in relation to the person the order is
While it is possible for the Board to appoint administrators with separate
functions and thus as “several” administrators,
it would not be very
practical to do so and would make it difficult for the administrators to consult
among themselves and with the
person the order is about and act in that
person’s best interests.
8. 5. 7. Types of administration
8. 5. 7. 1. Limited and full administration orders
The Guardianship Board may appoint an administrator for only a specified part
of a mentally incapable person's estate - a limited
administration order –
unless it is satisfied that such an order would not be appropriate, in which
case it can make a full
administration order applying to the whole of the
person's estate.
8. 5. 7. 2. Self-revoking orders
The Board has power to include limitations in any administration order it
makes, including a limitation as to the duration of the
order. Consequently, it
may make administration orders that are to last only for a set period (of less
than three years). Such orders
would not have to be reviewed at the
“circumstances reviews” discussed at 8. 5. 11. 1
Self-revoking orders
may be made for both limited and full administration orders.
8. 5. 7. 3. Urgent orders
If it is satisfied that urgent action is required, the Board may make an
urgent administration order for up to 21 days where such
an order is necessary
to stop transactions such as withdrawals from bank accounts or the transfer of
the title to real estate taking
There must be grounds
for believing that the person lacks mental incapacity but that more evidence has
to be gathered to demonstrate
whether or not the person the hearing about has a
mental incapacity.
8. 5. 8. Powers of the Supreme and District
Courts to make protection orders
Both the Supreme Court and the District Court may make a protection order
applying to all or part of the estate of a person who, they
are satisfied,
because of age, disease, illness, or physical or mental infirmity, is:
1. unable, wholly or partially, to manage their affairs,
2. being subjected to or liable to be subjected to, undue influence in
relation to their estate or the disposition of it, or
3. otherwise in a position which the court considers it necessary in the
interest of that person or of those dependent upon them that
their property
should be protected.
These criteria are consistent with those that courts and tribunals elsewhere
in Australia have to be satisfied about before they may
make an administration
order, but the two South Australian courts have a broad discretion to make
administration orders where they
are satisfied that a person is wholly or
partially unable to manage their affairs because:
1. the person takes alcohol to excess or uses any intoxicating, stimulating,
narcotic, or sedative drug to excess, and
2. this renders them, either continuously or occasionally, wholly or
partially unable to manage their
The courts may do this notwithstanding anything to the contrary in any other
8. 5. 8. 1. Who may apply for a protection order?
The following may apply for a protection order in either the Supreme or
District Court:
1. the person whose property is sought to be protected,
2. the person they are married to or their domestic
3. any near relation by blood or marriage of the
4. the Public Trustee, or
5. any other person who, through evidence, satisfies the court that
circumstances exist which make it proper that they should make
application.
When dealing with an action for damages for personal injury, both the Supreme
or District Courts may, either on their own motion or
on application, but before
assessing the amount of the damages, make a protection order relating to all or
part of the estate of
the person the action for damages is about if it appears
to the court that, as a result of that injury, the person suffers or is
to suffer from some physical or mental infirmity which renders them:
1. unable, wholly or partially, to manage their affairs, or
2. actually or likely to be subject to undue influence concerning their
estate or the disposition of
The courts may also make a protection order it they consider it is otherwise
necessary in the interests of the person or their dependents
that their property
should be protected under the
Aged and Infirm Persons’ Property Act
provision, inserted in the
in 1973, reflects more paternalistic
philosophy than is reflected in the principles of the
Guardianship and
Administration Act
8. 5. 8. 2. Who may be appointed manager under a protection order?
The courts may, in a protection order, appoint any of the following as either
sole or joint manager:
1. the person’s spouse or domestic partner,
2. the person’s near relation by blood or marriage,
3. some other person, or
4. any incorporated body (usually a trustee
The courts may appoint the Public Trustee but alone, not
The common law
preference for appointing a family member appears to have been displaced by the
terms of the
Aged and Infirm Persons’ Property Act
so that in any case the courts have a complete discretion as to whether or not
they appoint the Public Trustee or some other person
The courts may rescind or vary any protection
The powers that
managers have, unless the appointing court otherwise orders, are set out in the
8. 5. 9. Relationship between Aged and Infirm
Persons’ Property Act 1940 (SA) Guardianship and Administration Act 1993
If the Guardianship Board has made an administration order in relation to an
estate or part of an estate, then neither the Supreme
nor District Court may
make a protection order in relation to that estate or part of an estate.
Furthermore, if either of those courts
has made a protection order in relation
to an estate or part of an estate and subsequently the Guardianship Board makes
an administration
order covering that estate or part of an estate and files its
order in that court, the protection order is deemed to have been rescinded
from the day that the administration order was
In these ways
administration orders made by the Guardianship Board take precedence over
protection orders made by the two courts.
8. 5. 10. Powers and functions of an
administrator
Guardianship and Administration Act
clear that, although the administrator has the control and management of the
estate and has the duties and obligations of,
and is accountable as a trustee in
relation to it, the estate does not vest in the
administrator.
remains the property of the mentally incapable person.
Administrators have significant powers and duties when appointed by the
Guardianship Board; however the Board can limit the extent
of these powers in
the orders it makes.
Nevertheless, the Board may, in its orders, confer further powers on an
administrator, beyond those set out in the legislation, if
the Board considers
these necessary or desirable for the proper administration of the estate of the
mentally incapable person. The
Board may include in the administration order
such conditions or limitations as it thinks fit, including a limitation as to
the duration
of the order.
It is by appointing them that the Board gives administrators their powers to act
in South Australia. Most of the powers of administrators
are found in the
Guardianship and Administration Act
Private administrators must provide statements of the accounts of the estates
they are administering to both the Guardianship Board
and the Public
The Public Trustee
must examine those statements of accounts and report on them to the
Where the Public
Trustee is the administrator, she must provide statements of the accounts of
each estate she is administering as
a result of an order by the Board to the
Board at intervals decided by the
8. 5. 11. Reviews of administration orders
8. 5. 11. 1. Automatic reviews
The Guardianship Board is required to review the “circumstances”
of those whose financial affairs are under administration
at least every three
years to see whether the administration order in relation to them is still
appropriate for those people. On
completion of the review, the Board must revoke
the order unless it is satisfied that there are proper grounds for keeping the
If the Board
decides to keep the order in force, it may vary the terms of the order. The
Board has a wide discretion as to how it
may conduct its reviews.
8. 5. 11. 2. Parties to automatic reviews of administration orders
Guardianship and Administration Act 1993
does not set out who
are the parties to a review; however procedural fairness would require that at
least the person whose estate
was under administration, the administrator of
their estate and their guardian (if any) would have to be notified of the review
be given the opportunity to take part in it.
8. 5. 11. 3. Powers of the Board on automatic review
While the Board is required to review the circumstances of the person rather
than the administration order, the purpose of the review
is to decide whether
the administration order is still needed. If it is not still needed, it must be
revoked so that the person is
not under the stigma of having an administration
order. If the order is still needed, its terms may be varied.
8. 5. 11. 4. Requested reviews
The website of the Public Advocate notes that the Board will review an
administration order upon request, if there is new information
or a change in
circumstances to justify such a
Guardianship
and Administration Act
provides that “on an
application” the Board may vary or revoke an administration
8. 5. 11. 5. Who may request a review?
does not set out who may request such a review,
procedural fairness would require that the person requesting the review would
to have, in the opinion of the Board, sufficient interest in the order
being varied or revoked before it would carry out the review.
8. 5. 11. 6. Parties to requested reviews of administration orders
Again, while the
does not set out who are the parties to requested
reviews, at least the person whose estate was under administration, the
administrator
of their estate and their guardian (if any) would have to be
notified of the review and be given the opportunity to take part in
8. 5. 11. 6. Powers of the Board when dealing with requested
Requested reviews appear to be limited to applications to vary or revoke the
order. The drafting of the relevant section opens up
the argument that these
applications are different in nature from the reviews of its orders that the
Board is required to carry out
at intervals of no more than three years. The
argument is that they limit the Board to either dismissing the application or
or revoking the administration order and they are not reviews of
“the circumstances” of the person the order is about
which require
the Board to revoke the order unless it is satisfied that there are proper
grounds for the order remaining in
8. 6. Tasmania
8. 6. 1. Who has jurisdiction to appoint
financial managers?
For the reasons set out in Chapter 6. 5. 1., the wise course is to make
applications for orders appointing administrators to the Guardianship
Administration Board of Tasmania rather than to the Supreme Court.
8. 6. 2. Who may apply for a financial management
Any person may apply to Guardianship and Administration Board for an order
appointing an administration for the estate of a person
with a disability who is
18 years old or older.
other aspects of this matter, see Chapter 6. 5. 2.
8. 6. 3. Who may take part in the hearing as a
This matter is dealt with sufficiently in Chapter 6. 5. 3.
8. 6. 4. What has to be proved before an order
can be made?
Before the Board may make an administration order, it must be satisfied by
the evidence that:
1. the person the hearing is about has a disability,
2. because of that disability they are unable to make reasonable judgements
3. they are in need of an administrator for their
As to the other matters and considerations the Board has to put its mind to,
these are set out in Chapter 6. 5. 4. and 6. 4. 4.
8. 6. 5. Appointing a financial
Where Board is satisfied that it is in the best interests of the person the
hearing is about to appoint an administrator for their
estate, it may appoint as
administrator:
1. the Public Trustee,
2. the Public Guardian,
3. a trustee company, or
4. a private person.
While none of the Public Trustee, Public Guardian or trustee companies have
to meet any specific criteria, private persons have to
be suitable to act as the
administrator and the Board has to be satisfied as to other matters in relation
These are set out in
Chapter 6. 5. 5. and 6. 4. 5.
8. 6. 6. Joint/several/alternate
administrators
It is the practice of the Tasmanian Board to appoint only single
administrators. Applying the normal rules of statutory interpretation,
may be able to appoint joint administrators, provided each of them meets the
criteria for appointment as an administrator
and they have the same functions as
each other.
They would have
to make the decisions about the estate jointly. The Board does not appoint joint
administrators with different functions
and does not to appoint alternate
administrators. The
Guardianship and Administration Act 1995
provides for such appointments in relation to guardians, but does not have
similar provisions in relation to
administrators.
Also, since there is no provision for dealing with the death of an
administrator, the administration order would cease to operate
administrator died.
8. 6. 7. Types of administration
8. 6. 7. 1. Limited orders
The Board may make limited orders which list the type of financial decisions
that the administrator is authorised by the Board to
8. 6. 7. 2. Full orders
The effect of the
Guardianship and Administration Act
is that the Board may make a full order
which allows an
administrator to make all the financial decisions for the person with the
disability only if such an order is the
least restrictive of the person’s
freedom of decision-making and action as is possible in the circumstances.
8. 6. 7. 3. Emergency administration orders
The Board has the power to make an emergency order appointing the Public
Trustee as the administrator of the estate of a person whose
estate is not
already under administration applying the same processes and criteria as for
appointing a guardian where it is proper
to do so for reasons of
These processes and
criteria are set out Chapter 6. 5. 7. 3.
8. 6. 8. Powers and duties of an
administrator
In Tasmania administrators must at all times act in the best interests of the
person whose estate they are administering. This involves
them acting as far as
1. in such a way as to encourage and assist the person whose estate they are
administering to become capable of administering their
own estate; and
2. in consultation with that person and in
taking into account as far as possible their
Their powers and duties are set out in the
Guardianship and Administration
powers are similar to those given to administrators in New South Wales and
Victoria. Administrators must provide statements
of accounts of the estates they
are administering to the Guardianship and Administration Board. The Board must
examine those statements
of accounts and have them audited if
8. 6. 9. Administrators may seek
An administrator may apply to the Board for advice or directions on any
matter relating to:
1. the scope of the administration order appointing them, or
2. the exercise of any power by the administrator under that
If the Board receives such an application, it may
require notice of the application to be given to any person that the Board
However, the Board may exercise its powers in relation to such an
application without conducting a hearing. After considering the
application, the
1. approve or
disapprove of any act proposed to be done by the administrator,
2. give such advice as it considers
appropriate, and
3. vary the administration order or make any
other order that it could have made on the original application relating to the
administration
of the estate that it considers
In addition, the Board of its own motion may
direct, or offer advice to, an administrator in respect of any matter relevant
administrator’s administration of the
8. 6. 10. Reviews of administration
As with guardianship orders, the Board may make administration orders for a
maximum of three years. After that they will expire unless
they are continued
after a review.
However, the
Board is also empowered to hold a hearing to review an administration order at
any time. It may do so:
1. on its own initiative,
2. on application by, or on behalf of, the person
whose estate is under management, or
3. on the application of any other
8. 6. 11. Parties to reviews of guardianship
In Tasmania the parties to reviews of administration orders are those persons
that procedural fairness requires to be treated as parties.
These are at least
the following:
1. the person the order is about,
2. the administrator of their estate,
3. the applicant for the review if they are neither the administrator nor the
person whose estate is under administration.
Others, such as the spouse of the person whose estate is under
administration, may be entitled to be parties, but that will depend
circumstances of the case. However, it not necessary to be a party to be able to
attend a review and to give evidence at it
8. 6. 12. Powers of the Board on
After conducting the review hearing, the Board may vary or continue the
administration order, subject to any conditions or requirements
it considers
necessary, or it may revoke the order. Also, the Board may make such further
orders as it considers necessary in order
to give effect to the administration
In a 2004 case the Board received an application for an early review of an
administration order from the administrator. She wished
to resign as
administrator citing emotional conflict within the family. After considering the
circumstances of the case, including
the claim of another family member for
appointment as administrator, the Board varied its original order by appointing
Trustee as administrator. The Board concluded its reasons for
decision as follows:
The evidence received indicated to the Board that appointment of another
family member would exacerbate existing conflicts. While
appointment of the
Public Trustee cannot solve those conflicts, it can ensure that decisions made
made independently from that conflict and for a
single purpose of ensuring her best
8. 7. Victoria
8. 7. 1. Who has jurisdiction to appoint
financial managers?
The opinion of Morris J that Victoria has comprehensive laws relating to
guardianship and administration matters and the Victorian
Administrative Tribunal (VCAT) has a wide jurisdiction to deal with them has
been noted a number of times. While the Supreme
Court of Victoria’s parens
patriae jurisdiction may continue to exist, that Court has preferred to leave
the making of administration
This approach was noted
in a 2006 case.
Consequently,
for the purposes of this chapter, only VCAT’s jurisdiction to deal with
applications in relation to administration
matters, under the
Guardianship
and Administration Act
will be considered.
8. 7. 2. Who may apply for an administration
Any person may apply to VCAT for an order appointing an administrator of the
estate of a person with a disability who is 18 years
old or older or for such an
order to take effect when the person reaches 18 years, if that person is
resident in Victoria and they
have real or personal property in
If the person is
not resident in Victoria, the application cannot be made until they have reached
18 years of age and may apply only
to that part of their estate that is in
8. 7. 3. Who may take part in the hearing as a
The following are automatic parties to an application:
1. the applicant who can be any person,
2. the person the application is about (the person),
3. the proposed administrator,
4. anyone made a party to the application by
The following are entitled to notice of the application, the hearing and any
order made as a result of the application:
1. the nearest relative available of the person the application is
2. the primary carer (if any) of the person the application is
3. the Public Advocate,
4. any guardian of the person the application is about, and
5. any person who has advised VCAT of their interest in the person the
application is about or in their
8. 7. 4. What has to be proved before an order
can be made?
Before VCAT may make an administration order, it must be satisfied that the
person the application is about:
1. is a person with a disability,
2. that by reason of that disability is unable to make reasonable judgments
concerning matters relating to all or any part of their
3. is in need of an administrator of their estate, and
4. an administration order would be in their best
In a 2006 case, Cavanough J pointed out that the first three of these matters
are seen as separate and cumulative requirements and
should not be conflated. He
said that the question of whether the person was “in need of an
administrator” did not arise
unless and until VCAT was satisfied, first,
that they were a “person with a disability” and that, second,
that disability they were unable to make reasonable judgments about
all or part of their estate. He also noted that, generally speaking,
question of “need” would be answered primarily by reference to the
availability or otherwise of alternative arrangements
outside administration
(such as family support) to compensate for or deal with the person’s
“inability”.
Guardianship and Administration Act 1986
also requires VCAT
when determining whether or not a person is in need of an administrator of their
estate, to consider whether the
needs of the person the application is about
could be met by other means that were less restrictive of their freedom of
decision and action.
any administration order that VCAT makes must be the least restrictive of
freedom of decision and action of the person the
order is about as is possible
in the circumstances.
8. 7. 5. Appointing an administrator
Where VCAT is satisfied that it is in the best interests of the person the
hearing is about to make an administration order in relation
to their estate, it
may appoint either a private person, the State Trustees or a trustee company as
the administrator of the person’s
estate. Unlike with the appointment of a
guardian, there is no statutory requirement preventing VCAT appointing either
Trustees or a trustee company as the administrator of the
person’s estate only if no private person meets the tests set out
VCAT has a wider discretion as to whom it may appoint, but that discretion is
limited by the preference established in the
common law to appoint a family
member provided that that is in the best interests of the person the hearing is
member meets the requirements set out in the next
Before VCAT may appoint a private person as the administrator of the
person’s estate it must be satisfied that the proposed
administrator is 18
years or older and consents to be the administrator and that the proposed
administrator:
1. will act in the best interests of the person the hearing is about,
2. is not in a position where their interests conflict or may conflict with
the interests of the person the hearing is
3. is a suitable person to act as the administrator of the estate of the
person the hearing is about, and
4. has sufficient expertise to administer the estate.
If a person met the first three of these criteria and there was a special
relationship or some other special reason why the proposed
administrator should
be appointed, then VCAT may appoint
When deciding whether a person is suitable to be the administrator, VCAT must
take into account:
1. the wishes of the person the hearing is about,
2. the compatibility of the prospective administrator with the person the
hearing is about and with their guardian (if any).
8. 7. 6. Joint/several/alternate
administrators
Although VCAT has specific statutory power to appoint joint guardians, it is
not given the same power to appoint joint
administrators.
Nevertheless,
under the normal rules of statutory interpretation, VCAT could appoint joint
administrators. While doing so can create
difficulties as joint administrators
have to make all the administration decisions jointly and be in agreement about
those decisions,
VCAT and tribunals elsewhere in Australia do appoint joint
administrators.
Guardianship and Administration Act
not deal with the matter in terms, VCAT does occasionally appoint
“concurrent” administrators. For example, VCAT
has appointed a firm
of solicitors as administrator with power limited to “bringing,
maintaining or concluding” a particular
proceeding in the
Magistrates’ Court proceeding while, at the same time, maintaining the
appointment of the State Trustees
to administer all of the rest of the incapable
person’s estate.
VCAT has no statutory authority to appoint alternative administrators. If an
administrator dies, resigns or becomes physically, mentally
or legally incapable
of administering the estate they were appointed to administer, then a party to
the application may apply for
a rehearing of the application so that a new
administrator may be
8. 7. 7. Types of administration
8. 7. 7. 1. Plenary orders
Usually when VCAT appoints an administrator, it gives the administrator all
the powers and duties of an administrator in relation
to all of the estate of
the incapable person.
8. 7. 7. 2. Concurrent orders involving different aspects of an incapable
person’s estate
As already noted in 8. 7. 6 above, VCAT may appoint concurrent administrators
responsible for different aspects of an incapable person’s
8. 7. 7. 3. Orders with part of the estate excluded
While in most cases it will appoint the administrator to administer the whole
of the estate, VCAT may also make orders which apply
to part of a person’s
estate and leave other parts of the person’s estate under their
It is not uncommon
for VCAT to appoint an administrator just to conduct proceedings in the Family
Court or to apply for a maintenance
order under the
Administration and
Probate Act
on behalf of an incapable person, to lodge a
caveat to protect an incapable person’s interest in certain land or to
a pool of money that an incapable person may have inherited, been
gifted or won while leaving them in control of the rest of their
8. 7. 7. 4. Temporary orders
Any person can apply to VCAT to make a temporary administration order,
whether or not an application can be made for a “normal”
administration order. Those entitled to notice of a normal application have the
same entitlements in relation to an application for
a temporary
Before VCAT may make a temporary administration order, it must be satisfied
that the person the application is about:
1. is a person with a disability,
2. that by reason of that disability is unable to make reasonable judgments
concerning matters relating to all or any part of their
estate, and
3. is in need of an administrator of their estate
Temporary administration orders may remain in effect for a maximum of 21
days. VCAT may renew them but only once and for a maximum
VCAT must hold a
hearing within 42 days of making a temporary administration order to decide
whether or not to make a normal administration
order in relation to the person
the subject of the temporary
VCAT makes few of
these orders, but they are sometimes required to protect an inheritance or a
substantial sum of money that is about
to or has come into the hands of an
incapable person and VCAT is not possible to convene a full hearing of an
administration application
immediately.
8. 7. 8. The role of VCAT after making an
administration order
Unlike in New South Wales where the NSW Trustee has the role of giving
administrators their authorities and supervises their management
of the estates
they have been appointed to administer, in Victoria VCAT is responsible for
awarding their powers and duties to administrators.
VCAT also sets out the
arrangements for the examination or auditing of the accounts of the estates
under administration. It also
gives directions and advice to administrators
periodically,
on application or on its own initiative.
8. 7. 8. 1. Giving advice etc
VCAT may on its own initiative direct, or give an advisory opinion to, an
administrator concerning any
In addition, any
administrator may apply to VCAT for the advice about any matter relating to the
scope of their administration order
or the exercise of any power by them under
the administration order.
When dealing with such an application VCAT may, approve or disapprove of any act
proposed to be done by the administrator, give such
advice as it considers
appropriate and make any order that it considers
Where State Trustees Ltd wishes to commence proceedings acting in one
capacity or on behalf of one person whose estate they are administering
State Trustees Ltd acting in another capacity or on behalf of another person
whose estate they are administering, they must
seek and obtain an order from
VCAT approving such action.
Where this situation arises, State Trustees Ltd may deal with the matter by
taking action to have another administrator appointed
to administer the estate
of one of the parties to the proceedings.
Any person who has an interest as a creditor, beneficiary, next of kin,
guardian, nearest relative, primary carer or otherwise in
any estate being
administered by an administrator appointed by VCAT or the Public Advocate may
apply to VCAT about any matter arising
out of the administration of the estate
by the administrator. VCAT may make such order in relation to the application as
the circumstances
of the case may
While this right to
apply about any matter arising out of the administration of the estate by the
administrator is given to a range
of people, it is likely that their right to
apply would be limited to issues in which they have a clearly identifiable or
In order to assist VCAT to deal with any question of advice or other order in
relation to the administration of estate the subject
of an administration order,
VCAT may open and read the will of the person whose estate is under
administration and the subject of
proceedings before
While VCAT’s
application form encourages applicants to find the will of the person the
hearing is about and applicants sometimes
bring the person’s will to the
hearing, VCAT will only look at the will when there is a need to. However, if
the person whose
estate is under administration makes a will between the time an
administration order is made in relation to them and the reassessment
order, VACT is likely to look at that will.
8. 7. 8. 2. Accounts
Usually at the time that it appoints the administrator of an estate, but
sometimes at a later time, VCAT will appoint a person to
examine or audit the
accounts of the estate for a fee that VCAT approves and which is paid from the
In almost all cases the State Trustees Ltd is appointed as the examiner.
VCAT will receive a report from the examiner or auditor. If that report
recommends the disallowance of any item in the accounts, VCAT
must deal with
that matter. However, it may not make an order disallowing an item if it is
satisfied that the administrator acted
in good faith and with reasonable care in
the exercise of their powers as administrator. If any item is disallowed the
administrator
is liable for the amount of the item
disallowed.
8. 7. 9. Powers and duties of
administrators
When VCAT appoints administrators those administrators are automatically
invested with certain powers and
In addition VCAT may
give administrators, in the orders appointing them, one or more of a set of
further powers set out in the
Guardianship and Administration Act 1986
8. 7. 9. 1. The powers and duties of all administrators.
All administrators appointed by VCAT have the following powers and duties by
virtue of their appointment.
Duties of all administrators
Administrators must act in the best interests of the person whose estate they
have been appointed to administer. They do this if they
person’s best interests generally and in particular they act as far as
1. so as to encourage and assist the person to become capable of
administering their own estate,
2. in consultation with the person, and
3. take into account, as far as possible, the wishes of the
They must also keep accounts for each estate that they administer and have
those accounts examined or audited by a person appointed
for the purpose by
Powers of all administrators
All administrators have the general ancillary power to sign and do all such
things as are necessary to give effect to any power or
duty vested in them as an
administrator. However, they may not execute a will in the name of the person
whose estate they are
administering.
Administrators may apply to VCAT for advice about any matter relating to the
scope of their administration order or the exercise of
any power by them
administrator under that administration
Any administrator may make gifts of the property of the person whose estate
they are administering, but only if:
1. the value of the gift is not more than what is reasonable in all the
circumstances and, in particular, the person's financial circumstances,
2. the gift is;
(i) to a relative or close friend of the person and is of a seasonal nature
or for a special event (including, for example, a birth
or marriage),
(ii) a type of donation that the person had made when they had the capacity
to do so or might reasonably be expected to
Administrators themselves or any charity with which they have a connection is
not precluded from receiving such
administrators must notify VCAT in writing if the value of the gift, or the
total value of the gifts to the administrator,
or a charity with which the
administrator has a connection, is $100 or
Private administrators and trustee companies appointed as administrators, but
not the State Trustees Ltd, which has investment powers
under its own
1. for such period as the administrator thinks fit allow any part of the
estate to remain invested in the manner in which it had been
invested by the the
person whose estate they are administering,
2. in the case of money deposited in an authorised deposit-taking institution
within the meaning of the
Banking Act
re-deposit it
after it becomes payable.
Private administrators and trustee companies appointed as administrators have
and may exercise in relation to any part of the estate
they are administering
the same powers, including powers of investment, as the administrator would have
if the administrator were
a trustee of that part of the estate under the
Trustee Act
Administrators must keep separate accounts for the estates they are
administering. They must lodge these accounts as soon as practicable
anniversary of their appointment as administrator each year. These accounts must
provide a full and true account of the
assets and liabilities of the estate and
all receipts and disbursements relating to
Sometimes VCAT may
require an administrator to lodge accounts at another
The examiner or auditor
will examine the accounts and must lodge with VCAT a report in relation to those
In addition to the powers and duties conferred on all administrators
appointed by VCAT as a consequence of their appointment, there
are certain
powers and duties that may be imposed upon them in the order appointing them.
Duties that VCAT can impose on an administrator
While VCAT has a discretion as to whether it imposes all the duties listed
below on an administrator, its practice is to do
These duties are to:
1. have the general care and management of the estate,
2. take possession and care of, recover, collect, preserve and administer the
property and estate,
3. generally manage the affairs of the person,
4. exercise all the statutory or other rights which the person might exercise
if they had legal capacity, and
5. in the name and on behalf of the person may generally do all acts and
exercise all powers concerning the estate as effectually
and in the same manner
as the person whose estate they are administering could have done if they were
not under a legal
disability.
Powers that VCAT can give to an administrator
While VCAT has a discretion as to whether it gives all the powers listed
below on an administrator, its practice is to do
These powers that an
administrator may exercise, in the name and on behalf of the person whose estate
they are administering, are
1. collect, receive and recover income of and money due or which becomes due
to and any compensation or damages for injury to the
estate or person of the
2. invest any money in any security in which trustees may by law invest,
3. grant a lease of land at a rent and on conditions as the administrator
thinks fit for any term not exceeding 5 years or, with the
consent of VCAT, for
any longer term,
4. exercise to the extent and in the manner the administrator thinks proper
any power of leasing that is vested in the person whose
estate they are
administering,
5. surrender any lease, accept any lease, accept the surrender of any lease
or renew any lease,
6. bring land under the
Transfer of Land Act
7. sell, exchange, partition or convert into money any property,
8. mortgage or charge any property,
9. pay any debts and settle, adjust or compromise any demand made by or
against the estate and discharge any encumbrance on the estate,
10. carry on so far as appears desirable any trade, profession or business
which the person carried on,
11. agree to any alteration of the conditions of any partnership into which
the person has entered or to a dissolution and distribution
of the assets of the
partnership,
12. bring and defend actions and other legal proceedings in the name of the
represented person,
13. execute and sign deeds, instruments and other documents,
14. complete any contract for the performance of which the person was liable,
or enter into any agreement terminating liability,
15. pay any sum for the maintenance of the person (and, in the event of
their death, for funeral expenses) and for the maintenance
of their spouse or
domestic partner or any child, parent or other person dependent on them and for
the maintenance and education
of their children as to the administrator seems
expedient and reasonable,
16. do all matters necessary or incidental to the performance of any of the
matters set out above and apply any money from the estate
which it is necessary
to apply for the purposes of the
Guardianship and Administration Act 1986
In addition VCAT may give the administrator any of the following powers to
exercise if the administrator considers it expedient and
reasonable to do so.
VCAT usually gives these powers too. They are:
1. pay or cause to be paid to the person for their personal use any amount of
their money that the administrator has control of,
2. give or cause to be given to the person for their personal use any
personal property which belongs to them and is under the control
administrator.
3. If a person whose estate is being administered has a power vested in them
for their benefit or their consent is necessary to the
exercise of a power and
the power or consent is in the nature of a beneficial interest held by them, the
administrator may exercise
that power or consent in any manner the administrator
thinks fit if it appears to the administrator to be for the benefit of the
represented person that the power should be exercised or the consent given.
Administrators have a similar discretion if the power
or consent is given to the
person whose estate they are administering in the character of a trustee or
An administrator may open and read the will of the person whose estate they
are administering.
prudent step, particularly if the person has considerable assets and property as
they may have left specific bequests of
some of their real and personal
property. It is preferable to avoid selling such real or personal property or
changing its character
as part of the administration of the estate during the
lifetime of the person whose estate they are administering if that is possible
while still acting in the best interests of the person.
On its website VCAT advises that it usually requires administrators to
provide a financial statement and plan about how they intend
to manage the
estate within six weeks after the date of the administration order. Also, VCAT
usually requires administrators to lodge
statements of accounts of the estates
they are managing each financial year. These are examined by the State
8. 7. 10. Effect of a financial management
The real and personal property the subject of the administration remains the
property of the person the order is about even if the
nature of that property
changes, for example, by land or shares being sold and converted into
Nevertheless, while an
administration order applies to a person’s estate, the person the order is
alienate or charge their money or property or
any part of it that is under the control of the administrator or become liable
any contract in relation to that part of the estate, unless:
1. VCAT orders that the person may deal with their property or become liable
under a contract, or
2. the administrator gives their written consent to them so dealing or
becoming so liable.
exercising this discretion, administrators do not have to obtain the consent of
Every dealing, transfer, alienation or charge by the person in relation of
any part of the estate which is under the control of the
administrator is void
and of no effect. Also, any money or property the subject of any such dealing,
transfer, alienation or charge
is recoverable by the administrator in any court
of competent jurisdiction. However, any dealing, transfer, alienation or charge
by any person the subject of an administration order made for adequate
consideration with or to or in favour of any other person
who proves that they
acted in good faith and did not know or could not reasonably have known that the
person was the subject of an
administration order remains
8. 7. 11. Requested rehearings
In Victoria, VCAT can rehear an application for an administration order if an
application is made to it regardless of whether an administration
order was made
or the application was dismissed at the first hearing. If this happens, the
matter is reheard by a more senior member.
No rehearing can be applied for if
VCAT makes a temporary order or if the President of VCAT hears the application
alone or with others.
8. 7. 11. 1. Who may apply?
The Public Advocate, an automatic party or a person entitled to notice of the
application may apply to for a rehearing of the
application.
entitled to notice of the application who did not become a party at the initial
hearing may apply for a rehearing, but only
if VCAT gives them leave to do
The application for a
rehearing, or for leave to apply for a rehearing, must be made within 28 days
after the day of the
8. 7. 11. 2. Parties to rehearings of applications for administration
Anyone who was a party to the hearing of an application for an administration
order is a party to a rehearing of the application,
in addition to any other
parties such as a person given leave to apply for a rehearing or a person joined
as a party by VCAT. Anyone
was entitled to notice of the initial application is
entitled to notice of the application for a
8. 7. 11. 3. Powers of VCAT at the rehearing
VCAT must rehear the matter but in doing so has all the functions and powers
it had at the first hearing. After rehearing the application,
1. affirm the order made at the first hearing,
2. vary that order,
3. set aside that order and make another order
8. 7. 12. Reassessments of administration
In Victoria administration orders, as with guardianship orders, are the
subject of periodical reassessment. They can also be the subject
of requested
reassessments.
VCAT must conduct a reassessment of any administration order within 12 months
after making the order, unless it orders otherwise,
but must reassess the order
at least once within each three year period after making the order. However,
again VCAT has the discretion
In practice where
VCAT makes a longer order, it is usually only for three months or less longer
and for administrative convenience.
Nevertheless, VCAT may at any time conduct a reassessment of an
administration order made by it either on its own initiative or on
application of any
8. 7. 12. 1. Parties to reassessments
The following are automatic parties to a reassessment:
1. the person whose estate is under administration, and
2. the administrator.
The following are entitled to notice of the making of the application for
reassessment, the hearing and any order made as a result
of the reassessment:
1. the nearest relative available of the person the application is
2. the primary carer (if any) of the person the application is
3. the Public Advocate,
4. any guardian of the person the application is about.
Note that if VCAT intends to conduct a reassessment either as a periodic one
or on its own initiative and does not propose to amend,
vary or replace the
order it may give notice to the automatic parties and the others referred to
above that they can request a hearing
of the reassessment. If no hearing is
requested VCAT may conduct its reassessment “on the papers” without
8. 7. 12. 2. Orders after reassessments
After completing the reassessment VCAT may amend, vary, continue or replace
the administration order subject to any conditions or
requirements it considers
necessary; or it may revoke the
8. 8. Western Australia
8. 8. 1. Who has jurisdiction to appoint
administrators?
As already noted in Chapter 6. 8. 1, the Supreme Court of Western
Australia’s inherent jurisdiction, of which the parens patriae
Guardianship and Administration
which gives Western Australia’s State
Administrative Tribunal (WASAT) its jurisdiction to make administration
While the Court
retains its jurisdiction, most applications for administration orders are made
This appears to be supported by the Supreme Court which
acknowledged the specialist jurisdiction of WASAT in a 2007
8. 8. 2. Who may apply for an administration
Anyone may apply to WASAT for an administration order relating to real and
personal property in Western Australia, including that
part of the estate which
is in Western Australia of a person who is neither resident nor domiciled in
Western Australia.
8. 8. 3. Who may take part in the hearing as a
The executive officer of the Tribunal must give notice of the hearing at
least 14 days in advance to the following so that they can
attend if they
1. the applicant,
2. the person the hearing is about,
3. their nearest relative,
4. the Public Advocate,
5. any proposed administrator,
6. the Public Trustee
7. the guardian of the person if one has been appointed, and
8. any other person who in the opinion of the executive officer has a proper
interest in the proceedings.
8. 8. 4. What has to be proved before an order
can be made?
Before WASAT may appoint an administrator for a person, it must be satisfied
that the person is:
1. unable, because of mental disability, to make reasonable judgments about
matters relating to all or any part of their estate, and
2. in need of an administrator of their
When dealing with an application to appoint an administrator, the primary
concern of WASAT is the best interests of the person the
application is
It must also presume
that the person the hearing is about is capable of looking after their own
affairs and can make reasonable judgments
until the contrary is proved to the satisfaction of WASAT. In addition, the
Tribunal must,
as far as possible to do so, get the views and wishes of the
person the hearing is about however it can when the application is being
with or by gathering those views and wishes from the person’s previous
WASAT must not make an administration order if the needs of the person the
application is about could be met by other means less restrictive
person’s freedom of decision and
administration order it makes must be in terms that WASAT considers impose the
least restrictions possible, in the circumstances
of the case, on the
person’s freedom of decision and
8. 8. 5. Appointing an
administrator
If WASAT decides to make an administration order, it must first declare that
the person the hearing is about is in need of an administrator
for their estate
and then proceed to appoint an administrator or joint
administrators.
order may be subject to such conditions and restrictions that WASAT thinks
WASAT may appoint as private administrators only adults 18 years and above
who have consented to being appointed
administrator.
appointing them, the Tribunal must be of the opinion that they:
1. will act in the best interests of the person whose estate they are
appointed to administer, and
2. are otherwise suitable to act as the administrator of the estate of that
When considering the suitability of a proposed private administrator for
appointment, WASAT is required to take into account as far
as possible:
1. the compatibility of the proposed administrator with the person the
hearing is about and with the any guardian of that person,
2. the wishes of the person the hearing is about,
3. whether the proposed appointee will be able to perform the functions
proposed to be vested in them as
administrator.
The fact that a proposed administrator is the guardian of the person the
hearing is about does not disqualify them from being appointed
administrator of the estate of that
WASAT may also appoint as the administrator (or a joint administrator) of an
estate, the Public Trustee or a trustee company which
has consented to being so
As with private
administrators, the Tribunal must be of the opinion before appointing them that
1. will act in the best interests of the person whose estate they are
appointed to administer, and
2. are otherwise suitable to act as the administrator of the estate of that
Furthermore, when considering the suitability of a trustee company for
appointment as administrator, WASAT is required to take into
account as far as
1. the compatibility of the trustee company with the person the hearing is
2. the wishes of the person the hearing is about,
3. whether the trustee company will be able to perform the functions proposed
to be vested in it as
administrator.
This requirement also applies to the Public
However, there are
further limits that apply to trustee companies but not to the Public
A trustee company
may not be appointed as an administrator unless WASAT is satisfied that either
there is an individual who would
otherwise be appointed as administrator and
that individual has in writing requested the appointment of that trustee
or the person in the hearing is about has made a will appointing
the trustee company as executor and the will remains unrevoked at
the time of
the appointment.
WASAT has noted:
[T]here is a statutory preference for an unpaid individual to act as
administrator over a corporate trustee, where such a person
who is suitable for
appointment exists in the life of the represented person. That statutory
preference of an individual over a corporate
trustee as administrator does not
apply to the Public
Western Australia, the Public Advocate may be appointed as a joint
administrator, but WASAT must not appoint the Public Advocate
administrator unless there is no other individual or corporate trustee who is
suitable and willing to act as administrator
of the estate of the person the
particular hearing is about.
The Former Gaurdianship and Administration Board of Western Australia saw the
Public Advocate as administrator of last
circumstances could arise in which it was inappropriate to appoint the Public
Trustee, leading to the Public Advocate being
appointed. However, the fact that
it may be preferable to appoint the Public Advocate does not render the Public
Trustee unsuitable
for appointment, nor does the fact that the Public Trustee is
required to charge fees fixed by Parliament. In addition the Public
Trustee has
provided a “standing consent” to being
8. 8. 6. Joint/concurrent/alternate
administrators
As just noted, WASAT may appoint joint
administrators.
As WASAT may
appoint administrators for limited functions such as to conduct legal
proceedings on behalf of the person whose estate
they are administering, it is
likely that it will need to appoint “concurrent” administrators from
time to time where
one administrator has one or more functions and an another
administrator has one or more other
WASAT has no statutory authority to appoint alternative administrators.
8. 8. 7. Types of administration
8. 8. 7. 1. Orders giving plenary or limited functions
In Western Australia, WASAT has a discretion to give an administrator all the
functions of an administrator (plenary functions) or
to give them only the
functions of an administrator set out in the order appointing them.
Consequently administrators can
be appointed for limited purposes.
8. 8. 7. 2. What the Tribunal may do in an emergency
Sometimes situations arise in which an application is made and it appears to
the Tribunal that a person may be someone who needs an
administration order, but
it is not possible for the evidence to prove this to WASAT to be gathered and
presented or for appropriate
notice to be given or a procedurally fair hearing
to be conducted; nevertheless it is necessary to make immediate provision for
protection of the person’s estate. In these circumstances WASAT,
pending determination by it of the question whether the person
is, in fact, a
person in respect of whom an administration order should be made, may exercise
such of the powers conferred on it
Guardianship and Administration Act
as may be necessary for the protection of the person’s
Such powers could
include power to collect urgently money that would otherwise come into the hands
of the person the hearing was
that person.
8. 8. 7. 3. Orders authorising actions without administration orders
Where a person is, because of mental disability, unable to make reasonable
judgments about matters relating to all or any part of
their estate, but there
is no need of a continuing appointment of an administrator of their estate, the
Tribunal may, without making
such an appointment, make an order authorising or
requiring a person who could be appointed as administrator to perform any
orders are intended for situations where only one or a few actions of a
financial nature need to be taken in the interests
of the incapable person, for
example the sale of a
8. 8. 8. Obligations and functions of an
administrator
Administrators are required to act according to their opinion of the best
interests of the person whose estate they are
administering.
They act in
the best interests of that person if they act as far as possible:
1. as an advocate for the person whose estate they are administering, in
relation to the estate,
2. in such a way as to encourage the person to live in the general community
and participate as much as possible in the life of the
3. in such a way as to encourage and assist the person to become capable of
caring for themselves and of making reasonable judgments
in respect of matters
relating to their person,
4. in such a way as to protect the person from financial abuse, exploitation
or neglect,
5. in consultation with the person, taking into account, as far as possible,
the wishes of the person as expressed, in whatever manner,
or as gathered from
the person’s previous actions,
6. in the manner that is least restrictive of the rights, while consistent
with the proper protection, of the person,
7. in such a way as to maintain any supportive relationships the person has,
8. in such a way as to maintain the person’s familiar cultural,
linguistic and religious
environment.
Nevertheless, none of these considerations is to be read as restricting the
functions of an administrator may have at common law or
under any written
A consequence of that
provision is to preserve any functions of an administrator developed by the
judge made law and not replaced
by the provisions in the
Guardianship and
Administration Act
or other relevant legislation.
An administrator with plenary functions may perform any function in relation
to the estate that the person whose estate they are administering
performed if they were
An administrator
with limited functions may perform any function specified by WASAT in its
administration order, including any common
law function or any function found on
Part A of Schedule 2 of the
Guardianship and Administration Act
or in any in another
Administrators are empowered to execute documents and do such things on
behalf of the person whose estate they are administering as
are necessary for
the performance of the functions vested in them by the administration order
appointing them.
an administrator takes, decision they make, consent they give or other thing
that they do in the performance of the functions
vested in them by the order
appointing them has effect as if it had been taken, made, given or done by the
person whose estate they
are administering with full legal
In Western Australia the supervision of administrators is undertaken by the
Public Trustee. Administrators are required, within four
weeks of their
appointment, to provide the Public Trustee with information about the estate,
the person whose estate they are administering
and themselves. They must also
submit statements of accounts of the estates they are managing to the Public
Trustee who examines
There is no provision for the Public Trustee to report to WASAT about the
estates he is administering, except on a review of an administration
8. 8. 9. The role of Tribunal after making an
administration order
WASAT’s role in relation to administration orders is not confined just
to making and reviewing them. When it gives a function
to an administrator, it
may give directions as to the time, manner or circumstances of the performance
of the function by the
administrator.
WASAT may deal with applications from administrators with limited functions
to increase their functions without the need to conduct
a review of the
This provision is
rarely, if ever, used.
While administrators must submit their accounts to the Public Trustee in
Western Australia and the Public Trustee has, through its
examination of those
accounts, a supervisory role over other administrators, the Tribunal may, on
application, review decisions of
the Public Trustee relation those
8. 8. 10. Reviews of administration
When WASAT makes an administration order, it must specify a period, not
exceeding five years, within which the order must be reviewed
and WASAT must
ensure that the order is reviewed
accordingly.
However, WASAT
must also review an administration order if the administrator or a joint
administrator:
2. wishes to be discharged,
3. has been guilty of such neglect or misconduct or of such default as, in
the opinion of WASAT, renders them unfit to continue as
4. appears to WASAT to be incapable of carrying out their duties, because of
mental or physical incapacity,
5. is bankrupt or a person whose property is subject to an order or
arrangement under the laws relating to bankruptcy, or
6. is a corporate trustee but has ceased to carry on business, has begun to
be wound up, or is under official management or subject
receivership.
Any person may make an application for such a
They do not have to
obtain leave from WASAT to do so.
In addition to these mandatory reviews, WASAT may, at any time, review an
administration order on the application of:
1. the Public Advocate,
2. the person the order is about,
3. the administrator of their estate
4. their guardian, or
5. a person to whom leave has been granted, with or without conditions, to
conduct the review.
8. 8. 10. 1. Parties to reviews of administration orders
As the executive officer of WASAT is required to give those listed below at
least 14 days notice of the hearing of any of the three
kinds of reviews of
administration orders set out above, it is reasonable to assume that they are
parties to any reviews to which
they are given notice:
1. the applicant where there is one,
2. the person the order under review is about,
3. the nearest relative of that person,
4. the administrator,
5. if there is one, the guardian of the person the hearing is about,
6. the Public Advocate, and
7. any other person who in the opinion of the executive officer has a
sufficient interest in the
8. 8. 11. Powers of the
Tribunal on review
After reviewing an administration order, WASAT may, as it considers necessary
in the best interests of the person the order is about:
1. confirm the order,
2. amend the order so as to make any provision that may be included in an
administration order,
3. revoke the order,
4. revoke the order and substitute another order for it, or
5. without revoking the order, revoke the appointment of any administrator
and appoint a new or additional
administrator.
8. 9. Australian Capital Territory
8. 9. 1. Who has jurisdiction to appoint
financial managers?
As noted in relationship to guardianship in Chapter 6. 9. 1, the Supreme
Court of the Australian Capital Territory continues to have
all original and
appellate jurisdiction that is necessary to administer justice in the Territory,
including its inherent, parens
However, it is
not bound to exercise its powers if it has concurrent jurisdiction with another
court or tribunal.
Although the Supreme Court may exercise its jurisdiction to appoint managers
(the committee) of the property of an incapable person,
this jurisdiction is
more conveniently and cost effectively exercised by the ACT Civil and
Administrative Tribunal (ACAT) which can
appoint managers for the property of
adults, namely persons 18 years of age or
ACAT may also appoint
managers for persons less than 18 years of age, but such appointments do not
take effect until the person turns
In the light of these
considerations, this chapter will deal only with the jurisdiction of ACAT.
8. 9. 2. Who may apply for a management
Guardianship and Management of Property Act
not set out who may apply for a management order. The question of who may apply
is discussed in Chapter 6. 9. 2.
In emergency situations, the Public Advocate will usually apply. Only the
Public Advocate or the Public Trustee can be appointed as
manager in emergency
circumstances.
In most cases
the Public Trustee would be the appropriate public official to appoint.
8. 9. 3. Who may take part in the hearing as a
This matter is discussed in relation to applications for guardianship orders
in Chapter 6. 9. 3. If the person the application is
should be given notice of the hearing.
8. 9. 4. What has to be proved before an order
can be made?
Before it may make a management order ACAT must be satisfied that:
1. the person has impaired decision-making ability in relation to their
financial matters or a matter affecting their property; and
2. there is, or is likely to be, a need for a decision in relation to the
3. the person is likely to do something in relation to the matter that
involves, or is likely to involve, unreasonable risk to the
health, welfare or property; and
4. if a manager is not appointed the person’s needs will not be met; or
their interests will be significantly adversely affected.
Impaired decision-making ability and the person’s interests have the
same meaning as set out in Chapter 6. 9. 3.
While a person’s impaired decision-making ability for management must
arise from the same causes as for guardianship, the test
for management requires
an assessment of the person's level of understanding of their personal financial
matters or matters affecting
their personal property. The test is subjective in
that sense and not a more objective “inability to make reasonable
test that applies in Victoria, Tasmania and Western
There is a specific restriction on ACAT’s power to appoint a manager
for property in the Australian Capital Territory of someone
who lives outside
the Territory. ACAT may appoint a manager in these circumstances only if it is
satisfied that it is impracticable
for a manager for the property to be
appointed in the jurisdiction where the person with impaired decision-making
ability lives or
that an order appointing a manager for the property under the
law of the other jurisdiction cannot be registered under
Guardianship and
Management of Property Act 1991
8. 9. 5. Appointing a financial
Any of the following may be appointed by ACAT as a manager of a
person’s property in the Australian Capital Territory:
1. a private person 18 years or older,
2. the Public Trustee,
3. a trustee company, or
4. the Public
However, the Public Trustee, a trustee company or the Public Advocate may be
appointed must not be appointed as the manager if an
individual who is otherwise
suitable has consented to be
The private person may also be the person’s guardian or joint
Nevertheless, ACAT
cannot consider a private person suitable for appointment as manager unless it
is satisfied that that person will
follow the decision-making principles, has
provided certain information on oath and ACAT has taken into account a number of
considerations.
These matters
are discussed in Chapter 6. 9. 4.
The decision-making principles to be followed are:
1. the wishes of the person whose property is under management, as far as
they can be worked out, must be given effect to, unless
making a decision in
accordance with those wishes is likely to significantly adversely affect the
person’s interests,
2. if giving effect to those wishes is likely to significantly adversely
affect the person’s interests—the manager must
give effect to those
wishes as far as possible without significantly adversely affecting the
person’s interests,
3. if those wishes cannot be given effect to at all—the interests of
the person must be promoted,
4. the protected person’s life (including the person’s lifestyle)
must be interfered with to the smallest extent necessary,
5. those whose property is under management must be encouraged to look after
themselves as far as possible,
6. those whose property is under management must be encouraged to live in the
general community, and take part in community activities,
Note, as suggested in Chapter 6. 9. 11, these principles
manager to exercise “substituted judgment” and make decisions for
the person whose property is under management
according to their wishes unless
to do so would be likely to significantly adversely affect the interests of that
person. If the
person whose property is under management is able to express
views, the manager must apply a form of substituted judgment. It is
only if the
person whose property is under management is unable to express views that the
manager is free to act as a substitute
decision-maker and act in the way that
they think is in the best interests of that person.
Whether acting as a maker of substituted judgment decisions or as a
substitute decision-maker, there is a further limitation on the
manager. Before
making a decision, the manager must consult with each carer of the person whose
property is under their
management.
However, the
manager must not consult with a carer if the consultation would, in the opinion
of the manager, adversely affect the
interests of the person whose property is
under their management.
8. 9. 6. Joint/several/replacement
Private persons may be appointed jointly as managers of the property of a
person found by ACAT to have relevant impaired decision-making
They will usually
be required to act jointly only, but ACAT can specify that they may act
severally in making decisions about the
person’s property if necessary.
While there is no specific statutory provision for the appointment of
replacement managers, ACAT has an implied power to do so. This
is because it is
required to conduct a review to consider the suitability of a person to be a
manager as soon as practicable after
the person becomes the replacement
8. 9. 7. Types of management orders
8. 9. 7. 1. Management orders in relation to all of the person’s
ACAT may appoint a manager to manage all of the property of a person found to
have relevant impaired decision-making ability. ACAT
may also give that manager
all the powers it is satisfied are necessary or desirable to allow the manager
to make decisions in relation
to the property of the person, in accordance with
the decision-making
principles.
Nevertheless, the
Guardianship and Management of Property Act 1991
specifically
requires that the powers given to a manager of a person’s property are to
be no more restrictive of the incapable
person’s freedom of decision and
action than is necessary to achieve the purpose of the
In practice most management orders are plenary in effect to ensure that the
manager can mange all aspects of the property of the person
with impaired
decision-making ability without having to return to ACAT to request extra powers
when unexpected matters arise.
8. 9. 7. 2. Orders with part of the estate excluded
As an alternative, ACAT may appoint a manager to manage only a stated part of
the property of a person found to have relevant impaired
decision-making
ability. As with a manager of the whole of a person’s property, ACAT may
also give that manager all the powers
that are necessary or desirable to allow
the manager to make decisions in relation to the property, but only those powers
no more restrictive of the incapable person’s freedom of decision
and action than is necessary to achieve the purpose of the
Although most management orders made by ACAT are plenary in nature and apply
to all of the person’s financial matters and property,
ability to make orders applying only to a stated part of the person’s
property is consistent with the least restrictive
alternative provisions of the
. In practice how it works is for the Tribunal to include all of a
person’s property in a management order, except for a clearly
stated part
of it. This approach is sometimes used to allow a person with limited ability to
manage their property and financial
affairs to have control over their
disability support pension or other social security income while an inheritance,
a damages payment
or other substantial sum and other related matters are managed
on their behalf for their benefit and are protected against dissipation
result of the importuning demands of others.
8. 9. 7. 3. Emergency management orders
ACAT can make emergency management orders, lasting no longer than 10 days,
appointing the Public Trustee or the Public Advocate to
be the manager of a
person’s property, without holding a normal hearing. However, the Tribunal
must be satisfied that there
are special circumstances of urgency that make it
proper to do so.
The question of the degree of proof required in relation to whether:
1. the person the hearing has impaired decision-making ability in relation to
their financial matters or a matter affecting their
2. there is a need to make a decision about that matter, and if a manager is
not appointed, the person’s needs will not be met
or their interests will
be significantly adversely affected,
has not been resolved in relation to emergency management orders. There is no
indication in the legislation that it should be any
less than proof on the civil
standard of the balance of probabilities. In any event, as the application is
usually made by the Public
Trustee or Public Advocate, it is accompanied by one
or more doctor’s reports about the person’s decision-making ability
and information, albeit often hearsay, about the other matters that ACAT has to
be satisfied about, the information before ACAT usually
meets the standard of
proof required.
Unlike in New South Wales, in the Australian Capital Territory there is no
provision for an interim financial management order pending
consideration of the person’s capacity to manage their own affairs. Such a
provision allows a financial management
order to be made where the current and
urgent need for the order is clear but, while there is an evidential basis for
believing that
the person is incapable, there is insufficient evidence to prove
that matter on the balance of probabilities at the time the order
needs to be
However, in the
Australian Capital Territory there is power to seek a form of injunction to
restrain dealings which has some of
the same protective effect. This is
discussed in the next section, 8. 9. 8.
8. 9. 8. Injunctions to restrain
In addition to its power to make emergency management orders for periods no
longer than 10 days, the Tribunal has the power, on the
application of another
person, to make an order restraining a person from entering into, completing or
registering or otherwise giving
effect to a transaction with someone else in
relation to the property of that other person. However, before it may do so,
be satisfied that there are grounds for making an appointment of a
manager for the property of that person. ACAT does not have to
be satisfied by
the evidence before it that an order can and should be made. However, it must
have before it material that provides
an evidential basis for it to form a view
that there are grounds for the appointment of a
Such an order can be made for a period of not more than three days. If,
within that period, an application for the appointment of
a manager is made to
the Tribunal, it may continue the restraining order until the application is
8. 9. 9. Effect of a management
The accepted position when an administration order is made is that the power
of the person whose property is under management to deal
with their property is
suspended while the order is in
However, while
acceptance of this position is implied by the
Guardianship and Management of
Property Act
provides that if a person
whose property is under management purports to enter into a transaction in
relation to that property, the
transaction is not necessarily void on the ground
that the person was not legally competent to enter into the transaction. The
guardian or manager or some other person involved in the
transaction may, within 90 days after the date of the transaction, apply
ACAT, the Supreme Court or the Magistrates Court. ACAT or either of those courts
may by an order it considers just:
1. confirm the transaction; or
2. declare the transaction void; or
3. adjust the rights of the parties to the
transaction.
8. 9. 10. The role of Tribunal after making a
management order
ACAT’s role in relation to management orders is, as in most of the
States, not confined just to making and reviewing them. It
may, on application,
give directions, an opinion or advice to a manager about the exercise of their
functions or powers.
While managers must submit their accounts and other documents to the Public
Trustee in the Australian Capital Territory and the Public
Trustee must examine
those accounts and documents, it is the role of the Tribunal to disallow any
items in the accounts.
8. 9. 11. Powers and functions of a financial
When ACAT appoints a manager to manage all or a part of a person’s
property, it gives that manager all the powers it is satisfied
are necessary or
desirable to allow the manager to make decisions in relation to the property of
the person, in accordance with the
decision-making
principles.
Any act or omission of a manager acting under a management order or execution
of a document (instrument) by them has effect as if
it were an act, omission or
document of the person whose property they are
A manager may also
read the will of the person whose property they are managing, unless ACAT orders
This can help them
in their decision-making in relation to the management of the person’s
Guardianship and Management of Property Act
imposes the following obligations on managers to:
1. act, as far as possible, as the person would have acted in the
circumstances if they did not have impaired decision-making
2. take into account the need to ensure that the person whose property is
under their management does not become
3. take into account the desirability of maintaining, as nearly as possible,
the lifestyle of the person as if the person did not
have impaired
decision-making ability,
4. exercise the power in the best interests of the
ensure that in the
exercise of the power their own interests do not conflict with those of the
protected person,
5. ensure, unless ACAT orders otherwise, that their own property is kept
separate from that of the person whose property is under
management.
If the property the manager has been appointed to manage includes real
estate, the manager must lodge a copy of the management order
Registrar-General.
If the person whose property is being managed receives interest or income
from that property or money from the sale of it, or obtains
other property, for
example as a bequest in a will or as a gift, whatever is received will be
managed by the manager unless ACAT
A manager may only invest money that is part of the property they are
managing in accordance with the requirements of the
Trustee Act
, unless ACAT permits otherwise in an
Managers also have a discretion to pay out of the income or capital of a
person’s property they are managing, reasonable amounts
maintenance, advancement or education, or otherwise for the benefit, of the
person and their dependants. In deciding whether
to make a payment, the manager
must take into account:
1. the views and wishes of the person whose property they are managing,
2. the amount and nature of the property to be paid out for these
3. the amount and nature of the person’s remaining property, and
4. the present and likely future needs of the person and any dependants they
ACAT’s “Information for Managers” sets out the powers of
managers the principles they should operate by and other
matters, in further
On the anniversary of their appointment, managers must submit to the Public
Trustee their accounts and other documents relating to
their management of the
estates they are managing.
The Public Trustee must examine those accounts and other
There is no
provision for the Public Trustee to report to the tribunal, ACAT or the Supreme
Court, that appointed them as administrator.
8. 9. 12. Reviews of management orders
When the Tribunal appoints a manager, the appointment continues until:
1. the death of the person whose property is under
management,
2. ACAT removes the manager because it is satisfied that the manager is no
longer suitable, competent, or has neglected to perform
the duties and functions
of manager, or has contravened a particular provision of the
3. the manager resigns in writing given to
Nevertheless, ACAT must hold a review of (an inquiry into) each management
order at least once every three years to see whether the
order should be:
2. revoked on the ground that it is no longer needed, or
3. whether the manager should be
Such reviews may also be held as a result of an application or on
ACAT’s own initiative.
Reviews must also be held if the manager dies or a replacement manger, provided
for in the management order, becomes the
8. 9. 13. Parties to reviews of management
These reviews, whether periodic, requested or commenced on ACAT’s own
initiative, are conducted by way of
Chapter 6. 9. 3 sets
out those entitled to receive notice of and attend such hearings.
8. 9. 14. Powers of ACAT on review
After conducting a hearing to review a management order, it may:
1. vary the order,
2. revoke it on the ground that it is no longer needed, or
3. remove and replace the manager if they are no longer suitable to be a
manager or no longer competent to exercise the functions
or powers of a manager
or have failed to exercise the functions or powers of a manager, or have
contravened a provision of
the Guardianship and Management of Property
8. 10. Northern Territory
As both the Supreme Court and, in a more restricted way, the Local Court can
make administration orders in the Northern Territory,
the provisions relevant to
both courts are set out in this part of the chapter.
8. 10. 1. Who has jurisdiction to appoint
financial managers?
8. 10. 1. 1. The Supreme Court’s statutory and parens patriae
The Supreme Court of the Northern Territory may make an administration order,
known in the Northern Territory as a “protection
order”, in relation
to a person who meets the criteria set out in the
Aged and Infirm
Persons’ Property Act 1979
This jurisdiction
of the Supreme Court may be exercised by a Master (Associate Justice) of the
Court and not necessarily in open
court but in
The jurisdiction is in addition to any parens patriae jurisdiction that the
Court has. It is not intended to remove or reduce that
The Supreme
Court’s inherent jurisdiction, including its parens patriae jurisdiction,
was inherited from the Supreme Court
of South Australia when the Northern
Territory became a territory of the Commonwealth of Australia 1 January
In a 2006 case, Mildren J noted that the
Aged and Infirm Persons’
Property Act
enabled the Supreme Court to make a protection
order for the estate or part of the estate of a person.
It also enabled the Court to make
such an order of its own motion in any proceedings relating to the estate of any
party to those
proceedings.
He then continued:
The Court has wide powers to make such an order where the Court is satisfied
that it is necessary in the interests of the person
concerned that his estate be
protected. The Court, before making such an order, is required to take into
account whether the person
concerned is unable, wholly or partly, to manage his
or her affairs or is subject to or liable to be subject to undue influence in
respect of his or her estate or the disposition thereof. The Court may appoint
the Public Trustee or anyone else whatsoever to be
the manager of the estate and
the order may be made subject to such terms and conditions as the Court thinks
Aged and Infirm Persons’ Property Act 1979 (NT)
clear that the Supreme Court’s jurisdiction can be exercised if the person
the application is about resides or is
domiciled in the Territory; or, even if
they are not resident or domiciled in the Territory, the estate that is the
subject of the
proceedings is situated within the
8. 10. 1. 2. The Local Court’s guardianship related
In practice however, because of the costs involved in seeking a protection
order in the Supreme Court, but more particularly because
those who need
guardianship orders often need administration orders as well, the question of
the management of an incapable person’s
estate is usually dealt with by
the Local Court. Nevertheless, the magistrates have no power to appoint someone
to manage the estate
of an incapable person without first making a guardianship
order in relation to that
Guardianship Act 1988 (NT)
gives jurisdiction to the Local Court, at the
hearing of an application for a guardianship order, to appoint the guardian or
joint guardians to manage the estate of the person under
guardianship.
8. 10. 2. Who may apply for an administration
8. 10. 2. 1. Application for a protection order in the Supreme
If an application is made to the Supreme Court for a protection order, it may
be made by the following, without them first obtaining
the leave of the
1. the person in relation to whose estate the protection order is being
2. a spouse or de facto partner of that person, a near relation by blood,
marriage or de facto relationship of that person or an adopted
child of that
3. the Public Trustee.
With the leave of the Court, any person may make an application for a
protection order.
already noted, the Court may, of its own motion, and in any proceedings, make a
protection order.
8. 10. 2. 2. Management orders in the Local Court
As the Local Court can appoint as managers only those guardians it has
appointed, there is no separate provision about who may apply
for such orders.
Consequently, those who may apply for a guardianship order may also indicate
that they are seeking a management
order when they make their application for a
guardianship order. The people who may apply, and the process that is commenced
making of an application , are set out in Chapter 6.10. 2 and 6. 10.
8. 10. 3. Who may take part in the hearing as a
For matters being dealt with by the Local Court under the
Guardianship Act 1988 (NT)
, see Chapter 6. 10. 4.
For matters being dealt with by the Supreme Court under the
Infirm Persons’ Property Act 1979 (NT)
, notice of the application made
to the Court or the intention of the Court to make a protection order of its own
motion must be served
the personally on the person to whose estate is the
subject of the application or proceedings and on such other persons as the Court
may direct. However, the Court may if it is satisfied that special circumstances
exist, direct that service of notice not be carried
out and may hear or
determine any such proceedings as though such service had been carried
When conducting proceedings under this
, the Supreme Court has a
wide discretion as to how it goes about this. It may examine personally the
person whose estate the proceedings
are about in any manner which it thinks fit
either with or without the attendance of any other
Additionally or
alternatively, it may order an investigation and
8. 10. 4. What has to be proved before an order
can be made?
For matters being dealt with by the Local Court under the
Guardianship Act 1988 (NT)
, this is set out in Chapter 6.10. 5.
For matters being dealt with by the Supreme Court under the
Infirm Persons’ Property Act
, the Court must not make
a protection order unless it is satisfied that the person whose estate is the
subject of the proceedings
1. by reason of age, disease, illness or mental or physical infirmity in a
position which renders it necessary in their interests
or in the interests of
those dependent on them that their estate be protected, and
2. in determining whether the person’s estate should be protected, to
take into account whether the person is wholly or partly
unable to manage their
affairs or is subject to or liable to be subject to undue influence concerning
their estate or the disposition
When the Supreme Court makes a protection order under the
make the order subject to such terms and conditions as it thinks
8. 10. 5. Appointing a manager
Before it may appoint the guardian of the person to also manage their estate,
the Local Court has to be satisfied that the guardian
is competent to manage the
person’s estate. The Court may make the order subject to such terms and
conditions as it thinks
Such management orders are very common. A survey conducted in 2005 showed that
more than 90% of those subject to guardianship orders
in the Northern Territory
also had their guardian appointed as manager of their estate. The Public
Guardian is regularly appointed
manager in these circumstances.
However, if the Court is not satisfied that the guardian is competent to
manage the person’s estate, it cannot appoint another
person to act in
their place. Instead, it may order that the Public Trustee or some other person
make an application under the
Aged and Infirm Persons’ Property Act
to the Supreme Court for a protection
When the Supreme Court is appointing a manager under the
appoint either the Public Trustee alone or one or more private
8. 10. 6. Joint/several/alternate financial
When the Supreme Court is appointing managers under the
Aged and Infirm
Persons’ Property Act
, there is no provision for
alternate managers or managers to act severally. The
specifically
provides that where more than one manager has been appointed, all the managers
of the estate must concur in every act,
matter and thing done in relation to the
estate by any manager of the
This provision
counsels in favour of having only one and no more than two managers.
8. 10. 7. Types of financial management
8. 10. 7. 1. Plenary orders
The effect of the
Aged and Infirm Persons’ Property Act
is to allow the Supreme Court to make a protection order covering the
whole of a person’s estate for the whole of their life.
So the Court may
make plenary orders. However it may also make the order in relation to part only
of the person’s estate and
subject to such terms and conditions it thinks
fit. It may also vary or rescind a protection
Consequently, the
Court has considerable discretion about the extent of the person’s estate
to be covered, the longevity of
the order and its terms and conditions,
including the power to give the person whose estate is being protected leave to
all or part of their estate.
On the other hand, management orders made by the Local Court appear to be
plenary in power and to cover all of the person’s
estate. However, the
Local Court may vary or terminate a management order at any
8. 10. 7. 2. Orders in relation to part only of the person’s estate
As already noted, the Supreme Court may make protection orders covering part
only of a person’s
The Local Court does
not appear to have this power when it appoints a guardian as the manager of the
estate of the person under their
guardianship.
8. 10. 7. 3. Interim orders
The Supreme Court does not have power under the
Aged and Infirm
Persons’ Property Act
to make interim protection
orders pending further consideration of a person’s capacity to manage
their own affairs. However,
the Court would be able to exercise its powers to
issue interim injunctions or other orders to protect a person’s property
pending its decision whether or not to make a protection order.
The Local Court does not appear to have this power when deciding whether to
appoint a guardian as the manager of the estate of the
person under their
guardianship.
8. 10. 8. Powers and functions of a financial
Both the manager of an estate appointed under protection order by the Supreme
Court and the guardian appointed also as the manager
of the estate of the person
under their guardianship by the Local Court have the same powers and liabilities
of a manager.
These powers
and liabilities are set out in the
Aged and Infirm Persons’ Property
addition to its powers under that
, the Supreme Court has been willing
to rely on its parens patriae jurisdiction to order that an award to a woman
with an intellectual
disability, who needed her estate to be protected, be held
in trust and to appoint someone outside the jurisdiction (the Public Trustee
Western Australia) to act as
A guardian appointed as a manager is required, at least once a year, to give
the Executive Officer an account of the management of
the person's estate,
showing assets and liabilities and receipts and payments in relation to the
estate. The Executive Officer is
required to report on the management of the
estate to the Local Court at the time the guardianship order is
8. 10. 9. Effect of a protection order or
management order
8. 10. 9. 1. Protection orders made by the Supreme Court
A protection order made under the
Aged and Infirm Persons’ Property
renders the person the order applies to incapable of
dealing with any part of their estate that is covered by the order, for example
by charging or otherwise disposing of it. However, the person can buy
necessaries or deal with their estate with the leave of the
Supreme Court. Any
other transaction will be void, of no effect and unenforceable unless the
transaction was for valuable consideration
and the other party to it acted in
good faith and without actual notice of the protection
8. 10. 9. 2. Management orders made by the Local Court
Adult Guardianship Act
is silent on the effect of
a management on the capacity of the person the subject of the order dealing with
their financial affairs
and property. However, the common law position is that
the power of a person whose financial affairs are placed under administration
deal with their estate is suspended for the duration of the
8. 10. 10. Reviews of financial management
Because the Executive Officer is required to report to the Local Court on the
management of the estate at the review of the guardianship
order in relation to
the person, management orders made by the Local Court are, in effect, reviewed
at least every two years.
such a review, the Court may vary or terminate the appointment of a guardian as
the manager of the estate of the person under
guardianship.
8. 10. 10. 1. Requested reviews
Applications to vary or revoke protection orders made by the Supreme Court
Aged and Infirm Persons’ Property Act
can be made by the same people, subject to the same limitations, as can make
applications for such orders.
Those may attend and take part in the hearing are the same as those who may have
taken part in the original
Such reviews can
also be undertaken, on its own motion by the Supreme Court.
The Local Court may, at any time, vary or terminate the appointment of a
guardian as the manager of the estate of the person under
guardianship.
However, as
there is no process for initiating such an application, an application would
have to be made to review the guardianship
order upon which the management order
Those able to take
part in the review of the guardianship order would be entitled to notice of, and
to attend, such a requested
8. 11. General matters
8. 11. 1. Purpose of administration
It is well established in the common law and has been restated a number of
times in Australia in the late 20
century that administration
orders are to be made only where it is desirable to do so for the benefit of the
person with the decision-making
disability and not for the benefit of
Even then there is a
discretion as to whether or not to make the
Administration orders
are also to be made to protect those incapable of managing their property and
affairs from
exploitation.
The High Court has noted there will be cases in which a person who has lost
capacity because of the injuries they have received through
proven or admitted
negligence will receive an award of damages to compensate them for losses past,
present and future caused by that
negligence. Where such a person will never be
able to manage their financial affairs they will need an administrator. That
administrator
will have to invest the damages and act with reasonable diligence.
Consequently, they will incur expenses in performing those tasks.
Because the
incurring of those expenses is a direct result of the negligence, the damages to
be awarded to place the person, so far
as possible, in the position they would
have been in if the tort had not been committed will include an amount assessed
as providing
for the remuneration and expenditures properly charged or incurred
by the administrator of the fund during the intended life of the
8. 11. 2. Who may apply for an
The legislation in all States and the Northern Territory sets out who may
apply for an administration order and who may apply for
its review or
revocation. Sometimes there will be no family members or friends either at all
or any prepared to make the application
for an administration order. Sometimes
family members or “new found friends” of incapable people will be
exploiting them
financially and this may only come to light through accident or
the observation of others not related to the incapable person. Consequently,
is necessary in the best interests of incapable people for there to be a range
of people who can apply for administration orders
on their behalf.
Where a person in this position has a solicitor, the New South Wales
Guardianship Tribunal has been willing to accept an application
solicitor as a person who has a genuine concern for the person the application
is about. This practise has been beneficial
to some who need administration
orders, but it should be used with caution, and avoided altogether if it is
known that the incapable
person opposes such an application or there is
possibility that they will recover their capacity to such an extent that they
be able to appreciate that their affairs are under management and that that
was something they did not want.
In a 1993 case, Powell J observed that it was undesirable that a solicitor
should put themselves in an adversary position with their
clients if their
conditions could be cured or controlled and they might wish to oppose the
However, he went on to
acknowledge that there may be occasions when there was no one other than the
incapable person’s own
solicitor who was either willing or able to
commence proceedings for the appointment of an administrator. Nevertheless, he
to suggest that the preferable course in these circumstances was for the
solicitor to invoke the good offices of a friend of the
client, or even of one
of the trustee companies and have them bring the
application.
8. 11. 3. Who should have notice of the hearing
of the application?
The legislation in most States and the two Territories sets out who should be
given notice of the hearing of the application and be
able to attend. However,
in 1846 Lord Eldon noted:
Those to whom the Crown has confided the exercise of this jurisdiction have
thought, and in my judgment they have rightly thought,
that it is greatly to the
advantage of lunatics, generally speaking, that all the next of kin and the heir
at law should be present
when the proposals for
committees of the estate
of the person are discussed. In their absence many cases would be
decided in total ignorance of
or only with a partial and imperfect
acquaintance with, those circumstances a thorough knowledge of which is
necessary to enable the Lord Chancellor to
determine whether the
plans he is
required to sanction, will be
beneficial, or
detrimental, to the unfortunate persons on whose account they are
8. 11. 4. Tests for making administration
In all States and Territories of Australia there are statutory criteria that
must be satisfied before the various courts and tribunals
require the proof of “incapacity”-
a term which is given different
names in the different
8. 11. 5. The incapacity criterion
The test set out in the New South Wales Supreme Court case
seen as of great assistance in determining whether the statutory
“incapacity” criterion has been
The test has been
repeatedly applied in New South Wales both in terms of determining whether a
financial management order should
be made or whether, on review, the order
should remain in place or be
Powell J, explaining why he was not going to make an administration order in
relation to a man with schizophrenia, said:
[A] person is not shown to be incapable of managing his or her own affairs
unless, at the least, it appears:
(a) that he or she appears incapable of dealing, in a reasonably competent
fashion, with the ordinary routine affairs of people; and
(b) that, by reason of that lack of competence there is shown to be a real
risk that either:
(i) he or she may be disadvantaged in the conduct of such affairs; or
(ii) that such moneys or property which he or she may possess may be
dissipated or lost;
it is not sufficient, in my view, merely to demonstrate that the person lacks
the high level of ability needed to deal with complicated
transactions or that
he or she does not deal with even simple or routine transactions in the most
Like the man in
, others have difficult lives living in ways
that most of us could not tolerate, but that does not mean that they have lost
to manage their financial affairs. Ms W was essentially homeless and
relied on others to provide her with accommodation over night.
By the end of
most days she was intoxicated and sometimes she had her money stolen and
sometimes she was assaulted. Others, who had
through their actions long proven
that they had a genuine concern for their welfare, applied to the New South
Wales Guardianship
Tribunal for an administration order in relation to her. She
refused to come to the hearing. The only evidence about her capacity
mini-mental state examination in which she scored 28 out of 30. Other evidence
showed that she actively chose to spend most
of her income on alcohol and that
she was able to obtain accommodation. As the Tribunal was not satisfied that she
had lost her capacity,
did not make an order in relation to
In another case in which the Tribunal was not satisfied that a person had
lost their capacity to manage their financial affairs, a
husband was unable to
deal with the divorce proceedings brought by his wife to end their marriage. He
was able to continue to run
his business. While he was not dealing with one
important aspect of his financial affairs, the evidence did not show that he had
lost his capacity to manage his financial affairs and the Tribunal dismissed the
application for an administration order in relation
It should be noted
however that in Queensland at least where the incapacity may relate to a
particular financial matter, it may be
possible to make an administration order
only in relation to that particular financial matter if impaired capacity for
that matter
In dealing with the test for making an administration order in the Supreme
Court of New South Wales, Porter and Robinson have noted
It is very significant that the section does not limit the nature of the
disability and therefore an order could be made in the case
of someone who has
become incapable of communicating because of quadriplegia through trauma, but
whose cognitive or reasoning abilities
could remain quite
unimpaired.
There has been an apparent difference of view between the Supreme Courts of
New South Wales and Victoria about whether the proper
test for capacity is the
“objective” test of Powell J in
“subjective” test adopted in Victoria in which capacity is seen as
more related to the personal circumstances
of the person the application is
As Cavanough J of the
Supreme Court of Victoria noted in a 2006 case, under the subjective test it was
necessary to measure the
person’s ability against their actual property
and affairs however extensive, complex or demanding they may be, rather than
against an objective standard such as “the ordinary routine affairs of
man” (the New South Wales
Cavanough J noted that
the Victorian provision
applicable to a broader range of persons than the equivalent New South Wales
provision; however he took the
view that the proper tribunal to deal with
applications in Victoria was VCAT, and sent the matter back to it to
Cavanough J shared the concerns of other Supreme Court and Court of Appeal
judges in Victoria about the reach of the Victorian provision.
He referred
specifically to 1982 report upon which the Victorian Parliament relied in
framing the
Guardianship and Administration Act 1986
quoting part
of the report that a determination that a person was incapable of managing their
financial affairs should not operate
to mean that:
[A] bad investor or unsuccessful entrepreneur should not lose control of his
estate, nor should the person who simply lacks an interest
in money matters be
the subject of an estate administration order. It is the person whose capacity
lacking or is severely impaired
who may be in need of this type of
protection. (Cavanough J’s
also referred to the 1992 Victorian Court of Appeal case which noted that the
authority that may be conferred on an administrator
under the Victorian
effectively commits to the administrator total control over the
property of the person the order was about, but that control and
its extent may
be limited by virtue of the extent of the powers and duties given to the
administrator in the order made by
The Court of Appeal
went on to comment that while there would be cases in which the jurisdiction of
[now VCAT] may be justifiably
invoked, administration orders “are
calculated to achieve, at the instance of any person at all, a far-reaching
deprivation
of the freedom of action not only of represented persons but of near
relatives of such
also noted that the
Guardianship and Administration Act 1986
prescribed very important safeguards against the making of inappropriate
administration orders. These included the requirement that
freedom of decision and action of the
person the order was about as was possible
in the circumstances, that the best interests of that person were promoted and
their wishes
were given effect to wherever
When the matter was reheard in VCAT, the Deputy President in charge of the
Guardianship List, J.C. Billings, made a number of helpful,
general remarks
capacity was subjective or
If it were open but also necessary for me to choose between these Victorian and
New South Wales decisions, I would respectfully prefer
Re McGregor
the reasons set out in that
However, section
46(a)(ii) of the
Guardianship and Administration Act
contains further words that really distinguish these cases and reinforce the
subjective nature of the test. Those words are “
all or any part of
her or his estate” (emphasis added). This surely involves the Tribunal
considering the person’s capacity in relation
to his or her actual estate
and not “ordinary routine
Billings DP went on to note that the issue whether the subjective or
objective test was applied was important in the context of the
legislation being
interpreted in the New South Wales cases, because it was considered that
applying the subjective test would make
it more difficult for a person to
establish that they were now capable and so able to resume management of their
own affairs. However,
he also suggested that the need to resolve the issue in
terms of the Victorian
was not so strong because a person who had
capacity in relation to that part of their estate comprising ordinary routine
but who lacked capacity in relation to certain complex aspects of their
estate could, “depending on ‘need’ and
the other usual
matters”, be made the subject of an administration order limiting the
administrator’s power to managing
only the complex part of the
In support of the New South Wales objective test, Campbell J referred to the
concerns about the subjective test expressed by Powell
J. In a 1988 case,
predating the establishment of the Guardianship Tribunal, Powell J said:
I find myself unable to accept that the intention of the Parliament, as
expressed in the
Protected Estates Act
, was that a
person who does not suffer from mental illness, mental infirmity, mental
retardation or some other like condition, but
who, although otherwise capable of
leading a normal life and managing his affairs, is, for some reason, as, for
example, a limited
education, incapable of managing or administering a large or
complex estate which may fortuitously come his way, should be liable
deprived by the Court of all power to manage his life and
In a 1999 case Young J expressed a similar view. He noted that the subjective
test was whether the alleged incapable person was able
to manage their own
affairs as they exist in actuality, and continued:
Accordingly, a multi-millionaire with complex affairs would be more likely to be
declared an incapable person than a pensioner living
in a retirement village
without any property
In the same case Young J suggested that it was easier for an “alleged
incapable person” to be found to be still capable
under the New South
Wales “objective” test than under the Victorian
“subjective”
He also noted that the
“ordinary routine affairs of people” encompass matters such as
“dealings with one’s
insurance, pensions and choice of financial advisers” and that for the
incapable person” to be reasonably competent as required
test, they would need to be able to:
1. either personally carry out these tasks, or
2. be reasonably discerning in their choice of assistance, which assistance
might be from a family member and/or professional advisers,
3. be reasonably discerning in their capacity to evaluate the advice from
such assistance.
In reality, and partly because of the cautions expressed by the judges of the
Supreme Court of Victoria and the “glosses”
made by judges of the Supreme Court of New South Wales set out below, the
difference between the two tests in terms of the evidence
considered by the
court or tribunal determining particular cases, and the decisions they reach on
the facts of those cases, may not
In an unreported 1997 case Hodgson J commenting on the test in
agreed with Powell J that the first element of the test namely that
because of the lack of competence of the person the hearing is
real risk that they may be disadvantaged in the conduct of their financial
affairs, has to be judged without reference
to the difficulty or complexity of
the person’s affairs, but he continued:
I do not think [Powell J’s] view, however, means that the complexity
and difficulty of the person’s affairs cannot be
taken into account
in assessing the risk which has to be considered under the second element; and,
of course, there is no reason
why that aspect, that is the complexity and
difficulty of the person’s affairs, should not be taken into account
in any element
of discretion that the Court may
In a 2000 case in which Young J was not satisfied that a man, who had had
serious head injuries for which he had received substantial
damages, had
recovered his capacity to manage his own affairs, he said:
[T]he ordinary affairs of mankind do not just mean being able to go to the bank
and draw out housekeeping money. Most people’s
affairs are more
complicated than that, and the ordinary affairs of mankind involve at least
planning for the future, working out
how one will feed oneself and ones family,
and how one is going to generate income and look after capital. Accordingly,
does not have to be a person who is capable of managing complex
financial affairs, one has to go beyond just managing household
In Queensland, QCAT must be satisfied that the adult person the hearing is
other things, before
it may make an administration
Guardianship
and Administration Act
contains a long list of financial
administration orders made in Queensland cover all aspects of the property and
financial affairs of the person the order
is about, the test for capacity is
subjective in nature.
Whether or not a person the subject of an application meets the criteria for
making an administration order is not restricted to a
consideration of the
matters as the stand on the day of the hearing. The court or tribunal hearing
the matter is “both entitled
and required to consider what the position
will be in the reasonably foreseeable
8. 11. 6. Deciding the incapacity
In most cases, the incapacity of the person the hearing is about will be
beyond question and not in contention. Nevertheless, the
court or tribunal will
need to have before it some medical or other appropriate evidence to satisfy it
that the person has sufficient
incapacity for it to be able to proceed to
consider the other criteria it must be satisfied about before deciding whether
to make an order. The evidence of those lay to medicine, particularly
to their financial
affairs and avoiding the blandishments of others and other risks, can be very
important on this matter. This was
hinted at by Cavanough J in
XYZ v State
Trustees Ltd
when he also noted that VCAT had gone beyond the legitimate use
of expert evidence and had inappropriately delegated to the expert
responsibility that lay with it to decide the capacity
Billings DP took up the matter of capacity assessment in the
when it came back to VCAT for rehearing and, in doing so, noted the claim that
it neuropsychological examinations have moderately
good success in predicting
money management ability and performance on an important component of
instrumental activity of daily living
in the form of automated machine usage,
but may fall down on other quality of life type
As a 2006 decision from the Tasmanian Guardianship and Administration Board
shows, getting into serious financial difficulties because
of drinking and
gambling addictions will not necessarily prove incapacity and inability to make
reasonable financial judgments. In
that case the medical evidence indicated that
any incapacity that the person the hearing was about had was likely to be due
to alcohol use rather than being due to dementia or
brain injury. If the person
were to stop drinking altogether, then it would be likely that there would be
very little residual incapacity
and that the person would “be able to
attend to all normal functions at all
disability issue the Board stated:
The Board was not satisfied that when [the person the hearing was about] is
sober, he is a person with a disability; that is the
Board did not receive any
conclusive evidence that [the person] has experienced any absence, loss or
abnormality of mental, psychological,
physiological or anatomical structure or
function. Even if we were satisfied that there may be an underlying depression
stage brain damage, we could not be satisfied that by reason of that
disability he is incapable of making reasonable financial
8. 11. 7. The need criterion
In four States, New South Wales, Victoria, Tasmania and Western Australia,
the tribunal or court making the order has to be satisfied
that the person the
hearing is about is in need of another person to manage their financial affairs
before it may make an administration
order in relation to that
As already noted, Cavanough J of the Victorian Supreme Court has stated that,
generally speaking, the question of “need”
is answered primarily by
reference to the availability or otherwise of alternative arrangements outside
administration (such as family
support) to compensate for or deal with the
person’s identified
“inability”.
On the question of the need for an administrator criterion and the least
restrictive alternative criterion, Underwood J of the Tasmanian
Supreme Court
noted in a 1998 case that once it was established that the person the hearing
was about was under a disability and
because of that was unable to make
reasonable judgments about matters relating to all or part of their estate, it
would almost invariably
follow that there was a need for an administration
order. However, because Parliament had directed the Tasmanian Guardianship and
Administration Board to consider, not only the need for an administrator to
manage and protect the estate, but also all the other
needs of the person the
hearing was about, if after having done this, the Board reached the view that
all the person’s needs
could be satisfied by means less restrictive of
their freedom of action and decision than would be the case if an administration
order was made, then an administration order should not be made. Underwood J
commented that his construction reflected the philosophy
apparent in the
Guardianship and Administration Act
namely that control
over and restriction on a person under a disability is to be kept to a
Underwood J’s approach was followed in Western Australia in 2001 in a
case decided by a panel the then Guardianship and Administration
Western Australia which included its president and deputy
However, the
Western Australian Board expanded on Underwood J’s views. They noted that
while the need for an administrator
(or guardian) would usually follow from the
existence of disability, they stressed that the mere fact that a person has a
that makes them unable to make reasonable decisions does not
automatically mean that they are “in need of an administrator”
guardian). The person may have no assets that require administration or their
assets may be in a joint account which their spouse
can access and use for the
person’s benefit. Their pension may be sent by Centrelink to a nominee to
use for the person’s
benefit. The person may have appointed an attorney
under an enduring power of attorney while they were still capable or a formal
trust or court order may be in existence, avoiding the need to appoint an
administrator.
The Western Australian Board also noted that the phrase "needs of the person"
Guardianship and Administration Act
was the same
as that term in the Tasmanian
as interpreted by Underwood J, but took
the matter further.
Board noted that the term “needs of the person” was of wide import
and encompassed all the wants and necessaries
of the person. The Board also
noted that there was a two step process. The tribunal deciding the matter had
first to determine whether
there was a need for an administrator (or guardian)
and then move on to the issue of whether, notwithstanding the absence of any
formal legal authority to deal with the affairs of the person, the needs of that
person could, nevertheless, be met under informal
arrangements which were less
restrictive of the person's freedom of decision and
The first step is the question whether the basic requirements for making an
order have been satisfied, that is, whether an order
be made on the
facts of the particular case. The second … is the question whether there
is any alternative to making an order,
that is, whether an order
is suggested that the same approach applies as a result of the legislative
provisions and common law applicable in the other States
and Territories of
It is the established practice of the New South Wales Guardianship Tribunal
that if there are currently satisfactory informal arrangements
in place for the
management of an incapable person’s estate and these are continuing to
operate and will be able to continue
to operate into the foreseeable future,
then there will be no need to make an administration order. Young J supported
the approach
of the Tribunal in a case in which he noted that when a tribunal or
a court is exercising its discretion as to whether or not to
administration order, it should bear in mind that ordinarily members of the
community consider that (the appointment of a
family member as administrator) or
the appointment of an outside manager is a measure of last
The recent reform of powers of attorney legislation in some Australian
States, particularly in relation to enduring powers of attorney,
had as one of
its goals the encouragement of people to make enduring powers of attorney in
anticipation of a time when they might
lose their decision-making capacity
either temporarily or permanently. By appointing an attorney under an enduring
power of attorney,
the appointor (sometimes called the principal or the donor)
has the dignity of appointing the person they want to manage their financial
affairs when they are incapable of or no longer wish to manage those
While this will work
well in most cases, there will be occasional difficulties. Enduring powers of
attorney are discussed in Chapter
However, as Cohen J of the Supreme Court of New South Wales pointed out in a
1998 case, that where a now incapable person’s
solicitor is also their
attorney, it is difficult not to have a conflict of interest. One difficulty is
that the solicitor would
have no one who could give them instructions about
their charges and no one would be able to authorise the payment of the fees
they might charge. Cohen J considered the “checklist of
considerations” summarised below at 8. 11. 13, particularly the
of appointing the now NSW Trustee in these circumstances. He declared the
appointor incapable of managing her affairs,
ordered that her estate be subject
to management under the since repealed
Protected Estates Act
and ordered that the then Protective Commissioner (now NSW Trustee) be
appointed manager of her
In relation to the
appointment of professionals as attorneys under enduring powers of attorney he
stated, in particular, that:
In any event I think a professional person who becomes an attorney is put in a
very difficult or even impossible
In Queensland and the Australian Capital Territory the need criterion is
expressed as the needs of the incapable person not being
met without the
appointment of an
administrator.
Nevertheless,
the same considerations that lead a tribunal or court to be satisfied as to the
need for an administration order in
the other States and the Northern Territory
seem to be relevant in Queensland at least. There, in a 2003 case, the tribunal
is now QCAT was satisfied that there was a need to appoint an administrator
for the person the hearing was about because without
an appointment his needs
would not have been adequately met and his interests not adequately protected.
The medical evidence showed
that he was unable to manage his own finances. There
were concerns “that other people could take advantage of [the person]
they got hold of his details” and there was a substantial debt owing on
his car that had to be
8. 11. 8. The best interests
There is a “best interests” or “interests” criterion
to be met before an administration order is made in all
the Australian
Australia the best interests criterion is found in the principles of the
Guardianship and Administration Act 1990
In a 1986 case involving a young man blinded and significantly brain damaged
in a motor vehicle accident the question was whether
to appoint as financial
managers of his estate the parents and carers or to commit his estate to the
management of the then Protective
Commissioner. Citing English and New South
Wales cases as authority, Powell J said:
It is … a commonplace that questions arising for determination in the
Protective Division of the Court are determined solely
by reference to the
interests of the particular defendant, the Court's overriding duty being to
ensure that that defendant's estate
is so managed as to serve that defendant's
Young J has taken the view that the consideration of “best
interests” in relation to administration orders must include
taking into
account the welfare, health and well-being, in a wide sense, of the person the
hearing is about. Also, what is in their
interests means what is for their
personal benefit and not for the benefit of their family or friends or
8. 11. 9. Onus of proof
In the courts the onus of proof lies on the person applying for the order to
be made, or for it to be
However, if a
tribunal conducting its proceedings in a less formal manner, taking a more
inquisitorial approach and informing itself
of the matters to be decided in the
manner it thinks fit that is consistent with the requirements of procedural
fairness, it will
be up to the tribunal to be satisfied that the statutory
criteria have been met rather than the applicant having to prove that they
8. 11. 10. Standard of proof
The standard of proof required in both courts and tribunals is on the balance
of probabilities tempered by the effects of the nature
of the application, the
subject-matter of the particular case, the gravity of the matters alleged and
the strength of the evidence.
However, when dealing with applications to revoke administration orders, the
Supreme Court of New South Wales has taken a careful
approach to people awarded
substantial damages for brain injuries who subsequently seek to by free from
administration in order to
spend the money awarded. As Young J pointed out in a
1999 case, the court is always wary when someone awarded damages for permanent
brain damage in a motor vehicle accident case a few years later wishes to take
up the position that, having got those damages they
should now be free to spend
In a 2000 case Young J
noted that a person who wished to show that seven years after the damages
were assessed for head injuries,
things have changed to such an extent that
despite their injuries, they were then able to manage their own affairs bears a
In a 2005 case, Campbell J of the Supreme Court of New South Wales pointed
out that in deciding whether an applicant for revocation
of an administration
order had discharged their onus of establishing that they were capable of
managing their own affairs, it was
legitimate to take into account the
seriousness of their making a mistake which wasted capital. A very important
factor was the extremely
long pension preclusion period, often many decades and
in that case nearly 22 years. Campbell J conceded that any member of the
managing their own affairs is at some risk of making a financial
mistake, but noted that for most members of the community the seriousness
making such a mistake is alleviated by the fact that, even if the mistake is a
very serious one which results in their bankruptcy,
they still have, in many
cases, the capacity to earn a living up to retirement age, and usually, if they
are unable to earn their
living or are past retirement age, they have a right to
support of a rudimentary kind from social
8. 11. 11. Who to appoint as administrator
– a “checklist” of considerations
In the leading New South Wales Court of Appeal case on the appointment and
removal and replacement of administrators, Kirby P noted
that it was
inappropriate for the discretion to appoint or remove administrators to be
confined by rigid rules or even “guidelines”
expressed in general
Nevertheless, he did
suggest, but without limiting the possibility of other applicable
considerations, a checklist of considerations
that might be kept in
It is suggested that these are relevant to all Australian jurisdictions, but
must be read so as not to change or reduce the effect
of any statutory criteria
dealing with the appointment of administrators. The checklist deals with
considerations relevant to the
appointment of both private persons and public
bodies as administrators. It is summarised below as follows:
1. The appointment of an administrator invites the exercise of a discretion
that derives from legislation and must be exercised keeping
in mind the purposes
of the legislation. The exercise of the discretion should not be narrowed to
apply only to certain circumstances
because other discretions were so limited
because of other legislation,
2. An application for the removal of a person validly appointed as a manager
will not invoke the same discretion as the initial appointment
of a manager. It
will normally be necessary for the party seeking a change in the status quo to
show some reason why the court or
tribunal dealing with the matter should do
3. The abiding rule in the exercise of powers under guardianship and
administration legislation is the achievement of best interests
of those for
whom guardianship or administration orders have been made,
4. Where it is shown that a person appointed as manager is incompetent or has
acted in a relevant way improperly or unlawfully, the
court or tribunal may
terminate the appointment and appoint another manager,
5. Ordinarily, a person who would face a conflict of interest and duty would
not be appointed a manager of a person's estate. However,
in some family
situations, inter-related property interests may present such conflicts.
Sometimes they will be more apparent than
real. They do not necessarily present
an absolute bar to appointment as a manager for otherwise this would exclude
from consideration
a range of family members who were in every other way
appropriate,
6. When weighing up the competing advantages of appointing a family member or
the statutory body authorised to act as an administrator,
for example the State
Trustees Ltd in Victoria, the (now NSW Trustee) in New South Wales, the Public
Trustee in Queensland, South
Australia, Tasmania, Western Australia and the
Australian Capital Territory, or the Public Guardian or Public Trustee in the
Territory, to manage the estate of a person incapable of managing their
own financial affairs, the court or tribunal may take the
following into account
as relevant:
(a) the appointment of the public official has the following
advantages:
(i) the manifest independence of the statutory office;
(ii) the advantages of a dispassionate and neutral approach where there
is a potential for family conflict and sharply divided views
concerning the best
interests of the person;
(iii) the expertise of the staff of the statutory body, their
experience in managing estates, the know how accumulated by them over
their impeccable reputation; and
(iv) the security provided to the estate against loss or damage,
(b) the appointment of a family member has the following advantages:
(i) the size and complexity of the estate: in a smaller estate it may
often be appropriate to appoint a family member who will be
entirely familiar
with the assets and liabilities and readily able to manage them with greater
economy and possibly free of cost
to the person. (Public officials are entitled
to and ordinarily do recover their fees.),
(ii) the capacity of the incapable person, to interact with their, so
far that as possible, they may remain in charge of, or at least
influence, the broad directions of the management of the estate,
(iii) the ingredient of love and affection and unquestioning devotion
to the person which an appropriate family member can add to
the task of
management. Whilst the office of manager is, by its definition, concerned with
proprietary and financial matters and
involves the prudent control of the
property and like interests of the protected person, in the nature of things the
manager of the
estate of an incapable person is more likely than a general
trustee or receiver to become involved in decisions which affect that
quality of life. A lifetime knowledge of the person and a devotion to his or her
interest may contribute to that quality.
It may more readily be secured by the
appointment as manager of a family member with the requisite knowledge and
motivation;
(iv) any special features
of the case which may require particular attention, and
(v) any special qualities of the applicants to act as managers will be
7. Different considerations may affect the management of an estate
comprised of few liquid assets when contrasted to one which
enjoys substantial
and regular income. The court or tribunal appointing a manager from the family
of the incapable person, should
satisfy itself that the income and (where
necessary) the capital assets of that person's estate are devoted to the
incapable person's
interests. Especially where the bulk of the estate is made up
of a verdict calculated by reference to the protected person's expectation
life and as compensation for injuries, disabilities, pain and suffering and loss
of the enjoyment of life it is appropriate that
the capital and income should be
expended, as intended, to advance the quality of life of the incapable person
rather than to increase
in due course the assets of their
Kirby J noted that he may have overlooked considerations which would be
relevant to particular cases and then repeated that it was
undesirable that, by
rules or guidelines, the broad discretion of appointment and revocation should
be controlled.
Particularly when dealing with an initial application for an administration
order but also relevant when reviewing an order, dissension
in the family,
provided that the conflict goes beyond “typical family differences”,
can be a reason a public official
may be appointed administrator over a relative
in the best interests of the person the hearing is about. So can the lack of
ability on the part of the relative proposed as administrator. The best
interests of the person the hearing is about remains the
abiding rule and it is
not necessary for the tribunal or court dealing with the matter to expressly
find that the relative proposed
as administrator was deficient in their ability
to act as administrator before moving to appoint a public official or a
non-relative.
In what could be seen as a high-water mark example of the discretion to
replace a manager, in 2000 Hodgson J of the New South Wales
Supreme Court found
that the relationship between the mother and primary carer of a man the
management of whose estate had been committed
to the (now NSW Trustee) had
broken down and could not be restored. This had adverse consequences for the man
and his estate because
his mother could not deal directly with the then
Protective Office. She engaged solicitors to do this, incurring very substantial
costs that were paid out of her son’s estate. Although Hodgson J found no
material breach of duty by the then Protective Commissioner,
he considered that
the history of the particular estate did not suggest that there was any
significant advantage to the man in retaining
the then Protective Commissioner
as manager, rather than appointing a reputable trustee company. Consequently he
replaced the then
Protective Commissioner as manager with a trustee company even
though there was likely to be a small financial disadvantage to the
the possibility that the relationship between the mother and the trustee company
could break down in the future. Hodgson
J considered that on balance, the
advantage in removing a manager outweighed any disadvantage involved in the
appointment of the
In a 2002 case Windeyer J of the New South Wales Supreme Court followed
Hodgson J’s approach, and replaced the then Protective
Commissioner as
manager with a trustee
He pointed out that
it was not his intention to decide that an order for a change of managers was
justified by annoyance or minor
complaint or even a justified complaint. He
noted that such matters were often able to be dealt with by the Court giving
under the now
NSW Trustee and Guardian Act 2009
Windeyer J also
noted that for general management of the estate of a sometimes difficult person,
the long experience of the (now
NSW Trustee) is
There were three matters that led him to change managers. The first was the
lack of continuity of managers in the Office of the then
Protective Commissioner
which causes distress when relationships are built up and then severed without
consideration of the effect
on the person whose affairs are under management and
their family or others who are providing services or support to them. The second
was that the trustee company’s financial plan was likely to be more
beneficial to the person whose affairs were under management
than the then
Protective Commissioner’s financial plan. The third matter was the
uncertainty of the fees to be charged by the
then Protective
Commissioner.
matter has been resolved since Windeyer J’s decision. There is a cap on
the fees that the NSW Trustee may charge,
but she may charge fees for specific
8. 11. 12. Appointing private
In a 2000 case, Young J of the New South Wales Supreme Court pointed out
[I]f a responsible member of the incapable person's family, with the consent of
other members of the family and particularly when
joined with a person with
financial expertise, seeks to be the manager, such an order will, at least at
present, usually be made
almost as of
Nevertheless, before a court or tribunal may appoint them as an
administrator, it has to be satisfied that they are a “suitable
person”. In the same case the Young J said:
In the case of a relative, the Court must look to see that there are minimal
conflicts of interest, or, if conflicts of interest
cannot be avoided, that they
are properly dealt with. In the case of a private manager who purports to have
financial expertise,
the Court needs to be satisfied not only of that person's
good fame and character and of his or her ability generally to manage funds,
also that that person has a good conception as to what is required of a fund
another case he also decided in 2000, Young J was more specific about what a
court or tribunal considering appointing a private
manager had to be satisfied
the court or tribunal
had to be satisfied that:
1. any “so called” financial expert has, in fact, expertise to
allow him or her to assist the incapable person in the
circumstances of the
particular case; and
2. any relative has either no conflicts of interest or, alternatively, the
conflicts of interest are able to be handled by appropriate
guidelines from the
(now NSW Trustee).
Young J also noted that there would always be some conflict arising in the
management of the estates of incapable people. Some of
these may be benign
conflicts as shown in the English case
Other potential
conflicts can arise from deciding whether small donations should be made to
charities or whether gifts should be
made to relatives for Christmas and things
of that nature. Young J noted that most of those can be dealt with sensibly by
of the (Supreme Court or now NSW Trustee) or by management plans
developed by the (now NSW Trustee) where the Guardianship Tribunal
financial management order.
Young J also noted that while it was “most acceptable” that a
parent who is the financial manager of a person who cannot
manage their own
affairs lives in the same house as their adult child rent free, care needs to be
taken that the manager is not receiving
a substantial benefit at the expense of
the incapable person.
potential conflicts of interest or conflicts within families do not prevent the
appointment of a family member as administrator
while others make the
appointment of an independent public official as administrator essential. It
depends on the facts in each
For the assistance of financial managers generally, Young J also noted the
Supreme Court “does not countenance” people
obtaining damages on the
basis that certain improvements to their house are absolutely necessary and then
not substantially carrying
out those improvements with the verdict money they
8. 11. 13. Effect of administration
As stated in the
, the common law position on the effect of
an administration order made by a court or tribunal is that the power of a
person whose
financial affairs are placed under administration (a protected
person) to deal with their estate is suspended, for the duration of
in relation to so much of that estate as is placed under management of those
appointed to administer it.
For a discussion of the effect of administration orders on the right of the
person whose estate is under management to deal with
that estate is dealt with
in Chapter 3. 3. 5. 3.
The estate of the person does not vest in the administrator. It remains the
property of the person the administration order is about.
This is the position
established in the common law, but it is specifically referred to in the
legislation of some of the States and
Territories.
8. 11. 14. Functions and powers of
administrators
8. 11. 14. 1. Does the administrator have all the functions and powers
that the person whose estate they are administering would have
if they were
In Queensland, unless the terms of their appointments limit them,
administrators are authorised to do anything in relation to the
estate they have
been appointed to administer that the person whose estate it is could have done
if they had capacity.
In New South Wales, the NSW Trustee may do all these things if appointed
financial manager (administrator), subject to any limiting
directions given to
her by the Supreme Court in relation to a particular
However, a private
financial manager, as already noted at 8. 3. 11 above, has only those functions
and powers given then in an order
The Supreme Court
may also make such orders.
In the Australian Capital Territory, ACAT may give a person’s manager
all the powers the person with impaired decision-making
capacity would have in
relation to their property if they were
It is suggested that subject to any specific limitations in the legislation
of the other States or the Northern Territory, administrators
automatically have, or may be given, by the relevant, tribunal, court or other
authority any functions or powers the person
whose financial affairs are under
management would have in relation to their property either real or personal.
These functions and
powers are set out in relation to some of the States and
Territories in 8. 3. above, but the next section sets out the functions,
and requirements of administrators that apply in Queensland. It is suggested
that they are at least guidelines to administrators
in the other States and the
two Territories as to their functions and powers and as to how they should
operate as administrators.
8. 11. 14. 2.
The functions and powers and requirements/obligations
of administrators
For the assistance of family members and friends who are appointed as
administrators in Queensland,
Guardianship and Administration Act
sets out a series of powers, functions and requirements of
administrators.
As noted in
the last section, it is suggested that these apply equally to administrators,
financial managers and managers appointed
in the other States and Territories of
Australia. These are set out below.
Administrators must apply the general principles of the legislation under
which they are appointed.
Administrators must exercise their powers and functions honestly and with
reasonable diligence in order to protect the interests of
the person whose
estate they have been appointed to
administer.
They must also
exercise their powers as required by the terms of the order appointing
Administrators should avoid entering into transactions which would result in
a conflict between the duty they owe as an administrator
towards the person
whose estate they have been appointed to administer and:
1. their own interests, or
2. the interests of those with whom they have a close personal or business
relationship, or
3. another duty they have as the person’s
administrator.
An example of this is the administrator buying the car of the person whose
estate they have been appointed to administer. Administrators
should enter into
such transactions only if authorised to do so by the tribunal or other body (in
New South Wales the NSW Trustee)
supervising their administration.
Where two or more persons are appointed as administrators of the estate of an
incapable person, they should consult with one another
regularly to ensure that
the interests of the person whose estate they have been appointed to administer
are not prejudiced by a
breakdown in communication between
Because of this
possibility, where there is conflict in a family relating to a person for whom
an administration order is being made,
careful consideration should be given
before appointing as joint administrators those family members who are in
conflict with one
another or who may become so as they are representatives of
differing factions within a family. This is particularly so in those
Territories in which the joint managers “must concur in every act, matter
or thing done in relation to the estate
In Queensland administrators have a right to all the information the person
whose estate they have been appointed to administer would
have been entitled to
if they had capacity and which is necessary for the administrator to have in
order to make an informed exercise
of the particular powers they have as
administrators. Also, if an administrator requests such information, a person
who has custody
or control of that information must give it to the
administrator, unless the person has a reasonable excuse for not doing
Furthermore, if the person who has custody or control of the information
not give it to the administrator, the administrator may apply to QCAT for an
order that the person give the information to the administrator.
If QCAT makes
such an order the person must give the information to the administrator unless
they have a reasonable excuse for not
doing so. A person has a reasonable excuse
if giving the information might tend to incriminate them. This provision
specifically
overrides any restriction, in legislation or the common law, about
the disclosure or confidentiality of information; and any claim
confidentiality or privilege, including a claim based on legal professional
The privacy legislation of the Commonwealth and some of the other States and
Territories, is sometimes relied upon to deny administrators
(and guardians)
information they need to make the decisions they are authorised to make under
the terms of their appointments. This
is not the purpose of such legislation,
but its drafting is usually complicated and its administration so conducted that
substitute decision-makers are sometimes denied necessary information
with outcomes that contradict the intended effect of the modern
guardianship and
administration legislation.
The Queensland legislation also provides that where it is necessary or
convenient for the exercise of power given to an administrator,
they may execute
an instrument with their own signature or, if sealing is required or seal; and
do any other thing in their own name,
provided that they execute the instrument
in such a way that shows that they executed it as
administrator.
Consistent with this approach, if an administrator is empowered to do a
thing, they have the power to execute a deed to do the
Private administrators are entitled to reimbursement from the estate of the
person whose estate they have been appointed to administer
for any reasonable
expenses they incur while acting as administrator, while those who carry on
businesses as administrators, trustee
companies and Public Trustees are entitled
to remuneration for the provision of their
Administrators must keep records that are reasonable in the circumstances and
be able to produce them to their supervising authorities
when asked to do
There are different rules
in each State and Territory about the kinds of records administrators must keep
and when they have to present
them. However, administrators need to be able to
show how they have been managing the estate they have been made responsible for.
Even if the estate is that of a close relative or of a family member who has
never been able to manage their own affairs, the estate
remains the property of
that person. It does not become the property of the administrator. They have no
legal or equitable interest
in the property, only the obligation to manage it in
the best interests of the person the administration order is about. This is
administrators must keep the estate property separate from their own property,
unless the administrator owns the property jointly
with the person the
administration order is
Administrators may invest money from the estate they are administering but
only in investments that a trustee investing under trustee
legislation may
invest in. However, they may continue the existing investments of the person
whose estate they are managing and taking
up rights to issues of new shares, or
options for new shares, arising from existing
shareholding.
In some States
and Territories they may obtain approval to invest outside the ambit of the
trustee legislation.
Administrators may give gifts from the estates they are managing but usually
only if the gift or donation of the nature the person
whose estate is being
managed made when they had capacity or was a gift or donation of the nature the
person might reasonably be
expected to make and the gift’s value is not
more than what is reasonable having regard to all the circumstances,
particularly
the person’s financial
circumstances.
Administrators may provide from the estates they are managing for the needs
of the dependants of those whose estates they are managing.
However, what is
provided must not be more than what is reasonable having regard to all the
circumstances, particularly the financial
circumstances of those whose estates
they are managing.
It is well settled that where a person does not have the capacity to marry,
no court or tribunal or substitute decision-maker such
as an administrator or
guardian can consent to marriage on behalf of an adult who lacks the capacity to
However, the
question has arisen as to whether an administrator may commence proceedings on
behalf of the person whose estate they
are managing to dissolve a marriage or
have it declared void or seek a property settlement or a legal
separation.
This matter is
discussed in Chapter 2. 5 and 2. 6.
The role of the administrator comes to an end at the death of the person
whose estate they are managing and their affairs are then
administered by their
executor or by anyone else authorised by the relevant Supreme Court to manage
their estate.
However in some
States, the administrator has some leeway to continue to act after
8. 11. 14. 3. Administrators for legal proceedings
In Western Australia, WASAT may make plenary administration orders or orders
limited to specific functions. In 2001 the then Guardianship
and Administration
Board of Western Australia noted:
If the only issue is the conduct of litigation which is either underway or
contemplated, the usual order of the Board is to appoint
a limited administrator
with the authority to conduct legal proceedings on behalf of the represented
person (the person the hearing
For those States and the Australian Capital Territory
where it is possible to appoint an administrator for the purpose of conducting
or defending litigation on behalf of an incapable person, the recent
consideration of capacity to litigate by English judges may
be useful. The
settled view in England is that the question of capacity to litigate is not
something to be determined in the abstract.
The focus has to be on the
particular piece of litigation in relation to which the question of capacity
arises. The question is always
whether the person has capacity to litigate in
relation to the particular proceedings in which they are
The issue is addressed by asking three questions:
1. does the litigant have the mental ability to recognise the problem,
2. can the litigant obtain and receive, understand and retain relevant
information, including advice, and
3. can the litigant weigh the information (including that derived from
advice) in the balance in reaching a
In a 2002 case Chadwick LJ rejected the submission that
a person who was incapable of taking investment decisions in relation to a
sum received as compensation would be held, for that reason, to be incapable of
pursuing a claim for that compensation. He
accepted that capacity to pursue a
claim required capacity to take a decision to compromise that claim and that
that capacity to
compromise required an understanding of what the effects of a
compromise would be. To be capable of litigating the person would have
understand that the compensation monies would have to be dealt with so as to
provide for the future. But the person would not
have to have an understanding
of how that would be
In New South Wales, if the estate of an incapable person has already been
committed to the management of the NSW Trustee, she may
bring or defend legal
actions in any court or tribunal in New South Wales on behalf of the person
whose estate the order is
If a private person
has been appointed as the manager of an incapable person’s estate, the NSW
Trustee may authorise the manager
to bring or defend legal actions in any court
or tribunal in New South Wales on behalf of the person whose estate the order is
Now that the New South Wales Guardianship Tribunal has an unencumbered
discretion to exclude specified parts of an estate from the
administration
order, it may be able to make an order limited to the administrator bringing or
defending legal actions in courts
or other tribunals
Nevertheless, the practice
of applying to the court or tribunal in which the litigation is to be commenced
or is already under way
to appoint another person to commence or defend legal
action brought by or against the incapable person as the incapable
tutor, next friend or litigation guardian may be continued.
8. 11. 14. 4. Payments for past care given gratuitously
In a 2004 case in the New South Wales Court of Appeal, McColl JA noted that
the decisions made by judges applying the common law were
founded on the
proposition that the courts exercised their protective jurisdiction to manage an
incapable person’s estate for
the benefit of that person, but took
“a large and liberal” view of what that benefit was and that it
included not only
what may benefit the incapable person directly, but what that
person “as a right-minded and honourable” would desire
Consequently, payments for past gratuitous care could be made, where
appropriate, in the exercise of the court’s inherent
in the exercise of its statutory
8. 11. 15. Reviews of administration
The courts and tribunal empowered to make administration orders in the
various States and Territories also have the power to review
such orders and,
and where they are provided, apply the statutory criteria that are set out for
dealing with those matters. They
will also apply the common law that has not
been replaced by or rendered inappropriate by the legislation they operate
While some administration orders are revoked on review, in most cases the
person the order is about remains incapable of managing
their property and
affairs and in need of an administrator for the rest of their lives. Usually an
administration order, once made,
remains the least restrictive way of achieving
the best interests of the person the order is about. As already noted, the
approach applications by those awarded substantial damages for brain
injuries assessed to be permanent to have the administration
orders in relation
to them revoked with a degree of skepticism, particularly if the evidence
indicates a tendency in the person to
spend beyond the ability of their award to
sustain or that the person has had a range of money-making plans and a
disinclination
to take financial
The risk of being unable to obtain income support through the Australian
social security system because of lengthy pension preclusion
periods, is a
particular problem for those who have received substantial awards of damages
based on the likelihood that, because
of their injuries, they would not be able
to obtain or maintain employment. However, treating it as a legitimate matter to
account in deciding whether an applicant for revocation of an
administration order had discharged their onus of establishing that
capable of managing their own affairs, raises the question of paternalism that
concerned Cavanough J of the Supreme Court
of Victoria and Miles CJ of the
Supreme Court of the Australian Capital
As Cavanough J pointed out in the
, there are three separate
and cumulative requirements for making an administration order, the first being
satisfaction by the tribunal
that the person the hearing is about is a person
with a disability.
matter is not proved to the satisfaction of the tribunal deciding the matter,
then the tribunal proceeds no further and
dismisses the application. The
question then becomes, if there is an application to review, rehear or reassess
the order with a view
to revoking it and the evidence satisfies the tribunal
that the person is not currently a person with a disability, does this mean
the tribunal must revoke the order without considering any other matters
including the risks to the person the order applies
to of revoking the
It is suggested that the answer depends on the way the legislation of the
particular State or Territory is framed. In Victoria, if
Cavanough J’s
opinion is applied to applications seeking revocation of an order, the answer
would have to be yes. Tasmania’s
legislation is very similar to that of
Victoria on this matter, so the answer would be yes
Elsewhere in Australia the answer is likely to be no as the determination of
incapacity involves an assessment of both the person’s
disability and the
effect of that disability. In New South Wales the Court or the relevant tribunal
must be satisfied that the person
is capable of managing their own affairs, a
requirement that involves a consideration not only of the person’s
disability but
also the effect of that disability on their capacity to manage
their own affairs.
consideration is required in South Australia and the Australian Capital
In the Northern
Territory, because the definition of intellectual disability requires not only a
disability but also inability to
make reasonable judgments or informed decisions
arising from that disability, the Local Court would have to consider both
before revoking an
The Supreme Court of
the Northern Territory would apply the common law to any application to revoke a
protection order. However,
once the court or tribunal is satisfied that the
person is capable of managing their affairs, it should discharge the
administration
order even though it may appear to have a discretion in the
legislation not to do so.
Young J pointed out in 1999 case involving a woman whose financial affairs were
committed to the then Protective Commissioner
in 1990 as a result of injuries
she received in a motor vehicle accident, whose preclusion period was over and
who wanted to invest
in a noodle business:
There is no room in the legislation for benign paternalism. A person is allowed
to make whatever decision she likes about her property,
good or bad, with happy
or disastrous effect, so long as she is
Western Australia, WASAT may revoke an administration order if it considers that
to do so is necessary in the best interests of
the person the order is
This necessarily
involves a consideration of the consequences of revoking an order. However, if
the person still meets the first
criterion for the making of an order namely
that they still have a mental disability by reason of which they are unable to
make reasonable
judgments about matters relating to all or part of their estate,
then it would be unlikely that WASAT would revoke the order. On
the other hand,
if the evidence showed that either they no longer had a mental disability or
that disability did not prelude them
from making reasonable judgments, then the
foundation requirement for making an order would have disappeared and the
statutory presumption
that the person was capable of managing their affairs
would be in effect.
In Queensland the question does not arise because of the particular processes
QCAT must go through when reviewing an administration
order as a result of a
periodic, own motion or requested review. QCAT is required to revoke the order
at the end of the review unless
it is satisfied that it would have made the
order on a new application. Consequently, at the end of the review it must be
that the person still has “impaired capacity” for one or
more financial matters meaning that the person is not capable
of understanding
the nature and effect of decisions about a financial matter, some financial
matters or all financial matters or
is not capable of freely and voluntarily
making decisions about one or more financial matters before it may renew the
8. 12. The assessment of financial capacity: the
role of the expert
8. 12. 1. Understanding the concept
Financial capacity comprises a broad range of conceptual, pragmatic and
judgmental abilities that distinguish it from more simple
and less cognitively
demanding types of decision-making which are primarily verbally mediated. Its
complexity renders it an “advanced”
or “higher order”
activity of daily living (ADL) compared with basic or household ADLs such as
shopping, housework or
bathing. Notwithstanding the inherent complexity of the
construct, some estates are more complex to manage than others; and, some
are more involved in the management of their own affairs than others. Thus,
financial abilities vary across individuals depending
on their socioeconomic
status, occupational attainment and financial
experience.
Further, even within the financial capacity construct, there may be
partial or limited competency such that a person may be able to
do some things
like write cheques or handle small amounts of money, but not handle more complex
investment and financial decisions.
The expert must understand,
however, that the extent to which the individual’s unique circumstances
are considered by the tribunal
or court rather than a generic concept of dealing
with everyday financial matters of man (i.e. the subjective or the objective
depends on the jurisdiction in which the expert is operating. For a
consideration of the tests developed by the judges see, 8. 11.
5 which deals
with the incapacity criterion.
8. 12. 2. The legal tests
When asked to perform an assessment of a person’s capacity with regards
to administration or financial management, the expert
must direct themselves to
the question of what needs to be proved in their relevant jurisdiction for an
order to be made. The basic
elements of the tests for incapacity in financial
management are disability, incapacity, need and best interests, although these
are required in variable combinations in the different jurisdictions across
Australia. A suggested approach to the assessment of
each of these elements will
be outlined.
8. 12. 2. 1 Disability
Some form of disability must be present for a financial manager to be
appointed in the Victorian, South Australian, Western Australian,
Australian Capital Territory and Northern Territory jurisdictions. While
tribunals in New South Wales and Queensland do
not require demonstration of
disability, provision of this information will usually assist with understanding
the basis of incapacity
Although the crucial
evidence usually relies on an explanation of how the disability impacts on the
person’s ability to manage
their affairs (i.e. the person’s
capacity), an assessment of the nature and severity of the disability is
extremely useful
in placing the capacity issues in context.
A 2006 decision from the Tasmanian Guardianship and Administration Board
illustrated the importance of establishing the type of disability
incapacity. The decision showed that getting into serious financial difficulties
because of drinking and gambling addictions
will not necessarily prove
incapacity and inability to make reasonable financial judgments. In that case
the medical evidence indicated
that any incapacity that the person the hearing
was about had was likely to be due to alcohol use rather than being due to
or brain injury. If the person were to stop drinking altogether, there
it would be likely that there would be very little residual
incapacity and that
the person would “be able to attend to all normal functions at all
disability issue the Board stated:
The Board was not satisfied that when (the person the hearing was about) is
sober, he is a person with a disability; that is the
Board did not receive any
conclusive evidence that (the person) has experienced any absence, loss or
abnormality of mental, psychological,
physiological or anatomical structure or
function. Even if we were satisfied that there may be an underlying depression
stage brain damage, we could not be satisfied that by reason of that
disability he is incapable of making reasonable financial
What sort of disabilities cause absence, loss or abnormality of mental,
psychological, physiological or anatomical structure or function?
varies enormously and may include dementia, head injury, developmental
disability and chronic mental illnesses such as
schizophrenia. Financial
abilities have been shown to be impaired in the early stages of dementia, if not
Mild Cognitive Impairment
(a prodromal phase before the onset of dementia,
characterised by subjective and objective memory loss, normal performance on
cognitive tests and generally preserved activities of daily
As stated previously, common to all jurisdictions in the making of financial
management orders is the requirement that the person
is incapable of making
their own decisions or “reasonable judgments” in regards to
financial matters. How can these
functions be assessed? Billings DP took up the
matter of capacity assessment in the
when it came back to VCAT
for rehearing and, in doing so, noted several important issues addressed here
(a) the limitations of the Mini Mental State Examination(MMSE)in assessing
capacity; and
(b) the relationship between neuropsychological test data and real life
functioning.
8. 12. 3. The assessment of
8. 12. 3. 1. Mental status
Obtaining the person’s psychiatric history and making or obtaining an
assessment of their mental status to exclude symptoms
of mental illness relevant
to financial decision-making such as abnormalities of mood (e.g. depressed or
manic states) and thought
content (e.g. grandiose delusions or grandiosity or
delusions of poverty) is essential to the assessment of financial capacity
8. 12. 3. 2. General cognitive screens
As emphasised by Sullivan, the MMSE, which is a general screening tool, was
not developed to assess
Its use in capacity
assessments is a subject of debate due to its cost effectiveness and substantial
literature base on the one hand,
against its insensitivity, reliance on
education and language skills and its failure to test executive functions on the
In regards to the latter, the MMSE does not adequately assess abilities
crucial to capacity determinations such as the foresight,
planning and task
execution skills necessary to take care of one’s property or to
one’s manage funds.
Not withstanding these limitations, the MMSE can be a useful means of
documenting general cognitive abilities and of estimating the
severity of
cognitive decline. However, it must supplemented by tests of executive or
frontal lobe function (e.g. judgment, planning
and reasoning). Sullivan has
argued persuasively for the need for a two stage capacity assessment involving
an assessment of general
cognitive ability followed by a specific measure of
capacity. There are several reasons for this. They include the relationship
general cognitive abilities such as memory and decision-making ability;
the better documentation, knowledge base and standardisation
of general ability
tests compared with specific measures of capacity; and finally, that a good
general ability assessment may provide
insights into why a person failed a
specific ability test.
8. 12. 3. 3. Neuropsychological testing
Neuropsychological testing is clearly far more comprehensive than
“bedside screening” tests such as the MMSE, in that
incorporates a detailed assessment of attention, memory, language, visuospatial
abilities and most importantly, executive
function. However, like the MMSE,
neuropsychological testing was not developed to assess questions of legal
A commonly cited
shortcoming of even detailed neuropsychological testing is its lack of
ecological validity (i.e. the difficulty
extrapolating from testing to real
life). In the
Billings DP showed insight
into this very issue, acknowledging statements by Crowe that neuropsychological
examinations have moderately
good success in predicting money management ability
and performance on an important component of instrumental activity of daily
in the form of automated machine usage, but may fall down on other
quality of life type issues.
Crowe commented further that the most appropriate way to assess how someone
functions in the real world is to move in with them for
a month and watch how
they cope in their daily lives, while acknowledging the impracticality of such a
What are the neuropsychological correlates of financial abilities? One
proposed model of financial capacity contains three elements:
1. Declarative knowledge – the ability to describe facts, concepts and
events related to financial activities (e.g. knowledge
financial data, interest rates, loans);
2. Procedural knowledge – the ability to carry out motor-based,
overlearned practical skills and routines (e.g. making change,
writing cheques);
3. Judgment – the ability to make financial decisions consistent with
self-interest both in everyday and novel or ambiguous
situations.
It is judgment which is probably most complex and therefore vulnerable to the
effects of neurodegenerative disorder. For example,
in subjects with mild
cognitive impairment (MCI), financial ability correlated with attention and
executive function (i.e. planning,
task initiation and persistence, judgement),
and it is likely that the basis of functional change in MCI may not be amnestic
based on memory), but rather, emergent declines in the abilities to
selectively attend, self monitor and temporally integrate information
(“working memory”), and abstract
This further
emphasises the need to test executive functions and, even more specifically,
conceptual understanding of finances
rather than over-learned, pragmatic cash
transaction skills, which rely on procedural memory (memory for well-learned
routines) which
are often relatively well preserved until later in the course of
neurodegenerative disease.
8. 12. 3. 4. Instruments
The appeal of purpose-built tests of financial capacity is that they measure
the specific competency task we wish to assess, in this
case the ability to
manage financial affairs. A specific instrument to measure financial capacity
has only recently emerged but has
contributed significantly in shedding light on
the nature of the financial capacity construct. The financial capacity
(FCI) is a standardised psychometric instrument based on a conceptual
model of the financial capacity construct which assesses 14
tasks of financial
ability comprising six clinically relevant domains of financial activity,
1. Domain1: Basic Monetary skills
a. Naming coins/currency
b. Coin/currency relationships
c. Counting coins/currency
2. Domain 2: Financial Conceptual knowledge
a. Define financial concepts
b. Apply financial concepts
3. Domain 3: Cash transactions
a. 1-item grocery purchase
b. 3-item grocery purchase
c. Change /vending machine
4. Domain 4: Chequebook management
a. Understand chequebook
b. Use chequebook/register
5. Domain5: Bank statement management
a. Understand bank statement
b. Use bank statement
6. Domain 6: Financial judgment
a. Detect mail fraud risk
b. Detect telephone fraud risk
7. Domain 7; Bill payment
a. Understand bills
b. Prioritize bills
c. Prepare bills for mailing
8. Domain 8:.Knowledge of personal assets/estate arrangements
9. Domain 9: Investment decision making
The instrument yields scores for each domain as well as a total score.
Patients with mild Alzheimer’s disease (AD) performed
significantly below
controls on all domains except Basic Monetary skills, while patients with
moderate AD performed below norms on
Mild Cognitive
Impairment (MCI) participants demonstrated impairments in Financial Conceptual
knowledge, Cash Transactions, Bank
Statement Management and Bill Payment,
although these impairments were mild and may only apply to a subset of patients
Although administering such an instrument in its entirety may be beyond the
scope of a standard capacity assessment, many of the tasks
can be useful to
guide the clinician in devising questions which might specifically test
financial capacity (see below).
8. 12. 3. 5. Need and best interests
As previously stated, tribunals or courts in New South Wales, Victoria,
Tasmania and Western Australia, have to be satisfied that
the person the hearing
is about is in need of another person to manage their financial affairs before
it may make an administration
order in relation to that
Further, New South
Wales, Victoria, Tasmania, and Queensland have a “best interests” or
“interests” criterion
to be met before an administration order is
Sometimes health
professionals will be able to provide evidence as to need or best interests,
depending on how well they know the
patient and their social milieu and
functioning. It is sometimes useful to consider such issues in terms of the risk
or consequences
of not making an order. For example, is the person not meeting
their everyday needs? Are alternative informal arrangements with regards
management of affairs working? Is the person being exploited financially?
8. 12. 4. Report writing
A suggested outline for medicolegal report relating to financial management
is outlined in BOX 8.12.14:
A suggested outline for medicolegal report relating to financial management
is outlined in BOX 8.12.14:
Suggested outline for report writing for assessment of ability to manage
financial affairs
: An outline of the health care professional’s
background or expertise that they are bringing to the assessment
Is there a diagnosis or disability?
If so, provide basis for
that diagnosis (i.e. psychiatric history, results of mental status examination
and cognitive assessment,
and/or results of neuropsychological testing). Why, as
a result of that diagnosis might the person be incapable (e.g. frontal
lobe/decision
making/planning/judgement, calculation, overspending, delusions of
poverty or grandiosity)?
An estimate of the severity of the
disability/intellectual disorder
Specific testing of financial capacity:
Does the person know
their assets? Can they read a bank statement? Can they use a chequebook? Can
they identify currency and its relative
value? May use the Financial Capacity
Instrument (8.12.3.d) as a guide to ensure all domains are covered such as Basic
skills, Financial Conceptual knowledge, Cash transactions, Chequebook
management, Bank statement management, Financial judgment,
Bill payment,
Knowledge of personal assets/estate arrangements, Investment Decision making [NB
Need some corroborative information
regarding assets to check veracity of
responses.]
Need and/or best interests
Is there a need or is it in the
best interests of the person – depending on the jurisdiction (e.g. Can
they afford food? Do
they pay crucial bills such as rent, electricity, water
rates or a crucial accommodation bond)? Are they at risk of exploitation
dissipation of the estate by others? If they are unfamiliar with their financial
affairs or have never managed their own affairs,
have they made appropriate
alternative arrangements for the management of their estate? Is there an
alternative or informal arrangement
already in place (e.g. a family member
looking after their affairs, a Power of Attorney, an accountant)?
Aged and Infirm
Persons’ Property Act
, ss 11 and 12.
Gardner; re BWV
, [99], 7 VR 487.
For the Supreme Court see,
NSW Trustee and Guardian Act
; for the Guardianship
Tribunal see,
Guardianship Act
and for the Mental
Health Review Tribunal see
Mental Health Act
NSW Trustee and Guardian Act
Guardianship Act
Courts and Crimes
Legislation Further Amendment Act 2008
Sch 16 and the Second
Reading Speech relating to the bill for that
, Hansard Transcript (
NSW), Legislative Council, 27 November 2008, Second Reading , 6.
XC v Protective
Commissioner
[2006] NSWADTAP 64.
Guardianship Act
Uniform Civil Procedure
Porter, B and Robinson, M,
Protected Persons and their Property in New South Wales
, Sydney, Law Book
Company, 1987, 41-42. As an example of an application by a
“stranger” see,
In the Matter of an Alleged Incapable Person
(1959) 77 W.N. (NSW) 156.
Ibid. s 59.
and 67A and
Administrative Decisions Tribunal Act
s 67(2A), (2B)
Guardianship Act
Ibid. s 57A.
Uniform Civil Procedure
Guardianship Act 1987
NSW Trustee and Guardian
Uniform Civil Procedure
NSW Trustee and Guardian Act
and (3). See also Porter and Robinson op cit (footnote 12),
Guardianship Act
(Guardianship Tribunal) and
NSW Trustee and Guardian
(Supreme Court).
Uniform Civil Procedure
and Porter and Robinson op cit (footnote
12), 46-47.
Holt v Protective
Commissioner
(1993) 31 NSWLR 227
[2000] NSWSC 886
Young J said: “The authorities show that if one can have members of the
family manage an incapable person’s estate
then that is often the
preferred course”. However, the court or tribunal appointing the private
manager has to be satisfied
as to other matters. See 8. 11. 13 and 14.
Holt v Protective
Commissioner
(1993) 31 NSWLR 227
See 8. 11. 13.
SH v Protective
Commissioner
[2006] NSWADTAP 4
[25]. The Tribunal on the other hand has
considered that it has a complete discretion to appoint either a private manager
Protective Commissioner under the “abiding rule” of achieving
the best interests of the person whose estate is to be
placed under management.
Matter no 2003/2438
(unreported, Guardianship Tribunal, 16 December
Guardianship Act
For an example of this becoming apparent during the course of an
administration order see,
Matter no. 92/0799
(unreported, Guardianship
Board (Tribunal), 10 April 1992).
Guardianship Act
s 25H(1)and
s 25H(2)(b).
s 25H(2)(a).
Powers of Attorney Act 2003
Ibid. s 25H(3). For an
example of an interim order resolving the problem and overcoming the need for a
final order see,
Matter no. 92/1808
(unreported Guardianship Board
(Tribunal), 22 July 1992).
Ridgeway v Darwin
[1802] EngR 423
(1802) 32 ER 275
[1999] NSWSC
[15]. See also,
(unreported, NSW Supreme Court, Powell J, 12
August 1992).
Mental Health Act
The following statement is
set out under the heading, “What happens at a mental health
inquiry?” in Schedule 3 of the
Mental Health Act 2007
If Mental Health Review Tribunal makes an order that you are to remain in a
mental health facility as an involuntary patient, Mental
Health Review Tribunal
must also consider whether you are capable of managing your financial affairs.
If Mental Health Review Tribunal
is not satisfied that you are capable, an order
must be made for the management of your affairs under the
NSW Trustee and
Guardian Act 2009
Note that under
the Mental Health Review Tribunal has to be
satisfied that a patient is not capable of managing their (financial) affairs
a management order may be made in relation to them. See
Schedule 2 Item 2;
Mental Health Regulations
7 and Form 2.
Mental Health Act
and Schedule 2. The term “primary
carer” is defined in
of that Act.
Mental Health Act
The term “close
friend or relative” of a person means a friend or relative who maintains
both a close personal relationship
with the person through frequent personal
support to the
person wholly or substantially on a commercial basis. See,
Mental Health Act
NSW Trustee and Guardian
A patient is
formally defined as a person who is admitted to a mental health facility in
accordance with the
Mental Health Act 2007
and who is in the
facility following the person’s admission. The definition includes a
person so admitted while they are absent
from the facility either with or
without leave of absence. See,
Mental Health Act 2007
NSW Trustee and Guardian Act
NSW Trustee and Guardian
Guardianship Act
s 25M(2)(a).
NSW Trustee and Guardian
Guardianship Act
NSW Trustee and Guardian
(1993) 30 NSWLR 417
437-439 and Kirby P 430-432.
Guardianship Act
s 25N(4)(a).
ss 25N(4)(b)
NSW Trustee and Guardian
Porter and Robinson op cit
(footnote 13), 57-58.
Interpretation Act
Ibid. s 90.
Ibid. s 90(2).
Guardianship Act
and (7) (parties and 57A (Tribunal joining parties).
NSW Trustee and Guardian
Holt v Protective
Commissioner
(1993) 31 NSWLR 227
(siblings of the person);
Protective Commissioner
[2000] NSWSC 717
50 NSWLR 24
(mother and primary carer of the
person) and
Application of J and K
[2009] NSWSC 1453
(father and sister).
For a case in which two
members were satisfied that the person was now capable of managing their affairs
and one member was not see,
Matter no. 2000/5600
(unreported NSW
Guardianship Tribunal, 15 May 2001).
Ibid. s 25P
Ibid. s 25U(2).
Ibid. s 25U(4).
Holt v Protective
Commissioner
(1993) 31 NSWLR 227
KW v Protective Commissioner
[2008] NSWADTAP 5.
Ibid. s 25U(3). For an
example of the Tribunal dealing with an application to replace a manager see,
Matter no 95/1860
(unreported, NSW Guardianship Board, 27 September
Ibid. s 25Q(2).
(unreported, NSW Guardianship Tribunal, 27 May 2002).
NSW Trustee and
Guardian Act
Interpretation Act
Holt v Protective Commissioner
(1993) 31 NSWLR
See 8. 11. 13.
Ibid. s 25Q(3) and
Guardianship and
Administration Act
Public Trustee Act
which provides that on the application of the Public
Trustee, the Supreme Court may make a protection order appointing the Public
Trustee to take possession of, control and manage all or part of the estate of a
person who is under 18 years and who the Court is
satisfied is:
1. by reason of age, disease, illness, or physical or mental infirmity or of
their taking or using in excess alcoholic liquors, or
any intoxicating,
stimulating, narcotic, sedative or other drug,
2. either continuously or intermittently,
3. unable, wholly or partially, to manage their affairs; or subject to, or
liable to be subjected to, undue influence in respect of
the their estate or
part of it, or
4. is otherwise in a position which in the opinion of the Court renders it
necessary in the interest of that person or of those dependent
upon the person
that the person’s property should be protected.
See Ch 6. 7. 2 and 6. 7.
Guardianship and
Administration Act
See also, Ch
Ibid. Schedule 4.
Ibid. Sch 2.
Guardianship and
Administration Act
s 14(1)(b)(i).
If the proposed
administrator has been a bankrupt or has taken advantage of the laws of
bankruptcy as a debtor under the
Bankruptcy Act
similar law of a foreign jurisdiction, then the Tribunal must have regard to the
matters set out in
in considering the competence of that person for
appointment and the appropriateness of appointing them. For an example of a case
in which it was necessary to appoint the Public Trustee as administrator and not
a family member see,
[2003] QGAAT 23.
Ibid. s 14(1)(b)(ii).
For a case showing the criteria the Tribunal used to choose between the Public
Trustee and a trustee company
as administrator see,
[2001] QGAAT
Guardianship and
Administration Act
Presidential Direction
No 2 of 2005.
Guardianship and
Administration Act
example see,
[2004] QGAAT 11[8].
For some examples see,
[2006] QGAAT 84
[2004] QGAAT 5.
For an example see,
Adam v Hardy
[2007] SASC 277.
District Court Act
Aged and Infirm
Persons’ Property Act
Guardianship and
Administration Act
. See, Ch 8. 6. 2.
Guardianship and
Administration Act
. For an example of a case in
which the Board failed to take into account at least some of the
Williams v Guardianship Board
[1999] SADC 25.
ss 35(4)(a)
Ibid. s 14(7).
Aged and Infirm
Persons’ Property Act 1940
The terms “near
relation” and “blood relation” are not defined in the Act nor
Interpretation Act
1915 (SA)..
Aged and Infirm
Persons’ Property Act
s 8A(1)(c).
Guardianship and
Administration Act
Aged and Infirm
Persons’ Property Act
Note that where there is more than
one manager they must all concur in every act,
matter, and thing done in relation to the protected estate. See
example of an application to rescind an order see,
Porker v Porker
Guardianship and
Administration Act
an example,
Wescombe v Guardianship Board
[1997] SADC 3609.
www.opa.sa.gov.au.
Guardianship and
Administration Act
Contrast the terms of
with those of
Guardianship and
Administration Act 1995
For a description of the
Board appointing the Public Trustee as administrator see,
KB and RB v
Guardianship and Administration Board
[2007] TASSC 45.
Acts Interpretation
Act 1931(Tas)
Guardianship and
Administration Act
Guardianship and
Administration Act
JMP (Admin Review) 21.
www.guardianship.tas.gov.au
Gardner; re BWV
[2003] VSC 173
, [99], 7 VR 487.
Trustees Ltd
[2006] VSC 444
Guardianship and
Administration Act
Ibid. s 43(2).
Ibid. s 43(3). However,
note that it is not necessary to nominate a proposed administrator. VCAT will
decide who is to be the administrator
if it determines that an administrator
should be appointed.
Victorian Civil and
Administrative Tribunal Act 1998
Guardianship and
Administration Act
s 44(a). The “nearest relative:
of the person is their spouse or domestic partner or, where they do not have a
spouse or domestic
partner, the first listed relative in list below who is
18 years or older. If there are of two or more relatives at the same level
then the elder or eldest: (a) son or daughter; (b) father or mother; (c) brother
or sister; (d) grandfather or grandmother; (e) grandson
or granddaughter; (f)
uncle or aunt; (g) nephew or niece, see ibid. s 3. The nearest relative
available is the nearest relative available
to take part in the proceedings.
The primary carer of the
person is the person who is primarily responsible for providing support or care
to the person, see ibid.
Ibid. s 44.
Ibid. s 46(1) and
XYZ v State Trustees
[2006] VSC 444
, [44]-[45]
Guardianship and
Administration Act
Ibid. s 46(4).
The relevant common law
is discussed below at 8. 11. 11 and 8. 11. 12..
Where a parent or nearest
relative of person the hearing is about is proposed as the administrator, that
person is not, by virtue
only of the fact that they are the person’s
parent or nearest relative, to be taken to be in a position where their
conflict or may conflict with those of the person the hearing is
Guardianship and Administration Act
Guardianship and
Administration Act
s 47(1)(c).
Ibid. s 47(1)(c)(iv).
Ibid. s 47(2).
Ibid. s 23(5).
For a Victorian example
FF and IF (Guardianship)
[2007] VCAT 1298.
GM (Guardianship)
[2007] VCAT 1313.
Guardianship and
Administration Act
Ibid. s 52(1).
Ibid. s 59.
Ibid. s 33(2).
Ibid. s 33(3).
Ibid. s 55(4A).
Ibid. s 55(1). See,
(Guardianship)
[2007] VCAT 2486
GM (Guardianship)
Ibid. s 55(4).
Ibid. s 55(2).
Ibid. s 56.
Ibid. s 54.
Ibid. s 58(1).
Ibid. s 58(2C),(3) and
Ibid. s 48(1). Those
powers and duties are found in ss 49 to 58 of the
Guardianship and
Administration Act
. They are discussed in the paragraphs
immediately below in 8. 7. 9. 1. A more general discussion of the powers and
duties of administrators
is found in 8. 11. 14.
Ibid. s 48(1). Those
powers and duties, found in ss 58B to 58G, are set out below in 8. 7. 9. 1.
This matter is taken
seriously by VCAT and will be considered when it is reassessing administration
orders. See for example,
PL (Guardianship)
[2007] VCAT 2458.
Ibid. s 49.
Ibid. s 58.
Ibid. s 50.
Ibid. s 55.
Ibid. s 50A(1).
Ibid. s 50A(2).
Ibid. s 50A(3).
Ibid. s 51(1)(a) and (b).
For the powers of the State Trustees as an administrator, not set out in the
Guardianship and Administration Act
Trustees (State Owned Company) Act
Ibid.s 51(1)(c). See also
Ibid. s 58(2).
Ibid. s 58(2A).
Ibid. s 58(2B).
Ibid. s 48(1).
Ibid. s 58B.
Ibid. s 48(1).
Ibid. s 58B(2).
Ibid. s 58B(3).
Ibid. s 58C. These are
complex matters in relation to which an administrator should obtain expert legal
advice before exercising
any discretion on behalf of the person whose estate
they are administering.
Ibid. s 58G.
See VCAT website,
www.vcat.vic.gov.au.
Ibid. s 53.
Ibid. s 52(1).
Ibid. s 52(3).
Ibid. s 60A(1) and (6).
For an example of an application for a rehearing in a guardianship matter see,
Public Advocate v RCS
[2004] VCAT 1880.
Ibid s 60A(1) and(3).
Ibid. s 60A(2).
Ibid. s 60A(4).
Ibid. s 60A.
Ibid. s 60(2).
Ibid. s 61.
Ibid. s 61(1).
Ibid. s 61(2).
Ibid. s 62(1).
Ibid. s 62(1)(a). The
“nearest relative: of the person is their spouse or domestic partner or,
where they do not have a spouse
or domestic partner, the first listed relative
in list below who is 18 years or older. If there are of two or more
relatives at the
same level then the elder or eldest: (a) son or daughter; (b)
father or mother; (c) brother or sister; (d) grandfather or grandmother;
grandson or granddaughter; (f) uncle or aunt; (g) nephew or niece, see ibid.
The primary carer of the
person is the person who is primarily responsible for providing support or care
to the person, see ibid.
Ibid. s 62(2A).
Ibid. s 63. For an
example of a reassessment of an administration order see,
[2006] VCAT
Guardianship and
Administration Act
[9] and [10],
(2001) 28 SR (WA) 333
Rowell v Calder
[2007] WASC 23.
Ibid 64(1)(c)and(d).
s 64(3)(a).
s 68(1)(a).
68(1)(c)and(d).
68(1)(c)and(d).
(1)(b)and(3).
While the Public Trustee
is defined as a corporate trustee in
Guardianship and
Administration Act
, it is not a trustee company under the
Trustee Companies Act 1987
. Consequently, the provisions of
Guardianship and
Administration Act
apply to the Public Trustee. See,
[2007] WASAT 7
[2007] WASAT 7
[66]. See also,
Guardianship and Administration Act
Guardianship and
Administration Act
[15]. See also
[2004] WAGAB 3.
Guardianship and
Administration Act
s 64(1)(d).
See for example,
[2001] WAGAB 1
GM (Guardianship)
[2007] VCAT 1658.
The Tribunal may authorise an administrator to perform any function specified in
the order appointing them including any
function set out in Part A of Schedule 2
Guardianship and Administration Act
See for example,
[2006] WASAT 64.
The functions set out in Schedule 2B may be exercised by an administrator but
only if directed to do so by a Tribunal order.
Guardianship and Administration Regulations
Guardianship and
Administration Act
Guardianship and Administration Regulations
Guardianship and
Administration Act
example of a private administrator being replaced by the Public Trustee on a
periodic review see,
(1999) 24 SR (WA) 173.
Supreme Court Act
See also, Chapter 8. 9. 1.),
A v Guardianship and
Management of Property Tribunal
[1999] ACTSC 77
, [69]-[70] and
Trustee v Thompson
[2000] ACTSC 4.
Supreme Court Act
Guardianship and
Management of Property Act
ss 8 and 8A.
Ibid. s 8C.
Guardianship and
Management of Property Act
A v Guardianship and
Management of Property Tribunal
[1999] ACTSC 77
, [60]-[61]. See also,
Guardianship and Administration Act
Guardianship and Administration Act
Guardianship and Administration Act
Guardianship and
Management of Property Act
“carer” is defined in the
Guardianship and Management of Property
Guardianship Act 1987
Guardianship and
Management of Property Act
David by her Tutor
the Protective Commissioner v David
(1993) 30 NSWLR 417.
Guardianship and
Management of Property Act
clause 6 of the
Guardianship and administration of Property Regulation
Ibid. s 8(2).
Ibid. ss 13 and 23.
Ibid. s 20.
Guardianship and
Management of Property Act
common law.
common law.
www.acat.act.gov.au.
clause 6 of the
Guardianship and Administration of Property Regulation
Guardianship and
Management of Property Act 1991(ACT)
Ibid. s 29.
Ibid ss 19(2) and
Ibid s 19(1).
Ibid s 19(3).
Ibid. s 19(1) and
Ibid ss 19(1)and(2) and
Aged and Infirm
Persons’ Property Act 1979 (NT)
ss 5, 11 and 12.
Ibid. s 5(1).
Supreme Court Act
Equity Act 1866-7 (SA)
s 7. See also,
Colmer v O’Brien
(1974) 9 SASR 378
Renehan v Leeuwin
Ocean Adventure Foundation Ltd
[2006] NTSC 28
Infirm Persons’ Property Act 1979 (NT)
Ibid. ss 12(2), 13 and
Adult Guardianship
Act 1988 (NT)
Ibid. s 16(1)(a).
Aged and Infirm
Persons’ Property Act 1979 (NT)
Ibid. s 7(2).
Ibid. s 7(3).
Aged and Infirm
Persons’ Property Act
Ibid. s 12.
Ibid. s 16(1). A list of
the matters that can be included in those terms and conditions are set out in s
Adult Guardianship
s 16(1)(a).
Ibid. s 16(1)(b).
Aged and Infirm
Persons’ Property Act
Ibid. s 19.
Ibid. ss 11, 15,16 and
Adult Guardianship
Act 1988 (NT)
Aged and Infirm
Persons’ Property Act
Adult Guardianship
Aged and Infirm
Persons’ Property Act
ss 17 and 21.
Renehan v Leeuwin
Ocean Adventure Foundation Ltd
[2006] NTSC 28.
Adult Guardianship
s 16(3) and (4).
Aged and Infirm
Persons’ Property Act
David by her Tutor
the Protective Commissioner v David
(1993) 30 NSWLR 417
(1993) 30 NSWLR
Adult Guardianship
Ibid. s 16(2A).
See, 8. 8. 2. 1. and
Aged and Infirm Persons’ Property Act
See 8. 8. 3.
Adult Guardianship
Adult Guardianship
See Ch 8. 8. 8.
XYZ v State Trustee
[2004] NSWSC 444
2 NSWLR 508
(2000) NSWSC 886
[35]-[37]..
[2000] NSWSC 886
Willett v Futcher
[2005] HCA 47
[49] and [51]. See also
Smith v Hanrahan
[2006] WADC 20
SR (WA) 268.
[1846] EngR 163
[1982] 2 NSWLR 700.
, [5]. See also,
[1983] 1 NSWLR 138
Protected Estates Act
(1988) 12 NSWLR 96
Re C (TH) and the
Estates Act
[1999] NSWSC 456.
[1982] 2 NSWLR 700
(unreported, Guardianship Tribunal, 15 February 2000).
(unreported, Guardianship Tribunal, 10 March 2000). This case and
the previous one are in contrast to
Matter No. 2000/909
(unreported,
Guardianship Tribunal, 10 March 2000).
Guardianship and
Administration Act
and Schedule 2
Porter and Robinson op
cit (footnote 10), 40.
Re McGregor
[1985] VicRp 85
[1985] VR 861.
XYZ v State Trustees
[2006] VSC 444
Ibid. [70], [72] and
Ibid. [72].
Guardianship and
Administration Act 1986
McDonald v Guardianship and
Administration Board
[1993] VicRp 36
[1993] 1 VR 521
Guardianship and Administration Board
[1993] VicRp 36
[1993] 1 VR 521
Guardianship and
Administration Act 1986
McDonald v Guardianship and
Administration Board
[1993] VicRp 36
[1993] 1 VR 521
[2007] VCAT
, [47] – [51]. See also his discussion of the degree of capacity
required and capacity assessments [60]-[70].
[1985] VicRp 85
[1985] VR 861.
[2007] VCAT
Ibid. [56]. See also,
Guardianship and Administration Act
Estates Act
(1988) 12 NSWLR 96
EMG v Guardianship
and Administration Board of Victoria
[1999] NSWSC 501
Ibid. [46].
Ibid. [50].
As to the position in
England and Wales see,
Masterman-Lister v Brutton & Co
[2002] EWCA
[18] and [19].
(unreported, NSW Supreme Court, Hodgson J, 13 March 1997) 4, quoted in,
[2005] NSWSC 581
(2005) 221 ALR 589
(unreported, NSW Supreme Court, Young J, 20 March 2000), 7-8.
Guardianship and
Administration Act
Ibid. Schedule, 2
[2006] VSC 444
[2007] VCAT 1196
[13] at www.guardianship.tas.gov.au/decisions.
Ibid. [16].
Guardianship Act 1987
for the Guardianship Tribunal,
Guardianship and
Administration Ac
s 46(1)(a)(iii)
Guardianship and
Administration Act
s 51(1)(3)(c)
Guardianship and
Administration
s 64(1)(b).
XYZ v State Trustees
[2006] VSC 444
, [44]-[45]
Public Trustee v
(1998) 8 Tas SR 256
,265. See also
Guardianship and Administration Act
[2001] WAGAB 2
(2001) 28 SR (WA) 320
Ibid. [54] and [55].
Guardianship and
Administration Act
Guardianship and
Administration Act
[2001] WAGAB 2
(2001) SR (WA) 320
, 330. For an example of this see
13 SR (WA) 21.
[2000] NSWSC
For an example of this
approach being upheld, but expressed in terms of “the least restrictive
alternative” see,
[2010] WASAT 91.
Miner v Anderson
(unreported, Supreme Court of NSW, Cohen J 30 November 1998) BC9807761.
Guardianship and
Administration Act
s 12(1)(c)(i)
Guardianship and Management
of Property Act
s 8(1)(c)(i).
[2003] QGAAT
[48]. For a Western Australian example see,
(1994) 12 SR (WA)
Guardianship Act
in particular (Guardianship
Tribunal), and
Public Trustee and Guardian Act 2009 (NSW)
s 39, s 39(a)
in particular (Supreme Court and Mental Health Review Tribunal);
Guardianship
and Administration Act
Guardianship and
Administration Act
Guardianship and
Administration Act
Aged and Infirm
Persons’ Property Act 1979 (NT)
s 12(1) and the
Guardianship and
Management of Property Act
s 8(1)(c)(ii).
[2010] WASAT 51
, a case in which the wishes of a person with a
longstanding mental illness were overruled because her estate was at significant
and it was in her best interests that the Public Trustee be appointed as
her administrator to negotiate with credit providers and
take steps to protect
her estate.
Aust. Tort Reports 80-042, 67,880, BC8600849, 11.
[2000] NSWSC
[35] and [37].
[2005] NSWSC 581
221 ALR 589.
Briginshaw v
(1938) 60 CLR 366
[2005] NSWSC 581
, [23] (also
reported as Re GHI (a protected person)
[2005] NSWSC 581
(2005) 221 ALR 589.
For a case in which
the standard of proof for the proof of disability was “more likely than
FF and IF (Guardianship)
[2007] VCAT 1298
Re C (TH) and the
Protected Estates Act
[1999] NSWSC 456
(unreported, NSW Supreme Court, 20 March 2000, Young J), 9. See also
[2005] NSWSC 581.
Holt v Protective
Commissioner
(1993) 31 NSWLR 227
Ibid. 241-243. Kirby
J’s guidelines, given in a NSW Court of Appeal case, post-date and
probably supersede the guidelines
that Powell J had noted had grown up to assist
judges to exercise their discretion as to whether to appoint the statutory
of the estates of incapable persons or family members in
(1986) Aust. Tort Reports 80-042, 67,881-67,882, BC8600849, 15-17.
See as examples,
Matter of Hancock
828 S. W. 2d 707
Matter of Benson
S. W. 3d 79
MB v Protective
Commissioner
[2000] NSWSC 717
(2000) 50 NSWLR 24
, [126]-[129].
M v Protective
Commissioner
[2002] 421.
Ibid. [45]. See
Trustee and Guardian Act
Ibid. [46].
Ibid. [43] and [46]
[2000] NSWSC
Ibid. [12].
[49]. For a more recent example of the NSW Supreme Court appointing
joint private financial managers see,
[2009] NSWSC 852.
[2000] Ch 343.
NSWSC 721 [16].
Contrast the facts in
[2004] QGAAT 56
with those in
[2005] QGAAT 32.
{2000] NSWSC
721 [17] and [18].
David by her Tutor
the Protective Commissioner v David
(1993) 30 NSWLR 417.
Guardianship and
Administration Act 1985 (Vic)
Guardianship and Administration
Guardianship and Administration Act
Guardianship and Management of Property Act 1991
Aged and Infirm Persons’ Property Act
Guardianship and
Administration Act
In NSW the Protective
Commissioner has all and private financial managers have all or any specified
function necessary and incidental
and care of the estate, see
Guardianship
(1). In Tasmania administrators have the
general care and management of the estates they are administering
Guardianship
and Administration Act 1995
s 56(1)(a).
NSW Trustee and
Guardian Act
. Note the possible role of
the Guardianship Tribunal in
Guardianship and
Management of Property Act
Guardianship and
Administration Act
Guardianship and
Administration Act
In Queensland those general
principles are found in Schedule 1 of the
Ibid. s 35.
Ibid. s 36.
Ibid. s 37.
Ibid. s 40.
Aged and Infirm
Persons’ Property Act
Guardianship and
Administration Act
Sheffield City Council
[2004] EWHC 2808 (Fam)
Re An Incapable Person
[1983] 2 NSWLR 590.
For an example from Western Australia see,
[2008] WASAT 13.
[1913] UKLawRpCh 63
, 323 and 326. See also,
Protected Estates Act 1983
Guardianship and Management of Property Act 1991
Aged and Infirm Persons’ Property Act 1979 (NT)
Aged and Infirm
Persons’ Property Act
Guardianship and
Administration Act
Guardianship and Administration
Guardianship and Administration Act
ss 58AB and 58G.
28 SR (WA) 333.
Sheffield City Council
[2004]EWHC 2808 (Fam) [38] and
Masterman-Lister v Brutton
[2002] EWCA Civ 1889.
For a consideration of the matter in relation to
litigation in the Federal Court of Australia see,
L v Human Rights and Equal
Opportunity Commission
[2006] FCAFC 114
[25]-[35] and
Owners of Strata
Plan 23007 v Cross
[2006] FCA 900
[2006] FCA 900
233 ALR 296
and for the Supreme
Court of Queensland see,
Aziz v Prestige Property Services Pty Ltd
Sheffield City Council
[2004]EWHC 2808 (Fam) [133].
Masterman-Lister v
[2002] EWCA Civ 1889
NSW Trustee and
Guardian Act
s 16(1)(s).
s 64(1)and(2)
Guardianship Act 1987
NSW Trustee and
Guardian Act 2009
Protective Commissioner v D
[2004] NSWCA
[150]-[151]
[2004] NSWCA 216
60 NSWLR 513.
McColl JA notes that payments for past gratuitous
care can also be made, where appropriate, by statutory administrators at least
in Western Australia, South Australia, Tasmania the Australian Capital Territory
and, probably, Queensland [[143]-[148].
See for example,
[2005] NSWSC 581
(2005) 221 ALR 589
(unreported, NSW Supreme Court, 20
March 2000, Young J).
Trustees Ltd
[2006] VSC 444
, [58] (Cavanough J) and
A v Guardianship and
Management of Property Tribunal
[1999] ACTSC 77
, [67] (Miles CJ).
Trustees Ltd
[2006] VSC 444
Guardianship and
Administration Act
Guardianship Act
NSW Trustee and Guardian Act
Guardianship and
Administration Act
Guardianship and
Administration of Property Act
Guardianship
[2005] NSWSC 581
Re C (TH) and the
Protected Estates Act
[1999] NSWSC 456
Guardianship and
Administration Act
s 4(2)b)(iii).
Guardianship and
Administration Act
and Schedule 4.
Okonkwo OC., Wadley VG.,
Griffith H.R. et al (2006) “Cognitive correlates of financial abilities in
mild cognitive impairment”
J Am Geriaitrc Society
Moye J., Marson D.C
“Assessment of decision-making capacity in older adults: an emerging area
of practice and research”
Journal of Gerontology
2007; 62B3-11
British Medical
Association and The Law Society,
Assessment of Mental Capacity –
Guidance for doctors and lawyers
, London, BMJ Books, 2
2004, p. 51.
Marson D.C. Loss of
competency in Alzheimer’s disease: conceptual and psychometric approaches
International Journal of Law and Psychiatry
(2001) 24: 267-283.
Bennett HP, Hallen P.
“Guardianship and financial management legislation: what doctors in aged
care need to know”
Intern Med J.
(2005) 35(8):482-7.
XT (Admin) 6.3.06
[13] at www.guardianship.tas.gov.au/decisions.
Ibid. [16].
Griffith HR, Belue K/.,
Sicola A., et al (2003) Impaired financial abilities in mild cognitive
impairment Neurology 60: 449-457.
Okonkwo OC., Wadley VG.,
Griffith H.R. et al (2006) Cognitive correlates of financial abilities in mild
cognitive impairment J Am
Geriaitrc Society 54: 1745-1750.
[2007] VCAT 1196
Sullivan K In Mental
Capacity. Measuring mental capacity;models, methods and tests (2005) Collier
B, Coyne, Sullivan K. Leichardt
:The Federation Press p116
Sullivan K.
Neuropsychological assessment of mental capacity
Neuropsychology Review
2004; 14(3):131-142.
Sullivan K in
. Measuring mental capacity; models, methods and tests (2005)
Collier B, Coyne, Sullivan K. Leichardt: The Federation Press p116-118.
Darzins, P, Molloy DW,
Strang D. (Ed) “Who can decide? The six step capacity assessment process
“(2000) Memory Australia
Press, Adelaide, p8.
MG.,.Evaluation of mental competency
American Family Physician
Sullivan K (2005) Op cit,
Sullivan K. 2004., Op
cit, p 136.
[2007] VCAT 1196
The parallel
universe: Does neuropsychological assessment tell us anything about the real
InPsych highlights, June 2005
(www.psychology.org.au/publications/inpsych/).
Moye J., Marson D.C
“Assessment of decision-making capacity in older adults: an emerging area
of practice and research”
Journal of Gerontology
2007; 62B3-11
Okonkwo OC e al., op cit.
(footnote 547).
Marson, D.C., Sawrie,
S.M., Snyder, S., McInturff, B., Stalvey T., Boothe A., Aldridge T., Chatterjee,
A., Harrell, L.E. “Assessing
financial capacity in patients with
Alzheimer’s disease”
Archives Neurology
2000; 57; 877-884.
Griffith HR, Belue K/.,
Sicola A., et al (2003) “Impaired financial abilities in mild cognitive
impairment”
60: 449-457.
Marson Ibid.,
Guardianship Act
for the Guardianship Tribunal in NSW;
Guardianship
and Administration Act 1986
s 46(1)(a)(iii),
Guardianship and
Administration Act 1995
s 51(1)(3)(c)
Guardianship and
Administration Act 1990
s 64(1)(b).
Guardianship Act 1987
Guardianship and Administration Act 2000
Guardianship and Administration Act 1985 (Vic)
Guardianship and Administration Act 1995
Infirm Persons’ Property Act 1979 (NT)
s 12(1) and the
Guardianship
and Management of Property Act 1991
s 8(1)(c)(ii).
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (1.86 MB)
PDF format (563 KB)
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter