URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/journals/MqLawJl/2018/4.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 15:21:17
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Mitchell, Bill --- "Identifying Institutional Elder Abuse in Australia through Coronial and Other Death Review Processes" [2018] MqLawJl 4; (2018) 18 Macquarie Law Journal 35
IDENTIFYING INSTITUTIONAL ELDER ABUSE IN AUSTRALIA THROUGH CORONIAL AND OTHER DEATH REVIEW PROCESSES
I INTRODUCTION
II DEFINITIONS AND CONTEXT
A Types and Subsets of Institutional Elder Abuse
B An Example of Hybrid Institutional Abuse: Restrictive Practices
C Defining ‘Institution’
D Defining ‘Death’
III SOME FUNDAMENTAL LIMITATIONS
A Limitations of Coronial Systems
B Limitations of Domestic Violence Death Reviews
C Prevalence and Incidence Studies
D Prevention of Death
E The Chilling Effect of Constitutional Power
F The Impact of Ageism
IV LAW REFORM AND LEGAL PROCESS SOLUTIONS
A Clarifying Key Definitions
B Aged Care Regulatory Reform
C Other Post-Death Investigations
1 Public Guardians and Public Advocates
2 Aged Care Complaints Commission and Australian Aged Care Quality Agency
D Coronial Law Reform
E Overseas Models
V CONCLUSIONS
IDENTIFYING INSTITUTIONAL ELDER ABUSE IN AUSTRALIA
THROUGH CORONIAL AND OTHER DEATH REVIEW PROCESSES
BILL MITCHELL
Coronial and other death review systems can help identify institutional elder
abuse if they are aligned to intercept appropriate cases.
While retrospective in
nature, coronial and other death review systems help us understand how and why a
person died. Poor understanding
of the nature and characteristics of
institutional elder abuse, limited epidemiological, prevalence and incidence
data and missing
or misaligned reporting systems have hampered our ability to
understand and address institutional elder abuse in residential aged
services (RACS). It is important to identify why deaths in RACS are not
investigated, particularly deaths that arise from institutional
elder abuse.
This analysis involves examining coronial and other death review processes, and
in particular the ‘triggers’
that initiate those processes. The
analysis involves considering what we already know about deaths in RACS. We also
need to understand
how our systems’ response to deaths by institutional
elder abuse is potentially impacted by other factors including constitutional
confusion and entrenched ageism. This paper suggests law reform solutions and
legal process alternatives to improve our understanding
and our approach to
institutional elder abuse.
I INTRODUCTION
Coronial and other death review processes can help identify institutional
elder abuse if reporting systems are aligned to intercept
appropriate cases.
While retrospective in nature, coronial and other death review processes help
society understand how and why a
person died. Poor understanding of the nature
and characteristics of institutional elder abuse, limited epidemiological and
data and missing or misaligned reporting systems have hampered our
ability to understand and address institutional elder abuse through
health policy and regulatory frameworks.
To understand the limitations of existing coronial and other death review
processes, it is important to identify why deaths in
are infrequently investigated,
even if they result from institutional elder abuse. This article examines the
that initiate coronial and other death review processes
and how they might be improved to better identify deaths from institutional
elder abuse. It also suggests law reform and legal process solutions to improve
the identification of deaths from institutional elder
abuse. Firstly, we need to
understand the context of institutional elder abuse.
Institutional abuse is an accepted subset or type of elder
It has been recognised since
Townsend’s landmark study,
The Last Refuge,
was published in
The World Health Organisation
recognises the institutional setting of elder
Abusive acts in institutions include physically restraining patients, depriving
them of dignity (for instance, by leaving them in
soiled clothes) and choice
over daily affairs; intentionally providing insufficient care (such as allowing
them to develop pressure
sores); over- and under-medicating and withholding
medication from patients; and emotional neglect and
Despite this recognition, there is no accepted, authoritative definition of
institutional abuse of older
Inherent difficulties in
operationalising definitions, under-reporting and methodological problems in
research studies have contributed
Institutional abuse is often
described as maltreatment or abuse of a person by or from a system of
Put simply, it is abuse by
or within an institutional
These two aspects
– circumstance and setting – also reflect how coronial and other
death review processes are triggered.
Research across institutional abuse
suggests the predominance of perpetrators and abusers are systemic actors such
as employees.
This naturally
depends on how we define the circumstances and setting of institutional elder
Perpetrators within an institutional setting are numerous and comprise
biological and non-biological family members including co-residents
spouses and visitors. In cases of staff on resident violence, workplace
stressors are said to play an important
Similarly, in in-home care
settings, carer stress has been linked to perpetration of elder abuse. The early
view of caregiver abuse
was that abuse was largely due to frustration caused by
the stress and burden of caregiving, and ignorance of the rights and needs
the older person.
However, more
recent research has found that the caregiver model does not explain the majority
of cases of elder abuse.
Older persons living in RACS are vulnerable to
and are more likely to
have some degree of cognitive impairment and/or a disabling
They are often
frailer and more dependent on others for care and support and all approved care
recipients reflect high level
The impacts of elder
abuse on older persons are grave; mortality rates for victims are three times
Obviously, a higher
index of suspicion for investigation into the preventable factors around the
death of an older person in RACS
Ecological perspectives reveal institutional elder abuse occurs within a
range of systems with a multiplicity of risk
contemporary, Australian context:
Some taxonomies of abuse also include institutional elder abuse as a form of
elder abuse — described as occurring when the
‘routines, systems and
regimes of an institution result in poor or inadequate standards of care and
poor practice which affects
the whole setting and denies, restricts or curtails
the dignity, privacy, choice, independence or fulfilment of
individuals.’
Inquiries regularly reveal, but rarely name, the phenomenon that is
institutional elder abuse. The New South Wales Parliamentary Inquiry
Abuse recounted the shocking example of a man demeaned and treated roughly by
RACS staff.
That same Inquiry
dedicated minimal time to the issue because it considered ‘that abuse of
older people in aged care is an
area of Commonwealth Government responsibility
and thus outside the scope of this
II DEFINITIONS AND CONTEXT
Institutional elder abuse includes all forms of elder abuse such as physical,
psychological and financial abuse, as well as contextual
examples of sexual
abuse, resident on resident aggression and staff on resident violence.
Australian studies on the sexual assault
of older women in RACS have begun to
uncover the extent of specific types of institutional abuse in
Therefore, while RACS
encounter all forms of elder abuse, they also appear to have some types
particular to their circumstances and
Accepted subsets of institutional abuse include ‘overt abuse’,
‘program abuse’ and ‘systems
RACS or their
agents can be abusers in each of these subsets – that is, they are the
circumstance. RACS are also the setting
for various forms of violence and abuse,
including abuse perpetrated by others such as family members, co-residents,
visitors and
staff. In some cases, RACS are both the circumstance and setting:
where the RACS has an institutional awareness of, is complicit
in, or is party
to the abuse in some way. In overt abuse cases, the abuse includes physical,
sexual, psychological, emotional or
verbal abuse by an institutional actor or
agent such as a staff member or contractor. In cases of program abuse, the
institution
itself causes harm by its acts or omissions, such as operating below
acceptable conditions or improper use of its power to modify
the behaviour of a
person. Complaints to the Aged Care Commission system often reflect a range of
hybridised (overt and program)
abuse issues. Breaches of the
Aged Care Act
(Cth) and related instruments such as the
Charter of Care
Recipients’ Rights and Responsibilities – Residential Care
reveal overt and program abuses.
Systems abuse involves an entire care system that is stretched beyond
capacity and causes maltreatment through inadequate resources.
Recent inquiries
have raised concerns about system-wide abuse in the RACS
Systems abuse is often
reflected in cases reported by coroners where an element of the overall system
fails older persons and leads
to death. For example, in the
Inquest into the
Death of Margery Frost
, the Coroner considered the adequacy of staffing
levels in the context of an older woman’s
Staff-resident ratios
have program and system-wide relevance and are commonly raised as a matter of
concern. Different types of institutional
abuse do not occur in a vacuum and
individual deaths can reveal idiosyncratic, programmatic and systemic
An Example of Hybrid Institutional Abuse:
Restrictive Practices
Using the definitions proposed earlier, many types of institutional elder
abuse appear to be hybrids. One illustrative example is
the use of restrictive
practices (also called restrictive interventions) within and by RACS.
Restrictive practices are ‘the
deliberate or unconscious use of coercive
power to restrain or limit an individual’s freedom of action or
legislation governing the activities of federally funded aged care services in
Australia — the
Aged Care Act 1997
(Cth) — does not prohibit,
legislate for, or regulate the use of restrictive practices to manage the
challenging behaviours
of some aged care
The Public Advocate
of Queensland recently reported that ‘it is concerning that the
inappropriate use of restraints in RACS
in Australia has been a factor in the
deaths of some people upon whom the restraints were
applied...’.
Administrative Appeals Tribunal equated the use of restrictive practices to
breaches of the rights of residents under the
Aged Care Act
Saitta Pty Ltd v Secretary, Department of Health and
the Tribunal (per
McDonald DP) was reviewing a RACS’ accreditation over a legion of quality
of care issues:
A resident was observed an hour after breakfast had concluded sitting in the
dining room (not at the table) with a lap belt restraining
her. It was Dr
Lett’s oral evidence that, as well as restraining the resident from
undertaking normal activity, this is also
a dangerous practice as the resident
may try to wiggle out causing skin to tear or bruise or the resident to fall and
injure him/herself.
This is an example of an incident where even [if] it
was a once off occurrence the fact of it happening is strongly indicative of
serious non-compliance, as the restraint could easily be removed when the
resident had finished her meal. The Tribunal is satisfied
that there is
non-compliance with Standard
Item 3.5 (residents to be assisted to achieve
maximum independence), Item 3.6 (right to dignity) and Standard
(management actively working to provide a safe and comfortable environment
consistent with residents’
The decision reinforces that restrictive practices reflect overt abuse and
program abuse. The Public Advocate of Queensland has argued
that restrictive
practices ‘may also constitute a breach of law and human
The absence of
regulatory frameworks for the use of restrictive practice and interventions in
RACS is the subject of numerous recommendations
It begs the question:
are any restrictive practices legitimised, particularly for those who cannot
consent to such practices? Are
all restrictive practices abusive? This is a
digression, albeit an important one, and we will return to the issue of
restrictive
practices as a potential trigger for coronial attention later in
this article.
Defining ‘Institution’
A key issue for institutional elder abuse is how ‘institution’ is
defined. Recent Australian inquiries have taken a very
broad approach to the
term. The Royal Commission into Institutional Responses to Child Sexual Abuse
defined ‘Institution’
as ‘any organisation, including
children’s homes, religious organisations, missions and reserves,
government agencies,
schools, sports clubs, juvenile justice facilities and
out-of-home care (foster, relative and kinship
Such a broad-brush
approach suggests that institutional elder abuse would incorporate an assortment
of settings where older persons
live or receive clinical or personal care. It
seems uncontroversial that RACS would be included in even a narrow definition.
care in all its various manifestations has an institutional aspect and
‘institution’ would also include community-dwelling
older persons
receiving home-based aged care services. The focus of this article is deaths in
RACS but the parallels between children
and older persons in community-based
care obviously warrant further consideration.
Defining ‘Death’
That older persons die in RACS is not controversial. RACS are cruelly known
as ‘God’s waiting rooms’. In 2015-16,
214,000 persons entered
Based on recent data,
nearly 80 per cent of residents died after an average length of stay of 34.5
months, and length of stay correlated
Accurate cause of
death is essential for understanding how many older people have premature,
preventable deaths, with implications
for aged care services, healthcare
expenditure, quality and safety, and human
How we define deaths is
therefore also fundamental to identifying instances of institutional elder
The Australian Bureau of Statistics (ABS) uses a range of descriptors under
causes and types of death. Causes of death are drawn from
the International
Classification of Diseases (ICD-10) diagnostic criteria and contain thousands of
codes. The three principal types
of death are natural, external and
The same definitions
are used by coroners for reporting
As discussed later,
coroners have the added role of deciding how the person died.
External cause deaths are those where the underlying cause of death is
determined to be one of a group of ‘causes external to
the body (for
example intentional self-harm, transport accidents, falls, poisoning
They include
intentional and unintentional deaths. These types of deaths are often reported
to coroners.
They reflect issues
across all subsets of institutional elder abuse. Suicide within RACS has
received some attention but researchers
are just beginning to explore this
phenomenon and its possible
prevention.
Natural cause deaths are deaths ‘due to diseases (for example diabetes,
cancer, heart disease etc.) which are not external or
Natural cause
deaths offer insights into clinical and personal care, disease management and
other issues within RACS that may reflect
institutional elder abuse. If the
deaths of frail, older persons are inaccurately classified as natural, and any
contributing modifiable
factors are not identified, avoidable mortality cannot
be highlighted and addressed.
The term ‘premature death’ is also used at
Interestingly, older
persons over 70 years are excluded from this death
classification.
therefore be viewed as a somewhat discriminatory age proxy that equates the age
of 70 years and older as being the right
time to die. Unknown deaths are deaths
where it is unable to be determined whether the cause was natural or
Quite apart from causes of death, the ‘Australian Cause of Death
Statistics System’ also reports on ‘potentially
deaths’ as measured by ‘potentially preventable deaths’ and
‘potentially treatable
‘Potentially preventable deaths’ are those amenable to screening and
primary prevention, such as immunisation, and reflect
the effectiveness of the
current preventive activities of the health
These deaths are of
great interest for both program and system abuse identification. Deaths from
potentially treatable conditions
are those which are ‘amenable to
therapeutic interventions and reflect the safety and quality of the current
treatment system...’.
These deaths potentially reflect overt and program abuse issues.
Each of these death classifications are present in the cohort of deaths
within RACS. Each one also potentially aligns with definitions
of institutional
elder abuse. Hitchen et al make a useful suggestion about the classifications at
play in RACS:
Three general aspects bear on whether and how a death should be investigated: Is
it due to the progression of a medical condition
(natural)? Is it expected given
the person’s overall condition and their disease (premature)? Is it only
attributable to the
medical condition(s) and the person’s overall
condition and not amenable to other factors
(preventable)?
As we see later in this article, this classification mirrors how
coroners’ laws have been framed in recent years. An additional
for post death investigation arises with the dignity of risk, in which
patients’ right to self-determination and
autonomy directly overrode
prevention strategies.
‘preventable death’ category might not be easily applied to these
This advice is given with
the caution that ‘this determination requires vigilance and should not be
accepted without
Staff actions
can look relatively harmless or even merciful at times, masking a neglectful or
more sinister, even homicidal, reality.
Another example is where ‘a
“preventable death” still occurs because staff are reckless or
provide sub-optimal
care and then use the older person’s dignity of risk
choice as “a shield” – to avoid their professional obligations
and responsibilities.’
Exploring the alignment of death classifications with what is known about the
subsets of institutional elder abuse is clearly worthwhile.
Hitchen et al have
suggested an alternative classification
They suggest that a
more nuanced classification of deaths in older people would permit improved
assessment of the quality of care provided, including
identification of health
or life care practices that are unsafe or deleterious. Identified gaps can be
addressed, and more generally,
minimum standards set for such
The alternative suggested is for ‘treated’,
‘untreated’ and ‘untreatable’ to replace
‘premature’
‘preventable’.
might exclude deaths from institutional elder abuse such as external cause
deaths where quality of care issues were something
other than medical care.
In the end, we are interested in cases where institutional elder abuse causes
or contributes to death, from which we might learn how
to prevent the abuse and
ultimately prevent death. From an investigative sense, Mosqueda and Wiglesworth
called this cohort ‘suspicious
Coroners and
medical examiners in the United States have benefited from inquiries into deaths
in RACS, allowing some level of differentiation
between accidental deaths and
fatal elder abuse.
mirrors Australian coroners’ work on externally caused deaths in RACS. It
is, however, only one area of distinction
in a complex field. Deepening our
understanding about how death classifications reveal and reflect typologies of
institutional elder
abuse is key.
III SOME FUNDAMENTAL LIMITATIONS
Beyond definitional issues, a number of problems hamper our ability to
identify institutional elder abuse deaths. These include limitations
in coronial
and other death review processes, prevalence data and the impacts of
constitutional confusion and ageism.
Limitations of Coronial Systems
State coroners are a recent development in Australia. The South Australian
Government appointed the first State Coroner in 1975 and
other states and
territories followed suit over the following decades. The role of Australian
coroners is more circumscribed than
the historical role of the mediaeval
Coroner, whose diverse role included collecting chance revenue from sources such
as deodands,
shipwrecks, treasure troves, royal fish and forfeited property of
felons and brigands.
The modern coroner’s role is to take charge of a death investigation
and make findings. They examine issues that arise from
Their role is described
by Hermagoras’ ‘elements of circumstance’: who, how, when,
where and what.
Inquests are
formal judicial hearings into the causes and circumstances of death, in which
the parties involved present evidence,
cross-examine witnesses and are often
represented by lawyers.
other death investigations are handled ‘in chambers’, where findings
are reached on the basis of desk-based reviews
of witness statements, police and
medical examiner reports and other forensic
Inquests occur within
‘a maelstrom of conflicting
best-case scenario can ‘facilitate understanding of the circumstances of
death, forgiveness for error or fault and
adoption of better and safer processes
with the potential to avoid deaths occurring in comparable
circumstances.’
In Australia, nearly 20,000 deaths, or 12% of all deaths, are reported to
coroners each year.
deaths are subject to mandatory reporting, while others rely on the discretion
of third parties to report. Some types of
deaths must be the subject of an
inquest, while others are at the discretion of the Coroner. Coroners’
findings (whether for
investigation or inquest) usually require the
‘how’ and ‘what’ of death. The ‘how’ equates
‘the manner of death or mechanism of death and the context in which it
‘what’ ‘focuses on the medical cause(s) of death, not the
legal responsibility for it, or the circumstances
in which it
The overall inquest rate of reported deaths has been estimated at
approximately 1 in 20 reported
Coroners are
disproportionately unlikely to hold inquests for deaths due to suicide and
deaths among the elderly (65 years or
This is even though
persons over 65 account for more than half of reported
Importantly for this
article, the odds of discretionary (non-mandated) inquests declined with the age
of the decedent.
particularly important given the lack of mandated reporting or inquests for
deaths in RACS.
Australian epidemiological research on premature deaths amongst RACS
residents highlighted that coronial processes fail to identify
prevent deaths:
[P]remature and preventable deaths occur in nursing homes, and it follows that
coroners have an important role in identifying factors
that may prevent death
and injury. However, formal coroners’ inquests examined fewer than 3% of
the external cause deaths,
and in 98.4% of all cases coroners made no
recommendations about injury prevention. There were substantial variations
between jurisdictions
in the number of cases for which recommendations were
delivered (0-21%).
This research presumed that all deaths directly or indirectly resulting from
injury or non-natural causes must be reported to
The study considered
21,672 reported deaths (18,383 natural cause and 3,289 external cause). Only 95
of the 3,289 external cause
deaths resulted in
Of those, about half
(53) lead to recommendations that sought to identify preventative or remedial
Therefore, only 1.6% of
all reported external cause deaths led to
recommendations.
Ibrahim noted,
‘disturbingly, there has been no reduction in the prevalence of these
The rate of inquest varied by Australian jurisdiction from 0-8% of reported
external cause deaths, and the rate of recommendations
varied from
Crucially, and in line
with previous comments, this cohort only included cases from the National
Coronial Information System (NCIS).
This meant it was limited to deaths that had
been reported to a coroner. Therefore, the study missed deaths that had not
coronial attention. Additionally, the cohort did not look at natural
cause deaths, which in the absence of a mandated process have
a substantially
lower rate of report, investigation or inquest. The findings of this study, one
might suggest, are the tip of the
Notwithstanding the low rate, coroners’ inquests do consider issues of
institutional elder abuse. In the findings of an
Inquest into the Death of
Caterina Montalto
Victorian Coroner considered a case where no report was made until a
whistleblowing staff member made a
disclosure.
The deceased’s
death was ‘covered
and the inquest
revealed serious accountability issues within the facility. High among them was
the need for staff to understand
and comply with the obligation for coronial
reportability.
A Queensland
example, the
Inquest into the Death of Albert
considered a range
of issues including continuity of care and competence of staff. This inquest
also highlighted the importance of
clinical records, an issue canvassed more
thoroughly later in this article. In the
Inquest into the Death of Ruth Ann
the Coroner looked
at death by neck compression caused by a lap sash seatbelt on the
deceased’s wheelchair. Ibrahim makes the
point that choking accounted for
7.9% of all external cause deaths and is by definition
preventable.
Areas of attention for coroners looking into deaths in RACS have included a
veritable grab-bag of issues, including: falls, choking,
the use of restraints,
fire safety, medication, end of life care, lifting and hoisting equipment,
resident-on-resident aggression,
personal hygiene (bathing, showering,
toileting), emergency treatment, resuscitation, wound management (pressure
sores, ulcers),
disease management and control, (gastroenteritis, influenza),
catheterization, aspiration, dental care (dentures, oral hygiene) and
constipation.
Many of these
issues involve aspects of institutional elder abuse at overt, program and system
Prior to statutory jurisdictions, common law courts only intervened when
there was an ‘insufficiency of inquiry’ into
Currently, courts only
intervene where specific statutory criteria are made out to warrant orders such
as a fresh coronial investigation
or inquest. State and territory coronial laws
are largely uniform and use relatively consistent terms and definitions. Births,
and Marriages law in all Australian jurisdictions provide certification
procedures within a prescribed period of death or its discovery.
Where a death
is reportable, a certificate is not issued and the death is reported to the
coroner. The failure to report a death
is an offence in all Australian
How then is it that deaths in RACS are not reported? All Australian
reporting of
certain deaths to coroners. These deaths are known as ‘reportable
This is different
to the ICD death
classifications.
The definition
of deaths that must be reported to coroners varies slightly across the six
states and two territories.
Deaths are reportable to coroners by virtue of circumstance (examples include
violent or unnatural, sudden, unknown cause, suspicious
or unusual) or setting
(examples include custody, care or recent health procedure). This aspect can be
called ‘reportability’.
A death in RACS is not a prescribed
circumstance or setting in any Australian jurisdiction. The term ‘death in
is a common class of reportable death but each jurisdiction has a
narrow or constrained definition that excludes
Health care deaths are reportable in most jurisdictions but have limited
application to a death in a RACS. The trend for medical-setting
deaths in eastern seaboard states’ coronial laws has centred on the
criteria that the death was not a reasonably
This obviously aligns
with Hitchen et al’s notion that death investigations might follow the
question of whether death was
expected. This has some utility within the RACS
setting if reporting was honestly and dutifully undertaken. Cases like
potentially
render this sort of trigger
ineffectual.
This Australia-wide
constrained reportability means that deaths in RACS are not subject to the same
level of accountability as other
deaths in care.
Take Queensland’s scheme as an example — under the
(Qld) ‘reportable deaths’ include ‘deaths in
The definition of
‘deaths in care’ does not include a death in
Guidelines specifically
note this exclusion.
Accordingly, deaths in RACS only come to the attention of a coroner when they
are reported by virtue of circumstance because the
opportunity to report based
on setting is completely absent. Excluding obvious, irrelevant triggers (the
person is unknown or died
in a police operation), the death would only come to
the attention of a coroner if the death was violent or otherwise
suspicious,
health care
or where a cause of
death certificate was not
In a RACS setting, a
likely report is where the examining medical practitioner refuses to certify
cause of death or the death was
externally caused. However, this does not always
occur, even in the face of evidence. Mosqueda and Wiglesworth use the example of
advanced bedsores to highlight this
Or, as they note, it
may be as simple as the authority with the obligation to report failing to
examine the whole body.
Age proxies are evident in some legislative
Coroners Act
uses age 72 to further constrain reportability. The
Act limits the need to report where a person aged 72 years or older dies an
or violent death after sustaining an injury from an accident, being an
accident that was attributable to the age of that person,
that contributed
substantially to the death of the person, and was not caused by an act or
omission by any other person.
This must impact on the rate of report, and consequently on investigations and
inquests in New South Wales RACS. Age proxies like
this reinforce ageist views
that deaths in RACS are outside the warrant of coronial oversight. These types
of provisions are not
examples of positive discrimination, rather, they
reinforce the view that the older the decedent, the less need for a post-death
investigation.
Operational policies recognise the consequences of limited reportability and
provide specific procedures for making referrals to the
Office of Aged Care
Quality and Compliance or Office of the Aged Care Quality
Commissioner.
Notwithstanding
that referrals may be entirely within scope, this clearly represents a different
approach to other deaths in care.
Coroners Act 2003
specifically includes deaths in care facilities under the
Disability Services
Forensic Disability Act 2011
Mental Health
Public Health Act 2005
Child Protection Act
Corrective Services
(Qld). So then,
what of other death review processes?
Limitations of Domestic Violence Death
Family violence death reviews do not effectively target elder abuse or
institutional elder abuse. Some Australian jurisdictions use
these specialised
processes in cases of family or domestic violence or homicide. Operating within
coronial processes, death reviews
have a qualitative (individual case) and
quantitative review function. The review ‘looks into cases of domestic
violence and
uses these as a window, or a lens, into systems, services and
communities, identifying opportunities for intervention, prevention
or where the
story may be changed.’
Recent inquiries in
Queensland,
and Victoria regarded
aspects of elder abuse as falling within the sphere of domestic and family
There is an ongoing
definitional debate about these issues that cannot be fully aired in this
article. Suffice to say there are many
areas of overlap between elder abuse and
other forms of interpersonal violence. The United Nations has suggested that
violence, abuse
and neglect experienced by older women combined elements from
elder abuse (or older adult mistreatment), abuse of vulnerable adults
intimate partner violence.
The Australian Institute of Family Studies noted that the ‘intersecting
fields of thinking and concern include those related
to family violence,
violence against women, and
disability.’
step aside from this definitional quagmire, opportunities exist to use the
alignment between aspects of elder abuse and
family violence to review deaths
from institutional elder abuse.
In Queensland, the Domestic and Family Violence Death Review and Advisory
Procedural Guidelines
set out a case identification system
using definitions from the
Domestic and Family Violence Protection Act 2012
(Qld) (DFVPA) and the
Coroners Act 2003
outline detailed ‘case identification and selection’
information and a process for death
The definition of
domestic and family violence death’
includes a relevant
relationship between the deceased and a second
trigger for review relies on an expansive definition of ‘domestic
includes ‘emotional or psychological
‘economic abuse’,
both of which are commonly experienced forms of elder abuse, even if economic
and financial abuse may overlap but should not be conflated.
Estimates put
‘emotional or psychological abuse’ at 1-6% and economic or financial
abuse at 1-9%, and they commonly coalesce
Notwithstanding the
breadth of the definition of domestic violence, which obviously encapsulates
many aspects of elder abuse, the
triggers for a death review have limited
prospects of occurring with respect to institutional elder abuse as the
provision now stands.
There is of course the opportunity to consider any
violence that led to a death occurring between an older person and another with
whom they are in a ‘family
relationship’.
However, one important trigger potentially exists for an ‘informal care
relationship’.
definition of informal care relationship excludes parent/child and commercial
care arrangements.
death review might be triggered in a home care setting if there was an informal
care relationship.
also apply to an informal care relationship within an institution, say between a
visitor and older person. There are cases
of older persons, especially women,
who depend on others to provide informal care in exchange for receipt of carer
payment or carer
allowance from Centrelink. Where these relationships involve
violence, abuse or neglect, they are in a twilight zone between in-home
abuse and domestic violence.
of the DFVPA defines an informal care
relationship as one that exists between two persons if one of them is or was
dependent on the
other person (the carer) for help in an activity of daily
living. This definition actively excludes commercial arrangements but notes
the carer payment scenario is not a commercial arrangement. Therefore, if a
person (including relatives outside the parent child
relationship) receiving
carer payment providing care commits acts of violence (as defined under the
DFVPA), this may come within
the scope of a death review referral. It is not
clear if any research has ever been done to consider this situation in
or elsewhere but it deserves careful scrutiny.
term absent from the DFVPA is ‘neglect’. Definitions coalesce around
‘acts’ as opposed to ‘omissions’.
This is an important
distinction and point of divergence between elder abuse and family and domestic
violence. Many serious cases
of elder abuse, and also child abuse, involve
omissions, such as neglect and the failure to provide necessities of life.
this, there seems to be no reason why an act of neglect should not be
included in domestic and family violence definitions, and this
might be worth
consideration by state parliaments. It may be the view of legislators that those
for whom the DFVPA is crafted are
invulnerable to neglect.
In the United States, Elder Death Review Teams study and learn from
suspicious elder deaths and facilitate communication amongst agencies
identify barriers and fill
How a death becomes the
mixed results. Mosqueda
and Wiglesworth found inconsistency across the essential
areas: screening processes, data sets, trigger events and
definitions.
Australia’s National Coronial Information System has been highlighted as
innovative,
and a unique
national repository.
as noted earlier, the NCIS’ utility is ultimately limited by
reportability. So how much do we actually know about
deaths in RACS?
Prevalence and Incidence Studies
Prevalence studies are essential to identify how many older adults are
mistreated in institutions at a given point in time or during
a given time
Incidence studies
provide information about how many persons are abused for the first time during
a specified time period.
significant limitation of most elder abuse studies is that they do not
include older persons in RACS
Accordingly, prevalence studies into
elder abuse rarely capture the true picture and extent of institutional elder
Therefore, most
prevalence studies can only reflect a partial view of the nature and extent of
elder abuse. Prevalence studies have
principally focused on private
households:
Studies of the prevalence of elder abuse have been conducted in several
countries, including Canada, the UK, Portugal, Ireland, Spain,
Israel and the
USA ... [i]n each of the listed prevalence studies, the focus was on older
people in private households who were deemed
to have the cognitive capacity to
participate in the study. Older people living in residential aged care
facilities and those who
lived in private dwellings but did not have sufficient
cognitive capacity to discuss their circumstances and experiences in an
were excluded from the estimation of the prevalence of elder abuse in
these studies.
This situation is concerning given that older persons in RACS and those
living in private dwellings with cognitive impairment are
at greater risk of
abuse than any other population of older persons. The inclusion of these people
would give us a very different
picture of elder abuse, and national prevalence
research should address this gap. If we know so little about the prevalence of
institutional
elder abuse, how much do we actually know about deaths in
Prevention of Death
There already is a substantial evidence base on deaths from institutional
elder abuse. It remains, however, partially hidden within
other sources of data.
Ibrahim and his colleagues provided a comprehensive analysis of preventable
deaths in RACS with recommendations
on a wide range of external-caused and
preventable deaths including
medication,
restraints,
resident-to-resident
aggression,
and unexplained
Many of the
circumstances analysed by Ibrahim and others fall within accepted definitions of
institutional elder abuse and are flags
for death investigation.
A common thread in the research is the need for improvement in the
information reported to police or
Ibrahim recommended
‘[a]mending the relevant
Coroners Act
in each jurisdiction to make deaths
occurring in respite or within seven days after discharge from respite care a
reportable death.’
is a good starting point for coronial reform but does not go far enough. The
primary data source for the retrospective study
was information generated for
coroners’ investigations of injury-related deaths that occurred in RACS,
which must be reported
to coroners in accordance with state and territory
legislation.
The report was
limited in the sense that ‘other areas of neglect and abuse e.g. sexual
assault and deprivation of freedom of
movement, did not lead to deaths that were
reported to the coroners. Therefore, we were not able to examine
This conclusion
is correct and exemplifies the problem of constrained reportability in two ways.
Firstly, it assumes that all deaths
that should be reported are. Secondly, it
misses deaths that did not need to be reported under current reporting
obligations. The
combination of these two factors means we only ever see a
portion of a more substantial cohort.
Ibrahim, Bugeia and Ranson also looked at the issue of using medico-legal
death information to improve RACS care for older
They suggested this
rich source was underused
blamed three myths for the lack of use of the data: firstly, that deaths in RACS
are not preventable or at least inevitable;
secondly, that public health gains
are too small; and thirdly, that it is someone else’s charter or
responsibility.
The first is
completely undermined by recent work on prevention. The second requires separate
expert consideration. It is the third
myth that is most interesting as it plays
into the mythology of central Commonwealth responsibility. Ibrahim, Bugeia and
Ranson suggested
that ‘not one entity was responsible for systemically
aggregating and analyzing medico-legal death
This article
accepts that their point is true but suggests that the problem is far deeper. Is
it the case that the states and territories
have failed to take responsibility
for ensuring coronial and other death review processes including RACS?
The Chilling Effect of Constitutional
Has the spectre of constitutional control had a chilling effect on coronial
and other death review processes with respect to deaths
in RACS? Has
Commonwealth legislative superiority seen aged care excluded from important post
death accountability? Who has the legislative
power to deal with aged care? The
short answer to these questions is that aged care is both a Commonwealth and a
State responsibility.
have broad legislative powers that often encompass aged care and work
cooperatively to provide services to older persons.
Lacey noted that the mythology of Commonwealth constitutional control and
capacity in aged care is ‘based on an incomplete understanding
Commonwealth’s constitutional
She contended
that ‘[t]he reality — based on the Commonwealth’s legislative
powers as set out in
Constitution
— is that the
Commonwealth has only a partial ability to effect a legal framework for
preventing and responding to elder
She calls it
the ‘myth of an all-encompassing Commonwealth legal and policy dominance
in the ageing
portfolio.’
So it seems
that while the Commonwealth does not have complete constitutional control over
aged care, the actions of the States in
this area reflect otherwise, whether by
agreement, ceding or surrender.
The external affairs power is mooted as a source for specific elder abuse
frameworks.
It allows the
establishment of underpinning frameworks, which could include those aimed at
institutional elder abuse, as far as they
implement existing standards found in
various multilateral
instruments.
It might be more
useful to have a specific international instrument to rely upon. A Convention on
the Rights of Older Persons has
been mooted for some time and its feasibility
and possible content is the subject of mandates within the Open-ended Working
around rights that should be contained in a convention have included the right
to freedom from abuse in institutional
The Impact of Ageism
It is easier for the community to consider most deaths of older people and
especially those in an aged care setting inevitable, rather
than actively
seeking to identify preventable
If ageism is more prevalent than sexism and
this question needs
to be asked: Is ageism partly responsible for system failures such as the
absence of coronial and other death
processes for deaths in RACS, the lack of
prevalence and incidence data, the failure to align existing processes where
opportunities
exist, and the failure to improve obvious systemic failings or
gaps? The notion of a virtual age queue is relevant here, in that
societal allocation of practical and figurative resources tends to favour the
middle-aged, as long as the line keeps moving, everyone
generally gets his/her
privileged turn. However, those at the back of the line are dependent on those
at the front transitioning
away in order to keep the line
Does a virtual age queue also remove any chance of accountability when older
persons suffer institutional elder abuse leading to death?
In the United States
the elderly age of a decedent was a factor influencing investigators towards a
decision in which the death was
assumed to be
If children are the
only other group in society who are merely distinguished by their
why do they not suffer
the same lack of accountabilities? The sorts of systems to report, respond and
remediate abuse are far more
comprehensive.
IV LAW REFORM AND LEGAL PROCESS SOLUTIONS
Discovering elder mistreatment post mortem is problematic in part because the
resources are inadequate and the personnel inadequately
trained for the purpose,
but also, and perhaps primarily, because the science of differentiating abuse
and neglect from natural causes
is in its infancy. The prevalence of these
occurrences is unknown and as long as they go undetected, it will remain
Unless reforms are made, institutional elder abuse will remain beyond the
reach of our understanding and beyond the reach of legal
processes designed to
prevent future deaths. We will continue to entrench ageist attitudes about the
lives and deaths of older Australians.
It also means we will continue to have
systems of institutional care that lack accountability for the most vulnerable
persons, in
the most extreme cases.
However, as suggested by Ibrahim et al, ‘aggregating and analysing data
from coroners’ findings provides information about
the nature and burden
of nursing home deaths and an evidence base for public health prevention
strategies.’
clearly worth moving to improve our evidence base. How can we achieve this? A
number of possible solutions exist:
1. Clarifying key definitions;
2. Reforms to aged care regulation;
3. Enabling other post-death investigative processes; and
4. Engaging in coronial law reform to fine-tune existing systems.
Clarifying Key Definitions
Clarifying key definitions is necessary to move forward in this space. Key
definitions include elder abuse, institutional elder abuse,
classifications, and coronial reportability. Work currently underway to develop
Australian definitions of elder abuse must
take into account the lived
experience of older persons living in RACS. This is particularly important in
any foundational definition
building exercise. The inclusion of institutional
elder abuse in elder abuse definitions would ensure that any National Plan on
Abuse is designed with the needs and personal safety of vulnerable older
persons in mind. By 2050, 3.5 million older Australians
will be using aged care
This alone is
reason for the inclusion of RACS in key definitional work.
Aged Care Regulatory Reform
Alongside the National Plan on Elder Abuse, aged care regulatory reform has
shown to be necessary given incidents of abuse at various
RACS and other
services such as Oakden in South Australia. The recent Legislative Review of the
Aged Care Act 1997
(Cth) noted that, ‘the Department of Health (the
department) is currently working with the sector to develop a new set of quality
standards and processes to apply across all of aged care, called the Single Aged
Care Quality
Framework.’
standards should provide an evidence base for post-death investigation.
While the Oakden Aged Mental Health Care Service was not a RACS, the
subsequent Oakden Report
Carnell-Paterson Report
highlighted many areas of necessary aged care reform. The abuse at Oakden is
likely symptomatic of other institutional settings for
older persons. The
Carnell-Paterson Report noted, as many others have over time, that restrictive
practices can lead to deaths of
older persons in institutional care and urgent
reforms were needed for this
It also highlighted
reforms needed to serious incident reporting
Issues raised as
potentially coming within the reporting scheme include physical restraint, elder
abuse, resident on resident aggression,
suicide attempts or self-harm, choking,
and unexplained absences.
Unfortunately, Carnell-Paterson did not consider the coronial system’s
response to deaths in aged care.
The Oakden Report did highlight the importance of a clinical record:
Ultimately, the clinical record of a person is one of the most important
reflections of what has happened during the provision of
their Health Care. At
its most fundamental, the clinical record is relied upon when [c]ourts and
[c]oroners need to determine what
has occurred. Clinical records need to meet
standards and those that do not are a window into the system and those providing
The utility of RACS’ clinical records in a post-death investigation
would be heightened if reforms are made to aged care regulation.
system of regulation and accountability could be implemented for the use of
restrictive practices, including the recording
and reporting of the use of
practices and interventions. Secondly, an effective serious incident reporting
and response scheme could
A third area of
reform could be the effective suitability screening of RACS
Each reform
addresses an absence of protective safeguards against institutional elder abuse.
Each reform would put in place obligations
that would provide a yardstick
against which an assessment can be made about the experience of the older
persons prior to and leading
up to death. They would each be reflected on the
face of relevant RACS records, including clinical records, about whether
institutional
elder abuse might be a factor in an older person’s death.
This would be particularly so in cases of staff on resident violence,
on resident aggression, and in cases of overt abuse and neglect. Imagine looking
back over the clinical record of a recent
decedent that revealed a range of
these occurrences – for example, a history of restrictive practices or a
number of serious
incident reports or both. There exists excellent potential for
alignment of reformed clinical records with triggers for deeper post
investigation.
Other Post-Death Investigations
There are other agencies that might have a greater involvement in post-death
investigations connected to institutional elder abuse.
These include public
guardians, public advocates, the Aged Care Complaints Commission and the
Australian Aged Care Quality Agency.
Public Guardians and Public Advocates
There is an existing mandate for public guardians and public advocates to be
involved in individual and systemic complaints of institutional
elder abuse. In
Queensland, proposed amendments to the
Public Guardian Act 2014
would allow the Public Guardian to investigate a complaint or allegation after
an adult’s death.
provides the Public Guardian with broad
powers to investigate ‘a complaint or allegation that an adult is or has
been neglected,
exploited or
There is very
limited judicial consideration of the extent or operation of this power. It
appears to be limited to matters relating
to ‘adults with impaired
capacity for a matter’ and the Office of the Public Guardian’s own
policy reflects this,
even though it has not been confirmed by judicial
The Public Guardian
is already empowered under the
Guardianship and Administration Act 2000
(Qld) to engage in systemic advocacy on behalf of adults with impaired
decision-making capacity. The recent work of the Public Advocate
included the impact of restrictive practices on older persons in aged
Aged Care Complaints Commission and Australian
Aged Care Quality Agency
The Aged Care system is currently in a state of flux and has been called a
The Aged Care
Complaints Commission (ACCC) system provides some opportunity to investigate
deaths from institutional elder abuse.
The Commissioner has stated that the
Commission has ‘a limited window on elder
statutory authorities, the ACCC’s jurisdiction is prescribed to certain
areas. The Commissioner has given examples
of cases within jurisdiction:
• Inappropriate chemical or physical restraint;
• Inappropriate use of force;
• Seclusion or not involving the person receiving care in social and
other activities of the service;
• Neglect and other gaps or omissions in care; or
• Not allowing a person receiving care to make their own
These examples align closely with the WHO description of elder abuse within
an institutional setting. The
Aged Care Complaints Principles 2014
are silent on whether investigation can occur after the death of a RACS
resident. However, a complaint may be made by a ‘person
... raising an
issue or issues about an approved provider’s responsibilities under the
Act or under the principles made under
section 961 of the
This renders
death irrelevant beyond the logistical and evidentiary limitations it imposes.
Guidelines for the Aged Care Complaints Commissioner
complaints on behalf of deceased RACS residents through an example ‘... a
complaint relating to a deceased person could
be made more than a year later
where the family has been grieving and has not yet felt ready to make a
complaint.’
also a corresponding provision to allow refusal of a complaint where ‘the
issue is subject to a coronial
policy notes:
[I]f a complainant alleges that the failure to administer correct medication
caused a death, the delegate may decide to take no further
action in respect of
that issue because determining the cause of death is a matter for the
If there are issues about care that are not directly related to the coronial
inquiry, such as where someone has concerns about the
continence management of a
person receiving care immediately before they died, such issues can be resolved
without interfering with
Once more we see other systemic actors reliant on the constraints of the
coronial system. However, the policy is clear that the investigation
complaint not subject to coronial or other death review processes is open to the
ACCC. The question arises: Is investigation
by the ACCC an appropriate
substitute for coronial processes? The short answer is no, for a range of
reasons, including that death
investigations should be the purview of judicial
officers, who hold the powers to conduct thorough investigations and report
publicly. The ACCC has provided industry alerts on topics with clear
alignment to institutional elder abuse such as oral health and
dental hygiene,
lap belts on wheelchairs, manual lifting, fire safety, bed poles, call bells and
These issues align
with Ibrahim’s research and the findings of coroners, and they contribute
to the existing evidence base
of institutional elder
The suite of Aged Care Principles includes
Quality of Care Principles 2014
User Rights Principles 2014
User Rights
set out care recipients’ rights in residential care, which
includes ‘to be treated with dignity and respect, and to live
exploitation, abuse or
principles include rights to quality care appropriate to his or her
to live without
discrimination or
victimisation,
and to live in
a safe, secure and homelike
environment.
values should be a yardstick for post-death investigation. Given all of this,
clarifying the ACCC’s jurisdiction in cases
of institutional elder abuse
pre- and post-death is a priority.
The Australian Aged Care Quality Agency (AACQA) is responsible for
accreditation and monitoring of RACS in
The ACCC can refer
matters to the AACQA where ‘if, in the course of dealing with a complaint,
the Complaints Commissioner identifies
matters that could indicate an issue of a
systemic nature (that may affect some or all people receiving care at a
Many of the
issues subject of investigation and finding by the AACQA would fall within the
definition of institutional elder abuse.
The serious risk statutory decisions
are a clear example of this. While these matters can be the subject of
AACQA’s consideration,
they have no particular role to investigate
individual deaths in RACS. Despite this, the nature of those cases also fits
within possible
triggers for post-death investigation of institutional elder
abuse. Triggers could include notifications of consideration of serious
any accreditation decisions flowing from that process.
Recent parliamentary inquiries have considered how the ACCC and AAQCA provide
accountability for quality of care in light of the failures
The Senate has
recommended a new Single Aged Care Quality Framework which would combine the
ACCC and other bodies.
Additionally, new Aged Care Quality Standards are being
Draft standards
include consumer dignity, autonomy and choice, personal care and clinical care,
lifestyle services and supports,
and service
environment.
In any event,
structural changes to the ACCC and AACQA systems should ensure those agencies or
their successors are fine-tuned to
detect and deal with complaints of
institutional elder abuse at individual, program and systemic levels.
Coronial Law Reform
Coroners Act
(Qld) was debated, it was said that
it would include a focus on identifying emerging
Deaths in RACS are
not a new or emerging pattern. Rather, deaths in RACS simply fail to be
investigated because of the barriers noted
in this article. This is not a
criticism of coronial systems. Rather, it is a reflection of their
functionality, and their inbuilt,
systemic limitations. Coronial and death
review laws should be amended to ensure proper inclusion of deaths in RACS as a
setting and circumstance. Using Queensland’s coronial laws as
an example, reform could be achieved in several ways.
A new class of reportable death could be added to the
Coroners Act 2003
(Qld). This might be framed in a number of ways. It might be a new subset of
reportable deaths, namely, ‘a death in residential
aged care’ or
‘a residential aged care related
a new subset of
health care related deaths
a new subset of deaths in
Each option needs
careful consideration.
The finer detail about when such a death is reportable should include the
circumstances detailed in this article. Settings would include
Circumstances could include:
• Types of causes of death that align with possible institutional elder
abuse such as potentially avoidable deaths, including
those deaths that were
potentially preventable or potentially treatable;
• Where the decedent was involved in a critical, serious or reportable
incident, including where the decedent had been involved
in resident on resident
violence or staff on resident violence;
• Where a report had been made to the RACS about the violence or abuse
of a visitor;
• Where a Public Guardian or Public Advocate had been investigating
quality of care at the RACS;
• Where the decedent had a restrictive practices history;
• Where staff suitability concerns had been raised or were relevant to
the decedent; and
• Where a complaint had been made to, or an investigation initiated by,
a relevant agency about breaches of aged care quality
care standards or
legislative principles.
Clear drafting would ensure that amendments were consistent with the
Constitution
. The scope of model laws could be considered by the
Australian Law Reform Commission or the Law, Crime and Australian Community
Overseas Models
Overseas models might assist in identifying best practice in reportability of
deaths in aged care. Ontario uses a ‘Geriatric
and Long Term Care Review
Committee’ (GLTCRC) to assist and advise a coroner investigating deaths of
older people in residential
It has a focus on all
homicides involving residents of long term care or retirement homes.
The GLTCRC also reviews cases where systemic
issues may be present or
where significant concerns have been identified by the family, investigating
coroner or Regional Supervising
Between 2004 and
2016, it reviewed 282 deaths and made 639
recommendations.
similar in function to Queensland’s Domestic Violence Death Reviews.
Importantly, the GLTCRC work has a systemic
and preventative focus:
Reviews and recommendations prepared by the GLTCRC are widely distributed to
service providers, long term care providers and other
relevant agencies and
organizations throughout the province. Our role is to provide information to
relevant organizations that will
subsequently lead to improvements in processes,
policies and initiatives, with the goal of preventing future deaths in similar
circumstances.
Referrals to the GLTCRC are made by the Office of the Chief Coroner in the
event that expert or specialised knowledge is needed to
further the
coroner’s investigation, and/or when there are significant concerns or
issues identified by the family, investigating
Coroner, Regional Supervising
Coroner, or other relevant
stakeholders.
The Committee
has recently noted that ‘although physical abuse and neglect causing death
is not often seen in the cases reviewed
by the GLTCRC, elder abuse in its many
forms is often a peripheral or contributory
Of course, the GLTCRC model has limitations, including that the GLTCRC is
advisory in nature and it only reviews deaths that meet
the criteria for
mandatory referral, (ie homicides in long term care or retirement homes), or
discretionary referral, (ie where systemic
issues or implications may be
Certainly, it
provides another model for improving our understanding of institutional elder
V CONCLUSIONS
Awareness of a problem but not knowing the extent or nature of it makes it
difficult to create evidence-based policies that would
provide a blueprint for
resources and programs necessary to ameliorate the
This article raises some of the systemic issues impacting on our ability to
identify and understand deaths contributed to or caused
by institutional elder
abuse. It particularly addresses the problem of limited reportability within
coronial and other death review
processes and has sought to raise some practical
solutions for consideration. Ibrahim summarised this urgent need by saying that
‘improving the quality of care for older people living in RACS in
Australia requires a better understanding of how, why, where
and when residents
We must move
beyond the underlying assumption that elder deaths are all natural
LLM, Principal Solicitor,
Townsville Community Legal Service Inc.
For the purposes of this
article, RACS are residential care as defined under
413 Meaning of
residential
Residential care
is personal care or nursing care,
or both personal care and nursing care, that:
(a) is provided to a person in a residential facility in which the person is
also provided with accommodation
(i) appropriate staffing to meet the nursing and personal care needs of
the person; and
(ii) meals and cleaning services; and
(iii) furnishings, furniture and equipment for the provision of that
care and accommodation; and
(b) meets any other requirements specified in the Subsidy Principles.
(2) However, residential care does not include any of the following:
(a) care provided to a person in the person’s private home;
(b) care provided in a hospital or in a psychiatric facility;
(c) care provided in a facility that primarily provides care to people who
are not frail and aged;
(d) care that is specified in the Subsidy Principles not to be residential
Lynn McDonald et al,
‘Institutional Abuse of Older Adults: What We Know, What We Need to
Know’ (2012) 24(2)
Journal of Elder Abuse & Neglect
Peter Townsend,
(Routledge & Paul, 1
World Health Organisation,
Elder Abuse
(11 January 2018)
http://www.who.int/en/news-room/fact-sheets/detail/elder-abuse
Lynn McDonald, ‘Elder
Abuse and Neglect in Canada: the Glass is Still Half Full’ (2011) 30(3)
Canadian Journal on Aging
Donna Goodridge and D
Wierucka, ‘Vulnerable in a Safe Place: Institutional Elder Abuse’
(1996) 9(3)
Canadian Journal of Nursing Administration
Jane Powers, Andrea Mooney and
Michael Nunno, ‘Institutional Abuse: A Review of the Literature’
(1990) 4(6)
Journal of Child and Youth Care
McDonald et al, above n
Donna Goodridge, Patricia
Johnston and Maureen Thomson, ‘Conflict and Aggression as Stressors in the
Work Environment of Nursing
Assistants: Implications for Institutional Elder
Abuse’ (1996) 8(1)
Journal of Elder Abuse & Neglect
Lawrence Schiamberg and
Daphna Gans, ‘An Ecological Framework for Contextual Risk Factors in Elder
Abuse by Adult Children’
(1999) 11(1)
Journal of Elder Abuse &
Melanie Joosten, Freda
Vrantsidis and Briony Dow, ‘Understanding Elder Abuse: A Scoping
Study’ (Research Report No 16,
University of Melbourne and the National
Ageing Research Institute, 2017) 16.
McDonald et al, above n 2,
Care Act 1997
212 Eligibility to receive
residential care
person is eligible to receive
residential care
(a) the person has physical, medical, social or psychological needs
that require the provision of care; and
(b) those needs can be met appropriately through residential care
services; and
(c) the person meets the criteria (if any) specified in the Approval of
Care Recipients Principles as the criteria that a person
must meet in order to
be eligible to be approved as a recipient of residential care.
Etienne Krug et al (eds),
World Report on Violence and Health
(World Health Organisation, 2002)
Tatiana Hitchen et al,
‘Premature and Preventable Deaths in Frail, Older People: A New
Perspective’ (2017) 37(8)
Ageing & Society
Lawrence Schiamberg et al,
‘Elder Abuse in Nursing Homes: An Ecological Perspective’ (2011)
Journal of Elder Abuse & Neglect
Australian Law Reform
Commission,
Elder Abuse
A National Legal Response,
131 (2017) 110.
Legislative Council General
Purpose Standing Committee No 2, Parliament of New South Wales,
Elder Abuse
in New South Wales
Rosemary Mann et al,
‘Norma’s Project: A Research Study into the Sexual Assault of Older
Women in Australia’ (Research
Report No 98, Australian Research Centre in
Sex, Health and Society, June 2014).
Christine Barter,
‘Who's to Blame: Conceptualising Institutional Abuse by Children’
(1997) 133(1)
Early Child Development and Care
Aged Care Act 1997
(Cth) sch 1.
House of Representatives
Standing Committee on Health, Aged Care and Sport, Parliament of Australia,
Inquiry into the Quality of Care in Residential Aged Care Facilities in
(2018) Terms of Reference.
Inquest into the Death
of Margery Frost
[2009] Queensland Coroners Court 1725 (31 May 2011).
Claire Spivakovsky,
‘Restrictive Interventions in Victoria’s Disability Sector: Issues
for Discussion and Reform’
(Discussion Paper, Office of the Public
Advocate, August 2012) 3.
Office of the Public
Advocate Queensland, ‘Legal Frameworks for the Use of Restrictive
Practices in Residential Aged Care:
An Analysis of Australian and International
Queensland, June
[2008] AATA 681.
Ibid [122].
Office of the Public
Advocate of Queensland, Submission to the Standing Committee on Health, Aged
Care and Sport,
Inquiry into the Quality of Care in Residential Aged Care,
February 2018, 3.
Australian Law Reform
Commission, above n 20, [4.10]–[4.11].
Commonwealth, Royal
Commission into Institutional Responses to Child Sexual Abuse,
(2017) vol 1, 17–18.
Australian Institute of
Health and Welfare,
(15 January 2018)
<https://www.aihw.gov.au/reports-statistics/health-welfare-services/aged-care/overview
Hitchen et al, above n 18,
Ibid, 1531.
Australian Bureau of
Statistics,
Causes of Death, Australia, 2016: Explanatory Notes
September 2017)
http://www.abs.gov.au/AUSSTATS/abs@.nsf/Lookup/3303.0Explanatory%20Notes12016?OpenDocument
Briony Murphy et al,
‘Suicide Among Nursing Home Residents in Australia: A National
Population-Based Retrospective Analysis
of Medico-Legal Death Investigation
Information’ (2018) 33(5)
International Journal of Geriatric Psychiatry
Joseph Ibrahim et al,
‘Premature Deaths of Nursing Home Residents: an Epidemiological
(2017) 2016(10)
Medical Journal of Australia
Hitchen et al, above n 18,
Australian Bureau of
Statistics, above n 39.
Hitchen et al, above n 18,
Ibid 1537–8.
Ibid 1537–8.
Laura Mosqueda and Aileen
Wiglesworth, ‘Coroner Investigations of Suspicious Elder Deaths’
(Research Report No 239923,
National Criminal Justice Reference Service, October
Hugh Selby,
Aftermath of Death: Coronials, Law, Pathology, Counsellors, Safety, Media
(Federation Press, 1992) 6.
W Vollgraff, W,
‘Observations sur le sixieme discours d’Antiphon’ (1948) 1(4)
Coroners Act 2003
David Studdert et al,
‘Duration of Death Investigations that Proceed to Inquest in
Australia’ (2016) 22(5)
Injury Prevention
Ian Freckleton,
‘Minimising the Counter-Therapeutic Effects of Coronial Investigations: In
QUT Law Review
Studdert et al, above n 64,
Queensland Courts,
Coroner’s Guidelines Chapter 8: Findings
Simon Walter et al,
‘Factors Predicting Coroners’ Decisions to Hold Discretionary
Inquests’ (2012) 184(5)
Canadian Medical Association Journal
526; Studdert et al, above n 64.
Studdert et al, above n 64,
Walter et al, above n 71,
Ibrahim et al, above n 44,
Inquest into the Death
of Caterina Montalto
[2013] Coroners Court of Victoria 2011/2017 (18
December 2013).
Ibid 19, 52.
Inquest into the Death
of Albert Eric Bruce Biffin
[2017] Coroners Court of Queensland 2013/751 (3
Inquest into the Death
of Ruth Ann Dicker
[2013] Coroners Court of South Australia (14 August
Ibrahim et al, above n 44,
Residential Aged Care
(1 February 2018) The Communiqués
http://vifmcommuniques.org/residential-aged-care-communique/#home
R v Cardiff City
Coroner, Ex Parte Thomas
[1970] 3 All ER 469.
The Australian Bureau of
Statistics also uses this term. See Australian Bureau of Statistics,
of Death, Australia, 2013
(31 March 2015)
http://www.abs.gov.au/AUSSTATS/abs@.nsf/Lookup/3303.0Explanatory+Notes12013
‘Old People’s
‘Residential Institution’
in ‘Place of Occurrence’ of
death. See World Health Organisation,
International Statistical
Classification of Diseases and Related Health Problems 10
, 2016, Chapter XX
http://apps.who.int/classifications/icd10/browse/2016/en#/XX
Studdert et al, above n 64,
Coroners Act 2017
Coroners Act 1997
Coroners Act 1993
Coroners Act 1995
Coroners Act 2008
Coroners Act 1996
Sarah Middleton and Michael
Buist, ‘The Coronial Reporting of Medical-Setting Deaths: A Legal Analysis
of the Variation in
Australian Jurisdictions’
[2014] MelbULawRw 5
(2014) 37(3)
University Law Review
Inquest into the Death
of Caterina Montalto
[2013] Coroners Court of Victoria 2011/2017 (18
December 2013).
Coroners Act 2003
Queensland Courts,
State Coroner’s Guidelines Chapter 8: Findings
Coroners Act 2003
Mosqueda and
Wiglesworth, above n 60, 37.
Coroners Act 2009
See the interplay
sections 6(1)
Coroners Act 2009
Queensland Courts,
State Coroner’s Guidelines Chapter 8: Findings
Coroner’s Court
Domestic Violence Death Review Team Role and Function
http://www.coroners.justice.nsw.gov.au/Pages/Publications/dv_annual_reports.aspx
Special Taskforce on
Domestic and Family Violence in Queensland,
Not Now, Not Ever: Putting an End
to Domestic and Family Violence in Queensland
(2015); Communities,
Disability Services and Domestic and Family Violence Prevention Committee,
Parliament of Queensland,
Inquiry into the Adequacy of Financial Protections
for Queensland’s Seniors
Legislative Council
General Purpose Standing Committee No 2, Parliament of New South Wales,
Abuse in New South Wales
Victoria, Royal
Commission into Family Violence,
Summary and Recommendations
(2016) Paper
Neglect, Abuse and
Violence against Older Women
UN Doc ST/ESA/351 (2013) 3–56.
Rae Kaspiew, Rachel
Carson and Helen Rhoades, ‘Elder Abuse: Understanding Issues, Frameworks
and Responses’ (Research
Report No 35, Australian Institute of Family
Studies, February 2016) 2.
Domestic and Family
Violence Death Review and Advisory Board,
Procedural Guidelines 2016-19.
Ibid 16–17.
Domestic and Family
Violence Protection Act 2012
Kaspiew, Carson and
Rhoades, above n 115, 5.
See definition of
‘Relevant Relationship’ at
and ‘Family Relationship
and Relative’ at
Domestic and Family Violence Protection
Domestic and Family
Violence Protection Act 2012
Mosqueda and
Wiglesworth, above n 60.
Ibid 10–11.
Joseph Ibrahim, Lyndal
Bugeja and David Ranson, ‘Using Existing Information from Medico-Legal
Death Investigations to Improve
Care of Older People in Residential Aged Care
(2013) 21(2)
Journal of Law and Medicine
McDonald et al, above n
Kaspiew, Carson and
Rhoades, above n 115, 5.
Lixia Qu et al,
‘Elder Abuse Prevalence Scoping Study: Final Report’ (Report,
Australian Institute of Family Studies,
Joseph Ibrahim,
Recommendations for Prevention of Injury Related Deaths in Residential Aged
Care Services
(Monash University, 2017) 14–16.
Ibid 16–19.
Ibid 19–21.
Ibid 41, 55, 67, 87,
Ibrahim, Bugeja and
Ranson, above n 130.
The Commonwealth’s
most obvious powers for aged care lie at
s 51(xxiii)
s 51(xxiiiA)
Constitution
Wendy Lacey,
‘Neglectful to the Point of Cruelty? Elder Abuse and the Rights of Older
Persons in Australia’
[2014] SydLawRw 4
(2014) 36(1)
Sydney Law Review
Kaspiew, Carson and
Rhoades, above n 115, 21–2.
Convention on
Elimination of all Forms of Discrimination Against Women,
signed 18 December
1979 (entered into force 3 September 1981);
International Covenant on
Economic, Social and Cultural Rights,
signed 16 December 1966 (entered into
force 3 January 1976);
International Covenant on Civil and Political
, signed 16 December 1966 (entered into force 23 March 1976);
Convention on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities,
signature 30 March 2007 (entered into force 13 December 2006);
against Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or Punishment,
signed 4 February 1985 (entered into force 26 June 1987).
Follow-up to the
Second World Assembly on Ageing,
GA RES 65182, 65
February 2011);
Towards a Comprehensive and Integral International Legal
Instrument to Promote and Protect the Rights and Dignity of Older Persons
GA RES 67139, 67
sess (13 February 2013);
Measures to Enhance
the Promotion and Protection of the Human Rights and Dignity of Older
GA RES 70164, 70
sess (22 February 2016).
Robin Allen et al,
‘Freedom from Violence, Abuse and Neglect in Older Age’, Submission
to the Open-ended Working Group
on Aging, May 2017.
Hitchen et al, above n
World Health
Organization,
World Report on Ageing and Health
Susan Fiske and Michael
North, ‘A Prescriptive Intergenerational-Tension Ageism Scale: Succession,
Identity and Consumption’
(2013) 25(3)
Psychological Assessment
Mosqueda and
Wiglesworth, above n 60, 3–4.
Mégret, ‘The Human Rights of Older Persons: A Growing
Human Rights Law Review
Mosqueda and
Wiglesworth, above n 60, 10.
Joseph Ibrahim et al,
‘Nature and Extent of External-Cause Deaths of Nursing Home Residents in
Victoria, Australia’
(2015) 63(5)
Journal of American Geriatric Society
Productivity Commission,
Caring for Older Australians: Overview,
Report No 53 (2011) xxii.
Commonwealth of
Australia, Department of Health,
Legislative Review of Aged Care Act 2017
(2017), 19.
Aaron Groves (Chief
Psychiatrist (WA)),
The Oakden Report
(Department for Health and Ageing
(SA), 2017).
Kate Carnell and Ron
Paterson, ‘Review of National Aged Care Quality Regulatory
Processes’ (Report, Department of Health
(Cth), 25 October 2017).
Ibid. See also
recommendation 7.
Ibid recommendation 6.
Ibid 111–14.
Groves, above n 167, 77.
Australian Law Reform
Commission, above n 20, [4.1]–[4.6].
Ibid [4.9].
Public Guardian Act
Office of the Public
Guardian of Queensland,
Annual Report 2016-17
Office of the Public
Advocate Queensland, above n 29.
Community Affairs
Committee, Parliament of Australia,
Effectiveness of the Aged Care Quality
Assessment and Accreditation Framework for Protecting Residents from Abuse and
Poor Practices,
and Ensuring Proper Clinical and Medical Care Standards are
Maintained and Practised Interim report
(2018) Ch 4.
Aged Care Complaints
Commissioner, Submission No 148 to Australian Law Reform Commission,
into Protecting the Rights of Older Australians from Abuse,
August 2016, 8.
Aged Care Complaints
Principles 2014
(Cth) cl 6(1) citing the
Aged Care Act 1997
Guidelines for
the Aged Care Complaints Commissioner
(Australian Government, Version 2.0,
2017), 57 [5.29].
Aged Care Complaints
Principles 2014
(Cth) cl 8(e).
Guidelines for the Aged
Care Complaints Commissioner, above n 182, 57.
Aged Care Complaints
Commissioner,
Archived Industry Information
(29 November 2017)
<https://www.agedcarecomplaints.gov.au/internet/accc/publishing.nsf/Content/archived-industry-information
Ibrahim et al, above n
44; Ibrahim, above n 135.
User Rights Care
Principles 2014
(Cth) Schedule 1.
See Community Affairs
Committee, above n 178; Standing Committee on Health, Aged Care and Sport,
Parliament of Australia,
Inquiry into the Quality of Care in Residential Aged
Care Facilities in Australia
Community Affairs
Committee, above n 178, 67.
Parliament of Australia,
Single Quality Framework Draft Aged Care Quality Standards
, Consultation
Paper 2017.
Queensland,
Parliamentary Debates,
Legislative Assembly, 1 April 2003, 1059 (M
Coroners Act 2003
Geriatric and Long Term
Care Review Committee, Office of the Chief Coroner of Ontario,
2017 Annual
Geriatric and Long Term
Care Review Committee, Office of the Chief Coroner of Ontario,
2016 Annual
McDonald et al, above n
Ibrahim et al, above n
Mosqueda and
Wiglesworth, above n 60, 37.
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (447 KB)
PDF format (412 KB)
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter