URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/journals/WAStuLawRw/2023/4.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 15:59:04
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Lucassen, Elena --- "Minister for Home Affairs V Benbrika and Non-Punitive Incarceration: a Necessary Move Towards the Development of Preventive Justice or Another Constitutional Controversy?" [2023] WAStuLawRw 4; (2023) 6 Western Australian Student Law Review 53
MINISTER FOR HOME AFFAIRS V BENBRIKA AND NON-PUNITIVE INCARCERATION: A NECESSARY MOVE TOWARDS THE DEVELOPMENT OF PREVENTIVE JUSTICE
OR ANOTHER CONSTITUTIONAL CONTROVERSY?
MINISTER FOR HOME AFFAIRS V BENBRIKA
NON-PUNITIVE INCARCERATION: A NECESSARY MOVE TOWARDS THE DEVELOPMENT OF
PREVENTIVE JUSTICE OR ANOTHER CONSTITUTIONAL CONTROVERSY?
NON-PUNITIVE INCARCERATION—PREVENTIVE
MINISTER FOR HOME AFFAIRS V BENBRIKA
(2021) 272 CLR
—COMMONWEALTH
CONSTITUTION
CHAPTER III
COURTS—SEPARATION OF POWERS—INSTITUTIONAL
INTEGRITY—IMPLICATIONS ON HUMAN LIBERTY
‘History, and not only ancient history, shows that in countries
where democratic institutions have been unconstitutionally superseded,
been done not seldom by those holding the executive
This article explores
the development of jurisprudence around non-punitive incarceration, explaining
the implications of the decision
in the case of Minister for Home Affairs v
Benbrika (2021) 272 CLR 68 (‘Benbrika’) on human liberty, the
separation of
powers doctrine, and the institutional integrity of Ch III courts.
The article argues that the plurality decision in
Benbrika has made it
easier for the Commonwealth Parliament to characterise incarceration as
non-punitive, which in turn may lead
to an individual’s incarceration
without a finding of guilt beyond reasonable doubt.
The article also
argues that the High Court should re-open the cases of Fardon v Attorney-General
[2004] HCA 46
(2004) 223 CLR 575
, Thomas v Mowbray
[2007] HCA 33
(2007) 233 CLR 307
Benbrika for a careful examination of the reasonings, giving more attention to
the implications posed by the decisions.
I INTRODUCTION
Since the early 2000s, Australia has seen a rapid growth in the use of
preventive detention, especially in the application of anti-terrorism
legislation,
and where sex
offenders are deemed to pose an unacceptable risk of re-offending after release
from prison.
In determining the
constitutional validity of such laws, the High Court of Australia (‘High
Court’) is progressively
moving away from the original notion of punitive
detention based on a finding of criminal guilt. It appears that the High Court
moving towards the new characterisation of incarceration as
non-punitive,
provided the laws
have a clear non-punitive object of protecting the community from harm, and do
not breach Ch III of the
Commonwealth
Constitution
that is, the
laws do not ‘compromise the institutional integrity and independence of
any court involved in the
This article will argue that the plurality decision in
Minister for Home
Affairs v Benbrika
has made it easier for the Commonwealth Parliament to characterise
incarceration as non-punitive, which in turn may lead to an individual’s
incarceration without a finding of guilt beyond reasonable doubt. Initially,
of this article will explore the development of jurisprudence around
non-punitive incarceration. It will then focus on the decision
, explaining how the plurality reached the decision. Finally,
will explain the implications of
on human liberty, the
separation of powers doctrine, and the institutional integrity of Ch III courts.
The article will also argue
that due to the significant implications posed, the
High Court should re-open the cases of
Fardon v Attorney-General (Qld)
Thomas v Mowbray
careful examination of the Court’s reasoning in those cases and to give
more attention to the implications posed.
II THE DEVELOPMENT OF THE CHARACTER OF INCARCERATION: FROM
PUNITIVE TO NON-PUNITIVE
Chu Kheng Lim v Minister for Immigration, Local
Government and Ethnic Affairs: A Starting Point
To explain how the plurality of the High Court in
arrived at the
conclusion that the imposition of non‑punitive incarceration was within
the power of the Commonwealth, it is
necessary to first explore the development
of recent jurisprudence, starting with the case of
Chu Kheng Lim v Minister
for Immigration, Local Government and Ethnic Affairs
The case of
concerned the constitutional validity of certain sections
Migration Act 1958
(Cth), which authorised the compulsory
detention in custody of certain non-citizens. The majority of the High Court
held that ‘putting
to one side the exceptional cases ... the involuntary
detention of a citizen in custody by the State is penal or punitive in character
and, under our system of government, exists only as an incident of the
exclusively judicial function of adjudging and punishing criminal
This has been
termed the ‘
principle’.
The High Court
further clarified that ‘[d]etention in custody in circumstances not
involving some breach of the criminal law
and not coming within well-accepted
categories is offensive to ordinary notions of what is involved in a just
Therefore, any
involuntary detention (even short of incarceration) was originally considered
Well-accepted categories of exceptions to the
include where an
accused person is detained on remand pending
and detention in cases of
mental illness and infectious
Both categories could
‘legitimately be seen as non-punitive in character and as not necessarily
involving the exercise of judicial
As observed by
Gaudron J in
Commonwealth,
exceptions to the
principle involving the involuntary detention of
those suffering from mental illness or infectious disease share a purpose of
the community from
However, the
exceptions are ‘neither clear nor within precise and confined
categories’.
extending the exceptions to the administrative detention of a non-citizen that
was reasonably necessary to achieve a non-punitive
purpose (a grant of an entry
permit or removal from the country), the High Court in
effectively
allowed courts to extend the list of exceptions further in
However, the High Court
cautioned that for detention to have non-punitive character, the legislation
providing for detention should
have a justified non-punitive
principle has been referred to by many courts when considering
the validity of laws conferring judicial power to incarcerate an individual
non-punitive purposes, including in
Kable v Director of Public Prosecutions
These cases will
be discussed below.
Kable: An Unsuccessful First Attempt
was concerned with the
Community Protection Act
(NSW), which vested the Supreme Court of New South Wales with
powers to order re-incarceration of a dangerous criminal offender—in
case, Mr Kable, who had already served his sentence of imprisonment. One of the
issues for the High Court was whether the legislation
was invalid because it
authorised the incarceration of a person ‘not for what he has
done but for what the [government and
the Parliament] fear that he might
Even though the
legislation had a legitimate non-punitive purpose of protecting the community,
the majority held that non‑punitive
incarceration without a prior finding
of criminal guilt could not be
The High Court further
emphasised that such an authority to do so was ‘non-judicial in nature ...
and repugnant to the judicial
process in a fundamental
The second issue was whether valid legislation could be
ad hominiem
nature; that is, tailored to a particular individual as opposed to a class of
persons. The High Court answered in the
As will be explained
below, it is this second finding that other courts have subsequently decided to
take into consideration, while
completely overlooking—and, in some
instances, contradicting—the finding that incarceration without a prior
criminal guilt is repugnant to the judicial process.
Controversial Fardon
Court considered the validity of the
Dangerous Prisoners (Sexual Offenders)
Dangerous Prisoners Act
which empowered the Supreme Court of Queensland to make interim detention
orders and continuing detention orders for serious sexual
offenders after the
expiry of their sentence of incarceration. The
Dangerous Prisoners Act
considered in
differed from the legislation that was found to be invalid
that it was not
ad hominiem
in nature; the
Dangerous Prisoners Act
authorised the executive to single out not a particular individual, but a class
of persons who could be re‑incarcerated without
a fresh finding of
criminal guilt.
The majority in
relied primarily
on this difference and held that the judicial power was valid, and that interim
detention orders and continuing
detention orders were
non-punitive.
The High Court did
not consider the first finding in
focusing on
procedural features of the
Dangerous Prisoners Act
instead, which has
sparked criticism by academics.
In doing so, the High Court effectively overruled
without any express
acknowledgement or reasoning for departing from the
It is worth noting
that two members of the majority in
, McHugh and Gummow JJ, who
came to the opposite conclusion in
provided no
explanation as to the change in their views.
The majority in
held that incarceration would not have a
punitive nature if it was ordered for non-punitive
Dangerous Prisoners Act
provided for ‘the continued detention
in custody or supervised release of a particular class of prisoner to ensure
protection of the
community’.
Court had to be satisfied of the ‘unacceptable risk’ standard
‘to a high degree of
probability’.
onus of proof that a prisoner remains a danger to the community was held to be
sufficient for the
Dangerous Prisoners Act
to be regarded as protective
and not punitive.
Gleeson CJ further explained:
If it is lawful and appropriate for a judge to make an assessment of danger
to the community at the time of sentencing ... it may
be thought curious that it
is inappropriate for a judge to make such an assessment at or near the time of
imminent release, when
the danger might be assessed more
accurately.
Thus, the proper characterisation of the
Dangerous Prisoners Act
found to be protective rather than punitive
Even More Controversial Thomas
Court had to determine whether a scheme concerning the making of control orders
against persons suspected of terrorist activities,
as inserted into the
Criminal Code
Anti-Terrorism Act [No 2] 2005
was valid. Unlike
the preventive detention orders in
control orders
stopped short of incarcerating an offender in a state facility and restricted
where a person could be at specified
times. The High Court drew attention to
this fact, stating that ‘[d]etention in the custody of the State differs
significantly
in degree and quality from what may be entailed by observance of
an interim control order’.
Still, it seems clear that an order imposing a restriction on a person to be at
specified places at specified times could amount
to punitive detention in all
Additionally, the legislation did not impose a requirement for the existence
of a prior criminal offence. Indeed, the appellant in
was found to
be not guilty of the offence of intentionally providing resources to a terrorist
organisation and was released from
To address this point,
the High Court said that ‘the jurisdiction to bind over did not depend on
a conviction and it could
be exercised in respect of a risk or threat of
criminal conduct against the public at
The High Court adopted the observations of McHugh J in
(but not in
and found that the
power to issue control orders could be validly conferred on a federal court
because it was judicial power. Chief
Justice Gleeson held:
The power to restrict or interfere with a person’s liberty on the basis
of what that person might do in the future, rather than
on the basis of a
judicial determination of what the person has done, which involves interfering
with legal rights, and creating
new legal obligations, rather than resolving a
dispute about existing rights and obligations, is in truth a power that has
and is, exercised by courts in a variety of
circumstances.
Reaching this conclusion, Gleeson CJ drew analogies with reference to
historical practices such as bail and apprehended violence orders.
However, as
his Honour acknowledged, these ‘analogies are not
Justice Kirby, in his Honour’s dissenting judgment, performed a
detailed examination of these analogies and explained that
such analogies should
not be relied upon because they ‘are distinguishable and therefore fail as
analogies’.
Justice Kirby further added that deprivation of liberty by the judiciary
based on an assumption by an official of some future act,
not necessarily one to
be committed by a person subject to a control order, should not be validly
upheld because doing so would deny
a person their basic legal rights of a fair
trial and would seriously undermine public confidence in federal
Benbrika as a Consequence of Fardon and Thomas
The recent case that followed
on the issue of
preventive incarceration orders is
, the High Court had to determine the validity of the power to
order persons who have been convicted of a terrorist offence to be
re‑incarcerated for a further period after the expiration of their
sentence of imprisonment, conferred by s 105A.7 of the
Criminal Code
Exercise of the Federal Judicial Power
The plurality began their reasoning by stating that the scheme in question
was comparable to the one in
problem with this comparison: as highlighted by Gordon J in her
Honour’s dissenting judgment, while the two schemes
are drafted in similar
terms, they differ significantly in the legal and practical operation due to the
difference in the kinds and
range of conduct which may constitute the identified
It was further suggested by the plurality that the legislation in
had been tested
against the
principles and had survived,
although this might not be the case, as explained above in Part IIC.
Additionally, Gordon J noted an additional problem with this
reasoning: the
principle asked
whether a task given to a state court impaired the institutional integrity of
that state court, but in
federal court that was assigned the
Next, the plurality made
brief reference to
as authority for the validity of the power of Ch III courts to issue
control orders. This reference established that issuing continuing
orders is within the jurisdiction of Ch III
These findings of the plurality contain limited reasons as to the
constitutional underpinnings of the federal judicial power to issue
incarceration orders; however, they create significant implications for the
separation of powers doctrine and the institutional
integrity of Ch III
courts, as will be explained in Part IIIC. Finally, the plurality established
that s 105A.7 could be seen as
a valid exception to the
principle, stating:
There is no principled reason for distinguishing the power of a Ch III court
to order that a mentally ill person be detained in custody
for the protection of
the community from harm and the power to order that a terrorist offender be
detained in custody for the same
purpose. It is the protective purpose that
qualifies a power as an exception to a principle that is recognised under our
government as a safeguard on
Non-Punitive Character of Incarceration
Chief Justice Kiefel explained in
that if the
legislation had a clear object to protect the community from an unacceptable
risk of harm, then incarceration pursuant
to a continuing detention order could
be seen as non-punitive:
Detention in prison is
prima facie
penal or punitive; however, that
characterisation may be displaced by an evident non-punitive purpose.
This Court has consistently held, and most recently in
detention that has as its purpose the protection of the community is not
punishment. As Gummow J explained, the making of a
continuing detention order
under the Qld Act did not punish Fardon twice, nor did it increase his
punishment for the offences of
which he had been
In affirming the non-punitive character of incarceration, the plurality
further stated:
The object of Div 105A ... is plainly directed to the protection of the
community from harm. The fact that the Parliament has chosen
not to pursue this
object by a more extreme measure that is not conditioned on the subject being a
‘terrorist offender’
does not gainsay that the object of the
continuing detention order is community protection and not punishment. Nor does
that the detention for which Div 105A provides is in a prison detract
from the conclusion that its purpose is protective and not
It will be argued in Part IIIA that these reasons and findings of the
plurality, paired with the manner in which the plurality chose
to exercise
judicial power, has made it easier for the Commonwealth Parliament to
characterise incarceration as non-punitive, which
in turn may lead to an
individual’s incarceration without a finding of guilt beyond reasonable
Non-Punitive Purpose of Legislation
As the plurality’s reasoning in
primarily focused on
the legitimate non-punitive purpose of legislation, as opposed to the nature of
federal judicial power, it is
important to examine how the High Court has
assessed the meaning of a non-punitive protective purpose. In
the object of the relevant legislation stated: ‘to ensure the safety and
protection of the community by providing for the
continuing detention of
terrorist offenders who pose an unacceptable risk of committing serious Part 5.3
offences if released into
community’.
Justice Gageler cautioned that the legitimacy of the objective is to be
determined by examination of ‘the compatibility of
what the impugned law
is designed to achieve in fact with values protected by the constitutional
principle to be
, the High Court said: ‘if imprisonment goes beyond what
is reasonably necessary to achieve the non-punitive object, it will
be regarded
as punitive in character’.
Explanations of what might be seen as ‘reasonably necessary’ have
since been offered by the plurality in
: ‘demonstration
that legislation is non-punitive is essential, but it does not suffice. As a
matter of substance, the power
must have as its object the protection of the
community from harm’.
Justice Gageler agreed that the concern should be with substance and not
further suggested that prevention of harm which is grave and specific would
constitute a legitimate non-punitive objective,
while merely the prevention of a
criminal offence would not.
Thus, the High Court should be satisfied that ‘the offender would engage
in conduct the consequences of which would be grave
or serious for society as a
whole, or some part of it; a bare conclusion that it was probable the offender
would commit some indictable
offence in the future would not
Additionally,
the risk of committing a future offence should be ‘unacceptable’ to
a judge in light of the facts as they
stand at the time of making an
Finally, as suggested by
the plurality in
, the protective purpose would be supported by
the requirement to treat the incarcerated person in a way ‘as far as
possible, that is appropriate to their status as a person not serving
a sentence of
imprisonment’.
Thus, it appears that the High Court has moved towards the new
characterisation of incarceration as non-punitive, provided the laws
clear non-punitive object of protecting the community from harm. However, this
poses implications on human liberty, the separation
of powers doctrine, and the
institutional integrity of Ch III courts.
III IMPLICATIONS OF
ON HUMAN LIBERTY, THE
SEPARATION OF POWERS DOCTRINE, AND THE INSTITUTIONAL INTEGRITY OF CH III
Incarceration Without Proof of Criminal Guilt
Historically, a criminal trial has been a bulwark of liberty in
At federation, the
power to incarcerate a person without a criminal trial did not
In traditional criminal
law, a person could only be incarcerated following the curial process, and there
was an initial presumption
A criminal offence
had to be committed first, followed by a fair trial of the accused by a jury,
where a charge had to be proven
beyond reasonable
However, as seen in the
decisions above, the fundamental principle allowing the deprivation of liberty
only upon criminal conviction,
might have deteriorated. For example, pursuant to
considered valid law), a person could be re-incarcerated at state level, without
any new finding of criminal guilt, purely
on the assumption that they might
commit a future offence. In such cases, it is difficult to see how the
presumption of innocence
would apply; at the time of the review hearing a person
could be seen as a danger to the community simply because of their previous
conviction for which they have been initially incarcerated. It effectively
becomes the offender’s responsibility during their
initial incarceration
to prove they do not pose an unacceptable risk of recidivism by participating in
rehabilitation.
Further, the
review hearing is conducted by a single judge as opposed to a jury, which
raises questions of objectiveness and
impartiality.
Additionally, a
judge is to make their decision on the basis of the admissible
As highlighted by
[w]hen courts are required to predict the future, the prediction will usually
be determined having regard to expert evidence. Rarely,
if ever, would it be
information about which expert evidence, independent of the relevant government
agency, could be adduced. In
such cases the court would be left with little
practical choice except to act upon the view that was proffered by the relevant
Finally, proof beyond reasonable doubt is not required for a preventive
detention order to be issued in a review
Thus, while the
legislation in
for a person’s review hearing, such hearing has ‘no real resemblance
to a criminal trial’.
Above all, the number of subsequent review hearings is not
which could
potentially lead to indefinite incarceration. It is argued that allowing for the
re-incarceration of a person without
the commission of a fresh criminal offence
and without a traditional criminal trial offends the fundamental principles of
and breaks ‘the nexus between crime and punishment that is
fundamental to [the Australian] system of
Nevertheless, the plurality in
expressly affirmed the decision in
thus agreeing
with the preventive legislative scheme as a whole, but took a few bold steps
Further Implications on Human Liberty
First, as highlighted by Gageler J, by declaring div
valid, the plurality
allowed the Commonwealth Parliament to:
[extrapolate] from continuing detention to protect against a narrow category
of inherently harmful criminal conduct to continuing
detention to prevent
criminal conduct remote from the terrorist acts ... The exceptional case of
detention in custody otherwise than
as punishment for a past offence has in the
result become unexceptional in relation to offences having some (even very
remote) connection
to a potential terrorist
To reiterate, the legislation in
was subject to
being a narrow category of a dangerous ‘criminal offender’ or
‘sexual offender’ respectively.
The legislation in
‘intentionally associating with the terrorist
organisation’,
wide range of actions that are regarded as ‘engaging in a terrorist
includes any preparatory acts or mere membership in a terrorist
organisation.
together, the definitions in div
dealt with by the High
cover a very broad category of persons who could be somehow connected to a
terrorist act and therefore incarcerated, presenting great
danger to the liberty
of a person.
Second, while the Court in
insisted that for the positive
outcome of the review of subsequent re-incarceration to occur, the emphasis of
the legislation should
be placed on rehabilitation, appropriate treatment, and
staged reintegration,
is no such rehabilitation objective in the legislation considered in
Thus, once a
person has been found guilty beyond reasonable doubt, incarcerated and later
re-incarcerated for the prescribed period
of time, there seems to be little
opportunity given to the offender to satisfy a judge to a reasonable degree that
they might have
changed and consequently should not be
re‑incarcerated.
Finally, the plurality in
expressly allowed for the
incarceration to be ‘not conditioned on the subject being a
offender”’,
discussed in Part IIE2. It is the definition of a ‘terrorist
offender’ that requires a person to be held continuously
in custody at the
time of issuing a continuing detention order. The High Court in
went further to explain that the power in question to issue a continuing
detention order is conditioned ‘on the status of the
offender as a
prisoner serving a sentence for a terrorist offence (or having been in custody
continuously since having been convicted
However, one
may argue that the statement of not being subject to being a terrorist offender
could amount to not being subject to
continuous custody. This would allow for a
continuing detention order to become a preventive detention order similar to the
but with far
greater consequences of incarceration. Such a statement of the plurality also
raises a potential for the incarceration
to be applied to any class of persons
that might be regarded as dangerous or harmful to the community by the
legislature, so long
as it does not distort the institutional integrity of a
court and is for a protective non-punitive purpose; the latter of which could
achieved through careful
The Separation of Powers and the Institutional Integrity
of Ch III Courts
While the plurality in
appeared to
be concerned with determining whether preventive orders which allow
incarceration should be characterised as punitive
or non‑punitive, it
seems the very fact that preventive detention orders issued in these ways offend
the doctrine of separation
of powers may have been
overlooked.
This oversight
could undermine the institutional integrity demanded by the High Court of the
legislature and the executive.
Attorney-General (Cth) v The Queen; Ex parte
Boilermakers’ Society of Australia
Boilermakers’
Commonwealth
Constitution
forbids the conferral of judicial and
non‑judicial power upon one body. The doctrine of separation of powers was
affirmed in
many cases including
Therefore, Ch
III courts can exercise only judicial power. Arguably, federal legislation which
gives the High Court power to make
non-punitive incarceration orders for
protection of the community is conferring on the High Court non-judicial power,
Boilermakers
In reaching the conclusion that the power to make non-punitive incarceration
orders conferred by the federal legislation was federal
judicial power and could
be validly exercised by the High Court, the plurality in
heavily on specific findings in
These findings
will now be addressed, as they offend the separation of powers doctrine and
damage the institutional integrity of
Ch III courts.
The Judicial Power of Ch III Courts Requires a Matter
As reiterated by Gordon J in
, ‘[t]he judicial power of
the Commonwealth under Ch III requires that there be a “matter”
before there can be an
exercise of federal judicial
Justice Gordon
also cautioned
that merely observing that
the legislation was enacted to further desirable public ends did not answer
whether the task was within
the judicial power of the Commonwealth; rather, it
invited closer attention to whether the High Court was ‘used to further
legislative or executive objective or issue of policing and detecting future
crime by dressing the objective or issue in the garb
of a judicial
determination’.
Whether an application for any preventive order could constitute a
‘matter’ was decided by the plurality in
(and earlier
reference to McHugh J’s finding of a matter in
explained in
that ‘[t]he exercise of judicial power often involves the making of orders
upon determining that a particular fact or status
exists. It does so, for
example, in the cases of matrimonial causes, bankruptcy, probate and the winding
up of companies’.
argued that the analogies to which his Honour referred are very different as
they are civil law matters, which rarely (if ever)
result in incarceration and
potential further re-incarceration.
It is also worth noting that there is a further issue with his Honour’s
, as discussed in
in his Honour’s
earlier decision in
supported the opposite view, that is, that non-punitive incarceration without a
prior finding of criminal guilt could not
This was because it
was ‘non-judicial in nature ... and repugnant to the judicial process in a
fundamental degree’, even
where the legislation had a legitimate
non‑punitive purpose of protecting the
His Honour did not
an opposite conclusion was arrived at. It is thus unclear why the plurality in
chose to rely
on McHugh J’s finding of a ‘matter’ in
Such reliance
seems arguable and could lead to the infringement of the separation of powers
doctrine and damage the institutional
integrity of Ch III courts.
Exercise of the Judicial Power: From the State Level to the Federal
the plurality in
acknowledged
that the conferral of power in
was at the state level, and thus
the Supreme Court was not restricted to exercising only judicial functions, due
to the absence of
a strict separation of powers doctrine in state
constitutions.
To make the
exercise of the power valid at the federal level, the plurality in
’s ‘recognition that the
Constitution
permit different grades or qualities of
and added the
findings of a
validly conferred power to issue control orders at the federal level to the
equation. Thus, the power to issue continuing
detention orders in
capable of valid exercise at the federal level, provided it did not undermine
the High Court’s independence and impartiality
as required by the
finding raises a few issues that will be addressed further.
First, the references to
the plurality in
be addressed. As explained by Gordon J in
the decision
principle which asked whether a task assigned to a state Supreme Court impaired
the institutional integrity of that court so as to
be incompatible with the
court's exercise of Federal judicial
Her Honour further
argued that the separation of power doctrine would be inverted if one contended
that a ‘task which would
not impair the integrity of a State court can for
that reason be given to the High Court or a federal court created by the
Parliament’.
because such contention would not recognise that the basic premise of the
principle was
that ‘the State courts can be given tasks that the High Court (and federal
courts created by the Parliament)
Therefore, it
seems that the
principles could not be properly engaged in
because the
High Court was tasked by the federal legislation; and thus the
should not have been relied upon by the plurality.
Further, as highlighted by Gordon J in
[t]he Court did not decide in
whether a law of that
kind—permitting a court to make an order for continuing
detention—would be valid if made by the
Commonwealth Parliament. The Court
did not need to directly address [federal] judicial power. It does not follow
that a law of the kind considered in that case would be valid
if enacted by the Commonwealth
Parliament.
Finally, the plurality’s references to
considered. When reaching the decision in
the High Court
specifically addressed the point that issuing a control order, as a limited
circumstance of preventive interim orders,
was very different to
incarceration.
Justice Kirby
further cautioned:
Terrorist acts are indeed, potentially, serious dangers to the Australian
body politic. Effective laws to respond to such dangers
are possible, consistent
Constitution
and specifically with Ch III. However, the
lesson of the past responses of this Court to new challenges to the nation and
its security
is that fundamental features of the
Constitution
preserved or compatibly adapted. They are not
abandoned. Division 104 of the Code attempts an
unbalanced and unequal departure
from the Constitution's guarantee of equal
justice to all who come before the independent federal courts of the
Therefore, it is unclear why the plurality in
considered it
appropriate to refer to
authority for issuing continuing detention orders. Thus, it is arguable that the
plurality in
might have erred in finding that the power to make non‑punitive
incarceration orders conferred by the federal legislation was
federal judicial
power and could be validly exercised by the High Court.
IV FINAL REMARKS
In light of the implications discussed above, which were posed by the High
Court decisions in
subsequently
it is suggested that these cases should be re-opened, and the issues should be
re-considered. Careful examination of the issues and
decisions should take
place, with a stronger emphasis on protecting human liberty against potential
executive or legislative intrusion.
Indeed, the plurality in
seemed to allude to the possibility of re-opening
It is undisputable that an unacceptable risk posed by some serious sex
offenders, terrorist offenders, or any other class of dangerous
offenders for
that matter, should be mitigated and the community should be protected. It might
be that traditional criminal law is
not suitable for such cases and new
standards need to be introduced by the legislature, ‘which are consistent
Constitution
and specifically with Ch
However, in
deciding such cases, especially where liberty is at stake, the judiciary should
not divert from exercising judicial power,
overlook the doctrine of separation
of powers, or undermine the rule of law. By doing so, the judiciary could damage
public confidence
in the impartiality and integrity of federal courts. As Kirby
J reasoned in
once public confidence is lost, it will be difficult to regain.
Third-year Bachelor of Laws
(LLB) student, Edith Cowan University, Western Australia.
Australian Communist Party
v Commonwealth
[1951] HCA 5
(1951) 83 CLR 1
, 187 (Dixon J).
Criminal Code Act 1995
(Cth) sch 1 (‘
Criminal Code’
Dangerous Prisoners (Sexual
Offenders) Act 2003
Dangerous Prisoners
Recently, judges and academics
have chosen to use different terms interchangeably when describing forms of
detention, including
‘punitive or non-punitive detention’,
‘administrative detention’, ‘involuntary detention’, or
‘imprisonment’. In this article, except for direct quotations, the
word ‘detention’ will be used to mean
any form of involuntary
detention short of imprisonment, while ‘incarceration’ will be used
in reference to imprisonment
in a prison facility.
Commonwealth
Constitution
Anthony Gray, ‘Executive
Detention and the Australian
Constitution
(2014) 22(1)
Journal of Administrative Law
(2021) 272 CLR 68
[2004] HCA 46
(2004) 223 CLR 575
[2007] HCA 33
(2007) 233 CLR 307
Ibid 103 [48] (Kiefel CJ,
Bell, Keane and Steward JJ).
(1992) 176 CLR 1
Ibid 27 (Brennan, Deane and
Dawson JJ, Mason CJ agreeing at 10, Gaudron J agreeing at 55).
89–90 [15] (Kiefel CJ, Bell, Keane and Steward JJ), 130 [130]–[131]
(Gordon J), 161 [210] (Edelman J).
(Gaudron J).
Ibid 28 (Brennan, Deane and
Dawson JJ).
Blackstone,
Commentaries
on the Laws of England
(1769), bk 4, ch 22, 294.
Ibid bk 4, ch 2 at 25.
(Brennan, Deane and Dawson JJ).
[1997] HCA 27
(1997) 190 CLR 1.
Ibid 110 (Gaudron J).
Ibid. See also
Secretary of the Department of Immigration and Multicultural and Indigenous
[2004] HCA 36
(2004) 219 CLR 486
, 499 [20];
Al-Kateb v Godwin
[2004] HCA 37
, 604–5 [110], 646–7 [251].
31–2 (Brennan, Deane and Dawson JJ, Mason CJ agreeing at 10, Gaudron J
agreeing at 53).
Ibid 71 (McHugh J).
[1996] HCA 24
(1996) 189 CLR 51
Ibid 120 (McHugh J).
Ibid (Toohey J agreeing at
96–7, Gaudron J agreeing at 106, Gummow J agreeing at 132).
Ibid 132 (Gummow J). See
also Gaudron J at 106, and McHugh J at 115–16.
Ibid 98 (Toohey J), 109
(Gaudron J), 125 (Gummow J).
Patrick Keyzer,
‘Preserving Due Process or Warehousing the Undesirables: To What End the
Separation of Judicial Power of the
Commonwealth’
[2008] SydLawRw 5
(2008) 30(1)
[16]–[19] (Gleeson CJ), 596–7 [34] (McHugh J), 610 [74] (Gummow J,
Hayne J agreeing at 647–8
[196]), 654 [216]–[217] (Callinan and
Heydon JJ).
Keyzer (n 37) 104–12;
Dan Meagher, ‘The Status of the
Principle in Australian
Constitutional Law’
(2005) 16(3)
Public Law Review
Keyzer (n 37) 104.
591–2 [16]–[19] (Gleeson CJ), 596–7 [34] (McHugh J), 610 [74]
(Gummow J, Hayne J agreeing at 647–8 [196]),
654 [216]–[217]
(Callinan and Heydon JJ).
Dangerous Prisoners Act
Dangerous Prisoners Act
(n 3) s 13(3)(b).
596–7 [34] (McHugh J), 615–16 [93]–[96] (Gummow J), 649 [203]
(Callinan and Heydon JJ).
Ibid 586 [2].
Criminal Code
[115] (Gummow and Crennan JJ), 526 [651] (Heydon J).
Andrew Lynch, ‘
: Australia’s “War on Terror” Reaches the High
Court’ (2008) 32(3)
Melbourne University Law Review
1182, 1185. See
(n 9) 371 [175] where Kirby J called such impositions
‘substantial impositions on the liberty of the person’.
R v Thomas [No
[2006] VSCA 300
(2006) 14 VR 512
[120]–[121] (Gummow and Crennan JJ), 526 [651] (Heydon J).
[16] (Gleeson CJ); see also Gummow and Crennan JJ at 356 [116], Callinan J at
507–8 [595]–[596] and Heydon J
at 526 [651].
Ibid 329 [17] (Gleeson CJ,
Heydon J agreeing at 526 [651]).
[330]–[338].
Ibid 432 [357].
Criminal Code
[1] (Kiefel CJ, Bell, Keane and Steward JJ).
Ibid 140 [157], 142–6
[161]–[173].
82–3 [2] (Kiefel CJ, Bell, Keane and Steward JJ).
88–9 [14] (Kiefel CJ, Bell, Keane and Steward JJ).
[36] (Kiefel CJ, Bell, Keane and Steward JJ).
Cf ibid 148–9
[182]–[184], where Edelman J reasoned that incarceration pursuant to a
continuing detention order is punitive,
even where the aim of a continuing
detention order is to protect the community by preventing the commission of
Witham v Holloway
(1995) 183 CLR 525
, 534 (Brennan,
Deane, Toohey and Gaudron JJ), 545 (McHugh J);
Power v The
[1974] HCA 26
(1974) 131 CLR 623
, 627 (Barwick CJ, Menzies, Stephen and
Mason JJ); Keyzer (n 37) 106.
99–100 [40]–[41], citing
Falzon v Minister for Immigration and
Border Protection
[2018] HCA 2
(2018) 262 CLR 333
, 342 [24] (Kiefel CJ, Bell, Keane and
Edelman JJ),
North Australian Aboriginal Justice Agency Ltd v Northern
[2015] HCA 41
(2015) 256 CLR 569
, 611–12 [98] (Gageler J),
(n 8) 592 [20] (Gleeson CJ), 597 [34] (McHugh J), 610 [74] (Gummow J, Hayne
J agreeing at 647 [196]), 654 [217] (Callinan and Heydon
Commissioner of Police (NSW)
(2019) 269 CLR 219, 257–8 [83] (Bell,
Keane, Nettle and Edelman JJ) (‘
98–9 [39] (Kiefel CJ, Bell, Keane and Steward JJ).
Criminal Code
[78] (Gageler J, Edelman J agreeing at 149 [183]).
(McHugh J).
[36] (Kiefel CJ, Bell, Keane and Steward JJ).
Ibid 113 [78].
Ibid 113–14 [79].
Ibid 101 [43], citing
McGarry v The Queen
[2001] HCA 62
(2001) 207 CLR 121
, 129–30 [20]–[23]
(Gleeson CJ, Gaudron, McHugh, Gummow and Hayne JJ).
102–3 [46] (Kiefel CJ, Bell, Keane and Steward JJ).
Ibid 98–9 [39]
(Kiefel CJ, Bell, Keane and Steward JJ). See Keyzer (n 37) 106, who points out
that possibility of Australian
prisons to offer a different treatment is
questionable. It is beyond the scope of this article to investigate whether
prison facilities
in Australia indeed offer or are capable of offering a
different treatment required by the latter statement.
91–2 [20] (Kiefel CJ, Bell, Keane and Steward JJ).
Woolmington v
[1935] AC 462, 481;
Polyukhovich v The Queen
[1991] HCA 32
(1991) 172 CLR 501
Keyzer (n 37) 104.
Ibid. See also Jeffrey
Steven Gordon, ‘Imprisonment and the Separation of Judicial Power: A
Defence of a Categorical Immunity
from Non-Criminal Detention’
[2012] MelbULawRw 2
Melbourne University Law Review
Gordon (n 98)
Prisoners Act
(n 3) s 13(3)(a);
Criminal Code
(n 2) s 105A.7(1)(b).
(n 8), where Kirby J reasoned that functions based on
such evidence cannot be imposed on the judiciary: at [169]. Justice Kirby also
called such evidence ‘notoriously unreliable’: at [192].
Lynch (n 56) 1206. See
(n 9) 435 [365], where Kirby J pointed that ‘to expect
a court to rely for its decisions solely upon the evidence supplied by
officers seeking to secure or uphold the control order, is fundamentally
inconsistent with the adversarial and accusatorial
procedures, observed by the
Australian judiciary until now in serious matters affecting individual liberty,
as contemplated by Ch
Constitution
Prisoners Act
(n 3) s 13(3)(b);
Criminal Code
(n 2) s 105A.7(1)(b),
which requires ‘a high degree of probability’.
Keyzer (n 37) 104.
Criminal Code
2) s 105A.7(5).
Azzopardi v The
[2001] HCA 25
(2001) 205 CLR 50
, 65 (Gaudron, Gummow,
Kirby and Hayne JJ).
Criminal Code
Criminal Code
2) ss 105A.3(1)(a)(iii), 105A.3(1)(b), 105A.3(1)(c) describe a terrorist
offender as certain persons who have committed a ‘serious
offence’, which prescribes a maxim penalty of imprisonment for seven or
more years.
Ibid s 102.8.
Ibid ss 101.1, 101.2,
101.4–101.6, 102.2–102.7, 103.1, 103.2.
Ibid ss 101.1, 101.2,
101.4–101.6, 102.2–102.7, 103.1, 103.2.
Criminal Code
[4] (Gleeson CJ).
Ibid 599–600 [39]
(Kiefel CJ, Bell, Keane and Steward JJ).
Ibid 599 [38] (Kiefel
CJ, Bell, Keane and Steward JJ).
See generally Gerard
Carney, ‘The Exercise of Judicial Power by State Parliaments’ (2017)
Australian Bar Review
204, 215. It is beyond the scope of this
article to examine this issue and its implications.
(Kiefel CJ, Bell, Keane and Steward JJ).
See generally Michael H
McHugh, ‘Terrorism Legislation and the
Constitution
’ (2006) 28(2)
Australian Bar Review
117. See also Kate Chetty, ‘Persona
Designata, Punitive Purposes and the Issue of Preventative Detention Orders: All
Lead to Infringement of the Separation of Judicial Power’
[2016] MelbULawRw 10
Melbourne University Law Review
, advocating for the consistency
with the separation of power doctrine.
[1957] HCA 12
(1957) 95 CLR 529.
[10] (Gleeson CJ), 412 [300] (Kirby J), 467 [472] (Hayne J).
135 [144] (Gordon J).
[307] (Kirby J), 472–4 [490]–[500] (Hayne J);
135–8 [144]–[150] (Gordon J).
(Kiefel CJ, Bell, Keane and Steward JJ).
328–9 [16] (Gleeson CJ), 356 [116] (Gummow and Crennan JJ), 507–8
[595]–[596] (Callinan J), 526 [651] (Heydon
Ibid 597 [34].
Ibid 120 (McHugh J,
Toohey J agreeing at 96–7, Gaudron J agreeing at 106, Gummow J agreeing at
Ibid 106 (Gaudron
J), 115–16 (McHugh J), 132 (Gummow J).
(Kiefel CJ, Bell, Keane and Steward JJ).
(Kiefel CJ, Bell, Keane and Steward JJ).
Ibid 91–2 [20]
(Kiefel CJ, Bell, Keane and Steward JJ). See also
(n 9) 424 [336],
where Kirby J highlighted that ‘the constitutional separation of the
judicial power within the States observes
different legal rules’.
(Gaudron J);
(n 8) 617 [101] (Gummow J);
Wainohu v New South
(2011) 243 CLR 181, 209 [45] (French CJ and Kiefel J), 228–9
[105] (Gummow, Hayne, Crennan and Bell JJ);
(n 84) 278 [147]
(Gageler J).
Ibid 91–2 [20]
(Kiefel CJ, Bell, Keane and Steward JJ).
(Kiefel CJ, Bell, Keane and Steward JJ).
140–1 [158]–[159] (Gordon J).
Ibid. See also
(n 8) 614 [86], where Gummow J emphasised that ‘the repugnancy
doctrine in
does not imply into the Constitutions of the States the
separation of judicial power mandated for the Commonwealth by Ch III. That
fundamental for an understanding of
’ (Hayne J agreeing at 648
[197]–[198]). Justices Callinan and Heydon at 655–6 [219] stressed
that ‘this Court
hold however that in all
respects, a Supreme Court of a State was the same, and subject to the same
constraints, as a federal court
established under Ch III of the
Constitution
Federal judicial power is not identical with State judicial power’.
140–1 [158]–[159] (Gordon J).
Ibid 139–40
(Kiefel CJ, Bell, Keane and Steward JJ).
Ibid 356 [115] (Gummow
and Crennan JJ), 526 [651] (Heydon J).
Ibid 437 [371] (Kirby
(Kiefel CJ, Bell, Keane and Steward JJ).
(Kiefel CJ, Bell, Keane and Steward JJ).
Ibid 89–90 [15]
(Kiefel CJ, Bell, Keane and Steward JJ).
[371] (Kirby J).
Ibid 436 [368].
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (354 KB)
PDF format (506 KB)
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter