URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/journals/WALawTRw/2024/3.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 15:58:11
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Ricciardo, Aidan --- "Teaching Sensitive Content Safely: How to Approach Sexual Violence in Legal Education" [2024] WALawTRw 3; (2024) 2 The Western Australian Law Teachers' Review 11
TEACHING SENSITIVE CONTENT
SAFELY: HOW TO APPROACH SEXUAL VIOLENCE IN LEGAL EDUCATION
AIDAN RICCIARDO *
I INTRODUCTION
As teachers of law, no matter what subject we teach, at least some of the
content relevant to our subject area is bound to be 'sensitive',
complex, and
potentially distressing. In some subject areas — eg, Criminal Law —
this is obviously the case, but as law
inherently involves justice
injustice, the reality is that we are all required to teach complex and
sensitive content. This can be difficult for teachers and
students alike —
as put by Heath et al:
Learning about the law can involve bruising encounters
with injustice that the law does not always adequately redress. Many students
find this distressing... Undoubtedly some teachers find it distressing to have
the role of inflicting these new realisations on students,
even if they also see
understanding these questions as
Although teaching sensitive content is unavoidable for law teachers, many of
us (unsurprisingly) feel ill-equipped to do
It is clear that there is a
need for us to collectively reconsider — and develop our skills relating
to — how we teach
this content.
We must not shy away from teaching sensitive content where it is relevant to
our subject area. But the way that we approach this content
matters. This
article makes these arguments, taking the topic of sexual violence as an example
of sensitive content that might be
encountered in the law classroom. The
following definition of sexual violence is adopted in this article:
Sexual violence is a broad term to describe hurtful acts of physical or
emotional harm through the use of power, control, and/or intimidation.
violence includes sexual harassment, sexual assault, sexual exploitation, dating
and intimate partner violence, domestic violence,
Part II argues that where it is relevant to an area of law, we have an
obligation to teach content which relates to sexual violence.
Part III then
proposes a number of principles, informed by the literature, which can assist
law teachers to cover this content safely.
II WHY WE NEED TO TEACH OUR STUDENTS ABOUT SEXUAL
It is accepted that in a range of professional degrees, including law,
teaching sensitive and confronting content is necessary —
not only because
it is relevant to the subject area, but also because our students will encounter
these situations in their professional
lives. As put in an article by a
multidisciplinary academic team (including teachers of law, psychology, social
work, midwifery and
veterinary science):
[Teaching sensitive and confronting] material is necessary for both the
specific aims of the courses we teach (that is, in relation
to intellectual
engagement with the subject material and expected learning outcomes), and to
prepare students for situations many
will face as
professionals.
Sexual violence is relevant to many core areas of legal education and legal
practice, including those areas which law schools are
required to teach as part
of a qualifying law degree. Most obviously, sexual violence is relevant in the
teaching and practice of
criminal law. Similarly, many of the core cases in
evidence law relate to sexual violence, and a body of law has developed in
to the way that cases relating to sexual violence are tried. Tort law,
which demands discussion of consent and bodily autonomy, is
also unquestionably
linked to sexual violence. Sexual violence is also an inherent part of the
teaching and practice of many subject
areas which may not be
‘required’ in a qualifying law degree, but are commonly offered by
law schools as optional units.
For example, sexual violence arises in employment
law (eg, in the context of workplace sexual harassment), family law (eg, in the
context of family and intimate partner violence), and in human rights law (eg,
where sexual violence is used as a weapon of
Engaging with content which
relates and responds to sexual violence is a core learning requirement in these
areas of study. Having
a competent understanding of how laws — and lawyers
— do (and should) respond to sexual violence is also essential in
practice of these areas:
It is vital that students are prepared for dealing with such challenging
situations in their future professional practice through
the inclusion of such
subject matters within [course] curricula... [P]rofessional competency requires
capacity to address sensitive
Indeed, lawyers (and law graduates who choose not to practice) play a key
role in addressing and mitigating social issues, including
Educating our students
injustice — equips them
to contribute positively to society and advocate
for justice and reform.
Providing our students with an adequate education on matters of sexual
violence is especially important given that harmful misconceptions
violence, and about victim-survivors of sexual violence, are rife in Australia
generally and in the legal system
specifically.
In their future
careers, many of our students will be tasked with counteracting those
misconceptions. The following quote by Scriver
and Kennedy is written in the
context of medical and social sciences education in Ireland, but it could just
as readily be said of
legal education in Australia:
The sensitive nature of sexual violence, combined with a poor level of
knowledge about the topic among the general population in Ireland
lecturers to avoid its inclusion in curricula. However, [our] students ... are
future doctors, nurses, midwives, social
workers, teachers and policy-makers.
They are the people who will be tasked with addressing sexual violence and its
impact. It is
therefore essential that education about sexual violence is given
due consideration within [course]
Just like doctors, nurses and social workers, the professional lives of many
law graduates will involve addressing sexual violence
and its impact. It follows
that in the context of legal education, we would be doing our students —
and our society —
a disservice if we were to avoid teaching about how the
law responds to sexual violence. How, then, can we best go about teaching
III TEN PRINCIPLES FOR TEACHING SEXUAL VIOLENCE
There is a small body of research relating to the teaching of sensitive
material generally in law.
However, there is relatively little research which directly addresses how to
teach about sexual violence in
a fair number of articles which focus on teaching sexual violence in higher
education generally, and
in specific higher education disciplines other than
This Part draws together
research from each of these fields and distils it into ten core principles for
teaching about sexual violence
safely, and effectively, in law.
Principle 1: Be mindful of classroom power dynamics to
avoid re-traumatisation
As a starting point, and from before the semester begins, law teachers who
cover content relating to sexual violence need to be aware
of the power dynamics
inherent in the classroom, including in the teacher-student relationship. The
classroom, by its very nature,
involves a disparity of power that can lead to
re-traumatisation for survivors of sexual violence. As noted by Crumpton:
For students who have experienced the abusive exercise of power that
characterizes sexual assault, heightened anxiety in a context
that is already
organized around power disparity can be a trigger. It often invokes recall of an
incident(s) when power was used
to abuse. It can trigger a chain reaction of
sorts, in which the fears from former abuse are projected onto the disparate
power structure
that exists in the
An awareness of the potential for harm, including by way of
re-traumatisation, needs to underscore the entire approach to teaching
sexual violence. This is especially important given that we know from
sector-wide surveys that there are almost certainly survivors
of sexual abuse in
every classroom.
students, the resurgence of traumatic memories in an educational setting can
blur the lines between past abuse and the
present power-charged classroom
environment. As Crumpton continues:
When triggered, they may feel that “it” (the powerlessness, loss
of control, and violence) is happening again. There is
indeed a difference
between the power disparity in the classroom and the abuse of power in sexual
assault, but the resurgence of
traumatic memories often makes that distinction
less clear. The result is a highly charged environment wherein some are unable
distinguish the difference between the expected discomfort and the individual
sense of threat that
The traumatic response elicited by classroom dynamics can be profound,
causing some students to experience significant distress. This
highlights the
necessity for educators to develop a teaching approach and create a classroom
atmosphere that acknowledges and mitigates
these triggers.
Principle 2: Prepare students from the start of the
When the teaching period begins, the work to prepare students for the
upcoming sensitive content begins on day-one. Letting students
know from the
outset of the course that content relating to sexual violence will be covered
provides students with an opportunity
to prepare themselves for that content. It
also provides us as teachers with an opportunity to learn from students about
best support them when we ultimately encounter that content. As
explained by Bedera:
Professors can... begin centering survivors and preparing students for
discussions of sexual violence on the first day of classes...
I begin all
courses that include material on sexual violence the same way. I tell students
explicitly that we will cover controversial
and sensitive topics, including the
kinds of violence that many students may have experienced first-hand. At that
point, I... position
myself as a learner. I ask students what they need to feel
comfortable when having tough conversations in
Bedera’s approach helps to establish a safe, supportive learning
environment from the very outset of the course — this
approach not only
sets clear expectations but also opens a dialogue about how to handle these
discussions with care and sensitivity.
Further, by addressing the potential
emotional impact of the material from the start, educators can help normalise
the range of responses
students may have. Bedera tells her classes that
‘even students who have no personal ties to trauma sometimes tear
noting that this can help ‘survivors feel like having an
emotional response won’t be akin to disclosing their survivor
pre-emptive acknowledgment can reduce the pressure on survivors of sexual
violence, enabling them to participate without the
fear of being singled out or
inadvertently revealing their personal experiences.
Starting this preparation on the first day not only reassures students that
their emotional responses are valid but also establishes
a classroom culture of
empathy and respect. By positioning themselves as learners alongside their
students, educators demonstrate
a commitment to creating a safe and inclusive
space for learning. This proactive approach fosters trust and encourages open
communication,
which are vital components for effectively navigating the
complexities of teaching about sexual
Principle 3: Be careful and consistent with the language
Being careful and consistent with the language we use to describe acts of
sexual violence is crucial to creating a safe and effective
environment. The words we choose can either reinforce harmful stereotypes and
stigmas or help dismantle them. Using precise
and accurate terms such as
‘rape’ instead of ‘sex’ (in the case of a non-consensual
act of penetration) and
‘abuse’ or ‘sexual assault’
instead of ‘sexual encounter’ (in the case of other non-consensual
touching of a sexual nature) ensures that the gravity of these acts is
appropriately conveyed and that victim-survivors are not
further stigmatised or
blamed for their abuser’s
wrongdoing.
Language shapes perception, and the way sexual violence is discussed in the
classroom can have a profound impact on students’
understanding of these
When educators use
terms that downplay the severity of sexual violence, it can inadvertently
perpetuate the misconception that the
victim is partially responsible or that
the violence is less serious. Conversely, using clear and specific terminology
underscores
the non-consensual and violent nature of these acts, leaving little
doubt that we as teachers condemn, and recognise the severity
violence. This approach not only helps to validate the experiences of survivors
but also sets a standard for professional
and respectful discourse that students
can carry into their future careers in law. By modelling precise and respectful
we as law teachers contribute to a broader cultural shift in this
Principle 4: Where content isn’t optional, forewarn
to allow students to prepare
Forewarning, in the context of education, refers to the practice of informing
students in advance that specific sensitive or potentially
distressing content
will be covered in class. The purpose of forewarning is to allow students to
mentally and emotionally prepare
for the material, helping them to manage their
reactions and engage with the content more
effectively.
Forewarnings might sometimes — rather unhelpfully — be called
‘trigger warnings’,
and it is a common misconception that the purpose of such warnings is simply to
allow students who might be triggered to choose not
to engage with the content.
But, as established in Part II,
often in a law course content relating to sexual violence
and the reality is that students do not have a choice about whether or not they
engage with this content: we need to teach
students this content and they need
to be able to demonstrate an understanding of it.
In fact, forewarning is especially important in the context of content which
is not optional. Providing this advance notice allows
students to prepare
themselves psychologically and emotionally for the material, giving them an
opportunity to organise any support
they might need and put themselves in the
right frame of mind to learn. Scriver and Kennedy emphasise the importance of
this approach:
While forewarning for the purpose of optional non-attendance is... not
clearly supported by research..., efforts should be made to
provide students
with as much information as possible in advance of the teaching sessions so that
they know what to expect. Forewarning,
rather than acting as advice to
‘stay away’ for vulnerable students, can act as a means to empower
students to deal with
their emotional reactions by allowing them to situate
their response within a deeper conceptual understanding of that issue. Ensuring
students understand the purpose of learning about sexual violence is thus an
essential part of forewarning.
This approach helps students contextualise their responses and understand the
importance of learning about sexual violence within
the broader framework of
their legal education. As educators, it is important to communicate not only the
content but also the significance
of engaging with these challenging topics. As
Scriver and Kennedy suggest, explaining the relevance of the material can be
statements like: ‘I appreciate that this may be something that
you find difficult to think about, but it is important for you
to be aware of
this issue because ... .’
Forewarning students about sensitive content and providing them with the
rationale for its inclusion in the curriculum enables students
to engage more
fully with the material and develop a deeper understanding of the legal and
social complexities surrounding sexual
This approach not only prepares students for the content but also underscores
the importance of their learning journey, reinforcing
the necessity of
confronting and understanding sexual violence as future legal professionals.
Principle 5: Where content is optional, forewarn and ensure
students can leave
Despite the discussion in the previous section, sometimes content will be
optional. Perhaps more often, whilst students are required
to engage with
particular content, they might have the option of engaging with it in a manner
other than in face-to-face classes.
Forewarning still plays a critical role in
these instances, ensuring that students are fully informed about their options
make choices that best suit their needs. When learning about particular
content is optional, or where doing so face-to-face is optional,
law teachers
need to make sure that their forewarning is accompanied by an adequate
opportunity to leave the classroom.
For example, if students are given the option to ‘opt out’ of a
class or discussion, it is essential that attendance and
participation policies
reflect and support this option. For example, students need to be reassured that
they can opt out without
In practice, small
adjustments can help make these options more accessible. For example, taking
short breaks before difficult activities
or discussions can give students the
chance to step out without drawing attention to themselves. As suggested in a
resource for educators:
Take a 2–3 minute break before difficult activities or discussions, and
urge students to stretch, get a drink, or use the restroom
before regrouping as
a class. This practice allows survivors to step out without drawing attention to
themselves or feeling forced
to publicly identify themselves as a potential
This approach provides a discreet way for students to make the choices that
suit their needs without feeling exposed or singled out.
Indeed, educators should seriously consider whether students really need to
be present in a face-to-face class when learning about
sexual violence content.
This may well be necessary — eg, where discussion is required. But in many
instances, it will be appropriate
to offer alternative ways to engage with the
content. For instance, providing an online recording of the live lecture as an
alternative
to in-person attendance allows students to engage with the material
at their own pace and in a setting where they feel most comfortable.
flexibility can make a significant difference for students who may find
encountering the content in-person very
distressing.
Principle 6: Compile course materials carefully, centring
survivor voices
When compiling course materials for law classes that include content on
sexual violence, it is important to carefully select readings
and sources that
centre survivor voices and take the impact of sexual violence seriously. The
choices educators make in curating
these materials send a strong message to
students about the importance and gravity of the topic. As emphasised by Bedera,
selecting course materials (eg, readings, films) on sexual violence,
it is essential that they take seriously the impact of sexual
survivors.’
sources that trivialise or misrepresent sexual violence can lead students to
mistakenly believe that such perspectives
are acceptable or are tacitly endorsed
by the law teacher.
Setting sources which are created or influenced by survivors of sexual
violence ensures that the experiences and insights of survivors
are treated as
valuable and important. Bedera notes that ‘a survivor-centered approach
views survivors as what they truly are
— experts on sexual violence whose
experiences, views, and ideas are instructive in creating transformative
By foregrounding
survivor narratives, educators not only validate the lived experiences of
survivors but also provide students with
a more nuanced understanding of sexual
violence. Indeed, as an example, it is widely acknowledged that sexual offence
complainants
themselves are amongst those who are best placed to advise on how
criminal trial processes might be made less traumatic for sexual
complainants like them.
However, there may be instances where including problematic sources is
unavoidable due to their relevance or importance in the field.
In such cases, it
is crucial to provide context and guidance to students. When including a
potentially problematic source, educators
should explain in advance (either in
class or on the reading list) why the source is problematic and encourage
students to critically
assess its treatment of sexual violence. Additionally,
clearly stating the precise reason for including the source can help students
appreciate its educational value while remaining critical of its
shortcomings.
Course materials should also inform students of the support services and
resources available to them if they feel
distressed.
Providing this
information ensures that students know where to turn for help, reinforces the
message that their wellbeing is a priority,
and also makes it clear that the
teacher is not their counsellor: they should obtain professional assistance if
Principle 7: Consider in advance how to respond to
problematic comments
Whenever sexual violence is being discussed in the classroom, there is a very
real risk that students (or, indeed, teachers) will
make comments which are
potentially harmful. Law teachers should make it clear from the outset that
while discussion is welcome,
comments that perpetuate harm or support violence
will not be tolerated.
potentially harmful comments are made, it is very important for teachers to know
when and how to jump in and respond to these
rogue contributions. Ignoring or
mishandling these comments can reinforce harmful attitudes and contribute to an
environment that
is unsafe for survivors. Although many potentially harmful
comments will be borne of ignorance, in some cases these comments might
actively antagonistic. Indeed, as Bedera points out:
Although professors rarely like to think about it, it is extremely likely
that you have perpetrators of gender-based violence taking
your classes as well.
After all, studies indicate that as many as 11 percent of college men commit a
rape before graduation. There
are also a multitude of other reasons that
students may hold rape-supportive attitudes, such as having a close friend who
was accused
of sexual assault or simply growing up in a culture that normalizes,
excuses, and condones men’s acts of
This reality underscores the necessity for teachers to be vigilant and
proactive in addressing problematic comments. Teachers should
potential challenges and think ahead about how to effectively intervene.
Preparing in advance allows educators to confidently
and swiftly address harmful
comments when they arise, maintaining a respectful and supportive classroom
environment.
When responding to potentially harmful comments, it is important to address
the issue directly and clearly. Instructors should focus
on correcting
misinformation, reinforcing respectful discourse, and reiterating the principles
of empathy and support for survivors.
For example, if a student makes a comment
that implicitly blames a victim, the instructor might start by saying, ‘I
you might not have meant to imply what you just did, but I just want
to address that comment because it's important to understand
that victim-blaming
is harmful and incorrect....’
A failure to directly address harmful comments ‘can make an instructor
appear to endorse those
By planning their
responses, teachers can avoid being caught off guard and can handle these
situations with authority and sensitivity.
Principle 8: Be mindful of your own boundaries in dealing
with student trauma
Teaching about sexual violence can lead to instances where students disclose
their own traumatic experiences or seek emotional support
In this regard, we
must be mindful of our own roles and boundaries when dealing with student
trauma. While it is important to create
a supportive and empathetic classroom
environment, educators need to recognise the limits of their professional
responsibilities.
The role of a teacher is distinct from the role of a
counsellor,
and attempting to
take on such a role can lead to burnout and ethical challenges. As Bedera
states, ‘To prevent burnout and
ensure that students are treated
ethically, it is also key that instructors set their own boundaries about how
they would like to
engage with
Establishing
clear boundaries helps protect both the teacher's wellbeing and the integrity of
the support offered to students.
The complexity of managing disclosures of trauma can be overwhelming for
educators, who may not feel equipped to handle such situations.
acknowledges this concern: ‘professors report that they do not feel
skilled enough to manage the intricacies of sexual
assault disclosure. That is
perfectly okay — professors are academics, not
counselors.’
Scriver and Kennedy note that ‘we do not feel comfortable, nor would we
advocate for other teachers, to take on
the role of counsellor to
Recognising
this distinction is crucial. Law teachers should focus on their primary role as
facilitators of learning and guides through
the academic content, rather than
attempting to provide therapeutic support.
To navigate these challenges effectively, teachers should plan in advance how
to respond when students disclose traumatic experiences
and appear to require
further support. Heath et al advise that in these instances, teachers should
refer students to university counselling
services and other appropriate
Similarly, Bedera
advises that
a professor who does not feel equipped to do crisis intervention may tell a
student, ‘I do not feel fully qualified or prepared
to give you everything
you deserve, but I would love to support you in the ways I can, like listening
to you and helping connect
you to the resources you
Heath advises that simply listening is powerful:
Many sexual assault services suggest that people who have experienced rape
will find it useful to be listened to in a non-judgemental,
supportive and
validating way... If in doubt, I listen. I acknowledge the student's courage in
speaking with me. I clearly communicate
that I believe the student and will keep
their confidence. And, of course, I refer them to appropriate
Maintaining professional boundaries also helps prevent emotional exhaustion
and burnout for educators.
Teaching about sexual violence and other traumatic subjects can be emotionally
taxing, and without clear boundaries, instructors
may find themselves
overwhelmed by the weight of their students’ disclosures. By setting and
adhering to boundaries, teachers
can sustain their capacity to provide
high-quality education and support to their students over the long term.
Principle 9: Demand institutional support when you teach
As noted in the previous section, teaching about sexual violence presents
risks to the teacher’s own wellbeing. Scriver and
Kennedy note that
Lecturers who repeatedly teach sensitive topics may also suffer vicarious
trauma... Lecturers may experience vicarious trauma through
their engagement
with materials in researching and preparing sessions ... [or] following a
disclosure from a student which can result
in feelings of guilt, sadness, or
Educators who teach about sexual violence must demand appropriate
institutional support to manage the unique challenges and emotional
associated with this work. Universities have a responsibility to provide this
support, in recognition of the increased demands
placed on faculty who cover
such sensitive topics. Keene and Jordan highlight the need for administrative
recognition of these challenges:
Faculty staff involved in administering academic workloads should recognize
and take into account the increased workloads arising
from pastoral care work
done by academic staff teaching courses which include sexual
Acknowledging the additional pastoral care responsibilities in formal
workload allocations is essential for preventing burnout and
ensuring that
educators can continue to provide high-quality teaching and support to their
students. Universities must also prioritise
the wellbeing of their staff by
implementing measures that address these challenges. Educators must be provided
with access to counselling
services, peer support groups, as well as relevant
professional development. In particular, creating a supportive community among
faculty where they can share experiences and strategies can help mitigate the
isolating effects of vicarious
Principle 10: Reflect, reflect, reflect!
Finally, educators who teach about sexual violence and other sensitive
material must engage in a constant process of reflective practice.
can be expected to get everything right the first time (or, perhaps, any time),
and what worked one year might not work
as well the next. Through reflection,
educators can identify what worked well and what didn’t, allowing them to
make informed
adjustments and improve their approach over time. The literature
on learning and teaching in law consistently notes the importance
of reflective
practice for effective
By regularly considering the impact of their teaching methods and content
choices, educators can better understand how their students
are engaging with
the material and what additional support may be
This process involves
not only self-assessment but also seeking feedback from students and colleagues
to gain diverse perspectives
on the effectiveness of the academic’s
approach to teaching about sexual
Incorporating reflective practice into teaching routines can lead to
significant improvements in how sensitive topics are addressed
in the classroom.
For instance, after a challenging discussion on sexual violence, a teacher might
reflect on the students’
reactions, the classroom dynamics, and their own
feelings during the session. This reflection can reveal areas for improvement,
as adjusting the way certain topics are introduced, modifying discussion
guidelines, or finding new ways to support students who
may be struggling with
the material.
Importantly, reflective practice fosters a growth mindset, encouraging
educators to view challenges as opportunities for development
rather than as
This mindset is
particularly important when teaching sensitive subjects, where (as discussed in
the previous sections) there is great
potential for emotional and intellectual
strain. By embracing continuous improvement, law teachers can become more
resilient and
adaptable, better equipping themselves to handle the complexities
of teaching about sexual violence.
IV CONCLUSION
As law teachers, we are required to teach our students about sensitive
material. For some of us, that sensitive material will include
content relating
to sexual violence. It is important that we do not shy away from our
responsibility to teach this content where
it is relevant — covering this
material helps to prepare law graduates to address these issues with the right
knowledge and
sensitivity in their professional lives. But teaching this content
can be challenging, and the way we go about it matters. The ten
core principles
proposed in this article provide a basic grounding for law teachers who teach
can assist educators to foster safe
learning environments where students can learn to navigate the complex legal and
social dimensions
of sexual violence. Although teaching about sexual violence
and other sensitive content will never be easy, adopting a careful, consistent
and reflective approach can make ‘getting it right’ a little
* Aidan Ricciardo is a Lecturer at the UWA Law School, the University of
Western Australia.
Mary Heath et al,
‘Learning to Feel Like a Lawyer: Law Teachers, Sessional Teaching and
Emotional Labour in Legal Education’
(2017) 26(3)
Griffith Law
Macalester College,
Supporting Student Survivors in the Classroom
(Guidance Document, 2021)
<https://titleix.sdsu.edu/resources-for-faculty-and-staff/faculty-guide-for-supporting-survivors.pdf>.
Mary Heath et al, 'Teaching
Sensitive Material: A Multi-Disciplinary Perspective' (2017) 4
Paul Kirby, 'How is Rape a
Weapon of War? Feminist International Relations, Modes of Critical Explanation
and the Study of Wartime
Sexual Violence' (2012) 19(4)
European Journal of
International Relations
Heath et al (n 4) 6.
See generally Andrea A Curcio,
Teresa M Ward and Nisha Dogra, 'Educating Culturally Sensible Lawyers: A Study
Of Student Attitudes
[2012] UWSLawRw 6
University of Western Sydney Law Review
See, eg, Jacqueline Horan and
Jane Goodman-Delahunty, 'Expert Evidence to Counteract Jury Misconceptions About
Consent in Sexual
Assault Cases: Failures and Lessons Learned'
[2020] UNSWLawJl 24
(2020) 43(2)
UNSW Law Journal
; Julia Quilter, 'Getting Consent "Right": Sexual
Assault Law Reform in New South Wales'
(2020) 46(2)
Australian Feminist Law
Stacey Scriver and Kieran M
Kennedy, ‘Delivering Education About Sexual Violence: Reflections on the
Experience of Teaching
a Sensitive Topic in the Social and Health
(2016) 35(2)
Irish Educational Studies
See, eg, Heath et al (n 1);
Heath et al (n 4).
See, eg, Wendy Ball and
Jacquelin Mackinnon, 'Teaching the Unthinkable: Approaches to
Effective/Protected Learning in the Area of
Sexual Offences'
[1997] LegEdRev 4
(1997) 8(1)
Legal Education Review
; Mary Heath, 'Encounters With the Volcano:
Strategies for Emotional Management in Teaching the Law of Rape'
(2005) 39(2)
The Law Teacher
See, eg, Corrine C Bertram
and M Sue Crowley, 'Teaching about Sexual Violence in Higher Education: Moving
from Concern to Conscious
Resistance' (2012) 33(1)
Frontiers: A Journal of
Women Studies
Stephanie M Crumpton,
‘Trigger Warnings, Covenants of Presence, and More: Cultivating Safe Space
for Theological Discussions
Theology and Religion
Wendy Heywood et al,
National Student Safety Survey: Report on the Prevalence of Sexual Harassment
and Sexual Assault Among University Students in 2021
(National Report,
Social Research Centre, 2022) 1–6.
Crumpton (n 17) 138.
Nicole Bedera, ‘Beyond
Trigger Warnings: A Survivor-Centered Approach to Teaching on Sexual Violence
and Avoiding Institutional
Betrayal’ (2021) 49(3)
Teaching Sociology
Heath (n 11)
Constance Grady, 'The
Complicated, Inadequate Language of Sexual Violence',
(online, 30 Nov
<https://www.vox.com/culture/2017/11/30/16644394/language-sexual-violence>.
See generally Elizabeth R
Brown, Jennifer K Wesely and Curtis E Phills, 'De-stigmatizing Survivors:
Chapter De-stigmatizing Survivors
Intervening by Changing the Composition of
Campus Alerts about Sexual Assault' in Alicia H Nordstrom and Wind Goodfriend
Innovative Stigma and Discrimination Reduction Programs Across the
(Routledge, 2010) ch 6; Emma Gretgrix and Clare Farmer,
'Heteronormative Assumptions and Expectations of Sexual Violence: Language
Inclusivity Within Sexual Violence Policy in Australian Universities' (2023) 20
Sexuality Research and Social Policy
Katie Cebula, 'Student
Experiences of Learning About Potentially Emotionally Sensitive Topics: Trigger
Warnings Are Not the Whole
Story' (2022) 46(8)
Journal of Further and Higher
1120, 1121–2.
This implies that the only
purpose of the warning is to assist students who might be triggered by the
content. The term ‘forewarning’
is more appropriate because these
warnings serve other purposes and can be helpful for all students, as discussed
at length in this
Cebula et al (n 21)
Scriver and Kennedy (n 9)
Macalester College (n
Heath et al (n 4) 8, 10.
Bedera (n 16) 270.
See, eg, Australian Senate
Legal and Constitutional Affairs References Committee,
Current and Proposed
Sexual Consent Laws in Australia
(Final Report, September 2023) 37–62,
Scriver and Kennedy (n 9)
Heath et al (n 4)
Cebula et al (n 21)
Bedera (n 16) 272.
Heath (n 11) 144–5.
This burden is likely to fall disproportionately on female academics — see
generally Rebecca Hayes,
Tara N Richards and Kathryn A Branch, 'But I'm Not a
Counselor: The Nature of Role Strain Experienced by Female Professors When a
Student Discloses Sexual Assault and Intimate Partner Violence' (2010) 2(3)
Enhancing Learning in the Social Sciences
Heath et al (n 4)
Bedera (n 16) 274.
Scriver and Kennedy (n 9)
Heath et al (n 4) 10.
Bedera (n 16) 274.
Heath (n 11) 144.
Bedera (n 16) 274; Scriver
and Kennedy (n 9) 206; Heath et al (n 4) 6.
Scriver and Kennedy (n 9)
Samantha Keene and Jan
Jordan, ‘Teaching About Sexual Violence in Digital Learning
Environments’ (2021) 35(1)
Women’s Studies Journal
Heath et al (n 4) 10,
See, eg, Timothy Casey,
'Reflective Practice in Legal Education: The Stages of Reflection'
Clinical Law Review
Sue Clegg, 'Knowing Through
Reflective Practice in Higher Education' (2000) 8
Educational Action
See, eg, Maureen Bell,
'Supported Reflective Practice: A Programme of Peer Observation and Feedback for
Academic Teaching Development'
(2001) 6(1)
International Journal for Academic
Development
29, 32–5; Joseph Lamb, 'How do Teachers Reflect on Their
Practice? A Study into How Feedback Influences Teachers’ Reflective
Practice' (2017) 4(4)
The Student Teacher Perspectives Journal
See generally Diane LaFrance
and Lori Rakes, 'Teacher Identity, Growth Mindset, and Agency: Changing the
Trajectory of Teacher Retention'
in Maria Peterson-Ahmad and Vicki L Luther
Collaborative Approaches to Recruiting, Preparing, and Retaining
Teachers for the Field
(IGI Global, 2022) 119; Laura F Poe et al, 'Promoting
Positive Student Outcomes: The Use of Reflection and Planning Activities with
GrowthMindset Focus and SMART Goals' (2021) 19(4)
Information Systems
Education Journal
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (64.2 KB)
PDF format (366 KB)
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter