URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/journals/CICrimJust/2018/5.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 14:50:24
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Cadwallader, Jessica Robyn; Spivakovsky, Claire; Steele, Linda; Wadiwel, Dinesh --- "Institutional Violence Against People with Disability: Recent Legal and Political Developments" [2018] CICrimJust 5; (2018) 29(3) Current Issues in Criminal Justice 259
Contemporary Comment
Institutional Violence against People with Disability: Recent Legal and
Political Developments
Jessica Robyn Cadwallader,
Claire Spivakovsky,
International and Australian domestic evidence suggest that the prevalence of
violence against people with disability is substantially
higher than for the
rest of the community. Much of the violence experienced by people with
disability in Australia occurs within
the purview of a variety of institutions,
including group homes, large residential institutions, Australian Disability
Enterprises
(that is, disability employment facilities), schools, psychiatric
facilities, hospitals and correctional facilities. This comment
discusses recent
domestic and international legal and political attempts to grapple with the
issue of institutional violence against
people with disability, focusing in
particular on a series of Senate Committee inquiries into abuse and violence,
regulation related
to the National Disability Insurance Scheme, the coming into
force of the
Convention on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities
Australia’s anticipated ratification of the
Optional Protocol to the
Convention Against Torture
and recent calls by Disability People’s
Organisations and academics for a Royal Commission into violence against people
disability.
disability – institutional violence –
restrictive practices –
law reform – Royal Commission – torture – human rights
national disability insurance scheme – Australia
Introduction
International and Australian domestic evidence suggest that the prevalence of
violence against people with disability is substantially
higher than for the
rest of the community (Krnjacki et al.
Much of the
violence experienced by people with disability in Australia occurs within the
purview of a variety of institutions, including
group homes, large residential
institutions, Australian Disability Enterprises (that is, disability employment
facilities), schools,
psychiatric facilities, hospitals and correctional
facilities. Despite policies of deinstitutionalisation in the 1980s through to
the 2000s, many people with disability continue to live in institutions
(including being over-represented in correctional facilities)
(MacKinnon &
Coleborne 2003; see more broadly Chapman et al. 2014; Emerson 2004; Mansell
& Ericsson 1996; Productivity Commission
2011, p. 473). Increasingly these
services are provided by non-government organisations, both for-profit and
not-for-profit. Moreover,
where people with disability are living at home,
progressively disability support services are being delivered there too
(Australian
Institute of Health and Welfare 2017; Henman & Foster 2015;
MacDonald 2017; Muir & Salignac 2017).
Institutional violence against people with disability takes many forms,
including financial abuse (or theft), emotional abuse, neglect,
and physical and
sexual violence. It frequently occurs behind closed doors with victims having
very limited access to means of reporting
violence, and with limited oversight
of what occurs within these institutions. Indeed, administrative complaint
processes, such as
Ombudsmen or Disability Services Commissioners, often treat
expressions of violence and abuse that would otherwise be considered
worthy of a
criminal justice response as service incidents or signs of poor quality in
support provision (Frohmader & Sands 2015,
p. 19). This can limit the
capacity of people with disability to access justice on an equal basis with
others. Some forms of institutional
violence are even harder to address because
of their relationship with law and the way that this relationship precludes
these forms
of violence from both administrative and criminal justice complaints
processes. The Disability Acts of most Australian jurisdictions,
for instance,
allow disability service providers to use restrictive practices to contain and
control people with disability receiving
their services (see Spivakovsky 2012).
In practice this means that it is
legally permissible
for people with
disability living in group homes or attending day services to be physically or
mechanically restrained, forcibly sedated
and/or ‘secluded’ (that
is, placed in solitary confinement), despite the fact that if these harmful
actions occurred
outside of a disability setting or in relation to any other
population they would be recognised for what they are: acts of violence,
false imprisonment, and/or a breach of human rights. This has prompted scholars
like Steele (2015, 2017) to rebadge restrictive
practices as
‘disability-specific lawful violence’, a term adopted by the Senate
Community Affairs References Committee
in its recent inquiry into the abuse,
neglect and violence of people with disability (SCARC 2015), and a practice
which has been
consistently flagged for elimination by disability advocates due
to the violent nature of its harms (see, for example, Frohmader
2015, pp. 45–7 and People with Disability Australia & Women with
Disability Australia 2015). Essentially, then,
institutional violence in the
context of this comment should be understood to include the forms of violence
that institutions are
designed to enable, support and make lawful (that is,
restrictive practices), as well as those instances of violence within
institutions
which, while not strictly lawful, are not typically subject to
intervention due to the characteristics of the institution and its
In the past five years in Australia, institutional violence against people
with disability has been the subject of much advocacy,
and has received
increased media, political and legal attention. Notably in the space of three
years there were three Senate reports
related to this issue (SCARC 2013, 2015,
2016). Given many of the sites of this institutional violence are services
currently transitioning
to the federal National Disability Insurance Scheme
(‘NDIS’), the role of the NDIS in enabling or preventing
institutional
violence has been a particular, recent concern. At the same time,
two Royal Commissions — the Royal Commission into Institutional
to Child Sexual Abuse and the Royal Commission into the Protection and Detention
of Children in the Northern Territory
— have been called to focus on
institutional violence (although not specifically focused on people with
disability) precisely
because of its unique set of legal powers to challenge the
ways that institutions can limit oversight of or obfuscate the violence
occurs within their walls.
Recently, the Australian Government rejected calls by disability advocacy
organisations, various federal and state inquiries, and
academics, for a Royal
Commission into disability violence. The aim of this comment is to inform
readers of the key contemporary
attempts to grapple with institutional violence
against people with disability flowing from domestic review processes, the NDIS
domestic implementation of international law. We begin with a discussion of
recent domestic review processes.
Domestic inquiries and reviews
Public inquiries, including Royal Commissions and government and
parliamentary reviews, serve a number of functions within Australia’s
policy and law context (see Hindmarsh & Parkinson 2013; Prasser 1985). While
in the Australian system these processes ‘lack
a formal constitutional
basis for their existence’ (Prasser 1985, p. 1), they nevertheless have
the capacity to resolve contentious
political issues and enable transparency
where there is a government or public desire for independent oversight (see
Hindmarsh &
Parkinson 2013, pp. 295–6). Royal Commissions have in
particular a high value attached to them because of their legislative
coercive powers and prestige (Prasser 1986): these features of Royal Commissions
contribute to ‘them being highly valued
internally, and thus to a
corresponding (deeply rooted) social norm of expected independence’
(Samuel & Green 2017, p.
98). We note in particular that Royal Commissions
potentially have a ‘landmark’ status in highlighting the need for
structural change, even where governments prove unwilling to respond to the
norms they create; arguably the Royal Commission into
Aboriginal Deaths in
Custody, finalised in 1991, is an example of this (see Cunneen 2006, p. 333).
In this section we examine relevant national
inquiries relevant to violence against people with disability. There have been
state-level inquiries that have drawn attention to the range of
institutional forms of violence committed against people with disability
for example, the Victorian Parliamentary Inquiry into Abuse in Disability
Services and the New South Wales (‘NSW’)
Parliamentary Inquiry into
Students with a Disability or Special Needs in NSW Schools), but for brevity we
focus on national developments.
Following a long-running advocacy campaign led by Women with Disabilities
Australia and People with Disability Australia (see, for
example, Frohmader
2013) arguing for the criminal prohibition of sterilisation — that is, the
non-consensual surgical removal
of reproductive organs — in 2012 the
Senate Community Affairs Reference Committee (‘Senate Committee’)
the issue. In its 2013 report (SCARC 2013), the Senate Committee
recommended retaining the practice of court authorised sterilisation
without capacity — so sterilisation would not be prohibited by criminal
law as advocates had argued — but including
human rights considerations in
the legal test that governs court authorisation (SCARC 2013, p. x). While this
was a highly problematic
approach that reinforced the inequality in rights of
people with disability to freedom from legally sanctioned violence, there
continuing domestic and international pressure for positive reform. In
2013, responding to the Senate Committee finding, the United
(‘UN’) Committee on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities stated
it was ‘deeply concerned that the Senate
inquiry report ... puts forward
recommendations that would allow this practice to continue’ (CRPD 2013, p.
5 [39]). It urged
Australia to adopt laws prohibiting sterilisation ‘in
the absence of their prior, fully informed and free consent’ (CRPD
p. 6 [40]; see Steele 2016), recognising that the issue of informed, freely
given consent should focus on the issue of how
capacity may or may not be
supported for particular categories of people, rather than relying on outdated
presumptions of who does
or does not have capacity (see Arstein-Kerslake 2017;
Gooding 2018; People with Disability Australia et al. 2014).
Perhaps for the first time in an Australian policy context, systematic
violence against people with disability was addressed in the
2015 Senate
Committee report on institutional violence (‘Institutional Violence Senate
Report’). This Inquiry was established
in 2014 in response to an
Australian Broadcasting Commission
Four Corners
documentary highlighting
the systematic violence perpetrated by individual disability service workers
against people with disability
in disability services, and the failure of
disability service managers to recognise and pursue legal action against
perpetrators
In our care
2014). This documentary reflected concerns
which had been raised by disabled people’s organisations over a number of
their longstanding campaign against disability institutional
Relevant to this contemporary comment, the Institutional Violence Senate
Report made a headline recommendation for a Royal Commission
into Violence
against People with Disability (SCARC 2015, p. xv). The rationale for this
important recommendation was the need to
‘conduct a more thorough
investigation of instances of violence, abuse and neglect of people with
disability, including investigative
powers and be funded and empowered to visit
institutions’ (SCARC 2015, p. 267). In making this recommendation, the
Senate Committee
acknowledged the limitations of its own inquiry in capturing
the extent of violence, abuse and neglect experienced by people with
disability,
noting that the lack of reliable data available meant that prevalence was
undoubtedly far greater than ‘this inquiry
has been able to
determine’ (SCARC 2015, p. 268). The Institutional Violence Senate Report
also made recommendations relating
to enhancing access to justice through
training of police and lawyers and better witness support services (SCARC 2015,
p. xvii) and
improved reporting and oversight of disability services in relation
to their responses to violence in their services (SCARC 2015,
p. xviii). The
Institutional Violence Senate Report acknowledged and considered lawful
institutional violence against people with
disability (particularly restrictive
practices) (SCARC 2015, ch 4), but fell short of recommending the prohibition of
these forms
of institutional violence.
Arguably the response of the Australian Government to these far-reaching
recommendations has been poor. In March 2017, the Australian
Government released
its Response to the Senate Community Affairs Reference Committee’s
recommendations (‘the Response’).
The Response announced that the
Australian Government would not pursue a Royal Commission into the violence and
abuse of people with
disability. Instead, the Government proposed that violence
would be prevented by the establishment of the NDIS Quality and Safeguarding
Framework (Australian Government 2017, p. 5). We return to this proposition
regarding the capacity of the NDIS and its associated
mechanisms to address
institutional violence in the next section.
Continuing advocacy in Australia, as well as the Institutional Violence
Senate Report, has highlighted the indefinite detention of
people with cognitive
impairment and psychiatric disabilities who are considered ‘unfit to
plead’ in criminal cases due
to a lack of legal capacity (Australian
Government 2017, p. xvii) (see, for example,
Jailed without conviction
2014). Following the release of the Institutional Violence Senate Report, a
separate inquiry into indefinite detention of people with
cognitive and
psychiatric impairment in Australia was established. The subsequent report made
recommendations focused on enhancing
access to justice (SCARC 2015, pp.
xiii–xiv) and alternatives to detention in the forensic and criminal
context (SCARC 2015,
pp. xvi–xix), but did make one recommendation for a
nationally consistent approach to existing state and territory disability
oversight mechanisms to prevent violence in detention (SCARC 2015, p. xiv).
While not specific to people with disability, the Royal Commission into
Institutional Responses to Child Sexual Abuse (‘RCIRCSA’)
problematised violence against people with disability in institutional contexts.
The RCIRCSA addressed sexual abuse in disability
institutional settings such as
residential special schools, respite services, day services and other support
services designed for
children with disability (RCIRCSA 2017a). Its various
public hearings have explored some of the key strategies used to ensure children
and adults with disability can access criminal justice responses to
institutional violence perpetrated against them, such as introducing
offence for those institutional actors who know of cases of violence but do not
seek to have them addressed, and the use
of witness intermediaries (RCIRCSA
2017b). RCIRCSA recently released its report on criminal justice responses and
made recommendations
specifically in relation to victims and survivors with
disability (see, for example, RCIRCSA 2017c, pp. 509–12). RCIRCSA’s
also makes explicit references to children with disability in the context of its
final recommendations (RCIRCSA 2017d).
The collective impact of the above national review processes is difficult to
assess. On one hand, the unprecedented number of public
inquiries addressing
violence against people with disability is indicative of the relative success of
people with disability and
advocates in building public awareness and prompting
response from government. However, on the other hand, inquiries themselves do
not necessarily lead to positive reform. There are inherent problems with review
processes, including:
inquiry terms of reference decided upon by elites in non-transparent and
narrow representative procedures of formulation; the selection
of reviewers
which exclude citizen representatives and include obviously biased ones; and
where the major form of public participation
is submissions ... that invite
their strategic selection for decisional influence (Hindmarsh & Parkinson
2013, p. 306).
As discussed above, some review processes, such as the recommendations of the
2012 Senate Community Affairs Reference Committee, can
fail to live up to the
demands of advocates; while others, such as the Institutional Violence Senate
Report can fail to be meaningfully
implemented by government. However, there are
other reasons that public inquiries may be useful within a policy and law reform
in particular, in highlighting structural inequalities, creating an
evidence base and normative demand for change. The failure of
domestic inquiries
to prompt institutional change perhaps reinforces the place of more significant
inquiry processes, such as Royal
Commissions or international monitoring through
periodic human rights reviews (see below), in increasing pressure on governments
to respond effectively to violence against people with disability.
National Disability Insurance Scheme
As noted above, the Australian Government’s response to the
overwhelming call for a Royal Commission into the violence, abuse
and neglect of
people with disability has focused on improving the quality of service provision
through regulation of institutional
spaces (not, as we noted above, ending
institutionalisation or prohibiting specific lawful interventions such as
restrictive practices).
Until now, the majority of disability services in
Australia have been ‘block-funded’ by government agencies. Under the
NDIS, the funding of disability services will become individualised. This means
that people with disability who are eligible to receive
government funding will
now be able to choose the services they believe they require, receive funding
for those which are reasonable
and necessary, and have the power to change
providers should they be unhappy with the level or quality of service they
As a result of the shift in the distribution of disability funding, it is
expected that a number of new service providers will seek
registration with the
National Disability Insurance Agency (‘NDIA’) in order to compete
with existing disability providers
for people’s individualised disability
funding. It is intended that this development will turn Australia’s
services sector into a ‘market-based system’, where
people with disability — repositioned as service ‘consumers’
— will weigh up the risks associated with choosing the various service
options marketed to them by competing providers (Productivity
Commission 2011).
The NDIS Quality and Safeguarding Framework (‘the Framework’) is
designed to ensure that capability
and protections are built into this new
market-based system (Australian Government Department of Social Services 2016,
objectives of the Framework are to ensure NDIS funded supports, among
other things, uphold the rights of people with disability,
including their
rights as consumers and allow participants to live free from abuse, violence,
neglect and exploitation (Australian
Government Department of Social Services
2016, p. 11).
In relation to the potential violence against people with disability under
the NDIS, a number of protective measures have been built
into the Framework,
yet their potential effectiveness is questionable. For example, under the
Framework, the newly established NDIS
complaints commissioner has been given
responsibility for responding to the inappropriate or unauthorised use of
restrictive practices.
The NDIS complaints commissioner refers matters to the
senior practitioner for further consideration and response. Should the senior
practitioner have concerns about specific workers or providers having misused
restrictive practices, they can then refer the matter
to the NDIS registrar, who
in turn has the power to deregister or bar offending workers and/or providers.
Thus, use of restrictive
practices remains under the NDIS Framework as an issue
, and not criminal
prosecution
That is to say, the use of restrictive practices remains
legally permissible
under the NDIS Quality and Safeguarding Framework, despite this Framework
being touted by the Australian Government as the solution
to eliminating all the
problematic nuances of institutional violence raised in the Institutional
Violence Senate Report (including
the ‘disability-specific lawful
violence’ of restrictive practices).
Notably, in regards to the regulation of restrictive practices under the
Framework, the primary responsibility for reporting the inappropriate
unauthorised use of restrictive practices to the NDIS complaints commissioner
rests with (the offending) service providers. Indeed,
people with disability who
approach the commissioner directly with a complaint will be encouraged in the
first instance to raise
their concern with their service provider so that the
provider can address the complaint through their own internal processes
(Australian
Government Department of Social Services 2016, p. 47). This
prescription overlooks the complexity that people who are subject to
restrictive
practices are most often those who are the least likely to be able to raise
complaints about these practices on their
own behalf — either due to the
nature of their impairment or because of the environment within which they live
(or both) (see
Spivakovsky 2018). Moreover, should a complaint about restrictive
practices be raised with the NDIS complaints commissioner the Framework
provide any clear requirement for ensuring criminal justice intervention.
International human rights developments
Australia’s ratification of the CRPD arguably has had a pronounced
effect on the Australian policy and law landscape, at least
in prompting
analysis of the legal status of people with disability, and simultaneously
contributing to reform in delivery of social
supports. For example, the 2014
Australian Law Reform Commission review of laws and legal processes with the aim
of recognising that
people with disability should enjoy equal recognition as
persons before the law (ALRC 2014) and large-scale restructuring of social
supports in Australia through the development of the NDIS. However, the primary
policy framework designed to give life to Australia’s
CRPD obligations,
the National Disability Strategy 2010–2020, has achieved few of its aims
and objectives, and reports and
action plans under the Strategy have
consistently run late since its implementation.
Insofar as the CRPD elucidates a range of obligations relevant to violence,
abuse, torture and ill-treatment, the treaty also has
great potential for
addressing interpersonal and institutional forms of violence routinely
experienced by people with disability.
Indeed, in many respects, the CRPD offers
a more strongly articulated set of rights in relation to freedom from violence
core treaties, such as the
Convention on the Elimination of All
Forms of Discrimination against Women
(see Šimonović 2014, pp.
599–602). The CRPD reiterates that persons with disability should enjoy on
an equal basis
with others liberty and security of person (art 14), freedom from
torture or cruel, inhuman or degrading treatment or punishment
(art 15), freedom
from exploitation, violence and abuse (art 16) and bodily integrity (art 17). In
addition, these rights to freedom
from violence are underpinned by rights of
access to justice (art 13) and equal recognition as persons before the law (art
latter right in particular problematising legal arrangements, such as
guardianship, which enable institutionalisation and restrictive
practices (see
CRPD 2014). The rights of people with disability to be free from violence
strongly interact with other CRPD rights
such as the right of people to live
independently in the community, including choosing their place of residence (art
19), thus effectively
prohibiting institutional models of support that restrict
liberty (see Kayess & French 2008, p. 29; see also Spivakovsky 2017).
One area where there have been signs of policy progress both internationally
and in Australia is in relation to protection from torture
and ill-treatment
(see Karsay & Lewis 2012). Ill-treatment relating to people with disability
in the contexts of disability support
and healthcare has increasingly been
problematised within the UN system, with Special Rapporteurs on torture and
other cruel, inhuman
or degrading treatment or punishment drawing attention to
the use of restraints and seclusion, as well as the use of forced medical
interventions such as non-consensual sterilisation and the use of therapies such
as electroconvulsive therapy (Novak 2008, pp. 10–18;
Méndez 2013).
Indeed, Special Rapporteur Méndez, examining torture and ill-treatment in
health contexts, recommended
‘an absolute ban on all forced and
non-consensual medical interventions against persons with disabilities’
(Novak 2008,
p. 23), including in relation to children with disability (see
Novak 2008, pp. 19–20; Méndez 2015, p. 12). The policy
implications of applying a prohibition to the use of restrictive practices are
potentially significant for Australia, given
the continuing use of these
practices within the context of disability support (see Frawley & Naylor
2014), civil and forensic
mental health contexts (see McSherry 2017) and in
education (CYDA 2016; see also Paley-Wakefield 2012).
In late 2017, the Australian Government ratified the Optional Protocol to CAT
(‘OPCAT’), after an Australian Human Rights
Commission consultation
process (see AHRC 2017). OPCAT ratification will lead to international
monitoring of sites of detention by
the Subcommittee on Prevention of Torture
and Other Cruel, Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or Punishment of the Committee
Torture (‘SPT’) and also lead to the creation of a domestic
National Preventative Mechanism (‘NPM’). OPCAT
has significant
potential (alongside domestic criminal legal and other mechanisms being
considered in domestic law reform) as a vehicle
for monitoring of the treatment
of people in a variety of institutional contexts, and also for pursuing
improvements in support systems,
with the aim of eliminating systematic violence
against people with disability, and has been used in this way in a number of
countries (Sveaass & Madrigal-Borloz 2017). However, significant
political and conceptual challenges remain for implementation
of an Australian
NPM in such a way to offer enhanced protection for persons with disability; such
a mechanism would require the development
of a disability inclusive approach to
monitoring, including recognising
non-traditional sites of detention – such as large and small disability
institutions — and monitoring interventions such
as restraint and
seclusion practiced in contexts of ‘support’ and
‘therapy’ (see Lea et al. 2018; PWDA 2017;
see also Karsay &
Lewis 2012).
Conclusion: Where to from here?
Institutional violence is a widespread systemic issue with significant
criminal law and criminal justice dimensions, which include
conventional
questions of attrition and enforcement as well as deeper issues around what
constitutes violence and who can be a subject
of it. In light of recent human
rights developments designed to realise the rights of people with disability,
and the movement made
by recent domestic inquiries to engage with these multiple
issues, it is troubling that the Australian Government has so far avoided
reaching response to violence against people with disability, such as might be
provided by a Royal Commission.
Since the release of the Australian Government Response to the Institutional
Violence Senate Report into institutional violence against
people with
disability, a number of disability advocacy groups, as well as academics, have
renewed the call for a Royal Commission
into violence against people with
disability. Disabled People’s Organisations Australia (DPO Australia), a
coalition of peak
disability advocacy groups in Australia, has been particularly
instrumental in reinstating this call (see, for example, DPO Australia
2017b). In May 2017, over 160 Australian academics joined this call for a Royal
Commission, writing an open letter to Australia’s
Prime Minister
(DisabilityRoyalCommissionNow 2017).
At the time of writing, the Australian Government, led by Prime Minister
Turnbull, has not changed its position on the establishment
Commission. The Government continues to present the forthcoming NDIS Quality and
Safeguarding Framework as the only mechanism
needed for protecting people with
disability from violence, abuse and neglect in institutional settings, despite
advocates continuing
to emphasise its numerous limitations, especially in light
of the overt alignment between the NDIS Act Charter and the CRPD. Notably,
however, the Australian Labor Party has announced a commitment to establish a
Royal Commission into disability violence and abuse
should the Labor win the
2019 election. Disability advocates continue to encourage Prime Minister
Turnbull to show the same leadership
(DPO Australia 2017b).
Most of the problems and injustices addressed by Royal Commissions in
Australia remain after they have completed their work, and few
recommendations
arising from Royal Commissions have been implemented. However, as highlighted
earlier, the significance of Royal
Commissions lies not solely in the
implementation of recommendations, but also in the impact they have on the
perception of the injustice
discussed therein. A Royal Commission offers
unparalleled discovery powers and thus could conduct comprehensive and
independent investigation
into the extent of violence against people with
disability in Australia. Importantly, such a review has the potential to
the connection between institutional environments and systemic
violence against people with disability, and elucidate the barriers
that prevent
a criminal justice response, enabling reforms to support systems, inclusion
outcomes. This kind of robust interrogation
has the potential to also examine
how and why criminal justice remedies remain inaccessible to people with
disability, despite the
Australian Government’s explicit commitment to
realising their human rights, including their equality before the law. It can
also enable research designed to adapt the measures developed internationally to
address institutional violence against people with
disability, and ensure
evidence-based reform of and beyond the justice system, in line with the CRPD.
Perhaps most significantly,
however, it has the potential to make explicit and
to inhibit the current approach to institutional violence within
Conventions and Protocols
Convention against Torture and Other Cruel, Inhumane or Degrading
treatment or Punishment
, opened for signature 10 December
1984, 1465 UNTS 85
(entered into force 26 June 1987)
Convention of the Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination against
, opened for signature 18 December
1979, 1249 UNTS 13
into force 3 September 1981).
Convention of the Rights of Persons with Disabilities
, opened for
signature 13 December
2006, 2515 UNTS 3
(entered into force 3 May
Optional Protocol to the Convention against Torture and other Cruel,
Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or Punishment
, opened for signature 4
February 2003, UN Doc A/RES/57/199 (entered into force 22 June 2006).
Arstein-Kerslake, A 2017,
Restoring voice to people with cognitive
disabilities: realizing the right to equal recognition before the law
Cambridge University Press, Cambridge.
Australian Government 2017,
Australian Government response to the Senate
Community Affairs References Committee report: violence, abuse and neglect
against people
with disability in institutional and residential settings,
including the gender and age related dimensions, and the particular situation
Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander people with disability, and culturally and
linguistically diverse people with disability
viewed 1 April 2018,
https://www.dss.gov.au/sites/default/files/documents/03_
2017/government_response_to_senate_inquiry_into_violence_abuse_and_neglect_1_march_17.pdf.
Australian Government, Department of Social Services 2016,
NDIS quality
and safeguarding framework
, viewed 1 April 2018,
https://www.dss.gov.au/sites/default/files/documents/04_2017/
ndis_quality_and_safeguarding_framework_final.pdf.
Australian Human Rights Commission (‘AHRC’) 2017,
Australia consultation paper
, viewed 1 April 2018,
https://www.humanrights.gov.au/sites/default/files/document/publication/
AHRC_OPCAT_Implementation_Consultation_Paper_2017.pdf.
Australian Institute of Health and Welfare 2017,
Disability support
services: services provided under the National Disability Agreement
, Bulletin 140
, cat. no. AUS 212, AIHW, Canberra.
Australian Law Reform Commission 2014,
Equality, capacity and disability
in Commonwealth laws
report no 124, viewed 1 April 2018,
https://www.alrc.gov.au/sites/default/files/pdfs/publications/
alrc_124_whole_pdf_file.pdf.
Cadwallader, J 2017, ‘Disability and violence: contemplating the
intersections’, paper presented at MAEVe Seminar Series,
Melbourne Social
Equity Institute, Melbourne, 25 July.
Chapman, C, Carey AC & Ben-Moshe L 2014, ‘Reconsidering
confinement: interlocking locations and logics of incarceration’
Ben-Moshe, C Chapman & AC Carey (eds.),
Disability incarcerated:
imprisonment and disability in the United States and Canada
Macmillan, New York, pp. 1–24.
Children and Young People with Disability Australia (‘CYDA’)
Submission to the special rapporteur on the rights of persons with
disability: abuse of students with disability in Australian schools
1 April 2018, http://www.cyda.org.au/cdasubmissions.
Committee on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities (‘CRPD’)
Concluding observations on the initial report of Australia, adopted by
the Committee at its tenth session (2–13 September 2013)
21 October, UN Doc CRPD/C/AUS/CO/1.
Committee on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities (‘CRPD’)
Article 12: Equal recognition before the law
, General Comment No.
1, UN Doc CRPD/C/GC/1.
Cunneen, C 2006, ‘Racism, discrimination and the over-representation of
Indigenous people in the criminal justice system: some
conceptual and
explanatory issues’,
Current Issues in Criminal Justice
no. 3, pp 329–46.
DisabilityRoyalCommissionNow 2017,
Open letter from academics supports
calls for a Royal Commission into violence against people with disability
DisabilityRoyalCommissionNow, viewed 1 April 2018,
https://disabilityroyalcommissionnow.wordpress.com/2017/04/05/open-letter/.
Disabled People’s Organisations Australia 2017a,
Disability groups
call for Royal Commission into violence against people with disability
March, Disabled People’s Organisations Australia, viewed 1 April
http://dpoa.org.au/disability-groups-call-for-royal-commission-into-violence-against-people-with-disability/.
Disabled People’s Organisations Australia 2017b,
Civil society
statement to the Australian Government — end the violence: call a Royal
Commission into violence and abuse against
people with disability
7 June, Disabled People’s Organisations Australia, viewed 1 April
2018, http://dpoa.org.au/civil-society-statement-rc.
Emerson, E 2004. ‘Deinstitutionalisation in England’,
of Intellectual & Developmental Disability
, vol. 29, no. 1, pp.
Frawley, P & Naylor, B 2014, ‘Human rights and people with
disabilities in closed environments’,
Law in Context
Frohmader, C 2013,
Dehumanised: the forced sterilisation of women and
girls with disabilities in Australia
Women with Disabilities
Australia, Rosny Park, Tasmania.
Frohmader, C & Sands, T 2015,
Australian Cross Disability Alliance
(ACDA) submission to the Senate Inquiry into violence, abuse and neglect against
people with
disability in institutional and residential settings
April 2018, http://wwda.org.au/wp-content/uploads/2013/12/ACDA_Sub_Sen_
Inquiry_Violence_Institutions.pdf.
Gooding, P 2018,
A new era for mental health law and policy: supported
decision-making and the UN Convention on the Rights of Persons with
Disabilities
, Cambridge University Press, Cambridge.
Karsay, D & Lewis, O 2012, ‘Disability, torture and ill-treatment:
taking stock and ending abuses’,
The International Journal of
Human Rights
, vol. 16, no. 6, pp. 816–30.
Kavanagh, A, Robinson, S & Cadwallader, J 2015, ‘We count what
matters, and violence against people with disability matters’,
Conversation
, 27 November, viewed 1 April 2018, http://theconversation.
com/we-count-what-matters-and-violence-against-people-with-disability-matters-51320.
Kayess, R & French, P 2008, ‘Out of darkness into light?
Introducing the Convention on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities’,
Human Rights Law Review
, vol. 8, no. 1, pp. 1–34.
Krnjacki, L, Emerson, E, Llewellyn, G, & Kavanagh, AM 2016,
‘Prevalence and risk of violence against people with and without
disabilities: findings from an Australian population-based study’,
Australian and New Zealand Journal of Public Health
, vol. 40, pp.
Kumari Campbell, F 2009,
Contours of ableism: the production of disability
and abledness
, Palgrave Macmillan, Hampshire & New York.
Henman, P & Foster, M 2015, ‘Models of disability support
governance: a framework for assessing and reforming social policy’,
Australian Journal of Social Issues
, vol. 50, no. 3, pp.
Hindmarsh, R & Parkinson, A 2013, ‘The public inquiry as a
contested political technology: GM crop moratorium reviews in
Australia,’
Environmental Politics
22, no. 2: pp. 293–311.
In our care
2014, television program, ABC Television, 24 November.
Jailed without conviction
2014, television program, ABC Television, 12
Lea, M, Beaupert, F, Bevan, N, Celermajer, D, Gooding, P, Minty, R,
Phillips, E, Spivakovsky, C, Steele, L, Wadiwel, D & Weller,
‘A disability aware approach to torture prevention? Australian OPCAT
ratification and improved protections for people
with disability’,
Australian Journal of Human Rights
, vol. 24, no. 1, pp. 70–96.
Macdonald, F 2017, ‘Marketising social care’,
, no. 149 (Aug 2017), pp. 22–5.
MacKinnon, D & Coleborne, C 2003, ‘Introduction:
deinstitutionalisation in Australia and New Zealand’,
, vol. 5, no. 2, pp. 1–16.
McSherry, B 2017, ‘Regulating seclusion and restraint in health care
settings: the promise of the Convention on the Rights of
Persons with
Disabilities’,
International Journal of Law and Psychiatry
53, pp. 39–44.
Mansell, J & Ericsson, K (eds.) 1996,
Deinstitutionalization and
community living: intellectual disability services in Britain, Scandinavia and
, Chapman & Hall, London.
Méndez, J 2013,
Report of the Special Rapporteur on Torture and
Other Cruel, Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or Punishment
A/HRC/22/53.
Méndez, J 2015,
Report of the Special Rapporteur on torture and
other cruel, inhuman or degrading treatment or punishment
A/HRC/28/68.
Merry, S E 2011, ‘Gender justice and CEDAW: the
Convention on the
Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination Against Women
vol. 9, pp. 49–75.
Muir, K & Salignac, F 2017, ‘Can market forces stimulate social
change?: A case example using the national disability insurance
Australia’,
Third Sector Review
, vol. 23, no. 2, pp.
Nowak, M 2008,
Interim report of the Special Rapporteur on torture and
other cruel, inhuman or degrading treatment or punishment
Paley-Wakefield, S 2012, ‘Is legislation needed to limit the restraint
of clients? Sharon Paley-Wakefield compares UK and Australian
legislation and
guidelines on the use of restrictive practices with people who have learning
disabilities’,
Learning Disability Practice
, Apr. 2012, p. 24.
People with Disability Australia (‘PWDA’), The Australian Centre
for Disability Law (‘ACDL’) & The Australian
Human Rights Centre
(‘AHRCentre’) 2014, Submission to Australian Law Reform Commission
Inquiry into Equality, Capacity
and Disability in Commonwealth Laws, viewed
1 April 2018,
https://www.alrc.gov.au/sites/default/files/subs/136._org_people_with_disability_australia_
pwda__the_australian_centre_for_disability_law_acdl_and_australian_human_rights_centre_.pdf.
People with Disability Australia (‘PWDA’) & Women with
Disabilities Australia (‘WWDA’) 2015, Submission
to Consultation
Paper — Proposal for a National Disability Insurance Scheme Quality and
Safeguarding framework, viewed 1 April
http://pwd.org.au/documents/Submissions/NDIS_
QSF_PWDA_WWDA_Final.docx
People with Disability Australia (‘PWDA’) 2017,
responsive National Preventive Mechanism (NPM),
Submission to Australian
Human Rights Commission, viewed 1 April 2018, https://www.
humanrights.gov.au/sites/default/files/38.DPOA%20PWD%20Sub%20280717.pdf.
Prasser, S 1985, ‘Public inquiries in Australia: an overview’,
Australian Journal of Public Administration
, vol. 44, pp. 1–15.
Prasser, S 2006, ‘Royal Commissions in Australia: when should
governments appoint them?’
Australian Journal of Public
Administration
, vol. 65, pp. 28–47.
Productivity Commission 2011,
Disability care and support
, Report no.
54, Canberra.
Royal Commission into Institutional Responses to Child Sexual Abuse 2017a,
Case study 38
, viewed 2 April 2018,
http://www.childabuseroyalcommission.gov.au/case-study/27150f40-1e84-4b27-9f8b-c25fc162a561/case-study-41,-july-2016,-sydney
Royal Commission into Institutional Responses to Child Sexual Abuse 2017b,
Case study 41
, viewed 2 April 2018,
https://www.childabuseroyalcommission.gov.au/case-study/1c1a2449-93cd-4268-86da-7dd7e3272797/case-study-38,-march-2016,-sydney
Royal Commission into Institutional Responses to Child Sexual Abuse 2017c,
Criminal justice report: executive summary and
April 2018,
https://www.childabuseroyalcommission.gov.au/sites
default/files/file-list/final_report_-_criminal_justice_report_-_executive_summary_and_parts_i_to_ii.pdf.
Royal Commission into Institutional Responses to Child Sexual Abuse 2017d,
Final report recommendations
, viewed 2 April 2018,
https://www.childabuseroyalcommission.gov.au/sites/default/
files/final_report_-_recommendations.pdf.
Samuel, S & Green, JA 2017, ‘Domestic commissions of inquiry and
international law: the importance of normative authority’
in C Henderson
Commissions of inquiry: problems and prospects
, Bloomsbury
Publishing, Oxford and Portland, pp. 89–116.
Senate Community Affairs References Committee 2013,
Inquiry into
involuntary or coerced sterilisation of people with disabilities in
, viewed 2 April 2018, https://www.aph.gov.au/
Parliamentary_Business/Committees/Senate/Community_Affairs/Involuntary_Sterilisation/~/media/Committees/Senate/committee/clac_ctte/involuntary_sterilisation/first_report/report.ashx.
Senate Community Affairs References Committee 2015,
and neglect against people with disability in institutional and residential
settings, including the gender and age related dimensions,
and the particular
situation of Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander people with disability, and
culturally and linguistically diverse
people with disability
, viewed 2 April
2018, https://www.aph.
gov.au/Parliamentary_Business/Committees/Senate/Community_Affairs/Violence_abuse_neglect/~/media/Committees/clac_ctte/Violence_abuse_neglect/report.pdf.
Senate Community Affairs Reference Committee 2016,
Indefinite detention of
people with cognitive and psychiatric impairment in Australia
April 2018, https://www.aph.gov.au/Parliamentary_
Business/Committees/Senate/Community_Affairs/IndefiniteDetention45/~/media/Committees/clac_ctte/IndefiniteDetention45/report.pdf.
Šimonović, D 2014, ‘Global and regional standards on violence
against women: the evolution and synergy of the CEDAW
and Istanbul
Conventions’,
Human Rights Quarterly
, vol. 36, no. 3, pp.
Spivakovsky, C 2012,
Restrictive interventions and the disability sector:
a discussion paper
, Victorian Office of the Public Advocate, Melbourne.
Spivakovsky, C 2017, ‘Governing freedom through risk: locating the
group home in the archipelago of confinement and control’,
, vol. 19, no. 3, pp. 366–83.
Spivakovsky, C 2018, ‘The impossibilities of “bearing
witness” to the violence of coercive interventions in the
sector’ in C Spivakovsky, K Seear & A Carter (eds.),
Perspective on Coercive Interventions: Law, Medicine and Society
, Routledge,
London, pp. 97–114.
Steele, L 2015,
Submission to the Senate Community Affairs References
Committee, inquiry into violence, abuse and neglect against people with
in institutional and residential settings
Steele, L 2016, ‘Court-authorised sterilisation and human rights:
inequality, discrimination and violence against women and
disability?’,
UNSW Law Journal
39, no. 3, pp.
Steele, L 2017, ‘Lawful institutional violence against disabled
, vol. 143 (November/December), pp.
Sveaass, N & Madrigal-Borloz, V 2017, ‘The preventive approach:
OPCAT and the prevention of violence and abuse of persons
with mental
disabilities by monitoring places of detention’,
International Journal
of Law and Psychiatry,
vol. 53, pp. 15–26.
Wadiwel, D 2017, ‘Disability and torture: exception, epistemology and
“Black Sites”’,
, vol. 31, no. 3, pp.
Young, L & Ashman, AF 2004, ‘Deinstitutionalisation in Australia
part I: historical perspective’,
British Journal of Developmental
Disabilities
, vol. 50, no. 98, pp. 21–8.
Independent Scholar,
jess.cadwallader@gmail.com.
Senior Lecturer, School
of Social Sciences, Monash University, 20 Chancellors Walk, Clayton Campus,
Monash University Vic 3800, Australia. Email:
claire.spivakovsky@monash.edu.
Senior Lecturer, Faculty
of Law, University of Technology Sydney; Visiting Senior Fellow, Faculty of Law,
Humanities and the Arts,
University of Wollongong, Australia, PO Box 123,
Broadway NSW 2007, Australia. Email: linda.steele@uts.edu.au.
Senior Lecturer, The
University of Sydney, School of Social and Political Sciences, The University of
Sydney NSW 2006, Australia.
Email: dinesh.wadiwel@sydney.edu.au.
Authors have made equal
contributions to this Contemporary Comment and are listed in alphabetical
Violence against
people with disability, however, is extremely difficult to track, partly because
most Australian strategies for
tracking such data — for example,
large-scale representative research performed by the Australian Bureau of
Statistics (‘ABS’),
or police crimes data — tend to produce
and reproduce ‘ableist’ social norms (Kumari Campbell 2009) and
marginalise disabled people. For example, the ABS’s Personal
Safety Survey, generally understood as the gold standard of data
regarding violence in Australia, excludes non-private households such as
institutions and group homes, and will not provide
Auslan translations, braille,
or Easy English versions of the survey to ensure the participation of deaf,
blind, and/or people with
intellectual disability (Kavanagh, Robinson &
Cadwallader 2015).
This is despite
the Framework directly quoting the submission of Women with Disabilities
Australia and People with Disability Australia,
which stated that presenting
these issues as service incidents ‘dilutes the reality of violence and
harmful practices’,
and leads to the situation being ‘written
off’ for internal investigation, closing off options for police
involvement
(Australian Government Department of Social Services 2016, p. 50).
The Framework does makes some reference to the NDIS complaints
commissioner
having capacity to refer matters to police, although it is unclear under what
circumstances these referral pathways
are expected to be invoked, with the
Framework only indicating that they will be used ‘as needed’
(Australian Government
Department of Social Services 2016, p. 18).
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (409 KB)
PDF format (415 KB)
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter