URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/journals/IntTBLawRw/2004/10.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 15:05:45
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Editors --- "Book Reviews" [2004] IntTBLawRw 10; (2004) 9 International Trade and Business Law Review 243
Book Reviews
Philip Ayres, Own Dixon, The Miegunyah Press, Melbourne, 2003 ISBN o 522 850456
Edited by Tony Blackshiel, Coper and George Williams, The Oxform Companion to the High Court of Australia Oxford University Press,
2001 RRP $A150hb, $NS195, 804pp, ISBNo-19-554022-O
Ysaiah Ross and Peter Macfarlane, Lawyers’ Responsibility and Accountability Cases, Problems and Commentary, (2nd edn) (LexisNexis
Australia: Butterworths, 2002) pp i – xxix, 1 – 427 ISBN 0 409 31709 8
Gino E Dal Pont, Lawyers’ Professional Responsibility in Australia and New Zealand, (2nd edn) (Sydney: LBC Information Services,
2001) pp i – cxxi, 1 – 658, ISBN 0 455 21754 8
John Trone, Federal Constitutions and International Relations, (Brisbane: University of Queensland Press, 2001) ISBN 0702232416
Carl Michael von Qu itzow, State Measures Distorting Free Competition in the EC (The Hague: Kluwer Law International, 2001) ISBN:
90–411–1466–1
Adrian Briggs and Peter Rees, Civil Jurisdiction and Judgments (3rd edn) (LLP, 2002) ISBN 1 85978 374 0
WMC Gummow, Change and Continuity: Statute, Equity, and Federalism (Oxford, New York: Oxford University Press, 1999) pp I–xx,
1-122 ISBN 0 19 829823 4
Peter Luxton, The Law of Charities (Oxford: University Press, 2001) pp i–1xxxiv, 1–997 ISBN 0 19 826783 5 i-1xxxiv, 1-997
ISBN 0 19 8267835
Edited by Eva Micheler and DD Prentice, Joint Ventures in English and German Law (Oxford: Hart Publishing, 2000) ISBN 1 84113 106
Wayne C Booth, Gregory G Colomb and Joseph M Williams, The Craft of Research (2nd edn) (Chicago: The University of Chicago Press,
2003) ISBN 0226 06568 5 329 pp (paperback)
Book Reviews
Philip Ayres, Own Dixon, The Miegunyah Press,
Melbourne, 2003 ISBN o 522 850456
From time to time a great legal mind comes onto the judicial scene and Sir
Owen Dixon was one of those. By the time of his death,
in 1972 it was well
accepted that his decisions in the High Court of Australia had shaped much of
the common law world. The Chief
Justice of NSW said of him:
Sir Owen Dixon possessed the most formidable legal mind in all of our
(Australian) history. … [H]is particular genius for reasoning
and clarity of expression placed him in the first rank.
Associate Professor Philip Ayres sets out this genius of
Dixon’s in commendable detail in his book, Owen Dixon, published in
well described as a book of ‘profound scholarship’.
book is written from the personal diaries kept by Dixon. These diaries are
extensive and detailed and reveal aspects and judgments
on the personalities of
other major actors in his circle that are incisive and often devastatingly
critical. The author skilfully
allows the diaries to speak for themselves so
that the reader is able to draw conclusions from the published material rather
through the author’s views of the material.
Philip Ayres is Head of English Literature at Monash University, Australia.
He is not legally trained and close reading of the legal
aspects of the book
reflect this. However, his work brings the considerable literary skills that
probably would not be found in a
legal author.
The result is an
excellent book. As Dixon spanned a long period of professional activity, in
peace and wartime, in legal practice,
judicial office and diplomatic roles a
summary of his life is appropriate.
Dixon was born in Melbourne in 1886, his parents’ only child. His
father and mother were both of English background and at the
Dixon’s birth his father was a practising Melbourne barrister. When his
father went deaf he left the bar and joined
his own brother in a
solicitors’ practice in Melbourne. Later, driven by bouts of depression,
Dixon’s father developed
a serious alcohol problem.
Dixon was educated at Hawthorn College where he shone as a scholar. During
this time he found a love of the Greek classics that never
left him and to which
he returned after retirement from the bench. At Melbourne University he achieved
outstanding results in his
arts honours degree, especially in the classics. His
family’s financial hardship prevented post-graduate studies at Oxford
Cambridge, which would have been the norm, and required him to go straight on to
his law degree, which he obtained in 1908. His
university years were ‘full
as his father declined in spirit, health and income.
Dixon had to help the family finances by working in his uncle’s firm.
also helped care for his father during his bouts of alcoholism. Dixon swore to
his mother he would never drink and nor did he.
In 1910 Dixon started at the Melbourne Bar and life was hard. However,
because of his abilities he steadily gained reputation and
income. Whilst at
university and the junior bar, Dixon had professional contact with the people
that interacted with him all his
life. Robert Menzies, subsequently Victorian
Solicitor-General and Australian prime minister, was his pupil. John Latham was
Commonwealth Attorney-General and Chief Justice of the High Court,
appointed by Menzies, who also later appointed Dixon as Chief
Justice. There
were others. So it went on with a Melbourne coterie supporting each other into
high office.
In 1920 Dixon married Alice Brooksbank, daughter of Reverend Hubert
Brooksbank and his wife Alice. In 1922, aged 36, he took silk,
by which time he
was regularly appearing in the High Court. Later that year he travelled to
London to appear before the Privy Council
seeking leave to appeal in the
one of Australia’s major constitutional
cases. In his various Privy Council cases Dixon came to know many of the leading
legal actors, including Sir Edward Pollock KC, Sir John Simon KC, WS
Holdsworth (Vinerian Professor of Law) and Sir Douglas Hogg
(later Lord
Professor Ayres’s book and the diaries go on to develop further
Dixon’s career over the 1920s, including a period as an
acting justice of
the Victorian Supreme Court, after which he noted that judicial office was not
to his liking. Despite this Dixon
accepted an appointment to the High Court in
1929 (from Latham as Attorney-General), replacing Higgins J. He joined Knox CJ,
Duffy, Powers,
Rich and Starke JJ (married to Duffy’s
niece). He found a court where ‘everybody seemed to dislike everybody
Penetrating insights into the actual workings of the High Court are provided
by Dixon’s diaries. Dixon’s first written
judgment was for Rich J
(Rich J later transgressed
proper judicial conduct even further by having the judge from whom the appeal
came write a draft judgment
If the court was stressed as a
working legal bench when Dixon joined it in 1929, it became almost dysfunctional
after Evatt and McTiernan,
two politicians appointed by direction of the Labour
Party Caucus, joined it in 1930.
Dixon recorded that he wished to
resign and that Starke treated them with contempt and, later, Starke ceased all
communication with
Dixon’s diaries show that he was
frequently critical of Evatt and over the decade (the 1930s) lost faith in his
Notwithstanding this, in 1940, when Evatt resigned to
enter politics again, he asked Dixon to prepare Evatt’s outstanding
‘for propriety’s sake’.
Dixon had the
extraordinary ability of being liked and respected by, and being able to work
with, people for whom he had a low regard.
Australia went to war in 1939 in Europe, Africa and in the Pacific, along
with much of the rest of the world. Dixon, who had recently
returned from leave
in England seeking medical assistance for the eyesight of one of his sons,
offered Prime Minister Menzies his
services. He was immediately appointed to the
Central Wool Committee. Wool was a most important commodity in the war effort
had extensive experience having acted for many years for the Wool
In 1942 Prime Minister Curtin and Minister for Foreign Affairs Evatt offered
Dixon the task of Australia’s ambassadorship to
the USA, a vital position
in the dark days of war in the Pacific and Europe. Dixon served in that post
until 1944 and his diaries
reveal his work with the world’s political
leaders, including Roosevelt, Acheson and Churchill. He formed a close
with Dean Acheson that lasted for the remainder of their lives.
During the war years Dixon served with great distinction as a minister
Washington in assisting the war effort and Australia’s part in it.
His head of Chancery was Alan Watt and Keith Aitkin was his
. During these years the diaries reveal that Dixon was
much hampered by Evatt’s conduct as Minister for External Affairs. Dixon
reported direct to Prime Minister Curtin. The book reveals that Dixon’s
daughter Elizabeth, aged 14 at the time, recorded that
whilst Evatt was staying
at the Australian chancery with the Dixon family Evatt ‘behaved like a
In 1944 Dixon returned to Australia with Alice and his children and resumed
sitting in the High Court in November.
He was sitting in Sydney
Later, in 1950, Dixon agreed
to serve in a further diplomatic post, in this case
to be the United Nations mediator in the dispute between India and Pakistan over
Kashmir. His diaries reveal the enormous amount of work and travel he put into
the task over some five months.
In this endeavour he was, like so
many others, unsuccessful. On completion he returned to his judicial work in the
High Court.
In 1952 Menzies telephoned Dixon to offer him the position of Chief Justice.
He accepted, noting that Menzies considered that the
court already had
‘two passengers’.
The author describes Dixon’s
tenure as Chief Justice as the ‘golden age’ of the court
and it is hard to disagree. Dixon steadily worked to bring it from a place
where most members so disliked each other that they could
not work together to
one where the work of the court was done efficiently and harmoniously. In the
view of Lord Denning, the court
under Dixon ‘established a reputation
which overtopped even that of the House of Lords’.
to lack confidence, this was a view with which Dixon was in accord, as he had a
poor view of the work ethic and legal abilities
of many of the members of the
House of Lords.
It should be emphasised that the book uses many sources to detail those years
and Dixon’s diaries supplement them.
There is no doubt that
Dixon’s outstanding intelligence and industry led to his being one of the
world’s dominant jurists
in these years. The author develops this view and
Dixon’s diaries reveal how he worked so successfully over the 12 years
which he was Chief Justice (1952–64).
Sir Owen Dixon retired from the High Court in 1964 and died in 1972 of
congestive heart failure.
He was buried at Kew, Melbourne, beside
his wife Alice (d 1971) and parents. His four children survived him.
So what conclusions can one draw from this long discursis on Dixon, his
diaries and the book written by Professor Ayres. One can certainly
advance the
view that the book has a new and somewhat depressing view of the workings of the
High Court, certainly over the years
1930–52. One can also draw out that
the overwhelming positioning and scheming of many people to be appointed to the
High Court,
apart from Dixon, who was appointed on merit, brought them little
credit. Finally, one can posit that the internal, almost closet,
relationships
of the Melbourne legal establishment over these years, especially between
Menzies, Latham and Dixon, raise concerns
societies supporting each other to attain positions of high public office.
A note about the future of this treasure of legal and diplomatic diaries.
There is no present plan for publication of the full diaries.
If this were done
it would, indeed, be a contribution to history. If Dixon’s surviving
daughter, Mrs Betty Danby, would allow
it, perhaps they could be published in
two parts. The period of diplomacy by Dixon should be edited, if he would agree,
by Professor
Ayres so that he could bring his deep knowledge of the subject and
his literary skills to the fore once more. The periods at the
bar and on the
bench, however, would best be edited by someone of legally qualified and
experienced so that the nuances of the major
arguments and decisions could be
highlighted and developed.
In conclusion, this book
by Philip Ayres is a significant
contribution to legal history and scholarship and the author is to be
congratulated on the skill
and learning with which he has presented the Dixon
Michael White
Edited by Tony Blackshiel, Coper and George
Williams, The Oxform Companion to the High Court of Australia Oxford University
2001 RRP $A150hb, $NS195, 804pp, ISBNo-19-554022-O
This single-volume reference work about the High Court of Australia was
officially launched in Canberra on 13 February 2002 by the
Chief Justice of
Australia, The Hon Murray Gleeson AC, who cogently described it as ‘a
monumental work on the history and role
of the Court’.
Indeed, it is a credit to Professors Blackshield, Coper and Williams
– three leading constitutional scholars in Australia –
that they had
the perspicacity to appreciate the worth of a comprehensive and scholarly
publication that examines the Court in Australian
law, politics and society,
encompassing the cases it has decided and the people who have been involved in
its operation. Moreover,
it is the first work in the 99 years since the Court
commenced sitting (on 6 October 1903) that has subjected it to a sustained and
contextual examination of its decisions, justices, procedure and culture, as
well as its role as the third arm of the Federal Government.
The introductory material relates that Michael Coper, Professor of Law at the
Australian National University, from 1994 developed
the ‘ANU High Court
project’, gaining the support of the Australian Research Council, the
National Council for the Centenary
of Federation, and the Faculty of Law at the
Australian National University.
has 435 expertly compressed entries, in traditional
alphabetical order, totalling about 650,000 words, which have been developed
the suggestions made by more than 60 people.
It ranges over
the entire record of the Court since Federation and is structured around themes:
the development of the Court under
each Chief Justice (starting with ‘the
Griffith Court’
); the appointment of justices
(including appointments that might have been but did not eventuate); their
judicial work/abilities (albeit at times more flattering
to contemporaries than
long dead predecessors); relations between the Court and the community
(including politicians); summaries
of its most important decisions and the
development of substantive law in numerous areas of the civil and criminal law;
a jurimetrical analysis (jurimetrics is a branch of legal logic;
concerning ‘the use of scientific methods in the study of
matters’) of the Court’s voting pattern.
Also included
are issues such as how the Court has been affected by liberalism,
cultural diversity,
and sexual preferences.
In addition, there
are accounts of various aspects of the internal workings of the Court, such as
the role of associates,
the preparation of judgments and the fiscal
responsibilities and administration of the Court. Other entries cover the
strike in 1905,
the Chamberlain case,
the Murphy ‘affair’ of the 1980s
and even the
Australian movie ‘The Castle’ rates a mention.
Black-letter legal analysis is dispersed with what some may consider trivia,
which is nevertheless interesting and often reflects
the operation of the Court
in a certain milieu. There are several tables, one of which records the number
of times justices of the
Court – as recorded in the
Commonwealth Law
– appeared as counsel before the Court.
head of the list is Sir Hayden Starke with 211 appearances – 141 times
more than the present Chief Justice (Gleeson).
However, Sir Hayden’s
numbers can be seen as inflated if reference is made to the original
dealt with matters (eg tax, intellectual
property) that, from 1976 onwards, now fall within the purview of the Federal
while it does not take into account cases that did not make the
Commonwealth Law Reports
, it is nonetheless interesting and provides a
degree of insight into the workings of the Court.
Such entries demonstrate the fecundity of the minds that contributed to the
project, which features the informed commentary of 225
of Australia’s
leading experts on all aspects of the Court’s work. While the largest
single group of authors consists
of law academics, the editors have widened the
scope to include a number of current and ex-High Court justices, judges,
solicitors-general,
legal practitioners, journalists and even an ex-prime
minister. Of these, many contribute their personal insights. For example, the
first entry under ‘W’ is for Sir Cyril Ambrose Walsh
(1909–73), the son of a labourer who later became a justice
of the High
Court and a privy councillor.
The entry was composed by John
Kennedy McLaughlin, a master at the Supreme Court of NSW, who served as Sir
Cyril’s associate,
thereby enabling him to provide a unique insight into
the latter’s habits and personal life.
Moreover, such entries tell us a great deal not only about the make-up of the
Court at certain times but about social mobility in
Australian society. While E
Neumann and F Dominello, the authors of the entry ‘Background of
contend that the justices of the Court are
products of the upper-middle-class, thereby suggesting (despite a disclaimer) a
between class and position, of the present Justices, none comes from a
family with a background in law (as Gleeson CJ pointed out
’s launch). Indeed, at a time when class structure was
more firmly entrenched in Australian society, Sir Cyril’s rise
that appointment based on merit, rather than class, is a stronger analytical
component when exploring the selection process.
A connection between class and
appointments should not be assumed. In view of the
social commentary, an entry worthy of inclusion would have been the social
conditions under Prime Minister Menzies that contributed
to the make-up of the
present Court.
Nevertheless, very little of relevance or interest concerning the Court seems
to be absent. A challenge for those less directed readers
will be the lack of narrative flow, making it necessary to draw together the
snippets of information which, in combination, reveal
the history of the Court
during the 20th century. On the other hand, what is interesting is the overlap
between the various subjects
that have been superbly cross-referenced in the
text. It is possible to contrast what different contributors have to say about
same or similar topics. For example, contrast ‘Joint Judgments and
Separate Judgements’
with ‘Dissenting
Judgments’,
‘Collective Responsibility’
and ‘Concurring Judgements’.
Of course, many entries are based on interpretations, a great deal of which
is open to debate. Yet this is not surprising in a work
that does not merely
present information, but analyses, criticises and reflects, thus providing new
insights into the role of the
Court. Indeed, the editors point out that the
publication is not authorised by the Court, with most of those mentioned who are
alive having no opportunity to read in advance what was said about them.
The broad treatment of topics gives the
a scope far beyond
the professional concerns of legal practice. Hence this work will not only
benefit lawyers and law students, but
also prove to be a valuable resource for
journalists, political scientists, historians and those interested in the
history and workings
of the Court. Indeed, it goes a long way to filling the
need for a wider and deeper understanding of this institution and the part
plays in the life of the nation. While in many ways it is rivalled by
Oxford Companion to the Supreme Court of the United States of America
documents the development of a uniquely Australian, and truly independent, legal
system. On the eve of the High Court’s
centenary, this book deserves to be
regarded as the definitive compendium.
Michael R Young
Ysaiah Ross and Peter Macfarlane,
Lawyers’ Responsibility and Accountability Cases, Problems
and Commentary, (2nd edn) (LexisNexis Australia: Butterworths, 2002)
– xxix, 1 – 427 ISBN 0 409 31709
Lawyers’ Professional Responsibility in Australia and
New Zealand, (2nd edn) (Sydney: LBC Information Services, 2001) pp i –
cxxi, 1 – 658, ISBN 0 455 21754 8
Recent important decisions and changes in the area of lawyers’
professional and ethical obligations and responsibilities have
prompted second
edition publications of two popular books. Both books highlight the need to be
aware of the ethical framework in
which to practise and will assist law students
and practitioners in defining and resolving questions of professional legal
and responsibility.
Lawyers’ Responsibility and Accountability
comprehensive discussion of cases, problems and commentary on professional
responsibility in Australia. The authors intend
this book to fill a gap in
teaching a course on professional responsibility. Ross and Macfarlane suggest
the text is to be used in
conjunction with Ross,
Ethics in Law:
Lawyers’ Responsibility and Accountability in Australia
, (2nd edn)
(Sydney: Butterworths, 1998), but also point out the book can be used on its
own. This edition contains four parts. The
first part contains useful chapters
on the relationship of lawyers to ethical problems and outlines codes of ethics
adopted by the
New South Wales Law Society. The second part concerns structure
and regulation and identifies the debate over what is the best structural
arrangement for lawyers. Chapters 5 and 6 then examine the regulation of
admission to the profession and the various powers available
to discipline
lawyers respectively.
The third part defines the lawyer-client relationship and contains chapters
on the duties of representation, communication and control,
competence and care,
confidentiality and conflict of interest. The fourth and final part includes a
chapter on the adversary system
and considers the role of the judge and the
lawyer therein. The final chapter discusses the duties of fairness and candour,
those applying in the criminal trial. In addition, the authors have
included a table of cases, statutes, and an index of all the
topical references
used in the book.
The benefits of the second edition can be found in its up to date
incorporation of the recent decisions in the areas of legal professional
privilege and conflicts of interest. For example, Peter Macfarlane, the author
responsible for chapters 10–13, notes the High
Court’s decision in
Esso Australia Resources Limited v Commissioner of Taxation of the
Commonwealth of Australia
[1999] HCA 67
(1999) 201 CLR 49.
In this case the High Court
overturned Grant v Downs
[1976] HCA 63
(1976) 135 CLR 674
by applying the ‘dominant
purpose test’ as opposed to the long standing ‘sole purpose
test’. In the area
of conflict of interest, chapter 11 clearly outlines a
number of recent case extracts concerning the reliability of ‘Chinese
walls’ as a means of insulating the interests of one client from those of
another. The author is quick to identify the unease
the Australian courts are
feeling in this area.
Ysaiah Ross, the author responsible for chapters 1–9, successfully
challenges the law student as well as the lawyer by inviting
comment throughout
the chapters. In addition, a pleasing feature of the book is the objective style
with reference to what constitutes
an amoral and moral act. For example, issues
of individual preference are without the author’s personal views to
the reader’s judgment.
Lawyers’ Professional Responsibility in Australia and New Zealand
provides a more detailed and lengthier analysis of the law than the first
edition published five years ago. This up to date edition
includes the latest
cases, statutes and rules with a number of significantly extended chapters.
Notably, these are chapters 5 (negligence),
9 (successive conflicts), 14
(lawyers employed by non-lawyers), 15 (disclosure and recovery of costs), 18
(solicitors’ liens),
19 (lawyers’ duty to the court), 20 (particular
applications of lawyers’ duty to the administration of justice), 22
of practice) and 25 (lawyers’ discipline generally).
The text also boasts a comprehensive discussion of three chapters concerning
lawyers’ responsibilities to third parties and
the community. In addition,
four chapters are devoted to the law of costs, which is an essential area for
any lawyer as an appropriate
means of understanding costing and protecting
entitlement to costs. The author contends that ‘one of the principal
for public disrespect for the legal profession concerns the matter of
legal costs’.
This text also identifies the new development of lawyers’ professional
responsibility by observing the emergence of the subject
ethics’ in mainstream undergraduate legal education in Australia. The
author notes legal ethics is a subject mentioned
in the Priestley 11 and is
therefore a precondition in many jurisdictions to admission to practise. As a
result, this text continues
to demonstrate its worth as an invaluable learning
aid for all future and present lawyers.
The continuing relevance and importance of professional responsibility has
justified the publication of these two texts. Both texts
demonstrate the growing
need for law students to learn and lawyers to develop good moral judgment in
practice. Both books are an
essential tool for building the professional lawyer.
Josh Clifford
John Trone,
Federal Constitutions
and International Relations, (Brisbane: University of Queensland Press, 2001)
ISBN 0702232416
Once it was said that the law followed the
flag. Now, international law is everywhere. Its influence
In this age of globalisation the external affairs powers of federal
governments have assumed great prominence. This is not surprising.
In the last
50 years international trade, commerce and travel have increased rapidly. The
internet has changed society. Today no
nation is immune from the rules,
expectations and views of other nations. As Sir Gerard Brennan AC KBE, the
former Chief Justice
of Australia states in his foreword to Dr Trone’s
Federal Constitutions and International Relations
Globalisation is a phenomenon that affects contemporary thinking. For the lawyer
globalisation describes those changes in domestic
legal systems that respond to
concepts arising from external or transitional phenomena. The most influential
are found in treaties
and in the norms of customary international law.
Section 51(xxix)
Constitution
of the Commonwealth of
Australia gives the Commonwealth Parliament the power to ‘make laws for
the peace, order, and good government
of the Commonwealth with respect to
external affairs’. The external affairs power of the Commonwealth has been
the subject
of considerable argument before the High Court of Australia: see
Koowarta v Bjelke-Petersen
[1982] HCA 27
(1982) 153 CLR 168
The Tasmanian Dam Case
[1983] HCA 21
(1983) 158 CLR 1
Richardson v Forestry Commission
[1988] HCA 10
(1988) 164 CLR
Mabo v Queensland
(1988) 166 CLR 186
, commonly known as ‘Mabo
[No 1]’; and
Queensland v The Commonwealth
[1989] HCA 36
(1989) 167 CLR 232.
Koowarta v Bjelke-Peterson
[1982] HCA 27
(1982) 153 CLR 168
at 259–60, Sir
Gerard stated that:
The international quality of the subject is established by its effect or likely
effect upon Australia’s external relations
and that effect or likely
effect is sufficiently established by the acceptance of a treaty obligation with
respect to that subject.
Dr Trone’s book examines the
legal principles that provide the basis for the relationship between treaty
provisions and the
powers of the branches of government in federations. The
US, Canada, Germany, Switzerland, Austria, India and Malaysia. This wide-ranging
international perspective provides the foundation
for a detailed consideration
of comparative constitutional law.
This work is an informative well-researched treatise. It is an accurate
statement of the interlocking principles of international
and domestic law.
Dr John Trone is a graduate of arts and law and holds a Doctorate of
Philosophy from the University of Queensland. He is the co-author
edition of Lumb and Moens’s
Constitution
of the Commonwealth of
Australia Annotated
(2001). He has also written numerous articles concerning
constitutional and international law.
Dominic Henley Katter
Carl Michael von Qu itzow,
Measures Distorting Free Competition in the EC (The Hague: Kluwer Law
International, 2001) ISBN: 90–411–1466–1
The European Community (EC) is a somewhat unique example of a modern,
organised and consensual regrouping of nations. The result is
quasi-federation of countries that had been independent economically and
culturally for centuries. Dr von Quitzow’s recent
work addresses the
current problem of distortions of cross-border competition in the EC.
According to the Spaark Report the aim of the predecessor to the EC Treaty
was the institution of a common market system. Despite
this fundamental ideal
there is still a need for strong policy preventing anti-competitive strategies.
The book focuses on man-made
distortions that create differences in competition
prerequisites or actions creating divergences in the capacity of countries to
compete on the EC market.
The fundamental economic theory is that the market is the most efficient
means of allocating resources and thus promotes the aim of
the EC Treaty in
creating an effective common market. Specifically the book examines which
measures adversely affect cross-border
competition and whether each example is
capable of being construed as compatible with a market designed on undistorted
competition.
The author does not propose that all state measures affecting
competition should be eliminated. This is a reasonable approach because
was not designed to amalgamate member states into a unified nation. Rather the
achievable goal is to curtail distortions which
are deemed to have effects that
are inconsistent with the goals of the EC.
The topic addressed by the book is especially important in the context of the
European and Monetary Union (EMU). It had previously
been advanced that member
states could manipulate exchange rates in order to protect the competitiveness
of internal production.
With the implementation of the EMU the author suggests
that member states will be tempted to increase protection through competition
distortions in an effort to protect inefficient production.
The book is divided into four major sections. Part A informs the reader of
definitions for the terminology used in the work and outlines
the scope of the
study and the methodology employed. In Part B Dr von Quitzow presents a thorough
discussion of particular measures
that are used to create competition
distortions as well as an extensive review of the provisions in the EC Treaty
that deal directly
with the topic. Part B also discusses the relevant case law
as decided by the European Court of Justice. The author concludes that
problem is that the current court has not displayed an economic agenda; instead,
decisions have focused on constitutional issues
with the collateral result of
increasing the threshold of tolerance for local regulation of competition.
deals with the conclusions of the author as well as a detailed chronological
survey of the case law. After convincing the reader
of the need for reform Dr
von Quitzow advances his ideas for possible future developments concerning state
measures in
Primarily the author recommends that there is a definite
requirement for the EC to adopt strict policy against anti-competitive
employed by member states in order to achieve the common market ideal
outlined in the EC Treaty especially in the environment of
Dr von Quitzow takes a systematic and almost scientific approach in his
unique investigation into the problems presented by competition
distortions in
the EC. It will undoubtedly raise both academic interest and comment as well as
provide a framework for future debate.
Sonja Brown
Adrian Briggs and Peter Rees, Civil Jurisdiction
and Judgments (3rd edn) (LLP, 2002) ISBN 1 85978 374 0
This book is extremely timely and was necessitated by the recent introduction
of the new Regulation by the Council of the European
Union on 1 March 2002. In
the preface the author’s state ‘just when it seemed that the law on
civil jurisdiction had
settled down, everything was turned upside down
again’. The authors are referring to the fact that four separate rules are
now in place to determine the civil jurisdiction of the courts in England. These
are the new Regulation of the European Union, the
Brussels Convention, the
Lugano Convention and the common law.
The book focuses and has achieved its purpose of demonstrating how the
various systems of jurisdiction work and fit together and it
also demonstrates
which rules have priority over others. As the authors indicate, at this present
stage, no one law governs the civil
Given the length of over 600 pages, it is unlikely that individuals from a
nonlegal background and even individuals from a legal background
would read the
book from cover to cover. Its usefulness will lie in its comprehensive index,
logical and descriptive topic and sub-headings,
and its succinct analysis of
The authors provide a comprehensive analysis of the different jurisdictional
rules and focus on the fact that the common law could
not push back the
frontiers of the European instruments. The authors establish that these
instruments, and the courts who possess
the authority to rule on their
interpretation, can push back the frontiers of the common law. The authors
rightly state that it would
be useless to pretend otherwise.
The authors then proceed to list the applicable rules and in chapters 2 and 3
examine the actual and impending jurisdiction of the
rules taking effect in
England through the enactment of the Regulation. The authors set out succinctly
three main questions that
need to be asked before a case is brought before the
courts of the United Kingdom. The issue of service of process is discussed
separately.
The work contains a comprehensive analysis of 14 questions listed by
the authors that determine whether the English courts have jurisdiction
particular defendant. The authors provided an extremely useful analysis of
relevant cases, in user-friendly language. The
book also extensively analyses
and examines the issue of domicile.
In chapter 3, the authors provide a very interesting and useful introduction
into the two conventions. The chapter also offers a comparison
between the
conventions and the regulations.
The authors then proceed in chapter 4 to consider and explain in detail what
happens when the traditional jurisdictional rules of
common law are permitted to
apply. The appropriate forum to bring cases and the issue of service within and
out of the jurisdiction
are also discussed effectively in this chapter. The
authors comprehensively examine the civil procedure rule relating to proceedings
by service outside the jurisdiction.
Chapter 5 contains an in-depth analysis of the civil procedure rules relating
to bringing a claim in court. This is a useful chapter
and provides a good and
succinct summary of these rules. The authors then contrast this summary with an
analysis of the actions that
may be taken by a party being sued overseas, who
believes that the action should be brought in another jurisdiction. Furthermore,
in chapter 6, the authors detail the various interim and interlocutory measures
that can be obtained during the course of litigation.
In chapter 7, the authors
pay close attention to whether a judgment is capable of being enforced
elsewhere, ie in another jurisdiction.
Chapter 8 deals in summary with the admiralty jurisdiction. It is
acknowledged by the authors that this jurisdiction is large subject,
and not one
for comprehensive analysis in this book.
The authors conclude their book in chapter 9 by taking account of the
practice of commercial dispute resolution, in particular the
arbitration
process. The earlier chapters of the book are dominated by consideration of the
process and the manipulation of the process
of a court proceeding and this
chapter is a fitting end to the book, due to the increasing popularity of
alternative dispute resolution
methods. One of the other advantages of the book
is that the appendices contain the script of the relevant regulations and
conventions
discussed throughout the book.
Civil Jurisdiction and Judgments
is undoubtedly an excellent and
comprehensive book for anyone wanting to gain an in-depth knowledge of the
current state of the civil
Niti Prakash
WMC Gummow,
Change and Continuity:
Statute, Equity, and Federalism (Oxford, New York: Oxford University Press,
1999) pp I–xx, 1-122 ISBN
0 19 829823 4
In this book, The Hon Justice William Gummow AC looks in retrospect at the
tensions that arose in Australia between the goals of continuity
of, and changes
to, the law. Such changes to the established principles were inevitable from the
outset of the parliamentary systems
in the 1850s. Before this time, all laws in
force in England were applied in the administration of justice in the colony of
Wales and what later became Tasmania. After the establishment of
self-government, life-style in the various colonies called for legal
recognition
of relationships and rights on a scale and nature not then seen in England. In
particular, grants of Crown land were
by, or pursuant to, local statute.
Justice Gummow follows the interwoven threads linking statute, common law and
equity that were to form the fabric of the law of the
land after the federation
of the states in 1901. His examination of the tensions between the threads as
manifested in Australia draws
comparison with other common law jurisdictions.
The work is divided into three parts that are appropriately titled
‘lectures’. The subject matter is presented as though
addressed to a body of academics. Justice Gummow draws on judicial and
scholastic writings to illustrate the significance of
the conflicting goals in
the development of legal doctrines but does not venture an opinion as to the
merits of any resolution. Notwithstanding,
a preference for case law as the more
appropriate ‘bridge across which society moves from the past to the
reflected in the opinions of the authorities cited.
The starting point of each discussion is to place the modern legal system
within a historical context. In the first lecture, Justice
Gummow explores a
variety of issues that have arisen from the coalescence of statute and the
common law; namely, the use of analogy,
the equity of a statute, legislative
intention, interpretation by the executive and adoption of policy, and the
statutory creation
of new private rights are discussed.
This examination is followed by a comparison between equity and the law. The
lecture focuses on the precept that ‘equity follows
the law’ with
the view to more accurately defining the relationship between the two concepts.
Justice Gummow then addresses
the role of equity ‘in an age of
statutes’; in particular, the operation of equitable doctrines in the
application of
rights and obligations created solely by statute.
Finally, in the third lecture, the author looks at the ‘concomitant of
a federal structure of government’ in terms of
legalism, parliamentary
supremacy and legislative competence. The discussion extends beyond the practice
of federalism in Australia
and makes reference, in particular, to the operation
of Community law in the European Union and the effect of devolution in Scotland.
By interpreting the dynamics within the context of the legal systems as a whole,
this lecture is useful by bringing together the
previous discussions concerning
the interaction between equity and law, and between common law and statute.
The strength of Justice Gummow’s work is its detailed and authoritative
discussion concerning the various approaches used to
develop and adapt the law.
The table of cases and index are convenient additions to the text.
Continuity: Statute, Equity, and Federalism
is thought-provoking reading and
offers an informative perspective of the nature of law and doctrinal
development.
Shanan Dunstan
Peter Luxton, The Law of Charities (Oxford:
University Press, 2001) pp i–1xxxiv, 1–997 ISBN 0 19 826783 5
i-1xxxiv, 1-997
ISBN 0 19 8267835
In the preface to his book, Peter Luxton states ‘[f]or the professional
lawyer and for other professional persons involved with
charities, the growth in
importance of charity law over the last decade has seen a remarkable
phenomenon…[t]he tension in charity
law between principles of property law
on the one hand, and of company and commercial law on the other, is an issue of
major significance
to the practitioner and of considerable interest to the
academic lawyer’ (pp vii, viii).
A stated by the author, the thrust of the work is ‘to present a picture
of charity law’ (p viii) that highlights the modern-day
effects of company
law more than the influences of property-based enacted rules. In addition to
dealing with matters of legal structure
and governance, the text offers a
valuable discussion on the advantages and disadvantages of establishing the
charitable status.
In particular, the tax exemptions enjoyed by charities are
outlined in chapter 3.
The development and changing status of the Charity Commissioners, since their
inception in 1853 to the enactment of the present day
Charities Act 1993,
reflect the variation of society’s conscience and provide the focus for
discussion regarding the supervision
and control of charities. The
Commissioners’ role has been broadly to carry out supervisory, advisory,
quasi-judicial and policing
duties. Over the years, with changes to the
parameters of social attitudes, the last two functions have assumed greater
to the Commission in making decisions and penalising breaches.
Peter Luxton helpfully provides a chapter that examines the intricacy and
meaning of charity, placing its definitive function in the
context of other
chapters concerning the body politic and judicature. It is coincidental that
after years in its preparation the
work was published in 2001, ‘a year
marking the 400th anniversary of the enactment of the Statute of Elizabeth 1601
whose preamble,
probably the most celebrated in English law, is still sometimes
referred to by the court in determining whether a purpose is charitable’
Throughout the text, the author considers the various statutes which have
altered the features of charity law including the Human
Rights Act 1998, the
Finance Act 2000 and, more recently, the Trustee Act 2000, which is provided in
full in the appendices.
One of the strengths of the work is its functional approach to examining this
area of law. Notably, the Charity Law Association Model
Documents (Trust Deed
for a Charitable Trust;
Constitution
for a Charitable Unincorporated
Association; and Memorandum and Articles for a Charitable Company Limited by
Guarantee) are of considerable
practical use and offer a convenient reference
for practitioners and business-persons alike.
The Law of Charities
provides a comprehensive and interesting study, adequately case-quoted and
footnoted. This text will add value to both professional
and academic libraries.
Shanan Dunstan
Edited by Eva Micheler and DD Prentice, Joint
Ventures in English and German Law (Oxford: Hart Publishing, 2000) ISBN 1 84113
As business between England and Germany continues to prosper into the 21st
century a team of lawyers and academics from both countries
have come together
to share their expertise and practical insight from many years of experience
from their fields of speciality.
The contributors’ specialities include
advice to leading banks and industrial and commercial companies from both
The information in this book is taken from the papers presented at the 1999
Anglo-German Law Conference and which have been revised
and edited for this
publication. This particular edition examines the legal framework of joint
ventures between English and German
companies. This book takes a comparative
approach, where each major aspect of joint venture law and practice from the
of both English and German law, but also compares and contrasts the
two. As a result it provides much practical insight, which many
practitioners may overlook.
The book is divided into four parts. Part One deals with the formation of
joint venture companies. It discusses the types of companies
that are usually
used to establish joint ventures as well as the rights and obligations of
members. It also addresses the law and
legal practice relating to memoranda of
understanding, warranties and indemnities, joint venture agreements and the
valuation of
contributors. Part Two deals with the management aspect of joint
venture companies and employment law. It analyses how the shareholders
influence management decisions, the rights and obligations of directors and
parent companies, as well as the legal position of
minority shareholders. Part
Three addresses the European Union as well as English and Germany competition
law. The Fourth and final
part deals with the termination of joint ventures.
The writers for each part of this book come from a team of leading English
and German lawyers who are specialists in their fields,
both academically and
professionally. The approach taken by the writers separates this book from
traditional legal texts as it takes
a comparative approach rather than taking
the typical form of many legal books of merely discussing the technical
examination of
existing law and practices. This approach makes the presentation
of the material concise and easy to understand.
This book is therefore highly recommended to practising lawyers and in-house
counsel whose practice is in the area of Anglo-German
business affairs.
Academics and students with a legal interest in relation to EU, European
commercial or comparative law should also
find this book a useful resource for
study and research. However, this book should not be limited to those with a
legal background.
It is also recommended to business academics and students who
are in international business, particularly in England and Germany.
Wayne C Booth, Gregory G Colomb and Joseph M
The Craft of Research (2nd edn) (Chicago: The University
of Chicago Press, 2003) ISBN 0226 06568 5 329 pp (paperback)
No matter the text that one reads on research there is always that
fundamental question, ‘Why do research?’ There are
a number of ways
to answer this question and most responses are framed in the context of a
working environment. For example, a secondary
or undergraduate student may tell
you that research is important for a passing grade; post-graduate students may
have developed a
real interest in a subject and wish to pursue a greater
knowledge of it; alternatively, if one is already in the workforce, the ability
to undertake research may determine funding for the organisation, career
advancement or professional recognition. All of these responses
are valid and no
doubt readers could add to them but perhaps the most difficult part of any
research is where to begin.
The Craft of Research
is a text that promotes
the value of research and encourages students to develop potential questions for
their research. The authors
state that their work embraces all levels of
research (from high school, tertiary students and experienced researchers).
In chapter 2 (Connecting with Your Reader) the authors have highlighted a key
feature of research; this is that your work will have
an audience. This sounds
obvious, but no doubt we can all recall wading through journal articles, reports
and studies that have been
anything but engaging to the reader. The authors
point out that research can be a solitary venture but that the art of
conversation
is a ‘social activity’. This is a crucial observation
for those embarking upon research. A relationship is created between
your readers and like it or not your work will be judged, in part, by how well
you present your work to an audience. Any
marketing manager will tell his or her
staff that a product must be ‘pitched’ to a certain group. In other
words, when
embarking upon research you must know the audience that will be
reviewing and reading your work.
The authors also make a number of other valuable observations. The
authors’ checklist on p 32 is a great tool for referring
throughout the writing of your piece of research.
of the text examines
the planning stages of research. The authors provide a four-point process when
planning a research task (pp
37–38). In chapter 5 (From Problems to
Sources), the authors begin to examine how to collect data and some of the
when doing so. The ‘Ethics of Research’ is discussed in
of the text.
The book covers some important issues such as reliability and the use of the
internet, but only in summary form. In future issues
I would suggest that the
book should examine in detail issues such as sampling; levels of measurement;
how to conduct an interview
or design a questionnaire; the issue of bias in
research; probability; benefits of qualitative and quantitative studies; and
The text also provides a good review of how to present material visually (pp
241–62). Students need to know that what they are
presenting is accurate
and reliable data. Chapter 9 (Reasons and Evidence) states that readers want
‘… your evidence
to be accurate, sufficient and representative, and
precise’ (p166).
Towards the end of the text the authors look at the need for revision
(Chapter 13
– Revising Your Organisation and Argument). Once again this is a
valuable exercise. For undergraduates and workplace assignments
this view of
revision may prove to be an excellent approach when questioning how best to
convey one’s argument and findings.
In summary, this book will assist students in upper secondary schools and
undergraduates. It is a useful guide for those in organisations
who need to
present seminars, prepare reports or submissions. The authors provide a
well-written and easy to follow text.
The Craft of Research
for a North American audience and thus provides an excellent bibliography for
readers in that region. The text will be
it is perhaps best suited to the humanities and social sciences. It should be
utilised as
an introductory text before exploring research methodology in depth.
Simon Brown
Hon. JJ Spigelman AC, Chief Justice of NSW, in an address to launch the
book on 22 May 2003; see www.lawlink.nsw.gov.au/sc and see
prompts under
‘Speeches’ (visited 16 June 2003).
Geoff Lindsay SC,
Owen Dixon: A Biography
, in a review of the book
Australian Bar Review
The author had taken much trouble to seek the assistance of a number of
highly regarded legal scholars and jurists to work with
Amalgamated Society of Engineers v Adelaide Steamship Co Ltd
[1920] HCA 54
[1921] HCA 30
(1921) 29 CLR 406
(1921) 29 CLR 406.
For some details on Powers J, see White, M and Rahumtula, A, (eds),
contributions in
Queensland Judges in the High Court
, to be published
AQ update???
October 2003, Queensland Supreme Court Publication.
Letter Dixon to Latham, 7 April 1964, see Chapter 5, fn 1.
, p 191. It was in 1949 and the judge was Clyne J of the Federal
Court of Bankruptcy; Isaacs v McKinnon
[1949] HCA 64
(1949) 80 CLR 502
, where Rich J joined
the majority in dismissing the appeal. Dixon dissented.
Generally see Book, chapter 8.
Book, p 165.
Generally described in Book, chapter 10.
Book p 229.
, p 231, citing Denning’s Fifth Wilfred Fullagar Memorial
Let Justice Be Done
Under Dixon CJ the Australian High Court first held that it was not to be
bound by decisions of the House of Lords, see
Parker v The Queen
[1963] HCA 14
111 CLR 610.
Dixon wrote: ‘Having carefully studied
Director of Public
Prosecutions v Smith
[1961] AC 290
I think we cannot adhere to that view or
policy. There are propositions laid down in the judgment which I believe to be
misconceived
and wrong.’ See 111 CLR at pp 611, 632.
To illustrate the extent of the sources that supplement the diaries, one
notes that the table of cases extends over seven pages,
the notes (References to
the chapters) over 63 pages and the bibliography over 15 pages. For completeness
one mentions that the text
is comprised of 294 pages; there is an informative
preface by the author, a list of illustrations and a complete and very useful
Book, p 291.
For a transcript of this speech, see ‘The Oxford Companion to the
High Court of Australia’, Canberra Book Launch, 13
February 2002, at
http://www.hcourt.gov.au/speeches/cj/ cj_oxford.htm.
See Blackshield et al,
The Oxford Companion to the High Court of
, Oxford, University Press, 2001, at xi.
, at vii. 28
, at 311. 29
, at 19. 30
, at 381. 31
, at 432. 32
, at 277. 33
, at 625. 34
, at 186. 35
, at 620. 36
, at 622. 37
, at 34. 38
, at 650. 39
, at 85. 40
, at 486. 41
, at 82. 42
, at 164–65.
, at 702. 44
, at 45. 45
, at 367. 46
, at 216. 47
, at 109. 48
Kirby, ‘The growing rapprochement between international law and
national law’ in Sturgess and Anghie (eds)
Visions of the Legal Order
in the 21st Century: Essays to Honour His Excellency Judge CJ Weeramantry
1998, The Hague: Kluwer International. Parts of this contribution appeared in an
earlier form in the paper by the author ‘The
Impact of International Human
Rights Norms: “A Law Undergoing Evolution”’ (1995) 25
Western Australian Law Review
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (106 KB)
PDF format (117 KB)
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter