URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/journals/MqJlBLaw/2008/8.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 15:20:33
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Gordon, Marcel --- "Welcome to Europe - An Introduction to EU Law for Businesses" [2008] MqJlBLaw 8; (2008) 5 Macquarie Journal of Business Law 171
Welcome to Europe – An Introduction to EU Law for Businesses
Introduction
Characterising the EU
The Four Freedoms
Competition
Establishment
The Common Commercial Policy and the EEA
Standards and Consumer Protection
Intellectual Property
The Future – An Ever Closer Union?
to Europe – An Introduction to EU Law for Businesses
MARCEL GORDON
Introduction
The European Union is a prominent international actor, in both political and
economic fora. Yet for many non-Europeans, the exact
identity of the European
Union is hard to pin down and the implications of the European Union’s
existence are somewhat nebulous.
This article looks at the nature of the
European Union and its effect on doing business in modern-day Europe.
This article starts by introducing the European Union via its historical
roots and core political and economic concerns. It then explores
some of the
most significant legal ramifications of the European project for carrying on a
business in the European Union: the four
freedoms; establishment; the Common
Commercial Policy; competition; standards; and intellectual property. It
concludes with a brief
look at what the near future holds for the world's
largest market.
It is revealing to begin with a contrast. The entity that we know today as
the European Union, or more commonly as the EU, began its
life with an economic
compact between six war-weary European states: France, Germany, Italy, the
Netherlands, Belgium and Luxembourg.
The six nations came together in Paris in
1952 to create the European Coal and Steel Community (ECSC), promising to
organise Franco-German
coal and steel production through the establishment of a
common market in which other European states could
participate
In 2008, the EU consists of 27 countries – known as Member States
– spanning more than 4 million square kilometres and
encompassing 493
million people.
The common market
now covers goods and services of all types, and demands the free movement of
European citizens and an open labour
market. The EU has its own directly-elected
parliament,
a two-tier judicial
and a 25,000 strong civil
service in Brussels called the European
Commission.
Together with the
Member States, these institutions set European-wide rules on issues from
workers’ rights
composition of chocolate,
as determining foreign policy
controlling Europe’s trade
On the international
stage, the EU is in many contexts, such as at the
treated in the same way as
How has a treaty organising the production of coal and steel become one of
the world’s most important political entities? And
what sort of entity has
it become, exactly? For our purposes, two aspects of the ECSC are salient in
understanding this evolution,
and through it the modern EU.
First, from the very beginning, the enterprise was linked to higher aims than
simple economic development, and the preamble of the
ECSC witnesses an ambition
inspired by the horrors of the Second World
CONSIDERING that world peace may be safeguarded only by creative efforts equal
to the dangers which menace it; CONVINCED that the
contribution which an
organized and vital Europe can bring to civilization is indispensable to the
maintenance of peaceful relations;
CONSCIOUS of the fact that Europe can be
built only by concrete actions which create a real solidarity and by the
establishment of
common bases for economic development; DESIROUS of assisting
through the expansion of their basic production in raising the standard
living and in furthering the works of peace; RESOLVED to substitute for historic
rivalries a fusion of their essential interests;
to establish, by creating an
economic community, the foundation of a broad and independent community among
peoples long divided by
bloody conflicts; and to lay the bases of institutions
capable of giving direction to their future common
That vision, surely remarkable in the preamble of a coal and steel treaty, is
now expressed in the well-known EU refrain of an “ever
It is the spirit
of European integration.
Second, the establishment and maintenance of a common market has been the
consistent and unwavering goal of European integration.
It emerges from the
preamble above, as the means by which peace, freedom and prosperity is to be
achieved; and it was further empowered
in the Treaty of Rome in 1957, when the
ECSC became one facet of the European Economic Community, expanding the common
cover other realms of economic
The common market has
been the foundation upon which all other endeavours have been built.
There are much more nuanced explanations for the developments of the fifty
years between Rome and today,
but to put it crudely, a common market either demanded or permitted (depending
upon one's viewpoint) the development of common rules
in relation to a variety
of other sectors. From transport to the environment, uniform laws were seen to
be necessary to ensure a
level competitive playing field. In some cases,
uniformity has been achieved by removing disparate national rules (known as
integration”). Here the European Court of Justice (ECJ)
has played a central role by holding national laws to be incompatible
European treaties. In other areas, the EU has specified out common rules by way
of its legislative process (known as “positive
integration”). The
quest for uniformity has been marked by a constant struggle to find a
politically stable and constitutionally
effective balance between the regulatory
autonomy of the Member States and the centralising demands of integration.
The number of countries involved in the enterprise grew steadily as the
common market grew in importance. Denmark, Ireland and the
United Kingdom joined
in 1973 (the UK having been rebuffed twice before at French insistence),
followed by Greece in 1981, Spain
and Portugal in 1986, Austria, Sweden and
Finland in 1995, Cyprus, Malta, Slovenia, Estonia, Latvia, Lithuania, Poland,
Republic, Slovakia, Hungary in 2004, and finally Romania and Bulgaria
in 2007. All of these countries have committed to opening up
their markets to
the rest of Europe and complying with the associated
Promulgating common rules requires an institutional structure. The gradual
changes in the name of the entity we are talking about
can be mapped to changes
in its organisation and institutions, by way of successive treaties. The Single
European Act, signed in
1986, added foreign policy competence to the European
Economic Community established in Rome, allowing it to act on the international
stage where the Member States so desired (and could
In 1992 the EU came into
existence with the Treaty of
Maastricht.
The EU is the
gathering of all the Member States. It has three components, known as
“pillars”: the common market (renamed
the European Community (EC),
incorporating most aspects of the European Economic Community); the Common
Foreign and Security Policy,
under which the Member States discuss, agree on and
execute foreign policy; and Justice and Home Affairs, now known as Police and
Judicial Cooperation.
sense, the European Economic Community became a component – the first
pillar – of a greater construction, the EU.
This three pillar structure
has survived until the present, but the recently signed Treaty of Lisbon will,
if it comes into force,
tear down the pillars, leaving just the EU containing
all those facets (and a little
Characterising the
Having explained its genesis as a tool for the unification and economic
advancement of Europe, it is probably time to answer the question
of what the EU
is. Unfortunately, there isn’t really a simple answer. International law
recognises states as the primary actors
on the international stage, but the EU
is not a sovereign state. It only has those powers that have been given to it by
States – its constituting treaties set out the areas in which
it can act, and to what extent.
In fact, following the creation of the EU proper in the Treaty of
Maastricht, it wasn't even clear that the EU had international legal
personality
that is, the EU might
just be a construct with relevance to the Member States, but no formal role in
international legal relations.
If it did have legal personality, it might well
have been classified as an international organisation, like the UN or the
Yet the EU is something more than an international organisation. The UN or
the WTO are “merely” intergovernmental forums,
whereas the EU
entails deep integration and a certain degree of subjugation. It has been
described as a “constitutional order
but is most
commonly referred to simply as
sui generis –
of its own kind. In
practice, the EU has been permitted to act like a state in some international
contexts (the EC is a WTO
but not in others (there
is no prospect of the EU becoming a member of the UN). Internationally the EU is
a special case, due to
its peculiar internal structure.
The EU's special relationship with its Member States can be seen most clearly
in its law-making processes. European law applies in
all Member States. Given
the diverse social and economic backgrounds of the Member States, and their
diverse legal systems, it is
tricky to achieve uniformity in the application of
the law; but this is what a true common market
In pursuing this end,
the EU uses two main mechanisms.
Certain measures are themselves directly effective (these are known as
“regulations”) and are treated akin to the legislative
national government.
This is the
simplest case, because the text of the regulation can be relied upon as setting
out the law. However, these are in the
minority, because in most areas the rules
coming from Europe need to fit in with the existing laws and underlying legal
of each Member State.
For the most part, the EU enacts a measure (known as a
“directive”) which tells the Member States what has to be achieved
but not how to achieve it.
Member State is then bound to enact laws via its own processes and according to
its own preferences which achieve the ends set
out. Where the Member State fails
to do so, it is liable to suffer punitive action from the
Commission,
and its citizens are
able – for the most part – to rely upon the directive to enforce
their rights (or escape their obligations,
as the case may
Before anyone concludes that the Member States – among them world
powers such as Germany and the United Kingdom – have
bound themselves to a
system of decrees issued from Europe, replacing the medieval Vatican with modern
day Brussels, it is important
to understand that the Member States have a
controlling hand in the legislative process. The actual law-making processes are
complicated,
and while the European Parliament and Commission play important
the Member States still
dominate the process through the European Council. Moreover, in the course of
the evolution of the EU and
its successive treaties, they have determined by
negotiation and agreed by consensus on the structure and mechanics of the
institutions
through which they now have to operate. While there is frequent
discussion of a democratic deficit in the operation of the European
there is little cause to pity the individual Member States, all of whom have
been complicit in its development.
To summarise, the EU is a collection of European countries acting together to
regulate themselves and represent themselves on the
world stage. By doing so
they sustain a deeply integrated common market, with the associated benefits of
free trade, increase the
ties between the polities and peoples of Europe and
leverage their combined economic and political power to serve their shared
affairs agenda. That is the view from ten thousand feet, sailing over
five remarkable decades of integration. For the rest of the
article we descend
to street level, to see what the European project means for the operation of a
business in the modern European
Union. First, however, a stop over Rome in 1957
to examine the four freedoms established with the creation of the European
In the EU, four freedoms define the common market: the free movement of
goods; the free movement of services and freedom of establishment;
movement of persons; and the free movement of capital. It is important to set
these out, because they inform the development
of European law. They will be
referred to in discussing specific topics below. It is important to note that
none of these freedoms
apply to situations which are wholly within a Member
State; there must be some effect on trade between Member States before the
can be invoked.
The free movement of goods means that national provisions preventing goods
from being moved and sold throughout the Union are invalid
unless justified by
the Member State in question. There is a complicated and still maturing
jurisprudence on what exactly this entails.
The ECJ has moved from focusing on
measures discriminating against imported products to a much broader proscription
of any regulations
which impede substantive market access, requiring Member
States to justify any measure that prevents goods from achieving their full,
transboundary economic potential. This includes measures which merely regulate
the market, whether discriminatory or
Following assaults on
seemingly innocuous measures such as the United Kingdom's Sunday trading rules
using this doctrine of market
and in line with a
renewed emphasis on Member State autonomy, the ECJ has withdrawn slightly to
ensure that Member States retain
their capacity to regulate their markets in a
reasonable, non-discriminatory
In general, any kind of direct obstacle, whether in the form of a tariff, fee
or quota, is forbidden.
less direct restrictions – such as national packaging requirements, which
would entail repackaging costs for
– are generally
forbidden, but may exceptionally be justified. There is a presumption that goods
which are able to be sold
in one country should be able to be sold in another,
and a Member State imposing regulatory barriers which make the marketing of
products from another Member State more difficult must explain the reason (with
reference to a limited set of
justifications),
show that neither the exporting Member State nor EU harmonising measures have
sufficiently addressed that
consideration
and demonstrate
that no other less restrictive measure will
The free movement of services follows a very similar pattern to the free
movement of goods. Services can be provided across Member
State borders, unless
some compelling reason can be shown for a
limitation.
The possible
justifications for limitations are similar to those in respect of
In assessing the
justification offered by Member State, account must be taken of measures taken
by the service provider's home state
to address the
In addition, the
restriction must be a proportionate response in light of the
justification.
Much of the case
law on services relates to the rights of recipients of services to receive them
abroad on equal terms as they would
at home, for example in relation to medical
treatment and education.
free movement of services is linked with freedom of establishment – the
right to set up a business or corporate entity
– because providing a
service in another Member State often entails
establishment.
The whole area
has been further complicated by the recent Services Directive, which will come
into full effect in December
The free movement of persons was originally set out in the Treaty of Rome as
the free movement of workers, and that provision lives
on in the EC
It gradually expanded
through the case law based on the argument that in order to truly be free to
work in another Member State,
one had to be treated like a native citizen. This
entailed the right to be accompanied by one’s family and the right to
social benefits for oneself and one’s family. This approach has
now been confirmed by the Citizen's Rights
and the articles on
Union citizenship in the EC
The basic principle is
that every citizen of a Member State has a right to live and work anywhere in
but that is subject to
complex qualifications.
Finally, the free movement of capital is relatively
self-explanatory.
whereas the other freedoms relate only to trade between Member States, the
provision on capital explicitly prohibits restrictions
on the movement of
capital and payments between Member States and third countries as well. It can
have a quite far-reaching impact
– for example, it underpinned a series of
cases in which “golden share” schemes used to maintain control over
utilities were
invalidated.
The exceptions to
the free movement of capital are different to those governing goods and
Before leaving, it is worth noting that a basic principle underlies all of
these freedoms: non-discrimination. This principle is set
out explicitly in the
Within the EU, all
goods, services, people and capital must be treated equally, unless there is a
compelling reason not to do so.
Nationality alone is irrelevant in the EU; all
goods, services, people and capital are European.
Competition
Competition laws are one of the essential elements of a functional
They complement the four freedoms by ensuring that the free markets created by
preventing regulatory barriers are not then stymied
by anti-competitive
They also prevent
Member States from giving national firms a competitive advantage through the use
of state aid.
It was realised very early on that leaving competition laws to be enforced by
national regulators in each Member State was not a satisfactory
Alongside the possibility of political influence deterring rigorous enforcement,
national perceptions of competition law
are different across the Member States
as a result of different perceptions of the role of the state in the market (and
in society). For instance, the French state has traditionally played
an active role in the market, while the UK has been at the forefront
liberalisation in sectors such as energy. Further, in a true single market
action at European level would be the logical solution
to anti-competitive
behaviour which crosses national boundaries.
As a result, the EU has a powerful and respected Competition Directorate in
the European Commission. This Directorate is responsible
for enforcing treaty
provisions which forbid abuse of a dominant position, anti-competitive
agreements and the payment of state aid.
Enforcement has grown more rigorous
over the last fifteen years, with inquiries into traditionally sensitive and
protected areas
such as retail
highlighting the
Commission's extensive powers and willingness to act.
The introduction of an EU-level administrative agency dealing with
competition has not seen the abolition of national regulators however.
Commission tends to target specific sectors with an eye to strategic results
with broad market implications, the national
regulators continue to do the
day-to-day job of policing national markets. For all but the largest firms
– and whichever sector
finds itself in the Commission's spotlight at any
given time – competition issues remain the domain of the national
Even so, it is important to bear in mind that national regulators now
act with European rules and European powers in mind. The duty
of consistent
interpretation, requiring national legislation to be interpreted consistently
with European law where possible, serves
to reinforce this
There is also a
strong emphasis on cooperation and communication between national and European
authorities, and between national
authorities.
Establishment
Given the almost completely free movement of goods and services within the
EU, from a regulatory point of view it is unlikely to be
important where a
business establishes its European subsidiary. The ECJ has held that establishing
a corporate vehicle in one Member
State in order to avoid more stringent
regulatory requirements in a second Member State cannot justify the latter
Member State abridging
any of the four freedoms, even if the company trades
primarily or solely in the latter Member
However, it is worth
noting that Member States may apply restrictions to companies which seek to
change jurisdictions.
As a result, although logistical considerations will determine the placement
of operational facilities, the jurisdiction in which
the corporation operating
the business is established is entirely at the establisher's discretion. In this
regard it is important
to understand that, despite a certain amount of
harmonisation through European directives and regulations, the legal systems of
Member States remain quite diverse. When considering establishment, the most
relevant legal differences are likely to be found in
the law of business
organisations and taxation.
There is one universal feature in the law applicable to these fields: it is
complex. Member States will offer different forms of vehicle
under which a
business can be operated, different procedures for incorporation of these
vehicles, different ownership structures,
different establishment costs,
different principles of liability and different regulatory and accounting
requirements. In respect
of taxation, establishment in a jurisdiction such as
Ireland (common law) may be worth higher initial establishment costs in order
take advantage of lower company tax rates. Finally, it is worth noting the
emergent Societas Europea, a European company recognised
in all Member States,
although at this early stage this structure is most relevant to very large
pan-European groups.
Of course, the choice of jurisdictions in which to establish may depend upon
many features related directly or indirectly to the legal
system. A more lenient
regulatory environment is not always an advantage, as one might discover if
trying to sell international financial
services from Nigeria. In addition, the
availability of high quality service industries and competitive financial
markets will vary
considerably across the EU. Details such as these bear
investigation, as they can be counter-intuitive – for example, Poland
become synonymous with cheap labour in the United Kingdom, but the country
itself has been suffering from a labour shortage as
a significant portion of its
young workforce moves to wealthier Member States in pursuit of higher pay.
Whatever jurisdiction is chosen, the advantages of the EU should be clear.
There is no need to become established in every Member
State in order to do
business there and there will be almost certainly be no legal obstacles to
supplying markets across the EU from
a single location. One initial investment
allows access to the world's largest single market.
The Common Commercial Policy and the
As discussed above, the roots of the EU were in the creation of a common
market in Europe. In order to achieve this, the EU was assigned
the competence
to set tariff rates and border measures for the entire union, known as the
Common Commercial Policy.
importers seeking to distribute a product produced overseas, this is obviously
of considerable importance. It means that there
is only one boundary to cross:
one set of administrative procedures; one set of inspections; and one set of
duties to pay. While
the tariffs will be equal regardless of the Member State
into which the goods are imported, the administrative procedures, while
substantively the same, will depend to some degree upon local administrative
practice. The regulations may be European, but Italian
port authorities still
run Italian ports.
Within this single border, all goods – regardless of origin – are
entitled to free movement.
fact, the single border now extends slightly beyond the EU to encompass the
European Economic Area (EEA). The EEA came into existence
in 1994 following an
agreement between the EU (and all its Member States) and three of the four
remaining members of the European
Free Trade Association (EFTA): Norway;
Iceland; and Liechtenstein.
EEA has adopted the EU's four freedoms and a certain portion of its legislative
program. Switzerland, the missing fourth member
of the EFTA, opted not to join
the EEA, instead concluding a number of bilateral agreements with the
Standards and Consumer
Differing national product standards hold the potential to undermine the free
movement of goods significantly, eliminating economies
of scale and allowing
disguised protectionism. However, if goods can move and be sold freely across
the common market without regulatory
interference, what protection does the
consumer have? In particular, what will prevent a “race to the
bottom” in which
manufacturers establish themselves in the jurisdiction
with the lowest standards, exporting unsafe products across the EU? There
clear tension between product standards and consumer protection and allowing
free access to markets.
Fortunately, the ECJ has proved to be alive to this tension, allowing Member
States to defend obstacles to free movement on such bases
as consumer and
environmental protection, but only where harmonised European standards have not
been promulgated.
establishing European standards has proved to be complicated: reconciling the
priorities and interests of the culturally
diverse Member States is no easy
task. In particular, some Member States have a considerably more interventionist
approach to consumer
protection than
The original approach to establishing EU technical and safety standards for
products was a laborious one: the Member States negotiated
common, detailed
rules on a sector by sector basis.
The positive aspect of this
approach was that the standards which resulted were exhaustive and uniform
across the EU; the difficulty
was that the Member States could take decades to
reach a consensus,
resulting standards, enshrined in primary legislation, were then very difficult
to amend. Indeed, in order to reach a consensus
at all such directives often
left certain key aspects at the discretion of Member States, meaning that
complete harmonisation was
not achieved.
As a result, a more decentralised approach has emerged which relies upon
private bodies to set voluntary
A European directive
is adopted to set the essential safety requirements for an industry or sector
(such as pressure equipment
Technical specifications are then drawn up for particular products by European
standards organisations.
which meet these technical specifications are presumed to comply with the
essential safety requirements set out in the directive
and may therefore use the
However, manufacturers
can choose not to rely upon these standards, instead obtaining CE certification
individually through a scheme
of tests and
certificates.
Either way, they
can take advantage of free movement: the relevant directive provides that goods
within its remit which carry the
CE marking cannot be subject to national
legislation imposing different or more onerous technical standards.
Obviously, whatever the legislative approach, there is an enormous set of
European standards which must be consulted before marketing
a product. However,
the harmonised nature of these standards mean that a product which satisfies
them will be eligible for sale across
the EU. In addition, there are a number of
mutual recognition agreements between the EU and countries such as the United
Japan, Canada, Australia, New Zealand and (since 2008)
Switzerland,
which mean that
standard certification in those countries may be sufficient to satisfy European
regulators (and vice versa).
Beyond technical standards, European consumers are also protected by a
growing body of uniform consumer law. This includes directives
on doorstep
and product
Although the
existence of a European law might seem at first to add complexity to everyday
transactions, it in fact simplifies matters
for traders because the same set of
standard terms will be valid across the EU. For consumers, it means that they
have a standard
set of protections wherever they happen to be shopping, of
particular significance in e-commerce transactions.
The most far-reaching consumer law directive in this regard is the Unfair
Terms Directive.
governs the use of standard terms and conditions in sales to consumers,
protecting the consumer from terms which create
a significant imbalance in
rights and obligations, contrary to good
One very significant
effect is that a choice of jurisdiction clause, whereby the seller can enforce
the contract in their preferred
court, cannot be included in standard terms and
conditions.
The case law of the
ECJ has also been consistent in establishing that the standard of consumer
protection should be based on a “an
average consumer who is reasonably
well-informed and reasonably observant and
circumspect”.
There has been much talk in academic circles about the possible development
of a European private law, putting contractual relations
throughout the EU on a
uniform basis.
Given the diverse
legal systems of the Member States – particularly between the civil and
common law systems – this is
a far-reaching and controversial
The European Commission
has raised the idea, proposing in the first place a Common Frame of Reference
setting out such things as
common definitions and model provisions, but avoiding
the controversial idea of a harmonised code (at least for the time
In the meantime,
approximation of laws by way of individual directives seems set to continue.
Intellectual
Intellectual property is a complex and specialised area of law, but it is one
in which almost every business has an interest in the
modern commercial
environment. The main categories of intellectual property are patents (control
over registered inventions), trademarks
(control over signs distinguishing one's
products) and copyright (control over original works). There are also a number
of less prevalent,
more specialised types of intellectual property, including
plant variety rights, industrial designs and database
Less precise concepts
such as trade secrets and confidential information are also often discussed
under the moniker of intellectual
A great deal of the complexity with intellectual property comes from the fact
that intellectual property laws are for the most part
national. This means, for
example, that completely unrelated parties can own identical trademarks in
different countries. When establishing
a business in another country, it is
important to pay attention to who owns the relevant intellectual property rights
in that jurisdiction,
and whether existing intellectual property rights might
restrict your business model.
Unfortunately, for the most part intellectual property rights remain national
in the EU. This is a major derogation from the free
movement of goods and a
considerable impediment to a true common
For example, a Spanish
producer of “Dulce” chocolates may be stopped from selling in Italy
by an Italian producer of
“Dolce” chocolates. For a business in the
EU, it means that intellectual property rights have to be checked – and
valid, acquired and enforced – separately in every jurisdiction. Worse,
the laws across Europe are far from uniform, so
one may be subject to different
constraints and requirements, and have different rights and remedies, in
different Member States.
The complexities and barriers caused by the existence of national
intellectual property systems within the EU has hardly gone unnoticed,
variety of measures have sought to address it. In some areas there are European
regimes to assist with obtaining intellectual
property rights. The European
Patent Convention allows patents to be obtained in all contracting states with
one initial application.
Community Trade Mark is a trademark which is valid in all Member
There have also been a
number of directives aimed at harmonising important elements of intellectual
property laws across the EU,
particularly copyright,
results have been
ambivalent.
One salient reform in the Treaty of Lisbon is the addition of a specific head
of competence in relation to intellectual property:
the EU “shall
establish measures for the creation of European intellectual property rights to
provide uniform protection of
intellectual property rights throughout the Union
and for the setting up of centralised Union-wide authorisation, coordination and
supervision arrangements”.
Although this is no guarantee that anything will be achieved in this field, it
reflects a consensus among the Member States that
intellectual property is a
topic which needs to be addressed at the EU level. It also gives the EU a surer
legal footing for any
measures which might be taken, both internally and
internationally.
Coming from the opposite perspective, as an intellectual property owner, it
is important to be aware of the doctrine of exhaustion.
In general, where a
product is put on the market in any place in the EU (or the EEA) with the
consent of the intellectual property
owner, intellectual property rights cannot
be used to prevent that product from being moved to another Member State and
sold there.
The rights are said
to be 'exhausted' by placing the product on the market. In this way, owners of
intellectual property across the
EU are prevented from partitioning the
hard-earned common market into national markets using intellectual property
rights. The same
cannot be said for a product put on the market outside of the
EU, even by the owner of the intellectual property rights within the
the doctrine of exhaustion does not apply internationally to allow
re-importation into the EU.
The Future – An Ever Closer
The topics set out above are far from exhaustive, but they serve to
illustrate how deeply European law penetrates into the national
legal systems of
the Member States in fairly fundamental areas, with significant ramifications
for business. The EU has also led
to the at least partial approximation of law
in areas as diverse as employment and taxation and to liberalisation of sectors
– and traditionally protected – as aviation and energy.
For a business looking at the EU, this can have significant implications:
relation to electricity, for instance, every consumer now has the choice of
electricity provider.
such as these, the state and detail of the law is less important than the
effects on the market that have been achieved
on a Europe-wide scale.
Over the past five decades, the ambition set out in the preamble to the ECSC
has become the torch of European integration. Supporters
of the European project
see a continent united as never before, the diverse nations tied to each other
through a deeply integrated
common market.
However, the fact remains that the EU is not everyone's cup of tea. Some
consider it a grossly overgrown trade group, citing bureaucratic
wastefulness,
inertia in decision-making and nationalistic horse-trading as symptoms of a
corrupted ideal.
measured tone, the Laeken Declaration on the Future of the European Union,
issued by the Heads of State and Government
of the Member States in 2001,
recognised that '[t]he Union needs to become more democratic, more transparent
and more efficient'.
Certainly there have been concessions to this viewpoint in recent years, with a
renewed emphasis on considering whether action is
best taken at European or
national level.
failure of the proposed Constitutional Treaty in
the debate over further
expansion seems to have taken a back seat to structural consolidation and
introspection.
That introspection has been far from quiet. A political and academic debate
continues over the proper capacity of Member States to
act for social policy
ends at the expense of European economic goals. Economic goals have
traditionally been pre-eminent; but as
market opening reaches further into
national regulatory autonomy ever more sensitive social issues are being
The lack of a shared,
coherent vision of the extent and aim of the EU, and the best path to achieve
it, has already led to some highly
controversial decisions as the ECJ struggles
to fill the gap left by the lack of political
leadership.
The differences
between the visions of the EU held by the Member States, long concealed under
the broad economic consensus, are beginning
to emerge and create real practical
and political problems.
Despite the difficulties, in December 2007 the Member States signed the
Treaty of Lisbon, committing themselves to further institutional
Although it incorporates many provisions of the abandoned Constitutional Treaty
– including replacing the confusing
EC/EU division with a single entity,
the EU – the changes embodied in the Treaty of Lisbon are far from
significant, rearranging institutions which help to govern almost half a billion
people and aiming to form the basis for
continued political and economic
development; but they focus on the internal machinery of government rather than
the nature or path
of the Union's continued development.
This kind of practical change reflects the fact that while social policy and
political union dominate the headlines, the common market
remains the engine of
the European enterprise. The freedoms of the common market continue to be
consolidated in law, defended by
the ECJ and asserted by ever more
European-aware traders and consumers. In the modern EU, the implications of the
common market –
in areas as diverse as establishment, standards and
intellectual property – play an ever more important role in business
decision-making.
Welcome to Europe.
Since the time of writing, the ratification and entry into force of the
Lisbon Treaty has become a considerably less certain affair.
Ireland was the
only country which was to have a referendum on the Lisbon Treaty. On 12 June
2008, Irish voters rejected the Lisbon
Treaty. Despite this result, other Member
States have expressed a strong desire to go ahead with the changes envisaged by
Treaty. Whether the treaty is abandoned, repackaged once again or
adopted de facto through informal political and inter-institutional
arrangements
is difficult to foresee.
gordonmarcel@gmail.com
Treaty Establishing the
European Coal and Steel Community (hereafter “ECSC Treaty”), Paris,
The European Union at a glance,
http://europa.eu/abc/index_en.htm, accessed 23/04/08.
Consolidated Version of the
Treaty Establishing the European Community (hereafter “EC Treaty”),
OJ 2002, C 325/1, arts
EC Treaty arts 220-245.
The European Commission,
http://europa.eu/institutions/inst/comm/index_en.htm, accessed 23/4/08.
See, eg, Directive 80/987/EEC
on the protection of employees in the event of the insolvency of their
Directive 2000/36/EC relating
to cocoa and chocolate products intended for human consumption.
Consolidated Version of the
Treaty on European Union (hereafter “TEU”), OJ 2002, C 325/1, Title
V (Provisions on a Common
Foreign and Security Policy).
EC Treaty, Title IX (Common
Commercial Policy).
The European Communities and
http://www.wto.org/english/thewto_e/countries_e/european_communities_e.htm,
accessed 23/4/08.
ECSC Treaty, preamble.
EC Treaty, preamble; TEU,
Treaty Establishing the
European Economic Community, Rome, 1957 (commonly referred to as the Treaty of
See, eg, Andrew Moravcsik.
“The European Constitutional Compromise and the neofunctionalist
legacy” (2005) 12(2)
Journal of European Public Policy
The existing body of
European law is known as the “acquis communautaire”.
Single European Act,
Luxembourg/The Hague, 1986.
Treaty on European Union,
Maastricht, 1992 (commonly referred to as the Treaty of Maastricht).
TEU, Title VI.
The Treaty of Lisbon
amending the Treaty on European Union and the Treaty Establishing the European
Community, Lisbon, 2007 (commonly
referred to as the Treaty of Lisbon). The
Treaty of Lisbon is due to come into force in 2009 following ratification by the
States. Although the common understanding is that the Treaty of Lisbon
will abolish the pillar structure, the Common Foreign and
Security Policy
remains institutionally separate from all other areas of EU competence (TEU, as
amended by the Treaty of Lisbon,
Title V). Further, some special provisions
apply to the areas formerly contained in the third pillar, Police and Judicial
Cooperation,
particularly during the transition period from 2009 to 2014 (see,
eg, TFEU, arts 82, 83; Protocol on Transitional Provisions, Title
There are three sets of numbering in operation in present: the numbering
from the present TEU and the EC Treaty; the numbering as
set out in the Treaty
of Lisbon; and the numbering which will take effect when the Treaty of Lisbon
amends the TEU and the EC Treaty
(to be renamed the Treaty on the Functioning of
the European Union, or “TFEU”). The latter can already be seen in
consolidations such as that of the United Kingdom's Foreign and
Commonwealth Office
(http://www.fco.gov.uk/resources/en/pdf/pdf1/consolidated-eu-treaties),
be used in this article when referring to changes made by the Treaty of
EC Treaty art 5: “The
Community shall act within the limits of the powers conferred upon it by this
Treaty and of the objectives
assigned to it therein.” This is known by
various names, including the principle of conferral of powers, and is common to
constitutions (for instance, section 51 of the Australian
Constitution
setting out the powers conferred on the Commonwealth).
Cf EC Treaty art 281:
shall have legal personality.” (emphasis
added) TEU art 24 expressly contemplates the conclusion of international
agreements,
but it is not clear from the text whether such agreements would be
concluded by the EU itself or by the Member States jointly. In
practice, the
Member States and other states have treated the EU as capable of concluding
international agreements, giving it international
legal personality.
Dashwood et al, “Draft
Constitutional Treaty of the European Union and related documents”,
European Law Review
Technically, the
“European Communities” are a member of the WTO. This term hasn't
been used in this article, to avoid
(further) confusion. It usually encompasses
the EC, the ECSC (which was only integrated into the EC when the ECSC Treaty
in July 2002) and Euratom (which deals with matters related to atomic
energy). However, in the WTO context, the moniker “European
Communities” has been adopted because the European Commission often acts
on behalf of the EU and the Member States together,
who are each individually
WTO members.
This was one of the driving
forces behind the Single European Act – despite almost 30 years of a
supposed common market, there
were still substantial barriers to free trade
within the Community. See, eg, Commission of the European Communities,
Completing the
Internal Market: White Paper from the Commission to the European
Council, COM(85) 310, 14 June 1985; EC Treaty art 14.
EC Treaty art 249, para 2:
“A regulation shall have general application. It shall be binding in its
entirety and directly applicable
in all Member States.”
EC Treaty art 249, para 3:
“A directive shall be binding, as to the result to be achieved...but shall
leave to the national
authorities the choice of form and methods.”
EC Treaty arts 226, 228.
There is a very complicated
body of case law setting out the circumstances in which a directive can be
relied upon despite not being
implemented – either properly or at all
– in national law. The seminal cases are
Van Gend & Loos
[1963] EUECJ R-26/62
[1963] ECR 1
, setting out the doctrine of direct effect of European law
in national legal systems, and
Costa v ENEL
[1964] EUECJ C-6/64
[1964] ECR 585
establishing the primacy of European law over national law in the case of
conflict. Speaking
generally, directives can be relied upon in
national courts against Member States, but cannot be relied upon against private
and where a loss is suffered as a result of being unable to rely upon a
directive, it may be possible to claim damages from a Member
State. However,
there are still circumstances in which it is impossible to either rely upon the
direct effect of a directive or obtain
compensation for failure to implement the
See EC Treaty arts
Such situations are referred
to as “wholly internal” situations, and EU law does not apply to
them directly. There must
be some link to the common market for the freedoms to
apply. The ECJ will make every effort to find such a link. The exclusion of
wholly internal situations comes from the text of the articles of the EC Treaty
which define the four freedoms: they are defined
in terms of trade between
Member States.
Procureur du Roi v Benoit
and Gustave Dassonville
[1974] EUECJ R-8/74
[1974] ECR 837:
“All trading rules
enacted by Member States which are capable of hindering, directly or indirectly,
actually or potentially,
intra-Community trade are to be considered as measures
having an effect equivalent to quantitative restrictions.”
Torfaen Borough Council v
, C-145/88, [1989] ECR 3851;
UDS CGT de l'Aisne v Sidef
Conforama; Criminal proceedings against Marchandise
, C-312 & 332/89,
[1991] ECR I-1027
Stoke on Trent and Norwich City Council v B & Q
[1992] EUECJ C-169/91
[1992] ECR I-6635.
Keck and Mithouard
C-267 & 268/91, [1993] ECR I-6097: “[T]he application to products from
other Member States of national provisions restricting
or prohibiting certain
selling arrangements is not such as to hinder, directly or indirectly, actually
or potentially, trade between
Member States within the meaning of the
Dassonville
judgment…provided that those provisions apply to all
affected traders operating within the national territory and provided
affect in the same manner, in law and in fact, the marketing of domestic
products and those from other Member States.”
Quotas and measures having
equivalent effect are prohibited by arts 28 and 29 of the EC Treaty. Taxation in
excess of that applied
to domestic products is forbidden by art 90 of the EC
For example, a law requiring
margarine to be packaged in cube-shaped containers in order to distinguish it
from butter:
Walter Rau v De Smedt
, C-261/81,
[1982] ECR 3961.
Rewe Zentrale v
Bundesmonopolverwaltung für Branntwein (“Cassis de Dijon”)
[1979] EUECJ R-120/78
[1979] ECR 649.
The possible justifications come from art 30 of the EC
Treaty and from the case law. The latter were identified in
as “mandatory requirements”, an unfortunate translation
but one which has stuck. The mandatory requirements constitute
an open list of
overriding justifications, including reasons such as public health, defence of
the consumer and environmental protection.
According to the orthodox reading of the case law, directly discriminatory
restrictions can only be saved by reference to the express
derogations in art
30, while indirectly discriminatory restrictions can be saved by reference to
either the express derogations or
the mandatory requirements (
Commission v
Belgium (Walloon waste)
[1992] EUECJ C-2/90
[1992] ECR I-4431).
However, the ECJ has
blurred these categories at times, allowing Member States to rely on the broader
mandatory requirements in cases
which seem to involve direct discrimination
Walloon waste
a good example).
Commission v Italy
(chocolate)
[2003] ECR I-513.
Walter Rau v De
, C-261/81,
[1982] ECR 3961.
This last requirement is known as
proportionality.
EC Treaty art 49.
It would seem that, unlike
in respect of the free movement of goods, both the express derogations in EC
Treaty art 46 and the general
justifications are available for both directly and
indirectly discriminatory measures (
Her Majesty's Customs and Excise v
, C-275/92,
[1994] EUECJ C-275/92
[1994] ECR I-1039).
Sager v Dennemeyer &
[1991] EUECJ C-76/90
[1991] ECR I-4221.
Criminal proceedings
against Jean-Claude Arblade and Arblade & Fils SARL, and against Bernard
Leloup and Sofrage SARL
, Joined Cases C-369 & 376/96,
These are difficult areas,
which have become even more complex since the advent of Union citizenship (EC
Treaty Part Two). They are
not relevant to the discussion here.
Freedom of establishment in
another Member State is set out in EC Treaty art 43.
Directive 2006/123/EC on
services in the internal market (“Services Directive”). The Services
Directive is the complicated
child of political compromises, with myriad
exclusions and a somewhat oblique text. However, as well as setting out in more
the contours of the free movement of services, it seems to require that
all the Member States review their legislation regulating
service providers to
show that all requirements are justifiable and proportionate, promising a
“bonfire of red tape”.
In addition, when it comes into force the
Services Directive will require Member States to establish a “Point of
Single Contact”
through which a business can obtain information in
relation to all such requirements and carry out any necessary administrative
procedures.
The cautious conclusion of commentators seems to be that the
Services Directive is something of a mess, but could nevertheless have
positive effects. For a thorough treatment, see Catherine Barnard,
“Unravelling the Services Directive”
(2008) 45(2)
Common Market
The Services Directive dovetails with other legislation such
as Directive 2005/36/EC on the recognition of professional qualifications.
are also specific directives relating to architects, lawyers and various
healthcare professions.
EC Treaty art 39.
Directive 2004/38/EC on the
right of citizens of the Union and their family members to move and reside
freely within the territory
of the Member States. See also Directive 96/71/EC
concerning the posting of workers in the framework of the provision of services;
Regulation 1612/68/EEC on freedom of movement for workers within the
EC Treaty Part Two.
EC Treaty art 18.
EC Treaty art 56. Paragraph
1 prohibits restrictions on the movement of capital; paragraph 2 prohibits
restrictions on payments.
Commission v
, C-367/98,
[2002] EUECJ C-367/98
[2002] ECR I-4731
Commission v Belgium
[2002] EUECJ C-503/99
[2002] ECR I-4809
Commission v France
, C-483/99,
[2002] EUECJ C-483/99
Commission v Spain
, C-463/00,
[2003] EUECJ C-463/00
[2003] ECR I-4581
Commission v
United Kingdom
[2003] EUECJ C-98/01
[2003] ECR I-4641
Commission v Netherlands
C-282/04, [2006] ECR I-9141;
Commission v Germany
, C-112/05, judgment 23
October 2007. Note that golden share schemes are not per se invalid – the
Commission v Belgium
, allowing ex post facto intervention by the
Belgian government based on objective criteria and subject to judicial review,
to be justified and proportionate to the goal of safeguarding energy
EC Treaty art 58.
EC Treaty art 12:
“Within the scope of application of this Treaty, and without prejudice to
any special provisions contained
therein, any discrimination on grounds of
nationality shall be prohibited.”
Jürgen Basedow,
“A common contract law for the European market”
Market Law Review
EC Treaty arts 81
(anti-competitive agreements) and 82 (abuse of a dominant position).
EC Treaty art 87.
Communication from the
Commission: Sector inquiry under Article 17 of Regulation (EC) No 1/2003 on
retail banking, COM(2007) 33.
Communication from the
Commission: Inquiry pursuant to Article 17 of Regulation (EC) No 1/2003 into the
European gas and electricity
sectors, COM(2006) 851.
Marleasing SA v La
Comercial Internacional de Alimentacion SA
, C-106/89,
[1990] ECR I-4135
[8]: “in applying national law, whether the provisions in question were
adopted before or after the directive, the national
court called upon to
interpret it is required to do so, as far as possible, in the light of the
wording and the purpose of the directive
in order to achieve the result pursued
by the latter”.
See, eg, European
Competition Network,
http://ec.europa.eu/comm/competition/ecn/index_en.html, accessed 4 May
Centros v Erhervs- og
Selskabsstryrelsen
, C-212/97, [1999] ECR I-1459.
Ex p. Daily Mail
[1988] ECR 5483.
Noëlle Lenoir, "The
Societas Europaea (SE) in Europe: A Promising Start and an Option with Good
(2008) 4(1)
Utrecht Law Review
EC Treaty art 133.
EC Treaty art 23(2)
explicitly states that the free movement of goods applies to goods from third
countries (non-Member States) as
well as goods from Member States.
Agreement on the European
Economic Area, OJ 3.1.1994, L 1/7.
The EU and Switzerland have
entered into a variety of agreements, including the EC Switzerland Free Trade
Agreement, 1972, covering
trade in goods and competition laws. See The EU's
relations with Switzerland,
http://ec.europa.eu/external_relations/switzerland/intro/index.htm, accessed
2 May 2008.
See above, nn 34 - 36.
Germany had a notably low
threshold for consumer protection, based on a low assessment of the capacity of
the average consumer (Stefan
Dittmer, “Misleading advertising: an end to
the cursory average consumer”
(1998) 20(8)
European Intellectual
Property Review
Barnard sets out the story
of Directive 2000/36/EC relating to cocoa and chocolate products intended for
human consumption, which
saw partial harmonisation in 1973 finally followed by
exhaustive harmonisation in 2000 (Catherine Barnard,
The Substantive Law of
ed, 2007) 593-5).
The new approach is set out
in Council Resolution of 7 May 1985 on a new approach to technical harmonization
and standards, OJ 1985,
C 136/1. More generally, see New Approach,
http://ec.europa.eu/enterprise/newapproach/index_en.htm, accessed 2 May
Directive 97/23/EC on the
approximation of the laws of the Member States concerning pressure
Comité Européen de
Normalisation, Comité Européen de Normalisation Electronique, and the
European Telecommunications
Standards Institute are good examples of
European-level bodies. Progress is generally much quicker here because designing
is their raison d'être, and the issue is depoliticised to a great
extent by the technical focus.
National standards
organisations are still involved, producing a national standard based on the
European standard. Given that the
free movement of goods does not apply to
situations which are wholly within a Member State, these national standards
could be made
mandatory for domestic manufacturers producing for the domestic
market; but given the difficulty of monitoring compliance, this is
unlikely to
occur. In any case, manufacturing according to the national standard will ensure
that the product can be sold at home
and throughout the EU.
See Council Resolution of 21
December 1989 on a global approach to conformity assessment, OJ 1989, C 10/1;
see generally New Approach
Standardisation in the Internal Market,
http://www.newapproach.org, accessed 2 May 2008.
See Mutual Recognition
Agreements,
http://ec.europa.eu/enterprise/international/index_en.htm, accessed 2 May
Directive 85/577/EEC to
protect the consumer in respect of contracts negotiated away from business
Directive 90/314/EEC on
package travel, package holidays and package tours.
Directive 85/374/EEC on the
approximation of the laws, regulations and administrative provisions of the
Member States concerning
liability for defective products.
Directive 93/13/EEC on
unfair terms in consumer contracts (known as the “Unfair Terms
Directive”).
Unfair Terms Directive art
3(1) provides that “[a] contractual term which has not been individually
negotiated shall be regarded
as unfair if, contrary to the requirement of good
faith, it causes a significant imbalance in the parties' rights and obligations
arising under the contract, to the detriment of the consumer.”
Océano Grupo
Editorial SA v Roció Murciano Quintero
, C-240/98, [2000] ECR I-4941.
This means that retailers in the European market cannot use contractual terms to
ensure that they can
bring enforcement actions – such as for default on
payment contracts – in their own jurisdiction, which is both familiar
convenient. Such clauses, which are ubiquitous in cross-border contracts, cannot
be used in relation to consumers in the EU.
This will arguably dissuade SMEs
from dealing across the single market at the same time that the directive aims
to make consumers
more comfortable doing so. Further, it will raise enforcement
costs, ultimately raising consumer prices in the European market. This
significant step to be taken by judicial fiat.
Gut Springenheide GmbH v
Oberkreisdirektor des Kreises Steinfurt
[1998] EUECJ C-210/96
[1998] ECR I-4657.
See, eg, Stephen Weatherill,
EU Consumer Law and Policy
ed, 2005) Chapter 7; Basedow,
above n 52.
See Pierre Legrand,
“European legal systems are not converging”
International & Comparative Law Quarterly
Communication from the
Commission to the European Parliament and the Council: European Contract Law and
the revision of the acquis:
the way forward, COM(2004) 651.
Directive 96/9/EC on the legal protection of databases, are peculiar to the
European Union and there
are no signs of their migration to other jurisdictions.
Although on the face of the directive the protection offered is quite extensive,
the ECJ's case law has made clear that they will apply only in narrow
circumstances. In particular, “a substantial investment
in either the
obtaining, verification or presentation of the contents” (art 7(1)) is
required for protection, and according
to the case law this effort does not
include the creation of the contents itself (for example, the taking of photos
or the writing
of documents which make-up a database). This means the right will
only apply to quite exceptional databases. See
Fixtures Marketing Limited v
Spel, C-338/02,
[2004] ECR I-10497.
This derogation is set out
explicitly in art 30 of the EC Treaty: “The provisions of Articles 28 and
29 shall not preclude
prohibitions or restrictions on imports, exports or goods
in transit justified on grounds of...the protection of industrial and commercial
The European Patent
Organisation, set up in 1977 on the basis of the European Patent Convention,
Munich, 1973, is responsible for
the European Patent Office. There are currently
34 contracting states. A single application in a single language is sufficient
obtain rights in the States nominated in the application. However, the rights
obtained are independent national rights rather than
a unitary European patent,
and as such must be enforced and defended in each jurisdiction separately. See
Gesellschaft für Antriebstechnick mbH & Co KG v Lamell und
Kupplungsbau Beteiligungs KG
[2006] EWHC 56
[2006] All ER (D) 221
Nederland BV v Dr Frederick James Primus
, C-593/03,
[2006] EWCA Crim 508
[2006] All ER (D)
Regulation 40/94 on the
Community trade mark.
Particularly noteworthy in
this context is Directive 89/104/EEC to approximate the laws of the Member
States relating to trade marks.
Directive 91/250/EEC on the
legal protection of computer programs; Directive 93/83/EEC on the coordination
of certain rules concerning
to satellite broadcasting and cable retransmission; Directive 2001/29/EC on
harmonisation of certain aspects of copyright and related rights in the
information society; Directive 2001/84/EC on the resale
right for the benefit of
the author of an original work of art; Directive 2004/48/EC on the enforcement
of intellectual property
rights; Directive 2006/116/EC on the term of protection
of copyright and certain related rights; Directive 2006/115/EC on rental
and lending right and on certain rights related to copyright in the field of
intellectual property.
See, eg, Hugenholtz, van
Eechoud, van Gompel et al,
The Recasting of Copyright & Related Rights
for the Knowledge Economy
(2007), available at
http://www.ivir.nl/publications/other/IViR_Recast_Final_Report_2006.pdf,
accessed 4 May 2008.
TFEU art 118. Existing
measures have generally been based upon EC Treaty art 95, as measures affecting
the functioning of the internal
Put simply, the lack of
specific EU competence to legislate in respect of intellectual property means
that the EU does not have general
competence to conclude international
agreements in respect of intellectual property (
Opinion 1/94 (World Trade
Organization)
[1994] ECR I-5267).
Deutsche Grammophon GmbH
v Metro GmbH
, Case C-78/80,
[1971] ECR 181.
Silhouette International
Schmied GmbH & Co. KG v Hartlauer Handelsgesellschaft mbH
, C-355/96,
[1998] ECR I-4799.
Directive 2003/54/EC
concerning common rules for the internal market in electricity, art 21(1).
See, eg, John Gillingham,
Design for a New Europe
The Future of the
, Laeken, 15 December 2001 (known as the “Laeken
Declaration”).
The principle of
subsidiarity is set out in art 5 of the EC Treaty (“[T]he Community shall
take action, in accordance with
the principle of subsidiarity, only if and in so
far as the objectives of the proposed action cannot be sufficiently achieved by
the Member States and can therefore, by reason of the scale or effects of the
proposed action, be better achieved by the Community”)
and recognised in
the preamble to the TEU (“Resolved to continue the process of creating an
ever closer union among the peoples
of Europe, in which decisions are taken as
closely as possible to the citizen in accordance with the principle of
subsidiarity”).
It is the subject of separate Protocols in the Treaty of
Nice and the Treaty of Lisbon, the latter establishing a mechanism for review
and intervention by national parliaments on the basis of breach of the
principle; see Gavin Barrett, “"The king is dead, long
live the king": the
recasting by the Treaty of Lisbon of the provisions of the Constitutional Treaty
concerning national parliaments”
(2008) 33(1)
European Law Review
The Constitutional Treaty
suffered defeats in referenda in France and the Netherlands. This was seen as a
considerable setback for
the European project and the political elite leading
it, despite 18 Member States already having ratified the Treaty. Ratification
procedures were halted and the European Council – comprised of the heads
of state or government of the Member States –
called for a period of
reflection. There is little legal writing on the failure, whether because the
failure is a matter for political
scientists or because so much ink had already
been spilt on the implications of the Treaty's ratification. For a good
perspective
see Brendan Donnelly, “The European Constitutional Treaty: its
past, present and future”,
European Essays – Essay Number 38,
October 2006
, available at http://www.fedtrust.co.uk (accessed 4 May 2008);
for a more historical, political account see Richard Baldwin,
Failure: History of the Constitutional Rejection and Implications for the Future
(Centre for European Policy Studies, May 2006), available at
http://shop.ceps.eu/BookDetail.php?item_id=1332 (accessed 4 May 2008).
Fritz Scharpf, ‘The
European Social Model: Coping with the Challenges of Diversity’
Journal of Common Market Studies
Two recent cases have
become the icons of so-called “social dumping”, the erosion of
labour standards and other social
values by the strong application of the
economic freedoms:
International Transport Workers' Federation v Viking Line
Case C-438/05 [ruling of 11 December];
Laval un Partneri Ltd
v Svenska Byggnadsarbetareförbundet
, Case C-341/05 [ruling of 18
December] (known as
See, eg, Paul Craig,
“The Treaty of Lisbon, process, architecture and substance”
European Law Review
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (222 KB)
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter