URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/journals/PrecedentAULA/2024/4.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 15:29:56
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Duncan, Dianne --- "Steering Change: Navigating the Shifting Legal Landscape and Career Opportunities Within and Beyond the Law Firm" [2024] PrecedentAULA 4; (2024) 180 Precedent 10
Steering change: Navigating the shifting legal landscape and career
opportunities within and beyond the law firm
By Dianne Duncan
Young lawyers are facing an existential crisis. As revealed by an
International Bar Association (IBA) survey, half are considering
leaving their
current role over the next five
In Australia, it’s
clear that increasing numbers of Gen Z lawyers are confused and disenchanted by
both job demands and industry
expectations. It’s time to take a good, hard
look at the entrenched challenges they face, as they try to advance their
How do we find the viable solutions our ‘young guns’ need
to fulfil their potential, both within and beyond the legal
profession?
INCREASING CHALLENGES FOR YOUNG
When the IBA surveyed 3,000 young lawyers about their job satisfaction, half
reported a desire to leave their current role in the
Levels of enthusiasm also appeared to decrease with age. While 25 per cent of
lawyers aged under 25 reported the most excitement about
developing their legal
career, only 14 per cent of those aged 36–40 matched it.
‘New and incumbent employees will continue to work harder and longer
hours’ as they compensate for post-COVID staff shortages
significantly increasing demand for legal services, as predicted in 2022 by a
market insights report for employers and professionals
in the legal
In terms of
remuneration, ‘junior and mid-level lawyers generally received generous
reviews of up to 10%’ as they progressed,
according to the 2023 edition of
the report.
Yet this was
correlated with increased expectations of return on investment, along with
increasing pressure to perform.
A faulty work-life balance
Young lawyers in Australia have had enough, as reported in the
Financial Review
The article,
‘Why young lawyers have had enough’, referenced a surge in
resignations from law firms, coupled with a mass
exodus of talented young
Australian lawyers to companies in London and New York.
The author, Stefanie Costi, a junior lawyer at Garland Hawthorn Brahe,
pointed to hefty university fees and unrealistic work expectations
drivers of dissatisfaction. Individual wellbeing and healthy work-life balance
are both quickly exchanged for ‘demanding
workloads and billable
My own experience as a legal recruitment specialist has shown me the stark
challenges faced by young graduates and junior lawyers,
as they struggle to
balance a new world of intense work demands with their own health and enjoyment.
Their questions are getting
harder and harder to answer:
• How do I balance the complexity of work challenges with my personal
• How can I make weekend plans without having to cancel them again?
• How do I ‘switch off’ when I’m working so many
weekends and late nights?
• How do I stay ahead of the curve for clients yet also turn my mind to
other things?
• How do I forge a viable career path if I’m not a high-flier, a
strong networker or a particularly competitive personality?
• How do I deal with the anxiety I feel about whether I’m really
cut out to be a lawyer, now and as my life continues
A genuine crisis of confidence and self-belief
Young Australian lawyers are currently facing unprecedented challenges,
according to Florence Thum, assistant director at the College
‘There is a disconnect between who our young lawyers believe themselves
to be or wish to become and what they believe they are
capable of in legal
practice, which is rapidly evolving. Thus, giving rise to anxiety, and even
depressed moods’.
Thum regards this as nothing less than an ‘existential crisis’,
driven by two key factors – rapid advances in technology
and the COVID
pandemic – which have made people significantly more reliant on social
media. This is impacting the mental health
of young Australian lawyers, as they
are forced to navigate vast amounts of online information and quickly acquire
new skills.
Global social media users swelled by 137 million between January 2022 and
January 2023,
Lawyers Weekly
reports. With two-thirds of Instagram users
aged 18–34, and close to 60 per cent of LinkedIn users aged 25–34,
lawyers are questioning whether they have the skills and knowledge
required to keep up with the
As rapidly developing AI continues to change the legal profession, lawyers
just starting out can no longer count on the historic and
traditional precedents
their predecessors relied on as industry standards.
Legal profession struggling to adapt to shifting values
The values and expectations of young lawyers are also undergoing a seismic
shift, leaving the legal profession scrambling to keep
As the 2023 market insights report demonstrates, young practitioners are
turning down lucrative offers in favour of law firms with
values that align with
their own. They are also seeking a level of flexibility not traditionally
offered within the industry:
‘There are the beginnings of generational tension in the legal
profession as Gen Z lawyers come through. These lawyers have
very different
expectations of their career and employer and often see their career path as
non-linear (which is at odds with the
linear progression structure of law
The IBA report sets out the factors most appealing to lawyers under the age
of 40, including:
• The ability to continue learning on the job.
• Being involved with work that challenges them.
• Having the opportunity to develop their
Clearly, times are changing in the Australian
legal profession. It’s critically important that law practices change with
by offering junior lawyers the flexibility, recognition and options they
More lawyers taking career breaks
The legal profession is demanding – of
time, energy and patience. Successful lawyers need to possess strong analytical
and intellectual
powers, high ethics, outstanding communication and great
resilience under stress. As technology and competition continue to turn
screw, it’s no wonder young lawyers are questioning their ability and
willingness to meet the sector’s ever-growing
requirements.
Increasing numbers of lawyers are choosing to park secure jobs and take
career breaks of 6 to 12 months, the 2023 market insights
report shows. This may
be by taking a leave of absence, extended breaks between jobs, or simply
resigning. They use this time to
‘recharge, reflect and refresh’.
Some opt to switch to other areas of law on their return. Others are deciding to
the profession altogether, in pursuit of new
As a young lawyer, you may have found yourself at this crossroads.
HOW DO YOU NAVIGATE FORWARD?
As the profession grows in complexity and demands, it’s important to
have a handle on what makes you tick. If you don’t
truly know and work to
your strengths, weaknesses and core values, you’re unlikely to engage with
your role in a meaningful
or productive way.
The better you understand yourself, the more likely you are to understand the
genuine requirements of your job and perform accordingly.
Self-assessment also comes into play in clarifying whether and when to change
jobs or career.
In this situation, my suggestions are as follows:
• Explore your core values, work ethic, capabilities and
aspirations.
• Isolate the factors that are negatively impacting your current role,
including hours, type and nature of work, workplace culture,
environment and ongoing stress levels.
• Assess the current health of your work-life balance.
• Work out whether you are pursuing your own area of professional
interest or simply meeting the needs of your employer.
• Take some time to research the diverse legal specialties and
opportunities that are available.
• Carry out an honest assessment of your proficiencies, talents, flaws,
motivations, personality, career targets and life goals,
to help identify the
optimum job match.
Opportunities for lawyers within and beyond
the legal world
Before deciding whether to leave the sector for good, it’s important to
assess whether you are in the right area of law. Maybe
it’s a question of
moving from a large, busy law firm to a smaller practice, a different area of
specialty or even setting
up your own business.
As a junior lawyer, you may find yourself in a practice area that
doesn’t suit you. You have stuck with it so far for the sake
career. Perhaps it seemed like a good opportunity at the time, a chance to
learn, and a pathway to something more fulfilling.
Now, however, you’re
embedded in a commercial contracts practice. What happened to your dream of
being a litigator, and what
The multiple specialties within law offer many opportunities for change.
Areas of growing demand include energy and resources (specifically
renewables),
employment, construction and infrastructure, litigation and dispute resolution
(especially class actions), insolvency
and restructuring, and insurance, all
with sub-specialities of their own.
It’s worth taking the time to unpack your options, and explore related
areas like governance, risk and compliance or knowledge
management roles. For
instance, you might find IT and how the law affects it more interesting than the
purely legal side of IT.
Beyond the law, there
are plenty of creative and productive ways to use a law degree for those who
want to leverage their legal education
and skills in non-traditional ways. To
name a few:
• Governance, risk and compliance
• Contract management
• Legal analyst
• Legal technology professional
• Mediator/arbitrator
• Legal journalism
• Corporate governance specialist
• Policy analyst
• Human resources
• Risk manager
• Educator/trainer
• Non-profit administrator
• Environmental compliance specialist and recruitment.
Sales, consultancy, journalism, politics and teaching all lend themselves to
professionals with legal expertise. Real estate, human
resources and public
relations can be a good fit, and many lawyers have very successful careers in
legal recruitment.
Other roles available to legal candidates with the appropriate interest and
skills include policy analyst, project manager, paralegal,
mediator, compliance
officer and anti-money-laundering reporting officer.
Practical steps to moving on
When it’s time to take the next career step, either inside or outside
the law, it pays to think ahead:
• Identify your strengths and skill gaps, then factor them into your
job search.
• Reach out and talk to people in the industry or organisation you are
• Build your industry and social media networks to expand your
• Prepare a plan to help you transition to a new role, including how
you will address any skill gaps.
• Your resume should reflect your competency in technology use, client
management, cultural awareness, business acumen, sales,
marketing and
interpersonal skills.
• Focus on emotional intelligence as much as your legal skills, that
is, your ability to listen, understand and show empathy.
• Demonstrate your ability to be resilient in the face of
confrontation, that is, to resolve conflict and solve problems calmly.
• If you simply want a job change, be open to applying your skills in a
variety of settings.
• If you have very specific career goals, be strategic and closely
align your next role with your objectives.
• Look for jobs which satisfy your work-life balance, offering
flexibility and benefits like gender neutral paid parental leave
• Explore the culture and workplace diversity of companies where you
seek employment.
• Work out the level of autonomy, personal development and career
growth on offer.
• Balance remuneration level with the rewards of working in an
inclusive environment with generous benefits.
• Seek practices and organisations offering mentors, along with mental
health and wellbeing programs.
• Be sure you can demonstrate to potential employers how you align with
the company’s culture, ethics, mission and values.
Today’s junior lawyers are operating in a changed landscape, where the
old rules don’t always apply. This means you need
to be honest, analytical
and open when assessing what kind of career you want to pursue, according to
Nick Malone, who was appointed
director at Pragma Lawyers in Perth before
reaching his thirtieth birthday.
‘So if you find yourself in a rut where
you’re not interested in what you do, you’re not interested in the
you’re doing it at, or you’re not interested in the area of
law anymore, you’re simply not going to be the best
version of yourself.
My personal view is that, like any other job, law’s not for
Self-awareness is key. Through honest appraisal, you can come to the
realisation that it’s okay to shift your personal goalposts
and chase your
Dianne Duncan
is a legal recruitment
specialist with a demonstrated history working in the legal practice industry,
specialising in advising and
placing lawyers across all practice areas and
703 987 EMAIL dianne.duncan@tardis-group.com WEBSITE
www.tardis-group.com.
Legal Policy & Research
Unit International Bar Association,
IBA Young Lawyers’ Report
London (2022)
<https://www.ibanet.org/document?id=IBA-Young-Lawyers-Report-2022>.
Ibid; N Neilson, ‘What
would motivate young lawyers to stay in their current role?’
(7 February 2022)
<https://www.lawyersweekly.com.au/newlaw/33565-what-would-motivate-young-lawyers-to-stay-in-their-current-role>.
Mahlab Report 2022
Mahlab Recruitment (Vic), 3
<https://www.mahlab.com.au/wp-content/uploads/2022/07/Mahlab-Report-2022-FINAL.pdf>.
Mahlab Report 2023
Mahlab Recruitment (Vic), 3
<https://www.mahlab.com.au/wp-content/uploads/2023/07/220726-Mahlab-Report-2023-Digital.pdf>.
S Costi, ‘Why young
lawyers have had enough’
The Australian Financial Review
<https://www.afr.com/companies/professional-services/why-young-lawyers-have-had-enough-20220913-p5bht1>.
F Thum, ‘The
“existential crisis” facing young lawyers’,
(21 August 2023)
<https://www.lawyersweekly.com.au/biglaw/37967-the-existential-crisis-facing-young-lawyers>
Mahlab Report 2023
above note 4, 2.
IBA Young Lawyers’
, above note 1, 30.
Mahlab Report 2023
above note 4, 9.
L Croft, ‘Young
lawyers should “be open to changing and adapting”’,
(10 July 2023)
<https://www.lawyersweekly.com.au/biglaw/37681-young-lawyers-should-be-open-to-changing-and-adapting>.
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (54.4 KB)
PDF format (305 KB)
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter