URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/journals/MelbULawRw/2024/10.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 15:18:14
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Rizzi, Marco; Gleeson, Penny; Paterson, Jeannie Marie --- "Floors and Ceilings: Coordination, Coherence and Consistency in the Relationship Between Therapeutic Goods Regulation and Consumer Protection" [2024] MelbULawRw 10; (2024) 47(2) Melbourne University Law Review 466
FLOORS AND CEILINGS: COORDINATION, COHERENCE AND CONSISTENCY IN THE RELATIONSHIP BETWEEN THERAPEUTIC GOODS REGULATION AND CONSUMER
I INTRODUCTION
II EVOLVING NORMS IN SETTING REASONABLE CONSUMER EXPECTATIONS
A The TGA Regulatory Regime
III INCONSISTENCY BETWEEN THE POSITIONS TAKEN BY THE REGULATORY REGIMES: HAND SANITISERS
IV CHANGING APPROACHES TO APPROVALS AND RESETTING THE STANDARD FOR SAFETY DEFECTS: COVID-19 VACCINES
A What Is a Vaccine and How Is It Made Available to the Public?
B The Special Nature of Public Health Crises and Their Impact on the Evaluative Basis for Consumer Expectations
C Separating the Factual from the Normative
V INADEQUATE SCRUTINY OF APPROVAL STANDARDS: PELVIC MESH
A Blind Reliance on International Regulatory Decisions
B Distinctions (or Their Absence)
C Lessons Learned — and Yet To Be Learned
VI THE NEED FOR REGULATORY COHERENCE AND COORDINATION
VII CONCLUSION
FLOORS AND CEILINGS: COORDINATION, COHERENCE AND
CONSISTENCY IN THE RELATIONSHIP BETWEEN THERAPEUTIC GOODS REGULATION AND
MARCO RIZZI,
PENNY GLEESON
AND JEANNIE
This article examines the tensions between the two Australian regimes that
govern the regulation of therapeutic goods: the broad consumer
protection regime
Australian Consumer Law
and the more specific regime under the
Therapeutic Goods Act 1989
(Cth). The authors develop three case studies
of therapeutic products (hand sanitisers, vaccines and medical implants) to
the challenges of consistency and coherence that may arise between
the regimes. These challenges arise specifically when one regulatory
responds to a public health crisis such as the COVID-19 pandemic. Our more
general point, however, is that the regimes should
act in a complementary
manner, as the floor and ceiling of consumer and patient protection. This
requires a coordinated and dynamic
approach to regulation in order to ensure the
relationship between the regimes remains coherent and
consistent.
INTRODUCTION
The regulation of therapeutic
is at the core of any well-functioning consumer protection regime. Such products
— most commonly, pharmaceuticals (including
many vaccines) and medical
devices — have a direct and significant impact on the health and wellbeing
of consumers and
In Australia, regulatory responsibility for these specific matters falls between
two regimes: the
Therapeutic Goods Act
Therapeutic Goods Act
’) administered by the Commonwealth
Therapeutic Goods Administration
Australian Consumer Law
’) contained in
sch 2 of the
Competition and Consumer Act 2010
(Cth) and administered by
the Australian Consumer and Competition Commission
The TGA regulatory regime aims to ensure that therapeutic products are safe and
effective when they go to market according to a range
of scientific
standards (often described as ‘pre-market’
regulation).
complements this regime with a suite of general market protections that, through
a liability regime, aim to ensure that consumer
products are accurately
represented,
and meet baseline standards of
and reasonable expectations of
This article focuses on the normative tension between the pre-market regulatory
regime exclusively administered by the TGA and the
remedies and causes of action
provided to consumers under the
The combined effect of these regimes is that, in most instances, consumers
and patients are entitled to assume the products they buy
live up to the
statements made by those promoting them, and that these products will be
reasonably safe and reliable. Of course,
in practice, some products, and the
conduct of the firms promoting them, will depart from these assumptions, and
such products will
be defective or their performance will have been
misrepresented. In these instances, the
provides robust enforcement
powers to its regulators to respond to contraventions of the
and remedial options
to consumers who suffer loss or damage because of a contravention or failure to
comply with the regime, including
seeking damages and
compensation.
Consumers and patients are additionally entitled to expect that each of the
pertinent regulatory regimes will work in a rigorous,
consistent and coherent
manner in protecting their wellbeing. This is even more the case in
circumstances where there is a public
health crisis and public health
imperatives demand the highest levels of confidence from consumers and patients
in relation to the
effectiveness and safety of therapeutic
Coherence between the regulatory regimes in relation to therapeutic goods is
therefore important to ensure that government can fulfil
its role in protecting
The core regulatory approaches to determining
whether therapeutic products should go to market, whether they meet community
expectations
of reasonable safety, and the veracity of statements made about
them, are themselves
This is to be expected as community expectations and the demands of the health
system change over time and in response to evolving
circumstances.
What is unclear
is whether and how the two regimes — the
and the TGA regulatory
scheme — should and do interact with each other to ensure the best
outcomes for patients and consumers.
Thus, we see uncertainty about whether and
how the two regimes ensure a consistent stance about patient and consumer
protection.
This was illustrated by recent class action litigation for
contraventions of the
for implantable transvaginal mesh medical
devices approved under the TGA regulatory
It is equally unclear how a judicial finding of a safety defect would be
considered or otherwise accommodated within the TGA’s
own approval
A mismatch between regulatory approaches introduces a risk of incoherence
between the workings of the specific TGA regulatory regime
and the standards
demanded by the general consumer protection regime under the
Moreover, there is a risk of real harm to consumers in this important field if
the regulatory approaches are out of step. The purpose
of this article is to
draw attention to the risks of inconsistency between the regimes and the
importance of regulators coordinating
their approaches in regard to core
overlapping responsibilities. We recognise that other sources of statutory and
common law may,
and do, contribute to consumer protection in relation to
therapeutic goods, most notably the law of
negligence.
However, the focus
of this article is the key legislative sources of regulation of therapeutic
goods, namely the TGA and
regulatory regimes, at the heart of this
We recognise that, following the holding of the Full Court of the Federal
Merck Sharp & Dohme (Australia) Pty Ltd v Peterson
regulation of therapeutic goods should be understood as providing a floor,
not a ceiling, when it comes to overseeing safety, quality
Relevant conduct and performance obligations under the
impose higher standards than required under the TGA regulatory regime leading to
pre-market authorisation. Our concern,
however, is that the differences between
the two regimes may easily slide beyond the floor/ceiling complementary
interplay and result
instead in conflicting outcomes, which in turn risk
compromising the overarching goal of consumer/patient protection. We
additionally
observe that differentiating between constructive interplay and
detrimental conflict is, at its core, a normative argument and should
acknowledged as such.
We illustrate the merits of this argument as follows.
of this article
discusses the general regulatory framework for consumer protection under the
respective TGA and
regulatory regimes.
, IV and V provide
three in-depth case studies (hand sanitisers, COVID-19 vaccines and transvaginal
mesh medical device implants)
where different stances were implicit in the
regulatory approaches promoted under the two regimes.
discusses the
merits of regulatory coherence. We then offer some concluding remarks.
II EVOLVING NORMS IN
SETTING REASONABLE CONSUMER EXPECTATIONS
In the specific context of therapeutic goods, the
general regulatory regime of consumer protection in the
alongside the specific approval regime administered by the TGA. However, the two
regulatory regimes are driven by distinct
objectives and norms. In synthesis,
the TGA regulatory regime is animated by the goal of gatekeeping access to
market for therapeutic
goods by setting a rigorous baseline (the
‘floor’) for their safety and
To do so, the TGA subjects the marketability of new therapeutic goods to a
cost-benefit (or risk-utility) assessment epistemically
grounded in
‘scientism’.
By contrast, the
operates as a general consumer protection
setting high standards
of conduct for firms in their dealings with consumers, and with each
as well as with
performance standards for the
of consumer products,
including therapeutic ones (the ‘ceiling’).
The TGA Regulatory
The TGA forms part of Australia’s overarching public health
architecture. The legislative regime it oversees has two objectives
relevant to
article — first, to provide for a ‘national system of controls
relating to the quality, safety, efficacy and timely availability
of therapeutic
goods’, and second, to provide a uniform national approach for the control
and safe handling
of poisons.
The role of the TGA includes ensuring that therapeutic products that are
supplied and marketed in Australia have been through a pre-market
process to meet ‘requisite standards of quality, safety and efficacy
performance’.
The degree of regulatory scrutiny that is applied to the evaluation of a
therapeutic good generally depends on its level of risk.
Where the product poses
a higher level of risk, it is subject to a ‘rigorous scientific evaluation
of data submitted by the
product sponsor’ and involves the application of
‘expertise from several scientific
Pharmaceuticals and medical devices that meet the relevant approval
requirements are included on the Australian Register of Therapeutic
Goods (‘ARTG’).
The supply of a therapeutic good that has not been included in the ARTG is
prohibited unless certain exceptions
Broadly speaking,
pharmaceuticals are either ‘registered’ on the ARTG (because they
pose a higher health risk and therefore
require a greater degree of regulatory
control) or are ‘listed’ (because they pose a lower risk and
therefore require
less regulatory
oversight).
All prescription medicines (as opposed to over-the-counter medicines) must
therefore be registered on the ARTG before they can be
A similar risk-based approach applies to the regulation of medical
which are classified as
either a low to medium risk medical device (Class I and Class IIa), a medium to
high risk device (Class IIb)
or a high risk device (Class
The regulation of medical devices is further analysed in relation to the case
study discussed below in
The TGA regulatory regime allows for provisional or temporary approval to be
granted to pharmaceuticals ‘where the need for
early access outweighs the
A pharmaceutical product may therefore be provisionally registered on the
if its safety and efficacy
‘for the purposes for which it is to be used have been satisfactorily
established ... based on preliminary
The quality of the
medicine must also be
established
and the product
sponsor must have an adequate plan to ‘submit comprehensive clinical
data’ on its safety and efficacy
An example of the
application of the provisional approval pathway is the regulation of vaccines
for COVID-19. A number of vaccines
had been provisionally registered on the ARTG
during the pandemic to facilitate
In comparison, the provisional approval of medical devices is not generally
permitted under the TGA regulatory regime.
In addition to overseeing the ‘pre-market’ approval of
therapeutic goods, the TGA has a vital role in monitoring the post-market
performance of those goods. This is primarily achieved through the collection of
information about ‘adverse events’ (eg
side effects) that are
reported by manufacturers, clinicians and the public in relation to the use of a
pharmaceutical or medical
The TGA regulatory regime also imposes controls in relation to the
advertising of therapeutic products ‘beyond those required
for everyday
Consequently, the regulatory regime prohibits the making of certain
‘false or misleading statement[s]’, representations
advertisements relating to the registration or listing of a therapeutic
Therapeutic goods are
subject to the
Therapeutic Goods (Therapeutic Goods Advertising Code)
Instrument 2021
Therapeutic Goods Advertising
Its purpose
includes ensuring ‘that advertisements are accurate, balanced and not
misleading, promote the safe and proper use
of the goods and are consistent with
public health
campaigns’.
One of the key norms that guides, and is reflected by, the TGA regulatory
regime is that only therapeutic goods whose benefit or utility
outweighs their
risk should be approved for supply to the
For example, a medical
device must comply with certain ‘essential
principles’,
that ‘[t]he benefits to be gained from the use of a medical device ...
must outweigh any undesirable effects arising
‘risk-benefit’ principle is also reflected in the provisional
approvals granted to pharmaceuticals during periods
of greater need, such as the
COVID-19 pandemic.
context, therapeutic goods may be provisionally approved because it is perceived
that they offer greater benefits than
the risk they pose during a particular
public health crisis. The risk-benefit paradigm consistently underpins the
TGA’s regulatory
regime’s counterparts in other jurisdictions, such
as Europe and the United States
A further norm embedded in the regulatory control exercised by the TGA is
that of scientism.
dictates that ‘the only reality that we can know anything about is the one
science has access to’ and that
consequently ‘what lies beyond the
reach of scientists cannot count as
knowledge’.
The scope of
the TGA’s regulatory field includes an exceptional number of
patients’ and consumers’ individual and
collective experiences of
health and illness, and thousands of therapeutic interventions. But the TGA
regulatory regime is dominated
by the reduction of these persons and their
experiences to objective, scientifically measurable
In this respect,
commentary that the regulation of the quality and safety of the Australian
healthcare system favours ‘technical
and professional’ perspectives
above those of patients and the broader public applies equally to the TGA
regulatory regime.
Together, these norms amount to a regulatory regime that is firmly focused on
the ‘scientific’ attributes (or otherwise)
of the therapeutic good
itself and the scientific standards by which the quality, safety and efficacy of
those goods are assessed.
focus of the TGA regulatory regime is not the protection of the patient or
consumer per se, but the analytical assessment of
the risk/benefit of the
therapeutic
to the Australian public.
This, as will be seen, contrasts with the general consumer protection regime
. It is perhaps only in relation
to the advertising of therapeutic goods that the TGA regulatory regime shifts
its focus from the
regulated therapeutic product to the patient
or consumer.
In contrast to the TGA regulatory regime, the
provides a general,
not sector specific, regime for consumer protection. The purposes of a consumer
protection regime such as the
include promoting fair and efficient
In furthering these
purposes, the
makes extensive use of general standards (as opposed to
specific rules) such as misleading
unconscionable
and reasonably
These standards are
described as ‘open-textured’ because they are deliberately
which requires the decision-maker to make an evaluative judgement about whether
particular facts fall inside or outside the standard
This use of open-textured
standards requires ‘inordinately more attention to facts than
and a greater focus
on ‘situation-specific
variables’.
The attractions of open-textured standards are in allowing courts to be
responsive to the justice of the individual
and flexible in responding
to new situations and
circumstances.
The evaluative judgement required to give content to open-textured standards
will rely on a number of considerations. As explained
by Dietrich, giving
content to an open-textured legal standard ‘permits, indeed requires, an
appeal to common sense, social,
personal (and judicial) experience, social norms
and intuition’.
synthesis of relevant considerations necessarily includes decisions about policy
and values.
Policy and values
are part of the determination of whether it is right or just that the standard
is treated as having been met. This
nuanced process of evaluative judgement
contrasts with the type of cost-benefit analysis applied in Australia by the TGA
at the pre-market
indeed the American
Restatement (Third) of Torts: Product Liability
key component of American consumer protection law) which also adopts the
risk-utility
The kind of evaluative judgement being discussed is apparent in deciding
whether conduct is reasonably capable of being misleading
Conduct is misleading, or likely to mislead, under the
‘viewed as a whole [it] has a tendency to lead a person into
That inquiry
involves assessing the effect of the conduct having regard to the reactions of
the ordinary, reasonable members of the
class of persons to whom the
representation was made, with reference to the medium through which the
representation was made and
A dynamic and contextual evaluative judgement is also demanded in the
assessment of the related standards of ‘safe’ and
defect’ under the
for the purposes of liability for failing to
comply with the consumer guarantees and compensation for injury from a safety
respectively. Thus, s 54(1) of the
provides a guarantee of
acceptable quality for consumer goods. The
provides a list of factors
relevant to assessing whether goods were of
which includes having
regard to whether the goods were
The baseline
standard for making this assessment is the expectations of a reasonable consumer
who is ‘fully acquainted with
the state and condition of the goods
(including any hidden defects of the
The flexibility
of the reasonableness test in the guarantee of acceptable quality is intended to
protect consumers while not imposing unrealistic standards on
The assessment is not, however, a cost-benefit analysis undertaken from a lens
of scientism; it is a multifactorial analysis informed
by the circumstances of
the particular case.
The Australian product liability regime is set out in pt 3-5 of the
. The regime allows consumers who suffer loss or damage because of
defects in a manufacturer’s goods to recover the cost of
that loss or
damage from the manufacturer.
Far from being a binary question, a safety defect is again defined in s 9(1) of
by reference to consumer expectations: ‘goods have a safety
defect if their safety is not such as persons generally are entitled
expect’. Courts have affirmed that the measure is based on the experience
of the affected person or
and stated that it ‘would be wrong to measure the reasonable expectations
of the hypothetical reasonable consumer against the
specialist technical
knowledge of [the
manufacturer]’.
standard is based on the expectations of the consumer, having regard to the
matters set out in
s 9(2) and subject to a series of defences in s 142 of the
As already suggested, when it comes to assessing whether a therapeutic good
has a safety defect, it is well established that sectoral
requirements of safety and efficacy, such as under the TGA regulatory regime,
act as a floor and not a ceiling of the
level of safety that consumers can
reasonably expect.
This regime
may capture therapeutic products approved by the TGA but which have not met
consumer expectations of safety under the
. Where products prove not
to meet consumer expectations of safety, the redress provisions in pt 3-5
provide compensation and, in
principle, a mechanism that corrects and improves
the general safety of products in the market by requiring manufacturers to
internalise
the risks of harm.
As will be discussed in Part V, an example is certain types of implantable
transvaginal mesh medical devices approved under the TGA
regulatory regime but
subsequently found by the Full Court of the Federal Court to be below the
standards of safety and quality set
The courts’ assessment of what is reasonable for consumers to expect
regarding the safety of goods and services will inevitably
be shaped by social,
legal and regulatory norms, as well as the operation of other cognate regulatory
regimes. The role of these
norms may reasonably vary over time and in response
to changed circumstances, as may the impact of other regimes which themselves
will be responding to different regulatory objectives and pressures. A factor
that has not been squarely identified to date and that,
we suggest, plays an
important role, is the influence of the decisions made by the TGA; specifically,
those decisions that scrutinise
whether, and in what way, pharmaceutical and
other therapeutic products are approved to be included on the ARTG and
subsequently
supplied to the Australian public in the first place. A question
then arises as to how, if the approach under the TGA regime changes
is this accommodated under the more general
regime? In some instances, we may
consider it legitimate and indeed necessary for courts and regulators applying
to place new emphasis and meaning on its regulatory standards in
response to the changing environment. In other instances, those
applying and
enforcing the
may need to adapt to new processes or accommodate
findings from other agencies. But how do they do that in a manner that is clear
and coherent? This is explored in greater detail in relation to the specific
examples of hand sanitisers in Part III, and COVID-19
vaccines in Part IV.
Conversely, to the extent that the general
regime provides oversight
and scrutiny of products released under the specific TGA regime, how does the
TGA design an effective feedback
mechanism to ensure that legitimate
expectations identified by the general high standards of the
are embraced by the more specific ‘floor’ provided by the TGA? This
is also a question that is raised by the exploration
of the transvaginal mesh
implants case in Part V.
In this article, we do not provide definitive answers to these questions,
which we do not yet have. Rather, we aim to raise the significance
alive to the questions and demands of both consistency and coherence between the
and TGA regulatory regime, in addition to the need for some degree of
systematic coordination between the regulatory agencies responsible
regimes. We examine three case studies that highlight the urgency of this
inquiry and the need for further efforts to ensure
that the floor and
ceiling of consumer protection in regard to therapeutic products are
appropriately aligned.
III INCONSISTENCY BETWEEN
THE POSITIONS TAKEN BY THE REGULATORY REGIMES: HAND SANITISERS
The case of ‘hand sanitiser’ in the COVID-19 crisis illustrates
the importance of acknowledging the dynamic relationship
between the general
) and specific (TGA) regulatory regimes in times of public health
Hand sanitiser used to
be a product conventionally associated with personal hygiene but was by no means
essential. With the outbreak
of the COVID-19 pandemic in 2020, hand hygiene
became one of the prime methods of prevention and
containment.
In this context,
the concept of a ‘sanitiser’ was elevated to a new level of
significance. This new significance exposed
the risks of a lack of coordination
between regulators and consequentially a potential gap in Australia’s
consumer protection
regime in relation to therapeutic products.
The initial stages of the pandemic in 2020 resulted in huge demand for
personal hygiene items, the importance of which was repeatedly
stressed by the
Australian government.
soap was endorsed as the preferable product to protect against the severe acute
respiratory syndrome coronavirus-2 (‘SARS-CoV-2
in the absence of
soap and water, hand sanitisers were
It can be inferred
that consumers assumed hand sanitiser would assist in protecting them from the
spread of the virus,
evidenced by widespread ‘panic buying’ and ‘hoarding’ in
the early days of the pandemic, resulting in
a shortage of toilet paper and hand
sanitiser across the
However, not all so-called sanitisers proved effective against
Federal and state government advice was that sanitiser with a high percentage of
alcohol was required.
however, no regulatory verification of the veracity of claims about the amount
of alcohol found in hand sanitiser. Indeed,
the Australian Consumer Association
(‘CHOICE’) drew attention to instances where the advertised level of
alcohol had
not been met.
this focus on sanitisers has faded with the introduction of vaccines, at the
height of the pandemic it was an issue of considerable
importance to
It is therefore worth
addressing the contribution that the regulatory regimes themselves may play in
confusing, if not undermining,
consumer expectations in the context of public
health events such as the COVID-19 pandemic.
Critically, we consider that minimal coordination between the
the TGA regulatory regime contributed to consumer difficulties by leading to a
two-tier system of content and labelling. At the
base of this confusion is a
significant, but poorly understood, distinction between ‘cosmetic’
and ‘therapeutic’
kinds of sanitiser for regulatory purposes. The
TGA describes cosmetic hand sanitisers as ‘general consumer
that are made up of ‘only low-risk ingredients’ and
which make ‘therapeutic claims ... limited to general low level
Consumer Goods (Cosmetics) Information Standard 2020
Cosmetics Information Standard
’), introduced by the
Commonwealth government in late 2020 under the
, defines a hand
sanitiser in a similar
Many hand sanitisers that are available in supermarkets fall within this
cosmetic category.
products are regulated under the
but are not subject to the approval
requirements of the TGA regulatory regime (although they must also meet certain
advertising requirements
under the TGA
Cosmetic hand
sanitisers must list their ingredients including, under the
Information Standard
, the percentage amount of alcohol they
Further, cosmetic
hand sanitisers containing imported chemicals may be regulated under the
alternative National Industrial Chemicals
Notification and Assessment
In contrast, therapeutic hand sanitisers are those that claim to kill viruses
or other organisms and that can be used in relation
to health conditions and
in medical contexts.
Therapeutic hand sanitisers must therefore meet the
TGA regulatory regime’s approval and other requirements (as well as the
ordinary, general standards of the
As part of the
TGA regulatory
requirements, therapeutic goods must meet specific standards of quality,
and effectiveness.
In response to the initial, unprecedented demand for hand sanitisers in March
2020, the then federal Health Minister announced that
would relax its requirements in relation to certain therapeutic hand
sanitisers.
The amendments meant that hand sanitisers produced according to
‘recipes’ approved by the World Health Organisation
would not require TGA
The WHO approved recipes enabled sanitisers to be manufactured with food grade
alcohol, rather than medical grade
The changes made it easier for local businesses to manufacture hand sanitiser,
both for use in healthcare settings and by general
Nevertheless,
manufacturers of therapeutic hand sanitisers still had to maintain certain
safety standards by ensuring that the products
were produced according to the
correct formulation, under sanitary conditions and following safety labelling
requirements.
By contrast, provided a cosmetic hand sanitiser did not make misleading
claims about its medicinal or therapeutic effectiveness, it
was not (and still
is not) required to contain the requisite percentage of alcohol to
be effective against COVID-19, despite being prominently labelled as a
Particularly
during the pandemic, it was reasonable to expect that consumers would look to
branding statements about the legitimate
use that might be made of a sanitiser,
with a risk of arriving at the mistaken conclusion that all products labelled as
sanitisers’ would be effective against
COVID-19. Significantly, a common claim on cosmetic hand sanitisers is that
they are effective against 99.9% of germs (or, in some
government advice was that a high alcohol concentration was required for
effectiveness against COVID-19, but this was
not a regulatory requirement for
the supply of cosmetic hand sanitisers during the critical pre-vaccine period,
In this context, it is arguable that to claim effectiveness against
‘germs’ when the product was not effective against
a virus such as
COVID-19 was misleading.
term ‘germ’ does not have a fixed scientific meaning. It may
commonly be understood as ‘a bacterium or other
microorganism,
esp[ecially] when considered to be a cause of
any supposed distinction between germs and viruses might well be dismissed as
spurious. Some sanitisers state that they
are effective against
‘bacteria’,
is similarly problematic. The headline message is that the product
‘sanitises’, which should be given the meaning
consumers would
reasonably expect in the environment they are immersed in. So, it is not
far-fetched to suggest that, in the COVID-19
era, consumers would reasonably
expect that a ‘sanitiser’ would be a product that combats certain
viruses, and that,
in doing so, it meets certain scientific standards.
Similarly, a cosmetic hand sanitiser product is arguably not of acceptable
quality under the
consumer guarantee
at least at the time
of the heightened concerns raised by the COVID-19 pandemic. As discussed
earlier, the criteria for assessing
acceptable quality include whether the
product is fit for the purposes for which such products are used, as judged by
the expectations
of a reasonable
This baseline
measure must, to some degree, be shaped by consumers’ legitimate
expectation of a well-regulated consumer market,
whereby traders’ conduct
and the products sold are held to high standards of probity. During the
pandemic, consumer expectations
justifiably rose to embrace effectiveness
against the COVID-19 virus.
From the perspective of consumers’ reasonable expectations a hand
sanitiser should be a product that sanitises effectively.
In this environment,
claims about ‘sanitising’ and effectiveness against bacteria or
germs, for a product ineffective
against COVID-19, would appear misleading as
well as fail to meet the standards required by the
consumer guarantee
Both the TGA and the ACCC imposed fines on manufacturers of sanitiser that
purported to reach the therapeutic or WHO standard but
Yet the trend of
manufacturers of cosmetic sanitisers promoting effectiveness against bacteria
was neither sanctioned nor clarified
in a way that would have been salient for
consumers by either the TGA or the
Claims of effectiveness
against germs and even bacteria can be considered problematic from a consumer
protection perspective. However,
the TGA considered these statements to be
outside its regulatory
The regulators could, and arguably should, have promoted a more dynamic
approach to consumer protection.
Consumers could have been helped, for example, to appreciate the important
distinction between ‘cosmetic’ and ‘therapeutic’
sanitisers by requiring retailers to physically separate and label therapeutic
from cosmetic products at the point of
This simple step may
have alerted consumers to the distinction and empowered them to make further
enquiries. Another intervention
could have been to impose more demanding
standards for labelling, to require the products to specify against what types
(if any) the product sanitises. A more definitive step could have
even been to ban cosmetic products from being labelled as ‘hand
sanitisers’ where they did not meet WHO standards or other government
recommended levels of alcohol — on the basis that
‘sanitiser’ developed a new significance in this time of COVID-19
concern — so that only therapeutic hand sanitiser
products were permitted
to be called ‘hand sanitisers’.
The more general lesson from this experience is the way in which the salience
of the terminology used to promote consumer products
changes over time, in this
case the significance of ‘sanitise’. While at one time it might be
acceptable that commonly
sold ‘sanitisers’ fail to meet therapeutic
standards for sanitising, post-pandemic consumers might reasonably expect
hand sanitisers to meet scientific standards equivalent to those
applied under the TGA regulatory regime in relation to ‘therapeutic’
hand sanitisers. In other words, there is an argument that the regulatory
‘floor’ should rise in step with consumer expectations.
question leads back to the overarching point: how do complementary regulatory
regimes respond to changed circumstances
in a way that is consistent and coherent in order to promote optimal
consumer outcomes?
IV CHANGING APPROACHES TO
APPROVALS AND RESETTING THE STANDARD FOR SAFETY DEFECTS: COVID-19 VACCINES
The case of COVID-19 vaccines provides another timely example of how there
can be discord between the
and TGA regulatory regimes, made worse by
there being no mechanism for adjusting the application of the general
protections in the
in response to changes in regulatory stance under
the more specific TGA regime. These frictions risk, in turn, undermining the
assessment of a ‘safety defect’ under the
and the reasonable consumer expectations that inform this concept. Indeed, the
Australian approval process and roll out of COVID-19
vaccines uncovered the
existence of a measure of conflict between, first, factual evidence and
value-based judgements and, second,
between diverging value judgements
predicated upon the same factual evidence by different competent regulatory
authorities. This
creates an intricate entanglement of inconsistent evaluative
positions that, in the face of potential claims for injuries, would
rationalised into a coherent synthesis by adjudicating courts of what degree of
safety, in the circumstances, consumers
are generally ‘entitled to
Here we examine the different approval processes that are in place for
vaccines under ‘normal’ circumstances as opposed
to public health
crises, and what this entails for the construction of reasonable consumer
expectations. We subsequently contrast
how the risk assessments underpinning
approval for use and roll out recommendations can conflict, thereby further
muddying the normative
waters of safety expectations.
What Is a Vaccine
and How Is It Made Available to the Public?
Technically, a ‘vaccine’ is a pharmaceutical product that
protects against
a specific disease by stimulating the immune
Common vaccines
include childhood vaccines against measles, mumps and rubella, or whooping
cough, as well as the seasonal vaccine
The key process leading to the deployment of a new vaccine is a rigorous
pre-market assessment performed by the TGA with the assistance
of the Advisory
Committee on Vaccines
The assessment is based on international guidelines provided by the European
Medicines Agency
which in turn refer to the standards and procedures negotiated
internationally at the International Council on Harmonisation of Technical
Requirements for Pharmaceuticals for Human Use
safety and efficacy of a new vaccine have been successfully assessed, it is
included in the ARTG and becomes
marketable.
Under ‘normal’ circumstances, the pre-market assessment of a new
vaccine can take up to 15
The International
Federation of Pharmaceutical Manufacturers and Associations
(‘IFPMA’) explains that developing a new
vaccine is more onerous
compared to most other medicines, because the final product is targeted to a
very wide and healthy population,
across all age
This demands
particularly ‘large safety and efficacy datasets’, making clinical
development a lengthy and burdensome
Special provisions are in place in most countries, including Australia, for
the speedy approval of new annual influenza
However, this is a
very different process to that leading to a ‘new’ vaccine because
new strains of influenza viruses does not require clinical trials. As
by the TGA:
We take this approach because there have been many years of safe and effective
use of seasonal flu vaccines in several million people.
This registration
process only applies for seasonal flu vaccines where the manufacturing process
the same as a previously registered vaccine and the only change is to the
Ultimately,
registration in the ARTG is the consequence of a
product is safe and effective, which is based on data; the quantity and
depth of which is context-dependent. So, the seasonal flu vaccines receive a
lighter ‘regulatory touch’ than newly developed
Vaccines are regularly
cited as some of the safest and most effective pharmaceutical products
governments around the world (including the Australian Commonwealth government
and most subnational governments) have adopted
various forms of mandatory
childhood immunisation
It stands to reason
that the presence and operation of a lengthy and thorough regulatory review
process would form an integral part
of the normative evaluation of what
consumers are generally entitled to expect.
The Special Nature
of Public Health Crises and Their Impact on the Evaluative Basis for Consumer
Expectations
The challenges posed by the outbreak of a pandemic or epidemic disease
(‘PED’) put the risk assessment process for therapeutic
countermeasures under enormous pressure. Other challenges include the need to
quick, large-scale manufacturing and access to product
In the first instance, public health crises prompt regulators to fast track
product review and approval. The search for a vaccine
against the SARS-CoV-2
virus saw an unprecedented race, with first marketing approvals coming only
weeks after the first anniversary
of the Wuhan
This is astonishing when one looks at recent PED outbreaks that have prompted
swift vaccine development. The Ebola outbreak that has
affected West Africa
saw the first
vaccine receive conditional approval by the EMA at the end of 2019, a full five
years after the start of the
that the virus had been known for
Looking further
back, in the course of the A-H1N1 ‘swine flu’ pandemic of 2009, a
vaccine was conditionally approved
This was largely
because influenza vaccines are based on decades of research and development.
Further, vaccine developers can rely
on well-established influenza vaccine
technology and new strains are relatively easy to integrate into existing
How does a process that typically takes up to 15 years get reduced so
substantially? Many in the scientific community have underlined
how the time lag
characterising vaccine development under normal circumstances tends to be due to
a combination of bureaucratic delays,
and difficulties in gathering volunteers for
In contrast, every
regulatory authority involved in the global effort to secure safe and effective
COVID-19 vaccines streamlined
administrative processes, and had virtually
limitless funding and no shortage of trial
volunteers.
Nevertheless, the unprecedented speed at which these vaccines are being
developed mandates a measure of caution. An unavoidable quantum
of uncertainty
accompanies such speedy development of products that, in many cases, are based
on the vaccines’ new mRNA technological
Moreover, the
urgency and significant societal pressure on developers increase the risk of
human mistakes, as exemplified by the dosing
errors in the trials of the
Oxford/AstraZeneca vaccine (‘AstraZeneca’)
In addition to streamlining bureaucracy, most regulatory regimes, including
that of the Australian TGA, include special provisions
for provisional approval
of medicines for serious or life-threatening
In Australia, as
outlined earlier, this type of approval allows the provisional market
authorisation of a product that has undergone
more limited clinical review, on
the condition that safety and efficacy data will be collected on a rolling basis
as the product
is deployed, with a final review at the end of the provisional
This is the pathway the TGA has adopted for COVID-19
Crucially, despite a measure of trade-offs warranted by the seriousness and
imminence of public health threats caused by a PED like
COVID-19, vaccines
receiving provisional approval undergo rigorous testing and must satisfy the TGA
that they offer benefits far
outweighing possible
Nevertheless, rolling
out vaccines subject to provisional approval carries the risk of rare, serious
adverse events that remain undetected
in trial phases and manifest themselves
only in the general population. For example, the fast rollout of the A-H1N1
vaccine revealed
several unexpected side effects, which proved particularly
problematic in countries that had deployed aggressive immunisation campaigns,
such as France.
the link between the AstraZeneca COVID-19 vaccine and the rare occurrence of a
blood-clotting disorder (thrombosis with
thrombocytopenia syndrome
(‘TTS’)) emerged only a few months after the vaccine had been
heavily rolled out in
Separating the
Factual from the Normative
What transpires from the analysis above is that a positive regulatory outcome
for new vaccines (ie some form of registration on the
ARTG on the basis of
safety and efficacy assessments) can occur as a result of different processes
involving different levels and
amounts of evidence. However, the concluding
normative judgement, that a product is sufficiently ‘safe and
be deployed,
similar in nature. This is despite it being based on different factual or
evidentiary bases, depending on whether approval
occurred following normal or
provisional procedures. Public health crises are bound to call for courses of
action that accept higher
trade-offs between safety and speediness. This much is
accepted in regulatory frameworks, such as the TGA, and at general common
In contrast, this is not fully reflected in processes for assessing relative
safety under the
product safety regime and its concept of
‘safety defect’.
This constitutes a first layer of tension between the two regulatory regimes. It
is unclear whether the level of safety that ‘persons
generally are
entitled to expect’ under the
varies alongside
the TGA’s different evidentiary basis for granting provisional, as opposed
to normal, approval for the inclusion
of therapeutic goods, such as COVID-19
vaccines, on the ARTG.
A second layer of regulatory tension derives from divergent interpretations
given to the same evidential basis by different regulatory
authorities in
relation to vaccines. The obvious example here is the approval and supply of the
AstraZeneca COVID-19 vaccine. It
was approved under the TGA regulatory regime on
16 February 2021 for individuals aged 18 years and
It was initially
rolled out in the general population following the priority order established
under the Australian government’s
‘COVID-19 Vaccine and Treatment
2021, however, in response to concerns about
the Australian Technical Advisory Group on Immunisation (‘ATAGI’)
issued a recommendation that the alternative Pfizer
vaccine was to be
‘preferred over AstraZeneca COVID-19 vaccine in adults aged under 50
years’ (later pushed to under
While it is certainly
within the remit of ATAGI to ‘provide technical advice to the Minister for
Health on the medical administration
of vaccines available in
Australia’,
the primary
regulatory responsibility to establish the safety and efficacy of vaccines
remains with the TGA. The TGA did not modify
its approval of the AstraZeneca
COVID-19 vaccine for individuals aged 18 years and
In addition to these divergent interpretations of safety and efficacy data,
the general public has been exposed to further interpretive
inconsistencies.
These include the Chief Health Officer of Queensland stating: ‘I
don’t want an
18-year-old in Queensland dying from a clotting illness who, if they got
COVID, probably wouldn’t
This was in response to pressures by the federal government to ramp up the use
of the AstraZeneca vaccine to
revitalise a lingering
The skirmish was
swiftly followed by the then Commonwealth Minister for Health announcing the
establishment of a special COVID-19
indemnity scheme for significant adverse
reactions to COVID-19 vaccines.
Finally, as the COVID-19 Delta variant outbreak grew worse in New South
Wales, ATAGI revised their advice to underline the overall
benefits of the
AstraZeneca vaccine in the context of a large
All of this
occurred in the absence of variations to the terms of approval of the
AstraZeneca vaccine by the
In the Australian context, where the ‘consumer expectation test’
benchmark for product
assessing the
AstraZeneca vaccine represents a truly wicked task. Indeed, should the matter
come to litigation, courts would have
to navigate a cross-current of evaluative
tensions to establish what can legitimately constitute a reasonable expectation
by consumers
in the context of the pandemic. In part, this problem is inherent
to therapeutic goods, which has prompted commentators to argue
alternative ‘risk-utility’ (or risk-benefit) paradigm may be more
appropriate and would align the
with the TGA regulatory
However, this problem
is also the result of the dual tension discussed in this Part. First, the
application of different procedures
and evidentiary bases under the TGA
regulatory regime may form the basis for reasonable consumer expectations and,
by implication,
the identification of a safety defect under the broader consumer
protection regime. Second, the existence of a complex web of considerations,
particularly during a public health crisis, may lead to different regulators and
other authorities (eg ATAGI) promoting different
and not necessarily consistent
recommendations. While the focus of this article is not the outcomes associated
with these recommendations,
it is valuable to highlight, as we have above, that
a range of tests and standards, and their underpinning operative criteria, carry
the potential to produce conflicting regulatory outcomes.
V INADEQUATE SCRUTINY OF
APPROVAL STANDARDS: PELVIC MESH
Recent case law from the Federal Court of Australia involving contraventions
in relation to implantable medical devices has raised
significant questions about how such products came to be approved by the TGA
— and consequently about that regulatory regime’s safety and
quality-assurance
As outlined earlier, registration of a therapeutic good (such as a medical
device) in the ARTG is, generally speaking, the culmination
of a complex process
of product review and approval for which the TGA adopts a risk-based approach.
This allows for reduced scrutiny
of products that are deemed low risk, and
increased precautionary steps for products that present a higher, harmful
therapeutic goods in the ARTG thus serves the twofold purpose of maintaining a
high degree of control over the marketability
of products that fall within the
scope of the
Therapeutic Goods Act
and ensuring that the products that
are included conform with set standards of safety, quality and efficacy. While
the goal is obviously
not to provide an unachievable no-risk guarantee, the TGA
regulates to ensure that ‘therapeutic goods in the marketplace ...
of high quality and of a standard at least equal to that of comparable
countries’.
Unfortunately, dependence by the TGA regulatory regime on schemes in
‘comparable
indefensible registration of certain implantable medical devices by the TGA in
the ARTG. This is particularly problematic
for a country like Australia where
most implants are imported and not locally
There are two aspects related to this issue that warrant further
examination.
Blind Reliance on
International Regulatory Decisions
The first aspect can be described as one of blind reliance on
the risk assessments adopted by foreign regulatory frameworks, without
supplementing these with adequate independent reviews under
the TGA’s own
regulatory arrangements.
recent, painful, example of this problem is the class action brought by Kathryn
Gill, Diane Dawson and Ann Sanders against subsidiaries
of the Johnson &
Johnson group for damages caused by two types of transvaginal mesh implants
manufactured and supplied by the
The case is
particularly distressing because it involves relatively healthy women who
decided to undergo procedures to resolve urogynaecological
and subsequently
found themselves battling unexpectedly widespread and debilitating
The case was decided at first instance by Katzmann J in the Federal Court of
Australia in November 2019
and the substantive findings were upheld
by the Full Court of the Federal Court in March
The High Court of
Australia subsequently refused Johnson & Johnson’s application for
special leave to appeal.
the trial started in 2017, 700 women had registered as members of the
The trial judge
estimated, however, that the membership of the class was much larger in light of
the fact that over 90,000 of the
incriminated devices were supplied in
In early September
2022, a settlement was agreed between the parties for $300 million, which the
applicants’ lawyers assert
is ‘the largest settlement in a product
liability class action in Australian
settlement was subsequently approved by the Federal
The findings in
Gill v Ethicon Sàrl [No 5]
(and its appellate
affirmation)
particularly damning for the subsidiaries of the Johnson & Johnson group.
Justice Katzmann found the respondents liable
on several bases, spanning a
number of consumer protection provisions under the
Trade Practices Act
(Cth) (now the
), including supplying goods with a safety
defect, supplying goods not of merchantable (now acceptable) quality and
engaging in misleading
The respondents were
further found liable under the law of
negligence.
However, aside
from the misconduct of the respondents, more relevant for the purposes of this
article is the severe indictment of
the TGA regulatory regime, which led to the
market authorisation of the defective implantable devices. The devices and their
were found by the Federal Court to fall well below the normative
yardstick represented by the level of safety a consumer can reasonably
as reflected in the
This example therefore illustrates how the conflict between the respective
regulatory regimes can play out with devastating consequences
those involved.
There are two ways in which a medical device can be registered in the ARTG.
To demonstrate that the product meets the essential principles
set out in sch 1
Therapeutic Goods (Medical Devices) Regulations 2002
manufacturers must
undertake a conformity assessment leading to a certification that can be issued
either by the TGA itself (typically
for domestic products) or by other
recognised authorities, such as a ‘European notified body’
(typically for imported
bodies’ are entities notified to the European Commission (hence the name)
by European Union member states,
and this designation empowers them, among other
things, to issue quality and conformity assessment certifications, including the
CE mark (a universally-accepted mark of quality
assurance).
As noted by
Katzmann J, and restated by the Full Federal Court, the pelvic mesh implants
involved in the class action (except for
one) were added to the ARTG without
independent TGA scrutiny on the basis that they all carried the CE
This was per se
problematic given the controversial nature of notified bodies and their
contested status even in the European
Indeed, notified bodies are often private entities offering quality assurance
certifications as professional
In addition to
this, processes of research and development of new devices are mostly
self-regulated by the industry.
This is a significant point of difference from the development of
pharmaceutical products, which is highly regulated from drug discovery
pre-clinical testing, clinical trials and pre-market
The net result is
that, in Australia, it is entirely possible to have an implantable medical
device, classified as ‘medium
developed in accordance
with industry standards alone, and registered in the ARTG after a conformity
assessment performed by a private
entity as a professional service —
rather than by an independent regulator. As Katzmann J stated, ‘[a]ll that
proves is that the manufacturer
that a device meets
those requirements’
that, based on the evidence provided to the Court,
the TGA regulatory regime in relation to medical devices was therefore
self-regulating’.
The controversial role of notified bodies has prompted the European Union to
reform its regulatory framework for medical devices and
put these entities under
much greater scrutiny.
is certainly a positive development for countries like Australia that heavily
rely on the European supply of
The harrowing
experience of Kathryn Gill, Diane Dawson and Ann Sanders remains, however, a
stark cautionary tale against exclusive
reliance on outsourced assessments.
Distinctions (or
Their Absence)
Reliance on foreign approvals raises a second type of problem for the
practice of ARTG registration and its significance for consumer
expectations.
Foreign regulatory frameworks, such as the European model discussed above, or
the US’s regulations administered
by the Food and Drug Administration
(‘FDA’), may articulate distinctions in the levels of pre-market
approval that are
not catered for by the
Therapeutic Goods Act
2018, the International Consortium of Investigative Journalists
(‘ICIJ’) released the results of a global investigation
regulatory regimes for implantable medical devices in 36 countries titled,
Case studies involving Australian injured parties revealed that the TGA had
registered in the ARTG several devices that had not received
final approval in
their countries of
Provisional approval is not equivalent to general pre-market approval and is
only meant to allow limited distribution of the relevant
Provisional approval of medical devices is generally also not permitted under
the Australian TGA regulatory regime. The inclusion
of such devices in the ARTG
has led to the distribution of implants or other devices essentially unfit for
purpose, on the basis
of what appears to be an inadequate regulatory
appreciation of the level of safety and efficacy guaranteed by foreign risk
assessments.
Lessons Learned
— and Yet To Be Learned
of the TGA in response to the transvaginal mesh
controversy was extensive. It cancelled the approval of 43 vaginal mesh devices
prohibited the use of
Additional conditions and requirements were imposed on mesh devices that
remained on the ARTG and their classification was upgraded
to reflect the higher
degree of risk posed by the devices, and therefore the regulatory oversight
The political
fallout from the regulatory failings was also evident. A Senate inquiry was
established to investigate transvaginal
mesh implants, resulting in 13
recommendations, including in relation to the regulation of medical devices more
broadly, and other
regulators such as the Australian Commission on Safety and
Quality in Health Care.
after, the then Commonwealth Minister for Health and Aged Care apologised
‘[o]n behalf of the Australian government ...
to all of those women with
the historic agony and pain that has come from mesh implantation, which have led
to horrific
Other reforms were introduced to the TGA regulatory regime in the wake of the
transvaginal mesh scandal. They covered a comprehensive
range of implantable
devices and required manufacturers to provide ‘patient information
leaflets’ and ‘implant
The purpose of
the reforms was to improve patient consent procedures and the capacity for
implanted devices to be ‘traced’
implantation.
Despite these reforms, the general point raised in the preceding discussion
has not been acted on. Regulators and regulatory schemes
— most obviously
that of the TGA — need to maintain elevated levels of care in the
performance of processes designed
to achieve the goals of consumer and patient
safety. Specifically, if the purpose of TGA approval of a medical device is to
compliance with elevated safety and quality standards, the processes
leading to registration must be ‘fit for purpose’.
By virtue of its
relatively small size, Australia is bound to prevalently be an importer of
advanced technological devices (medical
otherwise).
As such, it is
critical that regulators remain alive to the characteristics of foreign
regulatory models, to preserve the integrity
of Australian consumer protection
regimes, which exist to govern the market for consumer goods, not to be
subordinate to its necessities.
The example of implantable devices, with
reference to the pelvic mesh class action and the Australian ‘Implant
is admittedly
egregious. Yet, it is symptomatic of broader structural weaknesses that
Australian patient and consumer safety regulations
need to confront openly and
independently. Or, in other words, it suggests a significant misalignment
between the floor and ceiling
of consumer protection in an area where
expectations of safety and quality are inherently high.
VI THE NEED FOR
REGULATORY COHERENCE AND COORDINATION
A strong consumer protection regime must be clear and coherent in relation to
therapeutic goods for Australian consumers and patients.
This is particularly
the case during public health crises such as the COVID-19 pandemic. The
preceding case studies, however, highlight
a lack of regulatory coherence in the
control of therapeutic goods and possible insufficient coordination between
regulators. This
is, at least in part, explained by the distinct and divergent
norms, outlined earlier, which inform the TGA regulatory regime, on
hand, and those of the
, on the other. The resulting operational
inconsistencies create a range of challenges for Australian consumers and
patients which
must be addressed.
In the case of hand sanitisers, the inconsistencies between the respective
regulatory regimes concerned the degree of safety and efficacy
that consumers
could expect from that product. During a pandemic, it was reasonable for
consumers to expect that a ‘sanitiser’
would achieve a protective
purpose relevant to that public health crisis. The TGA and
regimes supported, however, a distinction that arguably created, at best, public
confusion and, at worst, harmful individual
and public health outcomes. Broad
claims of sanitisers’ effectiveness against ‘germs’ or
can lead ordinary consumers into error. They are unlikely
to appreciate a distinction which, in the midst of a public health event,
likely to appear artificial. While the TGA regulatory regime adapted to
accommodate the supply and demand challenges of the public
health crisis (by
substituting TGA approvals for WHO-approved
formulations),
evolve to adequately consider the reasonable expectations of consumers. This
reflects the norms inherent in the therapeutic
goods regulatory regime discussed
earlier: that it is the scientific standards and the goods to which they apply
(and, in turn, their
manufacturers) that are at the centre of that regulatory
regime. Unlike the
, neither the patient nor the consumer appeared
central to the TGA regulatory regime’s control of this therapeutic good.
Importantly,
the ACCC did not pick up the slack by pushing back on the arguably
misleading claims of mere cosmetic sanitisers which, although
innocuous, assumed new salience during, and in the aftermath of, the
The provisional approval of COVID-19 vaccines under the TGA regulatory regime
is a further example of how that scheme adapted to the
demands of a particular
health event. What remains unclear, however, is how such an adaptation might (or
should) impact a subsequent
judicial assessment of ‘reasonable consumer
expectations’ in relation to that therapeutic good, and therefore the
or otherwise, of a safety defect under the
. In relation to
COVID-19 vaccines, the situation is further complicated by a prominent
divergence in normative assessments of who
should receive those vaccines based
on the available evidence. Such an intricate overlay of regulatory and policy
assessments reveals
additional challenges to the complex interaction between TGA
standards in fast-moving emergency scenarios.
The final case study discussed — implantable transvaginal mesh devices
— highlighted the normative ‘distance’
between the TGA
regulatory regime’s focus on the product of regulation (and their
associated assessments by third parties)
and patients’ focus on their own
expectations of safety, quality and efficacy. In contrast, it is the latter
which constitutes
the normative foundation for the broader
regime. And it is that regime which ultimately provided legal redress for the
survivors of transvaginal mesh implants.
regime proved effective
in prompting a revised approach to regulation by the TGA of the product in
question. But more general questions
of the standards applied by the TGA in
assessing the safety of medical devices more generally remain. In relation to
implantable
medical devices therefore, it appears that at a bare minimum, some
level of independent review by the TGA remains necessary for imported
therapeutic goods. This may support a degree of normative consistency with
Australian patients’ expectations of safety and
efficacy — and of
regulatory coherence between the TGA and
regulatory regimes. The
alternative is to permit a hollowing out of the TGA regulatory regime in
relation to the many therapeutic
goods imported into Australia which have
undergone conformity assessments in their countries of origin.
Collectively, these case studies indicate that the TGA regulatory regime
should be cognisant of the flexible and dynamic consumer
protection goals
underpinning the
. Similarly, the ACCC and Commonwealth government
should contemplate how the
might best engage with the scientific
norms inherent in the TGA regulatory regime and their impact on patient and
consumer expectations.
At its core, this requires regulators to engage in a
positive dialogue to bridge the inevitable gap that exists between the consumer
expectation logic underpinning the
and the risk-utility one that
informs the TGA. Patients and consumers expect that the TGA and
regulatory regimes should and will operate in a normatively coherent manner.
That is, for example, a product not captured by the
TGA should not be marketed
with claims that invoke in consumers an expectation of medical efficacy.
Conversely, that a medical device
approved under the TGA regime would not
contravene the
and likewise, that a product that contravenes the
would not be approved by the TGA.
In relation to therapeutic goods, coherence
between the applicable regulatory regimes is fundamental to the state’s
and perceived ability, to protect the health of its
Incoherence between
the relevant regulatory schemes can unwittingly sow the seeds of distrust about
the regulation of these important
products and in government, particularly at
times when trust is vital to sound public health
A government which
via one regulatory regime (ie the
) provides redress for the sale of
therapeutic goods which do not meet reasonable expectations of safety, may not
be perceived as
supporting public health if it also approves the original supply
of the same goods via another regulatory regime (ie the TGA regulatory
and fails to ensure a positive dialogue between the two. Enhanced coherence
between the TGA
regulatory regimes may also lead to greater certainty about
legal treatment of therapeutic goods and result in improvements in
regulatory compliance.
VII CONCLUSION
This article has sought to illustrate that reasonable expectations of
consumers and patients are not simply exogenous elements that
relevant laws,
regulations and governing actors refer to as set parameters of safety or
quality. They are constructs to which these
laws, regulations and governing
actors actively contribute, and in doing so, they shape the
‘edifice’ of consumer and
patient protection. The risk we have
identified is one of misalignment between the floor and ceiling of this
something that goes beyond the physiological variations
in focus and degrees of protection offered by different regimes. We developed
this argument through the exploration of three case studies, which highlighted
how circumstances that put regulatory frameworks to
the test can sharpen or
alter patient and consumer focus, and in turn exacerbate pressure back on the
regulatory frameworks to respond
promptly, appropriately and in a coordinated
way. The analysis points to the conclusion that where constructive interplays
different levels of the broad regulatory architecture that protects
patients and consumers are ignored, harm can ensue for consumer
and patient
protection and the integrity of the TGA and
regulatory schemes
respectively. While the COVID-19 pandemic has made these issues more apparent,
they are not exclusive to public
health crises, and the analysis has much
broader and ongoing ramifications for effective, just and safe regulation of
commerce and
the protection of consumers and patients.
LLB (Hons), LLM (UniPi), LLM,
PhD (EUI); Associate Professor and Deputy Head of School (Students), University
of Western Australia
Law School, The University of Western Australia.
BA, LLB (Hons) (Melb),
LLM (Cantab), PhD (Melb); Lecturer, Deakin Law School, Deakin University.
BA, LLB (Hons) (ANU),
PhD (Monash); Professor, Melbourne Law School, The University of Melbourne.
The authors are grateful
to Elise Bant, Professor of Private Law and Commercial Regulation at University
of Western Australia Law
School, The University of Western Australia, for her
significant contributions to earlier versions of this article. The authors also
thank Amy Thomasson for her outstanding research assistance. The usual
The terms ‘therapeutic
products’ and ‘therapeutic goods’ are used interchangeably in
this article. The definition
of a ‘therapeutic good’ includes goods
that are, or are represented to be, for use in ‘preventing, diagnosing,
curing or alleviating a disease, ailment, defect or injury’; or
‘influencing, inhibiting or modifying a physiological
process’; or
‘testing the susceptibility of persons to a disease or ailment’; or
‘the replacement or modification
of parts of the anatomy in
Therapeutic Goods Act 1989
(definitions of
‘therapeutic goods’ para (a)(i) and ‘therapeutic use’
paras (a)–(d), (f)) (‘
Therapeutic Goods Act
‘consumer’ and ‘patient’ will be used in this article
according to the appropriate context —
for example, ‘consumer’
in relation to the
Competition and Consumer Act 2010
(Cth) sch 2
’) and ‘patient’ in relation to the
Therapeutic Goods Act
There is of course extensive debate in the relevant literature about the use of
the terms ‘patient’ and/or ‘consumer’:
see, eg, Daniel
SJ Costa et al, ‘Patient, Client, Consumer, Survivor or Other
Alternatives? A Scoping Review of Preferred Terms
for Labelling Individuals Who
Access Healthcare across Settings’ (2019) 9(3)
‘TGA Regulatory
Framework’,
Therapeutic Goods Administration, Department of Health and
Aged Care (Cth)
(Web Page, 1 September 2020)
<https://www.tga.gov.au/tga-regulatory-framework>, archived at
<https://perma.cc/43NL-W7S7>.
Competition and Consumer
Competition and Consumer Act
Therapeutic Goods Act
) s 4(1)(a); ‘TGA Regulatory
Framework’ (n
) ss 18 (misleading or deceptive
conduct), 29 (false or misleading representations about goods or services), 33
(misleading conduct
as to the nature etc of goods).
Ibid pt 3-2 div 1 sub-div A
(guarantees relating to the supply of goods).
Ibid pt 3-5 (liability of
manufacturers for goods with safety defects).
Ibid pt 5-1.
Ibid pt 5-2.
See, eg, Sheila Jasanoff
and Stephen Hilgartner, ‘A Stress Test for Politics: A Comparative
Perspective on Policy Responses
to COVID-19’ in Joelle Grogan and Alice
Donald (eds),
Routledge Handbook of Law and the COVID-19 Pandemic
(Routledge, 2022) 289, 289–91,
See Dorothy Porter,
‘Introduction’ in Dorothy Porter (ed),
The History of Public
Health and the Modern State
(Clio Medica, 1994) 1, 1, citing George Rosen,
A History of Public Health
(John Hopkins University Press, 1958) 17;
Dorothy Porter,
Health Citizenship: Essays in Social Medicine and Biomedical
(University of California Medical Humanities Press, 2011)
204–5, 214–15.
‘Product Regulation
According to Risk’,
Therapeutic Goods Administration, Department of
Health and Aged Care (Cth)
<https://www.tga.gov.au/product-regulation-according-risk>, archived at
<https://perma.cc/2HZ3-R8HD>.
See, eg, Jasanoff and
Hilgartner (n
Gill v Ethicon
[2019] FCA 1905
[1]–[15] (Katzmann J) (‘
Therapeutic Goods Administration, Department of
Health and Aged Care (Cth),
‘TGA Response to Federal Court Decision on Urogynaecological Mesh Class
(Media Release, 26 November 2019)
<https://www.tga.gov.au/news/media-releases/tga-response-federal-court-decision-urogynaecological-mesh-class-action>,
archived at <https://​perma.cc/G8EX-88B7>.
) [3608], [3624]–[3884] (Katzmann
[2010] FCA 180
(2010) 184 FCR 1
305–6 [792]–[795] (Jessup J), affd
[2011] FCAFC 128
(2011) 196 FCR 145
[161]–[163] (Keane CJ, Bennett and Gordon JJ), cited in Richard Goldberg,
Medicinal Product Liability and Regulation
(Hart Publishing, 2013)
Therapeutic Goods
) s 4(1)(a).
Penny Gleeson, ‘Dope,
Drugs and Devices: The Political Legitimacy of Therapeutic Goods Regulation in
Australia’ (PhD Thesis,
The University of Melbourne, August 2020) 37.
Subject to a carve out for
financial services:
Competition and Consumer Act
See above n
See above n
See above n
and accompanying text.
Therapeutic Goods
) ss 4(1)(a)–(b).
a Therapeutic Good’,
Therapeutic Goods Administration, Department of
Health and Aged Care (Cth)
<https://www.tga.gov.au/how-we-regulate/supply-therapeutic-good-0>,
archived at <
https://perma.cc/Z5HP-4XH9
>. See also
ibid ss 4(1)(a), (1A), 25(1)(c), 41B–41BA.
‘Supply a Therapeutic
Therapeutic Goods
Ibid s 19B.
‘How We Regulate
Medicines’,
Therapeutic Goods Administration, Department of Health and
Aged Care (Cth)
(Web Page, 20 June 2019)
<https://www.tga.gov.au/resources/resource/​guidance/how-we-regulate-medicines>,
archived at
<https://perma.cc/LUA4-J5F5>. See ibid
Therapeutic Goods Regulations 1990
Therapeutic Goods Regulations
‘Prescription
Medicines Overview’,
Therapeutic Goods Administration, Department of
Health and Aged Care (Cth)
(Web Page, 18 November 2019)
https://www.tga.gov.au/resources/​resource/guidance/prescription-medicines-overview>,
archived at <https://perma.cc/8WXK-K77L>.
Therapeutic Goods
) s 9A(3)(c).
‘Medical Devices
Therapeutic Goods Administration, Department of Health and
Aged Care (Cth)
(Web Page, 13 April 2022)
<https://www.tga.gov.au/products/medical-devices/medical-devices-overview>,
archived at <https://perma.cc/3UCY-PDR9>;
Therapeutic Goods (Medical Devices) Regulations 2002
Therapeutic Goods (Medical Devices) Regulations
‘COVID-19 Vaccine:
Information for Consumers and Health Professionals’,
Therapeutic Goods
Administration, Department of Health and Aged Care (Cth)
(Web Page, 28
September 2021) <
https://www.tga.gov.au/products/covid-19/covid-19-vaccines/covid-19-vaccine-informati​on-consumers-and-health-professionals
archived at <https://perma.cc/TM6F-EL2P>. See also
Therapeutic Goods
) pt 3-2 div 1A.
Therapeutic Goods
) ss 25(1)(d), (3).
Ibid s 25(1)(d)(i).
Ibid s 25(1)(d)(ii).
Ibid s 25(1)(d)(iii).
‘COVID-19 Vaccines
Regulatory Status’,
Therapeutic Goods Administration, Department of
Health and Aged Care (Cth)
(Web Page, 14 November 2023)
<https://www.tga.gov.au/prod​ucts/covid-19/covid-19-vaccines/covid-19-vaccine-provisional-registrations>,
archived at <https://perma.cc/J9D4-XQM3>.
‘Reporting Adverse
Therapeutic Goods Administration, Department of Health and
Aged Care (Cth)
(Web Page, 19 August 2021)
<https://www.tga.gov.au/resources/resource/guid​ance/reporting-adverse-events>,
archived at
<https://perma.cc/7ZBK-QAC7>; ‘Prescription Medicines
Overview’ (n
Vaccines Overview’,
Therapeutic
Goods Administration, Department of Health and Aged Care (Cth)
(Web Page, 14
November 2023) <https://www.tga.gov.au/vaccines-overview>, archived at
<https://perma.cc/P3DM-5MPP>;
Therapeutic Goods Act
) ss 29A–29C, 41FN(3)(d),
Therapeutic Goods (Medical Devices) Regulations
) regs 5.7, 10.4–10.4AA.
‘Can I Advertise This
Therapeutic Good to the Public?’,
Therapeutic Goods
Administration, Department of Health and Aged Care (Cth)
https://www.tga.gov.au/resources/can-i-advertise-therapeutic-good-public
archived at <https://perma.cc/WY2P-3M8K>. See also
Therapeutic Goods
Therapeutic
Goods (Therapeutic Goods Advertising Code) Instrument 2021
Therapeutic Goods Advertising Code
Therapeutic Goods Act
) ss 21B(1), (3),
Therapeutic Goods
Advertising Code
Ibid s 7. A significant
breach of the
Therapeutic Goods Advertising Code
) may result in the cancellation of the
registration or listing of a therapeutic good:
Therapeutic Goods Act
s 30(1)(fb).
See, eg, ‘Overview of
Supplying Therapeutic Goods in Australia’,
Therapeutic Goods
Administration, Department of Health and Aged Care (Cth)
(Web Page, 28
August 2020)
<https://www.tga.gov.au/overview-supplying-therapeutic-goods-australia>,
archived at <https://perma.cc/YB3Z-V3KH>.
Therapeutic Goods
Therapeutic Goods
) ss 41BA(a), 41BH;
Therapeutic Goods (Medical Devices
Regulations
) reg 2.1. The essential principles are
contained in sch 1 of the
Therapeutic Goods (Medical Devices) Regulations
Therapeutic Goods
(Medical Devices) Regulations
) sch 1 cl 6; Therapeutic Goods
Administration, Department of Health and Aged Care (Cth),
Clinical Evidence
Guidelines for Medical Devices
(Guidelines, June 2022) 13
<https://www.tga.gov.au/sites/defa​ult/files/clinical-evidence-guidelines-medical-devices.pdf>,
archived at <https://perma.c​c/97NS-Q2ZE>.
‘COVID-19 Vaccine:
Information for Consumers and Health Professionals’ (n
See, eg, John Johnston and
Khadija Rantell, ‘Clinical Efficacy and Safety: The Concept of
Benefit-Risk’ in Peter Feldschreiber
The Law and Regulation of
Medicines and Medical Devices
(Oxford University Press, 2
2021) 27, 50–2; ‘Enhancing Benefit-Risk Assessment in Regulatory
Decision-Making’,
US Food and Drug Administration
(Web Page, 15 July 2022)
<https://www.fda.gov/industry/prescription-drug-user-fee-amendments/enhancing-benefit-risk-assessment-regulatory-decision-making>,
archived at <https://perma.cc/PY6q-dr59>.
Mikael Stenmark,
Scientism: Science, Ethics and Religion
(Routledge, 2018) 4.
) 172–3, 184–5.
See, eg, David J Carter,
James Brown and Carla Saunders, ‘The Patient’s Voice: Australian
Health Care Quality and Safety
Regulation from the Perspective of the
(2018) 25(2)
Journal of Law and Medicine
For example, the
Therapeutic Goods Advertising Code
) requires that an advertisement about
therapeutic goods must not ‘cause, or be likely to cause, undue alarm,
fear or distress’:
at s 9(2)(a). See also at s 29.
Productivity Commission
Review of Australia’s Consumer Policy Framework
Report No 45, 30 April 2008) vol 1, 63
<https://www.pc.gov.au/inquiries/completed/​consumer-policy/report/consumer1.pdf>,
archived at <https://perma.cc/C8BU-MY4A>.
Competition and Consumer Act
) s 2; Peter Cartwright,
Protection and the Criminal Law: Law, Theory and Policy in the UK
University Press, 2004) 27–8.
Ibid ss 20–1.
Ibid pt 2-3.
Cf ibid s 9.
Dietrich, ‘Giving Content to General Concepts’
[2005] MelbULawRw 6
(2005) 29(1)
Melbourne University Law Review
generally Mark Leeming, ‘Commercial Equity and Statutes’ (Conference
Paper, The Law Society of Western Australia Summer
School, 20 February 2015)
Charles EF Rickett,
‘Some Reflections on Open-Textured Commercial Contracting’ (2001)
Australian Mining and Petroleum Law Association Yearbook
Melvin Aron Eisenberg,
‘The Emergence of Dynamic Contract Law’
(2001) 2(1)
Theoretical
Inquiries in Law
See James Allsop,
‘Uncertainty as Part of Certainty: Appreciating the Limits of Definitional
Clarity and Embracing the Uncertainty
Inherent in Any Matter of
Complexity’ (Conference Paper, Australian Academy of Science and
Australian Academy of Law Joint
Symposium, 23 August 2018) 1–2. Eisenberg
describes the nature of ‘individualised’ doctrines as being based on
situation-specific variables: ibid.
Rick Bigwood and Joachim
Dietrich, ‘Uncertainty in Private Law: Rhetorical Device or Substantive
Legal Argument?’
[2021] MelbULawRw 10
(2021) 45(1)
Melbourne University Law Review
69–71; Jane Stapleton, ‘Good Faith in Private Law’
Current Legal Problems
Dietrich (n
) 239. See also Bigwood and Dietrich (n
Dietrich (n
‘The TGA’s Risk
Management Approach’,
Therapeutic Goods Administration, Department of
Health and Aged Care (Cth)
(Web Page, 24 February 2021)
<https://www.tga.gov.au/resource​s/resource/guidance/tgas-risk-management-approach>,
at <https://perma.cc/8HXN​-RS4B>.
American Law Institute,
Restatement (Third) of Torts: Products Liability
(1998) § 2 cmt
Campbell v Backoffice
Investments Pty Ltd
(2009) 238 CLR 304
, 319 [25] (French CJ), quoted with
approval in
Australian Competition and Consumer Commission v TPG Internet Pty
[2013] HCA 54
(2013) 250 CLR 640
, 655 [49] (French CJ, Crennan, Bell and Keane
Australian Competition
and Consumer Commission v Coles Supermarkets Pty Ltd
[2014] FCA 634
(2014) 317 ALR 73
[43] (Allsop CJ). See also
Campomar SL v Nike International Ltd
[2000] HCA 12
, 86–7 [105] (Gleeson CJ, Gaudron, McHugh, Gummow, Kirby, Hayne
and Callinan JJ).
) ss 54(2)–(3).
s 54(2)(d).
Ibid s 54(2).
For further guidance on
this test, see
[2009] 2 NZLR 830
[106]–[108] (Miller J) (‘
’), applying
Consumer Guarantees Act 1993
ss 6–7 which constitute the New Zealand equivalent of s 54 of the
Australian Competition
and Consumer Commission v Jayco Corporation Pty Ltd
[2020] FCA 1672
(Wheelahan J);
) 850 [94] (Miller J).
) ss 138–41.
Sarl v Gill
[2021] FCAFC 29
(2021) 288 FCR 338
, 460 [584]–[585] (Jagot, Murphy and Lee
A v National Blood Authority
[2001] EWCA Civ 2048
[2001] 3 All ER 289
, 311 [31] (Burton J).
Graham Barclay Oysters
Pty Ltd v Ryan
(2000) 102 FCR 307, 446 [536] (Lindgren J, Lee J agreeing at
See above n
and accompanying text.
See Richard Braddock,
Product Liability: Economic Impacts
(Product Liability Research Paper No
2, Australian Law Reform Commission, January 1989) 10.
) [3584]–[3607] (Katzmann J), affd
) 519 [811] (Jagot,
We use the phrase
‘public health crisis’ throughout this article to describe a broad
set of circumstances in which a nation-state
is faced with a ‘state of
affairs in which the health of a substantial portion of a community’s
members is either compromised
or in imminent danger because of the inability of
existing mechanisms for safeguarding the public’s health to cope with an
emergent health threat’: Alex John London, ‘Research in a Public
Health Crisis: The Integrative Approach to Managing
the Moral Tensions’ in
Bruce Jennings et al (eds),
Emergency Ethics: Public Health Preparedness and
(Oxford University Press, 2016) 220, 221. This includes public
health ‘emergencies’ as declared by the legislature or
executive, as
occurred in many countries, including Australia, during the COVID-19 pandemic:
see, eg, Paula O’Brien and Eliza
Waters, ‘COVID-19: Public Health
Emergency Powers and Accountability Mechanisms in Australia’
(2021) 28(2)
Journal of Law and Medicine
, 350; Marco Rizzi and Tamara Tulich,
‘All Bets on the Executive(s)! The Australian Response to COVID-19’
in Joelle Grogan
and Alice Donald (eds),
Routledge Handbook of Law and the
COVID-19 Pandemic
(Routledge, 2022) 457, 457.
See, eg, ‘Protecting
Yourself and Others from COVID-19’,
Therapeutic Goods Administration,
Department of Health and Aged Care (Cth)
(Web Page, 5 July 2023)
<https://www.health.go​v.au/topics/covid-19/protect-yourself-and-others?language=und>,
at <https://perm​a.cc/R23Y-YGQ8>.
eg, ‘Good Hygiene for Coronavirus (COVID-19)’,
Therapeutic Goods
Administration, Department of Health and Aged Care (Cth)
(Web Page, 18 May
https://www.health.gov.au/news/health-alerts/novel-coronavirus-2019-ncov-health-alert/ho​w-to-protect-yourself-and-others-from-coronavirus-covid-19/good-hygiene-for-coronavirus​-covid-19
archived at <https://perma.cc/2K22-LV46>.
‘Hand Sanitisers: Information for
Consumers’,
Therapeutic Goods Administration, Department of Health and
Aged Care (Cth)
(Web Page, 31 August 2020)
<https://www.tga.go​v.au/resources/resource/guidance/hand-sanitisers-information-consumers>,
archived at <https://perma.cc/8LB9-86NA>.
‘Hand Hygiene’,
Department of Health (Vic)
(Web Page, 23 November 2021)
<https://www.health.vic.gov.au/quality-safety-service/hand-hygiene>,
archived at <https://per​ma.cc/G8X8-QUYQ>.
Daniel Keane,
‘Coronavirus Is Causing Panic Buying, but What Does that Mean for
Australia’s Food Security?’,
(online, 16 March 2020)
<https://www.abc.net.au/news/2020-03-16/coronavirus-is-not-a-threat-to-food-supply-experts-say/12058412>,
archived at <https://p​erma.cc/8CAL-5TY2>; Rebeka Powell,
‘Coronavirus Fears Prompt Shoppers To Stock Up on Essential
Stripping Supermarket Shelves’,
(online, 2 March 2020)
<https://www.abc.net.au/news/2020-03-02/coronavirus-stockpiling-supplies/12014766>,
archived at <https://perma.cc/5GLB-3FDH>.
Grace Smith, ‘Are
Alcohol-Free Hand Sanitisers Effective against COVID-19?’,
(Web Page, 29 July 2020)
<https://www.choice.com.au/health-and-body/beauty-and-personal-care/skin-care-and-cosmetics/articles/alcohol-free-hand-sanitiser>,
archived at <https://perm​a.cc/4F8Q-37ZY>.
See, eg, Department of
Health and Human Services (Vic),
Are You and Your Home COVIDSafe?
(Report, 11 September 2020) 2. The Commonwealth government stated in regard to
hand hygiene that
[i]f you are not able to wash your hands, use an alcohol-based hand
rub/sanitiser containing 60% ethanol or 70% isopropanol. Non-alcohol-based
rubs are not recommended, as there is limited evidence available to support
their effectiveness in reducing bacteria and viruses.
‘Covid-19’,
Australian Commission on Safety and Quality in
Health Care
<https://webarchive.nla.gov.au/awa/20201111064127/https://www.safetyandquality.gov.au/covid-19>.
See, eg, Andy Kollmorgen,
‘CHOICE Investigation: Mosaic Brand Sold Mislabelled, Ineffective Hand
Sanitiser’,
(Web Page, 15 July 2020)
<https://www.choice.com.au/health-and-body/beauty-and-personal-care/skin-care-and-cosmetics/articles/mosaic-brands-hand-sanit​iser-fails-nmi-test>,
archived at <https://perma.cc/RLS5-HT3J>.
Department of Industry,
Science, Energy and Resources (Cth),
Hand Sanitiser in Australia: Market
(Report, July 2020) 3–5
<https://www.industry.gov.au/sites/default/files/2020-10/hand-sanitiser-market-insights-brochure.pdf>,
archived at <https://perma.cc/74FK-BH9G>.
‘Hand Sanitisers:
Information for Manufacturers, Suppliers and Advertisers’,
Therapeutic
Goods Administration, Department of Health and Aged Care (Cth)
(Web Page, 7
May 2020) <
https://www.tga.gov.au/hand-sanitisers-information-manufacturers-suppliers-and-advertisers
archived at <https://perma.cc/QXU6-77AN>.
Consumer Goods
(Cosmetics) Information Standard 2020
(Cth) ss 3, 6 (definition of
‘hand sanitiser’) (‘
Cosmetics Information
See generally,
‘Hand Sanitiser Labels Need a Clean Up’,
(Web Page, 28
October 2020) <
https://www.choice.com.au/health-and-body/beauty-and-personal-care/skin-care-and-cosmetics/articles/hand-sanitiser-labelling
archived at <https://perma.cc/8T96-AFE4>.
‘Hand Sanitisers:
Information for Manufacturers, Suppliers and Advertisers’ (n
). See, eg, Therapeutic Goods
Administration, Department of Health and Aged Care (Cth), ‘Strapit Fined
$37,800 for Alleged Advertising
Breaches for Disinfectant and Hand Sanitiser in
Relation to COVID-19’ (Media Release, 24 July 2020) <
https://www.tga.gov.au/media-release/strapit-fined-37800-alleged-advertising-breaches-disinfectant-and-hand-sanitiser-relation-covid-19
archived at <https://perma.cc/4TVK-X8GY>.
Ingredients Labelling’,
Product Safety, Australian Competition and
Consumer Commission
<https://www.productsafety.gov.au/standards/cosmetics-ingredients-labelling>,
archived at <https://perma.cc/X5UK-JZ73>;
Cosmetics Information
See generally ‘Who
We Are and What We Do’,
Australian Industrial Chemicals Introduction
Scheme, Department of Health and Aged Care (Cth)
(Web Page, 27 February
https://www.industrialchemicals.gov.au/about-us/who-we-are-and-what-we-do
archived at <https://perma.cc/VZ2H-D77R>. Details about this alternative
scheme for cosmetic products go beyond the scope
of this article.
‘Hand Sanitisers:
Information for Manufacturers, Suppliers and Advertisers’ (n
Therapeutics Goods
) s 25(1)(e).
Greg Hunt, Minister for
Health and Aged Care (Cth), ‘Increased Flexibility for Production of Hand
Sanitiser To Bolster Supplies’
(Media Release, 30 March 2020) <
https://www.he​alth.gov.au/ministers/the-hon-greg-hunt-mp/media/increased-flexibility-for-production-of-hand-sanitiser-to-bolster-supplies
archived at <
https://perma.cc/X4P2-L4PL
(‘Increased Flexibility for Production of Hand Sanitiser’).
Ibid; World Health
Organisation,
Guide to Local Production: WHO-Recommended Handrub
Formulations
(Guidelines, April 2010) 2–4 <
https://iris.who.int/bitstream/handle/10665/3​32005/WHO-IER-PSP-2010.5-eng.pdf?sequence=1
archived at <
https://perma.cc/V3VM-YH5A
Guide to Local Production
to Local Production
Therapeutic Goods Amendment (Excluded
Goods — Hand Sanitisers) Determination 2020
(Cth) sch 1 item
Excluded Goods Determination
Hunt, ‘Increased
Flexibility for Production of Hand Sanitiser’ (n
Excluded Goods
Determination
) sch 1 item
See, eg, ‘Dettol
Instant Sanitizer Original’,
<https://www.dettol.com.a​u/personal-hygiene/instant-hand-sanitiser/dettol-instant-hand-sanitizer-original-200ml/>,
archived at <https://perma.cc/XRY5-VW6R>; ‘Dettol Instant Hand
Sanitizer Chamomile’,
<https://www.dettol.com.au/personal-hygiene/instant-hand-sanitiser/det​tol-instant-hand-sanitizer-chamomile-50ml/>,
archived at <https://perma.cc/6T22-PF4R>.
Oxford English
(online at 20 March 2023) ‘germ’ (def 4).
See generally
‘Hand Sanitisers: Information for Manufacturers, Suppliers and
Advertisers’
) pt 3-2 div 1.
54(3)(c)–(e).
Therapeutic Goods
Administration, Department of Health and Aged Care (Cth), ‘Australian
Chemical Research Fined $25,200 for
Alleged Breaches in Relation to Hand
Sanitiser’ (Media Release, 29 June 2020)
<https://www.tga.gov.au/news/media-releases/australian-chemical-research-fined-25200-alleged-breaches-relation-hand-sanitiser>,
archived at <https://perm​a.cc/V4EU-VTZ3>; Therapeutic Goods
Administration, Department of Health and Aged Care (Cth),
‘Mosaic Brands
Pays $630,000 in Penalties over COVID-Related “Health
Essentials”’ (Media Release, 27 May
<https://www.accc.gov.au/media-release/mosaic-brands-pays-630000-in-penalties-over-covid-related-health-essentials>,
archived at <https://​perma.cc/W9AQ-UHXQ>.
Sanitisers: Information for Manufacturers, Suppliers and Advertisers’ (n
Alex Jane et al,
‘Coming Clean on Hand Sanitisers’,
(Web Page, 21
April 2020)
<https://pursuit.unimelb.edu.au/articles/coming-clean-on-hand-sanitisers>,
archived at <https://perma.cc/2TAH-XJCD>.
This could be achieved,
for example, through amendments to the ‘supply’ of
‘therapeutic’ hand sanitisers that
are not required to be included
on the ARTG under the
Excluded Goods Determination
) (as enabled by s 7AA of the
Therapeutic Goods Act
Further, and more broadly, the responsible Minister may determine conditions for
the supply (which includes ‘sale’)
of any therapeutic goods listed
or registered on the ARTG:
Therapeutic Goods Act
) ss 3 (definition of
‘supply’), 28(1), (2)(b).
Black’s Medical
ed, 2017) ‘vaccine’.
Ibid. See also
‘Immunisation for Children’,
Department of Health and Aged Care
(Web Page, 22 March 2023)
<https://www.health.gov.au/topics/immunisation/when-to-get-vaccinated/immunisation-for-infants-and-children>,
archived at <https://perma.cc/KHH6-64HU>.
Committee on Vaccines (ACV)’,
Therapeutic Goods Administration,
Department of Health and Aged Care (Cth)
(Web Page, 2 March 2023)
<https://www.tga.gov.au/committee/​advisory-committee-vaccines-acv
>, archived at <https://perma.cc/GT6T-HQLH>.
for Medicinal Products for Human Use, European Medicines Agency,
Guideline on
Clinical Evaluation of New Vaccines
(Doc No EMEA/CHMP/VWP/164653/2005,
18 October 2006)
<https://www.ema.europa.eu/en/documents/scientific-guideline/guideline-clinical-evaluation-new-vaccines_en.pdf>,
archived at <
https://perma.cc/FK2W-BW2C
2006 EMA Vaccine Guideline
’). See also ‘International
Scientific Guideline: Guideline
on Clinical Evaluation of New Vaccines’,
Therapeutic Goods
Administration,
Department of Health and Aged Care (Cth)
(Web Page, 6 January 2009)
<https://www.tga.gov.au/resources/resource/international-scientific-guidelines/international-scientific-guideline-guideline-clinical-evaluation-new-vaccines>,
archived at <https://perm​a.cc/7PFM-8XFH>. The relevant EMA
guideline has recently been updated (although there is no
indication that the
TGA and ACV have adopted this revised guideline): Committee for Medicinal
Products for Human Use, European Medical
Guideline on Clinical
Evaluation of Vaccines
(Doc No EMEA/CHMP/VWP/164653/05 Rev 1, 16 January
<https://www.ema.europa.eu/en/documents/scientific-guideline/guideline-clinical-evaluatio​n-vaccines-revision-1_en.pdf>,
archived at <https://perma.cc/XGQ3-3L6P>.
2006 EMA Vaccine
) 19. The ICH is a
transnational regulatory network for the negotiation and adoption of standards
and guidelines between regulatory
authorities
and industry representatives: ‘Mission: Harmonisation for Better
(Web Page) <https://www.ich.org/page/mission>,
archived at <https://perma.cc/P9ZT-QE4A>. For the full set of
international
scientific guidelines adopted in Australia, see
‘Resources’,
Therapeutic Goods Administration, Department of Health and Aged Care
<https://www.tga.gov.au/resources/resource?f[0]=type:333316>, archived at
<https://perma.cc/U8RU-X7MC>.
Overview’ (n
International Federation
of Pharmaceutical Manufacturers and Associations,
The Complex Journey of a
Vaccine — Part III: The Steps behind Developing a New Vaccine
29 July 2019) 3
<https://www.ifpma.org/publications/the-complex-journey-of-a-vaccine-the-steps-behind-developing-a-new-vaccine/>,
archived at <https://perma.cc/XX9S-3XJY>.
Marco Rizzi, ‘The
Road to a Vaccine for COVID-19: Regulatory and Policy Infrastructure, Incentives
and Obstacles’ (2020)
European Pharmaceutical Law Review
See, eg, Jerry P Weir
and Marion F Gruber, ‘An Overview of the Regulation of Influenza Vaccines
in the United States’
(2018) 14(3)
Influenza and Other Respiratory
354, 355; ‘Vaccines for Pandemic Influenza’,
Medicines Agency
<https://www.ema.europa.eu/en/human-regulatory/overview/public-health-threats/pandem​ic-influenza/vaccines-pandemic-influenza>,
archived at <https://perma.cc/G6C5-GNGD>. The TGA approves annual changes
to the influenza vaccine on the basis of the Australian
Influenza Vaccine
Committee’s review of epidemiological data and WHO recommendations:
‘2022 Seasonal Influenza Vaccines:
Information for Consumers and Health
Professionals’,
Therapeutic Goods Administration
Department of
Health and Aged Care (Cth)
25 March 2022)
<https://www.tga.gov.au/news/media-releases/2022-seasonal-influenza-vacc​ines>,
archived at <https://perma.cc/JLP2-T6HA>.
Overview’ (n
The literature is
immense: see, eg, Frank Destefano, Paul A Offit and Allison Fisher,
‘Vaccine Safety’ in Stanley A Plotkin
et al (eds),
Plotkin’s Vaccines
(Elsevier, 7
ed, 2018) 1584, 1600;
H Cody Meissner, ‘Understanding Vaccine Safety and the Roles of the FDA
and the CDC’
(2022) 386(17)
New England Journal of Medicine
1638. See also ‘Vaccine Safety’,
Department of Health of Aged
(Web Page, 7 August 2023) <
https://www.he​alth.gov.au/health-topics/immunisation/about-immunisation/are-vaccines-safe
archived at <https://perma.cc/64FQ-GHTY>.
See, eg, Katie Attwell
et al, ‘Recent Vaccine Mandates in the United States, Europe and
Australia: A Comparative Study’
(2018) 36(48)
7378–82. For an overview of the ‘No Jab No Pay’ national
policy and the ‘No Jab No Play’ state
policies, see ‘No Jab No
Play, No Jab No Pay’,
National Centre for Immunisation Research and
Surveillance
August 2023)
http://www.ncirs.org.au/public/no-jab-no-play-no-jab-no-pay
archived at <https://perma.cc/7E2P-DB69>. See also Katie Attwell and
Shevaun Drislane, ‘Australia’s “No
Jab No Play”
Policies: History, Design and Rationales’ (2022) 46(5)
Australian and
New Zealand Journal of Public Health
640, 641–4.
Nicole Lurie et al, ‘Developing Covid-19
Vaccines at Pandemic Speed’
(2020) 382(21)
New England Journal of
The Food and Drug
Administration (‘FDA’) issued an ‘emergency use
authorization’ (‘EUA’) for emergency
Pfizer-BioNTech COVID-19 vaccine on 11 December 2020: US Food and Drug
Administration, ‘FDA Takes Key Action in
Fight against COVID-19 by Issuing
Emergency Use Authorization for First COVID-19 Vaccine’ (Media Release,
11 December 2020)
<https://www.fda.gov/news-events/press-announcements/fda-takes-key-action-fight-against-covid-19-issuing-emergency-use-authorization-first-covid-19>,
archived at <https://perma.cc/SW7J-XBJS>. This was followed by a similar
EUA for the Moderna COVID-19 vaccine on 18 December
2020: US Food and Drug
Administration, ‘FDA Takes Additional Action in Fight against COVID-19 by
Issuing Emergency Use Authorization
for Second COVID-19 Vaccine’ (Media
Release, 18
December 2020)
<https://www.fda.gov/news-events/press-announcements/fda-takes-additional-action-fight-against-covid-19-issuing-emergency-use-authorization-second-covid>,
archived at <https://perma.cc/L257-KJ72>.
Ebola Outbreak in West Africa’,
Centers for Disease Control and
(Web Page, 8 March 2019)
<https://www.cdc.gov/vhf/ebola/history/2014-2016-outbreak/​index.html>,
archived at <https://perma.cc/7UJE-P3Q4>.
European Medicines
Agency, ‘New Vaccine for Prevention of Ebola Virus Disease Recommended for
Approval in the European Union’
(Press Release EMA/CHMP/282251/2020, 29
May 2020) <
https://www.ema.europa.eu/en/documents/press-release/new-vaccine-prevention-ebola-virus-disease-recommended-approval-european-uni​on_en.pdf
archived at <https://perma.cc/PF4J-TS7K>. See also Talha Burki,
‘Ebola Virus Vaccine Receives Prequalification’
(2019) 394(10212)
1893, 1893; Ewen Callaway, ‘“Make Ebola a Thing of the
Past”: First Vaccine against Deadly Virus Approved’
(2019) 575(7783)
‘What Is Ebola
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention
(Web Page, 17
May 2023) <https://www.cdc.gov/vhf/ebola/about.html>, archived at
<https://perma.cc/M4ZN-YNE9>; Aurelie
Ploquin, Kendra Leigh and Nancy J
Sullivan, ‘Ebola Vaccines’ in Stanley A Plotkin
et al (eds),
Plotkin’s Vaccines
(Elsevier, 7
2018) 276, 276.
Partridge et al, ‘Global Production of Seasonal and Pandemic (H1N1)
Influenza Vaccines in 2009–2010 and Comparison
with Previous Estimates and
Global Action Plan Targets’ (2010) 28(30)
4709, 4711.
Lurie et al (n
This has traditionally
been a major obstacle to successful vaccine research and development: Marco
Rizzi, ‘Rethinking Vaccine Development as an
Integral Part of Preparedness in the European Health Union’
(2020) 11(4)
European Journal of Risk Regulation
Rashmi Ashish Kadam et
al, ‘Challenges in Recruitment and Retention of Clinical Trial
Subjects’ (2016) 7(3)
Perspectives in Clinical Research
137–8; Richard M Jacques
et al, ‘Recruitment, Consent and Retention of Participants in
Randomised Controlled Trials: A Review of Trials Published in
the National
Institute for Health Research (NIHR) Journals Library (1997–2020)’
(2022) 12(2)
Ibid. See also Philip
Ball, ‘The Lightning-Fast Quest for COVID Vaccines: And What It Means for
Other Diseases’ (2020)
16, 16, 18; Jocelyn
Solis-Moreira, ‘How Did We
Develop a COVID-19 Vaccine So Quickly?’,
Medical News Today
(online, 13 November 2021)
<https://www.medicalnewstoday.com/articles/how-did-we-develop-a-covid-19-vaccine-so-quickly>,
at <https://perma.cc/GDB2-2K6Z>.
) 18. See generally Elie Dolgin,
‘The Tangled History of mRNA Vaccines’ (2021) 597(7876)
On the incident, see
Michelle Roberts, ‘Oxford/AstraZeneca Covid Vaccine “Dose
Error” Explained’,
(online, 27 November 2020)
<https://www.bbc.com/news/health-55086927>, archived at
<https://perma.cc/T63T-BYBT>; Jacqui
Wise, ‘Covid-19: How
AstraZeneca Lost the Vaccine PR War’
(2021) 373(921)
British Medical
, 2. For a peer reviewed analysis of trial data, see Merryn Voysey
et al, ‘Safety and Efficacy of the ChAdOx1 nCoV-19 Vaccine
against SARS-CoV-2: An Interim Analysis of Four Randomised Controlled Trials in
Brazil, South Africa, and the UK’
(2021) 397(10269)
See, eg, ‘Fast
Track Approval Pathways’,
Therapeutic Goods Administration, Department
of Health and Aged Care (Cth)
(Web Page, 16 March 2023)
<https://www.tga.gov.au/fast-track-approval-pathways>, archived at
<https://perma.cc/N6VA-57H5>.
‘Provisional
Registration Process’,
Therapeutic Goods Administration, Department of
Health and Aged Care (Cth)
(Web Page, 2 August 2018)
<https://www.tga.gov.au/publication/​provisional-registration-process>,
archived at <https://perma.cc/V8MW-7V5K>.
‘COVID-19 Vaccine:
Information for Consumers and Health Professionals’ (n
‘COVID-19 Vaccines Regulatory Status’ (n
‘Provisional
Registration Process’ (n
Therapeutic Goods Act
) ss 22C–22F, 23AA;
Therapeutic
Goods Regulations
10K–10L, sch 3.
Jeremy K Ward,
‘Rethinking the Antivaccine Movement Concept: A Case Study of Public
Criticism of the Swine Flu Vaccine’s
Safety in France’ (2016) 159
Social Science and Medicine
48, 50, 52.
‘AstraZeneca’s
COVID-19 Vaccine: EMA Finds Possible Link to Very Rare Cases of Unusual Blood
Clots with Low Blood Platelets’,
European Medicines Agency
Page, 7 April 2021)
<https://www.ema.europa.eu/en/news/astrazenecas-covid-19-vaccine-ema-finds-possible-lin​k-very-rare-cases-unusual-blood-clots-low-blood>,
archived at <https://perma.cc/WS8R-83CD>. See also
Chandini Raina MacIntyre et al, ‘Thrombosis
with Thrombocytopenia Syndrome (TTS) following AstraZeneca ChAdOx1 nCoV-19
COVID-19 Vaccination: A Risk-Benefit Analysis for People <60 years
in Australia’ (2021) 39(34)
4784, 4784.
Therapeutic Goods
Where forms of conduct
that would normally be characterised as breaches of duty of care can be
acceptable in the circumstances, see
the classic decision of
Hertfordshire County Council
[1954] EWCA Civ 6
[1954] 1 WLR 835
, 836–7 (Singleton J,
Morris LJ agreeing at 838–9), 838 (Denning LJ, Morris LJ agreeing at
838–9). States and territories
that have adopted civil liability
legislation post 2002 include provisions requiring special consideration for the
utility’ of the activity causing harm: see, eg,
(Wrongs) Act 2002
Civil Liability Act 2003
Civil Liability Act 2002
s 5B(2)(d).
Therapeutic Goods
Administration, Department of Health and Aged Care (Cth),
‘TGA Provisionally Approves AstraZeneca’s COVID-19 Vaccine’
(Media Release,
16 February 2021) <
https://www.tga.gov.au/media-release/tga-provisionally-approves-astrazenecas-covid-19-vaccine
archived at <https://perma.cc/7M7J-WTQY>.
See generally Department
of Health and Aged Care (Cth), ‘Australia’s COVID-19 Vaccine and
Treatment Strategy’ (Policy
Document, 23 April 2021) <
https://www.health.gov.au/sites/​default/files/documents/2020/08/australia-s-covid-19-vaccine-and-treatment-strategy.pdf
archived at <https://perma.cc/96RD-UN8G>.
TTS is blood clotting,
including in the brain and abdomen, in conjunction with low levels of blood
platelets. It is a rare but potentially
very serious condition: MacIntyre et al
) 4784; Australian Technical
Advisory Group on Immunisation, Department of Health and Aged Care (Cth),
‘ATAGI Statement on AstraZeneca
Vaccine in Response to New Vaccine Safety
Concerns’ (Media Release, 8 April 2021)
<https://www.health.gov.au/news/atagi-statement-on-astrazeneca-vaccine-in-response-to-new-vaccine-safety-concerns>,
archived at <https://p​erma.cc/8B8B-KC6P>.
‘ATAGI Statement
on AstraZeneca Vaccine in Response to New Vaccine Safety Concerns’
); Australian Technical
Advisory Group on Immunisation, Department of Health and Aged Care (Cth),
‘ATAGI Statement on Revised
Recommendations on the Use of COVID-19 Vaccine
AstraZeneca, 17 June 2021’ (Media Release, 17 June 2021)
<https://www.health.gov.a​u/news/atagi-statement-on-revised-recommendations-on-the-use-of-covid-19-vaccine-astra​zeneca-17-june-2021>,
archived at <https://perma.cc/32TK-QQUR>.
Australian Technical
Advisory Group on Immunisation, Department of Health and Aged Care (Cth),
Terms of Reference
(2 September 2019)
<https://www.health.gov.au/sites/defa​ult/files/atagi-terms-of-reference.pdf>,
archived at <https://perma.cc/557Y-8F36>.
‘COVID-19 Vaccines
Regulatory Status’ (n
Stephanie Zillman,
‘Queensland’s Chief Health Officer Rejects Prime Minister’s
Comments on AstraZeneca’s COVID-19
Vaccine for under-40s’,
(online, 30 June 2021)
<https://www.abc.net.au/news/2021-06-30/qld-cho-rejects-morrisons-astrazeneca-commen​ts-covid-vaccine/100256022>,
archived at <https://perma.cc/UDW6-YCL2>, quoting Jeanette Young (Press
Conference, Queensland, 30 June 2021).
Greg Hunt, Minister for
Health and Aged Care (Cth), ‘COVID-19 Indemnity Scheme To Protect Health
Professionals and Patients’
(Media Release, 2 July 2021)
<https://www.health.go​v.au/ministers/the-hon-greg-hunt-mp/media/covid-19-indemnity-scheme-to-protect-health-professionals-and-patients>,
archived at <https://perma.cc/9MRX-DB2W>, subsequently confirmed in Greg
Hunt, Minister for Health and Aged Care (Cth), ‘No
Fault COVID-19
Indemnity Scheme’ (Media Release, 28 August 2021)
<https://www.health.gov.au/m​inisters/the-hon-greg-hunt-mp/media/no-fault-covid-19-indemnity-scheme>,
archived at <https://perma.cc/966N-FVYR>. For an initial discussion of
this indemnity scheme, see Marco Rizzi et al, ‘No-Fault
Compensation for
COVID-19 Vaccine Injuries in Australia’ [2021] (36)
<https://insightplus.mja.com.au/2021/36/no-fault-compensation-for-covid-19-vaccine-injuries-in-australia/>,
archived at <https://perma.cc/4QQW-C3SC>.
Australian Technical
Advisory Group on Immunisation, ‘ATAGI Statement: Response to NSW COVID-19
Department of Health and Aged Care (Cth)
(Web Page, 24
<https://www.health.gov.au/news/atagi-statement-response-to-nsw-covid-19-outbreak-24th-july-2021>,
archived at <https://perma.cc/U6YD-DTQK>.
‘COVID-19 Vaccines
Regulatory Status’ (n
) 460 [582]–[585] (Jagot, Murphy
and Lee JJ).
See, eg, Mabel Tsui,
‘Pharmaceutical Product Liability and the Australian Consumer Law: Towards
a Principled Approach’
(2015) 23(2)
Competition and Consumer Law
, 190–1. The test was famously adopted in the US: American
Law Institute (n
See Therapeutic Goods
Administration, Department of Health and Aged Care (Cth),
‘Action Plan for Medical Devices: Progress Report Card: June
2021’ (Report,
16 September 2021)
<https://www.tga.gov.au/sites/default/files/2022-08/action-plan-for-medical-devices-progress-report-card-june-2021.pdf>,
archived at <https://perma.cc/4Z6L-5669>, where the TGA completed
extensive consultations by June 2021 to implement
An Action Plan for Medical Devices: Improving Australia’s Regulatory
(Report, April 2019) <
https://www.tga.gov.au/sites/default/files/2022-08/action-plan-medical-devices.pdf
archived at <https://perma.cc/N8P8-YX7K> (‘
Action Plan
) implements three strategies for the
strengthening of the regulatory framework governing the approval and monitoring
of medical devices
in Australia: at 4; ‘Action Plan for Medical
Therapeutic Goods Administration, Department of Health and
Aged Care (Cth)
(Web Page, 9 February 2023)
<https://www.tga.gov.au/resources/publication/publications/medical-devices-reforms-action-plan-medical-devices>,
archived at <https://perma.cc/4GYA-SY98>. See also Penny Gleeson and Marco
Rizzi, ‘Response No 1006016444 to Therapeutic
Goods Administration’,
Consultation Proposed Enhancements to Adverse Event Reporting for Medical
(30 November 2020) 3–11
<https://consultations.tga.gov.au/tga/copy-of-copy-of-test-2-adverse-events-reporting-fo/consultation/view_respondent?fbclid=IwAR3SLQLiHSBU​aeydltmAsnVccTjIQcpA5d5I7Mf6r-4LoJ7ILa41HTc_6iQ&uuId=1006016444>,
archived at <https://perma.cc/3MKQ-ZFA8>.
Regulation According to Risk’ (n
); Rohan Hammett and Leonie Hunt,
‘The Australian Medicines Regulatory System: A Risk-Based Approach to
Regulation’ (2009)
Drug Information Journal
‘How the TGA
Regulates: Overview of How Therapeutic Goods Are Regulated in Australia’,
Therapeutic Goods Administration, Department of Health and Aged Care
<https://www.tga.gov.au/how-we-regulate/advertising/legal-framework/act-regulations-and-code-offences/how-tga-regulates>,
archived at <https://perma.cc/KGE3-ZSRD>.
‘List of Countries
and Jurisdictions Determined To Be Comparable Overseas Regulators (CORs)’,
Therapeutic Goods Administration, Department of Health and Aged Care
(Web Page, 24 October 2019)
<https://www.tga.gov.au/how-we-regulate/supply-therapeutic-good-0/supply-prescription-medicine/application-process/comparable-overseas-regulators/list-countries-and-jurisdictions-determined-be-comparable-overseas-regulators-cors>,
archived at <https://perma.cc/8PGD-2AYM>.
See Senate Community
Affairs References Committee, Parliament of Australia,
Number of Women in
Australia Who Have Had Transvaginal Mesh Implants and Related Matters
(Report, March 2018) 9; Gleeson and Rizzi (n
) 371–2 [169]–[170],
523–4 [833] (Jagot, Murphy and Lee JJ).
) [1]–[16] (Katzmann J).
See, eg, ibid [3890],
[4092]. The mesh implants considered in the case were indicated for use as
surgical implants for women with
stress urinary incontinence or pelvic organ
prolapse: at
[1]. Stress urinary incontinence and pelvic organ prolapse
are relatively common conditions amongst Australian women, and it is estimated
that mesh medical devices are implanted in 25% of pelvic floor reconstructions
undertaken to address these conditions: J Oliver Daly
et al, ‘The
Australasian Pelvic Floor Procedure Registry: Not Before Time’ (2019)
Australian and New Zealand Journal of Obstetrics and Gynaecology
[3921]–[4069]
(Katzmann J). See also at [4100]–[4227], [4237]–[4356].
Ibid [3458], [3496],
[3515]–[3517], [3581]–[3607], [3879]–[3884], affd
) 352 [26] (Jagot,
Murphy and Lee JJ). See also Moira Saville, Suzy Madar and Sarah-Jane Frydman,
‘Appeal in Ethicon Pelvic
Mesh Class Action: What Risks Need To Be
Disclosed?’
(2021) 29(3)
Australian Health Law Bulletin
Transcript of
Proceedings,
Ethicon Sarl v Gill
[2021] HCATrans 187
, 630 (Keane J). See
also Sonali Paul, ‘J&J Fails in Final Bid To Appeal Australian Pelvic
Mesh Class Action Ruling’,
(Web Page, 6 November 2021)
<https://www.reuters.com/business/healthcare-pharmaceuticals/jj-fails-final-bid-appeal-australian-pelvic-mesh-class-action-ruling-2021-11-05/>,
archived at <https://perma.cc/Y488-6ALL>.
) [13] (Katzmann J).
Shine Lawyers,
‘Settlement Reached in Mesh Class Actions’ (Media Release, 11
September 2022)
<https://www.shine.com.au/media-centre/media-releases/settlement-reached-in-mesh​-class-actions>,
archived at <https://perma.cc/Q8B4-P6YN>.
Gill v Ethicon
Sàrl [No 10]
[2023] FCA 228
, [2] (Lee J). On the subsequent mechanism
to distribute the settlement between class members, see
Gill v Ethicon
Sàrl [No 11]
[2023] FCA 229.
) [3515]–[3517], [3544],
[3581]–[3607], affd ibid 488 [696], [698], 519 [811] (Jagot, Murphy and
) [3879]–[3884] (Katzmann J).
These findings were restated by the Full Court in
) 389 [291] (Jagot, Murphy and Lee JJ).
For an overview, see the official summary by the Federal Court of Australia:
Anna Katzmann,
‘Gill v Ethicon Sàrl & Ors (No 5)
Federal Court of Australia
(Web Page, 21 November
<https://www.judgments.fedcourt.gov.au/judgments/Judgments/fca/single/2019/2019fca1905/summary/2019fca1905-summary>,
archived at <https://perma.cc/6P8L-GKLN>. See also Bill Madden,
‘Pelvic Mesh Litigation: Outcome of the Federal Court
of Australia Trial
Gill v Ethicon Sàrl (No 5)’
(2020) 28(3)
Australian Health
Law Bulletin
) [3458], [3496], [3515]–[3517]
(Katzmann J).
Justice Katzmann also
discusses alerts (relating to serious complications associated with the implants
under review in
issued in the US by the US Food and Drug Administration as early as 2008: at
[2449], quoting ‘FDA Public Health Notification:
Serious Complications
Associated with Transvaginal Placement of Surgical Mesh in Repair of Pelvic
Organ Prolapse and Stress Urinary
Incontinence’,
US Food and Drug
Administration
(Web Page, 20 October 2008)
<https://www.govinfo.gov/content/pkg/USCOURTS-ca4-15-01454/pdf/USCOURTS-ca4-15-01454-1.pdf>,
at <https://perma.cc/4UNZ-NKB4>.
Therapeutic Goods
(Medical Devices) Regulations
) sch 1 pts 1–2. Part 1 identifies
six general principles:
1 Use of medical devices not to compromise health
and safety ...
2 Design and construction of medical devices to
conform with safety principles ...
3 Medical devices to be suitable for intended purpose ...
4 Long-term safety ...
5 Medical devices not to be adversely affected by transport or storage ...
6 Benefits of medical devices to outweigh any undesirable effects...
Part 2 identifies a number of more specific principles about design and
construction.
‘Australian
Regulatory Guidelines for Medical Devices (ARGMD)’,
Therapeutic Goods
Administration, Department of Health and Aged Care (Cth)
(Web Page, 2
November 2023)
<https://www.tga.gov.au/resources/resource/guidance/australian-regulatory-guidelines-medical-devices-argmd>,
archived at <https://perma.cc/9L4V-5GMH>.
European Commission
<https://single-market-economy.ec.europ​a.eu/single-market/goods/building-blocks/notified-bodies_en>,
at <https://perm​a.cc/V5HS-KD9A>. This is an example of
what is commonly referred to as the European ‘new approach’
goods, under which general goals are mandated by legislation (European Union
directives or regulations), but standard setting
and conformity assessment are
outsourced to private or hybrid entities. The regime applicable to medical
devices is explained in
) [1389]–[1397] (Katzmann J) and
[168]–[170], [174] (Jagot, Murphy and Lee JJ).
) [1391], [1398];
) 372–3 [173]–[178] (Jagot,
Murphy and Lee JJ). Only one of the devices under scrutiny was classified as
III’, that is, a ‘high’ risk device:
) [1391], [1400]
(Katzmann J). See also ‘Medical Devices Overview’ (n
) for an explanation of the classes.
Note, however, that in order to have the high risk device registered, the
manufacturer had to
provide the TGA with further information including an audit
file, but no independent review was conducted nor was specific clinical
required prior to marketing:
) [1672], [1700] (Katzmann J). The Full
Federal Court used very strong wording for its damning findings about the
inadequacies of
the regulatory mechanisms underpinning attribution of the CE
mark for medical devices:
[168]–[178] (Jagot, Murphy and Lee JJ).
Paul Verbruggen and
Barend van Leeuwen, ‘The Liability of Notified Bodies under the EU’s
New Approach: The Implications
of the PIP Breast Implants Case’
European Law Review
, 398–9, 404–5.
) [1408] (Katzmann J). In
), the Full Federal Court analyses
how certain products could be marketed notwithstanding the absence of any
clinical evidence:
at 376 [200]–[202] (Jagot, Murphy and Lee JJ).
This point of difference
is not exclusive to Australia. The US and European regulatory regimes for
pharmaceuticals developed on the
back of two drug disasters: sulfanilamide in
the US in the early 1900s and thalidomide half a century later in Europe: Arthur
A Daemmrich,
Pharmacopolitics: Drug Regulation in the United States and
(University of North Carolina Press, 2004) 22–3, 25–7,
69. Medicines have benefitted from ad hoc regulatory infrastructures
decades. The same level of attention has been lacking for medical devices, as
exemplified by the European Union regulatory regime:
see, eg, Verbruggen and van
All but one of the
devices automatically registered for bearing the CE mark were ‘class
IIb’ devices, which are considered
‘medium to high’ risk:
) [398], [1400]
(Katzmann J). See generally ‘Medical Devices Overview’ (n
) [3270] (emphasis added).
Ibid [3687].
Regulation (EU)
2017/745 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 5 April 2017 on
Medical Devices, Amending Directive 2001/83/EC,
Regulation (EC) No 178/2002 and
Regulation (EC) No 1223/2009 and Repealing Council Directives 90/385/EEC and
[2017] OJ L 117/1, Preamble para 4, arts 35–6, 43–5,
47, annex VII.
Senate Community Affairs
References Committee (n
Investigation: Implant Files’,
International Consortium of
Investigative Journalists
(Web Page) <
https://www.icij.org/investigations/implant-files/
archived at <https://perma.c​c/VD3X-QU7S>; Fergus Shiel,
‘About the Implant Files Investigation’,
International Consortium
of Investigative Journalists
(Web Page, 25 November 2018)
<https://www.icij.o​rg/investigations/implant-files/about-the-implant-files-investigation/>,
archived at <https://p​erma.cc/VF5D-MVAL>. In Australia, the case
was followed by the ABC: see, eg, Mario Christodoulou
et al, ‘The Implant
Files: Deadly Devices’,
(online, 26 November 2018)
<https://www.abc.net.au/news/2018-11-26/implant-files-shine-light-on-medical-devic​e-industry/10521480?nw=0>,
archived at <https://perma.cc/BY85-GJHM>.
See, eg, Alison Branley
et al, ‘The Implant Files Reveal TGA Failures in Medical Device
(online, 26 November 2018) <
https://www.abc.net.au/news/2018-11-26/implant-files-reveal-tga-failures-in-medical-device-trial/10547486
archived at <https://perma.cc/​5HGT-6QFF>; Andrew W Lehren and Emily
R Siegel, ‘Exporting Pain: US-Made Medical
Devices Cause Serious Injuries,
Pain Overseas’,
(online, 26 November 2018)
<https://www.nbcnews.com/health/health-care/exporting-pain-u-s-made-medical-devices-cause-serious-injuries-n939121>,
archived at <https://perma.cc/2LWL-L4UK>.
See, eg, the different
pre-market approval methods available to the FDA: ‘PMA Application
US Food and Drug Administration
(Web Page, 27 September
https://ww​w.fda.gov/medical-devices/premarket-approval-pma/pma-application-methods
archived at <https://perma.cc/55WK-F48U>. Commonly used methods include
21 CFR § 814.19 (2024) for the purpose of which ‘clinical
evaluation of a device and the development of necessary information
marketing approval are merged into one regulatory mechanism’: ‘PMA
Application Methods’ (n
example of a device that never received final approval by the FDA but was
nonetheless registered in Australia is the PyroTITAN
shoulder replacement
device, which benefitted from mutual recognition of less stringent approval by
EU notified bodies: see Alison
Branley et al (n
Transvaginal Surgical Mesh Devices’,
Therapeutic Goods Administration,
Department of Health and Aged Care (Cth)
(Web Page, 19 December 2023) <
https://www.tga.gov.au/pr​oducts/medical-devices/urogynaecological-transvaginal-surgical-mesh-hub/background
archived at <https://perma.cc/4JXQ-9DZY>; Mike O’Connor and Bill
Madden, ‘Vaginal Dialogues: The Trials and
Tribulations of Mesh in the
Repair of Prolapse’
(2020) 27(3)
Journal of Law and Medicine
See above n
Senate Community Affairs
References Committee (n
Melissa Davey,
‘Greg Hunt Apologises to Women Affected by “Horrific”
Transvaginal Mesh Scandal’,
The Guardian
(online, 10 October 2018)
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/201​8/oct/10/greg-hunt-apologises-to-women-affected-by-horrific-transvaginal-mesh-scandal>,
archived at <https://perma.cc/8GDX-EGQU>, quoting Greg Hunt (Press
Conference, 10 October 2018).
‘Australian
Regulatory Actions: About Transvaginal Surgical Mesh’,
Therapeutic
Goods Administration, Department of Health and Aged Care (Cth)
(Web Page, 13
April 2023)
<https://www.tga.gov.au/products/medical-devices/urogynaecological-transvaginal-surgical-mesh-hub/australian-government-actions>,
archived at <https://perma.cc/XNF5-EWKM>.
See Senate Community
Affairs References Committee (n
See above nn
–8 and accompanying text.
Hunt, ‘Increased
Flexibility for Production of Hand Sanitisers’ (n
See above n
and accompanying text.
Jasanoff and Hilgartner
) 289, 293–4.
See, eg, Ida Mae de
Waal, ‘Coherence in Law: A Way To Stimulate the Transition towards a
Circular Economy?’
(2021) 28(6)
Maastricht Journal of European and
Comparative Law
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (1.3 MB)
PDF format (486 KB)
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter