URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/journals/UMelbLRS/2018/10.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 15:41:11
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Crommelin, M --- "The Federal Principle" [2018] UMelbLRS 10
THE FEDERAL PRINCIPLE
Michael Crommelin
Melbourne Law School, The University of
INTRODUCTION
The Commonwealth of Australia
Constitution
Act 1900 (UK) provided for the people of the six Australian
colonies to be united in ‘a Federal Commonwealth under the name
Commonwealth of Australia’,
self-governing polity within the British
The existing colonies,
already self-governing polities within the
became the ‘Original
States’ in the
federation.
The federal
principle is thus a foundational element of the
Constitution
, along with
representative democracy, responsible government, separation of judicial power,
and the rule of law. The
Constitution
does not, however, specify the content of
the federal principle. This chapter seeks to determine that content from the
context of the
Constitution
, the text and structure of the
Constitution
, and the jurisprudence of the High Court of Australia.
polities, limited authority of polities, and reciprocal
responsibility among
polities. These ingredients are tightly intertwined.
Historical context
In their contemporaneous
account of the Australian federation movement and revealing commentary on the
Constitution
derived from it, John Quick and Robert Garran point out that the
word ‘federal’ occurs fifteen times in the Commonwealth
of Australia
Constitution
Act (apart from references to the Federal Council of
Australasia).
According to usage at
that time, the term had four distinct meanings: (1) a union of states linked
together in one political system;
(2) the new state formed by such a union; (3)
a dual system of government, central and provincial; and (4) the central
organs in such a dual system of
government.
The last of these
contributes nothing to understanding the federal principle. The first reflects
the ‘compact theory’
prevalent at the time of the establishment of
the United States of America. The second and the third both involve the creation
a new polity by the federal union.
Quick and Garran suggest the
second meaning provides an apt description of the Australian federation, at
least in some respects:
‘It implies that the union has created
a new State, without destroying the old
States: that the duality is in
the essence of the State itself that there is a divided
sovereignty,
and a double citizenship. This is the sense in which Freeman, Dicey
Bryce speak of a “Federal State;” and it is the sense in which the
Federal Commonwealth” is used in [section 3 of
the Commonwealth of Australia
Constitution
Act] and in the preamble.
The word “Federation” ... is ... used as
synonym for the
concrete “Federal State.”
The third meaning
also illuminates significant aspects of the Australian union. According to Quick
and Garran:
‘Federal ... is properly applied to denote a dual
but co-ordinate system of
government, under one
Constitution
subject to a common sovereignty, in
which one State employs two
separate and largely independent governmental
organizations in the work
of government; the whole governing system, central and
and general, as
well as provincial and local, constituting the federal government;
central and general government being one branch, and the provincial and local
governments forming the other branch of the governing
organization.’
these two meanings are clearly distinguishable from the first identified by
Quick and Garran, a union in which the central
government, with only legislative
powers, does not itself constitute a
The framers of the
Constitution
, acutely conscious of the shortcomings of the Federal Council of
Australasia set up in 1885,
readily agreed upon the need to establish a national polity in addition to the
existing colonial polities.
The national polity could not, however,
replace the existing colonial polities. Both history and geography were opposed
to any such
suggestion. The original colony of New South Wales, dating from
1788, was later joined not only by Western Australia in 1829 and
South Australia
in 1836, both located beyond the territorial boundaries of New South Wales, but
also by Tasmania in 1825, Victoria
in 1851 and Queensland in 1859, all by
separation from New South Wales. The demand for colonial proliferation continued
until federation with strongly supported separation movements in
central and north Queensland. The Australian people were strongly
resistant to
government from afar. The vast Australian continent required a number of
self-governing political
communities.
The framers
Constitution
, with their accumulated wealth of experience in colonial
government, agreed from the outset that these polities must continue in
Australian union with substantial (if diminished) authority exercisable within
their established territorial boundaries. The
National Australasian Convention
that met in Melbourne in 1891 endorsed four principles proposed by Sir Henry
Parkes ‘to establish
and secure an enduring foundation for the structure
of a federal government’, the first of which was:
‘That the powers and privileges and territorial rights of the several
colonies shall remain intact, except in respect to such
surrenders as may be agreed
upon as necessary and incidental to the
power and authority of the National
Government.’
the same time, the Commonwealth must comprise legislative, executive and
judicial branches, unlike the ill-starred Federal Council
Australasia.
The people of the
new States would participate directly in the new polity without relinquishing
membership of their State
Just as representative
government had provided a measure of self-government in the colonies during the
latter part of the nineteenth
century, its incorporation in the design of the
new polity would ensure an extension of self-government to the Australian people
in the twentieth
Quick and Garran
confirm the importance of popular initiatives in various colonies, especially
Victoria and New South Wales, in reviving
the federation movement in the
mid-1890s after the failure of the colonial legislatures to respond to the
Constitution
Bill produced at the Melbourne Convention in 1891. The Australasian
Federation Enabling Acts required popular election in four colonies
delegates to the Constitutional Conventions in 1897 and 1898, and popular
ratification subsequently in all colonies of the
draft Constitutions that
emerged from those conventions before the submission of the final product to
United Kingdom Government for
enactment by the United Kingdom
Parliament.
The influence of the
people was also apparent in the substantial modifications made to the 1891
Constitution
Bill by the Conventions in 1897 and 1898, especially those
requiring direct election of senators in the Original States and approval
referendum of proposed amendments to the
Constitution
Accordingly, the
Constitution
establishes the Commonwealth
as a complete polity in functional terms with legislative, executive and
judicial branches: The Parliament
(Chapter I), The Executive Government (Chapter
II), and The Judicature (Chapter III). The
Constitution
also provides for the
continuation of the constitutions of the Original States, each of which was then
(as it is today) complete
in its possession of legislative, executive and
judicial branches.
The result is
a collection of seven polities invested with the full range of governmental
functions, exercising shared authority.
Despite yielding certain powers
to the Commonwealth,
continue as self-governing polities within the federal union with extensive
legislative, executive and judicial
The federal
union is organized on the basis of territory. The States retain their
pre-federation colonial boundaries that play a vital
part in the distribution of
authority among the Commonwealth and State polities. The
Constitution
the territorial integrity of each State by requiring the consent of its
legislature, together with the approval of the electors
of the State, for any
alteration of the territorial limits of that
In addition the
Constitution
requires the consent of the relevant State Parliament for the
formation of a new State by separation of territory from that State,
consent of the Parliaments of all affected States for formation of a new State
by the union of two or more States or parts
The Commonwealth
encompasses the territory of all of the States and federal
territories.
ARCHITECTURE AND AUTHORITY
The design of the Commonwealth Parliament presented
formidable challenges to the framers of the
Constitution
in realising the
federal principle. They readily accepted the need for a bicameral Parliament
with one house comprising representatives
of the people of each of the States,
the other representatives of all of the people of the
Commonwealth.
Beyond that, there
were significant differences. First was the matter of equal representation of
the States in ‘their’
house, the Senate, as proposed by Parkes in
1891 but not by Barton in 1897.
Despite vigorous opposition voiced by delegates from New South Wales and
Victoria, equal representation was accorded to the Original
Next was the closely
related issue of the relative authority of the two houses, the Senate and the
House of Representatives. Again,
although the issue was strenuously contested,
the views of the delegates of the smaller colonies prevailed. The Senate would
equal power with the House of Representatives in respect of all proposed
laws other than those imposing taxation or appropriating
The objective was that
the bicameral structure of the Parliament with equal representation of the
States in the Senate and broad
equality of power vested in both houses would
provide a political constraint upon the exercise of the legislative authority of
Commonwealth in accordance with the federal character of the Australian
But the federal
principle also required that all of the Australian polities, the Commonwealth
and the States, have limited authority,
the scope of which would be prescribed
Constitution
and placed beyond the reach of Commonwealth and State
legislatures and governments.
The framers initially considered two
models for allocation of legislative power to the Commonwealth and the States,
those of the United
States of America and Canada. The former specified a modest
list of federal powers but no state powers. The latter contained a more
extensive list of federal powers together with a similar list of provincial
powers; both federal and provincial powers were exclusive,
apart from a few
exceptions. The framers chose the United States model although the list of
federal powers that they produced was
considerably longer than that in the
United States
Constitution
. They did so in the mistaken belief that United
States model would be more effective than the Canadian in limiting the scope of
legislative
In some respects,
the design of the Commonwealth executive was relatively uncontroversial. During
the Sydney Convention in 1891, Dibbs
confessed to ‘possessing a slight
tinge of republican notions’ but that idea was peremptorily dismissed then
seriously revived.
Instead, the framers applied the experience that they had acquired during the
latter part of the nineteenth century in colonial governments
based upon United
Kingdom principles and practices, albeit with local
adaptation.
Moreover, unlike the
situation with the Parliament, the Commonwealth executive was unconstrained by
any provision for involvement
by the States in its composition, structure or
However, a Senate with powers equal to those of the House of
Representatives created a major dilemma for the framers in the design
Commonwealth executive. Was such a Senate compatible with the principle of
responsible government, a familiar and highly regarded
element of all colonial
constitutions? Many of the framers thought
There was no easy
way out of this quandary, and the framers were driven to compromise. The
Constitution
would explicitly recognize the principle of responsible government
but only to the extent that Commonwealth Ministers must be or
become members of
the Commonwealth Parliament.
Otherwise, the content of that principle would be determined by constitutional
convention.
The States would
have equal representation in the Senate but its power in the enactment of
proposed laws appropriating revenue and
imposing taxation would be somewhat
The authority of the
House of Representatives in relation to proposed laws originating in that house
would also be strengthened by
the provision for a joint sitting as the final
stage of the deadlocks
given the relative
sizes of the two houses.
The framers recognised that the judicature would be the ‘sole
arbiter and interpreter of the
constitution’.
major consideration in the design of the Australian union was the desire of the
founders to resolve the fractious fiscal competition
among the colonies by
establishing free trade and a common market within the union. This would be
achieved by a constitutional affirmation
of freedom of interstate trade and
intercourse together with the conferral of exclusive power to impose customs
duties on the Commonwealth,
subject to agreement upon distribution of the
proceeds of the Commonwealth
After little and rather
confused debate, the framers of the
Constitution
expanded the exclusive power of
the Commonwealth to include duties of
Nevertheless, this grant
of extensive fiscal authority to the Commonwealth carried a significant proviso:
Constitution
must mitigate the impact upon the States of this loss of their
principal source of
Constitution
established a bicameral Commonwealth
legislature comprising (along with the Queen) the Senate and the House of
Representatives,
with members of
both chambers directly chosen by the
In doing so it
identified the centrality of the people within the Commonwealth polity and
confirmed the status of representative
democracy as a foundational element of
the constitutional framework, closely related to the federal
As an interim
measure, the
Constitution
initially adopted the franchise as prescribed by each
State for its more numerous legislative chamber, but only until the Commonwealth
Parliament ‘otherwise
This power of
the Parliament to determine the qualification of electors is subject to
democratic requirements; the franchise must
be the same for both the Senate and
the House of Representatives, each elector must have only one vote for senators
and one for members
of the House of Representatives, and adults who have the
right to vote at elections for the more numerous house of a State legislature
can not be denied the right to vote at elections for either house of the
Commonwealth Parliament.
The federal character of the Australian union is clearly evident in
several aspects of the design of the Parliament. The composition
of both houses
is highly significant, as is the relationship between them. Moreover, the
authority of the Parliament is limited.
The Original States are entitled
to equal representation in the Senate, regardless of their
population.
Constitution
requires the people of each State to vote as one electorate in choosing their
senators, again until the Parliament ‘otherwise
Senators are
chosen for a fixed term of six years, and serve on a rotation basis that
provides for expiry of the terms of half of
the senators chosen from each State
every three years.
Constitution
confers powers on the Parliament to make laws prescribing the
method of choosing senators (which must be uniform for all States)
regulating the conduct of Senate
At the same time,
though, the
Constitution
empowers the Governor of each State to issue the writs
for election of senators,
authorizes the Parliament of a State to make laws for determining the times and
places of election of senators for the
and provides that a
casual vacancy in the Senate shall be filled by the vote in a joint sitting of
the Houses of Parliament of the
The House of
Representatives is composed of members directly chosen by the people of the
Commonwealth, for a term of up to three
Constitution
recognizes the place of the States in the federal body politic by requiring that
the number of members chosen in each of the States
shall be in proportion to the
respective numbers of their
thereby precluding the
creation of electorates straddling State or territory boundaries. It restricts
the number of members of the
House of Representatives, as nearly as practicable,
to twice the number of senators.
It also entitles each Original State to at least five members, regardless of its
population.
Subject to these
requirements, the
Constitution
confers broad powers on the Parliament to
determine the boundaries of electoral divisions, the number of members to be
each division, the conduct of elections for the House of
Representatives, and the voting system for the House of
Representatives.
relationship between the houses is intricate and carefully drawn, with all the
attributes of an uneasy compromise. The Senate’s
power in the enactment of
legislation is equal to that of the House of Representatives, apart from
particular exceptions relating
to taxation and appropriation
However, the
Constitution
provides an elaborate mechanism to resolve disputes between the
houses in relation to proposed laws originating in the House of Representatives,
involving a simultaneous dissolution of the two houses followed by an election
for all members of both of them, and culminating (if
necessary) in a joint
sitting of all the members of both
The relative size of the
two houses, with the number of members of the House of Representatives about
twice that of the Senate, is
a significant but not decisive factor in
determining the outcome of the joint sitting.
In accordance with the
federal principle, the
Constitution
prescribes limits upon the legislative
authority of all Australian polities.
Constitution
authority of the Commonwealth Parliament by conferring power on it to make laws
for the peace, order and good government
of the Commonwealth with respect to
specified subjects only.
few highly significant cases, that power is
aspects of fiscal
policy (duties of customs and excise, bounties on the production or export of
admission or
establishment of new States,
government of Commonwealth
territories.
Mostly, however,
Commonwealth legislative powers are
concurrent.
In the event of
inconsistency between the law of a State and the law of the Commonwealth, the
latter prevails.
Moreover, the
Constitution
places specific limitations on Commonwealth
legislative authority with respect to trade, commerce and intercourse among the
taxation of property of
any kind belonging to a State,
and matters of religion.
prohibits discrimination between States in taxation
State preference in
trade, commerce and revenue
and discrimination
based upon State of
Constitution
does not confer power on State Parliaments; that is a matter for
the State constitutions. They do so in general terms, to make laws
peace, order and good government of the State in all cases
whatsoever.
Implicit in this
language and inherent in the nature of the State polities is some limitation on
their extra-territorial legislative
As previously noted,
section 106
Constitution
underpins State constitutions with the
declaration that they shall continue as at the establishment of the Commonwealth
until altered
in accordance with their own
provisions.
At the same time,
Constitution
does impose significant limitations upon State legislative
authority arising from the exclusive legislative power of the Commonwealth
Parliament,
the declaration that
Commonwealth legislation prevails over inconsistent State legislation in the
broad field of concurrent legislative
the requirement that
trade, commerce and intercourse among the States ‘shall be absolutely
and various
prohibitions upon the raising or maintaining any naval or military force, the
imposition of any tax on property of any
kind belonging to the
Commonwealth,
the creation of
currency and legal tender,
the discriminatory treatment of residents of other
Constitution
confers the executive power of the Commonwealth on the Queen and makes it
exercisable by the Governor-General as her
representative.
It requires the
establishment of a Federal Executive Council to advise the Governor-General in
the government of the Commonwealth
and provides for the appointment of its
members by the Governor-General.
It authorises the Governor-General to appoint the Queen’s Ministers of
State for the Commonwealth to administer Commonwealth
departments established by
the Governor-General in Council
and declares that they shall be members of the Federal Executive
The States play no part
in the appointment of Commonwealth Ministers.
Significantly, while
membership of Parliament is not a prerequisite to appointment as a Minister, no
Minister can hold office for
more than three months without being or becoming a
senator or a member of the House of
Representatives.
requirement affirms the status of responsible government as a foundational
element of the
Constitution
, notwithstanding the structure of the
Constitution
with its separate chapters relating to the Parliament and the
The federal
limits upon the executive authority of the Australian polities are less explicit
than those upon their legislative authority.
Constitution
provides that the
executive power of the Commonwealth ‘extends to the execution and
maintenance of this
Constitution
, and of the laws of the
Commonwealth’.
It does not
prescribe any limits on the scope of State executive power, or attempt to
resolve any conflict arising from the inconsistent
exercise of Commonwealth and
State executive power.
The federal character of the Australian union is
apparent in some aspects of the design of the Australian judicature, together
the requirement of separation of judicial power that is implicit in the
organisation in distinct chapters of the provisions of the
Constitution
with the three branches of government.
Constitution
confers the
judicial power of the Commonwealth upon the High Court of Australia, such other
federal courts as the Parliament creates,
and such other courts as the
Parliament invests with federal
This provision is
premised upon two significant and related distinctions: the first between two
categories of courts, federal courts
created by the Commonwealth Parliament and
State courts in existence the time of federation or created by State
legislatures thereafter
in accordance with their
constitutions;
and the second
between two distinct categories of jurisdiction, federal and state.
Justices of the High Court and other federal courts are appointed by the
Governor-General in Council, and may be removed only
by the Governor-General in
Council on an address from both houses of the Commonwealth
Parliament.
The States play no
part, just as the Commonwealth plays no part in the appointment or removal of
judges of State courts.
Constitution
places the High Court at the
apex of the entire Australian judicature by conferring appellate jurisdiction on
it from all decisions
of any Justice exercising the original jurisdiction of the
Court, any other federal court, any court exercising federal jurisdiction,
the Supreme Court of any State.
Constitution
also confers original jurisdiction directly upon the
High Court in a number of specified
Furthermore, it
empowers the Parliament to make laws conferring additional original jurisdiction
on the Court in specified
defining the
any State court.
elements of this structure depart substantially from the federal principle: the
appointment of Justices of the High Court
solely by the Commonwealth Executive
without ratification by the Senate or approval by the States; the general
appellate jurisdiction
(extending to decisions of State courts in matters of
State jurisdiction) of the High Court; and the investiture by the Commonwealth
Parliament of federal jurisdiction in State courts.
RESPONSIBILITY
Historical context
The framers of the
Constitution
well understood that, as a consequence of the design of the
Australian union as a collection of polities, the
Constitution
must determine
the relationship among those polities. That relationship would comprise several
facets; it would be complex and fluid.
The polities would be complete, distinct
and, to some extent, independent. Despite their differences in population and
States would be equal in many constitutional respects. The
relationship between the Commonwealth and the States would not be
hierarchical,
even though laws
of the Commonwealth would prevail over those of the States, the High Court of
Australia would have unlimited appellate
confer federal jurisdiction on State courts.
All polities, the
Commonwealth and the States, would assume reciprocal responsibilities in the
Australian union. These responsibilities
would be quite distinct from the many
opportunities provided by the
Constitution
for co-operation among the polities
as a corollary of the distribution of powers among them, as these opportunities
would not entail
obligations.
contrast, the
Constitution
would impose a variety of obligations, some on the
Commonwealth to ensure its action in relation to matters within its exclusive
authority as defence, monetary policy and fiscal
management,
others on the
States in relation to the operation of the
Commonwealth’s responsibilities with respect to defence and monetary
policy were uncontentious.
Its responsibility for distribution among the Australian polities of the revenue
derived from Commonwealth taxation, arising from
its exclusive fiscal authority,
was anything but. There was no easy way out of the dilemma described by one of
the framers of the
Constitution
as ‘the hardest nut to
expressed serious misgivings about the situation in which one polity would be
responsible for raising public revenues for
in the end, however,
they accepted that they had no
The achievement of
the Australian union depended on a solution to ‘the financial
Distribution of Commonwealth revenue among the
Australian polities required two types of provisions in the
Constitution
for determining the total amount to be provided by the Commonwealth to the
States, and the other for determining the amounts
to be allocated by the
Commonwealth to each of the States. As to the former, the issue was whether the
Constitution
should prescribe a formula for calculating the total amount or
whether that task should be left to the Parliament. As to the latter,
was deeply divided between a simple allocation to each State on the basis of its
population (the
method) and a more complicated, but perhaps
‘fairer’, allocation to each State of a fixed proportion of the net
collected within its territory (the collections method); yet another
possibility was to leave this matter to the Parliament,
Constitution
provides that the polities are complete,
distinct and independent in various ways. The new Commonwealth comprises three
legislative, executive and judicial, each of which has authority
conferred upon it directly by the
Constitution
retain their pre-federation Constitutions, substantially intact, until altered
in accordance with the requirements of
Constitutions.
The equality
of the States is amply acknowledged in the representation of the Original States
in the Senate,
protection accorded to the integrity of State territorial
boundaries,
the need for the
consent of the Parliaments of affected States for the formation of new
and the requirement
for approval of a proposed amendment of the
Constitution
by a majority of
electors in a majority of States, as well as an overall majority of all
The States are also
entitled to impartial treatment by the Commonwealth in any law or regulation of
trade, commerce or revenue.
The relationship among the States within the Australian union is shaped
by several provisions of the
Constitution
which establish a common
allow interstate
discrimination among residents of different States based upon their place of
and ensure the
recognition and legal effect of State laws, public records and judicial
proceedings throughout the
Commonwealth.
States are responsible to the Commonwealth for issuing writs for Senate
filling Senate
casual vacancies
incarceration of persons accused or convicted of offences against Commonwealth
In addition, they must
not intrude upon matters of Commonwealth exclusive authority: the national
capital and other Commonwealth
Commonwealth
departments transferred by the
Constitution
duties of customs and
of excise, and bounties on the production or export of
naval and military
taxation of
Commonwealth property
currency, coinage and legal
Commonwealth is responsible to the States for matters placed by the
Constitution
beyond their control. Three stand out.
First, as a corollary of the
exclusive power of the Commonwealth over naval and military defence, the
Commonwealth must protect the
States against invasion and, on the application of
any State, against domestic
as the States have little authority over monetary policy, the Commonwealth is
responsible for the establishment and maintenance
of the Australian monetary
Finally, as a
consequence of the exclusive power on the Commonwealth to impose duties of
customs and excise, the Commonwealth has
responsibility for fiscal policy and a
particular obligation to share with the States the public revenues derived from
Commonwealth
taxation. That obligation comprises several rather elaborate
components: a limitation upon Commonwealth expenditure of the proceeds
Commonwealth duties of customs and excise, for at least the first ten years of
the Australian union;
specific requirements to distribute the Commonwealth’s surplus revenue
among the States according to the collections method
prior to the imposition of
Commonwealth duties of customs and excise and for at least the next five
and then on such basis
as the Parliament ‘deems
authority for the Parliament to provide ‘financial assistance to any State
on such terms and conditions as the Parliament
As the ‘sole arbiter and interpreter of the
Constitution
Court of Australia has the task of putting flesh on the bones of the federal
Multiple polities
The significance of multiple
polities in the design of the Australian federal union was apparent to the three
members of the first
High Court, all of whom had played prominent parts in
drafting the
Constitution
: Griffith CJ (leader of the 1891 Convention), Barton J
(leader of the 1897-98 Convention) and O’Conner J (member of the
In its first case
the new Court held that the State of Tasmania lacked the power to impose stamp
duty upon an officer of the Commonwealth
in relation to a receipt that he was
required by Commonwealth statute to give for payment of his salary, pointing out
that Tasmania
and the Commonwealth were distinct polities with discrete powers
of limited application.
two years later, the Court held that similar constraints precluded the
Commonwealth Parliament from regulating the terms of
employment of officers of
the State of New South Wales. The doctrine of immunity of Commonwealth and State
instrumentalities, founded
upon the necessity for freedom of each polity from
the control of the other, was
reciprocal.
however, the composition of the High Court had changed completely as had its
, also involving the power of the Commonwealth Parliament to regulate
terms of employment of State officials, the plurality disparaged
the doctrine of
immunity of instrumentalities as ‘an interpretation of the
Constitution
depending on an implication which is formed on a vague, individual conception of
the compact ...’
cast aside the federal principle and instead emphasised ‘... two cardinal
features of our political system which are interwoven
in [the] texture [of the
Constitution
] and ... radically distinguish it from the American
Constitution
... One is the common sovereignty of all parts of the British
Empire; the other is the principle of responsible
government.’
of these ‘cardinal features’ could supplant the federal principle
within the Australian union, however. The common
sovereignty of all parts of the
British Empire was inextricably bound up with the unity and indivisibility of
the Crown, a doctrine
which, long before
Harrison Moore had
predicted would lead to ‘inconvenience and mischief’ in any
federation.
Forty years
later, Latham CJ remarked that as a legal principle, the doctrine ‘tends
to dissolve into verbally impressive
mysticism’.
principle of responsible government, although undeniably significant in the
internal organisation of the Commonwealth and the
State polities in the
Australian union, had no bearing on the distribution of power to those polities
or the relationship between
So the High Court soon revived the
federal principle, replacing the repudiated doctrine of immunity of
instrumentalities with a more
modest restraint upon interference between
Commonwealth and State
This doctrinal
reconstruction culminated in the
State Banking Case
, decided in
The Court confirmed
there that the
Constitution
not only provided for the establishment of multiple
polities, Commonwealth and State, but also required their maintenance and
continuation.
In the words of
‘The foundation of the
Constitution
is the conception
of a central government and a
number of State governments separately
organised. The
Constitution
their continued existence as
independent
Notwithstanding
the assertion by the plurality in the
Engineers’ Case
political constraints would suffice to prevent abuse of power in the
Australian union,
Melbourne Corporation Case
held that the federal structure of the
union entails legal constraints upon interference between polities.
Melbourne Corporation
doctrine is now well entrenched in Australian
jurisprudence. Nevertheless, the High Court recently observed that the doctrine
proved insusceptible of precise
formulation’.
practice it provides a measure of protection to the States against interference
by the Commonwealth in the performance of their
functions. The problem lies in
determining the extent of that protection. While the doctrine also protects the
Commonwealth against
State interference, the Commonwealth is less likely to
invoke that protection as it has more explicit means of resisting interference
cases the Court distinguished between measures specifically directed by one
polity against another and measures of general
application, describing the
former as discrimination.
Melbourne Corporation Case
squarely raised this distinction as section 48
Banking Act 1945
prohibited a bank from conducting any
banking business
for a State
or any of its authorities
. The Court
acknowledged the distinction although two members rejected the description of
specific measures as discrimination, for
Specific measures
involved the placement of a ‘special burden’ by one polity on
It was clear that
the impugned provision of the
Banking Act 1945
imposed such a burden on
the States, but was that either necessary or sufficient to invoke the
constitutional constraint upon interference
between polities? Apparently not.
The federal principle ensured the continuing existence of the States as distinct
polities within
the Australian union and their capacity to function as such
revisited the distinction between specific and general measures in 1985 in
Queensland Electricity Commission v
Commonwealth
a challenge
to the validity of a Commonwealth statute directed at agencies of the Queensland
government.
extensive review of the authorities relating to the
Melbourne Corporation
doctrine, Mason J concluded:
‘This review ... shows that the
principle is now well established and that it consists
of two elements:
(1) the prohibition against discrimination which involves the
the States of special burdens or disabilities; and (2) the prohibition
against laws of general application which operate to destroy or curtail the
existence of the States or their capacity to function as
governments (citation
omitted). The second element of the prohibition
is necessarily less precise than the
first; it protects the States
against laws which, complying with the first element
because they have a
general application, may nevertheless produce the effect which
object of the principle to
contrast, Dawson J formulated the doctrine on a broader basis; the two elements
of discrimination and special burden merely illustrated
the application of the
doctrine but did not determine its content.
‘... [U]nless it is
otherwise apparent from the nature of a Commonwealth legislative
the language in which it is conferred, a Commonwealth law may not
interfere with the exercise by a state of its constitutional or governmental
functions... Discrimination against the States or their agencies may
point to breach
as may a special burden placed upon the States by a law
of general application.
Be that as it may, a general proposition
arises by implication from the federal
structure of the
Constitution
the Commonwealth Parliament cannot impair the
capacity of the States to
exercise for themselves their constitutional functions; that
their capacity ... to function effectually as independent
words of Gibbs J, ‘the reason for the limitation is ... to protect the
integrity of the
Re Australian Education Union; Ex parte Victoria
, the Court acknowledged
the possibility of confusion among statements of the
Melbourne Corporation
doctrine but chose not to resolve it on that
The case turned on
the scope of Commonwealth legislative power to prescribe the terms and
conditions of employment of Victorian public
servants. The plurality recognised
that application of the
Melbourne Corporation
doctrine involved difficult
matters of degree.
doctrine did not necessarily preclude the application of Commonwealth industrial
awards to the vast majority of State
At the same time,
some matters were critical to a State’s capacity to function as a
government, such as determination of the
number, identity, terms and conditions
of employment and dismissal of State employees, and the appointment, removal and
engagement of Ministers, ministerial assistants and advisers, heads of
department and high level statutory office holders, parliamentary
judges and others ‘at the higher levels of
government’.
strong dissent, Dawson J described such distinctions as
‘artificial’; they failed to ensure the capacity of a State
function as a polity in the Australian
In two recent
cases, the High Court clarified the
Melbourne Corporation
doctrine by
adopting the broader formulation of it as a corollary of the federal principle
protecting the multiple polities within
the Australian
The cases challenged
the validity of Commonwealth legislation that imposed a tax upon State judges
and State members of
in respect of
their pension and superannuation
Austin v The
Commonwealth
Gummow and Hayne JJ declined to adopt the conclusion of Mason J in the
Queensland Electricity
Commission Case
that the doctrine comprised
two elements, discrimination and special
on the ground that
it could obscure the ‘fundamental constitutional conception’
underlying the doctrine.
‘There is, in our view, but one limitation, though the
apparent expression of it varies
with the form of the legislation under
consideration. The question presented by the
doctrine in any given case
requires the assessment of the impact of particular laws
criteria as “special burden’ and “curtailment” of
capacity of the States
“to function as governments”.
These criteria are to be applied by consideration
not only of the
form but also the “the substance and actual operation” of the
federal law (citation omitted). Further, this inquiry inevitably turns upon
matters of evaluation and degree of “constitutional facts”
which are not readily
established by objective methods in curial
proceedings.’
Clarke v Commissioner of Taxation
, the plurality quoted this passage
with approval;
French J also
acknowledged that the doctrine was derived from the design of the Australian
union as an agglomeration of distinct
constitutional implication considered in
and its precursors means
the Commonwealth cannot, by the exercise of its legislative power,
significantly
impair, curtail or weaken the capacity of the States to
exercise their constitutional
powers and functions (be they legislative,
executive or judicial) or significantly
impair, curtail or weaken the
actual exercise of those powers or functions. The
Constitution
assumes the existence
of the States as
“independent
entities”. This
implies recognition of the importance of their
status as components of the
federation.’
Architecture
and Authority
The provisions of the
Constitution
allocating limited
authority to the Commonwealth and State polities also created significant
challenges for the High Court of Australia
from the very beginning.
deficiencies of the model chosen for conferring legislative authority upon the
Commonwealth and the States were soon apparent.
Commonwealth powers are
specified, but State powers are not. Most Commonwealth powers are concurrent, as
are State powers. Within
the realm of shared power, Commonwealth legislation
prevails over inconsistent State legislation. The scope of legislative powers
depends on the meaning given by the High Court to the terse and imprecise
language of the
Constitution
. The failure to specify any exclusive State
legislative powers means that the
Constitution
provides the High Court with
scant textual guidance in determining the scope of Commonwealth legislative
allocation method for executive authority is different but no less demanding in
its application. The executive power of the Commonwealth
‘extends to the
execution and maintenance of this
Constitution
, and of the laws of the
Commonwealth.’
Constitutions (including the executive power of the States) continue, subject to
the Commonwealth
Constitution
, until altered in accordance with their own
requirements.
first High Court took up the challenge involved in determining the scope of
Commonwealth legislative powers with a doctrine of
‘reserved powers’
that curtailed Commonwealth power to prevent intrusion upon established
legislative functions of the
This doctrine was
repudiated by the Court in the
Engineers’ Case
along with the
doctrine of immunity of instrumentalities. In the words of the
‘It is undoubted that those who maintain the
authority of the Commonwealth
Parliament to pass a certain law should be
able to point to some enumerated power
containing the requisite
authority. But we also hold that, where the affirmative terms
of a stated
power would justify an enactment, it rests upon those who rely on some
limitation or restriction upon the power, to indicate it in the
Constitution
the aftermath of the
Engineers’ Case
, the question for the High
Court was whether the federal principle was relevant in determining the scope of
Commonwealth legislative
Melbourne Corporation
protected the constitutional integrity of the States. But was that integrity
confined to institutional matters or did it
also require the maintenance of a
measure of legislative authority in the States?
Paradoxically, Dixon J
apparently favoured the narrower view in the
Melbourne Corporation
‘The foundation of the
Constitution
is the conception
of a central government and a
number of State governments separately
organized. The
Constitution
their continued existence as
independent entities. Among them it distributes powers
of governing the
country. The framers of the
Constitution
do not appear to have
that power itself forms part of the conception of a government. They
appear rather to have conceived the States as bodies politic whose existence and
nature are independent of the powers allocated to
or not the framers of the
Constitution
excluded power from their conception of
government, the High Court has frequently done so. Outstanding examples include
Uniform Tax Cases
Payroll Tax Case
(extension of the
fiscal dominance of the Commonwealth over the
Tasmanian Dam
(implementation of international treaty obligations on matters
otherwise beyond the authority of
Parliament),
Title Act Case
(protection and regulation of land rights of Indigenous
Work Choices
(regulation of the activities of foreign corporations and domestic
trading and financial
corporations)
(taxation of ‘above normal profits’ derived from production
of prescribed mineral
resources).
Attempts to
Melbourne Corporation
doctrine were firmly rebuffed by the
Court in all of these cases on the basis that Commonwealth legislation
encroaching upon matters
of traditional State legislative activity, however
substantial the intrusion may be, did not ‘impose any special burden or
disability on the exercise of powers and fulfilment of functions of the States
which curtails their capacity to function as
governments.’
contrast, the High Court has reaffirmed the significance of the federal
principle in recent cases requiring determination of the
scope of the executive
power of the Commonwealth.
Pape v Federal Commissioner of
, the Court identified
Constitution
as the source
of Commonwealth authority to spend public funds. Members of the Court were
unable to agree upon the scope of the power
and, in particular, whether it
extended to the short-term fiscal measures adopted by the Commonwealth in
response to the global financial
But all agreed that
the power was limited in scope and some identified the federal principle as a
basis for the limitation. As Hayne
and Kieffel JJ explained:
‘The executive power of the Commonwealth is the executive power of a
limited powers. The
Engineers’ Case
decided that
the powers are not to be
understood as confined by a priori assumptions.
But no statement of this Court
suggests that the executive power of the
Commonwealth is
unbounded.’
v The Commonwealth
challenge to the validity of the National School Chaplaincy Program established
by the Commonwealth by means of administrative
guidelines, contractual
arrangements and expenditure of public funds, without legislative authorisation
other than appropriation
of the necessary funds. The High Court relied on
different aspects of the federal principle in its response to the
Commonwealth’s
submissions on the scope of the executive power of the
Commonwealth. The first was that the Commonwealth, by analogy to a natural
person, had almost unlimited capacity to contract and spend. The Court pointed
out that, unlike a natural person, the Commonwealth
was a political entity
established by the
Constitution
and that its expenditure involved public
The second was that
the executive power of the Commonwealth encompassed at least all of the matters
within the scope of its legislative
power. That too was rejected. According to
‘A Commonwealth Executive with a general power to
deal with matters of
Commonwealth legislative competence is in tension
with the federal
conception which informed the function of the Senate as
a necessary organ of
Commonwealth legislative power. It would undermine
the parliamentary control of
the executive branch and weaken the role of
afterwards, the Parliament enacted legislation to remedy the deficiency in
Commonwealth executive power. The validity of that
legislation was then
challenged in
Williams v The Commonwealth [No
The High Court upheld
the challenge on the ground that Parliament lacked the power to enact the
legislation, and refused to reconsider
its decision in
Williams v The
Commonwealth.
In doing so, the Court explicitly repudiated any assumption
that the Commonwealth’s executive power to spend and contract is
as that of the British Executive. Once more, it invoked the federal
‘This assumption, which underpinned the arguments
advanced by the
Commonwealth parties about executive power, denies the
“basal consideration”
(citation omitted) that the
Constitution
effects a distribution of powers and functions
between the Commonwealth and the States. The polity which, as the
Commonwealth parties rightly submitted, must “posses all the powers that
in order to function as a polity” is the central polity of
a federation in which
independent governments exist in the one area and
exercise powers in different
fields of action carefully defined by law
(citation omitted). It is not a polity
organised and operating under a
unitary system or under a flexible constitution
where the Parliament is
Responsibility
In stark contrast to its willingness to acknowledge
the significance of multiple polities in the Australian union and to determine
and enforce the limits placed by the
Constitution
upon the authority of those
polities, the High Court has been reluctant to recognise and give legal effect
to the reciprocal responsibilities
imposed by the
Constitution
Commonwealth and the States.
R v The Governor of South
, the High Court refused an application for a writ of mandamus
ordering the Governor of South Australia to issue a writ pursuant to
Constitution
for the election of a senator for South Australia, following
upon a declaration by the Court of Disputed Returns that the recent
election of
one of the three senators for that State was
The question was
whether it had jurisdiction to compel performance, assuming that
Constitution
imposed a public duty on the Governor. The answer lay in the
nature of the functions and duties of the Governor of the State under
Constitution
with respect to the election of
The Court pointed
‘There are in fact, three modes in which the place of a
senator may be filled –
popular election, choice by both Houses of
Parliament, and appointment by the
Governor with the advice of the
Executive Council. In a case where the choice
ought to be made by both
Houses of Parliament it is quite clear that this Court could
not command
those Houses to meet and choose a senator and it would be immaterial
whether a writ had or had not been issues by the Governor for holding a popular
election. It is equally clear that the Governor could not be commanded to
which he can only do with the advice of the Executive Council.
As, therefore, this
Court would have no authority to correct by mandamus
a mistake of one kind as to
the mode of choice, it seems clear that it
was not intended to have authority by
mandamus in such matters at
surprising that, in the course of landmark decisions on the authority of the
Commonwealth to deal with internal threats to
Australia’s security, the
High Court has made no reference to the responsibility placed explicitly by
section 119
Constitution
upon the Commonwealth to protect the States
against invasion and domestic violence. In 1951, the Court held that the
Parliament did
not have the power to enact the
Communist Party Dissolution
the Court decided that the Parliament did have the power to insert
anti-terrorism provisions in the
Criminal Code Act 1995
Possible sources
of Commonwealth legislative power were section 51(vi) of the Constitution (naval
and military defence of the Commonwealth
and of the several States, and the
control of the forces to execute and maintain the laws of the Commonwealth);
sections 51(xxxix)
Constitution
(incidental power together with
the executive power);
an implied legislative power for protection of the Commonwealth against domestic
Commonwealth’s responsibility under
section 119
was apparently
irrelevant.
fixation upon power to the exclusion of responsibility has been illustrated best
in the High Court’s demolition of the
hard-fought financial settlement
that the framers incorporated in the
Constitution
. At the heart of that
settlement was the responsibility placed upon the Commonwealth to use its
extensive fiscal authority, much
of which was exclusive, to raise public
revenues on behalf of all polities in the Australian union, Commonwealth and
State, to be
shared fairly among them.
The demolition began in 1908 with
the Court’s decision in the
Surplus Revenue Case
Commonwealth Parliament could evade the responsibility imposed upon it by
Constitution
to distribute the surplus revenue of the
Commonwealth to the States ‘on such basis as it deems fair’ by
eliminating the
surplus through the simple device of appropriating moneys from
the Consolidated Revenue Fund for future Commonwealth
expenditure.
The decision was
a sad triumph of form over substance. A majority of the Court held that the
outcome depended on the meaning of ‘surplus
revenue’ in
Constitution
, having regard to the language of related
sections 89
some also considered the
power of the Parliament to enact the
Surplus Revenue Act 1908
Barton J framed
the issue in terms of the validity of the appropriation
Little attention was
given to the historical context or structural implications of the numerous
provisions of the
Constitution
that made up the financial
settlement.
Tellingly, Isaacs
J merely remarked that the primary object of the financial clauses, read
together and understood as part of a scheme
of government, was ‘the
creation and maintenance of the
Commonwealth’,
apparently devoid of any constitutional responsibility for alleviation of the
parlous fiscal position of the States within the Australian
union. A century
later, nothing has
Subsequently,
the High Court reinforced the Commonwealth’s financial dominance over the
States in momentous decisions relating
to income tax and excise duties without
any regard to the responsibility for sharing the public revenues derived from
Commonwealth
taxation fairly with the States. In the
First Uniform Tax
, the Court upheld the validity of wartime Commonwealth legislation
supplanting State income
Although the States
later succeeded in overturning Commonwealth legal barriers to their
reinstatement of income
they have been
deterred from doing so by practical and political considerations. In
South Wales
, the Court confirmed that the Commonwealth’s exclusive
legislative power to impose excise duties now encompassed practically
taxation of commodities,
beyond the mere taxation of local manufacture of goods as thought at the time of
federation.
the demolition of the financial settlement was concluded by decisions of the
Court on the scope of the power conferred on
Parliament by
Constitution
to grant financial assistance to any State on such terms and
conditions as the Parliament thinks fit. The Court rebuffed most attempts
constrain such terms and
conditions,
exceptions attributable to specific provisions of the
Constitution
section 116
Again, the Court was
preoccupied with Commonwealth power rather than its responsibility to share
public revenues with the States.
More recently, members of the Court have drawn
attention to ‘the significance of
in the federal structure’,
but without acknowledgment of Commonwealth responsibility to the States in
core ingredients of the federal principle in the Australian union are polities,
power and responsibility. The
Constitution
establishes the Commonwealth polity
and guarantees the continuation of the State polities. The States are part of
the Commonwealth
but distinct entities within it. The
Constitution
the complex relationship among the multiple polities based upon their limited
authority and reciprocal responsibility.
The federal principle requires
the maintenance of all polities and their capacity to function as such within
the Australian union.
While the Commonwealth needs little protection from the
States, given the distribution of authority within the Australian union,
reverse is certainly not the case. The High Court has responded to the need for
protection of the States by proscribing the exercise
of Commonwealth authority
that threatens the institutional integrity of the States.
The adequacy
of that protection is open to question, however, especially in relation to the
allocation of legislative authority between
the Commonwealth and the States. The
consistent refusal of the High Court to take account of the federal principle in
determining
the scope of Commonwealth legislative powers is surprising, on three
counts. First, the failure of the
Constitution
to specify any exclusive
legislative powers of the States leaves them vulnerable to unchecked expansion
of Commonwealth powers expressed
in ambulatory terms. Secondly, the capacity of
States to function as distinct polities within the Australian union surely
on their retention of some measure of exclusive legislative power; that
can be achieved only by limitation of the scope of Commonwealth
legislative
powers since Commonwealth laws override inconsistent State laws. Thirdly, the
High Court’s acknowledgment of the
federal principle in recent cases
involving the scope of the executive power of the Commonwealth seems difficult
to reconcile with
its refusal to do so in cases involving Commonwealth
legislative powers.
The neglect of reciprocal responsibility amounts to
an even greater shortcoming in the operation of the federal principle in the
union. This deficiency may be attributable to the view that political
means of recognition and enforcement of reciprocal responsibilities
appropriate and adequate without any need to resort to legal means. The High
Court’s decision in the
Surplus Revenue Case
lends some support to
it, and the plurality in the
Engineers Case
expressed a similar view with
respect to determination of the scope of Commonwealth legislative powers.
However, the Court soon acknowledged
the incapacity of the political process to
determine the scope of legislative authority in the federal union. Reliance upon
to determine the scope of its own powers creates an obvious and
insoluble conflict of interest. Precisely the same problem exists
in relation
to responsibilities. The failure of Parliament to accept and discharge its
constitutional responsibilities
is best illustrated by the sad fate of
the financial settlement, established as a cornerstone of the Australian
In light of this
historical experience, the persistent reticence of the High Court to enforce
responsibility stands in stark contrast
with its willingness to prescribe limits
17 November 2016
Commonwealth of Australia
Constitution
Act 1900 (UK), s 3; see also the preamble to this Act.
Commonwealth of Australia
Constitution
Act 1900 (UK), s 8
Anne Twomey, ‘Independence’
Commonwealth of Australia
Constitution
Act 1900 (UK), s 6
John Quick and Robert Randolph Garran,
The Annotated
Constitution
Australian Commonwealth
(Legal Books 1976) 332; they overlook a further
occurrence, in
s 51(xxxix).
Ibid; a more appropriate
descriptor for this union would be
‘confederate’.
Federal Council of Australasia Act 1885
Cheryl Saunders,
Constitution
of Australia
(Hart Publishing 2011)
, Sydney, 1891, 23 (Parkes); see also
Convention Debates
Adelaide, 1897, 395 (Barton)
, Sydney, 1891, 93 (Barton); see also
Convention Debates
Adelaide, 1897, 97, 642
, Adelaide, 1897, 395 (Barton); John Quick and Robert Randolph
The Annotated
Constitution
of the Australian Commonwealth
Books 1976) 418-9, 449-50
Ibid 150-165; see also Saunders [note 11]
Susan Kenny,
‘Evolution’
Constitution
Constitution
Constitution
; Andrew Inglis Clark,
Studies in Australian Constitutional Law
Constitution
Constitution
, Sydney, 1891, 23 (Parkes); see also
Convention Debates
Adelaide, 1897, 395 (Barton)
, Adelaide, 1897, 641-668, 1190; see also
Convention Debates
Sydney, 1897, 256-355
Convention Debates
, Sydney, 1891, 113 (Baker); see also
, Adelaide, 1897, 21
Michael Crommelin,
‘The Federal Model’ in Gregory Craven (ed),
Federation: Towards the Second Century
(MUP 1992) 33,
James Crawford,
‘The Legislative Power of the Commonwealth’ in Gregory Craven (ed),
The Convention Debates 1891-1898; Commentaries, Indices and Guide
VI (Legal Books, 1986) 113; see also Michael Crommelin, ‘The Federal
Model’ in Gregory Craven (ed),
Australian Federation: Towards the
Second Century
(MUP 1992) 33,
, Sydney, 1891, 185-8 (Dibbs), 228-9 (Gillies), 272 (McMillan), 301
(Abbott), 323 (Parkes); see Michael Crommelin, ‘The Executive’
Gregory Craven (ed),
The Convention Debates 1891-1898; Commentaries, Indices
, Volume VI (Legal Books, 1986)
and Government in Colonial Australia
Convention Debates
Sydney, 1891, 35, 37 (Griffith);
Convention Debates
, Adelaide, 1897, 175
Constitution
Michael Crommelin,
‘The Executive’ in Gregory Craven (ed),
The Convention Debates
1891-1898; Commentaries, Indices and Guide
, Volume VI (Legal Books, 1986)
136-142; see also Michael Crommelin, ‘The Federal Model’ in Gregory
Craven (ed),
Australian Federation: Towards the Second Century
Constitution
Constitution
Constitution
, Sydney, 1891, 198 (Cockburn); see also 2:129,
, Sydney, 1891, ** (Parkes resolutions); see also John Quick and
Robert Randolph Garran,
The Annotated
Constitution
of the Australian
Commonwealth
(Legal Books 1976)
Cheryl Saunders,
‘Fiscal Federalism – A General and Unholy Scramble” in Gregory
Craven (ed),
Australian Federation: Towards the Second Century
John Quick and
Robert Randolph Garran,
The Annotated
Constitution
of the Australian
Commonwealth
(Legal Books 1976) 827; see also Cheryl Saunders, ‘Fiscal
Federalism – A General and Unholy Scramble” in Gregory
Craven (ed),
Australian Federation: Towards the Second Century
(MUP 1992) 101, 104
Constitution
Constitution
Paul Finn, ‘A
Sovereign People, A Public Trust” in PD Finn (ed),
Essays on Law and
Government, Vol 1
(Law Book Company 1995) 1,
Constitution
(xxxvi); the Parliament provided otherwise in
Constitution
Constitution
Constitution
Constitution
Constitution
Constitution
Constitution
Constitution
Constitution
Constitution
Constitution
Constitution
Constitution
See Mark Leeming,
‘Power’ 12-13
Constitution
Constitution
Constitution
Constitution
Constitution
Constitution
Constitution
Constitution
Constitution
Constitution
Constitution
Constitution
Constitution
Constitution
Constitution
(NSW), s 5; cf
Constitution
Act 1975 (Vic), s 16: ‘to make laws in and for
Victoria in all cases
whatsoever’
Australia Acts 1986
(Cth and UK), s
Constitution
Constitution
Constitution
Constitution
Constitution
Constitution
Constitution
Constitution
Constitution
The expression
‘Governor-General in Council’ means the Governor-General acting with
the advice of the Federal Executive
Constitution
Constitution
Stevedoring and General Contracting Co Pty Ltd v Dignan
[1931] HCA 34
(1931) 46 CLR
Constitution
Constitution
Constitution
Constitution
Constitution
, which limits appeals to the Judicial Committee of the Privy Council
from the High Court, and
Australia Act 1986
(Cth) & (UK),
Constitution
Constitution
Constitution
W. Harrison Moore,
Constitution
of the Commonwealth of Australia
(John Murray 1903)
Robert French,
Co-operative Federalism
Other matters would include the establishment of the High Court of Australia and
the Interstate Commission:
Constitution
Constitution
John Quick and Robert
Randolph Garran,
The Annotated
Constitution
of the Australian
Commonwealth
(Legal Books 1976) 950 (monetary policy), 964
, Sydney, 1897, 9 (Symons); Cheryl Saunders, ‘The Hardest Nut
to Crack; The Financial Settlement in the Commonwealth
Constitution
Gregory Craven (ed),
The Convention Debates 1891-1898; Commentaries, Indices
, Volume VI (Legal Books, 1986)
Cheryl Saunders,
‘The Hardest Nut to Crack; The Financial Settlement in the Commonwealth
Constitution
’ in Gregory Craven (ed),
The Convention Debates 1891-1898;
Commentaries, Indices and Guide
, Volume VI (Legal Books, 1986) 149,
Cheryl Saunders,
Fiscal Federalism – A General and Unholy Scramble” in Gregory Craven
Australian Federation: Towards the Second Century
(MUP 1992) 101,
Cheryl Saunders,
‘The Hardest Nut to Crack; The Financial Settlement in the Commonwealth
Constitution
’ in Gregory Craven (ed),
The Convention Debates 1891-1898;
Commentaries, Indices and Guide
, Volume VI (Legal Books, 1986) 149,
Chapters I, II
Constitution
Constitution
, s 7; see also
Constitution
Constitution
Constitution
Constitution
Constitution
Constitution
Constitution
Constitution
Constitution
Constitution
Constitution
Constitution
Constitution
Constitution
Constitution
Constitution
Constitution
Constitution
Constitution
Constitution
Constitution
Constitution
, Sydney, 1891, 198
Constitution
of Australia
(Hart Publishing 2011)
D’Emden v Pedder
[1904] HCA 1
(1904) 1 CLR 91
Federated Amalgamated Government Railway and Tramway Service Association v
New South Wales Railway Traffic Employees Association (Railway
[1906] HCA 94
(1906) 4 CLR 488
Cheryl Saunders,
Constitution
of Australia
(Hart Publishing 2011)
Amalgamated Society
of Engineers v Adelaide Steamship Co Ltd (Engineers’ Case)
, 145 (Knox CJ, Isaacs, Rich and Starke
William Harrison
Moore, ‘The Crown as Corporation’
Law Quarterly Review
[1999] HCA 30
(1999) 199 CLR 462
, 501 (Gleeson CJ, Gummow
and Hayne JJ)
of Works (WA) v Gulson
[1944] HCA 27
(1944) 69 CLR 338
, 350-351 (Latham CJ)
[1925] HCA 30
(1925) 36 CLR 170
, 184 (Knox CJ), 192 (Isaacs J),
216-217 Higgins
, 229 (Starke J);
West v Commissioner of Taxation (NSW)
[1937] HCA 26
(1937) 56 CLR
, 668-669 (Latham CJ), 681 (Dixon J), 687 (Evatt
Corporation v Commonwealth (State Banking Case)
[1947] HCA 26
(1947) 74 CLR
Ibid, 55 (Latham CJ),
65-66 (Rich J), 70 (Starke J), 77, 81-82 (Dixon J), 99 (Williams
Ibid 82 (Dixon
Amalgamated Society
of Engineers v Adelaide Steamship Co Ltd (Engineers’ Case)
, 151-152 (Knox CJ, Isaacs, Rich and Starke
Commonwealth
(2003) 215 CLR 185
, 258 (Gaudron, Gummow and Hayne JJ); quoted
Fortescue Metals Group Limited v The Commonwealth (MRRT Case)
[2013] HCA 34
250 CLR 548
, 610 (Hayne, Bell and Keane
Constitution
Melbourne Corporation v Commonwealth (State Banking Case)
[1947] HCA 26
, 82-83 (Dixon J)
Pirrie v McFarlane
[1925] HCA 30
(1925) 36 CLR 170
, 184 (Knox CJ), 217 (Higgins J), 229
(Starke J);
West v Commissioner of Taxation (NSW)
[1937] HCA 26
(1937) 56 CLR 657
668-669 (Latham CJ), 681 (Dixon J), 687 (Evatt
Corporation v Commonwealth (State Banking Case)
[1947] HCA 26
(1947) 74 CLR 31
, 61 (Latham
CJ), 75 (Starke J); cf 66 (Rich J), 99-100 (Williams J);
(McTiernan J)
Ibid 52-3, 55,
61-2 (Latham CJ), 65-66 (Rich J), 70, 74-75 (Starke J), 77-83 (Dixon J), 99
(Williams J);
88-89 (McTiernan
[1985] HCA 56
(1985) 159 CLR
Conciliation and
Arbitration (Electricity Industry) Act 1985
Electricity Commission v Commonwealth
[1985] HCA 56
(1985) 159 CLR 192
, 217; see also
216-219 (Wilson J), 234-236 (Brennan
Ibid 260; see also
205-207 (Gibbs CJ), 245-246 (Deane
(1994-5) 184 CLR 188
227 (Mason CJ, Brennan, Deane, Toohey, Gaudron and McHugh
[1985] HCA 56
(1985) 159 CLR
Commissioner of Taxation
[2009] HCA 33
(2009) 240 CLR
Superannuation
Contributions Tax (Members of Constitutionally Protected Superannuation Funds)
Imposition Act 1997
Austin v The
Commonwealth
(2003) 215 CLR
[1985] HCA 56
(1985) 159 CLR 192
Austin v The
Commonwealth
(2003) 215 CLR 185
[2009] HCA 33
(2009) 240 CLR 272
307; see also 312 (Hayne
Michael Crommelin,
‘The Federal Model’ in Gregory Craven (ed),
Federation: Towards the Second Century
(MUP 1992) 33,
Constitution
Constitution
[1908] HCA 43
(1908) 6 CLR 41
, 67 (Griffith CJ, Barton and O’Connor
Amalgamated
Society of Engineers v Adelaide Steamship Co Ltd (Engineers’ Case)
(1920) 28 CLR 129
, 154 (Knox CJ, Isaacs, Rich and Starke
Corporation v Commonwealth (State Banking Case)
[1947] HCA 26
(1947) 74 CLR 31
South Australia v
The Commonwealth (First Uniform Tax Case)
[1942] HCA 14
(1942) 65 CLR 373
The Commonwealth (Second Uniform Tax Case)
[1957] HCA 54
(1957) 99 CLR 575
The Commonwealth (Payroll Tax Case)
[1971] HCA 16
(1971) 122 CLR
The Commonwealth v
Tasmania (Tasmanian Dam Case)
[1983] HCA 21
(1983) 158 CLR
Western Australia v
The Commonwealth (Native Title Act Case)
[1995] HCA 47
(1995) 183 CLR
New South Wales v
The Commonwealth (Work Choices Case)
[2006] HCA 52
(2006) 229 CLR 1
Metals Group Limited v The Commonwealth (MRRT Case)
[2013] HCA 34
(2013) 250 CLR 548
607-611 (Hayne, Bell and Keane JJ); see also 563 (French CJ), 636-637 (Kiefel
[2009] HCA 23
(2009) 238 CLR 1
56-64 (French CJ); 83-88 (Gummow, Crennan and Bell JJ); 114-124 (Hayne and
Kieffel JJ): 177-199 (Heydon
Ibid 118-9 (in
dissent); see also 181, 199 (Heydon J); cf 60 (French CJ); 85 (Gummow, Crennan
and Bell JJ)
Ibid 184 (French
CJ); 237 (Gummow and Bell JJ); 253-254 (Hayne J; 346 (Crennan J); 393-394
Ibid 205; see
also 234 (Gummow and Bell JJ); 248, 252 (Hayne
[2014] HCA 23
(2014) 252 CLR
Ibid 469 (French CJ,
Hayne, Kiefel, Bell and Keane JJ; 471 (Crennan
(1907) 4 CLR 1492
CJ, Barton, O’Connor, Isaacs and Higgins
Ibid 1512; see also
Mark Leeming, ‘Judicial Review of Vice-Regal Decisions:
South Australia
, Its Precursors and Its Progeny’
[2015] AdelLawRw 1
Australian Communist Party v The Commonwealth (Communist Party Case)
[1951] HCA 5
(1951) 83 CLR 1 (Latham
dissenting)
[2007] HCA 33
(2007) 233 CLR
Federal Commissioner of Taxation
[2009] HCA 23
(2009) 238 CLR 1
, 83 (Gummow, Crennan and
Bell JJ): ‘ ... the phrase “maintenance of this
Constitution
... conveys the idea of the protection of the body politic or nation of
Australia.’
Communist Party Case
[1951] HCA 5
(1951) 83 CLR 1
, 259-260 (Fullagar J; cf
[2007] HCA 33
(2007) 233 CLR 307
, 361-362 (Gummow and Crennan
Pape v Federal
Commissioner of Taxation
[2009] HCA 23
(2009) 238 CLR 1
, 83 (Gummow, Crennan and Bell JJ):
Constitution
assumes ... in
... the existence and
conduct of activities by the “Executive Government of the
New South Wales v The Commonwealth (Surplus Revenue Case)
[1908] HCA 68
(1908) 7 CLR
Ibid 189 (Griffith
CJ); 197 (O’Connor J); 200 (Isaacs J); 205 (Higgins J).
Ibid 199 (Isaacs J); 205
(Higgins J)
Constitution
New South Wales v The Commonwealth (Surplus Revenue Case)
[1908] HCA 68
(1908) 7 CLR
Federal Commissioner of Taxation
[2009] HCA 23
(2009) 238 CLR 1
, 83 (Gummow, Crennan and
Bell JJ); note also
Williams v The Commonwealth
(2012) 248 CLR 146
Australia v The Commonwealth (First Uniform Tax Case)
[1942] HCA 14
(1942) 65 CLR 373
Victoria v The
Commonwealth (Second Uniform Tax Case)
[1957] HCA 54
(1957) 99 CLR
[1997] HCA 34
(1997) 189 CLR
Peterswald v
[1904] HCA 21
(1904) 1 CLR 497 (Griffith
CJ, Barton and O’Connor
Victoria v The
Commonwealth (Federal Roads Case)
[1926] HCA 48
(1926) 38 CLR 399
South Australia v
The Commonwealth (First Uniform Tax Case)
[1942] HCA 14
(1942) 65 CLR 373
Federal Commissioner of Taxation (NSW) v W R Moran Pty Ltd
[1939] HCA 27
Victoria v The Commonwealth (Second Uniform Tax Case)
[1957] HCA 54
(1957) 99 CLR
Attorney-General
for Victoria; Ex rel Black v The Commonwealth
(1981) 146 CLR
P J Magennis Pty
Ltd v The Commonwealth
[1949] HCA 66
(1949) 80 CLR 382
ICM Agriculture Pty Ltd v The
Commonwealth
[2009] HCA 51
(2009) 240 CLR 140
Spencer v The Commonwealth
[2010] HCA 28
241 CLR 118
Williams v The Commonwealth
[2012] HCA 23
(2012) 248 CLR 156
, 235 (Gummow
and Bell JJ)
v The Commonwealth
[2012] HCA 23
(2012) 248 CLR 156
, 235-236 (Gummow and Bell
The equally sad fate
of the Interstate Commission provides another example.
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (457 KB)
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter