URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/journals/MqJlBLaw/2008/2.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 15:20:46
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Trost, Fred --- "Reconciling Regional Trade Agreements with the Most Favoured Nation Principle in WTO-GATT" [2008] MqJlBLaw 2; (2008) 5 Macquarie Journal of Business Law 43
Reconciling Regional Trade Agreements with the Most Favoured Nation Principle in WTO-GATT
Most Favoured Nation Treatment and GATT
GATT – A Short History
Regional Trade Agreements
How Regional Trade Agreements Comply with GATT Rules
Article XXIV of GATT
Interpreting Article XXIV of GATT – ‘Substantially All Trade’
Notification of RTAs under Article XXIV of GATT and the Dispute Settlement Process
Why are Regional Trade Agreements so Popular?
Abbott (2007) points out that there are “several reasons for this shift, including changes in the global political environment
and negotiating obstacles encountered by the multinational business community at the multilateral level”123 and that this shift
“appears to be an embedded phenomenon.” Fiorentino et al (2007) add weight to this argument when they point out that
RTAs are gaining momentum given that the “impasse in the Doha Development Agenda (DDA) negotiations is further strengthening
Members' resolve to conclude such agreements and indeed a flurry of new RTA initiatives has emerged in recent months whose effects
will be felt in the years to come.”124
Do Regional Trade Agreements Liberalise World Trade and Lead to MFN Treatment?
Reconciling Regional Trade Agreements with the Most
Favoured Nation Principle in WTO-GATT
“Yet, nearly five decades after the founding of GATT,
MFN is no longer the rule; it is almost the
exception.”
The recent proliferation of Regional Trade
WTO-GATT member states draws into focus the apparent contradiction that such
agreements pose against the background of the
original charter of the WTO viz.
to promote multilateral trade arrangements via Most Favored Nation treatment
(MFN) and, that of
RTAs which are “inconsistent with this obligation
because of the most favourable treatment granted by FTA parties to each
the original mandate of the WTO, with the end of WW2 in sight, was one of
actively discouraging bi and plurilateral agreements
in favour of multilateral
agreements which (it was expected) would promote global free trade through
consensus between all member
However, just the opposite has happened and MFN has been discarded in favour
of more expedient RTAs which, whilst legal in terms of
the loose interpretation
of GATT rules and weakness of the WTO as an administrative instrument, are
certainly not in the spirit of
MFN treatment on which GATT was founded.
Notwithstanding this conflict, there are those who argue that RTAs lead more
MFN treatment whilst, the contrary view is that it leads to
entrenched regionalism favouring large, developed economies such as the
States and European Community at the expense of the smaller middle powers (such
as Australia) and developing nations.
Whilst there is an apparent conflict between MFN treatment and RTAs the
reality of economic politics is driving the growth of RTAs.
This is evident as
the WTO reports from 1948 to 1994 GATT received 194 notifications of RTAs
whereas from 1995 to the present over
240 have been notified to the
As Goh (2006) observes, there
have been more RTAs “concluded in the first 10 years of the World Trade
Organization (WTO) than
in the previous 50 years of
The following graphic
representation well illustrates the growth of RTAs from GATT 1947 to 1995 and
post 1995 to 2006.
Enabling Clause
– Developing Countires -1979 Tokyo Round
Article XXIV
As at July 2007 there were 205 RTAs in force accounting for some 40% of total
global trade
and by 2010 it is
expected that over 400 such agreements will be
implemented.
This paper will explore the GATT exception rules that permit WTO-GATT member
states to enter into MFN discriminatory RTAs and issues
in respect of how these
rules are interpreted by various member states to provide legality to particular
RTA agendas. The various
WTO supervisory and appellate bodies appointed to
interpret GATT rules and report on their conformity (or otherwise) will also be
identified. Given that RTAs have now become the norm instead of the exception in
respect of the promotion of international trade
it is also important to discuss
why this is so and global economic merits or otherwise of RTAs vs. MFN in
promoting world trade.
Arising from this examination it is axiomatic that the paradigm shift from
MFN to RTA calls into question the relevance of the WTO
and, consequently,
raises a further question, albeit beyond the scope of this paper to address; is
the move from MFN treatment to
RTAs signaling a return to the pre-WW2 trading
block systems?
As Pascal Lamy put it, RTA “proliferation is breeding
and become a major
issue for the WTO-GATT as the move away from multilateral negotiation brings
into question the ‘raison d’etre’
of the organisation and,
therefore, the need to reform it if it is to maintain its relevance. This view
is echoed by Davey (2007)
not only in respect of the WTO but also the IMF and
World Bank when he posits that some “of the questions raised about these
organizations go to the very essence of their existence. For example, are they
still needed?”
Most Favoured Nation Treatment and GATT
The central concept of MFN in GATT has been extended into other WTO trade
agreements and, consequently, is now also prioritised under
Agreement on Trade in Services (GATS)
(Article 2) and the
on Trade-Related Aspects of Intellectual Property Rights (TRIPS)
(Article 4).
that in respect of the areas of trade covered by the WTO there should be no
discrimination in trade or services between
member countries.
Although there are MFN exception rules in GATS, given the constraints of this
paper, attention shall focus on the how MFN in GATT
1994 is circumvented in the
creation of RTAs with particular reference to Article XXIV.
However, before examining Article XXIV in more detail it is necessary to
understand the central role of MFN treatment in GATT. Following
from this, in
order to appreciate how RTAs have proliferated, it is pertinent to gain a
contextual appreciation of how these exception
rules evolved by examining the
historical background to the formation of GATT.
It is universally acknowledged that the foundation core of GATT 1994 is the
concept of free, multilateral trade between member states.
This is clearly
enunciated in GATT 1994, Part I, Article 1.1, General Most Favoured Nation
Treatment, “…any advantage,
favour, privilege or immunity granted by
any contracting party to any product originating in or destined for any other
country shall
be accorded immediately and unconditionally to the like product
originating in or destined for the territories of all other destined
contracting
MFN treatment
is further stipulated in Article XIII in respect of ‘like’
providing for
non-discriminatory administration of quantitative restrictions. This simply
means that any trade restriction or quota
“must be administered in a
non-discriminatory fashion regarding like products, and that in administering
import restrictions
and tariff quotas, WTO Members shall aim to allocate shares
close to that which might be expected in their
The claimed positive effects of MFN status on the global economy include
increased efficiencies based on the principle of comparative
stabilisation of the free trading system by increasing predictability of trade
and therefore enhancing trade and investment
between countries and reducing the
costs associated with the maintenance of the free trade system by reducing WTO
member “monitoring
and negotiation costs - the cost of watching and
comparing treatment received with that given to third countries - and of
negotiating
remedies to disadvantageous
associated country of origin costs.
Whilst the foundation concept of MFN in GATT 1994 and claimed associated
benefits to world trade is self evident from the above, in
order to appreciate
why MFN has been eroded by RTAs, it is important to appreciate that it was the
history of GATT’s formation
that has resulted in MFN becoming the
exception rather than the rule.
GATT – A Short History
Global commerce developed from a system of bilateral trade treaties in the
1700’s that saw the emergence of a closed system
of trading blocks such as
the Imperial Preference System which, by the 1930’s, underpinned a large
portion of the world’s
commerce. It has often been said that these
trading blocks (based in most part on old colonial alliances) was a contributing
to global conflict culminating in WW2 and, hence the end of the War saw a
dramatic change in the international trading paradigm from
that of bi or
plurilateral trading regimes to one of
multilateralism.
Planning for a global free trading economy post WW2 emerged from the Atlantic
and Mutual Aid
negotiations between
the United States of Amercia (U.S.) and Great Britain in
These negotiations also
involved the laying of the groundwork for what would become the World Bank,
and the mooted trade
regulating body called the International Trading Organisation (ITO) which, for
reasons to be elaborated later,
did not materialise until, the formation of the
In order to avoid trade
related wars, the U.S. position was essentially predicated on the principal of
free trade between the U.S.
and Cordell Hull, the
then U.S. Secretary of State,
was appointed by President Roosevelt to “initiate negotiations with
Britain on postwar economic
Keynes, on the
British side, had been an advocate of maintaining preferential trading regimes
given the vested
commercial interests of Great Britain and its Commonwealth he was quite a
passionate advocate of the pre-war Imperial
Preference trading bloc system.
The importance of these conflicting positions is that the negotiation in the
lead-up to the formation of GATT in 1947 was predicated
on two opposing trade
philosophies, multilateralism versus traditional trading
It was not surprising
that the U.S. argument should win on this position given that, economically, it
had the whip hand, however,
it was also deemed pragmatic that RTAs “could
have an overall benefit to international trade and that some trade
liberalisation
between some countries was better than none at
This was of
particular importance given the “need to support European integration
efforts then underway and its importance
for European (and international) peace
and security.”
seeds for bi and purilateral trade arrangements were already sown in the fabric
of the pre-GATT negotiations and then
enunciated, in particular, in Article XXIV
of the GATT 1947.
Whilst the UN was working on the ITO the 22 UN member nations (convened by
the U.S. to form the working group on the trade liberalisation
program) drafted
a temporary document called the ‘General Agreement on Tariffs and
Trade’ (GATT).
what was happening at the UN there was scant regard given to any instruments of
trade administration such that, when GATT
came into force in 1948 under the
‘Charter for an International Trade
Organisation’
that was to regulate it, the ITO, had been shelved by U.S.
As GATT was never ratified as a treaty by member countries they were not
required to enact legislation to mandate its provisions and,
“GATT was brought into being under the 1947 Protocol of Provisional
Application (PPA), under which the contracting
parties undertook to apply the
various trade policy
disciplines.”
by complying
with Section II of the GATT (national treatment laws) “to the fullest
extent not inconsistent with existing
legislation.”
The idea was
that future agreements would conform to the GATT whilst protecting pre-existing
laws and agreements and, as Raghavan
(1990) notes, this permitted countries
newly acceding to the GATT to claim the same privileges as the founding
In any event, it was
thought that the absorption of GATT into the ITO would lead to ratification but
this did not transpire due to
U.S. Senate intransigence to ratify the Havana
This left GATT, as the framework around which future international trade was
to be conducted. It is therefore important to bear in
mind that GATT arose as a
set of general, ‘temporary’ trade rules that had been drafted out of
a set of competing wartime
U.S./British trade interests and that these interests
reflected both the U.S. position of “substantial reduction of tariffs
other trade barriers and the elimination of preferences, on a reciprocal and
mutually advantageous
and that of the
U.K. to protect its Imperial Preference system.
The legacy of wartime negotiations on the initial draft of the GATT and the
failure to have the GATT regime incorporated into an administrative
body such as
the ITO left the provisions, most notably Article XIV and XXIV of GATT, by which
countries can opt out of the regime
of MFN in favour of preferential trade
arrangements in the form of either Customs Unions or Regional Trade Agreements
Notwithstanding, GATT has succeeded in providing a trade negotiation
framework with the 8 rounds since 1947 culminating in the completion
Uruguay Round in 1993 with 117 countries agreeing to “reduce trade
barriers and to create more comprehensive and enforceable
world trade
The proof of the
effectiveness of GATT has been a decline in general tariffs from an average of
50% to 5% albeit that there are
still extant many trade anomalies and tariff
Arising from the Uruguay round was a re-affirmation of the original GATT 1947
agreement as GATT 1994 and an agreement called, appropriately,
Embodying the Results of the Uruguay Round of Multilateral Trade Negotiations as
well as the creation of the WTO in 1995.
Despite the idealistic principles of
the WTO being “the foundation of the multilateral trading
as it emerged
from Uruguay Round negotiations it was nothing like the ITO envisaged by Keynes
and, as George (2007) put it, the “present
World Trade Organisation is
even further removed from his
Before examining rules, such as Article XXIV of GATT 1994 used to circumvent
MFN obligations, it is appropriate to define a RTA.
Regional Trade Agreements
There are many terms used to describe trade agreements outside of the WTO
multilateral trading system. These include ‘regional’,
‘preferential’ or ‘free’ trade agreements as well as
‘Customs Unions’ i.e. countries employing
common customs policies
such as the EC. The WTO defines RTAs as having “both a more general and a
more specific meaning: more
general, because RTAs may be agreements concluded
between countries not necessarily belonging to the same geographical region;
specific, because the WTO provisions which relate specifically to
conditions of preferential trade liberalization with
Accordingly, for the purpose of this paper, the term ‘Regional Trade
Agreement’ (RTA) will be employed to cover the wide
range of bilateral and
multi-country (plurilateral) preferential trade and tariff arrangements such as
the North American Free Trade
Agreement (NAFTA), the Southern Common Market
(Mercosur), and Australia–New Zealand Closer Economic Relations
Whilst the term ‘regional’ denotes close geographical proximity
of partners such as EC members or CER there is a trend
to expand such agreements
far more widely; for example, between Europe and the Carribean (CARICOM) or the
Tripartite Agreement between
Egypt, India and Yugoslavia. Given that some
countries who are close regional partners such as India/Pakistan and China/Japan
not likely to agree to a RTA in the near future the expression is used
“both to accommodate ‘extra-regional’ agreements
emphasise the preferential (and discriminatory) nature of such
arrangements”.
As distinct from dealing with matters in trade only, RTAs
“cover services, investment, intellectual property, technical barriers to
trade, dispute settlement, supra-national institutional
arrangements and so
and contain such
disciplines as may limit the “use of quantitative restrictions and
subsidies.”
The EC is an
example of such an arrangement in that the single market effect has seen the
elimination and harmonisation of technical
barriers that has achieved economies
of scale and enhanced
competitiveness.
As has already been mentioned, the rapid growth of RTAs has been almost
exponential in the last decade since the formation of the
WTO. The following
chart provides some appreciation of this growth such that nearly all WTO members
belong to a RTA and some are
involved in over 20 such
agreements.
Even Australia has been an active participant in the RTA rush. Up until 2003
Australia only had one RTA, CER
however, as Goh (2006) observes, since then Australia has concluded RTAs with
“Singapore, Thailand and the United States.
Australia is currently
negotiating or exploring FTAs with ASEAN, China, Malaysia, Japan, Mexico and the
United Arab Emirates.”
Having dealt with the definition of a RTA, this paper will now address how
RTAs must conform to GATT rules in order to be accepted
by the WTO.
How Regional Trade Agreements Comply with GATT
There are several rules in GATT 1994 that permit WTO members to enter in
The Sutherland
(SR) outlines the two
principle classes by which MFN may be the exempted under a RTA. The first is for
“functional reasons”
and the second “those that exempted
certain classes of contracting parties from the rules accepted by all the others
(or modified
the rules for
In respect of the first class there exists Article XXIV of the GATT rules
that permits the formation of RTAs and Customs
whilst the second class
permits developing countries preferential trading rules such as those under
Article XVIII of GATT and under
Article 1:2 which permitted pre-existing
colonial trading arrangements to
Given that colonial
(Imperial Preference) type arrangements have more or less disappeared as a
pretext for exemption, those provided
under Article XXIV will be examined more
closely later in this
In addition to the above, during the 1960’s were added positive
discriminatory arrangements for developing countries known as
‘Special and
Differential Treatment’ (S&D) provisions in GATT that explicitly
relieved them “of any requirement
to reciprocate the benefits provided by
developed countries.”
waivers were engrossed in a ‘Generalised System of Preferences’
(GSP) that were then adopted into GATT in 1979 under
the ‘Enabling
that also extended
the non-reciprocity to what was then termed ‘least developed
characterised as follows:
(a) In addition to preferential tariffs being applied to countries that may
have historical (colonial) ties they can also be claimed
by developing countries
(b) Only developing countries can obtain the benefit of GSPs and
(c) Developed countries unilaterally grant GSP benefits to developing
An example of a developing country RTA under the ‘Enabling
Clause’ is AFTA (ASEAN Free Trade Agreement) between China
Apart from these two principles classes (Article XXIV and Enabling Clause
Article XXIV:3 in
respect to frontier traffic between common border countries whilst under the
rubric of General Exceptions there
is also provision for exemptions on the basis
of protection of “public morals, life and health and Article XXI regarding
Exceptions.”
exceptional circumstances there also exists the possibility of obtaining a
waiver (clearly defined and subject to annual review
under Article IX:4) for MFN
under Article IX:3 whereby, given the consensus agreement of 75% of the other
contracting parties, a
country may “waive their obligations under the
agreement.”
There are also instances where the justification for a RTA has not been
accepted by GATT panels albeit that a waiver was still granted.
For example,
the Lome IV Convention between the EC and African, Caribbean and Pacific (ACP)
countries was presented as a GATT waiver
under GATT Part IV and Article XXIV.
The panels (in un-adopted 1993/94 reports) found that the waivers did not comply
with the claimed
exemptions as some of the trade parties were not GATT members.
Notwithstanding, the EC still managed to obtain a temporary waiver
agreement until 31 December,
There may also be instances whereby a WTO member does not wish, for political
reasons, to accede MFN status on a new member. Article
XIII also takes this
situation into account and permits the non-application of MFN “only if the
Member not consenting to the
application has so notified the Ministerial
Conference before the approval of the agreement on the terms of accession by the
Ministerial
Conference.”
Despite there being many GATT disputes in respect of RTAs that arise from
what are deemed to be MFN issues, it is rare that MFN is
invoked alone. Usually,
such disputes also deal with matters of “national treatment, quantitative
restrictions, TRIMs, rules
of origin, and standards and conformity
assessment”
By way of summary, RTAs can be formed by WTO members in one of two ways:
(1) By following the rules laid down under Article XXIV of GATT 1994 (from
1947 to the signing of Uruguay Round Agreement the Article
remained unchanged
save for clarification under the Understanding on the Interpretation of Article
XXIV of GATT 1994).
4 and 10 “provide for the formation and operation of customs unions and
free trade areas covering trade in
and there are two
criteria by which a RTA can be waived from MFN obligations. These are:
(a) a ‘substantial’ proportion of the trade among members of a CU
or RTA must be free
(b) post-union “substantially the same duties and other regulations of
commerce are applied by each of the members of the union
to the trade of
territories not included in the
(2) Developing countries have recourse to the ‘Enabling Clause’
that was invoked in the 1979 Tokyo Round Agreement. Essentially,
this clause
permits developing countries to participate in trade with developed countries on
more favourable terms and with other
developing countries
mutual reduction or elimination of tariffs and, in accordance with criteria or
conditions which may be prescribed by the CONTRACTING
PARTIES, for the mutual
reduction or elimination of non-tariff measures, on products imported from one
Whilst not covered under the scope of this paper it needs to be mentioned
that under trade agreements such as the GATS there also
exists the means by
which RTAs can be formed. For example, Article V of the GATS states that this
Agreement “shall not prevent
any of its Members from being a party to or
entering into an agreement liberalizing trade in services between or among the
agreement,”
“governs the conclusion of RTAs in the area of trade in services, for both
developed and developing
countries.”
The predominant set of rules by which RTAs are permitted to be formed to the
exception of MFN obligations is under Article XXIV of
GATT 1994 and this
important exemption rule will now be explored in more detail.
Article XXIV of GATT
It was never envisaged that Article XXIV would be much used; indeed, the
architects of GATT expected it to be implemented quite judiciously
prudently. Just the opposite has happened. Whereas Article XXIV recognised the
practical need for Customs Unions and Free Trade
Agreements it was to be subject
of certain basic conditions, viz. that ‘substantially all’ trade
barriers between partners
in such agreements was to be eliminated. The sad
reality is that this rule has been very loosely interpreted in its
application,
so much so that of
the hundreds of agreements on foot only one agreement advised to GATT has passed
examination under Article XXIV
Importantly, RTAs created under this exemption must “above all be
trade-creating as opposed to
trade-limiting”
to reduce duties and tariffs on ‘substantially all trade’. The
definition issues that arise from this important
term are dealt with in more
detail in the next section.
The trade creating and tariff/duty reducing aspects of RTAs finds expression
in Article XXIV:4 of GATT
finds further elaboration in the Understanding on the Interpretation of Article
XXIV of the GATT 1994 which re-affirmed “that
the purpose of such
agreements should be to facilitate trade between the constituent
territories“
recognizes that “the contribution to the expansion of world trade that may
be made by closer integration between the economies
of the parties to such
agreements”
and that such
contribution “is increased if the elimination between the constituent
territories of duties and other restrictive
regulations of commerce extends to
all trade, and diminished if any major sector of trade is
therefore, apparent that there was an attempt in the drafting of GATT to
“balance the interests of countries pursuing
RTAs with the rights of
non-parties to benefits under GATT such as Most Favoured Nation
treatment.”
For ease of reference, Article XXIV is reproduced:
Article XXIV
Territorial Application - Frontier Traffic - Customs Unions
and Free-trade Areas
1. The provisions of this Agreement shall apply to the metropolitan customs
territories of the contracting parties and to any other
customs territories in
respect of which this Agreement has been accepted under Article XXVI or is being
applied under Article XXXIII
or pursuant to the Protocol of Provisional
Application. Each such customs territory shall, exclusively for the purposes of
the territorial
application of this Agreement, be treated as though it were a
contracting party;
that the provisions of this paragraph shall
not be construed to create any rights or obligations as between two or more
customs territories
in respect of which this Agreement has been accepted under
Article XXVI or is being applied under Article XXXIII or pursuant to the
Protocol of Provisional Application by a single contracting party.
2. For the purposes of this Agreement a customs territory shall be understood
to mean any territory with respect to which separate
tariffs or other
regulations of commerce are maintained for a substantial part of the trade of
such territory with other territories.
3. The provisions of this Agreement shall not be construed to prevent:
) Advantages accorded by any contracting party to adjacent countries
in order to facilitate frontier traffic;
) Advantages accorded to the trade with the Free Territory of
Trieste by countries contiguous to that territory, provided that such
are not in conflict with the Treaties of Peace arising out of the Second World
4. The contracting parties recognize the desirability of increasing freedom
of trade by the development, through voluntary agreements,
of closer integration
between the economies of the countries parties to such agreements. They also
recognize that the purpose of
a customs union or of a free-trade area should be
to facilitate trade between the constituent territories and not to raise
to the trade of other contracting parties with such territories.
5. Accordingly, the provisions of this Agreement shall not prevent, as
between the territories of contracting parties, the formation
of a customs union
or of a free-trade area or the adoption of an interim agreement necessary for
the formation of a customs union
or of a free-trade area;
) with respect to a customs union, or an interim agreement leading
to a formation of a customs union, the duties and other regulations
of commerce
imposed at the institution of any such union or interim agreement in respect of
trade with contracting parties not parties
to such union or agreement shall not
on the whole be higher or more restrictive than the general incidence of the
duties and regulations
of commerce applicable in the constituent territories
prior to the formation of such union or the adoption of such interim agreement,
as the case may be;
) with respect to a free-trade area, or an interim agreement leading
to the formation of a free-trade area, the duties and other regulations
commerce maintained in each of the constituent territories and applicable at the
formation of such free‑trade area or the
adoption of such interim
agreement to the trade of contracting parties not included in such area or not
parties to such agreement
shall not be higher or more restrictive than the
corresponding duties and other regulations of commerce existing in the same
constituent
territories prior to the formation of the free-trade area, or
interim agreement as the case may be; and
) any interim agreement referred to in subparagraphs (
) shall include a plan and schedule for the formation of such a customs
union or of such a free-trade area within a reasonable length
6. If, in fulfilling the requirements of subparagraph 5 (
contracting party proposes to increase any rate of duty inconsistently with the
provisions of Article II, the procedure set forth
in Article XXVIII shall apply.
In providing for compensatory adjustment, due account shall be taken of the
compensation already afforded
by the reduction brought about in the
corresponding duty of the other constituents of the union.
) Any contracting party deciding to enter into a customs union or
free-trade area, or an interim agreement leading to the formation
union or area, shall promptly notify the CONTRACTING PARTIES and shall make
available to them such information regarding
the proposed union or area as will
enable them to make such reports and recommendations to contracting parties as
they may deem appropriate.
) If, after having studied the plan and schedule included in an
interim agreement referred to in paragraph 5 in consultation with
the parties to
that agreement and taking due account of the information made available in
accordance with the provisions of subparagraph
), the CONTRACTING
PARTIES find that such agreement is not likely to result in the formation of a
customs union or of a free-trade
area within the period contemplated by the
parties to the agreement or that such period is not a reasonable one, the
CONTRACTING
PARTIES shall make recommendations to the parties to the agreement.
The parties shall not maintain or put into force, as the case
may be, such
agreement if they are not prepared to modify it in accordance with these
recommendations.
) Any substantial change in the plan or schedule referred to in
paragraph 5 (
) shall be communicated to the CONTRACTING PARTIES, which
may request the contracting parties concerned to consult with them if the
seems likely to jeopardize or delay unduly the formation of the customs union or
of the free-trade area.
8. For the purposes of this Agreement:
) A customs union shall be understood to mean the substitution of a
single customs territory for two or more customs territories,
(i) duties and other restrictive regulations of commerce (except, where
necessary, those permitted under Articles XI, XII, XIII, XIV,
XV and XX) are
eliminated with respect to substantially all the trade between the constituent
territories of the union or at least
with respect to substantially all the trade
in products originating in such territories, and,
(ii) subject to the provisions of paragraph 9, substantially the same duties
and other regulations of commerce are applied by each
of the members of the
union to the trade of territories not included in the union;
) A free-trade area shall be understood to mean a group of two or
more customs territories in which the duties and other restrictive
regulations
of commerce (except, where necessary, those permitted under Articles XI, XII,
XIII, XIV, XV and XX) are eliminated on
substantially all the trade between the
constituent territories in products originating in such territories.
9. The preferences referred to in paragraph 2 of Article I shall not be
affected by the formation of a customs union or of a free-trade
area but may be
eliminated or adjusted by means of negotiations with contracting parties
affected.* This procedure of negotiations
with affected contracting parties
shall, in particular, apply to the elimination of preferences required to
conform with the provisions
of paragraph 8 (
)(i) and paragraph 8
10. The CONTRACTING PARTIES may by a two-thirds majority approve proposals
which do not fully comply with the requirements of paragraphs
5 to 9 inclusive,
provided that such proposals lead to the formation of a customs union or a
free-trade area in the sense of this
11. Taking into account the exceptional circumstances arising out of the
establishment of India and Pakistan as independent States
and recognizing the
fact that they have long constituted an economic unit, the contracting parties
agree that the provisions of this
Agreement shall not prevent the two countries
from entering into special arrangements with respect to the trade between them,
the establishment of their mutual trade relations on a definitive
12. Each contracting party shall take such reasonable measures as may be
available to it to ensure observance of the provisions of
this Agreement by the
regional and local governments and authorities within its territories.
Notwithstanding, the same article also permits inconsistent GATT measures to
be applied to RTAs under Article XXIV:8(b) insofar that
duties and restrictive
regulations of trade are to be “eliminated on substantially all the trade
between the constituent territories
in products originating in such
territories”
permitted under the various articles of the agreement.
If a WTO member wishes to form a RTA there are, essentially, three conditions
that must be met in order to satisfy other members that
a preferential trade
arrangement meets the requirements of Article XXIV. These are:
1. By meeting “the definition of a free trade area or customs union
under Article XXIV:8 of
in that tariffs,
“duties and other restrictive commercial regulations must be
eliminated”
and in respect
of such tariffs or other trade restrictions, it must be shown that
‘substantially all the
between the parties
has been freed from such
restrictions.
2. The second is that the RTA (or Customs Union) shall not “be higher
or more restrictive than the corresponding duties and
other regulations of
commerce existing in the same constituent territories prior to the formation of
the free-trade area.”
This, however, does not mean that individual duties cannot be raised provided
that a “compensatory
adjustment”
is provided to
RTA members and
3. The third, in respect of a WTO member challenging the application of
Article XXIV (preventing the RTA)
is the ability to prove to the
Appellate Body
that any measure
“being justified under Article
in respect of
formation of an RTA is permitted. However, Goh (2006) points out, the
“Appellate Body has considered ‘prevented’
as requiring a test
of impossibility”
the Turkey-India Textile Report
“‘the provisions of the GATT 1994 shall not make impossible the
formation of a customs
case the Appellate Body found that “restrictions on imports from India
were therefore not necessary for the formation
of the customs
As stated earlier in this section, given that there was never any clear set
of definitions provided in the original GATT of 1947 there
have been many
difficulties over the years in respect of interpretation. This contention is
supported by Crawford and Laird (2000)
who state that within “the GATT and
the WTO, the examination of specific RTAs has been plagued by disagreement about
the interpretation
of certain elements of the rules relating to RTAs as well as
by certain procedural
For example, in
Article XXIV “the term ‘substantially all trade’ has never
been defined and it remains unclear
whether this would equate to, for example,
90 per cent of trade, 80 per cent or even 60 per
Understanding on the Interpretation of Article XXIV GATT 1994 does not define
the term preferring to limit its reference
to the expression “extends to
all trade.”
By way of example of the uncertainty in definition of terms, referring again
to the Turkey-India textiles case, Goh (2005) makes the
point that the Appellate
Body (which does not have a mandate to interpret the GATT provisions; only to
apply them) deemed the term
‘substantially all trade’ to mean
“‘not the same as all the trade’ but was ‘something
considerably
more than merely some of the
recent times, Kim (2007) reports that Australia has proposed to define this term
as a “threshold level of 95 percent
of all HS tariff lines at a six-digit
, however, the
“practice by countries in the coverage of tariff elimination in their FTAs
varies widely.”
This problem of interpretation provides an appropriate segue to the important
issue of what constitutes ‘substantially all trade’
Interpreting Article XXIV of GATT –
‘Substantially All Trade’
The WTO admits that interpreting RTA rules is an ongoing problem stating that
“regional trade agreements have to meet certain
conditions. But
interpreting the wording of these rules has proved
controversial”.
reason for the controversy is political in nature as the members must pass
rulings, in effect, on themselves.
The controversy is based on the two possible, but not necessarily mutually
exclusive interpretations of ‘substantially all trade’.
“a quantitative approach, favours the definition of a statistical
benchmark, such as a certain percentage of trade
between the parties”
whilst the second, “a qualitative approach, would require that no sector
(or at least no major sector)
be excluded from intra-RTA trade
liberalization.”
argument is characterised by those parties in an RTA who believe that trade
enhancement with only partial trade liberalisation
is justifiable whilst others
argue that partial reduction of tariff or duties is not justifiable and, unless
full trade liberalisation
is achieved, “commerce remains subject to MFN
principles.”
As Grimmett and Tatleman (2004) observe, WTO members “have never
expressly disapproved an FTA, despite misgivings about the
consistency of
particular provisions with GATT
requirements.”
This situation is exacerbated by lack of resolve to find a solution and
evident by the fact that
The Regional Trade Agreements Committee (RTAC)
of the WTO formed in 1995 has “yet to complete its assessments of whether
trade agreements conform with WTO
provisions.”
Notification
of RTAs under Article XXIV of GATT and the Dispute Settlement Process
It is a requirement of the rules of GATT that RTAs arising from Article XXIV
be ‘notified’ to the WTO and subjected to
examination for
consistency with the rules by the Council for Trade in Goods (CTG). Given that
the problem with the interpretation
of the rules has been so problematic, in
1996 the WTO created a “Committee on Regional Trade Agreements (CRTA) to
give coherence
discussions.”
notified to the CTG were then forwarded to the CRTA for examination and, in
addition the CRTA also examined these RTAs for compatibility
multilateralism
consider the ‘systemic’ implications of such agreements.
Those agreements formed under the Enabling Clause are referred to the
Committee on Trade and Development (CTD). The CTD debates the
RTA but they are
not necessarily referred to the CRTA for more detailed
examination.
As distinct from Article XXIV rules, the ‘Enabling Clause’ does
not require that the elimination of trade barriers and
tariffs be applied to
‘substantially all the trade’ between RTA members over a 10 year
period and, given the ambiguous
nature of the rules for examination all that is
required is the reporting of the RTA to the WTO Committee on Trade and
Development.
An additional
problem is what is termed ‘early harvest’ schemes whereby, as Ueno
(2005) cites by way of example, AFTA
tariff reductions are provided on certain
agricultural products whilst trade negotiations on industrial products are still
This process of
‘cherry picking’ tariffs for elimination is contrary to the
objectives of Article XXIV.
To elaborate further, as previously stated, RTAs are required to be examined
and assessed on a consensus basis by the CRTA. It is
understood under Article
XXIV that, within a 10 year period, RTAs require ‘substantially all the
trade’ to be free of
restrictive regulations and tariffs to be eliminated.
Concurrently, the RTA members cannot raise trade barriers nor increase tariffs
to non-RTA members. Accordingly, in the case of a dispute, each member
interprets ‘substantially all the trade’ according
to their own
agenda such that those “belonging to a particular RTA assert that it is
consistent with the GATT, while those
outside it insist otherwise; the resulting
CRTA report thus ends up presenting the two opposing arguments in most
For example, the EU has argued that it is up to the WTO to provide
consistency to the RTAs, however, at the same time they also said
‘substantially all the trade’ is understood to have both qualitative
and quantitative dimensions, meaning
that no less than 90% of all trade between
contracting parties without excluding any major
effect has been that in respect of GATT consistency, the CRTA can only provide
‘qualified’ endorsement to RTAs
such that in “most cases, RTAs
go into effect with the question of GATT consistency
unsettled.”
Importantly, as Nataraj (2007) points out, the CRTA “has enjoyed no
success so far in assessing the consistency of the more
than 100 RTAs notified
to the WTO, due to various political and legal difficulties, most of which were
inherited from the GATT
and Crawford
and Laird (2000) add to this critique by stating that “the CRTA has not
been able to resolve many of the ‘systemic’
inherent in
RTAs. It is seen that the link between the consistency judgement provided by the
CRTA and the dispute settlement process
is problematic given that WTO members
are hesitant to “provide information or agree to conclusions that could
later be used
or interpreted by a dispute settlement
In addition are the controversial interpretations of the “WTO
provisions against which RTAs are assessed, and institutional
problems arising
from either the absence of WTO rules (e.g., on preferential rules of origin) or
from troublesome discrepancies between
existing WTO rules and those contained in
some RTAs.”
the mix is the confusion created by the plethora of “incoherent trade
policy regulations being implemented through
these special
Whilst RTAs have been notified to the WTO to test for conformity with Article
XXIV, as a result of the uncertainty in relation to
interpretation of the
article and “potential sensitivities over the legal implications of
adverse findings”
for one exceptional case
there has never been an examination completed by the CRTA! A legacy of the
failure to implement the ITO has been a clear lack of
any institutional
framework with the necessary mandate to interpret trade agreements and apply
disciplinary measures to WTO-GATT
member countries.
Notwithstanding this inertia, the WTO members did agree to resolve these
difficulties in Doha Declaration of 2001 by “clarifying
and improving
disciplines and procedures under the existing WTO provisions applying to
regional trade agreements. The negotiations
shall take into account the
developmental aspects of regional trade
agreements.”
the good intentions of the members, the first deadline of 1 January 2005 passed
and it was not until 29 June 2006 that the
Regional Trade Agreements Committee
(RTAC) published its ‘Transparency Mechanism for Regional Trade
Agreements’
, prompting
Pascal Lamy to declare in July 2006 that “This is an important step
towards ensuring that regional trade agreements
become building blocks, not
stumbling blocks to world
Accordingly,
future negotiations in respect of FTA rules will now take place within the Rules
Negotiating Group.
Why are Regional Trade Agreements so
As is evident, there is scope for the implementation of RTAs under GATT
rules, however, given that the spirit of the GATT was one
of encouraging
multilateral trade, why have bilateral RTAs now become the norm?
Abbott (2007) points out
that there are “several reasons for this shift,
changes in the global political environment and negotiating
encountered by the multinational business community
multilateral level”
that this shift “appears to be an embedded
phenomenon.”
Fiorentino et al (2007) add weight to this argument when they point out that
RTAs are gaining momentum given that
the “impasse in the Doha Development
Agenda (DDA) negotiations is further strengthening Members' resolve to conclude
such agreements
and indeed a flurry of new RTA initiatives has emerged in recent
months whose effects will be felt in the years to
The SR also examined the effects of individual RTAs in enhancing trade
between countries (not conclusive given that there are more
trade variables than
just simple two way traffic)
and whether they were conducive to the creation of multilateral trade
relationships via the expansion of FTA
suggests that the RTA partner benefits create entrenched blocs with vested
interests and conflicting rules of commerce
that preclude the further
liberalisation of trade and cites negotiations in Doha Round that highlighted
issues with developing countries
not wishing to diminish their preferential
agreements in favour of reducing tariffs
multilaterally.
The more recent growth in RTAs has been driven by not just trade related
concerns and, consequently, address many non-trade issues
such as labour rights,
environmental protections and protection of intellectual property
As Goh (2006)
summarised, RTAs today include issues such as sanitary, phytosanitary,
harmonisation rules and copyright protection
(an important U.S. concern) as well
as “investment facilitation and protection, mutual recognition of
technical regulations,
customs facilitation, intellectual property protection,
competition policy, government procurement, as well as ‘non-trade’
issues such as labour and environmental
protection.”
it even more difficult for the encouragement of member states to take part in
multilateral trade negotiations if, through
RTA negotiations, these non-trade
related issues become ‘boiler-plate’ template requirements in future
WTO negotiations.
The resulting convoluted ‘spaghetti bowl’ of RTAs has meant that
MFN (as a central tenet of WTO-GATT) has become the exception
rather than the
rule such that it is probably better described as the “least favoured
principle and,
consequently, “matters profoundly to the future of the
. By way of
example Ueno (2005) cites the example of the EC having only 9 MFN’s whilst
all their other trade agreements are
preferential in nature (RTA or GSP schemes)
having lower tariffs than those for the MFN
The following
illustrations
provide graphic
evidence of the ‘spaghetti bowl’ effect of RTAs.
Do Regional Trade Agreements Liberalise World Trade
and Lead to MFN Treatment?
There is the real possibility that the abuse of MFN status can be used as an
argument to justify RTAs as trade liberalising. The METI
report of 2001 makes
the point that a bilateral RTA outside of the WTO can be said to be to the
advantage of MFN in that any benefits
derived by the parties to the RTA are
then, as a consequence of MFN, passed on to other members. The justification for
that it is less time consuming than WTO negotiations and delivers the
same trade results. This is specious argument because “bilateral
negotiations lack transparency, there is a possibility that MFN treatment is not
extended to countries not in the negotiation, and
the fact that bilateral
negotiations tend to reflect the power relationship between the two
countries.”
addition, there is inherent procedural and political unfairness in the bilateral
negotiation process.
The important issue here lies in relative market strength between trading
partners. Bown (2004) explains that “‘power’
measures, such
as the credible threat of retaliation by the plaintiff, allow defendant
governments to live up to their trade liberalization
commitments”
there exists only “limited evidence that particular procedural or
institutional features of the GATT/WTO dispute settlement
process have
contributed to the successful economic resolution of trade
This contention is support by Abbott (2007) who points out that RTAs
“strongly favors powerful economic actors like the United
European Union, which are largely dictating terms to developing (and developed)
countries. Developing countries, particularly
the less economically powerful,
are losing autonomous decision-making
authority.”
As Goh (2006) asserts, “commentators have expressed concerns that RTAs
undermine the multilateral trading system and reduce
global welfare by eroding
the Most Favoured Nation principle, by diverting trade from non-parties and by
diverting attention and
resources from WTO
negotiations.”
consequences of such arrangements give rise to phenomena such as
‘bilateral opportunism’ whereby “subsets
of countries have an
incentive to renegotiate aspects of the agreement over time in order to enhance
their own well-being at the
expense of third countries excluded from the
renegotiations.”
Japan and the EC have been formally accused on engaging in such activity and
Brown (2004) cited the example of Canada’s
intervention in a Japan/EC
dispute over access to pork markets in
Goh (2006) also
supports this argument stating that “Australia has recognised, RTAs can
undermine the multilateral trading
system where they have ‘poor
trade-liberalising outcomes and trade distorting
The other side of the argument claims that RTAs “support WTO objectives
by promoting trade liberalisation, the development of
new rules and closer
integration between
countries.”
Bhagwati (1996) does agree that “the only sound argument for embracing
FTAs is that we cannot negotiate trade liberalization
on an MFN, worldwide basis
in multilateral negotiations like the Uruguay
(2007) also points out, he does not see RTAs as “aggressively
threatening”
to quantify negative factors (particular in such a robust global economic
climate) “may raise questions better attuned
to moral philosophers than
economists.”
By way of example of the administrative trade costs of RTAs, Ueno (2005)
points to the Japan-Mexico Economic Partnership Agreement
(EPA) in respect of
rules of origin and how they differ to those of the Japan-Singapore EPA and the
The reality is that
Japan applies a different treatment to the same product imported from both
Mexico and Singapore. Such regimes
incur additional costs to trade leading the
Taiwanese ambassador to the WTO to comment that “the costs incurred for
the issuance
and verification of certificates of origin, if executed strictly,
would offset the trade diversion effect when the gap between the
rates and FTA tariff rates is 5% or
However, Goh
(2006) asserts, despite these negative costs, they are outweighed by any lower
duty rates and the “fact that
business and exporter groups continue to
support successive RTAs in, for example Australia and the United States, would
support this
contention.”
Notwithstanding Goh’s assertion, Bhagwati (1996) is quite scathing of
RTAs pointing out that they “they can divert trade
from efficient
non-member suppliers to higher-cost member countries simply because the former
pay tariffs while the latter do not.
This hurts other member countries, who must
pay more for imports. But it can also harm non-members, who lose
argument to this is put forward by Clausing (2001) as cited by Bown (2004) in
respect of the CUSFTA “finding substantial
evidence of trade creation and
little evidence of trade
diversion.”
The SR acknowledged the utility and potential benefits that RTAs could bring
to the liberalisation of international trade, however,
the report was equally
concerned that the fundamental principal of MFN had been completely eroded by
RTAs (which the report describes
as Preferential Trade
Agreements)
These RTAs also
include the Generalized System of Preferences (GSP) scheme by which developing
countries are granted non-reciprocal
trade preferences such as tariff
reductions.
On the surface, most WTO members take the view, as espoused by Mark Vaile,
Minister for Trade, that RTAs are positive for trade liberalisation
they deliver substantial commercial and economic benefits across all sectors
faster than through multilateral reform.
Bilateral and multilateral trade
activities are mutually reinforcing. Free trade agreements can accelerate trade
liberalisation
and set higher benchmarks for the multilateral system. The
knowledge and skills gained through FTA negotiations can be transferred
multilateral trade negotiations, within APEC and the
This view is
supported by the U.S. in that they are forging ahead with RTAs and yet support
spokesman, Richard
Mills, commented that, in respect of the SR’s plea for ongoing support to
“opening markets and reducing
trade barriers globally offer the world the
best hope to expand economic growth, development, and opportunity both for
and developing
position was “We
In addition, it
was the U.S. position to support “ambitious multilateral trade
liberalization” and that in urging other
WTO members to support this
initiative it was necessary that all “must contribute to expanding market
access for all
At the same
time, the U.S. has, throughout 2005/06 been pursuing RTAs with Central and South
American countries as well as North
African, Asian and Middle Eastern
Notwithstanding the undermining of the GATT in respect of multilateral trade,
the SR does acknowledge the benefits that broader and
deeper bilateral trade has
had in respect of bringing regional stability, for example, the
accelerating aspects of
multilateral trade albeit on a more localised basis such as
or developing countries
enhancing their international trading expertise through more egalitarian
groupings such as
Pascal Lamy, whilst not wishing to condemn, nor praise RTAs, finds instead
that “the debate about whether regionalism is a good
or bad thing sterile.
This is not the point.”
The concern with their proliferation means that we “need to look at the
manner in which RTAs operate, and what effects they
have on trade opening and on
the creation of new economic opportunities. ... (and) we also need to reflect on
whether regionalism
is causing harm to multilaterally-based trading
relationships.”
Consequently, the argument rests in the relevance of
the WTO as a body designed to encourage multilateral trade. It is evident that
in order to be relevant the WTO needs to be reformed and strenghtened if MFN is
to survive as a viable instrument for promoting global
linberalisation.
It has been demonstrated that RTAs do conform with the somewhat liberal
interpretation of the GATT rule Article XXIV and the ‘Enabling
Clause’ that permit their formation at the expense of MFN treatment.
Whilst compliant with the rules of GATT they do not conform with the spirit
and intent of GATT, viz. to promote trade via MFN so as
to provide equal
treatment to all WTO member states. In other words, to provide a level playing
field for the benefit of all nations.
At the core of this issue lies the matter
of national interests that include, as Goh (2006) asserts, “improving
market access,
securing competitive advantage against other competitors, and
avoiding potential
discrimination.”
in addition, they “also include broader economic, political and strategic
considerations such as promoting economic integration,
improving global
competitiveness, enhancing diplomatic influence and supporting regional peace
and stability.”
clear that no country is going to act altruistically at the expense of its own
set of wide ranging national trade and political
Given that RTAs are, by their nature, discriminatory, as Abbott (2007)
asserts, there also arises the issue of “the exercise
of virtually
unconstrained political and economic power by the United States and EU to secure
concessions from developing (and developed)
countries.”
(2007) goes on to argue that “while this phenomenon might (or might not)
have negative economic implications for developing
countries, that is not at the
heart of the problem. The heart of the problem is that it deprives developing
countries of the capacity
to make autonomous decisions about the way their
affairs should be governed.”
This undermining of power
essentially makes the weaker nations servile to the larger powerhouses and is
quite reminiscent of the
relationship between old colonial powers and their
subject trading partners. Whilst this is certainly not the way in which the U.S.
or the E.C would characterise their relationships with smaller RTA partners, the
hint of paternalism is not lost on Abbott (2007)
who makes the observation that
presumably “most imperial leaders have believed they were acting in the
best interests of their
vassal states, and no doubt in some cases they were. But
this does not justify
subjugation.”
raises the question of whether a return to a form of the ‘Imperial
System’ that preceded (and contributed to) WW2
will be a consequence of
political alignment of various trading blocks and, if so, what does this portend
for future global stability?
One of the problems that the rush to enter in RTAs has created is the
undermining of the WTO as a trade regulating body whose purpose
was to promote
global stability.
According to the authors of the SR, the only real solution to the trade
related aspect of this quandary is to reduce the MFN tariffs
to zero since
“preferences are relative to MFN tariffs, if the latter go to zero so do
the preferences.”
However, the reality of the situation is recognised in that “as is often
the case in public policy, while RTAs increase the
necessity for MFN tariffs to
be taken to zero, their perceived discriminatory value also increases the
incentive not to do
A probably more practical approach is to provide a clearer understanding of
the application of Article XXIV and its compliance via
a suggested Trade Policy
Review Mechanism in order to provide greater “transparency and
understanding.”
In the interim, governments will act pragmatically in respect of entering
into RTAs whilst at the same time playing at least lip service
to MFN in the WTO
forum or, more optimistically, following a parallel agenda of developing MFN
through various trade round discussions
such as Doha whilst pursuing RTAs.
The SR makes a plea that governments take into account the damage there are
doing to multilateral trading arrangements should they
continue to enter into
RTAs saying that if the “motivation is to promote non-trade agendas or
simply an instinctive desire
to ‘catch-up’ with others or follow
suit, they should show
restraint.”
respect, it is posited that the reality of the situation is that RTAs are like
street gangs, "you may not like them, but
if they are in your neighbourhood, it
is safer to be in one."
Chapter 2 at 60 of “The
Future of the WTO: Addressing Institutional Challenges in the New
Millennium”, January, 2005
(Sutherland Report).
Also referred to as Free Trade
Agreements (FTA’s).
Grimmett, J. J., Tatelman, T.
B., “Free Trade Agreements and the WTO Exceptions” Legislative
Attorneys, American Law
Division, CRS Report for Congress, September 22,
http://digital.library.unt.edu/govdocs/crs/permalink/meta-crs-8208:1
http://www.wto.org/english/tratop_e/region_e/region_e.htm
Goh, G., “Regional Trade
Agreements and Australia: A National Perspective.”, Australian APEC Study
Centre, Monash University,
Source: Pg. 5, Fiorentino, R.
V., Verdeja, L., Toqueboeuf, C.,
“The Changing Landscape of
Regional Trade Agreements: 2006 Update”, Discussion Paper No. 12, Regional
Trade Agreements
Section, Trade Policies Review Division, World Trade
Organization, Geneva, Switzerland 2007.
World Bank, “Global
Economic Prospects: Trade, Regionalism and Development,” Washington
(2005), at 27 ,
http://www.wto.org/english/tratop_e/region_e/region_e.htm
http://www.wto.org/english/tratop_e/region_e/region_e.htm
The WTO also reports that “Some 380 RTAs have been notified to the
GATT/WTO up to July 2007. Of these, 300 RTAs were notified
under Article XXIV of
the GATT 1947 or GATT 1994; 22 under the Enabling Clause; and 58 under Article V
of the GATS. At that same
date, 205 agreements were in force.”
Lamy. P., Director General,
WTO, “Proliferation of regional trade agreements ‘breeding
concern’”, Conference
on ‘Multilateralizing
Regionalism’, WTO NEWS: Speeches, Geneva 10 September 2007
http://www.wto.org/english/news_e/sppl_e/sppl67_e.htm
Davey, W. J., “The
Future of International Economic Law”, Journal of International Economic
10 J. Int'l Econ. L. 439
, Oxford University Press, September, 2007
Understanding the WTO
Principles of the trading system
http://www.wto.org/english/thewto_e/whatis_e/tif_e/fact2_e.htm
See GATT 1947 -
http://www.wto.org/english/docs_e/legal_e/gatt47_e.doc
The issue of
‘like’ products can be contentious. For example, Ministry of
Economy, Trade and Industry (Meti) report
on Most Favoured Nation Treatment
Principle January, 2001, highlights the basis for potential discrimination
should one variety of
coffee bean be subject to tariff discrimination, yet, all
coffee beans like products could be considered ‘like’ products
resulting in tariffs being applied to imports from specific countries; a clear
contradiction of the MFN rule. See Spain - Tariff
Treatment of Unroasted Coffee,
BISD 28S/102 at
http://www.meti.go.jp/english/report/data/gCT9901e.html
Ministry of Economy, Trade
and Industry (Meti) report on Most Favoured Nation Treatment Principle, January,
http://www.meti.go.jp/english/report/data/gCT9901e.html
Abbott, F., “A New
Dominant Trade Species Emerges: Is Bilateralism a Threat?” Journal of
International Economic Law,
Oxford University Press, 10(3):571-583;
doi:10.1093/jiel/jgm 021 2007.
The Atlantic Conference :
Joint Statement by President Roosevelt and Prime Minister Churchill, August 14,
http://www.yale.edu/lawweb/avalon/wwii/atlantic/at10.htm
Anglo-American Mutual Aid
Agreement : February 28, 1942.
http://www.yale.edu/lawweb/avalon/wwii/angam42.htm
van, J., “The Planned Economies and International Economic
Organizations”
Cambridge University Press, Series:
Cambridge Russian,
Soviet and Post-Soviet Studies
(No. 77), 1991.
Pg. 281 – Arndt, J.
H., “Capital Controversy, Post-Keynesian Economics and the History of
Economic ... Keynes and Churchill”,
Essays in honour of Geoff Harcourt,
Volume 1, Routledge; 1 edition December 6, 1996.
George, S., “The
world trade organisation we could have had: Alternative finances.” Le
Monde Diplomatic – January
http://72.14.253.104/search?q=cache:rQPaOtLwJ:mondediplo.com/2007/01/03economy+ITO+2B+keynes+%2B+history&hl=en&ct=clnk&cd=3&gl=au
George also points out that Keynes proposal for an international clearing union
(ICU) also did not materialize.
Pg. 281 – Arndt,
J. H., “Capital Controversy, Post-Keynesian Economics and the History of
Economic ... Keynes and Churchill”,
Essays in honour of Geoff Harcourt,
Volume 1, Routledge; 1 edition December 6, 1996
Under the administration of
President Franklin D. Roosevelt for the 11 years from 1933 to 1944 Cordell Hull
became the longest-serving
Secretary of State in the US he also became on of the
principal architects of the founding of the United Nations and heavily involved
in the drafting, of the United Nations Charter in 1943.
Pg. 30 - Brabant van, J.,
“The Planned Economies and International Economic Organizations”
Cambridge University Press, Series:
Cambridge Russian,
Soviet and Post-Soviet Studies
Pg. 33 - Brabant van, J.,
“The Planned Economies and International Economic Organizations”
Cambridge University Press,
Cambridge Russian,
Soviet and Post-Soviet Studies
(No. 77), 1991
It has often been observed
that one of the principal reason given for the shift towards multilateralism was
that the Great Depression
and WW2 were, in part, blamed on the emergence of
regional blocs. See: Chapter 2 at 59 of “The Future of the WTO:
Institutional Challenges in the New Millennium” (Sutherland
Report) and Ueno, A., “Erosion of the Non-discrimination
Principle Through
Waves of Preferential Trade Agreements: A Warning from the Sutherland
Report”, RIETI Research Institute of
Economy & Trade (Japan), March,
http://www.rieti.go.jp/en/index.html
Goh, G., “Regional
Trade Agreements and Australia: A National Perspective.”, Australian APEC
Study Centre, Monash University,
There are other MFN
exception rules in GATT such as Article XXIV:3 dealing with frontier traffic
between common border countries,
Article I:2 Article XXI regarding Security
Exceptions. and waivers under Article IX:3. Each of these is discussed in
more detail
later in this paper.
Also known as the
‘Havana Charter’.
Raghavan, C., “EEC
Seeks Limitation on waivers and ‘Grandfather Clause’ use.”
Geneva, March 1 1990
http://www.sunsonline.org/trade/process/during/uruguay/country/03030190.htm
Protocol of Provisional
Application of General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade -
http://72.14.253.104/search?q=cache:fgVSTUNOPo8J:www.marxists.org/history/capitalism/gatt/ch41.htm+%22to+the+fullest+extent+not+inconsistent+with+existing+legislation%22&hl=en&ct=clnk&cd=8&gl=au
Raghavan, C., “EEC
Seeks Limitation on waivers and ‘Grandfather Clause’ use.”
Geneva, March 1 1990
http://www.sunsonline.org/trade/process/during/uruguay/country/03030190.htm
Preamble to GATT,
http://sul-derivatives.stanford.edu/derivative?CSNID=92290274&mediaType=application/pdf
Topulos, K.,
“WTO/GATT”, Duke University School of Law Library, Research
Guides, January 2007,
http://www.law.duke.edu/lib/researchguides/pdf/gatt.pdf
George, S., “The
world trade organisation we could have had: Alternative finances.” Le
Monde Diplomatic – January
http://72.14.253.104/search?q=cache:rQPaOtLwJ:mondediplo.com/2007/01/03economy+ITO+2B+keynes+%2B+history&hl=en&ct=clnk&cd=3&gl=au.
Understanding the WTO
Principles of the trading system
http://www.wto.org/english/thewto_e/whatis_e/tif_e/fact2_e.htm
and See Appendix F.
George, S., “The
world trade organisation we could have had: Alternative finances.” Le
Monde Diplomatic – January
http://72.14.253.104/search?q=cache:rQPaOtLwJ:mondediplo.com/2007/01/03economy+ITO+2B+keynes+%2B+history&hl=en&ct=clnk&cd=3&gl=au
WTO web site:
http://www.wto.org/english/tratop_e/region_e/scope_rta_e.htm
Goh, G., “Regional
Trade Agreements and Australia: A National Perspective”, Australian APEC
Study Centre, Monash University,
Pg. 4, Crawford, J., Laird,
S., “Regional Trade Agreements and the WTO”, Centre for Research in
Economic Development
and International Trade (CREDIT) Research Paper No. 00/3,
University of Nottingham. Prepared for a meeting of the North American
and Finance Association in Boston, 6-9 January 2000.
Pg. 4, Crawford, J., Laird,
S., “Regional Trade Agreements and the WTO”, Centre for Research in
Economic Development
and International Trade (CREDIT) Research Paper No. 00/3,
University of Nottingham. Prepared for a meeting of the North American
and Finance Association in Boston, 6-9 January 2000.
Notwithstanding, a
conflicting requirement is that EC standards may stand in stark relief to those
which are accepted internationally.
Pg. 5, Crawford, J., Laird, S.,
“Regional Trade Agreements and the WTO”, Centre for Research in
Economic Development
and International Trade (CREDIT) Research Paper No. 00/3,
University of Nottingham. Prepared for a meeting of the North American
and Finance Association in Boston, 6-9 January 2000.
Source: WTO web site:
http://www.wto.org/english/tratop_e/region_e/regfac_e.htm
The 1983 Closer Economic
Relations (CER) Agreement with New Zealand.
Goh, G., “Regional
Trade Agreements and Australia: A National Perspective”, Australian APEC
Study Centre, Monash University,
As part of the reform
movement within the WTO the then DG of the WTO, Supachai Panitchpakdi
commissioned a report in 2005 called
“The Future of the WTO: Addressing
Institutional Challenges in the New Millennium” herein referred to as the
‘Sutherland
Report’. The Sutherland Report was released in January
2005 and a key area addressed was the growth in RTAs and what this
meant for the
multilateral trading system on which WTO-GATT was built. See:
http://www.wto.org/english/thewto_e/10anniv_e/future_wto_e.pdf
Chapter 2 at 67 of
“The Future of the WTO: Addressing Institutional Challenges in the New
Millennium” (Sutherland Report).
Chapter 2 at 68 Ibid.
Chapter 2 at 69 Ibid.
Ministry of Economy, Trade
and Industry (Meti) report on Most Favoured Nation Treatment Principle, January,
http://www.meti.go.jp/english/report/data/gCT9901e.html
Chapter 2 at 70 of
“The Future of the WTO: Addressing Institutional Challenges in the New
Millennium” (Sutherland Report).
The agreement
“Differential and more favourable treatment reciprocity and fuller
participation of developing countries”
http://www.wto.org/English/docs_e/legal_e/enabling1979_e.htm
Chapter 2 at 70 of
“The Future of the WTO: Addressing Institutional Challenges in the New
Millennium” (Sutherland Report).
Ministry of Economy, Trade
and Industry (Meti) report on Most Favoured Nation Treatment Principle, January,
http://www.meti.go.jp/english/report/data/gCT9901e.html
Grimmett, J. J., Tatelman,
T. B., “Trade Preferences for Developing Countries and the WTO”
Legislative Attorneys, American
Law Division, CRS Report for Congress, January
http://fpc.state.gov/documents/organization/79277.pdf
Ministry of Economy, Trade
and Industry (Meti) report on Most Favoured Nation Treatment Principle, January,
http://www.meti.go.jp/english/report/data/gCT9901e.html
Understanding
on the Interpretation of Article XXIV of the General Agreement on Tariffs and
http://www.wto.org/english/docs_e/legal_e/10-24_e.htm
Nataraj, G.,
“Regional Trade Agreements in the Doha Round: Good for India?”
Tokyo: Asian Development Bank Institute.
http://www.adbi.org/files/dp67.regional.trade.agreements.doha.pdf
GATT – 1947
http://www.wto.org/english/docs_e/legal_e/gatt47_e.doc
Differential and More
Favourable Treatment Reciprocity and Fuller Participation of Developing
Countries. Decision of 28 November
1979 (L/4903)
http://www.wto.org/english/docs_e/legal_e/enabling_e.doc
General Agreement on Trade
in Services, (GATS) Article V
http://64.233.167.104/search?q=cache:LFh3mk-PXNYJ:www.wto.org/English/docs_e/legal_e/26-gats_01_e.htm+Article+V+%2B+GATS&hl=en&ct=clnk&cd=1&gl=au
Nataraj, G.,
“Regional Trade Agreements in the Doha Round: Good for India?”
Tokyo: Asian Development Bank Institute.
http://www.adbi.org/files/dp67.regional.trade.agreements.doha.pdf
Chapter 2 at 75 of
“The Future of the WTO: Addressing Institutional Challenges in the New
Millennium” (Sutherland Report).
The Czech and Slovak
Republics following the break-up of Czechoslovakia.
Goh, G., “Regional
Trade Agreements and Australia: A National Perspective”, Australian APEC
Study Centre, Monash University,
‘The contracting
parties recognize the desirability of increasing freedom of trade by the
development, through voluntary agreements,
of closer integration between the
economies of the countries parties to such agreements. They also recognize that
the purpose of
a customs union or of a free-trade area should be to facilitate
trade between the constituent territories and not to raise barriers
to the trade
of other contracting parties with such territories.’
Preamble to the WTO
Understanding on the Interpretation of Article XXIV of the GATT 1994
Goh, G., “Regional
Trade Agreements and Australia: A National Perspective”, Australian APEC
Study Centre, Monash University,
GATT – 1947
Article XXIV:8(b)
http://www.wto.org/english/docs_e/legal_e/gatt47_e.doc
Goh, G., “Regional
Trade Agreements and Australia: A National Perspective.”, Australian APEC
Study Centre, Monash University,
Grimmett, J. J., Tatelman,
T. B., “Free Trade Agreements and the WTO Exceptions” Legislative
Attorneys, American Law
Division, CRS Report for Congress, September 22,
http://digital.library.unt.edu/govdocs/crs/permalink/meta-crs-8208:1
Article XXIV:8(a)(i) of
Interim RTAs must also
contain a plan that details how tariffs and duties as well as restrictive trade
regulations are to be eliminated
– GATT 1994, Article XXIV:5(b)&(c)
supra note 1and 8(b).
Article XXIV:5(a) and (b)
of GATT 1994.
Article XXIV:6 of GATT
See the chapeau of Article
XXIV:5 of GATT 1994.
As per the WTO website:
“The Appellate Body was established in 1995 under Article 17 of the
Understanding on Rules and Procedures
Governing the Settlement of Disputes (
a standing body of seven persons that hears appeals from reports issued by
panels in disputes brought by WTO Members. The
Appellate Body can uphold, modify
or reverse the legal findings and conclusions of a panel, and Appellate Body
Reports, once adopted
by the Dispute Settlement Body (
must be accepted by the parties to the dispute. The Appellate Body has its seat
in Geneva, Switzerland.”
http://www.wto.org/english/tratop_e/dispu_e/appellate_body_e.htm
Goh, G., “Regional
Trade Agreements and Australia: A National Perspective”, Australian APEC
Study Centre, Monash University,
WTO Appellate Body Report,
Turkey – Textiles, adopted 19 November 1999.
Goh, G., “Regional
Trade Agreements and Australia: A National Perspective.”, Australian APEC
Study Centre, Monash University,
May 2006 citing WTO Appellate Body Report,
Turkey – Textiles, adopted 19 November 1999, para. 54.
Pg. 8, Crawford, J., Laird,
S., “Regional Trade Agreements and the WTO”, Centre for Research in
Economic Development
and International Trade (CREDIT) Research Paper No. 00/3,
University of Nottingham. Prepared for a meeting of the North American
and Finance Association in Boston, 6-9 January 2000.
Goh, G., “Regional
Trade Agreements and Australia: A National Perspective”, Australian APEC
Study Centre, Monash University,
Preamble to the WTO
Understanding on the Interpretation of Article XXIV of the GATT 1994
Goh, G., “Regional
Trade Agreements and Australia: A National Perspective.”, Australian APEC
Study Centre, Monash University,
May 2006 citing WTO Appellate Body Report,
Turkey – Textiles, adopted 19 November 1999, para. 48.
Kim, J. B., “Legal
Review of FTA Tariff Negotiations”, KDI School of Public Policy and
Management, August 6, 2007.
http://www.rieti.go.jp/jp/events/07080601/pdf/3-1_E_Kim_PPT_o.pdf
WTO rules: regional
trade agreements – The Doha Round was supposed to have reached a consensus
on interpretation but only
succeeded in the members agreeing to find a way to
agree on interpretation.
http://www.wto.org/english/tratop_e/dda_e/dohaexplained_e.htm#regional
Pg. 8, Crawford, J.,
Laird, S., “Regional Trade Agreements and the WTO”, Centre for
Research in Economic Development
and International Trade (CREDIT) Research Paper
No. 00/3, University of Nottingham. Prepared for a meeting of the North American
Economic and Finance Association in Boston, 6-9 January 2000.
Pg. 8, Ibid.
Grimmett, J. J.,
Tatelman, T. B., “Free Trade Agreements and the WTO Exceptions”
Legislative Attorneys, American Law
Division, CRS Report for Congress, September
http://digital.library.unt.edu/govdocs/crs/permalink/meta-crs-8208:1
WTO rules: regional
trade agreements.
http://www.wto.org/english/tratop_e/dda_e/dohaexplained_e.htm#regional
Nataraj, G.,
“Regional Trade Agreements in the Doha Round: Good for India?”
Tokyo: Asian Development Bank Institute.
http://www.adbi.org/files/dp67.regional.trade.agreements.doha.pdf
Ueno, A., “Erosion
of the Non-discrimination Principle Through Waves of Preferential Trade
Agreements: A Warning from the
Sutherland Report”, RIETI Research
Institute of Economy & Trade (Japan), March, 2005
http://www.rieti.go.jp/en/index.html
Nataraj, G.,
“Regional Trade Agreements in the Doha Round: Good for India?”
Tokyo: Asian Development Bank Institute.
http://www.adbi.org/files/dp67.regional.trade.agreements.doha.pdf
Pg. 9, Crawford, J.,
Laird, S., “Regional Trade Agreements and the WTO”, Centre for
Research in Economic Development
and International Trade (CREDIT) Research Paper
No. 00/3, University of Nottingham. Prepared for a meeting of the North
Economic and Finance Association in Boston, 6-9 January 2000.
Nataraj, G.,
“Regional Trade Agreements in the Doha Round: Good for India?”
Tokyo: Asian Development Bank Institute.
http://www.adbi.org/files/dp67.regional.trade.agreements.doha.pdf
Goh, G., “Regional
Trade Agreements and Australia: A National Perspective”, Australian APEC
Study Centre, Monash University,
The Czech Republic and
Slovak Republic customs union following the break-up of Czechoslovakia.
See Para 29, Doha
Declaration, “We also agree to negotiations aimed at clarifying and
improving disciplines and procedures
under the existing WTO provisions applying
to regional trade agreements. The negotiations shall take into account the
developmental
aspects of regional trade agreements.”
http://www.wto.org/english/thewto_e/minist_e/min01_e/mindecl_e.htm
Transparency Mechanism
for Regional Trade Agreements – June 29, 2006
http://www.wto.org/english/news_e/news06_e/job06_59rev5_e.doc
Lamy. P., Director
General, WTO, “WTO rules: regional trade agreements”, WTO NEWS: 2006
NEWS ITEMS, Geneva 10 July 2006
http://www.wto.org/english/news_e/news06_e/rta_july06_e.htm
Abbott, F., “A New
Dominant Trade Species Emerges: Is Bilateralism a Threat?” Journal of
International Economic Law,
Oxford University Press, 10(3):571-583;
doi:10.1093/jiel/jgm021 2007.
Pg. 1, Fiorentino, R.
V., Verdeja, L., Toqueboeuf, C.,
“The Changing Landscape of
Regional Trade Agreements: 2006 Update”, Discussion Paper No. 12, Regional
Trade Agreements
Section, Trade Policies Review Division, World Trade
Organization, Geneva, Switzerland 2007.
Chapter 2 at 78-82 of
“The Future of the WTO: Addressing Institutional Challenges in the New
Millennium” (Sutherland
Chapter 2 at 83
Chapter 2 at 85
Interestingly, this
harks back to the original intent of the of GATT to be under the administration
of the ITO whose charter did
include respecting labour rights.
“Regional Trade Agreements and Australia: A National Perspective.”,
Australian APEC Study Centre, Monash University,
Chapter 2 at 87 of
“The Future of the WTO: Addressing Institutional Challenges in the New
Millennium” (Sutherland Report).
Chapter 2 at 60
Chapter 2 at 60
Ueno, A., “Erosion
of the Non-discrimination Principle Through Waves of Preferential Trade
Agreements: A Warning from the
Sutherland Report”, RIETI Research
Institute of Economy & Trade (Japan), March, 2005
http://www.rieti.go.jp/en/index.html
Source: “Global
Economic Prospects. Trade, Regionalism and Development”, International
Bank for Reconstruction and
Development/World Bank, Washington DC, 2005.
Ministry of Economy,
Trade and Industry (Meti) report on Most Favoured Nation Treatment Principle,
January, 2001
http://www.meti.go.jp/english/report/data/gCT9901e.html
Bown, C. P.,
“Trade policy under the GATT/WTO: empirical evidence of the equal
treatment rule” 0008-4085 / 04 / 678–720
/ Canadian Economics
Association, Canadian Journal of Economics Vol. 37, No. 3 August, 2004 at Pg
Ibid at Pg 681.
Abbott, F., “A New
Dominant Trade Species Emerges: Is Bilateralism a Threat?” Journal of
International Economic Law,
Oxford University Press, 10(3):571-583;
doi:10.1093/jiel/jgm021 2007.
Goh, G., “Regional
Trade Agreements and Australia: A National Perspective”, Australian APEC
Study Centre, Monash University,
Bown, C., “Trade
policy under the GATT/WTO: empirical evidence of the equal treatment rule”
0008-4085 / 04 / 678–720
/ Canadian Economics Association, Canadian
Journal of Economics Vol. 37, No. 3 August, 2004 at Pg 679.
Ibid at Pg 680.
Goh, G., “Regional
Trade Agreements and Australia: A National Perspective”, Australian APEC
Study Centre, Monash University,
Bhagwati, J.,
“Asia's Chance to Lead – ‘Free trade areas,’ favored by
the U.S., are harmful.” Asia
Week, Nov 1996
http://www.asiaweek.com/asiaweek/96/1129/view.html
He also goes on to point out that it was frustration with trying to get MFN
agreements in place that led Washington to embrace RTAs
as a solution.
Abbott, F., “A New
Dominant Trade Species Emerges: Is Bilateralism a Threat?” Journal of
International Economic Law,
Oxford University Press, 10(3):571-583;
doi:10.1093/jiel/jgm021 2007.
Ueno, A., “Erosion
of the Non-discrimination Principle Through Waves of Preferential Trade
Agreements: A Warning from the
Sutherland Report”, RIETI Research
Institute of Economy & Trade (Japan), March, 2005
http://www.rieti.go.jp/en/index.html
Goh, G., “Regional
Trade Agreements and Australia: A National Perspective.”, Australian APEC
Study Centre, Monash University,
Bhagwati, J.,
“Asia's Chance to Lead – ‘Free trade areas,’ favored by
the U.S., are harmful.” Asia
Week, Nov 1996
http://www.asiaweek.com/asiaweek/96/1129/view.html
He also goes on to cite an important case study based on Mercosur undertaken by
World Bank economist Alexander Yeats that supports
this contention.
Bown, C.P., “Trade
policy under the GATT/WTO: empirical evidence of the equal treatment rule”
0008-4085 / 04 / 678–720
/ Canadian Economics Association, Canadian
Journal of Economics Vol. 37, No. 3 August, 2004 at Pg 682.
Chapter 2 at 61 of
“The Future of the WTO: Addressing Institutional Challenges in the New
Millennium” (Sutherland Report).
Ueno, A., “Erosion
of the Non-discrimination Principle Through Waves of Preferential Trade
Agreements: A Warning from the
Sutherland Report”, RIETI Research
Institute of Economy & Trade (Japan), March, 2005
http://www.rieti.go.jp/en/index.html
Trade 2005, Statement
made by Mark Vaile, Minister for Trade, Chapter 3,
http://www.dfat.gov.au/trade/trade2005/chapter_03.html
US Mission to the United
Nations in Geneva.
Mills R., “Re:
Sutherland Report on the WTO”
US Mission to the United Nations in
Geneva, January 17, 2005
http://www.usmission.ch/Press2005/017SutherlandReport.htm
These are, more
specifically, “Colombia, Peru and with five Central American countries and
the Dominican Republic (DR-CAFTA)37
and it has further pursued negotiations with
Ecuador and Panama. Further afield, it has secured deals with some Northern
and Middle Eastern countries, as part of its Middle East Free Trade
Initiative: the FTA with Oman has been signed while the FTAs
with Morocco and
Bahrain have both entered into force; negotiations have been launched with the
United Arab Emirates (other prospective
FTAs could include Egypt, Kuwait, Qatar
and Tunisia). In Asia-Pacific, the United States has opened FTA negotiations
with Korea and
Malaysia in an effort to strengthen ties with ASEAN
countries.” Pg. 14, Fiorentino, R. V., Verdeja, L., Toqueboeuf, C.,
“The Changing Landscape of Regional Trade Agreements: 2006
Update”, Discussion Paper No. 12, Regional Trade Agreements
Section, Trade
Policies Review Division, World Trade Organization, Geneva, Switzerland
Chapter 2 at 63 of
“The Future of the WTO: Addressing Institutional Challenges in the New
Millennium” (Sutherland Report).
Chapter 2 at 62
Chapter 2 at 65
Lamy. P., Director
General, WTO, “Proliferation of regional trade agreements ‘breeding
concern’”, Conference
on ‘Multilateralizing
Regionalism’, WTO NEWS: Speeches, Geneva 10 September 2007
http://www.wto.org/english/news_e/sppl_e/sppl67_e.htm
Goh, G., “Regional
Trade Agreements and Australia: A National Perspective.”, Australian APEC
Study Centre, Monash University,
Abbott, F., “A New
Dominant Trade Species Emerges: Is Bilateralism a Threat?” Journal of
International Economic Law,
Oxford University Press, 10(3):571-583;
doi:10.1093/jiel/jgm021 2007.
Chapter 2 at 104 of
“The Future of the WTO: Addressing Institutional Challenges in the New
Millennium” (Sutherland Report)
Chapter 2 at 104
Chapter 2 at 105 of
Chapter 2 at 104 of
Crawford, J., Laird S.,
Pg 201 “Regional Trade Agreements and the WTO”, North American
Journal of Economics and Finance,
12 ~2!:193–211, 2001 Statement
attributed to Alan Winters, Statement at Seminar on Regional Trade Agreements,
WTO, Geneva,
Wednesday 30 June 1999
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (10.7 MB)
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter