URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/journals/MelbULawRw/2024/4.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 15:17:59
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Steele, Mark J; Chin, Jason M; van Golde, Celine --- "Witness Preparation and the Corruption of Memory: A Survey of Australian Trial Judges" [2024] MelbULawRw 4; (2024) 48(1) Melbourne University Law Review 152
WITNESS PREPARATION AND THE CORRUPTION OF MEMORY: A SURVEY OF AUSTRALIAN TRIAL JUDGES
I INTRODUCTION
II METHODOLOGY AND SAMPLE
III JUDGES’ GENERAL EXPERIENCE OF WITNESS STATEMENTS
IV WITNESS PREPARATION PRACTICES
V POTENTIAL REFORMS
VI CONCLUSION
A Limitations
B The Path Forward
WITNESS PREPARATION AND
THE CORRUPTION OF MEMORY: A SURVEY OF AUSTRALIAN TRIAL JUDGES
MARK J STEELE,
JASON M CHIN
AND CELINE VAN
An extensive body of psychological research establishes that practices
commonly used in preparing witnesses to give evidence in civil
proceedings are
prone to corrupt witness memory. To grasp the scope of judicial perceptions of
this issue in Australia, and to assist
in informing a way forward, we conducted
a survey of trial judges in superior courts in four Australian jurisdictions (N
= 73, response
rate = 51%). We also interviewed 26 of those judges. We asked
judges about their experience with the reliability of witness statements
canvassed their views on a range of witness preparation practices and potential
reforms. The judges reported serious perceived
deficiencies in witness
statements and affidavits, which they attributed to problems with the witness
preparation process. There
was a strong consensus in favour of more guidance and
education for the profession to try and address these
INTRODUCTION
[Witness statements] are next to useless — the truth come[s] out of them
like water from a leaky
This is a long, long way from where we need it to
resolution of civil legal proceedings often depends on the evidence of witnesses
There has long been an understanding by participants in the legal process that
witness memory is inherently frail and potentially
unreliable.
The past 20 years, however, have seen an increasing appreciation that the
process by which witnesses are being prepared to give evidence
proceedings can and does work to further undermine the reliability of that
evidence by distorting witnesses’ memories
of critical
This state of affairs threatens the just resolution of disputes and public
confidence in the legal
These concerns led, in 2021, to the publication of a practice direction for
certain commercial courts in the United Kingdom (‘UK’)
closely regulated witness preparation (
Practice Direction
and, in 2022, to a report of the International Chamber of Commerce highlighting
the issue and providing guidance for practitioners
in arbitral
proceedings.
In Australia, however, there has to date been no significant reform or
systematic research addressing the potential for pre-trial
interactions with
witnesses in civil proceedings to unintentionally distort witness memory and the
implications of that potential
for fact-finding by
To redress this, we conducted a survey of trial judges of the Federal Court of
Australia (‘FCA’) and the Supreme Courts
of New South Wales
(‘NSWSC’), Queensland (‘QSC’) and Victoria
This article briefly puts the issue of witness memory in civil proceedings in
context and then reports on and discusses the results
of our survey. As will be
seen, and is reflected in the epigraphs above, the judges in our sample
expressed substantial concern about
the impact of witness preparation practices
on the reliability of the evidence given in witness statements in Australian
civil legal
proceedings.
Historically, witnesses in civil proceedings gave their evidence-in-chief
from the witness
Since the 1990s, however, in pursuit of efficiency and transparency, the
evidence-in-chief of witnesses in civil proceedings (and
particularly in
commercial cases) has often come to be provided in the form of a written
statement or affidavit, supplied to the
other parties and the court in advance
of the hearing.
In recent years
though, it has become clear that the process by which witness statements are
commonly prepared in civil proceedings
can affect not just the
presentation
of the witness’s evidence but also the
of the witness’s memory of the
relevant events.
In criminal investigations and prosecutions, the ways in which pre-trial
interactions with the witness can corrupt their evidence
have been recognised
for many years.
resulted in the extensive regulation of witness interactions in criminal
proceedings, including mandating procedures for
identification,
interviews with suspects and
complainants,
educating police
officers on the psychology of memory and training police officers in interview
techniques to minimise the risk of
witness memory being distorted by
suggestion.
It is also reflected
in the use, in appropriate cases, of expert psychological evidence or judicial
directions to alert the jury
to aspects of the psychology and fallibility of
memory which the criminal courts accept are not matters of common
The same potential for the corruption of recollection also exists in civil
proceedings. Despite this, and in marked contrast to the
position in criminal
proceedings, regulating the preparation of non-expert witnesses of fact in civil
proceedings
is essentially
confined to general ethical admonitions for lawyers to observe a paramount duty
to the administration of
to act with honesty and
and not to engage in
conduct likely to undermine confidence in the administration of
while at the same time
acting to ‘promote and protect fearlessly and by all proper and lawful
means the client’s best
interests’.
specifically, there are also prohibitions against condoning false or misleading
evidence and ‘coaching’
These rules can be extremely difficult to apply in practice, particularly in
the complex and nuanced process of engaging with a potential
‘refresh’ their memory of (often long ago) events and reduce that
recollection to a coherent, written narrative
that serves as admissible evidence
to assist a client’s case. These difficulties are further exacerbated by
the imperative,
in the adversarial system of justice, for lawyers to produce
evidence that will advance their client’s
The rule against ‘coaching’ witnesses, for instance, draws a
distinction between a lawyer, on the one hand, ‘advising
what answers the
witness should give to questions’ (which is prohibited) and, on the other,
‘questioning and testing
in conference the version of the evidence to be
given by a prospective witness, including drawing the witness’s attention
inconsistencies or other difficulties with the evidence’ (which is
permitted).
In practice, this distinction can be
For instance, the process of challenging a witness’s account and
confronting them with anomalies, inconsistencies or implausibilities
account will naturally and implicitly tend to encourage a witness towards a
version of events that ‘adjusts’
Similarly, while a
practitioner must not mislead the court, it is generally accepted that they have
a permitted role to play ‘in
carefully drafting the affidavit in the best
possible light, to highlight strengths and minimise
weaknesses’.
In practice, as courts have recognised, there is no bright line between
‘coaching’ and ‘refreshing recollection’
‘questioning and testing in
conference’,
difference between permissible and impermissible conduct is ‘inevitably a
Further, in civil practice, there is little or no formal education or training
for litigation lawyers on the nature and suggestibility
Interview technique is
also typically learned ‘on the
Importantly, in civil proceedings, in contrast to the position in criminal
prosecutions,
client legal
privilege also works to shield the witness preparation process from
Litigation privilege thus protects confidential communications and documents
from disclosure if they were prepared for the dominant
purpose of a client being
provided with legal services relating to anticipated or pending legal
proceedings.
This means that
records or notes of interviews and drafts of witness statements are typically
privileged against
disclosure.
The rationale for this privilege, which is distinct from the privilege that
protects the confidentiality of communications relating
to obtaining legal
advice, is said to be a need for secrecy ‘to facilitate investigation and
preparation of a case for trial
by the adversarial
To obtain data on the experiences and opinions of Australian judges about
witness preparation and its pitfalls in civil proceedings,
we surveyed and
interviewed a sample of senior Australian trial judges. Our aim was to begin to
build an evidence base for an Australian
response to the problem of the capacity
of the witness preparation process to corrupt witness evidence.
Judges are not themselves directly involved in the production of witness
statements,
but we decided to
survey the views of judges on witness preparation practices for the following
First, in the nature of
their work, trial judges closely observe numerous civil
proceedings.
Moreover, judges
are not merely passive observers — their role requires them to assess the
veracity and reliability of the
evidence of the witnesses who appear before them
and to reconcile differences in the evidence to make findings of
This role puts judges in a position to make informed observations about the
apparent impact of the way in which the evidence of witnesses
is prepared and
presented on witness evidence. Secondly, as our sample characteristics confirm,
judges are overwhelmingly drawn from
the ranks of the legal profession and so
will have had direct experience of witness preparation before their
appointment.
judges’ views on proper legal practice are influential in setting the
parameters for ethical behaviour, particularly
where the rules themselves are
ill-defined and inherently difficult to
That said, judges’
experiences and views provide only indirect access to information about witness
preparation practices and
their effects, and so this needs to be borne in mind
when considering our results. We further acknowledge and discuss, in Part VI,
the limitations inherent in asking judges about their views on these
Part II describes our methodology and the characteristics of the judges in
our sample. Parts III–V then present and analyse
the quantitative and
qualitative results from the survey, addressing, in turn, the judges’
general experience with witness
statements,
the judges’ views on commonly used witness preparation practices and the
judges’ views on a number of potential reforms.
In Part VI, we conclude
with reflections on the implications and limits of our findings.
METHODOLOGY AND SAMPLE
Our study consisted of a survey (N = 73) and interviews (N = 26) with trial
judges of the FCA, NSWSC, QSC and VSC. All surveys and
interviews were conducted
between August and December 2022. The University of Sydney provided ethics
The survey was prospectively
registered.
In each case, the Chief Justice of the Court gave their explicit support for
the research. We invited 165 judges to participate in
our survey on the practice
and regulation of witness preparation in civil
proceedings.
Ninety-five judges
responded. Twenty-two of the judges who responded disqualified themselves from
participating, mostly on the basis
that they sat exclusively or mainly in
criminal trials or in jurisdictions that did not typically involve them hearing
contentious
Seventy-three judges completed all of, or part of, the
The participation rate
among the judges who considered themselves qualified and able to respond
meaningfully was 51%.
response rate, which is high for studies of this
suggests that our results
are reasonably representative of the views of judges in the jurisdictions that
we studied and that the
topic is considered by judges to be
Our survey comprised 25, mostly multiple-choice, questions (some with several
elements) and included ‘comments’ sections
that gave the judges the
opportunity to add observations in relation to
The judges were given
the option of answering the survey either online or in hard
The survey was conducted
on the explicit basis that the judges’ participation and responses would
be anonymous.
The questions in the survey sought some background information about the
judge and their judicial practice and otherwise were organised
following headings:
1 ‘General Experience of Witness Statements’ — four
questions about the judge’s recent experience with particular
witness statements in cases before
2 ‘Witness Preparation Practices’ — a multi-part question
that sought the judge’s view as to whether the use
of each of 13 specific
practices in witness preparation was ‘generally acceptable’ or
unacceptable’;
3 ‘Potential Reforms’ — a series of questions that
solicited the judge’s view on various ways in which the
preparation of
witness evidence in civil proceedings might be changed, specifically:
a) Providing lawyers with additional guidance on how to prepare a witness
statement so as to minimise the risk of distorting the witness’s
recollection;
b) Increasing the transparency of the witness preparation process by
reforming the law to attenuate the application of litigation
privilege to
non-party witnesses;
c) Requiring additional information to be included in witness statements
regarding the witness’s recollection and the way in
recollection had been refreshed by reference to documents; and
d) The use of expert psychological evidence as to the nature, fallibility or
suggestibility of memory;
4 ‘The Psychology of Memory’ — a multi-part question that
sought the judge’s view as to whether, based on
their knowledge and
experience, six specific propositions relating to the psychology of memory were
‘essentially correct’
or ‘essentially
incorrect’.
In addition to the quantitative data from answers to the survey questions, we
also obtained qualitative commentary and observations
from the judges about the
matters raised in the survey in two ways.
First, the survey questions included sections in which the judge could add
Most judges took up
this opportunity for at least some questions, with more than half of the judges
providing comments on five or
more questions.
Secondly, the judges who completed the survey were asked if they were
prepared to be approached by the researchers to confidentially
discuss their answers.
Thirty-four judges agreed to be approached for such an interview; 26 were able
to be interviewed by the lead
These interviews were
conducted between September and December 2022.
The interviews were relatively informal and worked from the judge’s
specific survey responses. Typically, the interviews briefly
covered aspects of
each of the topics raised by the survey questions. They started at a general
level by asking the judges whether
the potential for witness preparation to
distort witness memory was a topic which was ‘on their radar’ before
the survey. The judges were also asked whether it was their experience
or expectation that many of the witness preparation practices
identified by them
in the survey as ‘generally unacceptable’ were nonetheless used in
practice. Most interviews were
recorded (with the permission of the judge
involved) and transcribed, with four judges preferring the researcher to work
notes. The interviews were generally 30–45 minutes in
All of the comments and observations made by the judges in interview were
collated to the specific survey question or topic to which
they related. The
first and second authors then organised the material under those headings into
themes, resolving disagreements
through discussion (eg whether a judge favoured
or opposed a proposal for reform or expressed a negative, positive or neutral
Excerpts from that material are included below, to provide further context,
depth and insight into the quantitative survey results.
In selecting those
excerpts, we have sought to represent the range of views expressed in relation
to the subject of each survey question
in a balanced way and to quote from a
number of different judges.
After a summary of our sample, the following parts correspond to the three
main sections of the survey, which are the subject of this
article. Those parts
report a summary of the results of the survey together with excerpts from the
judges’ commentary and interviews.
Data were analysed using open-source software (R, version 4.2.3). We
calculated 95% confidence
using the Sison-Glaz method for multinomial
proportions.
Percentages are
rounded to the nearest whole
Readers may verify our
results, as our Open Science Framework page contains the survey (including the
Qualtrics version), analytic
code, supplementary charts and prospective
registration.
The respondents were generally experienced judges, with over half reporting
that they had more than five years of judicial experience.
The characteristics
of the sample of judges which responded to our survey are outlined in greater
detail in Table 1. Columns that
do not sum to 73 reflect non-responses.
Table 1: Sample
Characteristics
Tenure as Judge
Practice Area as a Judge
Profession before Appointment
Practice Area before Appointment
Commercial or equity law
Commercial or equity law
Administrative law
Academic lawyer
Criminal law
Criminal law
Administrative law
The FCA was most heavily represented in our sample (n = 25), with the balance
drawn from the VSC (n = 19), the NSWSC (n = 17) and
the QSC (n = 10).
Approximately ⅓ of respondents (n = 25) reported having over 10 years of
service as a judge, ¼ reported
having 5 to 10 years of experience (n = 18)
and approximately ⅓ reported having fewer than 5 years of experience (n =
The majority of the judges in our sample reported that their judicial
practice was predominantly in commercial law or equity (n =
41), with the
remainder mostly in common law (n = 12), administrative law (n = 6) or criminal
law (n = 3).
We also asked the
judges about their work prior to serving as a judge. The majority had been
barristers (n = 61), with the remainder
comprising solicitors (n = 9) and one
academic lawyer. Finally, we asked the judges to identify their predominant area
of practice
prior to becoming a judge. The majority identified this as
litigation (n = 42), with the remainder being commercial law or equity
criminal law (n = 5) or administrative law (n = 4).
The characteristics of the judges who were interviewed substantially mirrored
the characteristics of the judges who responded to the
survey and are summarised
in Table 2.
Table 2: Characteristics of
Interviewees
Tenure as Judge
Practice Area as a Judge
Profession before Appointment
Practice Area before Appointment
Commercial or equity law
Commercial or equity law
Administrative law
Academic lawyer
Criminal law
Criminal law
Administrative law
JUDGES’ GENERAL EXPERIENCE OF WITNESS STATEMENTS
The judges responded to four questions directed to their general experience
of witness statements
last two to five years.
First, the judges were asked how often in the past two years they had
encountered a witness statement that was materially contradicted
or qualified in
cross-examination. Forty-two per cent of our sample said that this occurred
either ‘often’ (35%) or ‘very
In the same period, 30% of
the judges had, at least ‘often’, encountered witness statements
that, after cross-examination,
appeared to them to materially fail to reflect
the witness’s own
recollection.
Perhaps most strikingly, 65% of the judges reported that they
‘often’ (40%), ‘very often’ (21%) or ‘always
almost always’ (4%) encountered statements that, after cross-examination,
appeared to them to be in words other than those
of the witness.
Reflecting these concerns about the quality of written evidence-in-chief, 74%
of the judges reported that, at least occasionally,
they directed that all or
part of the evidence-in-chief of a witness be given orally rather than in
writing, with 33% reporting that
they did this ‘often’ or
‘very often’ and 6% that they did so ‘always or almost
Table 3: General Experience of
Witness Statements
Frequency of
95% Confidence Interval
Statement materially failed to reflect actual recollection?
Never or almost never
Occasionally
Always or almost always
Frequency of Experience
95% Confidence Interval
Statement recounted recollection in words not those of the witness?
Never or almost never
Occasionally
Always or almost always
Statement materially contradicted or qualified in cross-examination?
Never or almost never
Occasionally
Always or almost always
Direct all or part of evidence-in-chief to be given orally?
Never or almost never
Occasionally
Always or almost always
The overall picture that emerges from these survey responses, supplemented by
the judges’ written comments and our interviews,
is that a substantial
proportion of the judges surveyed reported encountering serious deficiencies in
the written evidence that currently
emerges from witness preparation processes.
This experience was echoed in observations made by a number of the judges. For
There is a disturbing regularity of the occasions on which witnesses
substantially depart from their affidavits or witness statements
... There must
be a failing in the legal education system in relation to the production of
statements.
Additionally:
‘Many affidavits have been over-lawyered with genuine recollection
obscured by what the lawyer thinks needs to
be in the affidavit to advance a
party’s case.’
As reflected in these statements, the judges typically identified the source
of these defects as the way in which lawyers set about
interviewing witnesses
and producing their written evidence. Judges thus expressed the view, for
instance, that written evidence
in civil proceedings is ‘overworked,
over-lawyered and
‘depart[s] from the true recollection of the witness and reflect[s] what
the legal adviser wants the witness to
and is produced in a
way which is ‘just
Alarmingly, a
handful of the judges even doubted the extent to which witnesses were involved
in the preparation of their statements,
with one judge saying: ‘I suspect
that the process involves the solicitor preparing a statement which is shown to
the witness
who is asked to agree to
Unsurprisingly, a number of the judges expressed concern that the
‘over-lawyering’ of statements had serious implications
trial process, complaining that it not only ‘leads to painful
cross-examination’
could also work substantively against a party’s
For instance,
‘witnesses often used technical expressions such as “to be held on
trust” or “the payment was
a dividend” without any real
understanding of the legal implications of that
nomenclature’.
particularly egregious version of this defect, which was reported by several
judges, is the production of witness statements in
which two or more witnesses
relate a contentious conversation in substantially identical
A witness might, of course, of their own volition overstate or misstate their
actual recollection in their witness statement and then
be obliged, in
cross-examination, to correct or qualify that evidence in a material
particular.
Accordingly, that
this defect might occur ‘occasionally’ (as reported by approximately
half of the judges) is perhaps
unsurprising. However, for this to be encountered
‘often’ or ‘very often’ (as reported by 42% of the
is cause for concern.
It is also particularly concerning that 65% of the judges reported that their
experience in the last two years was that witness statements
‘often’, ‘very often’ or ‘always or almost
always’ appeared to recount the witness’s recollection
in words that
were not their own.
judges’ reported experience in this regard thus echoed the observation of
Nettle and Gordon JJ in
Queensland v Estate of the Late Masson
The oft unspoken reality [is] that lay witness statements are liable to be
workshopped, amended and settled by lawyers, [with] the
risk that lay and,
therefore, understandably deferential witnesses do not quibble with many of the
changes made by lawyers in the
process — because the changes do not appear
to many lay witnesses necessarily to alter the meaning of what they intended to
course, a lawyer recasting the witness’s own words may simply be trying to
improve the clarity or succinctness of the
However, such
recasting can also have the pernicious effect of obscuring, and even distorting,
the witness’s actual recollection.
As one judge observed in their written
comments: ‘[t]he lawyer’s job is not to translate, but to
record’ the witness’s
Moreover, as Nettle
and Gordon JJ point out in the above-quoted passage, the facility of lawyers
with language is often not matched
by that of the
So it is that the
written evidence of a witness can come to be, not just more clearly expressed,
but subtly distorted. As one judge
observed of this tendency:
This is particularly relevant to nuanced positions that have been carefully
drafted on critical points — very often, when cross-examined
the witness
simply does not have the nuanced understanding of the issue that is conveyed by
existence of such concerns explains the significant incidence of judges (74%)
who, at least ‘occasionally’, direct
that all or part of the
evidence-in-chief of a witness be given orally, rather than in writing. Asked in
our survey when and why
they made such
directions,
these judges
generally said that they did so when the credit of the witness was likely to be
in issue and particularly in cases of
disputed conversations, where carefully
crafted written evidence was felt, all too often, to obscure the
In short, the view of many judges was that oral evidence was often
‘better quality evidence’ than the written evidence
that emerged
from current witness preparation
Two principal
reasons were given for this. First, a number of the judges felt that oral
evidence gave them
‘unfiltered’
access to the authentic and ‘less
voice of the
witness and that this helped those judges in assessing the reliability of the
Secondly, several
judges also thought that oral evidence-in-chief was fairer to the witness than
confining their oral evidence only
to cross-examination, because it allowed the
witness to settle in and express their account in their own words before being
cross-examined.
However, although the judges expressed the view that requiring oral
evidence-in-chief
the influence of lawyers on the
witness’s evidence, they also recognised that requiring oral
evidence-in-chief did not eliminate
that influence. As one said, ‘it
doesn’t cure the problem — it changes the nature of the preparation
but doesn’t
happening’.
Finally, although efficiency and cost concerns are commonly identified as
rationales for written evidence-in-chief, some judges expressed
the view that
written evidence-in-chief was typically
efficient and
costly than oral
This was because oral evidence tended to be more
and because it
reduced the onerous and costly process of having to deal with, often extensive,
objections to written
This general dissatisfaction with witness statements among Australian judges
mirrored the sentiment expressed in a 2018 survey of
UK judges and legal
practitioners.
survey, only 6% of respondents thought that witness statements
‘fully’ achieved the aim of producing the best
Echoing our own
results, 56% of respondents to the UK survey also thought that witness
statements ‘failed to reflect the witness’s
consistent theme was that witness statements were typically
‘lawyer-led’, ‘heavily crafted by solicitors’
‘a vehicle for the lawyer’s view of the
In the UK, this dissatisfaction recently led to the imposition of mandatory
‘best practice’ guidelines on practitioners
in the Business and
Property Courts
governing how
witness statements are to be prepared and what they are to
In Australia, little
has yet been done in this
but our survey
results point to the conclusion that similar reform here would be strongly
supported by trial
WITNESS PREPARATION PRACTICES
In the next section of the survey, the judges were presented with a variety
of practices used to prepare witnesses to give evidence
in civil proceedings and
asked whether they considered each practice to be ‘generally
acceptable’ or ‘generally
unacceptable’.
We chose the practices presented based on two criteria. First, we selected
practices that are currently widely (or at least sometimes)
used in witness
preparation in civil
proceedings.
While this was based on our own research and experience, it was also confirmed
by the observations of the judges that we
interviewed.
Secondly, we
chose practices that psychological research indicates are prone to distort
As described below, our results reveal differences among the judges as to
whether particular practices are ‘generally
unacceptable’.
strength of our conclusions is limited by the reality that there may be some
interpretative differences arising from how one
understands the practice that is
being referred to in the
or from the use of the
‘generally’.
Nonetheless, our findings suggest broad consensus among the judges about the
acceptability of some practices and considerable disagreement
disagreements present obvious challenges to lawyers in understanding what they
should and should not be doing
and also raise real questions about the
feasibility of formulating more precise rules or additional guidance for the
profession.
Table 4: Witness Preparation
Practices Considered to Be Generally Unacceptable
Practice Posed to Judges
Percentage Indicating ‘Generally
Unacceptable’
95% Confidence Interval
Preparing the witness for cross-examination by providing them with copies
of the statements of supporting witnesses
Seeking to refresh recollection by providing the witness with copies of
other witness statements
Seeking to refresh recollection by suggesting what
may have happened
based on other evidence
Seeking to refresh recollection by prompting the witness to explain what
Asking leading questions to try and prompt recollection
Preparing a witness for cross-examination by providing them with the
statements of opposing witnesses
Without rendering the evidence misleading,
omitting from the statement discrete aspects of recollection unhelpful to the
Seeking to refresh recollection by showing the witness contemporaneous
documents not created or seen by them at the time
Suggesting words for use in answering a particular question in
cross-examination, to make the answer clearer, more coherent or succinct
Without rendering the evidence misleading, drafting the statement to put
witness’s evidence in the best possible light for the
Putting forward language to be used in the statement other than the
witness’s words to improve clarity and coherence
Practicing cross-examination on the witness’s statement
Identifying for the witness the factual issues most important to the
client’s case
Starting with the areas of most agreement, more than 80% of the judges
considered that it was generally
unacceptable
to seek to refresh the
witness’s recollection by (a) providing them with copies of the statements
of other witnesses, (b) suggesting
to them what ‘may have happened’
based on the lawyer’s knowledge of the documentary record and the evidence
other witnesses or (c) prompting them to explain what ‘probably
happened’ or ‘could have happened’. Similarly,
judges considered it generally unacceptable to prepare a witness for
cross-examination by providing them with copies of
the statements of supporting
The judges were more divided, however, on other witness preparation
practices; for instance, whether it was generally unacceptable
Seek to refresh a witness’s recollection by showing
them contemporaneous documents that were not created or seen by them at
(57% considered this unacceptable);
Suggest to a witness how they might express their answer
to a particular question in cross-examination to make it clearer, more coherent
or more succinct (55% considered this unacceptable);
Draft the witness’s statement to put their evidence
in the best possible light for the client’s case (without rendering
evidence misleading) (51% considered this unacceptable); or
Put forward language to be used in the witness statement
other than the language used by the witness in interview to improve clarity
coherence (44% considered this unacceptable).
We suggest that this diversity of opinion is, at least in part, a reflection
of the complexity and nuanced nature of the witness preparation
which makes it
inherently difficult to be definitive about what is or is not permissible in all
circumstances.
As discussed
further below, this feature of witness preparation poses an obstacle to
developing clear guidance for legal practitioners
on acceptable, or even
‘best’, practice, and it poses an even greater obstacle to
formulating clear
The judges’ observations in interview shed some light on why many
judges found these practices unacceptable. The principal theme
was the perceived
potential for these practices to ‘contaminate’ or
‘distort’ the witness’s evidence
by suggestion. For
[T]he typical process of taking a witness statement in complex litigation is one
of going through with the witness all of the contemporaneous
documents in order
to fashion a narrative which not only is perceived to be consistent with the
contemporaneous material, but also
supports the case theory. Now I’m not
suggesting that people are doing that dishonestly; by their own lights
trying to do the right thing, but it’s a complete
contamination of genuine recollection
Indeed, one judge frankly described the way in which, in their own experience
as a legal practitioner, a witness’s recollection
could be moulded by
preparation. For instance:
There may be a series of documents over three days and if you give them all
three days of documents and then ask them a question
you get might be very different from if you go ‘well, let’s take a
look at this first document
and talk about that’ ... I find that I can ask
questions to get an answer in the way that I want it ... So if I’m doing
it I assume that other people are doing it
with these observations, when asked if they agreed or disagreed with the overall
proposition that ‘[p]ractices currently
used in preparing witnesses of
fact to give evidence in civil proceedings in Australia can distort a
recollection’,
majority of the judges ‘agreed’ or ‘strongly agreed’
(57% of the judges, with only 4% offering any
disagreement).
Table 5: Witness Preparation
Practices Can Distort Recollection
Proposition Put to Judge
Response Option
Percentage of Judges
95% Confidence Interval
Practices commonly used in preparing witnesses can distort
recollection
Strongly disagree
Neither agree nor disagree
Strongly agree
POTENTIAL REFORMS
Anticipating that there may be some concerns about witness preparation
practices among Australian judges, our survey also sought the
views on the adequacy of existing regulation of witness preparation and
potential reforms. Specifically, the judges
were asked to indicate agreement or
disagreement with six proposals for reform. The results are summarised in Table
6; the reforms
are ordered in accordance with their popularity among the judges,
beginningwith the reform with which the greatest number of the
judges agreed (or
strongly agreed).
Table 6: Proposals for
Reform Put to Judges
Response Option
Percentage of Judges
95% Confidence Interval
Professional conduct rules should include additional guidance
Strongly disagree
Neither agree nor disagree
Strongly agree
Witnesses required to state how and when recollection refreshed,
identifying documents used
Strongly disagree
Neither agree nor disagree
Strongly agree
Reform Put to Judges
Response Option
Percentage of Judges
95% Confidence Interval
Witnesses required to state ‘how well they recall’ important
disputed matters of fact
Strongly disagree
Neither agree nor disagree
Strongly agree
Record witness interviews and make available to other parties if court so
Strongly disagree
Neither agree nor disagree
Strongly agree
Remove litigation privilege in some cases
Strongly disagree
Neither agree nor disagree
Strongly agree
Court to receive expert evidence in some cases
Strongly disagree
Neither agree nor disagree
Strongly agree
Figure 1 also shows the reforms; they are ordered in accordance with the
number of the judges that strongly disagreed with the reforms,
beginning with
the reform with which the greatest number of the judges strongly disagreed.
Figure 1: Proposals for
In summary, the judges overwhelmingly supported more guidance and education
for the profession, with 74% of the judges agreeing or
strongly agreeing that
this was a desirable reform and only 4% offering any disagreement. Comments and
observations in interview
indicated that this reflected a widespread view among
judges that the existing rules are not sufficiently clear and detailed about
what practices should be avoided.
Proposals for more specific changes, however, generally did not attract
majority support. Comments made by the judges through the
survey or in interview
indicated that this was either because the judges thought that the proposed
reform was unlikely to be useful
(eg requiring witnesses to state their level of
confidence in their recollection) or because of their concern that the impact of
the proposed reform on the trial process would outweigh its benefit in
addressing the issue (eg receiving expert evidence on the
ways in which witness
preparation might distort memory).
We now review the results in more detail, starting with the least supported
reforms and then moving on to those that received more
support. We end with a
discussion of the reforms that most divided the
Starting with expert evidence, the judges were asked whether, in a case where
there was a reasonable basis for believing that the
recollection of a witness of
fact may have been materially influenced by suggestion on the part of the
lawyers, it would potentially
be useful for the court to receive expert evidence
as to the nature, fallibility or suggestibility of
Fifty-two per cent of the judges either ‘disagreed’ (35%) or
‘strongly disagreed’ (17%).
The judges who disagreed or strongly disagreed generally expressed the view
that the time and cost associated with such expert evidence
would outweigh any
benefit, although some thought that such evidence might be more useful if it
focused on the circumstances of particular
witnesses rather than
generalities.
Other judges,
in contrast, thought that an application of psychological expertise to the
position of particular witnesses would be
wrong in principle ‘as an
abdication of the role of the tribunal or
facto] fact-finding by the
On the other hand, while a handful of the judges thought that the psychology
of memory involved matters of ‘common
most expressed
the view that knowledge of the psychological research was useful and important
for judges and should be the subject
of judicial education (although not expert
Two other potential reforms, which did not attract favour among the judges,
were directed to introducing greater transparency into
the witness preparation
process. The judges were thus asked to consider the idea of removing litigation
privilege over communications
with non-party witnesses of fact either generally
or where there is a reasonable basis for believing that the recollection of the
witness may have been materially influenced by suggestion on the part of the
Fifty-one per cent of the judges either ‘disagreed’ (36%) or
‘strongly disagreed’ (15%) with that reform.
The judges were also
asked to consider whether parties should be required to make and retain a record
of interviews with non-party
witnesses and make that record available to all
parties if the court so ordered. Forty-six per cent of the judges
‘disagreed’
(38%) or ‘strongly disagreed’ (8%) with
The judges gave two principal reasons for disagreeing with these potential
reforms. First, many judges expressed concern that they
would lead to ancillary
disputes that would add unduly to the duration and cost of litigation: for
instance, that the reforms would
lead to a ‘morass’ of satellite
litigation,
‘give rise to tangential, time-consuming disputes which would be a
forensic nightmare’
be ‘likely to prolong
Secondly, some
judges were concerned that an attenuation of litigation privilege might
interfere with the witness preparation process
in counterproductive ways: for
instance, ‘I suspect you are probably creating an impediment to a candid
discussion taking place
between the solicitor and the
Despite the relative lack of support for attenuating litigation privilege,
however, a number of the judges accepted that there would
be some salutary
consequences in doing so. Most judges interviewed, irrespective of whether they
opposed or supported the proposal,
thus accepted that access to records of a
witness’s interviews would be a useful tool in assessing the reliability
of the witness’s
evidence. For instance, as one judge said of their
experience in having access to records of interview in criminal proceedings:
can follow the questions and you can see how and why people have
given answers, also what they have misunderstood when they have
given an answer,
the issues of language ... I find having the questions really
Additionally, the view was expressed that attenuating litigation privilege would
have a salutary effect on witness preparation practice.
As one judge said:
‘if more were exposed about how a witness was prepared, or could be
exposed, people would be a lot more
Some judges
also expressed the view that it was wrong in principle for a party to be able to
put evidence before a court and, at
the same time, resist inquiry into how that
evidence was
Further, it should be noted that opinion was divided on this reform, with a
substantial minority of the judges either ‘agreeing’
‘strongly agreeing’ (6%) with limiting litigation privilege in its
application to non-party
We now turn to a reform that received strong majority support —
enhancing professional conduct rules to include additional guidance
prepare a witness statement so as to minimise the risk of distorting the
witness’s recollection.
The section of the survey addressing that reform began by reminding judges of
the existing professional conduct
These rules provide
that practitioners (a) must not ‘coach’ a witness ‘by advising
what answers the witness should
give to questions which might be asked’
but (b) may question or test in conference ‘the version of evidence to be
by a ... witness, including drawing the witness’s attention to
inconsistencies or other difficulties with the
The judges were then asked whether, in their view, these rules ‘provide
adequate guidance for counsel as to what is and is not
permissible in preparing
a witness to give
also asked whether the rules ‘should include additional guidance for
lawyers on how to prepare a witness statement
so as to minimise the risk of
distorting the witness’s
recollection’.
Curiously, while 74% of the judges supported ‘additional guidance’,
64% also agreed or strongly agreed that the existing
rules provided
‘adequate guidance’. The judges’ comments and observations in
interview, however, suggest that this
apparent anomaly may be more
terminological than substantive. That is, many judges drew a distinction between
and ‘guidance’ in their responses to these two
questions; generally, they favoured more ‘guidance’ but also
expressed the view that this guidance neither needs to, nor should, take the
Related to this proposed reform, the judges in interview also expressed
general concern that the education and training of practitioners
preparation and interviewing techniques were insufficient (recognising that the
training that did occur was typically
ad hoc and ‘on the
One judge said,
for example: ‘In too many cases, even in larger law firms, witness
statements are prepared by lawyers who are
inexperienced and insufficiently
trained in the proper way to approach that
Although most
judges were in favour of additional guidance for the profession, there were a
variety of views expressed as to the
that such guidance should
Some judges favoured
stricter professional rules. For example: ‘Rules 68 and 69 are inadequate.
The practices listed above
should be specifically mentioned and
prohibited.’
A number of the judges, however, favoured the development instead of a set of
‘guidelines’ or a ‘code of practice’.
This was because,
in their view, the nature of the witness preparation process did not lend itself
to prescriptive ‘rules’.
As one judge said: ‘I would
definitely be in favour of additional guidance and education but the nature of
the process may
Others doubted that even clear ‘guidelines’ were feasible and
favoured more general education and training for practitioners.
As one judge
observed: ‘there are so many different scenarios that trying to codify
what should be done or not done in all
circumstances would be a fraught
These doubts as to the practicality of developing clear rules, or even
authoritative guidelines, are supported by the divergence of
views expressed by
the judges on what is and is not ‘generally acceptable’ in witness
preparation.
We discuss this
further in our conclusion.
The other reform that gained wide acceptance was the imposition of a
requirement that witnesses of fact state, if practicable, whether,
and if so how
and when, their recollection in relation to important disputed matters of fact
had been refreshed by reference to documents
and to identify those documents.
Sixty-four per cent of the judges either ‘agreed’ or
‘strongly agreed’ with this suggestion. In fact, this
is a proposal
that has been adopted in the UK where, since April 2021,
Practice Direction
has required:
On important disputed matters of fact, a trial witness statement should, if
practicable ... state whether, and if so how and when,
the witness’s
recollection in relation to those matters has been refreshed by reference to
documents, identifying those
adoption of this requirement in the UK was not mentioned in the survey and none
of the judges who responded to the survey or were
interviewed indicated that
they were aware of
Practice Direction 57AC
or the requirement.
Most of the comments on this proposal were provided by the minority of the
judges who did not agree with it, who expressed concern
that this ‘would
be very complicated’,
‘would be too complex and confusing for many
‘seems very onerous and
unnecessary’.
judges who agreed with the proposal, a number pointed out that it was analogous
to what would occur if a witness gave their
evidence-in-chief
The final potential reform was the imposition of a requirement that witnesses
of fact state in their witness statement how well they
recall matters that are
important disputed matters of
This proposal divided
the judges, with 40% either ‘disagreeing’ or ‘strongly
disagreeing’ and 32% ‘agreeing’
or ‘strongly
agreeing’. Again, most of the commentary was provided by the judges who
did not agree, who observed, for
example, that this was ‘a matter for
cross-examination’,
‘you’ll just end up with the same stock phrases and they’ll be
meaningless’
such statements would be of little use (eg ‘self-serving and carries
little weight’
‘not ... appropriate or even
meaningless (eg ‘[w]hat on earth does “how well they recall”
The judges were also asked whether there were any other potential reforms to
current witness preparation practices that they thought
considered.
This yielded a
range of suggestions.
proposals were mentioned by more than one judge: (a) that more evidence-in-chief
should be given orally
(b) that judges should direct the use in appropriate cases of pre-trial
depositions.
Trial judges hearing civil cases in Australian superior courts report that
they often find serious apparent defects in the witness
statements and
affidavits that come before
In particular, judges
often report encountering witness statements that appear to them to be expressed
in words other than those
of the witness, materially fail to reflect the
witness’s own actual recollection, or are materially contradicted or
cross-examination.
This is not a trifling matter. Every time such defective evidence is produced
it has the potential to lead to an unjust result. While,
as our survey results
attest, these defects sometimes appear to the judge during the hearing, one
cannot assume that this is always
the case. Instances where it becomes apparent
during the trial that a witness’s recollection has become distorted or
may be just the tip of an iceberg. This danger is illustrated by those
occasions when, more or less by chance, a hearing exposes
the extent to which
the process can go awry. For example, one judge recounted a case about whether a
property had been purchased
by the plaintiff for herself or for her mother (who
had provided the money for the
A witness swore an
affidavit attesting that the plaintiff had said to the witness explicitly that
the house belonged to her
Cross-examined,
however, the witness’s oral evidence was that she simply assumed that the
house belonged to the mother.
Similar examples can be found in reported authorities and illustrate the
potential for the witness preparation process to produce
written evidence that
is quite wrong.
In assessing the potential for distorted evidence to lead to an unjust
result, one must also take into account the great bulk of civil
cases that are
resolved before trial.
such cases, the evidence is never tested but nonetheless forms the basis for
advice on the prospects and risks of the litigation
and drives decisions as to
settlement.
In terms of what underlies these apparent defects, many judges in our sample
consider that they all too often arise from the way in
which current witness
preparation practices operate to distort witness evidence and that many of those
practices are ‘generally
unacceptable’.
same time, however, many judges considered that these ‘generally
unacceptable’ practices were both in common use
and permitted by existing
professional rules.
This has the potential to undermine the just resolution of civil disputes,
either by leading to an unmeritorious settlement or by
inducing the court to
place undue weight on flawed evidence. Over time, it has the capacity to
undermine public trust and confidence
in the judicial resolution of civil
proceedings and to damage the standing of the legal
Many judges in our
sample evidently considered that this state of affairs was unsatisfactory and in
need of change.
We conclude with a discussion of the limitations of this study and its
implications for the path forward.
Limitations
First, the primary limitation we would like to highlight relates to what can
be drawn from the judges’ responses to our questions
and prompts about the
reliability of written witness evidence and the impact of witness preparation
practices on that evidence. In
particular, the judges’ views about such
matters are necessarily impressionistic and limited by the judge’s
and knowledge.
Judges will often not know, for instance, whether a witness statement materially
failed to reflect a witness’s actual recollection
when it was prepared,
even where that statement has been contradicted or qualified in
cross-examination. Nor will they typically
know with certainty whether the
witness’s written and oral evidence misaligning was caused by the way in
which the witness’s
evidence was prepared by the lawyers involved or by
some other reason. Nor can judges generally know whether their fact-finding is
While this limitation must be kept in mind, we believe that our results still
provide valuable information. Trial judges are charged
with the task of
assessing the reliability of the evidence of the witnesses who appear before
them and using that evidence to make
findings of
This puts them in a
unique position to make observations about the apparent reliability of witness
evidence and the apparent impact
on that evidence of the way in which it is
prepared and presented. Commensurately, the fact that many judges express
substantial
reservations about the reliability of written witness evidence and
the impact of witness preparation should provide a serious basis
for concern
proceedings.
Secondly, our quantitative survey results are limited in their precision. As
seen throughout, the confidence intervals associated
with this study’s
estimates are about
however, even the low end of our estimates should be a cause for concern.
Finally, our analysis of survey comments and interview transcripts was
inevitably coloured by our own backgrounds and experiences
in civil litigation,
evidence law and legal psychology. Conscious of this, we have endeavoured to
present a balanced view of our
findings and to maximise transparency in our data
collection and analysis.
The Path Forward
So what can be done to address this apparent problem? The solution most
favoured by the judges who responded to our survey is additional
guidance for
legal practitioners on how to prepare a witness statement to minimise the risk
of distorting the witness’s
recollection.
Opinion was
divided on whether this should take the form of professional rules or less
prescriptive guidelines and education. However,
whether either is capable of
achieving real reform is doubtful for the following reasons.
First, the involvement of lawyers in the preparation of witness evidence is
widely accepted and encouraged by the courts as a means
of ensuring that
evidence is coherent, focused on the issues and in admissible form (ie complying
with the rules of evidence).
Notably, none of the judges in our survey suggested that it might be appropriate
to exclude lawyers from witness
preparation.
Secondly, seeking to achieve change through increased guidance and education
assumes that the problem is essentially one of ignorance
or misunderstanding
— that it is a failing of the lawyer rather than a problem with the
system. It is far from clear, however,
that this is the case.
In the adversarial system, litigation practitioners have a duty (and
competitive imperative), acting within ethical rules, to prepare
and put forward
the best possible evidence to serve their client’s interest in either
winning the case or settling it on favourable
practitioner cannot deliberately ‘coach’ the witness by telling them
what evidence they should give or encourage
or condone false
On the other hand,
however, their duty to protect and defend their client’s interests
requires them to seek from the witness
the most complete recollection that it is
possible to obtain, challenge that recollection if it seems improbable or
inconsistent
with other evidence and reduce it to writing in as coherent and
persuasive a form as
The practical
reality is that, while bound to act within the existing ethical rules, as one
experienced advocate and judge has observed:
‘Parties can hardly be
expected to interview potential witnesses in a detached way that would minimise
the damage that interrogation
Further, even
in the modern digital era, not all important events are recorded in documents.
Where they are not, practitioners have
no alternative but to work with the
memories of participants and to do their ethical best to try and produce
favourable and persuasive
evidence for their client’s case. Unprompted,
however, witnesses often have little or no recollection of the relevant
This is especially so
if, as is typical in commercial cases, the events occurred some time ago and
were not particularly remarkable
at the time (eg routine business meetings or
negotiations).
Typically, therefore, it is only by ‘refreshing’ the recollection
of the witness, through extensive recourse to contemporaneous
documents and
other prompts, that any sort of coherent account can be
By the end of that
process, however, how much of the witness’s account is based on an
untainted, actual memory of the original
events will be difficult, if not
impossible, to ascertain.
However, tainted or not, and whether or not founded in the witness’s
actual experience of the events, the evidence may convincingly
story’ of the client’s case. And, regardless, it will stand unless
it is impeached in cross-examination.
The use of such prompts to ‘refresh’ the witness’s
recollection is a practice that is well-entrenched and perceived
by lawyers as
serving their clients’ best
This practice is
how practitioners perform the alchemy of turning the ‘dross’ of
vague and fragmented memory into the
‘gold’ of coherent and
persuasive evidence. Unless these prompts are prohibited by clear enforceable
rules or other mechanisms
are adopted to force change, such practices are likely
to continue.
Thirdly, formulating clear rules to prescribe proper practice in witness
preparation is a difficult, perhaps impossible, task. As
many judges in our
survey observed, attempting to ‘refresh’, record and test a
witness’s recollection in interview
is a complex and nuanced process. This
process does not readily lend itself to firm guidance let alone definitive
This difficulty is
supported by the observations of many judges to that
It is also supported
by the division of views among the judges as to which witness preparation
practices are ‘generally acceptable’
or ‘generally
unacceptable’.
Fourthly, as a practical matter, changing the witness preparation process so
as to avoid, or even minimise, its capacity to corrupt
witness memory is not a
straightforward task. The psychological research makes it clear that witness
memory is inherently more fragile
and malleable than most people expect and
prone to distortion by even unconscious and subtle
suggestion.
practices listed in Table 4 have that potential, and that list is far from
exhaustive. Further practices that have been
identified by the psychological
research as having that capacity include such common and reflexive features of
the questioning of
a witness as (a) using qualifying descriptors in questions
(eg ‘how emphatic was he?’), (b) interrupting a witness’s
answers, (c) applying interrogative pressure, (d) giving implicit feedback to a
witness on their answers (eg looking surprised, concerned
or pleased about an
answer), (e) summarising the witness’s answer and (f) using documents to
‘fill in’ the gaps
in a witness’s chronology of
Finally, as long as litigation privilege protects the witness preparation
process from view, it is practically impossible for that
process to be
effectively policed.
These considerations mean that, in our view, the problem of the corruption of
witness memory during witness preparation is unlikely
to be effectively
addressed through additional rules, education or guidance
An alternative to this approach that was canvassed in our survey was to make
the witness preparation process more transparent. This
would allow the other
parties to see how an opposing witness’s evidence on a particular issue
was obtained.
process may have distorted the witness’s recollection on an important
disputed matter, a party could then bring
this to the attention of the judge.
This would allow the judge to better assess the reliability of that
witness’s evidence
and, where appropriate, voice criticism of the witness
preparation process. Over time, this would be likely to lead to real changes
practice. After all, ‘sunlight is said to be the best of
disinfectants’.
Consistent with these arguments in favour of increased transparency, 64% of
the judges surveyed ‘agreed’ or ‘strongly
agreed’ that
witnesses of fact should be required to state, if practicable, whether, and if
so how and when, their recollection
in relation to important disputed matters of
fact had been refreshed by reference to documents and to identify those
The difficulty
with this limited approach to transparency, however, is that all that would be
provided is a general description of
the process and a bare list of the
documents referred to. In the absence of a wider ‘lifting of the
veil’ with respect
to the witness preparation process, this limited
approach to transparency is unlikely to provide meaningful insight into how the
witness’s evidence was obtained (and potentially distorted). Worse, such
an incomplete picture might actually mislead the court.
If there is a real possibility that a witness’s recollection has been
corrupted in a material respect, one would need to have
a much more complete
picture of the information that was shared with the witness than merely knowing
what documents they were shown.
For example, what was the witness told about the
significance to the case of the events in question? What was shared with them
the recollection of other witnesses? How did their evidence
‘evolve’ in successive interviews and drafts of their witness
Armed with such information, the court may be able to see for itself, for
instance, whether a witness to a critical representation
recalled it
spontaneously or did so only after persistent questioning and being referred to
contemporaneous documents in a manner
suggesting what ‘might have
happened’. In such a case, the judge might even be meaningfully assisted
by expert psychological
evidence directed not merely to general propositions
in relation to the particular
There is surely a case to be made that interviews with non-party witnesses
should be recorded and excluded from the secrecy of litigation
privilege (either
generally or in specific circumstances). Importantly, the privileged nature of
communications with
witnesses is not justified by the policy
considerations in favour of preserving the confidentiality of
lawyer–client communications
but only by the far less compelling rationale
that parties in adversarial proceedings should be free to prepare their cases
Further, it is surely wrong in principle that a party should be able to engage
in practices that can corrupt the evidence of a witness
and, at the same time,
shield that process from view. Such a situation unfairly leaves the parties and
the court to assess the reliability
of the evidence without any real insight
into how it was obtained.
These considerations support an argument for the greater transparency of the
witness preparation process that could be achieved by
lifting litigation
privilege over communications with non-party witnesses (at least where there is
a reasonable basis for believing
that the recollection of a witness may have
been materially influenced by suggestion). This reform was canvassed by our
was not embraced by the majority of the judges. That majority
expressed concern about whether the benefits of such a change would
justify the
risk of prolonging trials and adding to their cost and whether such a change
might stultify frank communication with
On the other hand,
however, many judges accepted that such additional transparency would be useful
in more accurately assessing the
reliability of a witness’s evidence and
in improving witness preparation practice. And no judge took issue with such an
at the level of principle: that is, that it was wrong, in principle,
for a party to be able to act in a manner likely to distort
a witness’s
recollection and, at the same time, conceal that conduct from
Further, 28% of the
judges ‘agreed’ or ‘strongly agreed’ that such a reform
should be considered.
number of other judges also suggested that they might be amenable to such a
reform if more education and training for the profession
failed to improve the
Overall, our survey adds to the basis for concern that there are significant
problems with witness preparation practice in civil proceedings
in Australia. It
establishes that these problems are widely recognised by trial judges, who are
strongly of the view that change
is needed to address this situation. Our survey
also points to impediments to change, such as substantial disagreement about
practices are ‘acceptable’ in witness preparation and
hesitation among judges in exposing the process to greater transparency
reforming litigation privilege. The integrity of witness evidence is critical to
the just resolution of civil proceedings
and to public confidence in the legal
We hope that this
will contribute to
encouraging debate and building impetus for change so that witness evidence can
be more effectively safeguarded
from corruption through corrosive witness
preparation practices.
BCom, LLB (Hons) (Melb); BCL
(Oxf). Barrister and Senior Counsel, New South Wales Bar Association. This
research was carried out
as part of a PhD project at the University of Sydney on
the topic ‘The Practice and Regulation of Witness Preparation in Civil
Proceedings in
Australia’. In summary, that PhD project is examining (a) what the
psychological research on the nature and suggestibility of
memory tells us about
how witness memory can be distorted by witness preparation practices commonly
used in civil proceedings in
Australia, (b) the
adequacy of existing regulation of witness preparation in that regard and (c)
potential reforms to the regulation of witness preparation
to address this
issue. Dr Chin and Dr van Golde are Mr Steele’s supervisors for that PhD
project. The lead author can be contacted
by email at <
mark.steele@sydney.edu.au
BA (Hons) (Virginia);
MA, PhD (UBC); JD (Toronto). Senior Lecturer, College of Law, Australian
National University.
BSc, MSc (Maastricht);
PhD (Syd). Senior Lecturer, School of Psychology, Faculty of Science, University
of Sydney. The authors gratefully
acknowledge the support that this research
received from the Chief Justices of each of the surveyed Courts and the
judges of those Courts, who gave up valuable time to respond
to the survey and,
in many cases, to be interviewed. The authors are also grateful to the anonymous
referees for their perceptive
and helpful comments on earlier versions of this
Judge 7. Quotes from judges
who participated in our survey are cited anonymously in the form of either
‘Judge [number]’
(where the quote is taken from the written comments
provided by a judge in their survey response) or ‘Judge
[letter][number]’
(where the quote is taken from an observation made by a
judge in interview).
The expression
‘witnesses of fact’ refers to witnesses giving evidence about what
they have seen or heard about an event
and how it happened or a matter internal
to their mind (eg why they took some past decision or action) as distinct, for
from expert opinion evidence based on specialised knowledge or
expertise: Jeremy Gans, Andrew Palmer and Andrew Roberts,
(Oxford University Press, 3
ed, 2019) 183,
194–5. See Michelle Mattison and Penny Cooper, ‘Witness Statements
for Employment Tribunals in England
and Wales: What Are the
(2021) 25(4)
International Journal of Evidence
Gestmin SGPS SA v
Credit Suisse (UK) Ltd
[2013] EWHC 3560 (Comm)
, [20] (Leggatt J)
’). See generally JJ Spigelman, ‘Truth and the
Law’ [2011] (Winter)
99, 108–11.
See generally Mark J Steele,
‘Witness Preparation and the Corruption of Evidence in Civil
Proceedings’
(2023) 42(2)
Civil Justice Quarterly
The focus of
our survey was on the practices used in the preparation of witness statements.
The process of preparing witness statements
typically involves lawyers for a
party working with the witness to ‘refresh’ their recollection (eg
by recourse to contemporaneous
documents), evaluate and test that recollection
and reduce it to writing. References in this article to ‘witness
preparation’
are generally to that process. It should be noted, however,
that the process of preparing a witness of fact to give evidence in civil
proceedings also typically involves other elements, including familiarising the
witness with courtroom processes and preparing them
for cross-examination:
Thomas A Mauet and Les A McCrimmon,
Fundamentals of Trial Technique
(Lawbook, 4
ed, 2018) 19–21. The psychological research
indicates that those other elements of witness preparation also have the
to distort witness memory, but they are not the focus of our survey or
this article: see British Psychological Society,
Guidelines on Memory and the
Law: Recommendations from the Scientific Study of Human Memory
(Report, June
2008) 2, 29
http://www.antoniocasella.eu/dnlaw/Memory_law_2008.pdf
archived at <
https://perma.cc/33DZ-2A8D
‘There is a strong
public interest ... that in civil cases the claimant should succeed if he is
entitled to do so and should
fail if he is not’:
Three Rivers District
Council v Governor of the Bank of England [No 6]
[2004] UKHL 48
[2005] 1 AC 610
(Lord Scott).
Business and Property
Practice Direction 57AC: Trial Witness Statements in the Business and
Property Courts
, 6 April 2024 <
https://www.justice.gov.uk/courts/procedure-rules/civil/rules/part-57a-business-and-property-courts/practice-direction-57ac-trial-witness-statements-in-the-business-and-property-courts
>, archived at <
https://perma.cc/5NR4-FRHS
> (‘Practice Direction 57AC’); Witness Evidence Working Group, Factual Witness Evidence in Trials before the Business
& Property Courts (Report, 6 December 2019) <
https://www.judiciary.uk/wp-content/uploads/2019/12/Witness-statement-working-group-Final-Report-1-1.pdf
>, archived at <
https://perma.cc/XH64-WZLW
Commission on Arbitration
and ADR, International Chamber of Commerce,
The Accuracy of Fact Witness
Memory in International Arbitration
(Report, June 2020) 5 <
https://iccwbo.org/wp-content/uploads/sites/3/2020/11/icc-arbitration-adr-commission-report-on-accuracy-fact-witness-memory-international-arbitration-english-version.pdf
archived at <
https://perma.cc/2HTU-UC8F
of Fact Witness Memory
’). For a discussion of these developments, see
Indeed, there has been very
little study, in the context of civil proceedings, of the potential for
pre-trial interactions with witnesses
to distort witness memory. The extant body
of experimental psychological research on the nature and suggestibility of
memory thus
focuses almost exclusively on memory in the context of witnessing
and recalling
behaviour: see Kimberley A Wade and Ula
Cartwright-Finch, ‘The Science of Witness Memory: Implications for
Practice and Procedure
in International Arbitration’
(2022) 39(1)
Journal of International Arbitration
The Australian superior court system comprises the High Court of Australia (the ultimate appellate court), the Federal Court of Australia
(‘FCA’) (which sits around Australia with a
law and some criminal matters) and the Supreme
Courts of each State and
Territory (the highest state and territory
matters that also hear the most serious
matters): Productivity Commission,
Report on Government
Services 2024: Justice (Part C)
(Report, 29 January 2024) 48–9,
https://www.pc.gov.au/ongoing/report-on-government-services/2024/justice/rogs-2024-partc-overview-and-sections.pdf
archived at <
https://perma.cc/5GXS-Q398
and the Supreme Courts of New South Wales, Queensland (‘QSC’) and
Victoria (‘VSC’) were chosen
for the survey because they are the
largest of the Australian superior trial courts: at 59–60. Other
Australian superior courts
were not surveyed purely for logistical reasons (ie
time and resource constraints).
See above nn
and accompanying text. The expression
‘witness statement’ was expressly used in our survey, and is used in
this article,
to include both witness statements and affidavits: Mark Steele,
Jason Chin and Celine van Golde,
Judicial Survey
(Word Survey) 2 <
https://osf.io/xs8uc
>, archived at <
https://perma.cc/HGM9-7LGY
The evidence of witnesses
in civil proceedings is conventionally broken up into their evidence as to the
relevant facts given on behalf
of the party who has called them
(evidence-in-chief), then questioning by opposing parties (cross-examination)
and then further questioning
by the party who called them to clarify any
ambiguity arising from the cross-examination (re-examination): Gans, Palmer and
Evidence Act
Evidence Act 1995
Evidence Act
John Levingston,
of Affidavits
(Federation Press, 2
ed, 2024) 30; Arthur R
Emmett, ‘Towards the Civil Law? The Loss of “Orality” in Civil
Litigation in Australia’
[2003] UNSWLawJl 36
(2003) 26(2)
University of New South Wales Law
, 458–9. This is still the case in civil proceedings in
lower courts and in some divisions of state supreme courts in Australia:
Uniform Civil Procedure Rules 1999
(Qld) r 390;
County Court Civil
Procedure Rules 2018
(Vic) r 40.02;
Supreme Court (General Civil
Procedure) Rules 2015
(Vic) r 40.02 (‘
SCGCP Rules
) 460. See also Steele (n
Accuracy of
Fact Witness Memory
10–14; British Psychological Society (n
) 29; Steele (n
) 159, citing Wade and Cartwright-Finch (n
Evidence Act
Evidence Act 1995
Evidence Act
; Home Office (UK),
Police and Criminal Evidence Act
1984 (PACE): Code D
(Revised Code of Practice, December 2023) 10–18
[3.0]–[3.41] <
https://assets.publishing.service.gov.uk/media/65816ec7fc07f300128d4433/PACE+Code+D+2023.pdf
archived at <
https://perma.cc/E4A2-LWCR
Criminal Procedure Act 1986
Office (UK),
Interviewing Suspects
(Guidance, 31 August 2023) 15–19
https://assets.publishing.service.gov.uk/media/64f1e37e9ee0f2000fb7bdc0/interviewing-suspects.pdf
archived at <
https://perma.cc/QLC6-BUMR
For example, the PEACE
interviewing technique was introduced into the national training of police
officers in the United Kingdom (‘UK’)
in 1992: Forensic Interview
PEACE: A Different Approach to Investigative Interviewing
(Report) 3–5 <
https://www.fis-international.com/assets/Uploads/resources/PEACE-A-Different-Approach.pdf
archived at <
https://perma.cc/LP67-EH2H
>. See also
Ministry of Justice (UK),
Achieving Best Evidence in Criminal Proceedings:
Guidance on Interviewing Victims and Witnesses, and Guidance on Using Special
(Guidance, January 2022) <
https://assets.publishing.service.gov.uk/media/6492e26c103ca6001303a331/achieving-best-evidence-criminal-proceedings-2023.pdf
archived at <
https://perma.cc/7R9B-FMD9
>; Hayley J
Cullen, Lisanne Adam and Celine van Golde, ‘Evidence-Based Policing in
Australia: An Examination of the Appropriateness
and Transparency of Lineup
Identification and Investigative Interviewing Practices’
(2021) 23(1)
International Journal of Police Science and Management
Dupas v The
[2012] VSCA 328
(2012) 40 VR 182
, 195 [56]–[58] (Warren CJ, Maxwell P, Nettle,
Redlich and Bongiorno JJA) (on identification evidence);
Audsley v The
[2014] VSCA 321
(2014) 44 VR 506
, 520 [56], 523 [69] (Maxwell P, Weinberg and Priest
JJA) (on the impact of substance abuse, alcohol and sleep deprivation on
R v Bartlett
[1996] VICSC 47
[1996] 2 VR 687
, 690, 696 (Winneke P, Charles JA
agreeing at 699, Southwell AJA agreeing at 700) (on the phenomenon of
‘recovered memory’);
Hickey v The Queen
(1995) 89 A Crim R
, 560–3, 565 (Tadgell and Charles JJA, Vincent AJA) (on the impact of
drug abuse on capacity for accurate recall). In relation
to the dangers of
identification evidence, see, eg,
Evidence Act 1995
(1)(b), (2);
Evidence Act 1995
(1)(b), (2);
Evidence Act 2008
ss 165(1)(b)
Winmar v Western
[2007] WASCA 244
(2007) 35 WAR 159
, 163–4 [10]–[14] (Wheeler, McLure,
Pullin, Buss and Miller JJA). In relation to delayed complaints, see Judicial
of New South Wales,
Criminal Trial Courts Bench Book
rev ed, 2024) 720–1 [5-080].
The preparation of expert
witnesses, in contrast, has been the subject of much greater regulation than the
preparation of witnesses
of fact, in an attempt by the courts to reduce the
influence of partisanship on such evidence. Many courts have thus promulgated
‘codes of conduct’ for expert witnesses: see, eg, Federal Court of
Practice Note GPN-EXPT: Expert Evidence
, 25 October 2016
https://www.fedcourt.gov.au/law-and-practice/practice-documents/practice-notes/gpn-expt
archived at <
https://perma.cc/H7AD-W7KF
Federal Court Practice Note, for instance, contains provisions regulating
interactions between parties and their lawyers
and expert witnesses: at paras
3.1–3.4. This includes a provision that parties ‘should never
attempt to pressure or influence
an expert into conforming [their] views with
the party’s interests’: at para 3.1. See also
Uniform Civil
Procedure Rules 2005
(NSW) r 31.23, sch 7;
Uniform Civil Procedure Rules
(Qld) sch 1C;
SCGCP Rules
) form 44A.
See, eg, Legal Services
Legal Profession Uniform Conduct (Barristers) Rules 2015
March 2022) r 23 (‘
LPUC Barristers Rules
’); Legal Services
Legal Profession Uniform Law Australian Solicitors’ Conduct
(at 22 April 2022) r 3 (‘
LPUL Solicitors
Civil Procedure Act 2010
ss 10(1)(b)
Civil Procedure Act
LPUC Barristers
LPUL Solicitors
) rr 4.1.2–4.1.4;
Civil Procedure Act
LPUC Barristers
) rr 8(b)–(c);
LPUL Solicitors Rules
LPUC Barristers
) r 35. See also
Solicitors Rules
LPUC Barristers
) rr 69–70;
Solicitors Rules
See generally Steele (n
LPUC Barristers Rules
LPUC Barristers
) rr 69(b), 70. See also
LPUL Solicitors Rules
John S Applegate,
‘Witness Preparation’
(1989) 68(2)
Texas Law Review
See British Psychological
Levingston (n
See above n
and accompanying text. As one of the
judges in our sample observed in interview, ‘[t]he notion of
“refreshing recollection”
can be a pretty slippery proposition in
practice’: Judge C14.
Majinski v Western
[2013] WASCA 10
(2013) 226 A Crim R 552
, 559 [30] (Martin CJ, Buss JA agreeing at
563 [50]). See also
New Aim Pty Ltd v Leung
[2023] FCAFC 67
(2023) 410 ALR 190
, 219 [119]
(Kenny, Moshinsky, Banks-Smith, Thawley and Cheeseman JJ) (‘
’). As has been observed, ‘the line between preparing and
prompting (or “coaching,” the usual term of opprobrium)
clear even for the most scrupulous’: Applegate (n
See Wade and
Cartwright-Finch (n
See Mattison and Cooper (n
) 301. See also Witness Evidence
Working Group (n
In criminal proceedings,
the duty of prosecutorial fairness requires the prosecution to inform the
accused of all relevant evidence,
including material relevant to the credibility
or reliability of prosecution witnesses:
Grey v The Queen
(2001) 184 ALR
, 599–600 [23] (Gleeson CJ, Gummow and Callinan JJ), 611 [63] (Kirby
Mallard v The Queen
[2005] HCA 68
(2005) 224 CLR 125
, 133 [17] (Gummow, Hayne,
Callinan and Heydon JJ), 155 [81] (Kirby J).
Colin Passmore,
(Sweet & Maxwell, 4
ed, 2020) 2–3.
Evidence Act
Evidence Act 1995
Evidence Act
Public Transport
Authority (WA) v Leighton Contractors Pty Ltd
[2007] WASCA 151
(2007) 34 WAR 279
284 [19], 287 [31], 288 [34]–[35] (McLure JA, Steytler P agreeing at 281
[1], Miller JA agreeing at 288 [37]) (‘
Contractors
Ritz Hotel Ltd v Charles of the Ritz Ltd [No 22]
(1988) 14 NSWLR 132
, 133–4 (McLelland J);
Trade Practices Commission v
Ampol Petroleum (Victoria) Pty Ltd
(1994) 53 FCR 578
, 579–85 (Heerey
Leighton Contractors
) 284 [16] (McLure JA), quoting
Robert J Sharpe, ‘Claiming Privilege in the Discovery Process’ in
Law Society of Upper
Canada (ed),
Law in Transition: Evidence
(Richard De
Boo Publishers, 1984) 163, 164–5.
See generally Steele (n
We also considered
surveying practitioners in relation to witness preparation practices and may yet
do so as part of our wider research
project. However, obtaining direct and frank
information from legal practitioners as to the practices used by them in
preparing witnesses
to give evidence is potentially difficult, including because
that information may expose them to criticism. In the United States
(‘US’), for instance, the admittedly much more ‘robust’
practices used in witness preparation (which often
include the extensive
rehearsal of witness testimony) have been described as ‘one of the dark
secrets of the legal profession’:
Applegate (n
) 279. Witness preparation has also been
called the profession’s ‘[d]irty [l]ittle [s]ecret’: Roberta K
‘Witness Preparation: Regulating the Profession’s
“Dirty Little Secret”’
(2011) 38(4)
Hastings Constitutional
Law Quarterly
, 1007; Roberta K Flowers, ‘What You See Is What You
Get: Applying the Appearance of Impropriety Standard to Prosecutors’
(1998) 63(3)
Missouri Law Review
, 740. Further, the direct
observation of witness interviews is problematic because such interviews are
confidential and privileged
and the presence of a third party might ground an
argument for waiver of privilege: see Australian Law Reform Commission,
Privilege in Perspective: Client Legal Privilege in Federal
Investigations
(Report No 107, 2008) 94 [3.68] <
https://www.alrc.gov.au/wp-content/uploads/2019/08/ALRC107.pdf
archived at <
https://perma.cc/EM95-TZNC
Leighton Contractors
284 [19] (McLure JA). Also, consent to direct observation would be required
from the client, the lawyers involved and the witness
— none of whom would
have any particular motivation to provide it.
See above n
and accompanying text.
See Gans, Palmer and
) 98; ‘Explainer:
Civil Courtroom’,
Supreme Court of Victoria
(Web Page, 2024) <
https://www.supremecourt.vic.gov.au/about-the-court/virtual-info-hub/explainers-the-work-of-the-court/explainer-civil-courtroom
archived at <
https://perma.cc/SW4R-YWX8
(‘Civil Courtroom’).
See below Table 1. We
recognise, however, that it is possible that some practices have changed over
In the UK, for instance,
the recent promulgation of a practice direction for certain commercial courts
more closely regulating the
witness preparation process was initiated, sponsored
and influenced by the judges of those courts: Steele (n
) 172, 175, discussing
Direction 57AC
The introductory section of
the survey asked the judges to read references in the survey to ‘witness
statements’ to include
affidavits: Steele, Chin and van Golde,
Letter from Helen Mitchell
to Jason Chin, 5 July 2022 <
https://osf.io/duyj3
>, archived at <
https://perma.cc/659S-YTKM
A prospective registration
is a time-stamped record of a study protocol that can be compared to the final
protocol for that study
to determine if the researchers made any changes after
the data were known. For the importance of prospective registration in empirical
legal research, see Jason M Chin and Kathryn Zeiler, ‘Replicability in
Empirical Legal Research’
Annual Review of Law and Social
All trial judges in the
surveyed jurisdictions were invited to participate. Judges were contacted via
email to their chambers’
email addresses, which were obtained either from
the court website or with the assistance of the Chief Justice. Judges who sat
in appeals were not invited to participate because that work does not
typically involve hearing evidence from witnesses: see Richard
‘Raising Fresh Argument or Evidence on Appeal’
[2008] (85)
The 22 judges who responded
indicating that they would not be participating in the survey said that they
would not be doing so for
reasons that included sitting mostly in criminal
trials (n = 9) and sitting mainly in appeals (n = 8). A full list of reasons
can be found in our supplemental material:
Supplemental Materials
(Supplement) <
https://osf.io/cpxh5
archived at <
https://perma.cc/FZ28-BF5L
Not all judges responded to
all questions — sample sizes for individual questions below 73 indicate
that one or more judges
did not respond to that question.
Our receipt of 73 survey
responses out of 143 judges (165 invited judges less 22 self-disqualified
responses) yields this 51% participation
See, eg, Jonathan Clough et
The Jury Project 10 Years On: Practices of Australian and New Zealand
(Report, April 2019) 2 <
https://aija.org.au/wp-content/uploads/2019/04/AIJA-The-Jury-Project-A-Survey-final-18-April-2019.pdf
archived at <
https://perma.cc/8C5N-NYBN
> (with a 31%
participation rate); Nicky McWilliam et al,
Court-Referred Alternative
Dispute Resolution: Perceptions of Members of the Judiciary
Report, October 2017) 19 <
https://aija.org.au/wp-content/uploads/2019/08/AIJA-Court-Rererred-ADR.pdf
archived at <
https://perma.cc/UQL9-AV9Q
> (with a 30%
participation rate); Brian Flanagan and Sinead Ahern, ‘Judicial
Decision-Making and Transnational Law: A Survey
of Common Law Supreme Court
(2011) 60(1)
International and Comparative Law Quarterly
11 (with a 42% participation rate); Kathy Mack and Sharyn Roach Anleu,
‘The National Survey of Australian Judges: An Overview
of Findings’
(2008) 18(1)
Journal of Judicial Administration
, 8 (with a 54.5%
participation rate).
This is a view confirmed by
observations made by a number of the judges in interview. See Judge A16:
‘I don’t think this
is just an academic issue. I think it’s
quite important to have some research and work done on this.’ See also
B16: ‘This is a topic in which judges are definitely
interested.’
Steele, Chin and van Golde,
Judicial Survey
Qualtrics software was used
for the online survey. Sixty-one judges responded online and 12 judges responded
by completing a hard
copy of the survey and forwarding it to the researchers via
email or mail.
Steele, Chin and van Golde,
Judicial Survey
Ibid 7–10. The judges
were also asked whether there were any other witness preparation practices that
they found unsatisfactory
or troubling in addition to those 13 specific
practices: at 9–10. This produced a range of critical comments: see, eg,
12 (‘[l]ining up witness statements ... to ensure
consistency’); Judge 30 (‘[t]he practice of substantially cutting
and pasting the evidence of one witness into the affidavit of another is
particularly appalling, but it is not an irregular occurrence’);
(‘[t]here are, I fear, many worse practices than those mentioned, but they
include blatantly telling witnesses what
or what not to say to suit the case at
hand. Hopefully, that does not occur, but I fear it does’).
Steele, Chin and van Golde,
Judicial Survey
Ibid 20. In the interest of
keeping this article focused, the results of this discrete aspect of our survey
are reported in only summary
form. Six propositions about the nature of witness
memory were stated, with the judges asked whether each proposition seemed to
based on their knowledge and experience, to be ‘essentially
correct’ or ‘essentially incorrect’. While these
propositions
were generalisations, which could be subject to exceptions and differences of
interpretation, our results suggested
that the judges’ understanding of
key aspects of the nature, fallibility and suggestibility of witness memory
broadly aligned
with the psychological research: see, eg,
Accuracy of Fact
Witness Memory
British Psychological Society (n
In other words, our results indicated that judges, at least at a high level,
were generally well-informed as to the ways in
which memory could be corrupted
by suggestion. For a more detailed summary of this aspect of our survey, see
‘Witness Preparation
and the Corruption of Memory: A Survey of Australian
Trial Judges’ (Paper) <
https://osf.io/4gc8j
>, archived at <
https://perma.cc/3CGK-JTX7
Steele, Chin and van Golde,
Judicial Survey
As was clear from the
question asking the judges if they were prepared to be interviewed, the survey
responses of the judges who agreed
to be interviewed were known to the lead
author. However, the interviews were conducted on the explicit basis that
neither those
survey responses, nor the additional observations made in
interview, would be attributed to any identified judge: ibid 2–3.
consistent with the terms of our ethics approval: see Mitchell (n
There was no process of
‘selection’ by which the interviewed judges were chosen. Interviews
with the other eight judges
who indicated a willingness to be interviewed were
not able to be conducted purely due to timing and availability.
We followed an informal
version of a reflexive thematic analysis: see Virginia Braun and Victoria
Clarke, ‘Reflecting on Reflexive
Thematic Analysis’ (2019) 11(4)
Qualitative Research in Sport, Exercise and Health
589, 594. Our starting
point in analysing the interview transcripts, notes and survey comments was
informed by our research concerning
the quality of witness statements in civil
litigation and by our experiences in practice, the study of evidence law and the
of legal psychology.
The summary descriptions in
this article of the gravamen of the comments and interviews were formulated in
the first instance by the
lead author on the basis of a review of that material
and then separately reviewed by the second author.
A confidence interval
measures the precision of an estimate: Daniël Lakens, ‘Confidence
Intervals’,
Improving Your Statistical Inferences
(Web Page, 2022)
https://lakens.github.io/statistical_inferences/07-CI.html
archived at <
https://perma.cc/E32Z-SVC2
>. Here, our
estimates pertain to the attitudes, beliefs and knowledge of all Australian
superior court judges with some experience
in hearing civil proceedings. A 95%
confidence interval, which is what we calculate in this article, is wide enough
such that 95%
of the time it includes the percentage of Australian judges that
have the relevant attitude, belief or knowledge. Accordingly, confidence
intervals can help indicate the ‘resolution with which an effect is
estimated’: at [7.3]. Very narrow ranges provide
high resolution, with
larger ranges suggesting lower resolution. In this study, our confidence
intervals are approximately ±10%
around our estimates. We consider this to
be sufficient to draw the conclusions we make because our conclusions would be
in most cases even if our estimates were off by ±10%. However, we
invite readers to make their own judgements.
Cristina P Sison and Joseph
Glaz, ‘Simultaneous Confidence Intervals and Sample Size Determination for
Multinomial Proportions’
(1995) 90(429)
Journal of the American
Statistical Association
366, 366–7.
This accounts for any table
in which the percentages add to 99% or 101%.
Jason Chin, Celine van
Golde and Mark Steele, ‘Witness Preparation and the Corruption of Memory:
A Survey of Australian Trial
(Web Page, 3
September 2024) <
https://osf.io/kdcft/?
>. See also Steele,
Chin and van Golde,
Judicial Survey
Judicial Survey
https://osf.io/asrt9
archived at <
https://perma.cc/H5GA-HQCV
Australian Judges on Witness Preparation and Memory Contamination in Civil
(R Output, 8 June 2023) <
https://osf.io/f9zp6
Supplemental
); Jason Chin, Celine
van Golde and Mark Steele, ‘Witness Preparation: Survey for Judges’,
OSF Registries
(Web Page, 15 August 2022) <
https://osf.io/ej2rx
>, archived at <
https://perma.cc/3VBS-X6PZ
>. We did not
seek ethics approval to share our raw data due to the sensitivity of our sample.
However, the R code shows how that
raw data were analysed to produce our
Australian Judges on Witness Preparation and Memory Contamination in
Civil Cases
(R Code, 8 June 2023) <
https://osf.io/gm6nh
>, archived at <
https://perma.cc/F8YP-34KQ
>. We did not
perform any analyses on subsections of our sample (eg by reference to the
judges’ work prior to appointment)
because we considered that the samples
for such subgroups would have been overly small.
Eight judges chose
‘Other’ and filled in a response. For details of all
‘Other’ responses, see
Judge Practice Area: Other
https://osf.io/um473
>, archived at
https://perma.cc/L3MU-54RE
The relatively small
proportion of criminal judges in the sample is consistent with our recruitment
approach that explained that the
study was directed to their experience of
witness preparation in
proceedings: Steele, Chin and van Golde,
Judicial Survey
Again, we note that the
introductory section of the survey asked the judges to read references in the
survey to ‘witness statements’
to include affidavits: ibid.
The first three questions
were directed to the judge’s experience in the past
the fourth question was directed to the judge’s experience in the past
years: ibid 3–6.
See below Table 3 for
further details and confidence intervals.
It should be noted that a
portion of the ‘never or almost never’ answers to these questions
may reflect the fact that
some judges reported that they seldom received witness
evidence in written form. A point which was made by some judges in response
these questions was thus that (a) the judges who sat mainly in the common law
division of some courts (eg the VSC and the QSC)
seldom encountered
evidence-in-chief because the practice in that division was for
witnesses to give their evidence-in-chief orally and (b) it followed
judges would encounter the situations posited by the questions either
‘never’ or only ‘occasionally’
simply because they
seldom saw witness statements: Judge 35; Judge 71. See also
Uniform Civil
Procedure Rules 1999
(Qld) r 390(a);
SCGCP Rules
In the past two years for
the first three questions and in the past five years for the fourth
In one case, a judge
reported that a critical element of the party’s claim was that
‘individuals were targeted precisely
because they were vulnerable and had
limited education, but their affidavits were plainly written by highly educated
See, eg, Judge 61:
‘In at least two cases this year it has been clear that passages in direct
speech of conversations set out
in two witness statements were so similar’
that ‘it was likely that they were prepared by the lawyer acting for the
and had been suggested to the witness rather than being based on the
independent recollection of each witness’.
See Judge 63:
‘Witnesses themselves, especially parties, will in some cases distort
their evidence irrespective of the conduct
of legal advisers.’
See, eg, Judge 24:
‘Witness statements and affidavits are often drafted by lawyers in their
own language, not the language of
the witness.’
[2020] HCA 28
(2020) 381 ALR 560
As the courts have
recognised, the involvement of lawyers to assist in ensuring that witness
evidence is expressed in clear language
may be appropriate even in the case of
expert witnesses:
217 [112], 219 [120] (Kenny, Moshinsky, Banks-Smith, Thawley and Cheeseman
Judge 72. But see other
judges’ comments, which included the statement that ‘sometimes
improved expression helps, particularly
with those whose use of language may not
be great’: Judge 42. See also Judge B16: ‘if it’s still the
truth, expressed
more formally and perhaps more succinctly and more clearly than
the witness could do, I’m not troubled by that’.
) 591 [112].
Judge 57. As another judge
observed, witness statements ‘are usually the evidence of the
solicitor’: Judge 7.
Steele, Chin and van Golde,
Judicial Survey
These judges thus
explained that they ordered oral evidence-in-chief ‘to ensure that the
true observations and recollection
of the witness’ are ‘given in
evidence’: Judge 34. Another reason was to have the witness’s
evidence ‘unadulterated
by his/her legal advisers’: Judge 50.
‘[I]t reduces the risk of the evidence being filtered through the
Judge A42. As one judge pithily observed, the reason why they
ordered oral evidence-in-chief was ‘to get to the truth’:
Judge A42; Judge B21;
Judge D25; Judge D38. See Judge D39: ‘I do think from the judge’s
point of view that there’s
much greater insight into the witness’s
true recollection and the witness’s honesty and integrity through that
Judge A42. Similarly,
‘[o]ral evidence is reliably the evidence of the witness not the
lawyers’: Judge 39.
See, eg, Judge A16:
‘Generally, I think it’s more likely to produce a genuine
recollection ... to get the evidence in
their words, how they speak, how they
react, how they converse and then you get an idea of what is likely to have been
Such comments echo the observation of Callinan J that ‘[v]iva
voce evidence retains a spontaneity and genuineness often lacking
pre-prepared written material’:
Concrete Pty Ltd v Parramatta Design
& Developments Pty Ltd
[2006] HCA 55
(2006) 229 CLR 577
, 635 [175].
On the other hand, a
number of the judges accepted that oral evidence-in-chief could tend to favour
the confident, articulate witness
over the nervous or inarticulate. The same
judges, however, generally considered that they could adjust for this in their
of the witness ‘and make allowance for it’: see, eg,
‘It’s not a perfect solution, but it makes it harder’: Judge
See also Witness
Evidence Working Group (n
[18]; Western Australian Bar Association,
Best Practice Guide: Preparing
Witness Statements for Use in Civil Cases
(Guide, December 2021)
ii–iii [12] <
https://www.wabar.asn.au/wp-content/uploads/2022/08/Best-Practice-Guide-Preparing-Witness-Statements-for-use-in-Civil-Cases-as-at-December-2021.pdf
archived at <
https://perma.cc/ZKL6-V384
generally Emmett (n
) 458, 460,
As one judge said, oral
evidence was ‘quicker and cheaper’ because it worked against the
preparation of written statements
which were too often ‘opuses ... of
marginal utility’: Judge A10.
As a judge complained,
‘[witness statements] create an entire industry in taking petty
evidentiary objections’: Judge
See Witness Evidence
Working Group (n
Ibid 9 [29].
Ibid 9 [30]. The
majority of respondents (55.6%) either agreed (36.35%) or strongly agreed
(19.25%) that a reason that witness statements
did not fulfil their purpose was
that they ‘fail to reflect the witnesses’ own evidence’: at
app 1. See above Table
Witness Evidence Working
The Business and
Property Courts are a collective of specialist civil courts; those courts
include the courts of the Chancery Division
as well as the Admiralty Court, the
Commercial Court and the Technology and Construction Court from the King’s
Bench Division
of the High Court: ‘The Business and Property
(Web Page) <
https://www.gov.uk/courts-tribunals/the-business-and-property-courts
archived at <
https://perma.cc/BZE2-3TEQ
Although the guidelines
are described as a ‘Statement of Best Practice’, the practice
direction containing those guidelines
requires the legal representative of a
party with responsibility for the trial witness statement to certify that the
witness statement
has been prepared in accordance with the guidelines,
effectively rendering them mandatory:
Practice Direction 57AC
) para 4.3. See generally Steele (n
But see Western
Australian Bar Association (n
This was also a view
expressed by a number of the judges in interview. See, eg, Judge A8: ‘I
think it’s a massive hole
that people prefer not to look at.’
These practices were
drawn from a variety of sources, including discussions with judges and
practitioners and observations in judgments:
) [20] (Leggatt J);
Re Equiticorp
Finance Ltd; Ex parte Brock [No 2]
(1992) 27 NSWLR 391
, 395–6 (Young
Craig v Troy
(Supreme Court of Western Australia, Ipp J, 24 February
1995) 9–10 (‘
’). Practices were also drawn from
texts and articles by practitioners providing guidance on how to prepare
witnesses as well
as from existing best practice guidelines: see, eg, Mauet and
McCrimmon (n
) 19–23; Jeffrey
Evidence and the Litigation Process
(LexisNexis, 6
ed, 2017) 786 [17.022]–[17.023]; Richard Mahoney, ‘Witness
Conferences’
(2000) 24(5)
Criminal Law Journal
Justice Sheppard, ‘Communications with Witnesses before and during Their
(1987) 3(1)
Australian Bar Review
Western Australian Bar Association (n
) [2.1]–[2.10],
[10.1]–[24.6];
Practice Direction 57AC
) app paras 3.1–3.16. Finally,
practices were drawn from the lead author’s own experience practicing at
the commercial
Bar in Sydney since 1995.
Of the 23 judges who
were asked about this in interview, 20 said that it was their experience or
expectation that at least some of
the practices identified by them as
‘generally unacceptable’ nevertheless occurred in practice. For
instance, ‘I
think without a doubt they do happen’: Judge D19.
‘These practices are commonplace, both from my time as a barrister
judge’: Judge D39. The other three judges asked for a view on this felt
unable to express an opinion. See, eg, Judge
C3: ‘We don’t get much
insight from the Bench into what is actually happening in practice nowadays and
on the Bench for many years now.’
Accuracy of
Fact Witness Memory
31–40. See generally British Psychological Society (n
) 29–30; Wade and Cartwright-Finch
) 14–19; Elizabeth F Loftus et
Eyewitness Testimony: Civil and Criminal
(LexisNexis, 6
ed, 2023) ch 11.
See below Table 4.
For instance, in
relation to practicing cross-examination on the witness’s statement,
judges’ comments included Judge
3 responding that this would be okay as
long as ‘they are not cross-examined on documents or statements’ and
responding that it ‘[d]epends [on] what is involved’.
A number of the judges
made comments to the effect that their views relied significantly on the
qualification ‘generally’
and that there might be particular
circumstances in which practices identified by them as ‘generally
unacceptable’ might
be acceptable or vice versa. See Judge 35:
‘These questions do not admit of nuance.’ Some judges emphasised
practices identified as ‘generally acceptable’ were not
necessarily considered by them as something to be
encouraged. One judge commented that ‘[e]ven though I have referred to
some practices as “acceptable”, I am not
suggesting it is best
practice nor am I suggesting that it is always helpful for the judge’:
In practice, the witness
interview thus functions not merely as a surrogate for oral evidence-in-chief,
but as an integral part of
the process by which a party and their lawyers
investigate the facts and make decisions about what evidence to adduce in their
In that process, the lawyer does not simply reduce the witness’s
evidence-in-chief to writing, but challenges, probes and evaluates
that evidence
in order to make judgments about whether or not to deploy it: see generally
Mauet and McCrimmon (n
Several judges also made
observations to this effect. See Judge 57: ‘A number of these answers
depend on context.’ See
also Judge 44: ‘so much depends on a
judgment to be made according to the nature of the case, the significance of the
and the calibre of the witness.’
This difficulty is also
discussed by the lead author in the context of the promulgation in the UK, by
Practice Direction 57AC
a mandatory ‘Statement of Best Practice’: see Steele (n
Steele, Chin and van
Judicial Survey
The fact that 38% of the
judges neither agreed nor disagreed with this proposition may reflect a
reservation among some judges as
to their ability to be sure, in any particular
case, whether a witness’s memory has in fact been distorted. When asked in
why they had ‘neither agreed nor disagreed’ with this
proposition, some judges explained that they believed that witness
preparation
practices could distort witness memory but could not positively verify that
those practices did so or that they did so
in all cases. See Judge D41: ‘I
just don’t know. You might say, when you see someone talk and you realise
that they didn’t
speak the words recorded in the affidavit, then
there’s obviously a fair bit of lawyering involved in there, but whether
actually changed the thrust of the evidence, I don’t know.’
In reporting on the
attitudes expressed by the judges to the proposed reforms we have simply
reported the explanations given by the
judges for their agreement or
disagreement in their comments or observations in interview without attempting
to critically analyse
or challenge those explanations (eg as to whether they
might reflect an underlying resistance to change or insufficient time to fully
consider the implications of those changes).
It is to be noted that
our survey also asked the judges if there had been any occasion in the last five
years when a psychologist
had given expert evidence before them, in civil
proceedings, as to the nature, fallibility or suggestibility of memory: Steele,
and van Golde,
Judicial Survey
) 17. Only six of the 72 judges who
responded to this question said that this had occurred. Only two of those judges
also reported
on the circumstances in which this had occurred — one in a
case relating to childhood recollection and the other in a case
relating to
recovered memory of sexual abuse.
See Judge 45: ‘[I
would] expect the evidence would be too high level to be of any specific
assistance in a specific case. If
the evidence was directed to the particular
witness, evidence and circumstances, that may be useful.’
See, eg, Judge 35
(‘a topic that approaches the obvious’); Judge 37 (‘a matter
of common human experience’).
Some judges also expressed stronger negative
views about the utility of psychological evidence generally: see, eg, Judge 28
my experience it is among the most unreliable evidence I have ever
read or heard’); Judge 39 (‘[l]awyers should know
more about this
topic than psychologists. Psychobabble can be distracting’).
Judge 62. See also Judge
A14: ‘I feel that is a general issue that every single judge and every
lawyer has to understand as
part of their work and so we have to have education
around that.’
That is, a witness
giving factual evidence (as distinct, for example, from expert opinion evidence)
who is neither a claimant nor
defendant in the proceedings: Gans, Palmer and
) 183, 194–5.
It is to be noted that
this reform would also implicitly attenuate litigation privilege, because
requiring the record to be made available
to the other parties would necessarily
involve removing privilege from it: see Passmore (n
See Judge B16: ‘I
certainly agree that it is wrong for a party to be able to engage in conduct
behind closed doors which has
the effect of distorting the evidence, present the
evidence to the Court as if it’s the witness’s actual recollection
and then resist an inquiry into what had happened.’
It is also noteworthy
that 21% of the judges ‘neither agreed nor disagreed’ with the
proposal, with some indicating in
comments that they would need to reflect on
the reform before expressing a view. See, eg, Judge 57 (‘I don’t
I’ve been able to give this question sufficient thought to give a
sensible answer’); Judge 69 (‘[w]orth looking
at but have not
thought through how it would work’). Further, some judges who did not
embrace the reform in their survey responses
acknowledged in interview that, on
reflection, their initial reaction may have been too hasty. For instance, Judge
A10, who ‘disagreed’
in their survey response, said: ‘I know
my instinctive reaction was negative, but perhaps I was thinking about it too
superficially
... Maybe it’s not a bad idea’.
Steele, Chin and van
Judicial Survey
Australian Bar
Association,
Barristers’ Conduct Rules
(Rules, 1 February 2010)
11–12 rr 68–9 <
https://nswbar.asn.au/circulars/2010/feb/rules.pdf
archived at <
https://perma.cc/6FWQ-BU5A
>. See also
LPUC Barristers Rules
LPUL Solicitors Rules
Steele, Chin and van
Judicial Survey
Presented with this proposition, judges’ responses were ‘strongly
disagree’ (1%), ‘disagree’ (24%),
‘neither agree nor
disagree’ (11%), ‘agree’ (53%) and ‘strongly
agree’ (11%).
See, eg, Judge 9
(‘I agree that guidance is desirable, but it could take other forms (ie
need not be in the professional conduct
rules)’); Judge 44 (‘[t]here
are limits to how prescriptive a rule in this field can be’).
As Judge B21 recalled of
their own training: ‘it was just learning on the job — you watched a
solicitor sit down and carefully
reconstruct for someone what they thought it
was they remembered’.
See, eg, Judge A8:
‘I strongly agree that additional guidance should be provided. I think you
see enough evidence that the profession
doesn’t know what the proper
boundaries are’.
Judge 34; Australian Bar
Association (n
68–9. See also
LPUC Barristers Rules
) rr 69–70. As Judge 57 stated:
‘Without the professional conduct rules giving prominence to this issue
practitioners
will develop ... poor and inappropriate practices ... Rules cannot
by themselves change conduct but are norm-setting and importantly
Judge D25. See also
Judge A15: ‘I don’t know how you reduce some of these things to
Judge A42. See also
Judge C18: ‘I can’t think of anything but teaching by analogy and
examples.’ Some judges suggested
that seeking to develop more detailed
rules might even be counter-productive: see, eg, Judge 52 (‘[b]y seeking
to legislate
in more detail, the result may be that the general ethical rules
which govern this subject are in fact diluted’).
See above Table 4. This
is an observation that has also been taken up in further detail in the context
of the lead author’s
recent review of
Practice Direction 57AC
): Steele (n
Practice Direction
) app para 3.7.
See, eg, Judge 39:
‘Just as would happen in oral evidence.’ This analogy also seems to
be the underlying rationale for
the requirements in
Practice Direction
): see at app paras
This is also a reform
adopted in the UK where, since April 2021,
Practice Direction 57AC
) has required that ‘[o]n important
disputed matters of fact, a trial witness statement should, if practicable ...
the witness’s own words how well they recall the matters
addressed’: at app para 3.7.
Judge 8; Judge 63.
Judge 28. There is also
psychological research supporting the conclusion that people may, in any event,
lack the metacognitive ability
to assess the reliability of their own memories:
see generally Timothy D Wilson and Elizabeth W Dunn, ‘Self Knowledge: Its
Limits, Value, and Potential for Improvement’ (2004) 55
Annual Review
of Psychology
493, 494–504, 513.
Steele, Chin and van
Judicial Survey
For example, one judge
suggested a more inquisitorial role for the court in examining witnesses: Judge
19. Another suggestion was
requiring witnesses to write out their own account of
events: Judge 28. Interestingly, in a variation on the idea of requiring witness
interviews to be recorded, one judge suggested a requirement for more than one
practitioner to be present at witness interviews on
the basis that the
possibility of knowledge of what occurred at an interview becoming known to
others might act as a brake on poor
practice: Judge 24.
Judge 13; Judge 18;
Judge 39; Judge 47; Judge 65.
That is, allowing the
parties to cross-examine witnesses under oath prior to the hearing. See, eg,
Judge C3: ‘I favour the idea
of “controlled” use of pre-trial
depositions (ie, by leave or limited in number) to allow parties to test witness
before trial’. Depositions are a procedure commonly used in civil
litigation in the US: see generally Michael J Legg, ‘The
United States
Deposition: Time for Adoption in Australian Civil Procedure?’
[2007] MelbULawRw 6
(2007) 31(1)
Melbourne University Law Review
, 146–7; Emmett (n
That is, 30–65% of
the time, depending on the defect: see above Table 3.
See above Part III.
Ibid. The cross-examiner
prudently left it at that, so how the affidavit came to be so wrong was not
GmbH v King
[1995] 3 All ER 1
, 11–15 (Lightman J);
Day v Perisher
Blue Pty Ltd
[2005] NSWCA 110
(2005) 62 NSWLR 731
, 746–50 [31]–[35] (Sheller JA);
Justice Peter Smith, ‘Statement by the Judge’ (Speech, London, 21
[47]–[49] <
https://www.judiciary.uk/wp-content/uploads/JCO/Documents/Judgments/farepak-judges-statement.pdf
archived at <
https://perma.cc/2ULM-89Y6
Edwardian Group Ltd; Estera Trust (Jersey) Ltd v Singh
[2018] EWHC 1715
[2019] 1 BCLC 171
198–9 [90]–[94] (Fancourt J);
Bates v Post Office Ltd
EWHC 3408 (QB)
, [221]–[226], [249]–[252] (Fraser J).
Yun-chien Chang and
Daniel Klerman, ‘Settlement around the World: Settlement Rates in the
Largest Economies’
(2022) 14(1)
Journal of Legal Analysis
Our findings also have
potential implications for the increasing use by courts of paper-based or online
hearings in the wake of the
COVID-19 pandemic. In particular, a concern that the
taking of controversial witness evidence online blunts the ability of the
cross-examiner
to most effectively test the credibility of that evidence has
been expressed: see, eg,
Campaign Master (UK) Ltd v Forty Two International
Pty Ltd [No 3]
[2009] FCA 1306
(2009) 181 FCR 152
, 171 [78] (Buchanan J).
See above Part IV. This
is a view that is supported by a substantial body of psychological research
highlighting the ways in which
practices commonly used in witness preparation
have the capacity to corrupt witness memory: see, eg, Steele (n
) 161–5. See above n
and accompanying text.
See above Part IV. For
instance, although 57% of the judges considered that it is generally
unacceptable to seek to refresh a witness’s
recollection by showing them
contemporaneous documents not created or seen by them at the time, this has been
held to be ‘normal
practice’, with no ‘rule of law or
professional ethics to the contrary’:
Lindsay-Owen v Lake
, [3] (Hodgson CJ in Eq).
See above n
and accompanying text.
See above n
, Parts III–V. See, eg, Judge 7
(‘[there] needs to be a more complete statement of what is right and
wrong’); Judge
A8 (‘I think it’s a massive hole that people
prefer not to look at’); Judge A53 (‘I am strongly of the view
the process of taking witness statements leads to massive distortions of
memory’); Judge B21 (‘[t]his is a long,
long way from where we need
it to be’).
By this we mean that a
judge will seldom know with certainty the extent to which a witness’s
evidence was reliable or what impact
the witness preparation process may have
had on the reliability of the evidence. It follows that judges’ views on
such matters
are necessarily based on impression.
Such considerations
highlight the practical impossibility of
definitively
establishing the
real world impact of witness preparation on witness memory and, commensurately,
the need to approach that question
as a matter of
probability
comparing typical witness preparation practices with what psychological research
indicates about their likely impact on witness
memory) or by recourse to the
judgment and experience
of participants in the process (as we have tried
to do through our survey): see Gary Edmond et al, ‘A Warning about
Directions and Warnings’
[2023] AdelLawRw 7
(2023) 44(1)
Adelaide Law Review
See Gans, Palmer and
) 98; ‘Civil
Courtroom’ (n
In that regard, our
results also confirm and build on the evidence of the same concerns expressed in
a report of the International
Chamber of Commerce and in the report of the
Witness Evidence Working Group in the UK that preceded the promulgation of
Practice Direction 57AC
Accuracy of Fact Witness Memory
) 5–7; Witness Evidence Working
See above n
for an explanation of confidence
Seventy-four per cent of
the judges either ‘agreed’ (50%) or ‘strongly agreed’
(24%) with, and only 4% of
the judges expressed any disagreement with, this
suggestion.
‘This enables
lawyers to present witnesses who are thoroughly familiar with the subject matter
of their testimony and who are
prepared to say what they know in a clear,
coherent manner’:
) 9 (Ipp J). See also
Thomas v SMP
(International) Pty Ltd
[2010] NSWSC 822
, [19], [22] (Pembroke J).
‘[I]t is also clear that in Australia and New Zealand a substantial degree
of witness preparation
is accepted as a part of good litigation practice’:
) 299. Indeed, this is
accepted as proper practice even in the case of expert evidence:
) 217 [112], 219 [119]–[120]
(Kenny, Moshinsky, Banks-Smith, Thawley and Cheeseman JJ). See generally
Evidence Act 1995
Evidence Act 1995
Evidence Act
In contrast, in civil
law systems, which prefer the ‘inquisitorial’ model of justice, the
parties and their lawyers are
not permitted the opportunity to engage with or
prepare a witness; the witness is simply called by the court and gives their
‘cold’: Sergey V Vasiliev,
From Liberal
Extremity to Safe Mainstream? The Comparative Controversies of Witness
Preparation in the United States’
(2011) 9(2)
International Commentary
on Evidence
–67, 7, 26–8.
‘The duty of
counsel to his client ... is to make every honest endeavour to succeed’:
Tombling v Universal Bulb Co Ltd
[1951] 2 TLR 289
, 297 (Denning LJ).
Lawyers are thus required to ‘promote and protect fearlessly and by all
proper and lawful means the client’s
best interests’:
Barristers Rules
) r 35. See
LPUL Solicitors Rules
See above n
and accompanying text.
This is embodied in the
rule that a legal practitioner will not be acting unethically in ‘drawing
the witness’s attention
to inconsistencies or other difficulties with the
LPUC Barristers Rules
) rr 69(b), 70;
LPUL Solicitors
See British
Psychological Society (n
See Wade and
Cartwright-Finch (n
) 3; Asjeet S Lamba
and Ian Ramsay, ‘Commercial Litigation in Australia: An Empirical
Study’ (2015) 4(1)
Journal of Civil Litigation and Practice
For other witness
preparation practices, see above Table 4.
See British
Psychological Society (n
A lecture provided to
new members of the New South Wales Bar Association during the period of their
reading was said to have included
a statement that ‘[t]o obtain
comprehensive accounts of what took place and what was said it is often
necessary by drawing
upon one’s imagination to prod and stimulate a client
so that [they] ultimately [are] able to give a full and convincing
Sheppard (n
See Applegate (n
See, eg, Judge C14:
‘[i]t could be quite difficult given the complex and nuanced nature of the
process and its different functions
— investigating, gathering evidence,
testing etc’. These problems are also reflected in the frequent use in the
of Best Practice’ appended to
Practice Direction
) of numerous
qualifications to the prescribed rules: at app. For instance, those rules enjoin
practitioners to (a) avoid ‘so
far as possible’ any practice that
might alter or influence the recollection of the witness: at app para 3.10; (b)
use ‘[p]articular
caution’ in showing a witness a document they did
not create or see at the time: at app para 3.4; (c) state ‘if
practicable’
whether, and if so how, the witness’s recollection in
relation to important disputed matters of fact has been refreshed by
to documents: at app para 3.7; (d) use as few drafts ‘as
practicable’: at app para 3.8; and (e) generally avoid
leading questions
‘where possible’: at app para 3.16. See also Steele (n
See above nn
–6 and accompanying text.
See above Table 4.
Accuracy of
Fact Witness Memory
31–40; British Psychological Society (n
Accuracy of Fact
Witness Memory
experienced and trained interviewers can find it difficult to avoid such
practices. A 1991–92 British study of interviews
of eyewitnesses by
trained police officers, for instance, found that approximately one in every six
questions posed was suggestive
in some way: Ronald P Fisher, ‘Interviewing
Victims and Witnesses of Crime’
(1995) 1(4)
Psychology, Public Policy,
, 740, citing Richard George and Brian Clifford, ‘Making
the Most of Witnesses’
(1992) 8(3)
See Sharpe (n
There is also the
obvious danger that educating less scrupulous practitioners as to the extent of
the susceptibility of witness memory
to suggestion may exacerbate, rather than
remedy, the problem.
See above nn
–44 and accompanying text.
Louis D Brandeis wrote
this when arguing for the full disclosure of promoters’ fees in security
offerings: Louis D Brandeis,
‘What Publicity Can Do’ (20 December
Harper’s Weekly
See above Table 6.
See above nn
The rationale for
litigation privilege, which is distinct from the privilege that protects legal
advice, is thus said to be ‘the
need for a protected area to facilitate
investigation and preparation of a case for trial by the adversarial
Leighton Contractors
) 284 [16] (McLure JA), quoting Sharpe (n
) 165. See also
J-Corp Ltd v
Australian Builders Labourers Federated Union of Workers
Australian Branch) [No 1]
(1992) 38 FCR 452
, 457 (French J);
Secretary of
State for Trade and Industry v Baker
[1998] Ch 356
, 365–6 (Scott
It could also
potentially be argued that putting before a court witness evidence on the
implicit basis that it is the bona fide, uncorrupted
recollection of the witness
is conduct ‘inconsistent with the maintenance of the confidentiality of
the communication’
and thereby grounds an argument for a waiver of
privilege: see
Mann v Carnell
[1999] HCA 66
(1999) 201 CLR 1
, 13 [29] (Gleeson CJ,
Gaudron, Gummow and Callinan JJ). Additionally, ‘[t]he holder of the
privilege should not be able to
abuse it by using it to create an inaccurate
perception of the protected communication’:
A-G (NT) v Maurice
[1986] HCA 80
(1986) 161 CLR 475
, 488 (Mason and Brennan JJ). See also at 487 (Mason and
Brennan JJ). As Judge A53 pondered in interview: ‘I wonder if there
wouldn’t be an argument of waiver once a witness statement is relied upon,
but the point is never taken because no one wants
to open Pandora’s
See above nn
–40 and accompanying text.
See above n
and accompanying text.
See above Table 4.
See Judge 8: ‘I
think it is preferable to make the reforms to professional conduct rules’.
See also Judge 34 (‘[t]he
undesirable practices listed above should be
first addressed in professional conduct rules’); Judge D39 (‘[m]y
that greater guidance, clear guidance, to practitioners would do a great
deal and take the issue much further forward ... I would
certainly do that
See above n
and accompanying text.
Author contributions are
as follows: (a) conceptualisation: Mark J Steele, (b) data curation: Mark J
Steele and Jason M Chin, (c)
formal analysis: Mark J Steele and Jason M Chin,
(d) investigation: Mark J Steele, (e) methodology: Mark J Steele, Jason M Chin
Celine van Golde, (f) project administration: Mark J Steele, (g)
supervision: Jason M Chin and Celine van Golde, (h) visualisation:
Jason M Chin,
(i) writing (original draft): Mark J Steele and (j) writing (review &
editing): Mark J Steele, Jason M Chin and
Celine van Golde. Author contributions
were created using the Tenzing app: see generally Alex O Holcombe et al,
‘Documenting
Contributions to Scholarly Articles Using CRediT and
Tenzing’ (2020) 15(12)
e0244611:1–11.
In the view of the
authors there is considerable scope for further research in this area and we
would be interested in collaborating
with others on this. For instance, it would
be timely and useful for there to be some empirical exploration (potentially via
of practitioners and judges) of the ways in which
Practice Direction
) has changed witness
preparation practice in the UK and the perceived impact that this has had on the
reliability of witness evidence
there. Another opportunity for useful empirical
research would be a study (potentially a survey of practitioners or a
study’) to establish the extent to which civil lawyers in
Australia are using practices in their day-to-day preparation of
witnesses to
give evidence that have clear potential to distort the memories of those
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (4.42 MB)
PDF format (466 KB)
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter