URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/journals/PrivLawPRpr/2005/16.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 15:30:42
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Greenleaf, Graham --- "A Tentative Start For Implementation Of APEC's Privacy Framework" [2005] PrivLawPRpr 16; (2005) 11(7) Privacy Law and Policy Reporter 188
A Tentative Start For Implementation Of Apec’s Privacy Framework
A Tentative Start For Implementation Of APEC’s
Graham Greenleaf | University of New South Wales
The first steps toward the implementation of APEC’s new privacy
standards (see PLB January 2005) were taken in Hong Kong on
June 1-2 at the
first APEC Electronic Commerce Steering Group (ECSG) Technical Assistance
Seminar: Domestic Implementation of the
APEC Privacy Framework. The Seminar did
not aim to achieve anything immediate and concrete beyond its main objective of
attendees about the Framework. The fact that it has been held little
more than six months after APEC Ministers endorsed the standards
is significant
in itself, given the usual time-lags in implementation of international
agreements. Most of the presentations are
now available on the Hong Kong
http://www.pco.org.hk/english/infocentre/apec_ecsg1_2.html
Acceptances and apologies
The list of ‘developing’ economies (ie those without full
information privacy laws) represented at the seminar is an indicia
of success:
Brunei Darussalam, Chile, Mexico, The Philippines, Singapore, and Vietnam.
Taiwan and Thailand, with incomplete information
in developing them further. Most sent at least two representatives, some as many
as five (Vietnam).
None of these economies seemed to be at any advanced stage in
developing new privacy laws. Some other jurisdictions attended mainly
‘instruct’ on various aspects of how they had gone about
implementing their privacy laws: Hong Kong, South Korea,
Canada, New Zealand,
Japan, Australia and the USA. While most of these ‘tutors’ have
comprehensive information privacy
laws and a central enforcement body, US models
may be significant, most obviously in The Philippines where the legal system is
strongly by US developments.
In the Asia-Pacific, a group of 15 of the 21 APEC economies like this (six
‘developing’, seven ‘developed’
and two in the middle)
has never sat down for two days of discussions on implementing privacy laws.
There were 60 participants from
outside Hong Kong. The list of absentees was
short but disappointing, despite the strenuous efforts of seminar organisers to
them to attend. Notable no-shows were Malaysia (yet again rumoured to
be about to introduce a bill), the People’s Republic
of China (so many
rumours about so many bills it would be difficult to know who to invite), and
Indonesia (the second largest regional
country, and with an increasing interest
in human rights). Papua New Guinea and Peru were not represented, and Chile was
represented
only by its HK Consul General. There is therefore some evidence of
17 of the 21 APEC economies having an interest in developing privacy
that is encouraging.
The potential significance of the APEC processes are clear. If they influence
the directions of the couple of APEC countries known
to be developing bills, and
encourage just some of those already attending the Seminars to develop new
legislation, then the point
could quickly be reached where more than half of the
23 APEC economies had substantial information privacy laws with a common core
content and ongoing procedures for cooperation. At this ‘tipping
point’, privacy protection could develop a momentum
of its own across
APEC. That is the optimistic view.
Who’s who in APEC privacy?
Who else was able to participate in the Seminar? Many of the largest
computing companies and some of the largest consultancy firms
were present.
Quite a few obtained programme slots and presented their firms’ privacy
protection activities which, although
interesting, often did not seem to have
very direct bearing on implementation of the APEC Privacy Framework. Some of
them hosted
receptions and lunches for conference delegates, and one funded the
venue at the HK Convention Centre. Less than a handful of civil
representatives were invited and able to afford to travel to Hong Kong for the
event without any financial assistance. As
is typical of many government
consultations, including past APEC privacy events, this Seminar did not make a
practical attempt to
ensure even-handedness between business and consumer
influences.
A number of economies are investing considerable resources into encouraging
others to adopt the Framework. The USA has provided about
US$100,000 for the
2005 implementation exercise. The US Department of Commerce has a staff member
engaged full time for most of 2005
to supervise the implementation exercise,
with seminar content and participant liaison organised by Australian consultants
Crompton and Peter Ford. Hong Kong Acting Commissioner Tony Lam and his
staff were fully engaged in the ‘on the ground’
hosting of a
meticulous and hospitable privacy event for which that office is well known.
APEC ECSG Chair Jesus Orta Martinez of
Mexico attended the whole two days of the
seminar, indicating ECSG commitment. The Privacy Sub-Group Chair, Peter Ferguson
led a number of sessions and was generally deferred to on questions
of future directions. The implementation process appears to be
‘driven’ by the US, Canada, and Australia, with Hong Kong and South
Korea also making important contributions as Seminar
European observers will have to accustom themselves to APEC’s lack of
any constitutional structure normally associated with
international bodies. This
makes understanding the development of implementations of its privacy Framework
a very different exercise
from the relatively orderly progress of implementing a
European standard, governed as they are by procedures of mature institutions
treaty requirements, in combination with politics. In APEC, which has no basis
in treaties and no institutions beyond regular
meetings at different political
levels, political negotiation and relatively ad-hoc cooperation between changing
groups of players
is paramount, so it is necessary to pay particular attention
to who is at the table at any given time.
Applying APEC’s 9 Privacy Principles
APEC’s nine Privacy Principles are new (November 2004) and there is as
yet little public discussion as to how they will apply
to concrete fact
situations, or how they might be embodied in legislation (or other
implementation measures). Blair Stewart (New
Zealand) pointed out that
principles in international agreements are rarely enacted verbatim in domestic
legislation, they are always
‘translated’ into local terminology,
procedures and structure.
One of the most successful sessions at the Seminar was the half day in which
groups of participants (with members from both privacy-‘developed’
and ‘developing’ economies) considered how the APEC Principles could
be applied to five fact scenarios, and how mechanisms
from their own legal
systems might implement this. For many of the ‘developing’ economy
members, this was their first
attempt to apply a set of IPPs to factual
scenarios, and my impression is that many found this both very instructive but
also reassuring
that the results accorded with their own notions of what was
sensible and just. This exercise deserves to be repeated as often as
for policymakers unfamiliar with privacy. Future sessions would benefit from
addition of cases concerning government respondents,
since the APEC Framework is
supposed to apply to all sectors.
Other than that, not a great deal of time was spent on explaining the details
of the APEC Principles, the highlight being a very impressive
powerpoint presentation of their inter-relationships by HK Acting Commission
Lam, which others will now be asking to borrow.
There seemed to be general acceptance of the approach that the APEC Privacy
Principles were ‘a floor not a ceiling’ (my
own terminology), that
legislation already enacted in Asia-Pacific jurisdictions was usually stronger
on some points than APEC, and
that there was nothing wrong with new entrants
adopting elements of those stronger modes if they wished. This is not stated
in the APEC Framework (contrast OECD Guideline 6). At various points
Chair) Peter
Ford both accepted the ‘floor not a ceiling’ approach, Stewart of
New Zealand (a consistent participant
in the Sub-Group) encouraged participants
to consider the Principles in this way, and Tony Lam noted that the APEC
Framework is not
a ‘one size fits all’ mentality.
Modes of implementation: The friendly side
Some important aspects of implementation other than complaint resolution
received due attention. More exotic strains such as Privacy
Impact Assessments
were not covered.
The extensive achievements of the Hong Kong Commissioner’s Office in
educating the public and publicising information privacy
were detailed by
Acting Commissioner Lam. They show ‘a preoccupation with identifying
information needs in the community and
satisfying those needs’, an
‘evolutionary approach’ based on building community awareness before
changing community
behaviour. The HK experience in matters as diverse as mass
media campaigns using striking TV spots ending with a naked consumer,
advertising and billboard posters, seeding privacy issues in soap opera plots,
and competitions in schools and universities,
is carefully thought out and
implemented with confidence. It is well worth study by all other APEC
regulators, though we can only
assume that you also need a healthy budget (and
perhaps a city-state) to do it to full HK extent.
The value of each APEC economy submitting annual Individual Action Plans
(IAPs) detailing their progress on implementation of the
Framework (pursuant to
its Para 39) was underlined by Blair Stewart who considered that the OECD
Guidelines may have been implemented
more quickly if such a requirement had
existed. Both Stewart and Peter Ferguson detailed the elements that economies
could report
in an IAP, but questions from participants seemed to indicate a
desire that the Privacy Sub-Group devise a questionnaire or check-list
economies could complete, which would help ensure consistency of reporting. The
annual country reports published by EPIC might
provide a useful inspiration. It
has not yet been stated whether IAPs will be made public on an APEC website,
which would clearly
be desirable for transparency of the process.
Marty Abrams of the industry-funded Centre for Information Policy Leadership
made the case for businesses and governments across APEC
to embody its Notice
Principle requirements in Multi-Layered Privacy Notices, explained the
differences between very short, condensed
and complete notices, and outlined the
growing global endorsement of this approach both by privacy Commissioners and by
take-up. Surprisingly, how to access and correct your record was not
any explicit element of his ‘common template, though
it was included under
‘other important information’ in the IBM and MSN examples given. No
computer-readable version of
the very short notice is specified, but this is
the bridge to both PPP (Platform for Privacy Preferences) and the similar idea
the Creative Commons licences (‘computer readable’,
‘human readable’, and ‘lawyer readable’
licences, in
escalating complexity).
Modes of implementation: the pointy end
The APEC Framework does not require any particular form or standard of
implementation of its Principles, and does not require legislation
January 2005). The seminar programme provided plenty of opportunity for
discussion of self-regulation, trust marks and other
non-legislative approaches,
but it is remarkable how little discussion of such approaches took place. No one
presented details of
any pure self-regulation that worked. Legislation seemed to
be the assumed starting point for most speakers, but there was considerable
interest in the variety of ways in which mediation schemes could work within a
legislative framework.
In relation to modes of enforcement, it was accepted that APEC’s
Framework was so non-directive, permissive of any method of
implementation and
enforcement, that a sensible approach would be to look at what measures had
worked well in other jurisdictions
in the region, and whether they might be
appropriate in another jurisdiction.
The extensive mediation system which is the main implementation method in
South Korea’s legislation, presented by Dr Yi Changbeom
of the Korea
Information Security Agency (KISA) attracted considerable interest. It seems to
be the most viable alternative (though
only for complaint resolution) to the
Information Dispute
Mediation Committee (PICO) includes 15 independent experts
from many fields who mediate disputes involving personal information
and private
sector information and communication networks. They mediated in 1210 cases in
2004 (a 40% increase since 2003). The mediation
result acceptance rate is
currently over 98%. Dissatisfied parties have recourse to the Courts.
The US Federal Trade Commission’s Markus Heyder detailed the wide range
of privacy laws enforced by the FTC, particularly the
Financial Privacy and
Information Security Act
(Gramm-Leach Bliley Act) and its relationship to
Fair Credit Reporting Act
(FCRA), and the FTC Act itself. The
seriousness and complexity of US enforcement activities in these areas is
apparent, and is relevant
to all APEC economies involved in serious e-commerce,
irrespective of what approach they take to privacy remedies of general
application.
I outlined nine highly desirable elements of a legislation-based enforcement
‘Self-resolution’ first
(giving a business or agency
the opportunity to solve the problem themselves); three remedial powers needed
by regulators (
, which is all many complainants want provided
bad practices are also changed in future;
Changing practices
systemic change is needed; and
Financial compensation
so that real harm
results in a real remedy); the desirability of
Choice of procedures
including both mediation and recourse to binding decisions; how
Representative complaints
(as are possible in both HK and Australia)
allow civil society organisations to represent classes of complainants to push
change; the need for
Rights of appeal / review
regulator is perfect; the essential conclusion of a significant investigation,
Publication of case summaries
to ensure both transparency and deterrence;
and the publication of cumulative
Outcome statistics
accountability of expensive complaint regimes and that complainants really do
get remedies.
The Implementation Seminar preceded a full day (closed) meeting of the APEC
ECSG Information Privacy Subgroup which evaluated the
seminar, discussed
completing the remaining part of the Framework (Part IV(B)) and discussed
advancing implementation initiatives
in such areas as Individual Action Plans
(IAPs), improving privacy notices and promoting cooperative arrangements between
enforcement agencies.
Filling in the missing ‘cross-border elements’
The developments outlined above are constructive and a cause for optimism,
but the crucial element missing from APEC’s Framework
on its release, Part
IV(B) concerning data exports and international cooperation in enforcement, is
still not finalised. No overall
assessment can take place until it is complete.
The key questions about the APEC Framework that Part IV(B) will shed light on
(i) ‘how will an assessment be made of whether an economy has
implemented the Framework?’; and (ii) ‘to what extent
(if at all)
will such an assessment require other economies to allow personal data to be
exported to that economy?’
The first version of the draft APEC Privacy Principles in early 2003 included
a set of options for ‘Implementation Mechanisms’
concerning mutual
recognition of different privacy regimes. The then-Chair of the Privacy
Sub-Group Peter Ford proposed various forms
of recognition of ‘self
certification’ of APEC compliance by economies. In reply Blair Stewart of
New Zealand proposed
various means of collective recognition of APEC compliance.
There is room for a great deal of dispute here as to what course APEC
take. Many who do not wish APEC to follow the EU’s approach to third party
‘adequacy’ assessments will nevertheless
be uncomfortable with
self-assessments of compliance. APEC agreements are not treaties and APEC does
not usually attempt to require
its members to take particular steps.
Nevertheless, a strongly worded statement in the Framework that data exports
should be allowed
in certain circumstances is likely to be very influential and
treated as a requirement for ‘compliance’.
There was no further advance of this discussion until the USA tabled a
proposal for a draft Part IV(B) ‘Guidance for International
implementation’, at the Privacy Subgroup meeting in Hong Kong on June 3,
following the Implementation Seminar. Part II of this
is ‘Cross-border
encouraging Member Economies to
develop mechanisms which enable them to
recognise when cross-border privacy rules of corporations are sufficient to
satisfy ‘the
local data protection requirements’. The second
paragraph can be read as only encouraging APEC economies to take a consistent
approach to the development of such mechanisms, though it is ambiguous and could
also be read as encouraging a mechanism to enable
recognition in one economy to
be accepted in other economies. Whichever is correct, we can say of the current
draft that it is as
non-prescriptive as Part IV(a). It focuses on recognition of
APEC compliance at the level of individual corporations, rather than
level of whole economies At the Privacy Sub-group meeting in June, Hong Kong
made detailed comments on the US proposal, and
a working group consisting of
Australia, Canada, New Zealand, Hong Kong, Chinese Taipei and the US would
develop it further, possibly
expanding its language.
This is still only a draft, and any final assessments will have to wait until
it is finalised. It may emerge with stronger language
which attempts to
‘require’ mutual recognition of corporate rules once they have been
accepted in one jurisdiction.
It is also still possible that some version of
the original options fior economies to self-certify might also be added to Part
but there is no sign of that at present.
This US proposal reduces previous concerns (see Greenleaf, 2005) that the
Part IV(B) gap in the Framework is suspicious, possibly
indicating an unfinished
agenda to convert the APEC Framework into a mechanism for ‘ensuring’
free flow of personal information
within APEC (as the Framework requires)
without sufficient protection against low and unverified
‘implementations’ of
the Framework by economies – ‘free
flow at any price’. On the evidence of this draft (only), it seems more
that Section B will turn out to be as non-prescriptive as Section A.
Once matter which is unclear is whether any public input will be sought
before finalisation of part IV(B). APEC Ministers did not
endorse the part III
Principles in the Framework until most of it had gone through ten drafts and
there had been a call for public
submissions. No similar consultation process
was followed with Part IV(A), and none seems to be proposed for Part IV(B).
Other economies
have been invited to comment. There are no APEC requirements of
public consultation. It is not even clear that APEC Ministers will
be required
to endorse part IV(B): ECSG may be able to incorporate it in the Framework on
its own initiative.
There are therefore still good reasons to be cautious and to closely watch
the process until it is completed. The next meeting of
the Privacy Subgroup will
be in Korea in September, and a different draft may emerge from that
Maintaining the APEC momentum
Can APEC maintain (and preferably increase) the engagement of economies
without mature information privacy laws in its processes?
This is now the key to
success. The continuing participation of HK, New Zealand, Canada, Korea,
Australia, the USA and other key
participants in the development of the
Framework can be assumed to continue unless ‘developing’ economies
show no interest.
APEC is holding a second Technical Assistance Seminar, this time on
‘International Implementation’ in Kyongju, South Korea,
September. The focus is to be on implementation of measures concerning data
exports (and implications for free flow of personal
information), and methods of
cooperation between different national authorities where an issue crosses
boundaries. With the APEC
Framework still missing Part IV(B), the Korean
seminar is in the anomalous position that there is this
‘international’
element is not yet finalised, though discussion of
the US draft of Part IV(B) is underway. Nor should its finalisation be rushed,
as noted above.
The current position is that the Privacy Sub-group Chair, the two
implementation consultants and the US Commerce Department (as project
are working out whether the seminar in Korea will merely explore the issues
involved in international issues in implementation,
or whether a version of the
US proposal for ‘Guidance for International Implementation’ will be
proposed as the basis
for implementation discussions. The APEC process is at
another important junction.
Graham Greenleaf, University of New South Wales Faculty of Law and General
This article was written while the author was a visitor at the City
University of Hong Kong for the week of the seminar
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
No downloadable files available
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter