URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/journals/UNSWLawJlF/2020/6.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 15:45:36
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Dastyari, Azadeh; Renshaw, Catherine --- "Frontline Workers As Human Rights Defenders: Protecting The Human Rights Of Frontline Workers In Australia During The Covid-19 Pandemic" [2020] UNSWLawJlF 6; (2020) UNSW Law Journal Forum No 6
I INTRODUCTION
II A RAPIDLY DEVELOPING SITUATION
III A FAILURE TO DEFINE HEALTH WORKERS AS HUMAN RIGHTS DEFENDERS
IV THE DIFFERENCE THE DEFINITION MIGHT MAKE
A Determining who constituted an ‘frontline’ worker
V CONCLUSION
FRONTLINE WORKERS AS HUMAN RIGHTS DEFENDERS: PROTECTING THE
HUMAN RIGHTS OF FRONTLINE WORKERS IN AUSTRALIA DURING THE COVID-19
AZADEH DASTYARI
AND CATHERINE
During the first months of the COVID-19 pandemic, as state and territory
governments in Australia attempted to curb the spread of
the coronavirus,
attention was focused on a group that came, globally, to be known as
‘frontline workers’, which included
health workers. In this article,
we interrogate the construction of health workers as ‘frontline
workers’ during the
COVID-19 pandemic. We argue that this framing
supported the narrative that the dangers to which health workers were exposed,
included threats to their lives and wellbeing, was an unfortunate but
inevitable part of the war against the common enemy (COVID-19).
The effect was
to divert attention from what should have been the primary focus: ensuring that
health workers had the equipment and
conditions to carry out their jobs safely
and effectively. We argue that an alternative and more appropriate understanding
role of health workers during a pandemic – and the COVID-19
pandemic in particular – is that health workers are human
I INTRODUCTION
Human rights defenders are ‘any person or group of persons working to
promote human rights’.
rights protected can include ‘civil and political rights as well as ...
economic, social and cultural
such as the right to
There are many contexts in
which health workers are recognised as human rights defenders. In circumstances
of war and civil conflict,
for example, the obligation to provide healthcare to
victims of human rights violations leaves health workers exposed to violence
recrimination.
Recognising the
vulnerability of health workers in situations of social and political
instability, the United Nations
Declaration on Human Rights Defenders
provides that States ‘shall take all necessary measures to ensure the
protection by the competent authorities of everyone’,
including human
rights defenders.
During the COVID-19 pandemic ‘frontline workers’ has been the
term used to describe labourers who are engaged in work
that must continue
despite shutdowns, including and in particular health workers. The term evokes
the idea of honourable sacrifice.
Inherent in the concept of frontline workers
is that they are engaged in the battle with a common enemy – the COVID-19
– and as a result may suffer the loss of their health and even
lives. We contend that the correct classification of health
workers as human
rights defenders performs a more effective normative function than labelling
them as ‘frontline workers’.
Rather than being conceived of as the
foot soldiers in a campaign directed by the state, acknowledging health workers
as human rights
defenders would reinforce their agency, professional knowledge
and, critically, the human rights of frontline workers themselves.
this article outlines the early development of the pandemic in Australia,
contextualising the classification of health
workers. Part III analyses the
implications of failing to define health workers as human rights defenders. Part
IV argues that, had
health workers been defined as human rights defenders, their
rights during the crisis would have been better protected, enabling
them in turn
to better defend the rights of people in the community.
II A RAPIDLY DEVELOPING SITUATION
At the end of 2019, a respiratory illness of unknown cause, leading to a dry
cough, fever, body aches and malaise, was detected in
the city of Wuhan in Hubei
province, China. On 10 January 2020, the World Health Organisation issued its
first guidance on the novel
coronavirus
On 12 February 2020, the
World Health Organisation declared COVID-19 to be a pandemic. On 18 March 2020,
the Commonwealth of Australia
declared a human biosecurity emergency and began
to close its borders.
On 23 March
2020, state governments agreed to close bars, clubs, restaurants, cinemas,
places of worship, casinos and
In the months that followed,
states devised different plans to respond to the variable severity of COVID-19
within their borders.
Schools and businesses, which were closed in the early
months of the pandemic, were permitted to reopen across Australia. However,
Victoria suffered a second wave of the virus and in August 2020 went into Stage
4 lockdown. Restrictions imposed by the Victorian
government included a curfew
between 8:00 pm and 5:00 am, and severe restrictions on freedom of movement.
The literature that has emerged so far concerning COVID-19 and human rights
focusses on children,
and sex and
reproductive health rights.
There is also emerging work concerning whether the restrictions placed on the
community by government were justified under international
human rights
However, there has been
relatively little attention given to the role and rights of health workers in
this pandemic period.
From a human rights perspective, the response to COVID-19 can be understood
in terms of the law relating to
emergencies.
The pandemic was
akin to a natural disaster. Extreme measures were necessary to protect the human
rights to life
The aim of these
measures was to return society to a situation of
Governments argued
that the exigencies of the situation justified the outright suspension of
certain rights (such as the right to
and freedom of
), and the imposition of
measures that necessarily diminished freedom to enjoy some rights (such as the
right to work
and the right to
). Under international
human rights law, such measures are legitimate in ‘an exceptional
situation of crisis or emergency which
affects the whole population and
constitutes a threat to the organised life of the
community’,
purpose of the measures is to return the country as quickly as possible to a
situation of normalcy in which all rights
are once again enjoyed. Such a
situation is contemplated by article 4 of the
International Covenant on Civil
and Political Rights
which provides that:
In time of public emergency which threatens the life of the nation and the
existence of which is officially proclaimed, the States
Parties to the present
Covenant may take measures derogating from their obligations under the present
Covenant to the extent strictly
required by the exigencies of the situation ...
It is also worth emphasising the qualification that accompanies this power:
... provided that such measures are not inconsistent with their other
obligations under international law and do not involve discrimination
the ground of race, colour, sex, language, religion or social
At the core of the human rights calculation underpinning the Australian
government’s response to the virus was an important
affirmation of
equality. The pandemic did not threaten the population in a uniform way. A
certain part of the population –
the elderly and those with underlying
health conditions – was far more susceptible to negative health outcomes
from the virus.
Protective measures, impacting the whole population, were
designed primarily to preserve the lives and health of a minority. The
Australian government’s decision to respond in a way that best protected
the lives of the elderly and vulnerable, at an economic
and social cost to the
whole population, was underpinned by the equal right of all Australians to
and to the highest
attainable standard of physical and mental
The right to health is protected under article 12
International Covenant on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights
’), which includes a provision requiring states to
take steps to realise the right to health by preventing, treating and
controlling
Australia, there was little attention paid to suggestions that the virus should
be allowed to sweep through the community in order
immunity’ to develop.
speech to the British Policy Exchange think tank in September 2020, former Prime
Minister Tony Abbott suggested that the cost
of protecting the lives of the
elderly during the pandemic was disproportionate to the societal benefit and he
urged politicians
to think ‘like health
economists’.
Abbott’s suggestion was not seriously entertained or countenanced. The
consensus at all levels of Australian government was
that (1) the virus must not
be permitted to take its natural course through the community to the increased
detriment of a minority;
and (2) it is necessary to avoid a situation in which
decisions need to be made about who to prioritise for treatment because the
number of people needing treatment exceed the amount of medical equipment
Efforts were directed
to protecting the most basic human rights – equality and the equal right
to life and health – of
all Australians. The level of consensus on this
fundamental principle was critical to the shape of Australia’s successful
response to the virus.
III A FAILURE TO DEFINE HEALTH WORKERS AS HUMAN
RIGHTS DEFENDERS
There is no settled definition of frontline workers in the context of this
pandemic. Generally, the term refers to workers who are
required to work outside
their homes during the pandemic. It includes health workers, police officers,
border officials, schoolteachers,
supermarket workers and retailers. Some of
these roles were already considered ‘frontline’ roles prior to the
pandemic, while others became ‘frontline’ in the context of
the rapidly evolving and worldwide health crisis caused by
the COVID-19 virus.
During the early months of the pandemic, there was slippage and a fair degree of
confusion in the use of the
terms ‘frontline’ and
‘essential’ workers. In March 2020, the Prime Minister said that an
worker’ included anyone who had a job, as earning money
to support one’s family was
‘essential’.
position changed as the virus strengthened its presence and states imposed
restrictions on what they deemed to be ‘non-essential
businesses’
which included libraries, gyms, casinos, play centres, museums and cinemas.
These were distinguished from ‘essential
businesses’ such as
pharmacies, schools, medical centres, banks, bottle shops and convenience
stores. ‘Essential workers’
were no longer categorised as anyone who
had a job: essential workers were the workers attached to essential businesses.
However, the categorisation of essential workers as those whose labour was
associated with essential businesses did not resolve all
confusion. There was
significant inconsistency around the categories of work that were deemed
‘essential’.
Following a National Cabinet meeting on 27 March 2020, state governments listed
businesses that must cease
However there
was a great deal of discretion for other business owners
as to whether
they should remain open.
major retailers shut down their storefronts in order to protect their staff and
financial interests. Yet many remained open,
exposing their staff to potential
harm. JB Hi-Fi, for example, an electronics retailer with 201 stores across
Australia, continued
to operate.
JB Hi-Fi workers reported being exposed to people who should have been in
isolation and to coughing customers who touched goods in
the store, increasing
the risk of staff contracting the
JB Hi-Fi employees
calling for the shutdown of their stores argued that the task they perform is
not essential as these consumer
goods could be purchased
Calls for broader
shutdowns to protect staff were not limited to JB Hi-Fi, with calls across the
community for the closure of non-essential
retail businesses and service
providers such as hairdressers.
Retail employees reported an increase in the ‘instances of inappropriate
and potentially aggressive behaviour from customers’
towards retail
as the broader population
experienced stress and uncertainty.
The rhetoric of war, invoked by all levels of government during the pandemic,
who was an essential
worker. Within the wartime narrative, essential workers were ‘frontline
workers’ – those whose
job it was to defend the population from the
virus. The media supported the framing of these workers as soldiers in the war
coronavirus.
The Daily Telegraph
in Sydney, for example,
celebrated frontline workers as ‘our last line of defence in the war on
coronavirus’ in its ‘Frontline
Heroes’ campaign, and asked the
public to send messages of support to frontline
Health workers were
clearly ‘frontline heroes’: so too were the bus drivers who
transported them to work, the supermarket
staff who stacked the shelves with
goods that frontline workers needed and the petrol station attendants who
provided frontline workers
with fuel. Some schools were required to remain open
to care for vulnerable children and the children of ‘frontline
thus schoolteachers within these schools were also considered to
be on the frontline.
IV THE DIFFERENCE THE DEFINITION MIGHT MAKE
International human rights law recognises that there are circumstances in
which healthcare workers can and should be recognised as
human rights
For example, where
‘healthcare providers continue to provide medical services despite being
targeted, harassed, and faced with
threats of physical violence because of their
work, they are recognized and protected as [human rights
defenders]’.
The point of
recognition is to mobilise governments and civil society to keep defenders
secure so that they can continue their work.
The responsibility of governments
in protecting human rights defenders includes enabling human rights defenders to
carry out their
work safely.
The pandemic created a situation where the population at large was exposed to
serious health risks, employment was precarious, social
support structures were
weakened and there was widespread uncertainty about the nation’s capacity
to respond to the crisis.
This context meant that workers who might not
previously have identified themselves as human rights defenders became
vulnerable to
new dangers and acts of discrimination. In these circumstances, it
was important for governments to recognise their responsibility
to protect these
workers, as well as provide a safe and enabling environment for them to carry
out their work.
The responsibility to human rights defenders does not rest solely with
government. Civil society and the general public also contribute
effective protection of human rights defenders. The first step in protecting and
empowering human rights defenders is fostering
awareness that the work being
undertaken is human rights work; and that a specific and holistic conception of
security, which includes
physical security and psychological wellbeing, is
involved in the protection and enabling of these workers.
A Determining who constituted an
‘frontline’ worker
One of the problems, we suggest, is that there was a failure to explicitly
state that the human rights to life and health were at
stake at the height of
the COVID-19 crisis in Australia. Had that been made explicit, a distinction
could have been drawn between
those who were directly engaged in protecting
these rights (health workers and those providing vital ancillary services such
fuel, public security and transport), on the one hand, and others
whose exposure to the virus was not essential, on the other. An
extension of
this understanding would be to recognise that health workers and other vital
workers were human rights defenders.
For example, JB Hi-Fi can be differentiated from retailers providing
essential goods such as food and medicine including supermarkets
and pharmacies.
Unlike supermarkets and pharmacies, the consumer goods sector was not
instrumental in the preservation of the human
right to life or health of the
population. Australia’s piecemeal approach to restricting trade differed
from the broader shutdowns
across other jurisdictions affected by COVID-19. For
example, in Italy, which in March 2020 was the country hit hardest by the virus
outside of China, all retail stores except for supermarkets and pharmacies were
Wider closure of the
retail sector in Australia during the early months of the pandemic would have
assisted in ensuring the highest
standards of health for those affected and
further preventing the spread of COVID-19 as required under article 12(c)
A controversial issue in Australia during the first months of the pandemic
was the level at which health workers needed to be protected.
Unlike much of the
population, many health workers were unable to isolate themselves. This risk to
their health was exacerbated by
their direct interaction with the population at
One aspect of protecting the safety of human rights defenders involves the
adequacy of protective equipment. During the early months
of the pandemic, there
was significant concern in Australia about the lack of protective equipment for
frontline workers, particularly
for medical staff. Current research suggests
that the COVID-19 virus is transmitted between people through close contact and
The World Health
Organisation has identified the following protective equipment as an effective
measure against the transmission
of COVID-19 for those working closely with
infected individuals: ‘gloves, medical masks, goggles or a face shield,
as well as ... respirators (ie N95 or FFP2 standard or equivalent)
and aprons’.
2020, the World Health Organisation reported that the global stockpile of
personal protective equipment was
insufficient.
Shortages of protective equipment were reported across Australia. A survey of
245 frontline medical workers in April 2020 found that
86% reported anxiety
According to the
survey, 75% of the doctors surveyed said they re-used the same masks between
patients, a practice advised against
guidelines.
Healthcare workers
also reported using household equipment or skipping breaks to avoid
contaminating protective gear.
There were reports that personal protective equipment was in ‘very,
very short supply’ in NSW, with health workers forced
to break guidelines
and reuse supplies.
around the shortages in NSW led Jenny Aitchison, member for Maitland, to ask the
NSW Minister for Health and Medical Research
the following questions on 24 March
1. What action has the Government taken to ensure that all medical staff have
access to appropriate personal protective equipment
in both public and private
medical services?
2. Does the Government have any capacity to penalise medical institutions who
have not provided appropriate personal protective equipment
NSW Health responded by reporting that NSW is ‘implementing a
state-wide strategy to ensure all staff have the personal protective
needed to protect them at
Whilst a study of the discrepancies between frontline workers and the impact
of intersectionality is beyond the scope of this article,
it is important to
recognise that health workers are not a homogenous group and are not equally
affected by the pandemic. Economically
disadvantaged populations are left more
vulnerable in times of crisis.
Economically vulnerable health workers during the COVID-19 pandemic are no
exception. Health workers who are elderly, immune compromised,
disabled or from
a racial minority that face exacerbated targeting during the pandemic are also
more likely to suffer harm as compared
to frontline workers without pre-existing
vulnerabilities. The type of work can also affect vulnerability. For example,
nurses working
in COVID-19 wards are at greater risk of contracting the illness
than transport workers. Although men dominate in leadership roles
industries,
it should be noted
that a number of key industries continuing to operate during the pandemic are
dominated by women. This includes
health care and social assistance (79% female
in 2018) and education and training (73.2% female in
Migrant women, who are
particularly vulnerable to exploitation and harm, are also overrepresented in
the cleaning industry.
V CONCLUSION
In this paper we suggest that there is utility in considering the role of
frontline workers who protect the right to life and health
from a human rights
perspective. This perspective affirms the importance of frontline workers in the
protection of human rights and
directs attention to the threats and risks that
these defenders might face, such as inadequate protective equipment,
stigmatisation
and harassment. This framework centres the security of human
rights defenders in terms of the freedom (or protection) they need to
their work, which includes ‘freedom from constant threats, economic
security, political security, environmental security
Importantly,
there is growing awareness of the need to emphasise the self-care and personal
wellbeing of human rights defenders as
a necessary part of the physical and
psychological protection that sustains their work to further advance the
realisation of human
rights. Recognising frontline workers during a health
crisis as human rights defenders would expose the challenges they face so that
appropriate steps can be taken to ensure they can carry out their work.
* Associate Professor, School of Law, Western Sydney University.
** Professor, School of Law, Western Sydney University.
1 Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights,
Rights Defenders: Protecting the Right to Defend Human Rights
(Fact Sheet No
29, April 2004) 6.
The right to life can be found in article
Universal Declaration of Human Rights
, GA Res 217A (III), UN
GAOR, UN Doc A/810 (10 December 1948) (‘
Universal Declaration of Human
’) and has been made binding under article 6 of the
International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights
, opened for
signature 19 December
1966, 999 UNTS 171
(entered into force 23 March 1976)
The right to health can be found in
article 12 of the
International Covenant on Economic, Social and Cultural
, opened for signature 19 December
1966, 993 UNTS 3
(entered into
force 3 January 1976) (‘
’). See also
Convention on
the Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination Against Women
signature 18 December
1979, 1249 UNTS 13
(entered into force 3 September 1981)
Convention on the Rights of the Child
, opened for signature 20
1989, 1577 UNTS 3
(entered into force 2 September 1990) art 24;
Convention on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities
, opened for
signature on 30 March
2007, 2515 UNTS 3
(entered into force 3 May 2008) art
See Alice M Nah,
Protecting Human
Rights Defenders at Risk
(Routledge, forthcoming).
United Nations Declaration on the
Right and Responsibility of Individuals, Groups and Organs of Society to Promote
and Protect Universally
Recognized Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms
Res 53/144, UN Doc A/RES/53/144 (9 December 1998, adopted 8 March 1999) art 12
Declaration on Human Rights Defenders
’). It should be noted
that, while not legally binding, this declaration contains principles and rights
that have been enshrined
in other international law instruments and it was
adopted by the UN General Assembly.
This was an assessment tool to plan means
of controlling the virus at the national level.
Howard Maclean and Karen Elphick,
‘COVID-19 Legislative response
Human Biosecurity Emergency
Declaration Explainer’,
(Blog Post, 19 March 2020)
<https://www.aph.gov.au/About_Parliament/Parliamentary_Departments/Parliamentary_Library/FlagPost/2020/March/COVID-19_Biosecurity_Emergency_Declaration>.
For example, on 30 March 2020, the New
South Wales Minister for Health and Medical Research made the
Public Health
(COVID-19 Restrictions on Gathering and Movement) Order 2020
directing people to remain in their places of residence and not to gather in
groups of more than two people, excluding work;
people of the same household; 10
or fewer people attending a funeral service; and gathering to provide care or
assistance to a vulnerable
person: cl 6.
See, eg, Polina Martinkevich et al,
‘Physical Child Abuse Demands Increased Awareness during Health and
Socioeconomic Crises
like COVID-19’ (2020)
Acta Orthopaedica
See, eg, Monique J Brown and Sharon B
Weissman, ‘The Impact of COVID-19 on Older Adults Living with HIV: HIV
Care and Psychosocial
Effects’ (2020)
Journal of Gerontological Social
(advance); Carmelle Peisah et al, ‘Advocacy for the Human Rights
of Older People in the COVID Pandemic and Beyond: A Call to
Mental Health
Professionals’ (2020)
International Psychogeriatrics
1; Federica
Previtali, Laura D Allen and Maria Varlamova, ‘Not Only Virus Spread: The
Diffusion of Ageism during the Outbreak
of COVID-19’ (2020)
Journal of Aging & Social Policy
See, eg, Jessica MacKinnon and Alexane
Bremshey, ‘Perspectives from a Webinar: COVID-19 and Sexual and
Reproductive Health
and Rights’ (2020) 28(1)
Sexual and Reproductive
Health Matters
1; Joshua Kimani et al, ‘The Effects of COVID-19 on the
Health and Socio-Economic Security of Sex Workers in Nairobi, Kenya:
Intersections with HIV’ (2020) 15(7)
Global Public Health
Alessandra Spadaro, ‘COVID-19:
Testing the Limits of Human Rights’
(2020) 11(2)
European Journal of
Risk Regulation
; Audrey Lebret, ‘COVID-19 Pandemic and Derogation
to Human Rights’ (2020) 7(1)
Journal of Law and the Biosciences
See, eg, Alicia Dennis and Jane L
Whitelaw, ‘PPE Unmasked: Why Health-care Workers in Australia are
Inadequately Protected
against Coronavirus’,
The Conversation
(online, 4 August 2020)
<https://theconversation.com/ppe-unmasked-why-health-care-workers-in-australia-are-inadequately-protected-against-coronavirus-143751>.
There is significant scholarship on
the issue of international human rights law during an emergency. See, eg, Joan
Fitzpatrick,
Human Rights in Crisis: The International System for Protecting
Rights during States of Emergency
(University of Pennsylvania Press, 1994);
Emilie M Hafner-Burton, Laurence R Helfer and Christopher J Fariss,
‘Emergency and
Escape: Explaining Derogations from Human Rights
Treaties’ (2011) 65(4)
International Organization
Fassbender and Knut Traisbach,
The Limits of Human Rights
University Press, 2019).
(n 3) art 6.
(n 4) art 12.
‘Normal’ was a word often
used by the Prime Minister, Scott Morrison. See, eg, Paul Karp and Daniel Hurst,
Says “Early Mark” of Eased Restrictions Depends on
Uptake of Covidsafe Tracing App’,
The Guardian
(online, 1 May 2020)
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2020/may/01/morrison-says-early-mark-of-eased-restrictions-depends-on-uptake-of-covidsafe-tracing-app>.
‘Everyone lawfully within the
territory of a State shall, within that territory, have the right to liberty of
movement and
freedom to choose his [or her] residence’:
‘Everyone shall have the right
to freedom of association with others, including the right to form and join
trade unions for
the protection of his [or her] interests’: ibid art
‘The States Parties to the
present Covenant recognize the right to work, which includes the right of
everyone to the opportunity
to gain his [or her] living by work which he [or
she] freely chooses or accepts, and will take appropriate steps to safeguard
(n 4) art 6. See also
International
Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Racial Discrimination
for signature 7 March
1966, 660 UNTS 195
(entered into force 4 January 1969) art
Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination against
(n 4) art 11;
Convention on the Rights of the Child
Convention on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities
(n 4) art 27;
Convention (No 111) Concerning Discrimination in Respect of Employment and
, opened for signature 25 June
1958, 362 UNTS 31
(entered into
force 15 June 1960).
(n 4) art 13;
Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination against Women
(n 4) art 10;
Convention on the Rights of the Child
(n 4) arts 28 and
Convention on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities
(n 4) art 24.
A v Secretary of State for the Home
[2004] 2 AC 68
, 135 [111] quoting
Lawless v Ireland (No 3)
[1961] ECHR 2
(1961) 1 EHRR 15
, [28] (Lord Hope).
The federal government did not invoke
the emergency provisions of the ICCPR.
Universal Declaration of Human
(n 3) art 3;
(n 3) art 6(1).
(n 4) art 12.
Ibid art 12(2)(c).
Cf Peter Stubley, ‘Coronavirus:
Hundreds of Scientists Warn UK Government’s Response to Outbreak
“Risking Lives”’,
Independent
, (online, 15 March 2020)
<https://www.independent.co.uk/news/health/coronavirus-uk-scientists-letter-government-plan-herd-immunity-a9402661.html>.
Patrick Wintour, ‘Tony Abbott:
Some Elderly Covid Patients Could Be Left to Die Naturally’,
(online, 2 September 2020)
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2020/sep/01/tony-abbott-some-elderly-covid-patients-could-be-left-to-die-naturally>
See for example Australian Government
Department of Health, ‘Government Response to the COVID-19 Outbreak’
https://www.health.gov.au/news/health-alerts/novel-coronavirus-2019-ncov-health-alert/government-response-to-the-covid-19-outbreak>
(28 August 2020). Cf Jason Horowitz, ‘Italy’s Health Care System
Groans under Coronavirus: A Warning to the World’,
The New York
(online, 12 March 2020)
<https://www.nytimes.com/2020/03/12/world/europe/12italy-coronavirus-health-care.html>.
‘Read Scott Morrison’s
Full Statement on the New National Coronavirus Restrictions’,
(online, 25 March 2020)
<https://www.abc.net.au/news/2020-03-25/scott-morrison-alll-restrictions/12087112>.
See Amelia Dunn, ‘Who is Deemed
an “Essential” Worker under Australia's COVID-19 Rules?’,
(online, 26 March 2020)
<https://www.sbs.com.au/news/who-is-deemed-an-essential-worker-under-australia-s-covid-19-rules>.
is also of note that laws were introduced to penalise threatening to infect
essential frontline workers, signalling that there would
be no tolerance for
such (already criminal) behaviour towards essential frontline workers: see the
Queensland Cabinet and Ministerial
Directory, ‘Queensland Introduces Big
Fines for Coughing on Essential Workers’ (Media Statement, Queensland
Government,
27 April 2020)
http://statements.qld.gov.au/Statement/2020/4/27/queensland-introduces-big-fines-for-coughing-on-essential-workers
Queensland Government,
Protecting Public Officials and Workers (Spitting,
Coughing and Sneezing) Direction (No 3)
, 15 May 2020;
Government of
Western Australia, ‘Tough Penalties to Protect Essential Frontline Workers
during Pandemic’ (Media Statement,
1 April 2020)
<https://www.mediastatements.wa.gov.au/Pages/McGowan/2020/04/Tough-penalties-to-protect-essential-frontline-workers-during-pandemic.aspx>;
Criminal Code Amendment (COVID-19 Response) Bill 2020 (WA);
The Criminal Code
(WA) ss 318, 338B.
These included pubs and registered
clubs; food and drink premises (except for the provision of take away or
entertainment facilities; amusement centres; casinos; indoor
recreation facilities; spas, nail salons, beauty salons, waxing salons,
salons, tattoo parlours or massage parlours; auction houses and betting
agencies; information and education facilities; markets
that do not
predominantly sell food; and sex services. See, eg,
Public Health (COVID-19
Restrictions on Gathering and Movement) Order
2020 (NSW) cl 7, as at 30
March 2020.
Heather McIlvaine, ‘State
Directives Cause Confusion around Store Reopenings’,
Inside Retail
(online, 17 April 2020)
<https://insideretail.com.au/news/state-directives-cause-confusion-around-store-reopenings-202004>.
‘Coronavirus Australia: JB HI FI
Retail Workers Push for Store Closures over COVID-19 Safety Fears’,
7NEWS.com.au
(online, 14 April 2020)
<https://7news.com.au/lifestyle/health-wellbeing/coronavirus-australia-jb-hi-fi-retail-workers-push-for-store-closures-over-covid-19-safety-fears-c-976085>
(‘JB HI FI Retail Workers Push for Store Closures’).
Sahar Mourad, ‘JB Hi-Fi’s
Coronavirus Crisis: Staff Claim Customers Are Deliberately Coughing on Them and
Are Rubbing
their Hands on Goods’,
Daily Mail Australia
(online, 10
April 2020)
<https://www.dailymail.co.uk/news/article-8206571/JB-Hi-Fis-staff-slam-company-remaining-open-coronavirus-restrictions.html>.
‘JB HI FI Retail Workers Push
for Store Closures’ (n 35). Cf ‘Myer Shuts Stores in Wake of
(online, 27 March 2020)
<https://www.sbs.com.au/news/myer-shuts-stores-in-wake-of-covid-19>.
Victoria Craw, ‘“Shut Us
Down”: Confusion over PM’s Plan’,
Daily Mercury
(online, 23 March 2020)
<https://www.dailymercury.com.au/news/shut-us-down-confusion-over-pms-plan/3978673/>;
Heather McIlvaine,
‘CEOs Call for Shutdown as More Stores Close’,
Inside Retail
(online, 27 March 2020)
<https://insideretail.com.au/news/ceos-call-for-shutdown-as-more-stores-close-202003>.
‘Managing Occupational Violence
and Customer Aggression’,
NSW Government
(Web Page, 22 May 2020)
<https://www.nsw.gov.au/covid-19/safe-workplaces/employers/managing-violence-and-aggression>.
Matthew Benns and Adella Beaini,
‘Coronavirus: Sydney Residents Send Messages to Thank Frontline Healthcare
The Daily Telegraph
(online, 1 April 2020)
<https://www.dailytelegraph.com.au/coronavirus/coronavirus-sydney-residents-send-messages-to-thank-frontline-healthcare-workers/news-story/bcea5af0ba75ab4fbaba7abb397d232d>.
See, eg, Ashleigh Raper, ‘NSW
Government offers frontline public sector workers $1,000 amid coronavirus wage
online, 1 June 2020)
<https://www.abc.net.au/news/2020-06-01/nsw-public-workers-facing-coronavirus-wage-freeze-offered-bonus/12305704>.
See also Robert Bolton, ‘Teachers Reject Report Claiming COVID-19
Infection Risk is Low’,
Financial Review
(online, 27 April 2020)
<https://www.afr.com/work-and-careers/education/teachers-reject-report-claiming-covid-19-infection-risk-is-low-20200426-p54n8y>.
Cynthia Soohoo and Diana Hortsch,
‘Who is a Human Rights Defender? An Essay on Sexual and Reproductive
Rights Defenders’
University of Miami Law Review
Ibid 991. See also, Margaret Sekaggya,
Report of the Special Rapporteur on the Situation of Human Rights
, UN GAOR, UN Doc A/HRC/16/44 (20 December 2010) 9–10
Rachel Sandler, ‘Italy Shuts
Down All Stores Except Supermarkets and Pharmacies, Escalating Coronavirus
(online, 11 March 2020)
<https://www.forbes.com/sites/rachelsandler/2020/03/11/italy-closes-all-stores-escalating-coronavirus-lockdown/>.
World Health Organization,
Use of Personal Protective Equipment (PPE) for Coronavirus Disease
(Interim Guidance, 19 March 2020) 1
<https://apps.who.int/iris/bitstream/handle/10665/331498/WHO-2019-nCoV-IPCPPE_use-2020.2-eng.pdf>.
World Health Organisation,
‘Shortage of Personal Protective Equipment Endangering Health Workers
Worldwide’ (News Release,
3 March 2020)
<https://www.who.int/news-room/detail/03-03-2020-shortage-of-personal-protective-equipment-endangering-health-workers-worldwide>.
Brooke Wylie, Penny Timms and Sophie
Scott, ‘Coronavirus Treatment Doctors Report Trauma, Threats Over Lack of
PPE in Hospitals’,
(online, 9 April 2020)
<https://www.abc.net.au/news/2020-04-09/coronavirus-doctors-trauma-as-ppe-equipment-sharing-re-use/12136692>.
Aisha Dow and Melissa Cunningham,
‘In “$2 Raincoats” on Virus Front Line, Medics Call for Action
The Sydney Morning Herald
(online, 8 April 2020)
<https://www.smh.com.au/national/forced-to-wear-2-raincoats-nurses-doctors-demand-action-on-ppe-20200408-p54i8q.html>.
Kylar Loussikian and Kate Aubusson,
‘“Be Very, Very Careful”: Internal Messages Reveal Difficult
State of Sydney
Hospitals’,
The Sydney Morning Herald
April 2020)
<https://www.smh.com.au/politics/nsw/be-very-very-careful-internal-messages-reveal-difficult-state-of-sydney-hospitals-20200401-p54g12.html>.
NSW Legislative Assembly,
and Answers Paper
(Paper No 54, 24 March 2020) 1942
<https://www.parliament.nsw.gov.au/la/papers/Documents/2020/24-march-2020-questions-and-answers/054-QandA-P.pdf>.
See NSW Legislative Assembly,
Questions and Answers Paper
(Paper No 55, 29 April 2020) 2070
<https://www.parliament.nsw.gov.au/la/papers/Documents/2020/29-april-2020-questions-and-answers/055-QandA-P.pdf>.
See ‘Personal Protective Equipment (PPE)’, NSW Health (Web Page, 6
April 2020) <
https://www.health.nsw.gov.au/Infectious/covid-19/Pages/ppe.aspx>.
Faheem Ahmed et al, ‘Why
Inequality Could Spread COVID-19’ (2020) 5(5)
The Lancet Public
Australian Government, Workplace
Gender Equality Agency, ‘Gender Segregation in Australia’s
Workforce’ (Fact Sheet,
17 April 2019)
<https://www.wgea.gov.au/data/fact-sheets/gender-segregation-in-australias-workforce>.
Catherine Hemingway,
Not Just Work:
Ending the Exploitation of Refuge and Migrant Workers
(Policy Report,
WEstjustice, 2016) 218.
Karen Bennett at al ‘Critical
Perspectives on the Security and Protection of Human Rights Defenders’
(2015) 19(7)
The International Journal of Human Rights
, 884. See also
Jane Barry and Vahida Nainar,
Women Human Rights Defenders Security
Strategies: Insiste, Resiste, Persisite, Existe
(Report, Urgent Action Fund
for Women’s Human Rights, Front Line – The International Foundation
for the Protection of
Human Rights Defenders, The Kvinna till Kvinna Foundation,
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (101 KB)
PDF format (655 KB)
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter