URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/journals/LawTechHum/2025/5.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 15:13:15
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Nguyen, Anh --- "Export Controls as Innovation Marketing? Sociotechnical Imaginaries in the Ringfencing of Quantum Technologies" [2025] LawTechHum 5; (2025) 7(1) Law, Technology and Humans 68
Export Controls as Innovation
Sociotechnical Imaginaries in the Ringfencing
of Quantum Technologies
University of Amsterdam, The Netherlands
Export controls; quantum technologies;
innovation marketing; sociotechnical imaginaries.
Here is the essence of mankind’s creative genius: not
the edifices of civilization nor the bang-flash weapons which can end
the words which fertilize new concepts ...
Dan Simmons,
1. Introduction: Export Controls as a ‘Go-to’ Legal Instrument
to Ringfence Quantum Technologies
The saliency of quantum technologies (QT) cuts
across all domains of science, industry and the state. In an era of
Wars’, state involvement in quantum innovation to reach
‘quantum supremacy’ seems like a foregone
conclusion.
The United States has
already ‘blacklisted’ QT transfers to almost all major Chinese
quantum actors.
Amidst the sense of
urgency for states to ringfence their quantum innovation spaces, in the past
years the governments of
Netherlands
have announced virtually identical export controls on quantum computers
operating with up to 2000 quantum bits (‘qubits’).
Similar export
control restrictions were imposed in South
with further restrictions
planned in Japan.
Strangely, the greatest number of qubits ever achieved was 1121 qubits
by IBM’s Condor quantum processor in December
No quantum players in any of the jurisdictions imposing export controls on
quantum computers have come close to surpassing IBM, let
alone the ambitious
parameter of ‘2000 qubits’. Are these export controls with
hypothetical qubit capacity a deliberate
measure of ‘innovation
marketing’ to signal states’ quantum ambitions and preparedness to
protect any technological
breakthroughs that will eventually emerge from their
respective ecosystems? Are these measures pre-emptive or premature?
This article interrogates why export controls are imposed on QT, particularly
with technical specifications (e.g. 2000 qubits) that
are not yet realisable. To
answer this question, the article proceeds in three steps: first demystifying
the nature of QT and their
sociotechnical assemblage (Section 2); second
examining current QT export controls (Section 3); and third, presenting three
imaginaries that have coproduced narratives, in which QT export controls
are grounded (Section 4). The imaginaries and narratives
section will further
touch upon why the recent wave of export controls has not restricted other QT,
such as quantum sensing or quantum
communication technologies, but instead only
zeroed in on quantum computers, which typically conjure up powerful
sociotechnical imaginaries
that animate policy action and permeate regulatory
choices in the export control space.
The imposition of export controls on emerging and cutting-edge technologies
with dual-use potential is by no means unique to quantum
innovation. The chase
after a technology’s potential and the subsequent ringfencing through
export controls can be seen in
export restrictions on other promising
technologies, such as advanced semiconductor chips and manufacturing equipment
crucial for
developing next generations of
This article explores the
dynamics of export control law and policy at a specific moment in time when a
technology, such as QT, has
yet to materialise with any viable (commercial)
utility, yet because of its (borderline) fantastical hype inspires regulatory
to ringfence access to technology that is still condemned to always be
five or ten or even 20 years
By adopting the concept of sociotechnical imaginaries to understand the
ringfencing performed by export controls on QT, this article
contributes to
ongoing export control discussions, which until now have been contextualised and
historicised by the literature and
perspectives of international relations,
geopolitics and geoeconomics.
Considering the sociotechnical imaginaries shaping export control law-making
adds new contours and dimensions to our current understanding
of the geopolitics
of technology, showing that it is not merely pure power politics (between
nations, corporations and scientific
institutions) that moves the grand projects
of crossing technological frontiers but also the imaginaries of frontier
technologies
constructed and believed by the actors
2. Demystifying the ‘Frontier-ness’ of Quantum Technologies
The hype surrounding QT – especially its poster child, the quantum
computer – tends to border on the fantastical. Quantum
computers have been
hailed as being able to simulate and find new materials and chemical compounds
that can help solve climate change
Simultaneously quantum
computers are believed to be able to crack all existing encryption, opening the
floodgates to cyberattacks
that could ‘break the internet’
Quantum sensors could sense objects underground, beyond walls and what is out of
vision. They promise perfect transparency of the
world, materials, the human
body and the Earth.
communication technologies could alter the idea of online communication, provide
unhackable communication, bend time and
This section
demystifies these claims to put our feet back on the ground and understand what
kind of QT are subject to export controls.
The QT discussed in this article are the so-called
‘second-generation’ QT – as opposed to first-generation QT
on the manipulation of the interaction between quantum particles
(photons, atoms, electrons)
as nuclear power, semiconductors and
Second-generation QT are
premised on the direct manipulation and control of the quantum states of these
particles to exploit their
quantum mechanical
properties.
Fundamental to understanding QT – particularly quantum computers
– is its building block, the quantum bit (‘qubit’).
quantum mechanical systems that can be generated by manipulating atoms, ions,
electrons, photons, molecules or quasiparticles
so they enter into a quantum
state. In this state, quantum mechanical properties such as superposition,
interference or entanglement
There are five major
challenges to harnessing the computational and information processing powers
from these quantum mechanical properties
The difficulty in creating conditions for quantum states
Qubits are fragile. Any interaction between qubits and the outside
(‘classical’) world will make them lose their desired
quantum state
(‘decohere’). Thus, there is a substantial engineering barrier to
building the hardware to perfectly isolate
qubits from ‘noise’,
which includes light, sound, air, heat, electromagnetic interferences and cosmic
The current state of
quantum computing is referred to as the noisy intermediate-scale quantum (NISQ)
era, in which quantum computers
are still prone to noise and thus have no
‘quantum advantage’ over classical
The difficulty in creating ‘error free’ qubits
Qubits are also error prone. Thus, a large proportion of qubits must be
dedicated to error-correction routines that keep a computation
Currently a ratio of about 30–10,000 physical (‘redundant’)
qubits is needed to error-correct for one
a logical (‘useful’)
The difficulty of interacting with qubits
. To harness the
computational powers of qubits, we must be able to input commands and controls
to ‘tell’ a qubit what
to do. This, however, is greatly complicated
because the qubit is prone to decoherence upon interacting with the
‘classical’
The difficulty of scaling up qubits.
Adding more qubits
complicates the control over how all qubits may interact with each
The increased coherence
of qubits seems to be only possible at the cost of qubit speed. Protecting a
qubit from its noisy surroundings
also limits control over it. This is referred
to as the qubit speed-coherence dilemma: qubits are either coherent but slow or
but short-lived.
The difficulty in designing quantum algorithms.
computers are often said to be revolutionary because qubits being in
‘superpositions’ (instead of binary 0 or
1) can calculate ‘all
possibilities all at once’. This is a skewed understanding, as we would
still need to figure out
which one of presumably thousands of millions of
possibilities is the correct answer. Thus, quantum algorithms must be designed
properly ‘read out’ the correct answer – otherwise, upon
‘reading out’ information from a qubit system,
one would merely get
a random (incorrect) answer from all possible
Consequently, taking these engineering challenges seriously will sober up our
evaluation of the hype surrounding QT. The mathematical
and quantum mechanical
foundations of QT are theoretically sound and have been experimentally
As such, QT is not a
speculative technology; however, because of these engineering hurdles, the field
is still exploratory and uncertain.
article puts into
perspective: ‘Even with 2 million qubits, some quantum chemistry
calculations might take a century ... breaking
state-of-the-art cryptography in
8 hours would require 20 million
While there may be hope that QT is already at the cusp of commercialisation,
most QT firms are still in the R&D phase, and few
have reached the phase of
full-fledged commercial scale-up. There is no QT with (commercial) utility.
However, there are sites of
QT labs, where proofs-of-concept, prototypes and
demonstrators are built and reported on in prestigious journals such as
Nature, Science
Physical Review
These quantum
R&D artefacts are taken as proxies and reported as ‘quantum
technologies’. Consequently, the relevant
sites to study QT are in fact
the ‘quantum labs’ across all sectors of government, industry and
academic R&D.
This article borrows the concept of ‘sociotechnical assemblage’
from Jarrahi and Sawyer, who theorised it within the context
of tabletop
computing as a ‘heterogonous network of people, visions, concepts,
technological artifacts, and organizations that
come together to enable
innovation’.
In this vein, the ‘sociotechnical assemblages’ of quantum
innovation encompass not only the artefacts of proofs-of-concept,
prototypes and
experimental setups but the entire innovation value chain. This includes the
‘value-adding’ activities
and interactions of physicists, engineers,
computer scientists, technologists and technicians across the innovation value
well as the material supply chains of highly advanced equipment for
quantum labs. Thus, devices such as cryogenics (dilution refrigerator,
cryogenic cables), nanofabrication systems (superconducting materials,
lithography equipment), photonic sources (lasers,
modulators, interferometers),
vacuum equipment (vacuum pumps, chambers, isolators), precision electronics
(photon detectors, control,
measurement equipment) and ion and atom dispensers
(strontium, rubidium, iodine are common elements used in quantum labs) could
within the purview of technological ringfencing of quantum
innovation.
As a result, the ‘sociotechnical assemblages’ of quantum
innovation is a means of understanding what is even there and
what is even real
to the material reality of current
QT developments, this article concretises the
regulatory object of QT export controls as not QT
, but rather the
broader ‘sociotechnical assemblages’ of quantum innovation.
While the regulatory object of QT export controls is the
‘sociotechnical assemblages’ of quantum innovation, this article
contends that these assemblages are not the driving force behind QT export
controls. To understand why export controls are imposed
early in the
R&D phase, when QT is still mired in engineering challenges and
prophesied to always be five to ten to 20 years
away, this article relies on
Jasanoff and Kim’s concept of ‘sociotechnical imaginaries’.
These are ‘collectively
held and performed visions of desirable futures
(or of resistance against the undesirable), and they are also animated by shared
understandings of forms of social life and social order attainable through, and
supportive of, advances in science and
technology’.
Imaginaries surrounding QT, which are fuelled by the hype of utopia (solving
climate change and curing cancer) and premonition of
dystopia (breaking all
public key encryption), link up to the central inquiry of this article about the
seemingly ‘performative’
nature – that is, the
‘innovation marketing’ aspect of export controls on quantum
computers with hypothetical ‘2000
qubit’ capacity that is not yet
realisable. As Jasanoff points out, ‘The performative dimension of
sociotechnical imaginaries,
however, also relates this term to concepts more
closely linked to instrumental political action – in other words, to
Quantum imaginaries help to reconcile why current QT export controls set out
to regulate quantum computers of their hypothetical ‘2000
capacity, which is far removed from the current state of the art. Despite the
major engineering challenges of creating
(error-free) qubits, interacting with
them, scaling them up and designing algorithms to obtain the correct answers
from their calculations,
quantum imaginaries serve as a muse for the law and
policy-making process, which defies the often lustreless and convoluted reality
of quantum innovation.
The Law of Export Controls on Quantum Technologies
This section presents three ways in which export controls are designed to
sink their regulatory hooks into the transfer of QT outside
the territory of the
regulating state: (1) through restrictions on QT as such; (2) through
restrictions on the material supply chains
of QT; and (3) through restrictions
on the ‘intangibles’ (software, IP, algorithms) and knowledge
exchange in the R&D
and production of QT.
3.1 Export Controls on QT as
Export controls impose restrictions – for example, a licensing or
authorisation requirement – on the transfer of certain
technologies
outside the territory of the regulating state. These controlled technologies are
either military or dual-use technologies.
Export controls can set up a list of
entities to whom the technology export is restricted, or regulate according to
technical specifications
of a controlled technology.
In May 2024, the US Export Administration Regulation added 37 Chinese quantum
industry and research institutions to its Entity
These are deemed to be
‘acquiring and attempting to acquire US-origin items in support of
advancing China's quantum technology
capabilities, which has serious
ramifications for US national security given the military applications of
quantum technologies’.
Spain, France, Denmark, Italy, Germany, Finland and the Netherlands made use
of the Article 9 EU Dual-Use
Regulation,
which allows EU
states to prohibit or impose an authorisation requirement on the export of
dual-use items not included in the Regulation’s
Annex I (at the time of
writing this Article does not include QT). Between 2023 and 2024, the
governments of Spain (May 2023), France
(February 2024), the United Kingdom
(April 2024), Denmark (June 2024), Canada (June 2024), Germany (July 2024),
Italy (July 2024),
Finland (August 2024), Norway (October 2024), the United
States (September 2024) and the Netherlands (October
have all adopted export
restrictions on quantum computers (a QT
product’) with virtually identical technical specifications:
Quantum computers and related electronic assemblies and components therefor,
as follows:
a) Quantum computers, in accordance with the following requirements:
1. Quantum computers supporting
34 or more, but fewer than 100
controlled, connected and working
physical qubits
, and having a C-NOT
error of less than or equal to 10
2. Quantum computers supporting
100 or more, but fewer than 200
controlled, connected and working
physical qubits
, and having a C-NOT
error of less than or equal to 10
3. Quantum computers supporting
200 or more, but fewer than 350
controlled, connected and working
physical qubits
, and having a C-NOT
error of less than or equal to 2x10
4. Quantum computers supporting
350 or more, but fewer than 500
controlled, connected and working
physical qubits
, and having a C-NOT
error of less than or equal to 3x10
5. Quantum computers supporting
500 or more, but fewer than 700
controlled, connected and working
physical qubits
, and having a C-NOT
error of less than or equal to 4x10
6. Quantum computers supporting
700 or more, but fewer than 1100
fully controlled, connected and working
physical qubits
, and having a
C-NOT error of less than or equal to 5x10
7. Quantum computers supporting
1100 or more, but fewer than 2000
fully controlled, connected and working
physical qubits
, and having a
C-NOT error of less than or equal to 6x10
8. Quantum computers supporting
2000 or more
fully controlled,
connected and working
physical qubits
These export restrictions define in their accompanying Technical Notes that a
‘physical qubit’ is ‘a two-level quantum
system used to
represent the elementary unit of quantum logic by means of manipulations and
measurements that are not error
corrected’.
These rules
cover different forms of qubit models including ‘semiconductor,
superconducting, and photonic qubit chips and chip
arrays; surface ion trap
arrays; other qubit confinement technologies; and coherent interconnects between
such items’.
As explained in Section 2, qubits are error prone and thus need to undergo
error-correcting routines in order to become a ‘logical’
(‘useful’) qubit. ‘Logical qubits’ are ‘physical
qubits’ that have been ‘error corrected’.
Therefore, the
technical specifications also include a ‘C-NOT error’ rate, which
the rules define as ‘the average
physical gate error for the
nearest-neighbour two- “physical qubit” Controlled-NOT (C-NOT)
Essentially, a
C-NOT gate is a two-qubit operation and acts as one of the basic building blocks
of a quantum circuit.
Between February and October 2024, when multiple European governments
announced these identical export restrictions on quantum computers,
were not accompanied by specific scientific or technical explanations of the
specific thresholds for the qubit number and
C-NOT error rate. For instance, the
Dutch Minister for Foreign Trade and Development noted in an Explanation
accompanying the new
export control rules that quantum computers, being part of
the controlled technology, ‘make a crucial contribution to certain
advanced military applications and thus have a significant impact on national
and international security
The scientific community’s reaction was reserved and sceptical. These
identical restrictions were deemed as ‘mysterious’,
with concerns
expressed about the lack of ‘scientific reason’ or even lack of
‘basis in science’ for these
restrictions as well as the
‘secret international discussions’ in which these technical
specifications had been
negotiated.
Quantum computing
experts were reportedly ‘baffled’ by specifications, which were
perceived as ‘pointless’
or making ‘no
‘secret’ negotiations refer to confidential talks under the
Wassenaar Arrangement, a non-binding multilateral export
control regime that
allows participating member states to better coordinate export restrictions on
military and dual-use technologies.
Then, on 9 September 2024, the US Bureau of Industry and Security handed down
an Interim Decision on Commerce Control List Additions
and Revisions, which
included the restrictions on quantum
The Interim Decision
explains that the qubit number is a measure of ‘engineering advances in
component design and system integration
that will enable scaling of quantum
computers to very large
whereas the
‘C-NOT error’ rate is a ‘measure of the quality of the
These two metrics
combined are intended to indicate certain technological advances in the
development of quantum computers. As such,
the metrics for the qubit number and
C-NOT error must be assessed together to form a certain threshold reflecting
incremental technological
advances. This seems to suggest pre-emptive
ringfencing of specific ranges of piecemeal advances in varying degrees of
quantum computing
performance to ‘future-proof’ the necessary
material (and knowledge) resources, ensuring that such advances in computational
power do not fall into the wrong hands.
The Interim Decision does not include explanations for the numerical choice
of each of the eight thresholds set out in the export
control rules. It explains
that the uppermost threshold of 2000 qubits was set because this is the point of
Concretely, the necessary error rate increases with
increased qubit count but plateaus around 2000 qubit (with an error rate at
). The lower threshold of 34 qubits was chosen because it
‘represents a high level of technological sophistication warranting
national security, regional stability, and antiterrorism
Most likely,
these rationales would also be applicable to the identical technical
specifications adopted by the United States’
European counterparts.
Crucially, however, the Interim Decision does not make any concrete reference
to scientific studies, research or publications that
further substantiate and
justify the claims made about the upper and lower thresholds – that is,
the point of ‘plateau’
and the minimum ‘high level’ of
‘sophistication’ warranting national security protective measures.
The decision
does not further reference or indicate any scientific expert
(bodies) that have been consulted during the drafting of these export
restrictions.
3.2 Export Controls on the Material Supply Chains of QT
Beyond the restrictions on QT as such, restrictions can also be placed on
equipment, devices and component parts of the QT material
supply chain. The
above-mentioned export restrictions regulate these supply chains, as reflected
in the text’s inclusion of
‘Qubit devices and qubit circuits
containing or supporting arrays of physical qubits’, ‘Quantum
control components
and quantum measurement devices’ and ‘Technology
for the development or production’ of quantum computers and their
Previously, the US Commerce Control List (CCL) had already regulated
categories of technologies that are part of the QT supply chain:
superconductive
microelectronics,
dispensers.
Overall, these
devices can also be found in any (generic) material sciences or experimental
physics labs and are not quantum
However, with the new
wave of export restrictions on quantum computers, these specific pieces of
equipment can be regarded as ‘qubit
devices’, ‘qubit control
components and quantum measurement devices’, enabling technologies
‘for the development
or production’ of quantum computers.
Some export control legislation explicitly restricts vital equipment for the
QT supply chain, namely ‘cryogenic cooling systems
and components ...
cryogenic wafer probing equipment and advanced
materials’.
Finland has imposed export controls on
cryogenics,
in which the Finish company Bluefors is an industry leader, supplying to major
players such as IBM and burgeoning quantum computing
start-ups such as Alice
Cryogenics have also
been included in the US CCL under their Export Administration Regulation. The
CCL includes ‘Cryogenic
refrigeration
‘Helium refrigeration
3.3 Export Controls on ‘Intangibles’ and Knowledge Exchange
It has been noted that export controls on the technology as such and their
supply chains may not be enough to effectively hamper the
indigenisation of
controlled technologies in the rival state. For instance, only three weeks after
the US blacklisting of Chinese
quantum actors, a Chinese research team announced
a breakthrough, achieving the largest ever quantum computation with trapped-ion
qubits. This breakthrough was achieved under the leadership of a US-trained
Chinese scientist, which further fuels fears of technology
leakage due to open
international scientific
collaboration.
To effectively
prevent such technology leakages, ‘intangible’ aspects (e.g.
intellectual property, expertise and know-how)
related to the R&D and
manufacturing of a controlled technology must also be
Within the US export control regime, Daniels and Krige have (re)considered
technology export restrictions as a means of ‘knowledge
regulation’.
Natural persons working in cross-border scientific research would be considered
‘data exporters’ of
not only ‘technical data’ but also
their general expertise, know-how and implicit knowledge gained by virtue of
with US-based technology
In this light, US
export control implementation is carried out according to the ‘mosaic
theory’, which assumes that export
controls should extend to any kind of
‘knowledge’ related to the material technological artifact because
unrelated and
innocuous pieces of information could in combination yield a
bigger picture.
This is a line
of reasoning that the US export control authorities have adopted to characterise
any comingling of foreign technical
data or knowledge with US-origin data or
knowledge as a ‘deemed export’ under the ambit of US export control
administration.
The extension of export controls to regulating any form of knowledge exchange
is also reflected in Article 2 (2) of the EU Dual-Use
Regulation. In addition to
defining ‘(re)export’ as the movement of goods from the Union
customs territory into that
of third states, it also covers various means of
‘knowledge exchange’:
(d). transmission of software or technology by electronic media, including by
fax, telephone, electronic mail or any other electronic
means to a destination
... making available in an electronic form ... oral transmission of technology
when the technology is described
over a voice transmission
The 2009 Dual-Use Regulation excluded from its scope the ‘the supply of
services or the transmission of technology if that supply
or transmission
involves cross-border movement of
For instance,
this could have excluded any knowledge exchanged between scientists at a
conference outside of the European Union.
Instead, these cases were covered by
Article 1 of the Joint Action CFSP/401/2000 under the term of
‘technical assistance’,
which has now also been incorporated into
the scope of Article 1 of the 2021 Dual-Use
Article 8 provides
that member states must require authorisation for such providers of
‘technical assistance’ related
to controlled technologies under the
Regulation. Article 2(9) defines ‘technical assistance’ as:
any technical support related to repairs, development, manufacture, assembly,
testing, maintenance, or any other technical service,
and may take forms such as
instruction, advice, training, transmission of working knowledge or skills or
consulting services, including
by electronic means as well as by telephone or
any other verbal forms of assistance.
Article 2(10) widely defines the scope of ‘technical assistance’,
which encompasses transfers from natural or legal person
or partnership
‘from’ or ‘resident’ or ‘established’ in the
EU ‘into’ or ‘within’
the territory of a third state or
‘to a resident of a third state temporarily present’ in the EU
customs territory. This
last case covers instances of third-country citizens
following courses at universities, research centres or participating in industry
research and development programs in the EU. Previously, such cases were neither
covered by Article 7 of the 2009 Dual-Use Regulation
nor Article 1 Joint Action
CFSP/401/2000.
Given that the main challenge of QT is one of acquisition and bringing
together of engineering ingenuity from a collectively skilled
workforce, export
controls critically serve as a tool of knowledge regulation. This could have
major implications for open international
academic and scientific exchange in
QT, with institutions, entities, individuals, scientists, engineers and
technicians from foreign
(non-US/non-EU) states constituting a sizeable part of
the pool of talent in the high-tech sector. The US Bureau of Industry and
Security observed in its Interim Decision to impose export restrictions on
quantum computing:
Quantum computing research and development is substantially a
, with major innovation occurring in academic labs, small companies,
large companies, and national laboratories distributed throughout
the world. Key
foundational concepts, capabilities, and discoveries from one side of the globe
are often borrowed, improved, and/or
incorporated to advance efforts on the
other side of the world ... At the same time, there is a global shortage of
quantum computing
expertise, with demand currently outstripping supply. This has
a substantial world-wide competition to attract the top talent.
Academia and industry have described the talent bottleneck as one
of the largest
impediments to acceleration.
The domestic development of quantum information science and technology (QIST)
experts, including in quantum computing, is insufficient
to fill the United
States’ QIST strategic goals. The United States will continue to rely on
foreign talent to fill critical
workforce gaps. Currently, much of the QIST
talent developed in the U.S. are foreign persons. Foreign persons are subject to
requirements as administered by the Department of State. More than half of
QIST-related degrees conferred in the U.S. are awarded
to temporary U.S.
Given that certain parameters are still technically unrealised and currently
unrealisable, there is no ‘real’ quantum
device that can demonstrate
such hypothetical performance. However, what are real and can be ringfenced are
the ‘knowledge’
communities of quantum scientists in university and
company (start-up) R&D labs working on realising such ambitious hypothetical
parameters such as 2000 qubits.
Export control regulating knowledge exchange over a controlled technology
does not merely give effect to those provisions restricting
the controlled
technology as such (Section 3.1) and their material supply chains of enabling
technologies (Section 3.2). If current
export controls are to be enforced as
knowledge-regulation tools, they could indeed sink their regulatory teeth into
the people –
that is, ‘knowledge’ that make the
‘sociotechnical assemblage’ of quantum innovation possible. As
in Section 2, this assemblage does not just encompass the material
artefacts and resources of quantum innovation but the activities
interactions of physicists, engineers, computer scientists, technologists and
technicians which make this endeavour to innovate
Following this logic, the non-existence of a quantum computer with
‘hypothetical’ not yet realisable ‘2000 qubit’
is immaterial for the
raison d’être
of export controls. What
is relevant is the existence of communities of scientists, engineers and
innovators within sociotechnical
assemblages of quantum innovation, striving for
the elusive ‘2000 qubit’ – of which there are currently plenty
for export control ringfencing to sink their teeth into.
The Narratives Underlying the Ringfencing of Quantum Technologies
Export controls on quantum computers with hypothetical ‘2000
qubit’ capacity are rooted in different narratives co-produced
specific sociotechnical imaginaries of quantum computers. These narratives
around quantum imaginaries have fed into the
export controls’ different
rationales for ringfencing. This section discusses the imaginary of (1) the
universal quantum computer
(UQC) within the (quantum) ‘sovereignty’
narrative; (2) the cryptographically relevant quantum computer (CRQC) within
‘security’ narrative; and (3) the fault-tolerant quantum
computer (FTQC) within the ‘Sputnik’ narrative.
4.1 The Sovereignty Narrative
The cutting-edge and transformative nature of QT has become the driving force
behind export controls’ ringfencing rationale
to promote and protect a
state’s ‘sovereignty’ over innovation resources vital to
states’ technological
For the EU,
‘technological sovereignty’ means to ‘[avoid] situations where
the EU is reliant on a sole, or limited
number of, third country suppliers for
technologies which are critical to startups and to the EU’s economic and
societal wellbeing’.
reflects the effort to protect material and human resources vital for
maintaining the ‘technological lead time’,
which is taken as a proxy
for both ‘technological predominance’ and ‘technological
sovereignty’ – a
rationale particularly evident in US export
Within the context of QT, the term ‘quantum
sovereignty’
has emerged.
It similarly implores the need for Europe’s self-sufficiency and mastery
of quantum capabilities at various stages
of the supply chain and levels of the
technology stack, which is expected to impact a broad range of sectors such as
aerospace, defence,
pharma, material sciences and finance. This has manifested
in R&D and industry investments into quantum projects such as the
European Quantum Communication Infrastructure
Initiative,
the ‘Quantum
Valley’ R&D ecosystem
and the recently proposed EU ‘Quantum Chips
Similar investments
into the quantum industry are also seen in the Division B funding under the US
CHIPS and Science Act.
Quantum imaginaries are strong drivers of the ‘quantum
sovereignty’ narrative, which is contingent on policy makers’
perception of the promises, potentials and prospects of QT. Quantum imaginaries
relate to the (un)desirable futures attached to the
possession, lack of or
belated possession of quantum capabilities. A powerful imaginary which
encapsulates the cutting-edge and transformative
nature of QT is that of the
universal quantum computer
Also referred to as a
general-purpose quantum computer, the UQC is believed to be capable of executing
all quantum algorithms, despite
their creation still being one of the main
challenges in quantum computing. The possibilities provided by a UQC have been
as being a game-changer across all fields such as automotive, logistics,
finance, pharma and chemicals,
as well as paving the way for all types of ‘quantum use case’
supporting the Sustainable Development Goals and bridging
the digital
The imaginary of a UQC goes hand in hand with the sovereignty narrative
because of the universalising and totalising ‘grand’
visions evoked
by both concepts. The potential of having state-of-the-art computational
resources that could supercharge and unlock
all innovation potentials across
industries fires up the desire of states to claim technological sovereignty.
Despite such quantum
export controls’ protectionist spirit undermining
states’ free trade commitments under the Global Agreement on Tariffs
Trade (GATT),
the imaginary of
the UQC’s boundless potential animates policy action to ringfence the
necessary innovation resources to elevate
states’ respective industrial
and technological bases such that a state can stake a claim to being
technologically ‘sovereign’
– whether that means
‘independent’, ‘competitive’ or
‘predominant’.
4.2 The Security Narrative
A common understanding of the rationale behind export controls relates to
their national (military) security implications. In this
context, QT, as the
controlled technology, is viewed as both a security asset and a liability.
Export controls are imposed on advanced
technologies because of their presumed
dual-use nature (for military and/or civilian applications) to protect national
security and
international peace and security by preventing the
non-proliferation and transfer of such dual-use technologies in weapons and arms
Indeed, quantum sensing and quantum communication technologies have been a
fixture of defence technology
of all leading
‘quantum’ state players and
Quantum sensors’
ability to produce precise information about an electric signal and magnetic
anomalies, and for inertial navigation,
could have important applications such
as anti-drone surveillance radar, anti-stealth technology, detection of
submarines or underwater
mines and surveillance technology. Quantum
communication technologies are envisioned to facilitate secure information
exchange between
quantum computers with the help of quantum key-distribution via
a quantum network that uses optical fibre or free-space channels.
Importantly,
quantum communication could offer secure communication alternatives in the
advent of a quantum computer capable of breaking
current standard encryption
Given the major military, information and cybersecurity implications of both
quantum sensing and communication technologies, it is
peculiar that these
technologies have not been featured in recent QT export control. The discussed
export controls have lengthy technical
specifications for quantum computers but
make no mention of quantum sensing or communication technologies. This is
particularly questionable
given that quantum sensors have been assessed with a
higher technological maturity than quantum
Further, experts are
working on quantum communication network solutions that could provide secure
digital infrastructure that is
resilient against potential cyberattacks by
quantum computers.
are only quantum computers such a prominent feature in export control
legislation?
It is worth considering that quantum sensors and quantum communication
technologies may already be covered by technical specifications
provided in
states’ export control lists, which adopt and are aligned with the
specifications in the Dual-Use List under the
Wassenaar Arrangement. For
instance, Category 5 of the Dual-Use List covers Telecommunications and
Information Security, while Category
6 covers Lasers and Sensors. However,
recent export restrictions on quantum computers have been added under Category 3
and 4 cover
Electronics and Computers
respectively.
Had regulators
intended to include new and more specific export restrictions for quantum
sensors or communication technologies under
specific categories of their export
control lists, such an inclusion could have been coupled and rolled out with
restrictions on
quantum computers.
The non-inclusion of quantum sensors and communication technology in recent
export restrictions and the single-minded focus on quantum
computers could be
explained by the powerful imaginaries or imagined threat conjured up by a
quantum computer. A quantum computer
that is able to break current encryption
protocols – a cryptographically relevant quantum computer (CRQC) –
if realisable,
could constitute a major security threat. However, breaking
state-of-the-art cryptography would require 20 million qubits and could
to eight hours,
still five orders of magnitude away from the current state-of-the-art quantum
computer with around 1000 qubits. Given the
major engineering challenges in QT,
a threat of a CRQC is not non-existent, but it is not imminent. To fully
appraise the cybersecurity
threat of a CRQC, two factors need to be borne in
mind. There is the threat of ‘harvest now, decrypt later’, in which
state or other actors gather troves of encrypted data, which they hope can be
decrypted with a CRQC in the
This is particularly
relevant for certain data, which are ‘crown jewels’ (e.g. state
secrets, military sensitive data)
and thus will still be high-value data in the
not-so-distant future. However, states are now also shifting towards adopting
‘post-quantum
cryptography’ protocols that are developed to be safe
against CRQC attacks. Post-quantum cryptography algorithms have been
many export control
The complex on-the-ground reality of assessing the CRQC risks does not
directly drive the security narrative for ringfencing quantum
Instead, it is the imaginary of the CRQC with its spectre of ‘Q-Day’
that fuels the policy urgency to protect
our digital society from CRQC malicious
attacks. The CRQC imaginary seems to have animated a Hobbesian-like reflex of
as a sovereign, to protect the interests of society at large by
guarding us from threats of CRQC-wielding ‘barbarians at the
who threaten the cybersecurity architecture of our digital society.
In fact, interest in quantum computing grew in 1994 after mathematician Peter
Shor devised his eponymous Shor’s algorithm, a
quantum algorithm for
exponentially fast factoring of large primes (of more than 100 digits) – a
crucial step in cracking public
Shor himself
recounted that he had initially described his work as ‘solving discrete
logarithms’ – without mentioning
factoring, quantum computing or
cryptography. However, like the ‘children’s game of
Telephone’, his work was reported
as a solution for
‘factoring’ large numbers – that is, with application for
cryptography – which eventually
caught the attention of NSA
Shor’s algorithm has consequently added to the perception of what
threats are posed by a CRQC that hypothetically has qubits
stable and powerful
enough to run Shor’s algorithm. The diffusion of Shor’s algorithm as
scientific knowledge across
communities, according to Latour, can be attributed
to the production of inscriptions that simplify and ‘flatten’ the
world, and their subsequent distribution by ‘centers of calculation’
that enable these representations (Shor’s
algorithm as representing CRQC
– that is, cybersecurity, risks) to draw together actors and actions far
outside (cryptography
and NSA communities) the initial loci of production
(solving discrete
logarithms).
Without the
diffusion of Shor’s algorithm, the CRQC imaginary would not exist in its
current form. The anxiety that a CRQC
could execute Shor’s algorithm
remains a powerful fixture in the narrative of quantum computers, and QT more
broadly, as security
threats, which underlies the ringfencing rationale of
export controls on these devices.
4.3 The ‘Sputnik’ Narrative
Moving away from UQC and CRQC imaginaries, the fault tolerant quantum
computer (FTQC) is a quantum computer with relatively ‘error
and ‘coherent’ qubit states, and is thus considered one of the most
realistic but still moderately ambitious
milestones for the quantum computing
The goal of building a
FTQC has fed into the rationale of ringfencing quantum innovation to guard those
resources in order for a
state to become ‘the first’ in the race to
demonstrate large scale ‘quantum coherence’ – the key
engineering
challenge in quantum computing representing the field’s
‘Sputnik moment’.
The ‘Sputnik moment’ rhetoric has often been invoked to describe
quantum R&D efforts.
Thinking beyond the superficial meaning of this turn of phrase referring to a
disruptive technology entering the world stage, the
launch of the Sputnik was in
a fact a technological demonstration – a prototype put together to
demonstrate the ability to
launch objects into
In the same vein, any
resulting FTQC would also be a protype demonstrating the successful
implementation of error-correction routines
for logical (error-free and useful)
qubits. The Sputnik mission
did not have any immediate
military-defence, commercial or economic ‘utility’. Its significance
was rather the demonstration
of a state’s scientific technological and
engineering power – or, more romantically put, ‘human
– making the potential of space travel more real. The
Sputnik moment refers to a technological achievement that unlocks myriad
possible futures in terms of military, geopolitical, industrial, economic and
scientific ambition and powers.
In this light the FTQC imaginary represents an engineering triumph, a
first-of-its-kind quantum computer. The successful construction
of a FTQC would
be a breakthrough feat of demonstrating quantum coherence, essentially defying
the laws of quantum mechanics. Achieving
the FTQC milestone could make
imaginaries of more ambitious quantum computers such as the CRQC or UQC a more
possible reality. Fostering,
safeguarding and controlling the entire
sociotechnical assemblage of quantum innovation that goes into building a FTQC
lends meaning
to a state’s identity, value and ambition of being
‘the first’ in achieving quantum fault-tolerance.
The innovative capabilities and potentials surrounding the imaginary of a
FTQC become the leitmotif of state’s technology
Particularly in the
European Union, policy-makers have recognised that Europe has lost out in the
semiconductor industry market share
and thus also the attendant export control
race. Thus, there has been increased emphasis for the European Union and its
member states
to facilitate ‘first movers’ in
which makes the FTQC
imaginary all the more powerful in these discourses.
While it may be easy to impose export controls on any prized QT, such as
quantum computers, the performative nature of policy posturing
only goes so far.
Export controls should be critically considered upon a transparent basis upon
which technical considerations for
export control parameters have been decided.
Thus far, explanations have only made vague references to the cutting-edge or
nature of QT and have yet to garner wide (public) support from the
scientific community. Restrictions on cross-border R&D and
exchange must be considered in terms of how these could backfire on R&D
efforts to foster a quantum innovation ecosystem
worth protecting before a
too-high export control fence is constructed. This could result in an innovation
culture fractured along
geopolitical fault lines, thus keeping out material and
knowledge exchange that may be vital to achieving the quantum ‘Sputnik
Conclusion: Is it the Qubits or the Story We Tell About Them That
Given that no full-fledged ‘useful’ QT exist, export controls
become tools of knowledge regulation. They sink their regulatory
teeth into the
‘sociotechnical assemblage’ of quantum innovation to ringfence the
site where critical knowledge and R&D
exchanges are at work to overcome the
major engineering challenges standing between quantum ambition and reality.
Regardless of whether QT export controls are fit for purpose or whether their
parameters make technical sense or are adequate for
effective enforcement, the
mere invocation of export controls lends the state an air of regulatory
authority over prized QT. A state
attempting to ringfence the assemblage of
quantum innovation has its policies, ambitions and identity tied up in all
possible imaginaries
of QT, specifically those conjured up by quantum computers.
The technical (non)feasibility or (non)realisability of ‘2000
qubits’ is secondary. What is decisive for understanding
controls’ performance of ringfencing is the imaginaries that inspire
visions of power and possibilities of ‘2000
qubits’. Export controls
offer the veneer of control over QT. Even if states cannot ringfence the
amorphous assemblage of quantum
innovation, export controls provide a conduit
through which states can ultimately stake claims to potential futures
represented by
all possible quantum imaginaries.
Acknowledgement
Special thanks go to the journal’s editorial board and reviewers for
their thoughtful critiques as well as engagement from the
participants and
organisers of the ‘Narratives, Frontier Technologies & the Law’
Conference (Maastricht University,
30 October–1 November 2024), where a
draft version of this article was presented. Research for this paper is part of
the author’s
PhD project, which is funded by Quantum Delta Netherlands
(QDNL), a National Growth Fund programme, an initiative of the Ministry
Economic Affairs and Climate Policy and the Ministry of Finance.
Bibliography
Primary Sources
Additions of Entities to the Entity List, Document no.
89 FR 41886 (Rule
the US Bureau of Industry and Security, effective 9 May 2024).
Amendment to the German Foreign Trade Ordinance, Federal Law Gazette 2024,
No. 243 (22 July 2024).
Canadian Order Amending the Export Control List: SOR/2024-112 (31 May
Department of Commerce, ‘Hydrocarbon Research Inc., et al: Consent
Denial and Probation Order’ (1963)
Finnish Act on the Export Control of Dual-Use Items (500/2024) (16 August
Regulation (EU) 2021/821 of the European Parliament and of the Council
of 20 May 2021, Setting Up a Union Regime for the Control of
Brokering, Technical Assistance, Transit and Transfer of Dual-Use Items
Regulation of the Netherlands Minister for Foreign Trade and Development Aid
of 11 October 2024, nr. BZ2405833.
UK Export Control (Amendment) Regulations 2024 (SI 2024 No. 346) (1 April
US Bureau of Industry and Security Rule
2024-19633 (89 FR 72926)
September 2024.
US Commerce Control List in Export Administration Regulation
61 FR 12937
March 1996).
Defense Primer: Quantum Technology (Congressional Research Service, 25
October 2023)
https://crsreports.congress.gov/product/pdf/IF/IF11836
“The European Quantum Communication Infrastructure (EuroQCI)
Initiative.” European Commission, April 18, 2024.
https://digital-strategy.ec.europa.eu/en/policies/european-quantum-communication-infrastructure-euroqci
Farley Davia, Urayama, Junji, “Survey of the Worldwide Supply Chain of
Commodities Needed for a Quantum,” Sandia National
Laboratories, September
https://www.osti.gov/servlets/purl/1898243
“IBM’s Quantum Development & Innovation Roadmap Aims to Build
a FTQC by 2029.”
https://www.ibm.com/roadmaps/quantum/
“Key Enabling Technologies for Europe’s Technological
Sovereignty.” Study of the Panel for the Future of Science
and Technology,
European Parliamentary Research Service, December 2021.
https://www.europarl.europa.eu/thinktank/en/document/EPRS_STU(2021)697184
“New Roadmap to Position Europe as the ‘Quantum Valley’ of
the World.”
Quantum Flagship
, February 14, 2024.
https://qt.eu/news/2024/2024-02-14_new-roadmap-to-position-europe-as-the-quantum-valley-of-the-world
National Technology Strategy
The Netherlands Ministry of Economic
Affairs and Climate, January 19, 2024.
https://open.overheid.nl/documenten/67b0a9e1-135b-483f-9ed9-3aade270dbce/file
“Statement on Technological Sovereignty of the European Pilot Advisory
Board at the Launch of the European Innovation Council.”
EIC, March 18,
https://eic.ec.europa.eu/system/files/2021-03/EIC%20Advisory%20Board%20statement%20at%20launch%20of%20EIC_1.pdf
“Strategic Research and Industry Agenda.”
, November 2022.
https://qt.eu/media/pdf/Quantum-Flagship_SRIA_2022_0.pdf
South Korean Amendment of 24 February 2023 to the Public Notice of Special
Measures on Trade to Undertake Obligations for International
Peace and Security
Maintenance.
Spanish Order ICT/534/2023 of 26 May 2023.
French Order ECOI2401482A
of 2 February 2024.
Italian Decree of 1 July 2024 Establishing the National Control List for
Dual-Use Goods and Technology Not Listed in Annex I to Regulation
“Summary of NATO’s Quantum Technologies Strategy.” NATO,
January 16, 2024.
https://www.nato.int/cps/en/natohq/official_texts_221777.htm
Amendment to the Danish Export Control Act by Act No. 641 (11 June 2024).
Amendment to the Norwegian Export Control Regulations (3 October 2024).
Secondary Sources
Aaronson, Scott. “Above My Pay Grade: Jensen Huang and the Quantum
Computing Stock Market Crash,”
Shtetl-Optimized
(personal blog),
January 13, 2025.
https://scottaaronson.blog/?p=8567
Aaronson, Scott. “What Makes Quantum Computing So Hard to
, June 8, 2021.
https://www.quantamagazine.org/why-is-quantum-computing-so-hard-to-explain-20210608
“Accelerating Applications for Humanity.” Open Quantum Institute.
https://oqi.gesda.global/applications
Aspect, Alain. “The Second Quantum Revolution: From Basic Concepts to
Quantum Technologies.” in
Photonic Quantum Technologies: Science
and Applications
, edited by Mohamed Benyoucef. Chichester: Wiley, 2023.
Bluefors Homepage.
https://bluefors.com
Brooks, Michael. “Quantum Computers: What are They Good For?”
Nature Spotlight
, May 24, 2023.
https://www.nature.com/articles/d41586-023-01692-9#ref-CR3
Cain, Frank. “Computers and the Cold War: United States Restrictions on
the Export of Computers to the Soviet Union and Communist
Journal of Contemporary History
40, no 1 (2005): 131–147.
https://doi.org/
10.1177/0022009405049270
Carballido, Miguel et al. “Compromise-Free Scaling of Qubit Speed and
Coherence.” arXiv:2402.07313v2 (2024).
https://arxiv.org/pdf/2402.07313
Choi, Charles. “How Many Qubits Are Needed for Quantum Supremacy?
Whether Google Achieved Quantum Supremacy Depends on Perspective.”
, May 21, 2020.
https://spectrum.ieee.org/qubit-supremacy
Conover, Emily. “Quantum Computers Could Break the Internet.
Here’s How to Save It.”
Science News
, June 28, 2023.
https://www.sciencenews.org/article/quantum-computers-break-internet-save
Daniels, Mario, and John Krige.
Knowledge Regulation and National Security
in Postwar America
. Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 2022.
Dowling Jonathan and Gerald Milburn. “Quantum Technology: The Second
Quantum Revolution.”
Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society of
London. Series A: Mathematical, Physical and Engineering Sciences
1809 (2003): 1655–1674.
https://dspace.cuni.cz/bitstream/handle/20.500.11956/177254/120370266.pdf?sequence=1&isAllowed=y
Ezratty, Olivier.
Understanding Quantum Technologies
(6th ed.). Paris:
Le lab quantique, 2023.
Finnish public consultation available at
https://valtioneuvosto.fi/hanke?tunnus=UM008:00/2019
France 2030. “Point d’étapes trois ans après le
lancement de la stratégie nationale des technologies
quantiques et
lancement du programme PROQCIMA.” French Government Media Release, March
https://www.info.gouv.fr/actualite/france-2030-point-detapes-trois-ans-apres-le-lancement-de-la-strategie-nationale-des-technologiques-quantiques-et-lancement-du-programme-proqcima
Furukawa, Yuki. “Japan Tightens Export Controls on More Chip and
Quantum Tech.”
, April 26, 2024.
https://www.bloomberg.com/news/articles/2024-04-26/japan-tightens-export-controls-on-more-chip-and-quantum-tech
“Future Quantum Computers Could Offer Possibilities for Cancer
Detection.” TNO.
https://www.tno.nl/en/digital/digital-innovations/trusted-ict/quantum-computers-cancer-detection
“How Quantum Computing Can Help Tackle Global Warming.” McKinsey,
May 27, 2022.
https://www.mckinsey.com/capabilities/mckinsey-digital/our-insights/how-quantum-computing-can-help-tackle-global-warming
Gambetta, Jay. “The Hardware and Software for the Era of Quantum
Utility is Here.”
IBM Quantum Research
, December 4, 2023.
https://www.ibm.com/quantum/blog/quantum-roadmap-2033
“Government Bans on Quantum Computer Exports Have No Basis in
New Scientist
, July 10, 2024.
https://www.newscientist.com/article/mg26334993-100-governments-bans-on-quantum-computer-exports-have-no-basis-in-science.
Haeck, Pieter. “Europe is Ring-Fencing the Next Critical Tech:
, February 27, 2024.
https://www.politico.eu/article/how-europe-ring-fencing-quantum-computing-technology-defense
Hamlin, James and Brian Zhou. “Extreme Diamond-Based Quantum
366 (2019): 1312–1313.
https://doi.org/10.1126/science.aaz4982
Harford, James.
Reconsidering Sputnik
. London: Routledge,
Hrynkiv, “Legal and Policy Responses to National Security Measures in
International Economic Law.”
Georgetown Journal of International
54, no 2 (2023).
https://www.law.georgetown.edu/international-law-journal/in-print/volume-54/volume-54-number-2-winter-2023/legal-and-policy-responses-to-national-security-measures-in-international-economic-law
Hrynkiv, Olga and Saskia Lavrijssen. “Not Trading with the Enemy: The
Case of Computer Chips.”
Journal of World Trade
58, no 1 (2024):
https://doi.org/10.54648/trad2024003
IBM Scientists Cool Down the World’s Largest Quantum-Ready Cryogenic
Concept System.”
IBM Quantum Research Blog
https://www.ibm.com/quantum/blog/goldeneye-cryogenic-concept-system
Jarrahi, Mohammad Hossein and Steve Sawyer. “Networks of Innovation:
The Sociotechnical Assemblage of Tabletop Computing.”
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.repolx.2018.100001
Jasanoff, Sheila, and Sang-Hyun Kim (eds).
Dreamscapes of Modernity:
Sociotechnical Imaginaries and the Fabrication of Power
. Chicago: University
of Chicago Press, 2015.
Kim, Youngseok et al. “Evidence for the Utility of Quantum Computing
Before Fault Tolerance.”
618 (2023): 500–505.
https://www.nature.com/articles/s41586-023-06096-3
Krelina, Michal. “Quantum Technology for Military Applications”.
EPJ Quantum Technology
8: art 24 (2021).
https://doi.org/10.1140/epjqt/s40507-021-00113-y
Krige, John and Mario Daniels. “Change and Continuity in US Export
Control Policy.”
Issues in Science and Technology
39, no 2 (2023):
https://issues.org/us-export-control-policy-krige-daniels
Latour, Bruno. “Visualisation and Cognition: Drawing Things
Together.” In
Knowledge and Society Studies in the Sociology of
Culture Past and Present
, edited by Henrika Kuklick (pp. 1–40).
Bingley: JAI Press, 1986.
Leclerc, Nina. “A Quantum Sputnik Moment.”
https://www.justsecurity.org/81539/a-quantum-sputnik-moment
Liao, Sheng-Kai et al. “Satellite-Relayed Intercontinental Quantum
Physical Review Letters
120, no 3 (2018): 030501.
https://doi.org/10.1103/PhysRevLett.120.030501
Matthews, David. “Commissioner Designate Virkkunen Moots EU
Science|Business
, November 14, 2024.
https://sciencebusiness.net/news/quantum-computing/commissioner-designate-virkkunen-moots-eu-quantum-act
Michel, Quentin, Lia Caponetti and Ilaria Anna Colussi.
The European Union
Dual-Use Items Control Regime Comment of the Legislation Article-by-Article
Brussels: European Union, 2014.
Miller, Chris.
Chip War: The Fight for the World’s Most Critical
. New York: Simon & Schuster, 2022.
Noone, Greg. “Are Harvest Now, Decrypt Later Cyberattacks Actually
Happening?”
Tech Monitor
, October 30, 2023.
https://techmonitor.ai/hardware/quantum/harvest-now-decrypt-later-cyberattack-quantum-computer
Paulsen, Mona. “The Past, Present, and Potential of Economic
Yale Journal of International Law
http://dx.doi.org/10.2139/ssrn.4604958
Peng, Danie. “US-returned Chinese Physicist Duan Luming and Team Build
World’s Most Powerful Ion-Based Quantum Computing
China Morning Post
, May 31, 2024.
https://www.scmp.com/news/china/science/article/3264742/us-returned-chinese-physicist-duan-luming-and-team-build-worlds-most-powerful-ion-based-quantum
Pfotenhauer, Sebastian and Sheila Jasanoff. “Panacea or Diagnosis?
Imaginaries of Innovation and the ‘MIT Model’
in Three Political
Social Studies of Science
47, no 6 (2017):
https://www.jstor.org/stable/48568896
Quantum Computers: Computing the Impossible
. YouTube, March 22, 2017.
https://youtu.be/8qcn4edJuag?si=dc6-6FOiV_QYpQd-&t=48
“Quantum Computing: How Can It Serve Your Organisation?” TNO.
https://www.tno.nl/en/digital/digital-innovations/trusted-ict/quantum-computing
“Quantum in the CHIPS and Science Act of 2022.”
quantum|gov
, August 9, 2022.
https://www.quantum.gov/quantum-in-the-chips-and-science-act-of-2022
“Quantum Key Distribution (QKD) and Quantum Cryptography (QC).”
National Security Agency.
https://www.nsa.gov/Cybersecurity/Quantum-Key-Distribution-QKD-and-Quantum-Cryptography-QC.
“Quantum: The Tech Race Europe Can’t Afford to Lose.” BCG,
August 25, 2022.
https://www.bcg.com/press/25august2022-quantum-tech-race-europe-cant-afford-to-lose
Rajput, Trisha. “Restricting International Trade Through Export Control
Laws: National Security in Perspective.” in
Regulation of Risk
edited by Abhinayan Basu Bal, Trisha Rajput, Gabriela Argüello and David
Langlet. Leiden: Brill Nijhoff, 2022.
Shor, Peter. “Shor’s Algorithm: The Algorithm That Changed
Everything.”
40th Anniversary of the Physics of Computation Conference
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=dONacVnW1Ng
Simmons, Dan.
. New York: Bantam, 1995.
Sparkes, Matthew, “UK Ban on Quantum Computer Exports is Pointless, Say
Researchers.”
New Scientist
, June 10, 2024.
https://www.newscientist.com/article/2431853-uk-ban-on-quantum-computer-exports-is-pointless-say-researchers.
Sparkes, Matthew. “Multiple Nations Enact Mysterious Export Controls on
Quantum Computers.”
New Scientist
, July 3, 2024.
https://www.newscientist.com/article/2436023-multiple-nations-enact-mysterious-export-controls-on-quantum-computers
Stamper-Kurn, Dan, et al. “Topical: Quantum Technologies in
Space.” NASA.
https://smd-cms.nasa.gov/wp-content/uploads/2023/05/194_d48f1fb875c016f97021c15addadb1ab_Stamper_KurnDanM.pdf
Stewart, Ian. “The Contribution of Intangible Technology Controls in
Controlling the Spread of Strategic Technologies.”
Journal of Strategic
Technologies
1, no 1 (2015): 48–55.
http://www.str.ulg.ac.be/wp-content/uploads/2016/01/4_The_Contribution_of_Intangible_Technology_Controls_in_Controlling_the_Spread-of-Strategic-Technologies.pdf
Swayne, Matt. “Practical Quantum Computing Five to Ten Years
Quantum Insider
, February 13, 2025.
https://thequantuminsider.com/2025/02/13/practical-quantum-computing-five-to-ten-years-away-google-ceo.
Whang, Cindy. “Undermining the Consensus-Building and List-Based
Standards in Export Controls: What the US Export Controls Act
Means to the
Global Export Control Regime.”
Journal of International Economic
22, no 4 (2019).
“Would You Put Your Cat in a Fridge?”
, April 24,
https://bluefors.com/stories/would-you-put-your-cat-in-a-fridge
Wu, Chien-Huei.
Law and Politics of Export Restrictions
. Cambridge:
Cambridge University Press, 2021.
Zeilinger, Anton.
Dance of the Photons: Einstein, Entanglement and Quantum
Teleportation
. Harmondsworth: Penguin, 2023.
Zhang, Hongyong. “The US–China Trade War: Implications for
Japan’s Global Value Chains.” In
Geopolitics, Supply Chains,
and International Relations in East Asia
, edited by Etol Solingen.
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 2021.
Simmons, Hyperion, 191.
Choi, “Quantum
Supremacy.”
Additions of Entities to the
Entity List, Document no.
89 FR 41886 (Rule
of the Bureau of Industry and
Security, effective 9 May 2024).
Spanish Order ICT/534/2023 of
26 May 2023.
French Order ECOI2401482A
of 2 February 2024
Amendment to the Danish Export
Control Act by Act No. 641(11 June 2024).
UK Export Control (Amendment)
Regulations 2024 (SI 2024 No. 346)
Canadian Order Amending the
Export Control List: SOR/2024-112
Italian Decree of 1 July 2024
establishing the National Control List for dual-use goods and technology not
listed in Annex I to Regulation
(EU) 2021/821
Amendment to the German
Foreign Trade Ordinance,
Federal Law Gazette
2024, No. 243 (22 July
Finnish Act on the Export
Control of Dual-Use Items (500/2024) (16 August 2024)
Amendment to the Norwegian
Export Control Regulations (3 October 2024).
US Bureau of Industry and
Security Rule
2024-19633 (89 FR 72926)
of 6 September 2024
Regulation of the
Netherlands Minister for Foreign Trade and Development Aid of 11 October 2024,
nr. BZ2405833.
South Korean Amendment of 24
February 2023 to the Public Notice of Special Measures on Trade to Undertake
Obligations for International
Peace and Security Maintenance
Furukawa, “Japan
Gambetta, “Hardware
See, for instance, Hrynkiv,
“Not Trading with the Enemy,” 63ff or more popularised accounts in
Miller, Chip Wars, 201,
For instance, voiced by
Google CEO Sundar Pichai and Microsoft founder Bill Gates. Similarly, when
Nvidia CEO Jensen Huang voiced
the ‘20 years’ assessment for the
development of a useful quantum computer, stocks of publicly listed quantum
plummeted: see Swayne, “Practical Quantum Computing” and
Aaronson, “Quantum Stock Crash.” Google and Microsoft
are involved
in full-stack quantum computing development, while Nvidia is involved in cloud
provision for quantum computing services.
Cain, “Computers Cold
War,” 131–147; Wu, Export Restrictions, 172–178; Zhang,
“US–China Trade
War,” 41–59; Hrynkiv, “Not Trading
with the Enemy,” 63ff; Paulsen, “Economic Security,”
Jasanoff, Dreamscapes,
TNO, “Future
Quantum”; McKinsey, “Quantum Computing.”
Conover, “Quantum
Computers.”
Ezratty, Understanding
Quantum, 781ff.
Ezratty, Understanding
Quantum, 686ff.
Dowling, “Quantum
Technology.”
Krelina, “Quantum
Technology.”
Aspect, “Second
Quantum Revolution.”
Aspect, “Second
Quantum Revolution.”
Brooks, “Quantum
Computers.”
Ezratty, Understanding
Quantum, 226.
Ezratty, Understanding
Quantum, 164.
Aaronson, “Quantum
Computing.”
Nature Videos,
“Quantum Computers,” 0:48.
Carballido,
“Compromise-Free Scaling.”
Aaronson, “Quantum
Computing.”
Zeilinger, Dance of
Brooks, “Quantum
Computers.”
Kim, “Evidence for
Utility”; Hamlin, “Extreme Diamond”; Lia,
“Satellite-Relayed.”
Jarrahi, “Networks of
Innovation.”
draws on more extensive supply chain mapping of QT R&D labs conducted as
part of the author’s empirical research within
a PhD project, ‘Legal
Dynamics in the governance of quantum technologies innovation value
chains’ at the University of
Amsterdam (Netherlands). The technical
veracity of the mapping has been externally verified by a quantum technology and
supply chain
specialist based at the Netherlands Organisation for Applied
Scientific Research (TNO), an independent statutory research organisation.
Jasanoff, Dreamscapes, 19.
Jasanoff, Dreamscapes,
In this analysis, ‘QT
as such’ refers to also QT prototypes, proof-of-concepts and
demonstrators.
Additions of Entities to the
Entity List, Document no.
89 FR 41886.
Dual-Use Regulation (EU)
See legislative text of UK,
Canada and US export control rules, notes
(emphasis added).
For example, US export
control rules, note
explained above in Section 2.
For example, US export
control rules, note
For example, US export
control rules, note
Explanation to Regulation of
the Netherlands Minister for Foreign Trade and Development Aid of
11 October 2024, nr. BZ2405833.
Sparkes, “Multiple
Nations Enact Mysterious Export Controls”; “UK Ban on Quantum
Computer Exports.”
Sparkes, “UK Ban on
Quantum Computer Exports.”
US Bureau of Industry and
Security (BIS) Rule
2024-19633 (89 FR 72926)
of 6 September 2024.
US BIS Rule 2024-19633 (89
FE 72926), 72935
US BIS Rule 2024-19633 (89
FE 72926), 72935
US BIS Rule 2024-19633 (89
FE 72926), 72935.
Sub-sections (b), (c) and
(e) in each respective export restrictions discussed.
CCL Index, code 1C005.
Category 6 of the CCL.
CCL Index, code 2B231.
CCL Index, code 3E003.a.
CCL Index, code 6A005.e.2.
Category 6 of the CCL.
Farley, Sandia Report, 3.
For example, UK Amendment SI
2024 No. 346: see entry PL9013 in Schedule 3.
Finnish Act on the Export
Control of Dual-Use Items (500/2024) (16 August 2024)
Blufors Homepage,
https://bluefors.com
; IBM Quantum, “IBM
Scientists”; Blufors, “Cat in Fridge?”
See Alphabetical Index to
controlled items of the US Commerce Control List, code 0B001.d.7.b.
CCL Index, code 1B231.b.1.
CCL Index, code
3A001.b.1.a.4.
Peng, “US-returned
Stewart, “Contribution
of Intangible.”
Daniels, Krige, Knowledge
Regulation, 11–13.
Daniels, Krige, Knowledge
Regulation, 3.
“Hydrocarbon Research
Inc., et al: Consent Denial and Probation Order,” 12487.
Article 2 (2) Dual-Use
Regulation (emphasis added).
Article 7 Dual-Use
Regulation.
Article 1 Dual-Use
Regulation.
Michel, “European
Union Dual-Use,” 21–22.
See US Bureau of Industry
and Security Rule
2024-19633 (89 FR 72926)
of 6 September 2024, 72929.
European Parliamentary
Research Service, “Key Enabling Technologies.”
EIC, “Statement on
Technological Sovereignty,” 6.
Krige, “Change and
Continuity.”
BCQ, “Quantum: Tech
Quantum Flagship, “New
“Commissioner Designate Virkkunen.”
quantum|gov,
Ezratty, Understanding
Quantum, 225
TNO, “Quantum
Computing.”
OQI, “Accelerating
Applications.”
See discussions by
international trade scholars – for example, Rajput, “Restricting
International Trade,” 603;
Whang, “Undermining the Consensus,”
Export Restrictions,
172–78; Hrynkiv, “Legal and
Policy,” 169; Paulsen, “Economic Security,” 10–11.
Congressional Research
Service, “Defense Primer”; Krelina, “Quantum
Technology,” 11, 15, 37.
Krelina, “Quantum
Technology.”
National Security Agency,
“Quantum Key Distribution.”
See, for instance, the
export control classification code of ‘4A906 Quantum computers and related
‘‘electronic
assemblies’’ and
‘‘components’’ therefor.’ The first 4 of the code
indicates Category 4.
Brooks, “Quantum
Computers.”
Noone, “Are Harvest
Now, Decrypt Later Cyberattacks.”
Such as in Annex I, EU
Dual-Use Regulation, Dual-Use List, Wassenaar Arrangement (5.A.2.c) US CCL
(5A002.c), Export control lists
of Japan, South Korea and Australia.
Aaronson, “Quantum
Computing.”
Shor, “Shor’s
Algorithm,” 2:28.
Jasanoff, Dreamscapes, 17
citing Latour, “Drawing Things Together,” 30.
Quantum Flagship’s
Strategic Research Agenda aims to build a FTQC by 2027–2030;
France’s national QC Programme,
“PROQCIMA,” aims to build two
FTQC prototypes by 2032 and 2035; IBM’s Quantum Development &
Innovation Roadmap
aims to build a FTQC by 2029.
Leclerc, “Quantum
Sputnik Moment”; Stamper-Kurn et al, “Topical: Quantum
Technologies.”
Harford, Reconsidering
Sputnik, 22ff.
Pfotenhauer, Jasanoff,
“Panacea or Diagnosis?” 783, 784.
Haeck, “Europe is
Ring-fencing.”
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (283 KB)
PDF format (508 KB)
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter