URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/journals/UTSLRS/2019/4.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 15:51:02
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Goldblatt, Beth --- "Social and economic rights to challenge violence against women - examining and extending strategies" [2019] UTSLRS 4; (2019) 35(2) South African Journal on Human Rights 169
Violence against women in South Africa: constitutional
responses and opportunities
Beth Goldblatt
slightly amended version of this chapter appears in Dixon, R. & Roux, T.
Constitutional Triumphs, Constitutional Disappointments A Critical
Assessment of the 1996 South African Constitution's Local and International
, (2018) Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, UK, pp.
I Introduction
Violence against women, present in
every society in the world, is deeply embedded in South Africa’s past and
is a central feature
of the post-democratic society. The South African
Constitution
is path-breaking in acknowledging this reality by providing a right
to be free from violence in public and private realms. Over the
past two decades
since democracy, advocacy groups have been successful in lobbying and working
with government to secure new legislation
in the areas of domestic violence and
rape. Implementation of these laws has, however, been mixed or poor and recourse
is limited for many, if not most, victims of this violence. A number
of significant decisions have emerged from the Constitutional
Court in relation
to these laws and regarding aspects of the common law relevant to violence
against women. This chapter surveys
the jurisprudence on violence against women
in assessing the Court’s record in this area. While finding these
decisions valuable
in advancing the constitutional framework, the chapter
suggests that fuller interpretation of the
Constitution
and more creative
litigation and jurisprudence is necessary in contributing to the removal of the
scourge of violence against South
Africa’s women.
Violence against
women in South Africa is embedded in a history of brutality that has been
central to the making of the
Many of the acts of
colonial dispossession, invasion, war, slavery and apartheid, as well as
resistance to end this domination, have
entailed violence to the bodies of
While most of the historical
articulations of the wars against black South Africans are behind us, the war
against women and girls
lives on in the everyday occurrence of domestic
violence, femicide, rape, sexual abuse, harassment and harmful cultural
(abduction of girls for
and attacks on people
labelled witches.
Reported rape
numbers in South Africa were the highest in the world in
Recent figures showed 43,195
cases of rape for the year 2014/15 although service providers estimate that as
little as one in 13 rapes
Rape takes a particularly
brutal form in South Africa with a high rate of rape homicide and multiple
perpetrator rape being very
In a recent Constitutional Court decision Khampepe J noted
Rape is perhaps the most horrific and dehumanising violation that a person
can live through and is a crime that not only violates
the mind and body of a
complainant, but also one that vexes the soul. This crime is an inescapable and
seemingly ever-present reality
and scourge on the nation and the collective
conscience of the people of South Africa.
The levels of female homicide as a
whole are extremely high and domestic violence, though not adequately captured
in official statistics,
South Africa has the
dubious honour of being known as the ‘rape capital of the world’; as
having a deputy president (now
president) stand trial for rape of the daughter
of his friend;
sporting hero Oscar Pistorius convicted of murdering his partner; and as the
place where so called ‘corrective rape’
of lesbians
Many other high-profile
cases are reported of horrific abuse of women and girls. While violence against
women is a global problem
it has a local character in South Africa that is
shaped by the country’s history and closely connected to the many social,
economic and political challenges facing it
Undoubtedly,
legacies of structural violence live on for black and poor South Africans,
regardless of gender, working on the mines,
farms and factories and for those
living in impoverished rural areas or urban settlements and slums, often
separated from families
and communities. Lack of health services, adequate
nutrition and reliance on dangerous transport continue to determine the length
of a person’s life based on their race and class. Service delivery
protests, workplace violence starkly displayed in the Marikana
xenophobic bloodshed, and everyday brutal crime shape the South African reality.
While this violent backdrop gives context
to, and perhaps partly explains, the
levels of violence against women
it does not diminish the enormity of this issue – it is neither dramatic
nor imprecise to characterize this violence as a war
It is clear that
while violence against women is prevalent across social classes, the combination
of poverty shaped by race has a
fundamental impact on women’s
vulnerability to violence (and related to this, also to HIV infection). Lack of
access to income
and employment deepens women’s dependency on men and
limits their capacity to leave violent partners. Limited access to housing
social security also make escape impossible for many. Inadequate health care and
social services mean that responses to violence
often fall short of what is
needed. Poor basic services such as transport, sanitation, water and electricity
expose women to risks
of attack in urban and rural environments. Similarly,
girls face daily dangers in walking to school, at school where toilets may
some distance from classrooms or absent entirely, and where predatory teachers
often behave with impunity. Certain groups facing
additional challenges, such as
women with disabilities, lesbians, elderly women, and women refugees and
migrants, have greater exposure
to abuse because of their intersectional
disadvantage.
challenging context raises questions about how the country should respond with
the necessary urgency in marshalling the resources
to end this war. It also
raises questions about the role of the
Constitution
in informing the boundaries
and shape of the law as part of such a response. While some feminist scholars
are sceptical about rights
and laws in tackling violence against women, others
suggest that law should be one, albeit limited, part of the approach to this
challenging issue.
Law is seen
by the latter as a contested arena that must be engaged with in the context of
the broader project of ending sexual oppression
and gendered power imbalances.
Women’s groups were central to efforts to include strong gender equality
rights and protections
against violence in the South African
Constitution
text has since been used to inform legislative development of rape and domestic
violence laws and to defend and improve such
laws through the courts. The
Constitutional Court has been a focus of litigation on issues of violence
against women and has produced
sensitive and progressive jurisprudence in this
This chapter will briefly discuss the history and nature of the
constitutional text as it pertains to violence against women (Part
looking, also briefly, at the key legislative developments in the areas of
domestic violence and rape (Part III) over
the past 20 years. Thereafter, it
will survey the decisions of the Constitutional Court that dealt with this
legislation as well
as a series of decisions that dealt with the common law in
cases where women were victims of male violence (Part IV). It will evaluate
these decisions in terms of criteria set out in
The chapter will argue
(Part V) that a fuller interpretation of the
Constitution
and more creative
litigation and jurisprudence is necessary in addressing violence against women,
in particular through the use of
social and economic rights.
chapter is a domestic rather than comparative evaluation of the South African
constitutional project that assesses the Court’s
performance within South
Africa’s specific historical and current context, and considers the
unrealized opportunities that
the constitutional text presents for those working
to end violence against women. The chapter, nevertheless, provides insight for
comparative scholars considering the value of different constitutional
articulations of human rights and how these support (or fail
to support) efforts
to address violence against women. It also provides a view of the
jurisprudential opportunities and pitfalls
in this area that may be applicable
elsewhere. Gender equality, and central to this, the right of women to live
lives free of violence,
is a precondition for full democratic
participation
and is a universal
The South African
experience contributes to a wider understanding of the possibilities and limits
of constitutions in challenging
the ubiquity of violence against women.
II The Constitutional text
The involvement of women as a
lobby group in shaping the content of South Africa’s new
Constitution
focused on ensuring that gender equality was strongly
There was no specific
acknowledgement of rights for women facing violence in and outside of the home
in the Interim Constitution
1993. However, with input from the women’s
feminist parliamentarians
and technical experts involved in the drafting of the Final Constitution 1996
succeeded in including the
words ‘to be free from all forms of violence
from either public or private
in s. 12 of the
Bill of Rights which deals with freedom and security of the person as well as
significant reproductive and sexual
rights within the same section. These
notable additions aligned with and were informed by international developments
of the same
period. In 1994, the United Nations General Assembly adopted the
Declaration on the Elimination of Violence Against
and in the same year the
Cairo Programme of Action articulated women’s reproductive rights at the
International Conference
on Population and
Development.
Both of these
statements on women’s rights reflected a shift towards recognising
women’s agency over their bodies and
required the breaking down of some of
the harmful public/private divisions in law that had rendered violence against
women invisible.
international law has been specifically referenced by the Constitutional Court
in some of the key decisions on violence against
The inclusion of
freedom and security and bodily integrity rights was part of a broader
constitutional commitment to
as evidenced by the
strong equality right which includes sex, gender, pregnancy and marital status
as grounds of unfair
discrimination.
anti-discrimination legislation, mandated by the Constitutional equality right,
prohibits unfair discrimination based on gender
which includes gender-based
violence and female genital
mutilation.
The Act also
prohibits harassment based on sex and
and gender-related hate
Its preamble makes
reference to patriarchy, alongside colonialism and apartheid, as systems that
generated inequality and caused
pain and suffering to the majority of South
The Constitution also
established a Commission for Gender Equality as an independent body to promote
and protect gender equality.
Constitution contains a provision regarding the role of the police service in
protecting the
III Legislative
developments
It was this broad and hard-won constitutional framework
that informed the development of new post-apartheid laws on violence against
women. In the first decade of democracy, huge effort was expended in creating
strong legislative measures to address and respond
to violence against women.
This resulted in the enactment of the Domestic Violence
to allow courts to provide
protection orders and the Sexual Offences Act which expands the definitions of
rape and other sexual offences.
Both pieces of legislation were informed by the urgent need to address violence
against women and by the constitutional promise of
freedom and security.
The Domestic Violence Act replaced the Prevention of Family Violence
which was hurried through in
the last days of the Apartheid Government. The new Act was framed in terms of
South Africa’s constitutional
commitments to freedom and security of the
person and equality and its international obligations to end violence against
children. The Act contains a broad and progressive definition of
domestic violence that includes economic abuse, damage to property
controlling or abusive behaviour alongside more traditionally recognised forms
such as physical abuse and sexual
harassment.
Complainants can
obtain interim and final protection orders from courts that can include a wide
range of conditions limiting the
respondent’s access to the home or
workplace of the complainant and requiring the payment of rent and emergency
The protection order is
accompanied by a warrant of arrest that can be used if the order is breached and
criminal sanctions can be
imposed on contravention of an
Despite its positive
features, the
Domestic Violence Act
has been criticised for its piecemeal
approach (it neglects issues of child custody and matrimonial property) as well
as for focusing
on policing and the courts without also legislating in areas
such as health care, housing and income
Offences Act was introduced after a lengthy consideration by the South African
Law Reform Commission and an extended consultation
process that took a decade to
produce changes to the law. The Act aimed to bring the out-dated definition of
rape and related offences
in line with the rights in the Constitution. This led
to changes in the definition that recognised rape could involve penetration
the vagina, anus or mouth of the victim with any body part or
It also introduced
gender neutrality into the definition of rape by recognising that anyone, men
included, could be a victim of the
crime. The Act expanded on sexual crimes
against children and people with mental disabilities and introduced laws related
to trafficking.
The Act also provided some rights to victims for post exposure
prophylaxis to avoid HIV infection and introduced a sexual offences
While many feminists were actively involved in lobbying for the new legislation,
some felt despondent about the eventual
content of the law. Artz and Smythe,
commenting shortly before the Sexual Offences Bill was enacted, argued that the
focus on the
constitutional right to equality rather than the right to be free
from all forms of violence led to law with a ‘peculiarly
liberal feminist
particularly evident in the gender neutral definition of rape, taken together
with the lack of measures to protect victims,
that has ‘muted the
distinctly gendered experience of sexual
They suggested
that the removal of gendered language has ‘edited out the structural
reality of gender-based violence’
and the uneven gender power relations
between men and women.
Smythe were also critical of the failure to remove ‘consent’ from
the definition of rape. They were particularly
concerned with the relegation of
measures to protect victims in the criminal justice system to the policy
framework of government
rather than being located within the Act, as originally
intended. Their conclusion was that the reform of rape law has been somewhat
symbolic but has had some value in terms of public education. However, huge
challenges remain to shift practices within the justice
system and the
jurisprudence and to improve the experiences of victims.
Both Acts have
been accompanied by various policy plans by government to give effect to these
laws and develop wider responses. Dishearteningly,
many commentators have
bemoaned the poor implementation of these laws and plans in the period since
their enactment. Dee Smythe has
noted in relation to rape laws and policies
South Africa is paper rich when it comes to dealing with sexual violence. It
has ratified the leading international and regional human
rights treaties and
instruments seeking to address these problems, and enshrined a constitutional
protection against privately perpetrated
violence, applied and enforced through
decisions of our highest courts. At a policy level, the South African government
and the police
service have identified violence against women as a critical
policing priority and enacted institutional safeguards against inappropriate
responses to rape complainants through National Instructions and Standing
Orders. The problem is not with the law in the books but
with criminal justice
practice. It is in the practical realities of everyday policing and in the
attendant discretionary choices,
that police responses to rape crumble,
reinforcing the pretext that rape is, essentially, a crime that is impervious to
There is less despondency about the implementation of the
Domestic Violence Act but concerns remain about the training of government
officials, access to justice for poor women as well as the lack of options for
women fleeing violence.
two laws have been the subject of litigation in the Constitutional Court, in
some cases leading to their improvement and in
others defending their
provisions. The next Part examines this jurisprudence as well as three decisions
relating to the interpretation
of the common law where the state failed to
protect women from violent assault and rape.
IV Constitutional court
jurisprudence
This Part evaluates the jurisprudence of the
Constitutional Court over the past 20 years on the subject of violence against
While the Supreme Court
of Appeal and the provincial High Courts have handed down some very important
constitutional judgments on
this subject, mostly dealing with criminal law and
procedure, this broader jurisprudence will not be canvassed
The Constitutional Court
decisions are evaluated in terms of a number of criteria that, as discussed in
the introductory chapter
to this collection, combine both internal and external
measures of success. This evaluation considers, first, whether the jurisprudence
pursues the transformatory mandate inherent in the Constitution in ensuring laws
aimed at achieving far-reaching social change including
substantive gender
Second, and related to
this, whether the Court’s decisions infuse the interpretation of the law
and the rights in the Bill
of Rights of the Constitution with the democratic
values underlying the Constitution of dignity, equality and
Third, whether they
effectively engage with and provide guidance on the legal responses to violence
against women and advance the
law in this area. Fourth, whether they provide a
consistent, coherent and convincing jurisprudence on violence against women that
fairly balances sometimes competing constitutional rights. These are narrow
criteria, judged qualitatively, that do not attempt to
evaluate the possible
impact that the Constitution or the Court has had on governmental or public
responses towards violence against
women, let alone on the reduction of this
examining the Court’s decisions it is worth noting the factual issues in
nine of the leading judgments lest the real
people involved become lost in the
legal discussion.
The following
is a brief description, in chronological order, of the types of violence that
led to the judgments under discussion.
The complainant in
case alleged that her husband, an army officer, assaulted
her and threatened to kill her following the granting of an interdict where
had been ordered not to assault her and their child or prevent them from leaving
or entering their joint home.
was brutally assaulted by Francois Coetzee who had
previously been convicted of indecent assault of one woman, and attempted rape
of a 17-year-old girl. He attacked Carmichele with a pick handle and stabbed her
with a knife after breaking into the house where
she was staying. In
case, the applicant was arrested for breaching a domestic
violence order in which he had been prohibited from ‘threatening,
assaulting, harassing, intimidating, stalking or abusing’ his estranged
wife and their children. In
case a 20-year-old woman was
stranded without transport and was offered a lift by three policemen who then
assaulted and took turns
raping her.
was accused of anal
penetration of a nine-year-old girl. In
DPP v Minister for Justice and
Constitutional Development and others
, Phaswane was convicted of the rape of
a thirteen-year-old girl who was the sister of his cohabiting partner. In the
same case, Mokoena
was convicted of the rape of an eleven-year-old girl.
case concerned a woman who claimed she was repeatedly
raped over two years from the age of thirteen by a much older family friend.
case, a thirteen-year-old girl was given a lift home by a
policeman who assaulted and raped her. In the case of
fourteen-year-old boy was convicted of the rape of a seven-year-old boy and two
six-year-old boys. He was also convicted of assault
for stabbing a
twelve-year-old girl.
The facts in the cases that have reached the
Constitutional Court reflect the reality of vicious crimes against women, girls
Most of the victims were female and many were children. Aside from
age, other indicators of vulnerability include the lack of access
to transport,
women’s fear for their safety on the streets, and poverty that forced a
young girl and woman to seek lifts from
policemen. A number of the victims were
women and children who were unable to find safety from violence in their own
the perpetrators were male.
The Constitutional
Court’s ten decisions on violence against women broadly concern three
areas: sexual offences and how the
criminal law and procedure treat victims and
perpetrators of sexual crimes; the constitutionality of domestic violence
legislation;
and the boundaries of civil liability of the state where it fails
to protect victims from physical and sexual harm by employees and
(a) Sexual offences
The sexual offences judgments deal with
one decision that arose before the coming into force of the Sexual Offences Act
the common law definition of rape; a decision concerning the time
delay in the prosecution of child abuse; and three decisions arising
reforms to the law after 2007.
case concerned the
common law definition of rape which excluded anal penetration and was gender
specific. The case reached the Court
shortly before the long awaited Sexual
Offences Act created a statutory crime of rape ‘applicable to all forms of
sexual penetration
without consent, irrespective of
important judgment in setting out the patriarchal history of rape (in both its
colonial and customary origins) that saw
the crime in terms of the interests of
male protectors of women rather than in terms of the rights of the women
themselves; and understanding
this history in terms of male dominance and power,
objectification of women, and gender
stereotyping.
The judgment noted
that the new Constitution provides a different foundation for the law of rape
based on the democratic values of
the Constitution of human dignity, equality
and freedom.
In particular, the
rights to freedom from violence, equality and dignity are implicated in relation
to this crime.
acknowledged the role of women’s activism in challenging patriarchal
notions of rape and in ensuring the wide acceptance
that ‘sexual violence
and rape not only offends the privacy and dignity of women but also reflects the
unequal power relations
between men and women in
This led the
Court to extend the definition so as to ‘promote the spirit, purport and
objects of the Bill of
‘principles, ideals and values underlying the
Constitution’.
majority decision of Nkabinde J (followed by eight judges) did, however, refuse
to extend the definition of rape to non-consensual
intercourse between men
because in terms of the facts of the case this matter was not before the Court.
It hinted, however, that
law reform was needed in this
This was disputed by
Langa CJ in a minority decision (Sachs J concurring) where he found that the
absence of men in the definition
of the crime failed to give ‘effect to
the constitutional values of dignity, equality and freedom: dignity through
recognition
of a violation; equality through equal recognition of that
violation; and freedom as rape negates not only dignity, but bodily
While Nkabinde
J highlighted the particular vulnerability of women and girls to
Langa CJ focused on the
protection of all people, regardless of
He stressed that this
recognition would not detract from the understanding that women are the
‘primary target of rape’
and that ‘male domination of women is
an underlying cause of
He went further to
argue that limiting rape as a crime against women might entrench stereotypes of
women as vulnerable, hence reinforcing
their subordinate
He argued that male
rape is as much about ‘gender-supremacy’ as female rape and hence,
from an equality perspective,
requires equal
protection.
Langa CJ justified
the development of the common law beyond the facts presented in the case on the
basis that curing the gender defect
in the law was a necessary part of the
development of the crime of rape based on the underlying constitutional
principles, as necessitated
by the case before the
decision is more deeply aligned with a substantive understanding of gender
inequality since it recognises the concurrence
of male and female gender-based
harm while acknowledging the patriarchal underpinnings of and manifestation of
the crime. Ultimately,
it offers more transformatory possibilities than the
minority decision in requiring gender equality to include more far-reaching
systemic cultural, social and psychological change if sexual violence is to be
Commenting on this
decision, Bonthuys argued that the majority incorrectly focussed on ‘the
sex of the victims and perpetrators,
rather than on a proper understanding of
She suggested
that the majority’s approach in
reflected a similarly
conservative approach followed by the Court in the
case where it
failed to acknowledge that the criminalization of the sale of sex but not its
purchase was unfair gender
discrimination.
appeared to be favouring a safe and narrow approach to issues of sexuality where
‘bad’ women and male rape
victims do not fit the image of the victim
requiring protection.
CJ judgment, in succinctly capturing the implications of rape as a violation of
the core values of the Constitution, led
to a more nuanced and progressive
re-interpretation of the common law.
Constitutional Court balanced the accused’s right to a fair trial against
the interests of a complainant alleging
child sexual abuse and society’s
need for justice. The High Court had permanently stayed a private prosecution by
who alleged she had been raped as a child. It found that she had
waited an unreasonable length of time (39 years) which prejudiced
the right to a
fair trial of the man she accused. The Constitutional Court granted Mrs
Bothma’s appeal against the High Court
decision on the basis that victims
of child sexual abuse can take many years to acknowledge, report, and pursue
complaints. The Court
referred to Nkabinde’s strong statements on the
crime of rape in the
decision and added the context of unequal
power arising from age differences that impact on the silencing of children who
sexually abused.
J found that:
Without pronouncing on the veracity of her charges, it should be noted that
there also exist strong public policy reasons for allowing
the nature of the
crime to weigh heavily in favour of allowing these charges to be aired in court.
Adults who take advantage of their
positions of authority over children to
commit sexual depredations against them, should not be permitted to reinforce
their sense
of entitlement by overlaying it with a sense of impunity. On the
contrary, the knowledge that one day the secret will out, acts as
deterrent against sexual abuse of other similarly vulnerable children.
decision is a further demonstration of the Court’s contextual
understanding and firm stance on sexual violence.
The following cases
came to the Court after the enactment of the Sexual Offences Act in 2007. This
Teddy Bear Clinic
case was an attempt to correct a defect in the new Act
that was overly broad in restricting consensual sexual activity between
adolescents
leading to inappropriate and harmful criminalization of children. It
was brought by not-for-profit organisations working with victims
of child abuse.
The applicants argued that the Act violated the rights of children to dignity,
not in their best
They argued that the
provisions of the Act would unnecessarily expose children to the criminal
justice system and would constrain
‘healthy attitudes to sexual
behaviour’.
The position
taken by the applicants was supported by two amici curiae representing
women’s interests who argued that girls
would be disproportionately
affected by the provisions and that the provisions resulted in indirect
discrimination based on sex.
Khampepe J, in a unanimous decision, found that the provisions impaired the
dignity of adolescents by leading to stigma and shame
with potentially traumatic
and harmful consequences.
Dignity was closely linked to privacy and was also negatively impacted by the
provisions.
The provisions were
not in the best interests of children who should not be held criminally
responsible for consensual sexual behaviour.
Criminalization would drive
behaviours underground and prevent children from having open discussions with
The Court thus found
the provisions to be invalid to the extent of their inconsistency but suspended
this declaration for 18 months
to allow Parliament to rework the statute. During
this period of suspension, the Court ordered a moratorium on investigations,
and prosecutions of adolescents and to expunge any convictions or
sentences under the Act and remove these from the sexual offences
register. The
Court refused to consider the additional contention of the applicants regarding
the undesirable absence of a ‘close
in age’ defence for 16 and 17
year olds who engage in sexual conduct with adolescents.
The decision,
while not directly following an instance of violence against women, was
important in addressing a problem with the newly
Sexual Offences
. The Act had intruded too far into the realm of consensual sex in
attempting to protect children from violence by criminalizing normal
activity between adolescents. The judgment, in going against this somewhat
conservative sentiment, was more realistic and
enlightened with regard to sexual
behaviour of adolescents. While it hinted that sex education was more
appropriate than
criminalization,
it was careful
not to prescribe any particular policy response to the
The judgement is
disappointing in failing to engage with the value of freedom or the right to
freedom and security of the person.
While it examined issues of privacy and
dignity in relation to children with some sensitivity, it would have been
beneficial if it
had given greater consideration to the positive dimensions of
the rights to bodily integrity and freedom and security of the person
with the Constitutional values.
As with the
Teddy Bear Clinic
’s case related to the rights of children, in this case
those of child offenders. Here, there was mandatory inclusion of children
convicted of sex offences against children or persons with a mental disability
on the National Register for Sex
The inclusion on the
Register meant that listed people were precluded from working with, supervising
or assuming caring responsibilities
for children. The Constitutional Court found
that the legislation resulted in serious violations of the best interests of
In weighing up whether limitations of the rights of these children
were justified, the Court acknowledged the competing rights of
child offenders
and other vulnerable groups to be safe from abuse. The Court stressed
Sexual violence threatens a victim’s rights to freedom and security of
the person, privacy and dignity in a profound way. Sexual
offences have effects
that ripple far beyond the horrific immediacy and physicality of the crime. Our
success or failure as a community
to prevent and protect against sexual violence
has bearing on us all, collectively and individually. (footnotes omitted)
Nevertheless, the Court decided that the limitation of the rights of
child offenders was not justified as there were less restrictive
achieve the purpose of the legislation. However, the Court was unable to craft
an order that would remedy the situation
without a broader re-examination of the
Act as a whole. It therefore declared the section invalid but suspended the
declaration of
invalidity for 15 months to enable the legislature to remedy the
defect. The Court was mindful of the fact that the Act was already
reconsidered following the
Teddy Bear Clinic
case. It also ordered, as an
interim measure, that the government provide details of children listed in the
Register to the Court
to make available to organisations assisting offenders.
The Court demonstrated flexibility and the capacity to provide creative
in its order in this case, whilst avoiding stepping on the toes of the
legislature.
In 2015 Parliament made the necessary amendments to the
Sexual Offences Act
in response to both the
Teddy Bear Clinic
The case of
v Minister of Justice
involved a somewhat more hands-on response by the
Constitutional Court. The case involved statutory provisions dealing with the
of child complainants in sexual offences cases. The Court refused to
set aside the impugned provisions but acknowledged concerns
administration of justice in regard to child complainants in sexual offences
cases (as supported by evidence from the amici
in the matter). One of the
concerns was the lack of appointment of intermediaries for child complainants.
Another was the lack of
specialist sexual offences courts and officers to
prepare child witnesses. Only a small number of regional courts had facilities
to permit the use of intermediaries and even in those courts equipment was often
not working. Intermediaries were poorly trained
and unable to perform their
functions adequately. Similarly, interpreters or prosecutors, used because they
were easier to obtain
than intermediaries, were not equipped to deal with child
witnesses. Very few prosecutors had received appropriate training for these
found this state of affairs to be inconsistent with
the statutory promise of
intermediaries or the constitutional promise of the centrality of the
child’s best interest.
Court pointed to the vulnerability of child sexual offences complainants who are
not parties to criminal proceedings but who
do have constitutional rights that
must be protected. The Court stressed, in relation to poor implementation of the
new laws, that:
Compliance with the Constitution requires not only that laws be enacted to
give effect to the rights in the Constitution, but also
requires that these laws
be implemented. Failure to implement laws that protect constitutional rights is
a violation of the Constitution.
The Court also noted that the relevant
subsections of the Criminal Procedure Act envisaged that the state would
‘commit the
necessary resources’ to achieve the objectives of the
Act and the Constitution. In a supervisory order, the Court called for
information as a first step in the supervisory process, requiring the Department
of Justice to list, within 90 days, the number of
intermediaries and facilities
(CCTV, separate rooms for testimony, one-way mirrors) available and needed; and
the steps being taken
to meet these needs. The Court gave the DPP and the amici
the opportunity to comment on the information provided by the Minister.
open the possibility that further directions might be needed to ensure
supervision of its orders.
In following this decision, the Department of
Justice provided the information as ordered. The Court then directed the
to provide a further report in response to the comments on their
first report by the DPP and some of the amici. The second report
was required to
provide information on the huge shortage of intermediaries and the many
postponements in child rape cases resulting
from this; whether the Department
was considering increasing the rate of pay for intermediaries to ‘an
appropriate professional’
level; the extent of the problem of
malfunctioning equipment and what steps were being taken to address this
quickly. The Department
provided this report and made further information
available in 2012.
report by the Centre for Child Law, one of the amici in the
examined the extent to which the supervisory order was followed by the
Department of Justice five years later and whether the
situation had
The report found that
while there had been a quantitative improvement in the provision of services
this was not adequately or consistently
documented so it was hard to evaluate
this provision based on available evidence. It called for better and clearer
data collection.
From a qualitative perspective the report found some positive
examples of good practice but a lack of consistency and variations
available resources. It called for a ‘set of norms and standards
applicable to the provision of acceptable court services
for child victims and
witnesses’.
In relation
specifically to the provision of intermediaries, the report found greater use
and availability of these service providers,
but it recommended the need to
revise salaries and move away from contract appointments to address the shortage
of intermediaries.
decision is commendable in taking a firm stand on lack of implementation of
statutory provisions protecting sexual offence complainants.
The Court’s
use of its supervisory jurisdiction was necessary and important in a context
where good legal frameworks were failing
through poor administration. However,
it appears that despite the Court’s role implementation remains
inadequate. This raises
two possibilities: first, that the Court may have needed
to pursue its remedies more expansively; and second, that lack of resources
state capacity may remain challenges that cannot be immediately or easily
addressed. The latter point suggests the unwelcome
possibility that despite a
responsive Constitutional Court, certain problems may be immune to judicial
intervention.
Overall, the five sexual offences cases decided by the
Court led to improved substantive and procedural law and, to some extent, to
better administration of justice.
(b) Domestic violence
In two cases concerning domestic
violence, one brought under the old legislation and the other under the newer
Domestic Violence Act,
the Court was strong in its defence of laws under attack
from men named in court orders.
The case of
concerned the predecessor to the Domestic Violence Act 1998, the Prevention of
Family Violence Act 1993. It related to whether a
provision requiring a person
charged with breaching a family violence interdict to prove that they were not
guilty violated their
right to be presumed innocent. Sachs J, in a unanimous
judgment, found that the provision did not introduce a reverse onus and did
violate the rights of the person charged with breaching an interdict. The
decision is significant in presenting a sophisticated
argument, informed by
feminist theory, for viewing domestic violence laws as different from other
criminal law in the balancing of
the rights of women to be safe from domestic
violence against the rights of men accused of such crimes. In interpreting the
right to be ‘free from all forms of violence from either public or
private sources’, Sachs J noted
The specific inclusion of private sources emphasises that serious threats to
security of the person arise from private sources. Read
with section 7(2),
section 12(1) has to be understood as obliging the state directly to protect the
right of everyone to be free
from private or domestic violence. Indeed, the
state is under a series of constitutional mandates which include the obligation
deal with domestic violence: to protect both the rights of everyone to enjoy
freedom and security of the person and to bodily and
psychological integrity,
and the right to have their dignity respected and protected, as well as the
defensive rights of everyone
not to be subjected to torture in any way and not
to be treated or punished in a cruel, inhuman or degrading way. (footnotes
The right to be free from violence has thus been interpreted by the Court
as placing a positive obligation on the state to protect
women from domestic
The right is read
together with s. 7(2) of the Constitution which requires the state to
‘respect, protect, promote and fulfil
the rights in the Bill of
Rights’. Sachs J alluded to the distinction in the wording of s. 12 where
the overall rights to freedom
and security of the person (s. 12(1)) and to
bodily and psychological integrity (s. 12(2)) are seen as essential features of
to which everyone is entitled to receive protection. Most of the
sub-sections of ss. 12(1) and (2) contain the types of harms that
people should
not be subjected to – what Sachs J calls ‘defensive rights’.
Thus, people must expect the state
to defend them against such harms while
protecting their freedom, security and integrity.
Interestingly, Sachs J
added the issue of dignity here to his discussion of the right. It is unclear
whether he was referring to dignity
as one of the three central values of the
Bill of Rights set out in s. 7(1) of the Constitution or dignity as a right
articulated
in s. 10, or both. It seems curious to single out the value of
dignity from the list of dignity, equality and freedom when freedom
obviously central to the right in s. 12. Sachs J did, however, go on to consider
equality when he argued that domestic violence
‘compels constitutional
concern’ because it is ‘gender-specific’ and a product of a
patriarchal society.
noted, meant that ‘the non-sexist society promised in the foundational
clauses of the Constitution, and the right
to equality and non-discrimination
guaranteed by section 9, are undermined when spouse-batterers enjoy
J came to the issue of freedom when considering what autonomy means for women
facing domestic violence. Drawing on feminist
legal theory he noted that both
autonomy and privacy have been used to shield men and prevent intervention to
protect women in the
protection laws which are aimed at addressing the complexities of intimate
partner abuse without immediate recourse to the criminal law. Sachs J pointed to
the laudable purpose of protection legislation which
‘at its most
optimistic ... seeks preventive rather than retributive justice, undertaken with
a view ultimately to promoting
restorative
The judgment
has been rightfully lauded for its sensitive but firm elaboration of
women’s rights to be protected from domestic
violence by the
case was brought in terms of
the newer Domestic Violence Act of 1998. It concerned a similar issue of the
constitutionality of the
provision of the Act that allowed a Court, when issuing
a protection order, to authorize a warrant of arrest that would be suspended
unless there was a breach of the protection
The Court stated
The high incidence of domestic violence in our society is utterly
unacceptable. It causes severe psychological and social damage.
clearly a need for an adequate legal response to it. Whereas women, men and
children can be victims of domestic violence,
the gendered nature and effects of
violence and abuse as it mostly occurs in the family, and the unequal power
relations implicit
therein, are obvious. As disempowered and vulnerable members
of our society, women and children are most often the victims of domestic
The Court stressed that domestic violence ‘brutally
offends the values and rights’ of the
Constitution.
Because of the
‘complex public ... (and private) character’ of domestic violence,
measures were needed that differed
from the general criminal
The Court examined the
workings of the legislation and Omar’s arguments that his rights of access
to court and to a fair trial
and against arbitrary arrest were affected
negatively. It found that none of these rights were compromised by the scheme of
and, as with
case, there was no issue of a reverse
Since the Court found
that none of the rights of a respondent in a domestic violence matter were
infringed by the Act, it did not
need to undertake any kind of balancing
exercise. The
case did not significantly deepen the interpretation
of the Constitutional framework on domestic violence as developed in
. It did, however, confirm the value and integrity of the Domestic
Violence Act as a necessary and appropriate means of protecting
children (primarily) from harm in the home.
Both decisions use the
Constitution to defend women’s rights to freedom and security and affirm
the state’s obligations
to protect them. They do not, of course, consider
how the Constitution might oblige the state to take measures to prevent violence
against women from arising in the first place or to protect women by ensuring
that they have access to the resources needed to avoid
the violence that emerges
in situations where poverty and disadvantage leave them defenceless.
(c) State liability under the common law
While the above cases
deal with the state’s obligations to protect women from violence in the
of decisions regarding the state’s
obligations to protect women from violent men outside of the home under the
common law.
The three cases of
(2012) concern the way in which the Constitution informs the
interpretation and development of the common law in situations where
fails to protect people from criminal acts. In all three cases, the criminal
acts concerned violent attacks on women and
girls. These cases have proved
highly significant, not just to the law of delict, but more generally to the
understanding of the
role of the Constitution in reshaping the common law. The
case dealt with the question of whether the state was liable
for the conduct of police and prosecutors that led to a member of the
being harmed by a criminal who should not have been released on bail. It raised
the question, of importance to this discussion,
of the nature of the
state’s obligations to protect women from harm. The
cases were more narrowly focused on the vicarious liability of the state for
victims of violent acts against women by policemen.
In a unanimous
decision in
, the Constitutional Court stressed that the courts
have an obligation to develop the common law having regard to the ‘spirit,
purport and objects of the Bill of
In determining
whether police officers were under a legal duty to act, the Court said that the
weighing up of the interests of the
parties and the community involved a
proportionality exercise that would need to be considered in the context of a
‘constitutional
state founded on dignity, equality and freedom and in
which the government has positive duties to promote and uphold such
entail both a duty not to perform an act that violates rights and a positive
duty to provide protection.
This echoes the comments of Sachs J in
regarding the state’s
obligations to protect people from domestic violence and promote their rights to
freedom and security.
Constitutional Court found that the values underlying the Constitution pointed
to the possible extension of liability to the
state since the state, under the
Constitution, has obligations to ‘respect, protect, promote and fulfil the
‘and in particular, the right of women to have their safety
and security
protected’.
noted that for police approaching their positive obligations arising from
legislation and the Constitution, in relation
to the rights to dignity and
freedom and security of the person, ‘few things can be more important to
women than freedom from
the threat of sexual
Court upheld Carmichele’s appeal and referred the matter back to the trial
court to conclude the trial and determine the
factual and legal issues. The
trial court found the Minister of Safety and Security was liable and this was
confirmed by the Supreme
effectively reversing
the finding of the same court in an earlier hearing of the case. In the
intervening period the test for wrongfulness
in delict had been developed in
light of the Constitution in the cases of
which concerned an
escaped repeat rapist and
Duivenboden
concerned a man who killed his wife and child and shot a neighbour where he
should not have been allowed to possess firearms.
decision of the Constitutional Court has been broadly applauded for its focus on
the centrality of the values and rights within the
Constitution in shaping the
development of the common law. In comparing the case with a similar case in the
US courts, Roederer noted:
The contrast is between a court that views its constitution as a progressive
covenant between the people and its government, which
fosters a culture of
justification and accountability, and a court that views its constitution as a
charter of negative liberties,
which will go to great lengths to conserve the
status quo distribution of rights and entitlements. One is intent on protecting
vulnerable members of its society, and the other is skeptical of attempts by
the legislature to do so through the creation of new
rights. (footnotes
Commenting on the later case of
argued that it showed, like
, a similar value-based response to
state accountability and the obligation to protect vulnerable members of
’s case concerned the nature and scope of vicarious
liability in the situation where three policemen, while on duty, raped a
woman to whom they had offered a lift home. O’Regan J, in a unanimous
decision overturning the decision of the Supreme
Court of Appeal, found the
Minister of Safety and Security liable. The judgment developed the vicarious
liability rule in line with
the ‘spirit, purport and objects of the Bill
of Rights’, following the
requirement that the normative
values of the Constitution must inform the development of the common
The court recognised
that the principle of vicarious liability poses difficulties where the delictual
act deviates from an employee’s
normal duties, and is even more difficult
where it is an intentional
The Court explained
that the test for vicarious
subjective question of whether the wrongful acts were done purely for the
benefit of the employee. Even where they were,
there is still a further
objective test of the sufficient closeness of the link between the
employee’s acts to further his
or her own interests and the ‘purpose
and business of the
This part of
the test is both factual and legal – the legal component of sufficient
closeness requires examination in terms
of the ‘spirit, purport and
objects of the Bill of
In applying
the redeveloped test to the facts of
’s case the Court found that
the policemen, in
the rape against K, ‘were
simultaneously
to perform their duties as
policemen’.
O’Regan J noted that by offering K a lift, the policemen had induced her
to trust them, something she was entitled to expect
from the police in terms of
the Constitution. They failed to meet their general duty to protect K from harm
and their special duty
in the particular situation of the case. ‘The close
connection between the wrongful conduct of the policemen and the nature
employment’ led to the Minister of Police being liable for K’s
The policemen
infringed K’s constitutional rights to dignity and security of the
The decision sent a strong message to the governing bodies of the
police that police personnel who abuse their positions of power
responsibility of the force. In a country where women live in fear of sexual
violence, it is critical that they must be
able to both expect protection from
the police and feel confident that the police themselves will not abuse their
authority and take
criminal advantage of women.
The final and most
recent case in the sequence of cases dealing with the common law in relation to
liability following violent crimes
against women is the case of
a 13-year- old girl was raped and assaulted by a policeman on standby duty who
had given her a lift home. The case reached
the Constitutional Court on appeal
from the Supreme Court of Appeal (SCA) which had decided not to hold the
Minister of Safety and
Security liable. The majority decision of the SCA
distinguished this case from
’s case on the basis that a policeman
on standby duty was not on duty and hence had not committed a delictual
omission. It (mis)understood
’s case to mean that an intentional
commission such as rape could not result in vicarious liability for the state.
The Constitutional Court (Mogoeng J) considered the boundaries of the
test for vicarious liability as set out in
in the situation where a
policeman on standby duty ‘deviates from his employer’s
constitutional obligation to protect
the public and engages in conduct that
constitutes “the single greatest threat to the self-determination of South
African women”,
followed the
approach to determining vicarious liability in examining
the facts of
’s case. It looked at the following
the state’s constitutional obligations to protect the public; the trust
that the public is entitled to place in the police;
the significance, if any, of
the policeman having been off duty and on standby duty; the role of the
simultaneous act of the policeman’s
commission of rape and omission to
protect the victim; and the existence or otherwise of an intimate link between
the policeman’s
conduct and his employment.
Mogoeng J noted that rape by men of women and girls which is common and
ongoing, and often goes unpunished, is a violation of a range
of women and
children’s rights.
went on to say that:
The threat of sexual violence to women is indeed as pernicious as sexual
violence itself. It is said to go to the very core of the
subordination of
women in society. It entrenches patriarchy as it imperils the freedom and
self-determination of women. It is
deeply sad and unacceptable that few of our
women or girls dare to venture into public spaces alone, especially when it is
deserted. If official crime statistics are anything to go by,
incidents of sexual violence against women occur with alarming regularity.
This is so despite the fact that our Constitution, national legislation,
formations of civil society and communities across our
country have all set
their faces firmly against this horrendous invasion and indignity imposed on our
women and girl-children.
Mogoeng J stressed that courts must accept that
common law rules are now subject to constitutional values and ‘it is their
to ensure that the fundamental rights of women and girl-children in
particular are not made hollow by actual or threatened sexual
Court found that the standby duty status of the policeman did not preclude the
state from liability as the focus of vicarious
liability, following
’s case, was the trust placed by the member of the public in the
police. It also found that the SCA has misinterpreted the decision
that vicarious liability related not just to omissions of employees but
commissions as well. It explained that rape by a policeman
and his failure to
protect the woman are ‘two sides of the same coin’ and are
‘inseparable’.
The Court accepted that the ‘closeness of the connection’ between
the wrongful conduct of the policeman and his employment
was more tenuous on the
facts of this case than in
’s but that the link was still
sufficient to find the state vicariously liable.
The three cases clarify
and extend the obligations of the state under the common law of delict to
compensate women who have been harmed
by violent men due to the inaction and
action of state officials, particularly police and prosecutors. It remains to be
seen whether
the common law will be developed further, in light of the
Constitution, in requiring state responsibility for the protection of women
public and private sources of violence. Dee Smythe notes that the ‘full
ambit of state obligations to protect, investigate,
punish and compensate
victims of sexual violence has not been fully explored in South African
‘the cases have dealt with harm suffered consequent to a failure by the
police to comply with their obligations, rather
than the harm intrinsic in such
a failure.’
to a consideration of the way in which the Constitution might be used to greater
effect in tackling violence against women
in the ways that Smythe mentions and
in ways that might create the conditions for violence to be reduced and
V Expanding constitutional opportunities to address
violence against women
An evaluation of the jurisprudence indicates
that the Constitutional Court sees violence against women as an extremely
serious infringement
of human rights that is at odds with the values that
underlie the Constitution. The Court has shown a willingness to develop the
common law and require the improvement of statutes where these are failing to
appropriately tackle this urgent social crisis. The
Court has made it clear that
the state has obligations in terms of the Constitution and international law to
protect women from violence.
The cases also point to the Court’s
preparedness to use its remedial jurisdiction to order remedies that require the
to expend resources and take actions to meet its obligations under the
law. Most of the decisions are contextual in approach and
situate legal
development within an understanding of the extent, nature and impact of violence
against women. This ensures that the
decisions avoid conservative, inappropriate
or formalistic approaches to law. The combination of a progressive Court and a
constitutional text has resulted in jurisprudence and a constitutional
model worth emulating
judgments discussed demonstrate an engagement with the rights to freedom and
security of the person alongside dignity and equality
as key rights contravened
by acts of violence against women and children. The values of human dignity,
equality and freedom have
been given prominence in some of the leadings
decisions set out above. Compared to some of the gender equality jurisprudence
has attracted criticism by feminist
the violence
against women jurisprudence is broadly progressive. However, the ten decisions
in the 20 years of the Constitution have
dealt only with the protection of women
from harm and their treatment within the legal system or in claiming damages
once such harm
has occurred. No case dealing with the obligations of the state
to take active measures to prevent violence against women has reached
and this leads to a jurisprudential gap that should be remedied. It is a concern
that a limited range of cases has reached
the Court and that there has been a
lack of opportunity for the Court to deepen its jurisprudence and provide
far-reaching responses.
Advocacy and service organizations representing violence
victims have thus far played a mostly responsive role in assisting the Court
(with the exception of the parties who brought the challenge to the provisions
criminalizing under-age sexual
There appear to be
opportunities for such groups to creatively formulate new public interest
litigation that engages the Constitution
and the courts more effectively. The
lack of litigation may reflect a number of things, including despondency within
the sector about
the value of good judgments when implementation remains so
poor. Aside from looking to the Constitution for opportunities to litigate
further in this area, the Constitution should be used as a framing document for
new policy and law reform initiatives by the sector.
The South African
constitutional experience on violence against women reflects some important
successes but these must be taken further
to expand the legal frameworks and the
state’s obligations in this area. There are real questions about the
ability of the
Court to address lack of state capacity in implementing its laws
in the face of massive social and economic problems, including the
epidemic of
violence against women. Clearly, the Constitution alone is not sufficient to
solve this issue. Nevertheless, it is a
text with the capacity to contribute
further, in tandem with a range of other mechanisms and actors to tackle this
major challenge.
This last part of the chapter considers some of the
constitutional possibilities that could be explored to expand the
Constitution’s
reach in both protecting women from violence and responding
to it. These include: developing the meaning and content of the right
and security of the person in s. 12; deepening the interpretation of the
constitutional values and considering their substantive
content; drawing on the
social and economic rights, in combination with s. 12 and the right to equality
to obtain the necessary resources
and action by the state in addressing violence
that is closely tied to gendered poverty. Other rights such as rights to culture
religion may also prove important in challenging practices that lead to
violence and abuse of women.
Developing the interpretation of s.
The right to freedom and security of the person in s. 12 of the
Constitution is capable of further interpretation and elaboration
by the courts.
The positive and negative dimensions of the right could be more fully spelt out
as a basis for expanding the boundaries
of state obligations to address violence
against women. The various dimensions of the right have implications for women
facing violence.
Thus, deprivation of freedom referred to in s. 12(1)(a) may
result from controlling partners or parents who prevent women and girls
working, socialising or participating in their communities, using physical,
psychological, economic and other forms of control.
The idea of freedom from
violence from public or private sources referred to in s 12(1)(c) may involve
some definition with regard
to acts of abuse by teachers, religious leaders or
employers. In the employment context, sexual harassment is sanctioned but this
does not necessarily mean that employers are taking active steps to prevent its
occurrence. In situations where people face job insecurity,
common in high
unemployment contexts such as South Africa, the right might need to be used to
require measures to prevent harassment
and abuse of women workers. Similarly, in
the schooling context where power inequalities, together with poverty, shape
capacity to challenge teachers who abuse them, the right should be
used to expand the available preventative and responsive measures.
references in s. 12 to torture and cruel, inhuman and degrading treatment are
relevant to women in South Africa where
rape, domestic violence and other forms
of abuse can be categorised in these terms. Strong statements by the court on
these definitional
overlaps would be important in clarifying the conceptual
boundaries of violence against women as a violation of human
Similarly, bodily and
psychological integrity, the second part of s. 12, has important meaning in the
context of violence against
women, particularly the sub-right of ‘security
in and control over their body’. In a country where many young people
both sexes believe that non-consensual sex is
fulfilling the s. 12
right might entail educational programmes to address these alarming
perceptions.
Marius Pieterse
discusses the possibilities of using s. 12 to obtain material outcomes in the
health sphere and points to judicial
decisions in South Africa and Canada that
might support this interpretation. Similar arguments could be applied in the
area of violence
the substantive interpretation and application of the constitutional
The values of dignity, equality and freedom underlying the rights
in the Bill of Rights require ongoing interpretation and development
context of the particular rights they inform and the circumstances of the cases
reaching courts. In considering the development
of the right to equality in its
engagement with culture, Albertyn has proposed an interpretation of the
fundamental constitutional
dignity as affirming the humanity of each person and their entitlement to
equal concern and respect; equality as remedying of disadvantage
and enabling
redistribution (difference should not be a basis for disadvantage); an
affirmation of difference and diversity (positive
differences should be
recognised and developed); and freedom as autonomy, participation and the
establishment and nurturing of conditions
for substantive choice.
notes that freedom is the least developed constitutional value and, like
Pieterse, argues for a substantive conception of freedom
that enables choice,
agency and participation. Violence is multi-dimensional in its impact on women,
limiting their opportunities,
life choices, access to resources and to full
participation in society. Understanding dignity, freedom and equality
substantively
involves addressing these various dimensions of the impact of
violence on women. The development of substantive freedom as a fundamental
underlying all rights in the context of violence against women is a critical
conceptual constitutional project that may lead
to practical outcomes for
victims. For example, if sex workers who face regular sexual violence are not
provided with the mechanisms
to resist attack because the employment
‘choices’ they make are frowned upon, then freedom is given a
meaning that is
unresponsive.
on the social and economic rights (together with other rights)
examining the Constitutional Court’s jurisprudence on violence against
women have pointed to the need to look to the
social and economic rights in the
Constitution to address the conditions of poverty that expose women to violence
and limit their
access to appropriate
A study by Elsje
Bonthuys has considered the issue of domestic violence in particular and the
ways in which social and economic rights
might be used to overcome the
implementation deficiencies of the
Domestic Violence
This is innovative
research both within South Africa and beyond where the links between violence
against women and social and economic
rights have not been fully theorised in
constitutional or international human rights law. Conceptually, Bonthuys brings
the right to gender equality and socio-economic rights to focus on the
issue of domestic violence against women specifically. She
draws on work that
has combined substantive gender equality with socio-economic rights to address
the conditions of material disadvantage
and status-based discrimination that
adversely affect women.
While Bonthuys’ argument provides a fruitful framing of the issues
and the basis for further research, litigation and advocacy
on domestic violence
it leaves certain conceptual and substantive questions open for further
development. At a conceptual level,
the reliance on gender equality, together
with socio-economic rights, to provide the substantive responses to domestic
violence against
women overlooks the need to theorize the relationship between
the right to freedom and security of the person and socio-economic
rights. The
rights in s. 12 need to be given substantive content based on a rich conception
of the value of freedom that requires
state and private provision of the means
to exist as free and autonomous members of society. At a substantive level,
paper only addressed domestic violence and there would be value
in a similar study that considers the role of social and economic
addressing other forms of sexual or gender-based violence. Such a study might
lead to ideas for creative litigation including
the installation of lighting in
informal settlements to make streets safer for women, education programmes in
school to address male
and female attitudes to sex, transport for girls to reach
school safely or, as required by the Bombay High Court, the provision of
women’s toilets in public places that has a positive impact on their
Private provision of
services and supports might also be required in terms of social and economic
rights, for instance, to address
violence against women and sexual harassment in
the workplace.
We know there are problems with state capacity and
implementation and that solving these problems takes time. Constitutional rights
can create the enabling framework for community-based responses that are less
resource-dependent than orders requiring state provision
of services. An example
of this might be a program undertaken by school students, parents and teachers
to ensure girl students are
accompanied to school by protective groups based on
a roster system. Creative local responses can be defended by courts where they
face regulatory challenges or can be rolled out to other areas by courts. Such
strategies should not, however, be seen as transferring
state obligations to
women and communities, themselves time and resource
VI Conclusion
This chapter, in examining the jurisprudence
of the Constitutional Court on violence against women over the past 20 years,
the valuable framework created by the Court in defining the
state’s obligations in this area. It has argued that this framework
requires expansion if it is to offer additional space for attempts to use law to
challenge systemic and ongoing violence. The chapter
has made some suggestions
for ways in which this jurisprudential framework might be developed and where
creative litigation might
bring new issues into focus for the Court. These areas
of development would be aided by considering comparative and international
jurisprudence and might also impact on debates in these terrains. It is clear
that it is a difficult economic and political context
in which to demand more
from a state whose capacity to implement existing laws and policies is limited.
But it is always a difficult
time for women facing violence or its threat on a
daily basis. It is necessary to use all available measures to end the war
South Africa’s women and the Constitution remains one of the
important tools for this task.
Associate Professor,
Faculty of Law, University of Technology Sydney; Visiting Fellow, Australian
Human Rights Centre, Faculty of
Law, University of New South Wales; Honorary
Senior Research Fellow, School of Law, University of the Witwatersrand. I wish
the following people for their insightful observations in discussions
on the topic of this chapter in February 2016: Cathi Albertyn,
Elsje Bonthuys,
Lisa Vetten, Rashida Manjoo and Bonita
Meyersfeld.
Patriarchy, race
and class have been intimately connected in shaping the oppressive forms in
which gender relations have played out
in this country. For the classic article
that developed this argument, see B. Bozzolli ‘Marxism, feminism and South
studies’ (1983) 9(2)
Journal of Southern African Studies
discussion of the history of rape and its various forms in South Africa, see
Pumla Dineo Gqola,
Rape – A South African Nightmare
(Johannesburg:
MFBooks, 2015).
South African
Law Reform Commission, ‘The practice of Ukuthwala’ (Revised
Discussion Paper 138, Project 138,
Both women and men are
targeted: South African Law Reform Commission ‘The review of The
Witchcraft Suppression Act 3 of 1957’
(Discussion Paper 139, Project 135,
2014) (Review of Witchcraft
legislation).
Rape Unresolved: Policing Sexual Offences in South Africa
(Cape Town:
University of Cape Town Press,
AfricaCheck ,
Factsheet: South Africa’s 2014/15 assault and sexual crime
(2016) (available at
https://africacheck.org/factsheets/factsheet-south-africas-201415-assault-and-sexual-crime-statistics/#sthash.zuK16lgd.dpufhttps://africacheck.org/factsheets/factsheet-south-africas-201415-assault-and-sexual-crime-statistics/).
Rape Unresolved
(n. 5) at p.
Ndlovu v The State
[2017] ZACC 19
Vetten, ‘Deserving and undeserving women: a case study of South African
policy and legislation addressing domestic violence’
MA thesis, University
of the Witwatersrand (2013) p.
Although Jacob Zuma was
acquitted of rape, his views and behaviour, as they emerged from the trial,
represented a troubling understanding
of sex and power in a leader of the
country. For a discussion of the politics of the Zuma trial see, S. Hassim,
‘Democracy’s
shadows: sexual rights and gender politics in the rape
trial of Jacob Zuma’ (2009) 68(1)
African Studies
L. Mwambene and M. Wheal,
‘Realisation or oversight of a constitutional mandate? Corrective rape of
black African lesbians
in South Africa’
African Human Rights
Law Journal
This violent context is the product of the way in which masculinity and
femininity is culturally defined and gender inequality is
produced. It should be
noted at the outset that gender-based violence also affects men and boys
although women and girls are its
major victims. This chapter chooses to use the
term violence against women rather than more gender neutral terminology to keep
focus on the imbalance between men and women that reflects the underlying
patriarchal roots of this
For a discussion
of the causes of violence against women in South Africa today see, L. du Toit
‘Shifting meanings of postconflict
sexual violence in South Africa’
(2014) 40(1)
Are Women Human? And Other International Dialogues
(Cambridge,
Massachusetts: Harvard University Press, 2006), has noted that: ‘Men
violently dominating other men for control
of states is called war; men
violently dominating women within states is relegated to peace’: p. 5. But
note the concerns with
this approach to sexual violence and the state: R. Kapur,
‘Gender, sovereignty and the rise of a sexual security regime in
international law and postcolonial India’
(2013) 14(2)
Journal of International Law
As noted at n.11,
gender-based violence affects other vulnerable groups such as boys and gay
In the latter category,
in the South African context see, C. Albertyn et al, ‘Women’s
freedom and security of the person’
in E. Bonthuys and C. Albertyn (eds.)
Gender, Law and Justice
(Cape Town: Juta, 2007) 295. In the US context
see the foundational article by E. Schneider, ‘The dialectic of rights and
perspectives from the women's movement’
University Law Review
–652. For a discussion of human rights as a
contested space in responding to violence against women, see S. E. Merry,
Human Rights and Gender Violence
(Chicago: University of Chicago Press,
See, e.g., N. Fraser,
Justice Interruptus: Critical Reflections on the "Postsocialist" Condition
(New York: Routledge, 1997); M. Nussbaum,
Women and Human Development:
The Capabilities Approach
(Cambridge: Cambridge University Press,
United Nations,
Sustainable Development Goals
C. Albertyn,
‘Women and the transition to democracy in South Africa’
Acta Juridica
C. Albertyn
Engendering the Political Agenda: A South African Case Study
(Johannesburg: University of Witwatersrand, Centre for Applied Legal Studies,
1999), pp. 120–121,
Constitution of
the Republic of South Africa 1996, s. 12(1)(c). The whole section reads as
Section 12 Freedom and security of the person
(1)Everyone has the right to freedom and security of the person, which
includes the right ­
a. not to be deprived of freedom arbitrarily or without just cause;
b. not to be detained without trial;
c. to be free from all forms of violence from either public or private
d. not to be tortured in any way; and
e. not to be treated or punished in a cruel, inhuman or degrading way.
(2) Everyone has the right to bodily and psychological integrity, which
includes the right ­
a. to make decisions concerning reproduction;
b. to security in and control over their body; and
c. not to be subjected to medical or scientific experiments without their
informed consent.
sess., U.N. Doc. A/Res/48/104
A/CONF.171/13,
Report of the International Conference on Population and Development: Cairo
5-13 September 1994
(94/10/18) (18 October
E. Bonthuys and W.
Domingo, ‘Constitutional and international law context’ in E.
Bonthuys and C. Albertyn (eds.)
Gender, Law and Justice
(Cape Town: Juta,
2007) 51 pp. 64–8. For a discussion of South Africa’s international
human rights compliance see: M.
Govender, ‘Domestic violence: is South
Africa meeting its obligations in terms of the Women’s Convention?’
South African Journal on Human Rights
For a broader
discussion of human rights as a response to violence against women see: R.
Manjoo ‘Violence against women as
a barrier to the realisation of human
rights and the effective exercise of citizenship’
Bothma v Els and Others
(2010) 1 BCLR 1 (Constitutional Court), at para.
[2000] 1 BCLR 86 (Constitutional Court), at
Director of Public Prosecutions Pretoria (The
State) and Another
[2007] 8 BCLR 827, at para. 37;
Minister of Safety and Security
[2001] 10 BCLR 995 (Constitutional Court),
at para. 62 .
Constitution
of the Republic of South Africa 1996, preamble, s.
Promotion of Equality and
Prevention of Unfair Discrimination Act 2000, ss.
Constitution of
the Republic of South Africa 1996, s.
Ibid s. 205(3). This
role is elaborated by O’Regan J in
Minister of Safety and
[2005] 9 BCLR 835 (Constitutional Court), at para.
Domestic Violence Act
Criminal Law (Sexual
Offences and Related Matters) Amendment Act
Prevention of Family
Violence Act 1993.
Violence Act 1998, s. 1.
Ibid ss. 8,
Vetten, ‘Deserving
and undeserving women' (n. 8), p.
Criminal Law (Sexual
Offences and Related Matters) Amendment Act 2007, s. 1 (definition of sexual
penetration).
L. Artz and D.
Smythe, ‘Feminism vs. the State? A decade of sexual offences law reform in
South Africa’ (2007) 74
(n. 5), at pp.
H. Combrinck
‘The dark side of the rainbow: violence against women in South Africa
after ten years of democracy’
Acta Juridica
L. Artz and D. Smythe ‘Bridges and barriers: a five year retrospective on
the Domestic Violence Act’
Acta Juridica
Vetten, ‘Deserving and undeserving women’ (n.
The following decisions,
in chronological order, are considered here:
BCLR 86 (Constitutional Court);
Minister of Safety and
[2001] 10 BCLR 995 (Constitutional Court);
Ex Parte Omar
[2003] 10 BCLR 1087 (Constitutional Court);
Minister of Safety
and Security
[2005] 9 BCLR 835 (Constitutional Court);
Director of Public Prosecutions Pretoria (The State) and Another
Director of Public Prosecutions, Transvaal
. Minister for
Justice and Constitutional Development and Others
[2009] 7 BCLR 637
(Constitutional Court);
Bothma v Els and Others
[2010] 1 BCLR 1
(Constitutional Court);
Minister of Safety and Security and
[2012] 3 BCLR 244 (Constitutional Court);
Teddy Bear Clinic for
Abused Children and Another
Minister of Justice and Constitutional
Development and Another
[2013] 12 BCLR 1429 (Constitutional Court)
Teddy Bear Clinic
National Director of Public
Prosecutions and Another
[2014] 7 BCLR 764 (Constitutional Court). The case
[2010] 12 BCLR 1223 (Constitutional Court), dealing
with an appeal by a woman who arranged for her husband to be killed will not
included in the discussion. Her unsuccessful appeal concerned her wish to bring
further evidence of her status as a battered women
as a defence against her
conviction and sentence. The Constitutional Court’s decision is primarily
procedural and the substantive
issue of the battered woman defence had already
been decided by the Supreme Court of Appeal in the case of
Ferreira and Others
[2004] ZASCA 29
[2004] 2 SACR 454 (SCA).
The decisions in
Coalition for Gay and Lesbian Equality and Another
Minister of Justice
[1998] 12 BCLR 1517 and
National Director
of Public Prosecutions and Others
[2009] 5 BCLR 435 (Constitutional Court),
although concerning definitions of sexual offences, are not included here since
not concern violence against women. Both cases, formal equality
decisions, related to the unfairly discriminatory criminalization
male sexual conduct.
discussion of some of these decisions see, Albertyn et al, ‘Women’s
freedom’ (n. 15); M. J. Maluleke and
T. Madonsela,
Gender Equality
Jurisprudence in Landmark Court Decisions
(Department of Justice and
Constitutional Development,
See, K. Klare,
‘Legal culture and transformative constitutionalism’
South African Journal on Human Rights
–188; C. Albertyn and Beth
G., ‘Facing the challenge of transformation: difficulties in the
development of an Indigenous
jurisprudence of equality’
African Journal on Human Rights
As set out in
s. 39(1)(a) of the Constitution of the Republic of South Africa 1996 and
informed by ss. 7(1) and
See the discussion of
the evaluation of causation in the introductory chapter by Dixon and
case there were no individual applicants or respondents as the case
was brought directly by organizations challenging the constitutionality
He alleged, although
this was version was not accepted, that his wife and her brother had assaulted
Criminal Law (Sexual
Offences and Related Matters) Amendment Act 2007, preamble. See ch. 2, pt. 1, s.
3 for the definition.
Director of Public Prosecutions Pretoria (The State) and
[2007] 8 BCLR 827, at para.
Ibid at para.
Ibid at para. 27.
Ibid at para.
Ibid at para.
Ibid at para.
Ibid at para.
Ibid at para.
Ibid at para.
See also, C. Albertyn,
‘Substantive equality and transformation in South Africa’
South African Journal on Human Rights
E. Bonthuys,
‘Putting gender into the definition of rape or taking it out?
Director of Public Prosecutions (Pretoria) and Others
, 2007 (8) BCLR 827
Feminist Legal Studies
[2002] 11 BCLR 1117 (Constitutional
‘Putting gender into the definition of rape’ (n. 69), at
Teddy Bear Clinic for
Abused Children and Another
Minister of Justice and Constitutional
Development and Another
[2013] 12 BCLR 1429 (Constitutional Court) para. 29
Teddy Bear Clinic
Ibid para. 28.
Ibid paras.
Ibid paras.
In terms of s. 50(2) of
the Criminal Law (Sexual Offences and Related Matters) Amendment Act 2007
(Sexual Offences Act).
National Director of Public Prosecutions and Another
[2014] 7 BCLR
764, para. 48.
Law (Sexual Offences and Related Matters) Amendment Act Amendment Act
Director of Public
Prosecutions, Transvaal
. Minister for Justice and Constitutional
Development and Others
[2009] 7 BCLR 637, para.
Ibid, at para.
Centre for Child Law,
Making Room: Facilitating the Testimony of Child Witnesses and Victims
(Pretoria: Pretoria University Law Press, 2015), pp.
[2000] 1 BCLR 86 (Constitutional Court), at para. 11.
As discussed in Albertyn et
al, ‘Women’s freedom’ (n. 15) p.
[2000] 1 BCLR 86, at paras.
Ibid at para.
Ibid at para.
Domestic Violence Act
1998, s. 8.
[2003] 10 BCLR 1087 (Constitutional Court), at para.
Ibid at para.
Ibid at para.
The Court declined to
consider whether the definition of economic abuse in the Act was
constitutionally valid.
As stated in the Constitution of the Republic of South Africa 1996, s. 39(2);
Minister of Safety and Security
[2001] 10 BCLR 995
(Constitutional Court) at paras.
Ibid at para. 26.
Ibid at para.
Ibid at para.
Minister of Safety
and Security
[2004] 2 BCLR 133 (Supreme Court of
Minister of Safety and Security
[2002] ZASCA 132
[2002] 4 All SA 346 (Supreme
of Appeal).
of Safety and Security
Van Duivenboden
[2002] ZASCA 79
[2002] 6 SA 431 (Supreme
Court of Appeal).
Roederer, ‘The constitutionally inspired approaches to police
accountability for violence against women in the U.S. and
South Africa:
conservation versus transformation’
Tulsa Journal of
Comparative and International Law
–140 at 93.
Ibid at para.
As set out in
Minister of Police
[1985] ZASCA 105
[1986] 1 SA 117
Ibid at paras. 32,
Ibid at para. 48
(emphasis added).
Minister of Safety and Security
[2005] 9 BCLR 835 (Constitutional Court)
para. 37. The Court was quoting counsel for the Centre for Applied Legal
Studies, as cited
Ibid at para.
Ibid at para.
Ibid at para.
Ibid at para.
Ibid at para.
(n. 5) at p.
Ibid p. 224, endnote
Note however, that
although s. 12 was path breaking in referring to public and private violence,
constitutional provisions on violence
against women could be even more explicit
and expansive, for example, The Constitution of the Tunisian Republic 2014, Art.
says: ‘The state shall take all necessary measures in order to
eradicate violence against
Bonthuys, ‘Institutional openness and resistance to feminist arguments:
the example of the South African Constitutional
Canadian Journal of Women and the Law
–36; C. Albertyn,
‘Law, Gender and Inequality in South Africa’ (2011) 39
Development Studies
Bear Clinic for Abused Children and RAPCAN in the
Teddy Bear Clinic
On the relationship
between violence against women and human rights, see Manjoo, ‘Violence
against women’, (n. 23).
R. Jewkes and N.
Abrahams, ‘The epidemiology of rape and sexual coercion in South Africa:
an overview’ (2002) 55
Social Science and Medicine
recommendations of the types of programs to address these attitudes see E. Fulu
Why Do Some Men Use Violence Against Women and How Can We Prevent It?
Quantitative Findings from the United Nations Multi-Country
Study on Men and
Violence in Asia and the Pacific
. (UNDP, UNFPA, UN Women and UNV, 2013).
M. Pieterse,‘The
interdependence of rights to health and autonomy in South Africa’
South African Law Journal
–572. See also, D. Bhana,
‘The substance of contractual autonomy in the twenty-first century: the
South African experience’
(2015) 48(4)
VRÜ Verfassung in Recht und
Albertyn,‘The stubborn persistence of patriarchy’? Gender equality
and cultural diversity in South Africa’
Constitutional Court
See research on the
relationship between freedom, access to property and resources, and domestic
violence in the Indian context:
B. Aggarwal and P. Panda, ‘Toward freedom
from domestic violence: the neglected obvious’ (2007) 8
Human Development
Andrews, ‘Learning to love after learning to harm: post-conflict
reconstruction, gender equality and cultural values’
State Journal of International Law
–62 at 62; Combrinck, ‘The
dark side of the rainbow’ (n. 45) at
E. Bonthuys,
‘Domestic violence and gendered socio-economic rights: an agenda for
research and activism’
South African Journal on Human
S. Fredman,
‘Engendering social and economic rights’ in B. Goldblatt and K.
McLean (eds.)
Women’s Social and Economic Rights – Developments
in South Africa
, (Cape Town: Juta, 2011) p. 4. This involves an application
of Fredman’s focus on both distributive and status-based features
equality, to violence against women. Fredman’s conception of
four-dimensional substantive equality includes these recognition
redistribution dimensions but also requires a focus on participation and
transformative approaches. It would be valuable to map
all of Fredman’s
equality dimensions of socio-economic rights as a response to violence against
women. It would also be important
to think about intersectional discrimination
and how violence against women has different implications for a variety of
groups such as women with disabilities, lesbians, and women in
religious communities.
Milun Saryajani
Pune Municipal Corporation and Others
No. 98 of 2011, H. C. Bom, (23 December
For a discussion
of some of the dangers of placing obligations on poor women to address social
problems that should be fixed by the
society as a whole, see S. Chant,
‘The “feminisation of poverty” and the
“feminisation” of anti-poverty
programmes: room for revision?’
Journal of Development Studies
–197; M. Molyneux,
‘Mothers at the service of the new poverty agenda: progresa/oportunidades,
Mexico’s conditional
transfer programme’ (2006) 40
Social Policy
& Administration
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (419 KB)
PDF format (1.6 MB)
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter