URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/journals/UMonashLRS/2009/18.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 15:41:59
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Witzleb, N --- "Engaging with the World: students of comparative law write for Wikipedia" [2009] UMonashLRS 18
ENGAGING WITH THE WORLD: STUDENTS OF COMPARATIVE LAW WRITE
FOR WIKIPEDIA
DR NORMANN WITZLEB*
Improving students’ computer literacy, instilling a critical approach
to Internet resources and preparing them for collaborative
work are important
educational aims today. This article examines how a writing exercise in the
style of a Wikipedia article can be
used to develop these skills. Students in an
elective unit in Comparative Law were asked to create, and review, a Wikipedia
on an issue, concept or scholar in this field. This article describes the
rationale for adopting this writing task, how it was integrated
teaching and assessment structure of the unit, and how students responded to the
exercise. In addition to critically evaluating
the potential of this novel
teaching tool, the article aims to provide some practical guidance on when
Wikipedia assignments might
be usefully employed.
I INTRODUCTION
Wikipedia is a multilingual web-based free encyclopaedia which is written and
edited by countless contributors from around the world.
Its use by students
continues to divide, and at times enrage, academics. In principle, articles in
Wikipedia are open to be changed
by any user with access to the Internet, simply
by clicking an edit button on each website. This ‘open content’
differs radically from conventional sources of academic learning, such as
textbooks and articles in scientific journals, which usually
undergo rigorous
editorial or peer-review processes before publication. The way in which
Wikipedia controls the quality of its content
is not through commissioning
experts to write or act as referee, but through a watchful army of interested
persons from all walks
of life and all levels of ability and knowledge. Despite
occasional (and often only temporary) lapses in accuracy, the quality of
content in Wikipedia, in particular its rated articles, is increasingly
acknowledged.
areas, it is now certainly more comprehensive and more current than many
traditional encyclopaedias.
Some academics fear that the reliance on Wikipedia undermines academic
standards, encourages poor scholarship and leads to uncritical
criticism is, of course, not limited to students’ use of Wikipedia alone.
It concerns the way in which students employ
most information provided in
electronic format, be it on the Internet or on subject-specific databases.
However, there is no doubting
that, since its creation in 2001, Wikipedia has
grown rapidly in its size and user traffic. Wikipedia now has nearly three
has become the largest reference website on the
studies confirm that Wikipedia holds particular appeal for younger users. In a
recent German Internet usage survey, 94 per
cent of the teenagers between 14 and
19 years indicated that they used Wikipedia at least sometimes, compared with 65
per cent of
all users and 35 per cent of users of 60 years of
The ubiquity of
Wikipedia has led teachers to explore ways in which students can be educated in
using it safely and
responsibly.
of doing so is transforming students from uncritical consumers of Wikipedia to
creative contributors. This is in line with
the basic rationale of
‘wikis’, a term used for collaborative websites that allow for easy
creation and editing of content
by a group of
Encouraging
students to become ‘Wikipedians’ would also help to bridge the
divide between active and passive users of
Wikipedia, with currently only four
per cent of users actively contributing to the development of the
This article will describe the use of Wikipedia in the assessment of an
elective subject, Comparative Law, in an undergraduate law
degree at the
University of Western Australia. Setting such exercises is no longer
pioneering.
Wikipedia’s ‘School and University projects’
lists about 75 past and over 30 current projects worldwide in which educators,
generally at tertiary level and most often
in North America, have used Wikipedia
as a teaching and assessment tool. To encourage and to facilitate the
preparation of such initiatives,
the Wikipedia Foundation now provides resources
to assist teachers in creating open educational resources and incorporating
into their classroom
There is now also a growing amount of educational literature on the use of
wikis more generally (not just Wikipedia), in higher
available studies demonstrate the value of wikis as a form of social software,
which facilitates collaborative learning, which
is student-centred and which
supports social interactions. Learning with wikis has therefore the potential to
increase student
‘shift the focus to construction of knowledge, rather than the
presentation of
information’.
II RATIONALE FOR AND DESIGN OF THE PROJECT
The Wikipedia exercise in Comparative Law was prompted by a number of
considerations. First, the standard textbooks no longer fully
reflected current
knowledge on Comparative Law and their coverage did not coincide with the unit
syllabus. Introductory material
in this specialised field of study was thus
quite difficult to come by. The exercise therefore did not ask students somewhat
to produce a further iteration of readily available material. Students
researching and producing materials themselves received an
immediate and
tangible benefit from the
Second, asking students to provide an account of the state of knowledge in a
particular area is a valuable learning exercise. As experts
in a field, we often
underestimate how difficult it is to find a foothold, and a sense of direction,
in new terrain. Introducing
others to the fundamentals of an area requires not
only solid knowledge but also the ability to structure and present information
in an easily digestible form. Asking students to prepare introductory materials
on issues that are fairly new, even to them, functions
like a ‘crash
course’ in the area and provides them with a strong basis from which to
conduct further research and analysis.
Third, requiring students to write on these topics for an online medium makes
information on these topics available to a wider audience.
It is peculiar that
the Internet has developed quickly into one of the indispensable sources of
information on foreign
availability of electronic information on Comparative Law as a subject, its key
concepts and major scholars, has not kept
pace with this revolution. This
assessment exercise was intended, in a small way, to address this imbalance and
give comparative
law scholarship more prominence in mainstream Internet fora.
Fourth, the exercise was designed to give students an authentic task that
would educate them in the self-reflective use of secondary
sources and, at the
same time, enhance their computer literacy and research skills at an advanced
stage of their degrees.
Finally, the exercise was also influenced by the teacher’s own recent
experience of contributing to a conventional
encyclopaedia,
which had caused him to reflect on the demands, and sense of achievement, that
writing for a reference work can entail.
The assessment was divided into two parts. The first component of the
exercise consisted in students drafting a Wikipedia article,
and the second
involved reviewing an article written by one of their peers on a different
topic. Students were allocated a topic
from a list of potential articles. At the
time of creating the list, most of these articles were either non-existent or
existed only
in embryonic form (known in Wikipedia as a ‘stub’). The
list of suggested topics was diverse. Students had the opportunity
of writing on
an important concept, movement or an influential scholar or work in Comparative
Fundamental concepts included: common core methodology;
micro-/macro-comparison; mixed legal systems; legal transplants; legal families;
legal culture; globalisation of law; unification of law; harmonisation of law;
transnational law; European contract law; European
tort law; European family
law; and European Civil Code. Students who were assigned to write a biographical
article needed to undertake
research into the life and work of an eminent
comparative law scholar, such as Ernst Rabel, René David, Rudolph
Schlesinger,
Max Rheinstein, F H Lawson, and H C Gutteridge. A final set of
topics gave students the opportunity to prepare an account of an
influential
foreign legal code, such as the Dutch Civil Code, the Italian Civil Code or the
Spanish Civil Code.
The fact that none of these topics had an entry that went beyond rudimentary
content ensured that all students had a similar starting
point. All articles had
to be designed and researched from the ground up, and no student could (or had
to) consider preparatory work
done by others. Students who were nonetheless
unhappy with their allocated keyword had the option to suggest writing on a
topic and, after receiving approval, work on the area of their choice.
Each topic was assigned twice but students had to work independently.
Students were referred to the information available on how to
write and edit for
Wikipedia, which also enabled those unfamiliar with Wikipedia to understand the
task involved. Wikipedia itself
contains a comprehensive range of clear,
continuously updated guidelines on article writing. These guidelines address
writing ‘[y]our
include a ‘[g]uide to writing better
and even explain how to write ‘[t]he perfect
Students were instructed to comply with the Wikipedia standards and
suggested to students that they actually upload their article to Wikipedia but
they were not obliged to do so.
Assessment criteria for the first component of the exercise, the draft
article, included the quality of the content of the article
as well as its
style; in particular, its compatibility with the Wikipedia policies and
guidelines. This assessment item counted for
15 per cent of the overall mark in
the unit. The second component of the exercise, the peer review, consisted of
writing a review
of another student’s draft article. It is characteristic
of Wikipedia to be a collaborative effort, and this assessment item
mimicking this feature of Wikipedia. Students were asked to assess the quality
of a draft Wikipedia article written by one
of their peers and, where
appropriate, to suggest amendments. Where a student suggested revisions, he or
she was expected to explain
why they would improve the article. Two criteria for
assessment of the review article were stated: first, the degree to which content
and style of the suggested revisions were in line with the Wikipedia policies
and guidelines; and, second, the extent to which the
revisions and comments
served as helpful guidance in the assessment of the draft articles. This
assessment item counted for five
per cent of the overall mark in the
III ASSESSMENT OF STUDENTS’ WORK
Students reviewed the work of their peers without being aware of who was the
author. They were encouraged to provide candid feedback
but at the same time
reassured that their assessment of their peers’ work was by no means
determinative. Even though the assessment
instructions stated that the comments
received from fellow students were not binding, the idea of giving and receiving
peer feedback
needed some getting used to. The following student comment may
well be representative:
Reviewing another student’s article was a novel experience. I
think some students were cynical because they thought their mark
reflection of the quality of the other student’s work. But it is rare you
get to read what another student has written
in its entirety, and it gives
perspective to your own work. The process of critically evaluating another piece
of work is a process
that can easily be translated to reviewing your own work,
and so should improve your own writing.
The articles for review and revision were allocated by the teacher, thereby
ensuring that students gained wider exposure to fundamental
concepts of the
discipline area. The success of this strategy is evidenced by the following
student feedback:
Reviewing another student’s article exposed us to another topic of
Comparative Law. In that sense it was a great way to get
us thinking about
Comparative Law concepts — since obviously an introductory unit cannot
hope to cover everything.
Having the reviews was of great assistance in the final marking process. Even
though the teacher read the peer review only after reading
the article and
making a judgement on its merits, having the peer review provided the teacher
with a valuable check on his own perceptions.
Articles were returned with
comments as well as the marked review. Reviews were returned with comments as
well as the marked articles.
The standard of the submitted articles and reviews was, overall, very
pleasing. A fair number of students had evidently developed
great enthusiasm for
the task and for their respective topics. They delivered excellent work. On the
other hand, some other students’
work had the kind of weaknesses that any
form of student writing may suffer from. Such generic criticism related, for
example, to
the quality of research, the clarity of writing and lack of care
taking with editing and referencing. Sometimes, factual statements
inaccurate, incomplete or out-of-date. Where students relied too heavily on a
limited number of sources, their article tended
to be patchy in its coverage or
present a distorted view of the subject matter. Other common complaints
concerned the clarity of
prose or structure. Even though these deficiencies can
often also tarnish conventional research essays, they are more concerning
To be taken seriously, an encyclopaedia needs to strive for unassailable quality
and meticulous exposition. Accuracy, comprehensiveness,
clarity and attention to
detail were key, but not all students approached the task with that ambition, or
succeeded in their efforts.
Most instructive for the current context is how students handled the
conventions specific to Wikipedia. Some students evidently had
difficulty coming
to grips with the demands of writing in a novel format, and for an unfamiliar
purpose. It became evident that not
all students read the instructions or
followed them. Broadly speaking, Wikipedia adopts many of the conventions of
traditional encyclopaedias.
Articles should begin with a lead section,
containing the shortest possible definition or description of the
subject-matter. The
lead section should be able to stand alone and give a
concise overview of the article. Often, a summary style is preferable, which
means that important information should be dealt with first, then a summary be
given before the topic is explored in further detail.
Some students also had
difficulty finding the right tone for the article. The articles should be
pitched at the educated layperson
and adopt a neutral point of view. Writing
should be concise and self-contained. Some of the guidelines for proper style
also contain
valuable lessons for other forms of legal
Some students disregarded the fact that academic papers and encyclopaedia
articles have different purposes. Like conventional encyclopaedias,
has three core content policies: (i) no original research; (ii) a neutral point
of view; and (iii) verifiability. In relation
to the first policy, the purpose
of an encyclopaedia article lies in imparting knowledge, not in presenting an
argument. As a result,
articles should not consist of original research or
personal opinion.
An encyclopaedia is not the place to engage in debates, even though it may be
appropriate to describe divisions of opinion and uncertainties
subject-matter. If opinions are relevant to a topic, their significance and
origin need to be explained and documented,
just like in academic writing. If
opinions on a topic differ, these opinions need to be presented with
impartiality. Adopting a neutral
point of view means that all views need to be
represented fairly, and as far as possible without
verifiability is concerned, Wikipedia’s editorial policies insist on
providing information only from reliable sources
with appropriate
references.
means that students needed to consult the traditional sources of legal
scholarship such as published textbooks, journal articles
and government
reports, as well as other reference works, authoritative sources and documents,
to obtain a comprehensive and reliable
picture of their assigned subject-matter.
Not all students felt equally comfortable with being required to write in a
format that differed from a traditional essay-style assessment.
One student
frankly admitted after the exercise that she ‘appreciated the content, but
didn’t like the format’
of the Wikipedia assignment. Another student
was more self-reflective when he described his experience:
The wikipedia article, and particularly the review was met with a degree
of cynicism at first, because it seemed very ‘high
school’. However
once you sit down to write the article, you realise there is much more to it
— it takes longer and more
effort to write about a potentially complex
legal topic in a way that sounds simple and is pitched at a lay audience.
That was probably
the most valuable learning experience.
In contrast to text-based reference works, Wikipedia as an online resource
allows for multi-media content. Articles can be hyperlinked
to related articles,
external links and websites as well as be illustrated with pictures, videos,
diagrams and so on. Only a small
number of students made use of these
possibilities and enriched the description of their topic with non-textual
materials. In some
other cases, students needed to be reminded that copyright
regulation also applies to the Internet, including to Wikipedia.
IV EVALUATION OF THE PROJECT
The project was evaluated from the student perspective, teacher perspective,
from the perspective of skills development in law students
(in particular in
relation to media literacy and collaborative work), and from the broader
perspective of engagement of students
with a community of knowledge.
Student Feedback
On the whole, students reacted very favourably to this novel type of
assessment. In anonymous surveys after completion of the unit,
described the assessment as ‘original and thought provoking’ and
commended the unit for its ‘diversity
of assessment’. As a new form
of writing, it caught students’ attention. An obvious advantage of
Wikipedia is that students
are engaged in a ‘real life exercise’. If
students see that their writing has significance beyond the assessment, they
likely to be personally more engaged. The strong correlationship between
authenticity, student motivation and achievement has
long been recognised in
educational
literature.
connection to the ‘real world’ is one of the hallmarks of student
learning activities that have been described as
authenticity’.
In an end-of-semester unit evaluation, the statement that ‘the
assessments provided me with diverse and challenging tasks’
scored a mean
of 4.27 (out of 5.00), and the statement that ‘the Wikipedia Assignment
was an innovative and useful learning
experience’ scored 4.26 (out of
One student
made the following instructive observations after the end of the unit:
The wikipedia article was certainly a unique assessment piece, and one
particularly well suited to Comparative Law. It helped us understand
snippets of
an area of study with which none of us were particularly familiar.
A number of students were critical of certain aspects of the exercise. Some
commented that, in light of the workload involved, the
exercise should have been
worth more than the allocated 20 per cent of the final mark. Others would have
preferred greater guidance
on how to write for the Wikipedia assignment. These
are valuable suggestions that should be borne in mind for the design of similar
exercises in the future.
The fact that students were free to write and publish to Wikipedia, or could
opt to present their Wikipedia article as a Word document,
apparently also
caused confusion. Requiring actual publication may probably have been more
straightforward, would have added further
authenticity to the exercise and would
have ensured that more articles found their way onto the Internet. Now that
Wikipedia provides
even more step-by-step information on this process there is
probably little reason why students should not be required to upload
to Wikipedia. Where this course is chosen, students should be made aware of
their legal obligations when posting materials
on the Internet. Students should
not be left in doubt about the consequences of posting unlawful content such as
material in breach
of copyright, privacy, defamation and discrimination
Demands on Teacher
While the workload involved with the exercise was considerable, this was
partly due to the fact that not only students, but also the
teacher, had to
become familiar with the writing process in the Wikipedia environment. Where
students are likely to need much guidance,
the exercise might be more suited to
smaller classes. A limited group size also allows each student, or a small group
of students,
to work on individually-assigned topics. While having a multitude
of topics increases the marking load, compared to an assignment
with a single
topic for the whole cohort, there are a number of options to facilitate the
assessment process. One option is, as described
above, to ask students to review
one another’s articles and take this peer feedback into account in the
assessment. Another
option is to nominate the article for peer review on
As time progresses and knowledge accumulates it is bound to become more
difficult for students to write new articles on areas that
have not already
found some treatment in Wikipedia, yet meet Wikipedia’s notability
standards. The collaborative and public
nature of Wikipedia also stands in the
way of setting assignments on substantially similar topics in consecutive years,
if students do indeed upload their work. This does not necessarily
limit the use of Wikipedia because it may even be preferable for
students who
are Wikipedia beginners to critically analyse existing articles and to identify
and correct any errors they
In this way,
Wikipedia’s characteristic of not having authoritative content control can
be turned into an object of study and
used to educate students to engage with it
critically.
Teachers who prefer a discipline-specific online encyclopaedia under the
auspices of legal academics may also consider
Jurispedia.
alternative to Wikipedia is an emerging resource focusing on law, legal and
political science and has the ambitious aim of providing
information on all
legal systems of the world. Another legal wiki project is Wex, by Cornell Law
School’s Legal Information
Institute, which aims to build a law dictionary
and encyclopaedia but only invites authors with demonstrated expertise in the
Wiki beginners, be they students or educators, can now draw on a
well-developed range of online support materials. These resources
not only cover
the first steps but also contain guided tours, suggested exercises, guidelines
and instructions, templates, and a
They include
Wikiversity, an online centre which sees its mission in the creation and use of
free learning materials and
activities.
Improving Research, Media Literacy and Writing
The Wikipedia assignment encouraged students to reflect on the differences
between various types of sources, how they are produced
and when it is
appropriate to use one rather than another. In this way, the use of wikis
fosters a deeper style of learning, which
goes beyond the traditional recitation
of ‘what we know’ by inviting consideration of ‘how we
Furthermore, the exercise helped to improve students’ skills to engage
critically with material they found online and provided
them with tools to
evaluate the trustworthiness of information. Being involved in the production of
online content provided students
with a change of perspective. Even for students
who are aware that everyone can change content on Wikipedia, it is a vastly
experience to actively participate in this process and themselves
create or improve information available online.
It is a valuable lesson for law students to become proficient in a range of
media, formats and
to adapt to the specific requirements of diverse writing tasks is an important
generic skill for their later professional
lives, whether in law or elsewhere.
Quite apart from drafting letters, contracts and other legal documents, legal
professionals now
increasingly need to be able to write reports, submissions to
government or law reform inquiries, and company or law firm newsletters,
a few. Law schools should therefore expose students to a variety of writing
tasks. Writing in a clear and succinct style
and being able to explain difficult
concepts to an uninitiated audience is challenging yet indispensable. Lawyers
need to be able
to communicate effectively not only with their peers but also
with the community. The fact that plain language — understood
simple yet precise writing — is now firmly established as a desirable
attribute of legal
testament to this. A Wikipedia assignment can be used to require students to
express technical legal issues in a way that is
accessible, informative and
understandable for an audience of non-lawyers.
Collaborative Learning
Wikis help to create a new learning environment that emphasises
collaboration, rather than individualism and
competitiveness.
The Wikipedia exercise described here made only limited use of the collaborative
aspects of wikis. It did so mainly by asking students
to peer review a draft
article and then to post it to Wikipedia where it would be subject to further
evaluation and refinement. Other
projects described in the educational
literature show that wikis are often used for more intensive collaboration; for
example, in
group research projects, reflective learning, preparation and
sharing study
While wikis are useful tools to collate, update and store existing knowledge,
it is the interactive development of knowledge that
presents the greatest shift
from conventional classroom and assessment
little doubt that collaborative work practices and information-sharing
environments are likely to become of increasing importance
in our social and
professional
responsible contributor to this ‘public exchange of reasoned ideas and
requires students to learn the social norms that apply to teamwork and, more
specifically, to providing and receiving feedback in
these collaborative
settings. Developing mutual understanding, sensitivity and respect poses
particular challenges in cross-cultural
or global collaborations, which
web-based wikis readily allow for. Considering that professional legal practice
is becoming increasingly
international, technology-driven, team-oriented and
cross-disciplinary,
it is particularly appropriate that we instil in graduates the values and skills
needed to prosper in these environments.
Engagement with a Community of Knowledge
One of the most impressive aspects of the Wikipedia project is that it aims
to engage individuals from around the world to form a
global community collating
and disseminating knowledge. Research into Wikipedia suggests that there is
often a natural progression
in which Wikipedia users generally begin as seekers
of information, but gradually become increasingly active with Wikipedia by
proofreading
and fact checking, before eventually authoring new
assignment which requires students to become acquainted with the production of
Wikipedia breaks down the barrier between passive
consumption and active
contribution.
also gives students the opportunity to ‘publish’ their work on
Wikipedia and contribute to the sharing of knowledge.
In this way, learning
activities involving use of online collaboration, enable students to feel as a
part of this community of inquiry
and provide ‘a unique opportunity for
student writers to enrich public discourse in a way that serves a real purpose
and engages
Contributing to this process of sharing knowledge with others improves student
autonomy, their media literacy skills and encourages
them to engage in a
collaborative effort to create, edit and disseminate knowledge. It also
contributes to unlocking legal scholarship
from the ‘walled
commercial journals and databases, and can be seen as part of a wider movement
towards free and open access to the
The idea of Wikipedia as a global community of knowledge had a particular
appeal in this unit. Comparative legal studies, by its very
nature, spans beyond
knowledge of the laws in place in foreign
better understanding of our domestic law by contrasting it to the solutions
adopted elsewhere and
providing us with potential solutions for social problems
and legal issues. When lawyers from different jurisdictions come together,
may even occasionally gain insights about the universal nature of law and its
development, and ultimately deepen our understanding
of different societies and
cultures. As one student commented perceptively:
The Wikipedia format, being internationally ‘accepted’ and
recognised, ties in well with the concept of studying and comparing
legal systems.
The aims of comparative law thus resonate particularly well with the basic
premise of Wikipedia.
V CONCLUSION
Wikipedia assignments are a welcome addition to the traditional writing tasks
for students. Requiring students to engage actively
with the content of
Wikipedia, its production and limitations will enable students to become more
critical and self-aware in their
use of this now ubiquitous online resource. It
also improves student skills in writing in a different environment and for a
audience, while at the same time improving student engagement through a
‘real world’ exercise.
The skills which writing for Wikipedia requires vary, but are not in all
respects different, from those practised in standard writing
assignments. All
authors need to adapt their writing to the intended audience and the purpose of
their communication. Writing for
an online encyclopaedia affects format and
tone, in particular. As a reference text, Wikipedia should not contain original
be neutral and fact-based. But as in other forms of academic writing,
students still need to thoroughly research traditional scholarly
materials to
arrive at a sound knowledge of the subject area. They will also need to continue
to provide appropriate references to
the sources they use, and they remain
accountable for their quality and currency.
Writing for wikis creates a new learning environment that emphasises teamwork
and collaboration, rather than individualism and competitiveness.
Students are
encouraged to build on one another’s work and to become part of a
community of enquiry. The opportunity to ‘publish’
their work on
Wikipedia allows them to share their work with the world and to critically
engage with the process of knowledge production.
Collaborative learning and
active engagement with the views of others prepares students for a professional
practice that is becoming
increasingly technology-driven, cross-cultural, and
cross-disciplinary.
There are now even more resources at hand to allow teachers unfamiliar with
the potential uses of wikis in the classroom to test the
water and incorporate
them into their teaching. Students in the project discussed here responded, on
the whole, very favourably to
being set an innovative and challenging task that
really engaged them.
Senior Lecturer, Faculty of Law, Monash University Australia. The
author thanks the two anonymous referees for their helpful
Bill Wedemeyer, ‘The Quality of
Scientific Articles on the English Wikipedia’ (Paper presented at the
Wikimania 2008
conference, Alexandria, 19 July 2008)
http://www.kaltura.com/devwiki/index.php/The_quality_of_scientific_articles_on_the_English_Wikipedia
at 20 October
See further
R Stuart Geiger, ‘Conceptions and Misconceptions Academics Hold about
Wikipedia’ (Paper presented at the
Wikimania 2008 conference, Alexandria,
19 July 2008)
http://www.stuartgeiger.com/wordpress/conference-presentations/2008/07/18/conceptions-and-misconceptions-academics-hold-about-wikipedia/
at 20 October
Wikipedia: Size of Wikipedia
http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Wikipedia:Size_of_Wikipedia
at 20 October
is among the ten most popular sites on the Internet and the most widely used
reference website; see
Alexa Top 500 Global Sites
http://www.alexa.com/topsites
October 2009.
Kathrin Busemann and Christoph Gscheidle, ‘Web 2.0: Communitys bei jungen
Nutzern beliebt’ (2009)
Media Perspektiven
356, 360 (referring to
the ARD/ZDF-Onlinestudie 2009).
See, eg, Beth
Simone Noveck, ‘Wikipedia and the Future of Legal Education’
Journal of Legal Education
; Henry Jenkins, ‘What Wikipedia Can
Teach Us about the New Media Literacies’ (Keynote Address presented at the
Media Education Conference 2007, St Louis, 25 June 2007)
http://www.henryjenkins.org/2007/06/what_wikipedia_can_teach_us_ab.html
at 20 October
Wikipedia is a portmanteau of the words wiki (from the Hawaiian wiki-wiki,
meaning quick) and encyclopedia: see
http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Wikipedia
at 20 October 2009. Wikis are already used in legal education as part of
learning management systems such as
Blackboard.
Busemann and Gscheidle, above n 5,
The exercise
took place in semester two, 2007 at the University of Western Australia, Law
School. It appears to have been among the
first to use Wikipedia for assessment
in a law course. For other early projects, see Esther Hoorn and Dore van Hoorn,
Assessment of Using Wikis in Legal Education’ (2007) 1
Journal of Information, Law and Technology
http://www2.warwick.ac.uk/fac/soc/law/elj/jilt/2007_1/hoorn
at 20 October 2009; David Thomson, ‘Using a Wiki to Increase Student
Engagement in Administrative Law’
(2008) 15(1)
The Law Teacher
School and University Projects
http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Schools_and_universities_project
at 20 October
the so-called Wikiversity at
http://en.wikiversity.org
at 20 October
Alison Ruth and Luke Houghton, ‘The Wiki Way of Learning’ (2009) 25
Australasian Journal of Educational Technology
135; Irina Elgort,
Alastair G Smith and Janet Toland, ‘Is Wiki an Effective Platform for
Group Course Work?’ (2008) 24
Australasian Journal of Educational
195; Noveck, above n 6; Hoorn and van Hoorn, above n 9; Sheung On
Choy and Kwok Chi Ng, ‘Implementing wiki software for supplementing
learning’ (2007) 23
Australasian Journal of Educational Technology
Ruth and Houghton, above n 12,
studies have also referred to the lack of a suitable textbook as a reason for
setting a wiki task: see, eg, Ruth and Houghton,
above n 12, 147. However,
encouraging a class to prepare a common set of notes can also encounter
resistance from the more competitive
students: Thomson, above n
early assessment, see Normann Witzleb, Dieter Martiny, Ulrich Thoelke and Tim
Frericks, ‘Comparative Law and the Internet’
Journal of Comparative Law
http://law.kub.nl/ejcl/32/art32-1.html
at 20 October
Brockhaus Enzyklopädie
2005–6) vol
Wikipedia: Your First Article
http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Wikipedia:Your_first_article
at 20 October
Wikipedia: The Perfect Article
http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Wikipedia:The_perfect_article
at 20 October 2009.
Guide to Writing Better Articles <
http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Wikipedia:Guide_to_writing_better_articles
at 20 October 2009.
Students were
referred to the policies of Wikipedia at
Wikipedia: List of Policies
http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Wikipedia:List_of_policies
at 20 October 2009 and other relevant Wikipedia
Other assessment items were a critical review of a journal article (15 per
cent), a research assignment (35 per cent) and a take-home
exam (30 per
example, Wikipedia cautions against the use of ‘Weasel Words’ (such
as, ‘it is widely regarded as’ or
‘some have claimed’),
through which an author expresses an opinion veiled as fact; as well as against
the use of ‘Peacock
Terms’ (such as, ‘beautiful’,
‘well-known’, ‘significant’, and ‘obvious’),
which contain unverifiable evaluations: see
Guide to Writing Better
http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Wikipedia:Guide_to_writing_better_articles
at 20 October 2009.
Wikipedia: No Original Research
http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Wikipedia:No_original_research
at 20 October
Wikipedia: NPOV
http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Wikipedia:NPOV
at 20 October
Wikipedia: Verifiability
http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Wikipedia:Verifiability
at 20 October
Ju Kang, Hee-Jung Yoon and Ji Sim Kim, ‘Relationships among Learning
Authenticity, Motivation, and Achievement in
Web-Based Project Learning’
in Michael Simonson (ed),
31st Annual Proceedings of Selected Research and
Development Papers Presented at the Annual Convention of the Association for
Educational
Communications and Technology
dimensions of ‘thick’ authenticity are that learning is personal,
related to the discipline and aligned with assessment:
David W Schaffer and
Mitchel Resnick ‘“Thick” Authenticity: New Media and Authentic
Learning’ (1999) 10
Journal of Interactive Learning Research
‘strongly agree’ and 1 is ‘strongly
The Law Research Program of the ARC Centre of Excellence for Creative Industries
and Innovation (CCI) has released a
Blog, Podcast, Vodcast and Wiki Copyright
Guide for Australia
which contains useful guidance on copyright issues at
http://cci.edu.au/content/blog-podcast-vodcast-and-wiki-copyright-guide-australia
at 20 October 2009. See, more generally, Peter Black, Hayden Delaney and Brian
Fitzgerald, ‘Legal Issues for Wikis: The
Challenge of User-generated and
Peer-produced Knowledge, Content and Culture’ (2007) 14
Ayers, Charles Matthews and Ben Yates,
How Wikipedia Works
(2008) app B:
Wikipedia for Teachers
http://howwikipediaworks.com/apbs03.html
at 20 October
Murley, ‘In Defense of Wikipedia’
Law Library Journal
http://en.jurispedia.org/index.php/Main_Page
at 20 October
http://topics.law.cornell.edu/wex
at 20 October
Wikipedia: School and University Projects
Wikiversity
http://en.wikiversity.org/wiki/Wikiversity:Main_Page
at 20 October
Houghton, above n 12,
Lysaght and Danielle Istl,
‘Technology: Teaching Students to
Communicate in Another Medium’ (2004) 10
Journal of the Legal Writing
Kathryn O’Brien, ‘Judicial Attitudes to Plain Language and
Australian Bar Review
above n 6; Hoorn and van Hoorn, above n
See further
S Pixy Ferris and Hilary Wilder, ‘Uses and Potentials of Wikis in the
Classroom’ (2006) 2
Innovate — Journal of Online Education
http://innovateonline.info/index.php?view=article & id=258
at 20 October
Houghton, above n
and Sal Humphreys, ‘Building Collaborative Capacities in Learners: The
M/Cyclopedia Project, Revisited’ (Paper
presented at the International
Symposium on Wikis, Montréal, 21–23 October 2007)
http://eprints.qut.edu.au/10518/
at 20 October 2009; Camille Broussard, ‘Teaching with Technology: Is the
Pedagogical Fulcrum Shifting’ (2008–
New York Law School
Noveck, above n 6,
Maharg, ‘On the Edge: ICT and the Transformation of Professional Legal
Learning’ [2006] 3
Web Journal of Current Legal Issues.
Susan Bryant,
Andrea Forte and Amy Bruckman, ‘Becoming Wikipedian: Transformation of
Participation in a Collaborative Online
Encyclopedia’ (Paper presented at
the proceedings of ACM GROUP: International Conference on Supporting Group Work,
Island, 6 November 2005)
See also Elgort, Smith and Toland, above n 12,
Forte and Amy Bruckman, ‘From Wikipedia to the Classroom: Exploring Online
Publication and Learning’ (Paper presented
at the proceedings of the
International Conference on Learning Sciences,
Bloomington, 1 July 2006) 182–188,
http://www.cc.gatech.edu/~aforte/ForteBruckmanFromWikipedia.pdf
at 20 October
Hunter, ‘Walled Gardens’
Washington and Lee Law
; see also Hoorn and van Hoorn, above n
Gallacher, ‘Aux Armes, Citoyens: Time for Law Schools to Lead the Movement
for Free and Open Access to the Law’ (2008–
University of
Toledo Law Review
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (291 KB)
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter