URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/journals/SydLawRw/2025/7.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 15:38:53
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Mendes, Sofia --- "Cessnock City Council v 123 259 932 Pty Ltd: Clarifying Wasted Expenditure, a Facilitation of Proof" [2025] SydLawRw 7; (2025) 47(1) Sydney Law Review 21399
I Introduction
II The State of the Law Prior to Cessnock
III Background
C Court of Appeal
IV The High Court’s Decision
A One Measure of Consequential Loss
B A Principle of Facilitation of Proof
1 The Threshold for Enlivening the Principle
2 A Fluctuating Burden that is Impractical and Inconsistent with Precedent
C Reasonable Expenditure
V The Fundamental Divide
VI Conclusion
Cessnock City Council v 123 259 932 Pty Ltd
Clarifying Wasted Expenditure, A Facilitation of Proof
Sofia Mendes
Cessnock City Council v 123 259 932 Pty Ltd
’), the High Court of Australia provided
long-awaited clarity regarding the method of proving damages for wasted
expenditure
in an action for breach of contract. The plurality did so by
presenting a new framework for assessing such damages where a wrongdoer’s
breach causes or increases uncertainty regarding the position the plaintiff
would have been in ‘but for’ the breach —
a principle of
facilitation of proof. This case note examines the High Court’s treatment
of wasted expenditure, analysing the
method of proving wasted expenditure and
considering the application of
Hadley v Baxendale
prompts consideration of how damages should be assessed, and why they are
awarded. I argue that while the decision appears to provide
an elegant solution
to difficulties faced by plaintiffs in proving damages where a defendant causes
or increases uncertainty as regards
the plaintiff’s loss, the solution is
impractical and inconsistent with earlier authority.
I Introduction
The ruling principle on the recovery of compensatory damages for
consequential loss following a breach of contract is that ‘where
sustains a loss by reason of a breach of contract, he is, so far as money can do
it, to be placed in the same situation,
with respect to damages, as if the
contract had been
performed’.
But how can loss be compensated, and damages assessed, where it is uncertain
what position the plaintiff would have been in had the
contract been performed?
Cessnock City Council v 123 259 932 Pty Ltd
the High Court of Australia considered that question in the context of a
claim for ‘wasted’ expenditure.
The High Court considered how damages for breach of contract are assessed
where a plaintiff has incurred expenditure in reliance on
the expectation that
the defendant will perform its contractual obligations, but the defendant fails
to perform its obligations rendering
the expenditure ‘wasted’. In
four separate judgments (the joint judgment of Edelman, Steward, Gleeson and
Beech-Jones
JJ and the separate judgments of Gageler CJ, Gordon and
Jagot JJ) the High Court unanimously dismissed the Council’s appeal,
allowing the plaintiff to recover expenditure incurred and ‘wasted’
due to the Council’s breach of contract. Yet,
a divide in reasoning
appears, with the disagreement reflecting a difference in the underlying
rationale for awarding damages for
wasted expenditure and the method of
calculating loss.
This case note examines the High Court’s decision in
regards the Court’s introduction of a principle of facilitation of proof
for proving loss in instances of wasted expenditure,
but also more broadly where
a wrongdoer’s breach causes (or increases pre-existing) uncertainty as to
loss. In Part II I trace
the High Court’s jurisprudence on wasted
expenditure prior to
. In Part III I set out the case’s
background, outlining the decision at trial and before the New South Wales
Court of Appeal. In Part IV I summarise the High
Court’s approach to the recovery of wasted expenditure, beginning with its
characterisation, then the method of proof, before turning to a consideration of
remoteness. I argue that the plurality presented
a new method for facilitating
the proving of wasted expenditure, which has a low threshold for enlivenment and
appears to impose
a fluctuating burden of proof that is impractical and
inconsistent with precedent. In Part V I then discuss the fundamental divide
that has arisen over how loss ought to be calculated. Underlying this divide is
the question of why damages are awarded. I argue
that despite the division, the
ruling principle in
Robinson v Harman
to place plaintiffs
in the position they would have been in but for the breach — remains the
II The State of the Law Prior to
, the leading High Court case on the assessment of
damages in the context of wasted expenditure was
Commonwealth v Amann
Aviation Pty Ltd
However, the six separate judgments in
left the law on damages
claimed for wasted expenditure in a state of
To understand how
attempts to clarify the confusion, it is
important to understand the position of the Court to date. Cases like
Commonwealth Disposals Commission
are frequently discussed in this context, however, cases
Carr v JA Berriman Pty Ltd
TC Industrial Plant Pty Ltd v Robert’s Queensland Pty Ltd
are not so well understood. This section traces those decisions, referred to
by the Court in
, to begin to understand the rationale behind the
Court’s recent reasoning and illustrate circumstances where damages for
expenditure have been recognised.
Damages for wasted expenditure have been recognised by the High Court of
Australia since at least 1951, when Dixon and Fullagar JJ
accepted that where a breach of contract makes it
‘impossible’
the value of what was promised and what was received, ‘damages are to be
measured by reference to expenditure incurred
and wasted in reliance’ on
the promise,
with the burden
‘thrown’ to the defendant to prove that, if there was no breach, the
plaintiff would not have recouped
expenditure.
Two years later, the Court once again recognised the availability of damages
for wasted expenditure, this time alluding to its availability
as a unique head
of damage. In
JA Berriman
, a builder entered a contract to build on land
owned by T Carr & Co. However, Carr failed to excavate and deliver the
site, preventing
the builder from commencing work. In the meantime, the builder
had incurred expenditure to employ labourers in anticipation of commencing
building works. Fullagar J, with whom Dixon CJ, Williams, Webb and
Kitto JJ agreed, found that the builder validly rescinded the
contract and
was therefore entitled to
His Honour affirmed the
assessment of damages awarded by Owen J at first instance, which included
three heads of damage, with ‘expenditure
incurred and wasted’
treated as a unique head.
Although Fullagar J appears to treat wasted expenditure as a unique head of
damage, it is important to recognise that his Honour
did not consider the issue
because ‘the amount awarded under this head was not
challenged’.
A decade on, Kitto, Windeyer and Owen JJ in
TC Industrial
expressed a preference for a ‘single calculation’ of damages,
rejecting the notion of the necessity of making an election
between wasted
expenditure and loss of profits.
TC Industrial
, a buyer purchased a defective stone crushing
machine and sought to recover damages for wasted expenditure and loss of profit
the seller. The buyer purchased the machine to fulfil a government contract
to supply a large quantity of crushed stone to the Commonwealth.
The machine did
not meet the required standards and as a result the buyer was unable to fulfil
its contract. This resulted in the
Commonwealth terminating the agreement. The
seller relied on the English decision of
Cullinane v British
“Rema” Manufacturing Co Ltd
to argue that the buyer ‘could not recover under both heads of
damages’ and needed to elect between damages for the ‘expenditure
uselessly incurred’ due to the breach and ‘the loss of the
profits’ it would have earned under the Commonwealth
, the High Court rejected this submission and in turn the English
position that required election between damages for loss of profits
and capital
expenditure.
The Court reasoned
that the majority’s requirement in
that the plaintiff
elect between the heads of damage, flowed from: first, the plaintiff’s
failure to show that his expenditure
would have been
and second, the
confusing use of the word ‘profits’ when what was intended appears
to be ‘gross profits’,
as in revenue or ‘gross
To allow the plaintiff to recover damages for gross receipts, in addition to the
capital expenditure, would have been to allow double
The High Court
suggested that had the majority in
considered a claim for the
capital expenditure plus the ‘profits that would have remained after
recouping’ the expenditure
(that is, net profits), the claim likely would
have been accepted,
putting the
plaintiff in the position they would have been in had the contract been
performed and preventing double
The unanimous judgment in
TC Industrial
makes two important
contributions. First, it rejects the premise that a plaintiff needs to elect
between damages for wasted expenditure
and loss of
Second, their Honours
make clear that the question of damages is best resolved through ‘a single
calculation’, by subtracting
the total expenditure the buyer would have
incurred performing the Commonwealth’s contract from the ‘total
receipts the
plaintiff would have obtained under the contract’, thereby
treating profits as net profits and eliminating concerns of double
The High Court in
TC Industrial
thus, indicated that there ought to be just one measure of
consequential loss.
In sum, prior to
the position appeared to be:
(1) damages for wasted expenditure were available where the position that the
plaintiff otherwise would have been in was impossible
(2) that a plaintiff did not need to elect between damages for wasted
expenditure and loss of profits, nor plead them in the alternative.
, the Commonwealth entered a contract with Amann Aviation Pty
Ltd, whereby Amann Aviation would provide aerial surveillance over the
Australian coastline for three years. However, the Commonwealth purported to
terminate the contract six months after the
contract was awarded (and on the day
surveillance operations commenced). Unfortunately, Amann Aviation had already
incurred expenditure
in preparing for performance, namely acquiring and fitting
out 14 specially equipped aircrafts. Amann Aviation sought damages for
contract, including on a reliance basis.
The result in
was a ‘cacophony of the six different
difficult to discern a ratio decidendi. The position appeared to be that a
‘presumption of recoupment’ gave
rise to a rebuttable presumption
that a plaintiff would recoup its expenses incurred in reliance on the contract,
with the defendant
required to rebut the presumption by proving that the
plaintiff would not have been able to recoup that expenditure even if the
However, the treatment of damages claimed for wasted expenditure nonetheless
remained uncertain.
In this article I do not aim to deal with the complexities of
since this has been attempted
and the importance of these complexities has undoubtedly been diminished by the
decision in
. However, I do identify and consider two unresolved
questions flowing from
. The first is whether this
‘presumption of recoupment’ exists. The second is what the content
and application of the
‘presumption’ could be.
answers both questions.
III Background
In the early 2000s, Cessnock City Council sought to redevelop Cessnock
Airport. To achieve this, the Council, as a developer and the
proprietor, lodged a development application (‘DA’) to consolidate
the airport land, then subdivide
The DA was approved on the
condition that the subdivided lots be connected to the reticulated sewerage
system. However, the subdivision
was never registered by the
After the subdivision
DA approval, a further development application was lodged to develop an aircraft
hangar on one of the proposed
subdivided lots (Lot
The hangar DA was granted.
The appellant and respondent negotiated an agreement whereby the appellant
promised to grant the respondent
a 30-year lease for the proposed Lot 104 the
day after the subdivision plan was registered. Under the agreement, the
respondent was
to pay an annual licence fee and undertake extensive works to
develop the land.
The lease was
subject to the registration of the subdivision plan and required the Council to
take all reasonable actions to apply
for and obtain the registration by the
sunset date. If the plan was not registered by that date, either party could
terminate the
contract also allowed the Council to acquire the hangar for $1 on termination or
expiry of the contract.
The respondent undertook significant works to develop the hangar, estimated
to be about $3.7 million.
construction was complete, the respondent operated three businesses from the
hangar, none were profitable. The respondent then
ceased operation and was
deregistered by ASIC for non-payment of fees. The appellant decided that
connecting the proposed subdivided
lots to sewerage was too costly; as a result,
the land was not subdivided by the sunset date. The appellant then terminated
the contract
acquiring the hangar for $1 from
Cutty Sark was reinstated
by order and commenced proceedings against the Council for breach of contract
claiming that the Council
failed to take all reasonable actions to apply for and
obtain registration of the subdivision plan by the sunset
At first instance, Adamson J concluded that the Council breached its
obligations under the contract because it had failed to take
all reasonable
action to register the subdivision
The plaintiff, Cutty Sark,
sought ‘reliance damages’ at
seeking the wasted
expenditure incurred in reliance on the Council’s obligation to take all
reasonable steps to apply for and
obtain registration of the subdivision plan.
However, Adamson J refused to award substantive damages on two bases.
First, the presumption
did not arise because the Council’s
breach did not render it impossible to calculate the expenditure that would have
been recouped
if the agreement had not been
Second, the damages
sought did not fall within either limb of
Hadley v Baxendale
Thus, Cutty Sark was awarded only nominal damages of $1 and the quantum of Cutty
Sark’s expenditure was not
On appeal, Cutty Sark sought to challenge Adamson J’s finding that
it was only entitled to nominal damages. Cutty Sark argued
that it ought to have
been awarded substantial reliance damages for expenditure incurred constructing
the hangar. The Court of Appeal
(Brereton JA, Macfarlan and
Mitchelmore JJA
unanimously set aside the judgment below, finding:
(1) the presumption in
(2) the Council had failed to rebut the
presumption;
(3) the damages fell within the second limb of
The appeal was allowed, and judgment entered in favour of Cutty Sark for
$3,697,234.41.
The Court of Appeal concluded that the presumption in
arose because Cutty Sark was entitled to recover reasonable
expenditure incurred in relying on the Council’s contractual promise
take all reasonable action to procure and obtain registration of the subdivision
The Court found that the
expenditure incurred did not need to be confined to expenditure incurred
pursuant to or required by the
Adopting the view taken by Macfarlan JA (Bell P and Meagher JA
agreeing) in
Meetfresh Franchising Pty Ltd v Ivanman Pty
the Court of Appeal
rejected the trial judge’s conclusion that wasted expenditure was only
recoverable where expectation damages
were unquantifiable. Further, the Court
concluded the presumption was not rebutted as the Council could not prove that
over the 30-year
lease Cutty Sark would not have recouped its expenditure had
the Council registered the subdivision
Moreover, the nature of
the wasted expenditure could reasonably be supposed to have been contemplated by
both parties at the time
of contracting, meaning the nature of the wasted
expenditure fell within the scope of the second limb in
The Court then
assessed the quantum Cutty Sark expended on the construction of the hangar
including overheads and miscellaneous expenses
$3,697,234.41.
This was the
quantum of reliance damages Cutty Sark was entitled to.
IV The High Court’s Decision
On appeal, the High Court was faced with two questions:
• whether ‘a presumption arose that the respondent would at least
have recouped its wasted expenditure if the contract
between the [Council] and
the respondent had been
performed’;
• whether ‘the presumption was not rebutted in the circumstances
of this case’.
All four judgments recognise the recoverability of expenditure wasted in
reliance on the promise the defendant would perform its obligations.
disagreement arose over the characterisation of wasted expenditure,
(a) whether it is an independent head of damage or a ‘proxy’ for
expectation loss;
(b) how a plaintiff should prove a wasted expenditure claim; and
(c) how such a claim is to be limited to ‘reasonable
expenditure’.
One Measure of Consequential Loss
The plurality, Edelman, Steward, Gleeson and Beech-Jones JJ wrote a
joint judgment stating that ‘it is now well established
that there is only
one measure of consequential losses for a breach of
Their Honours
reasoned that expenditure wasted in anticipation of, or reliance on contractual
performance is best characterised as
a ‘proxy’ for or ‘species
of’ expectation loss.
While Gordon J, writing separately, stated that damages for wasted
expenditure are ‘not a separate measure or category of expectation
but a method of calculating damages
consistent’
principle in
Robinson v Harman
. All five judges shared a common goal
— to place the plaintiff in the position they would have been in had the
contract been
Jagot J also shared the same goal, though she did not explicitly restrict
the recovery of consequential loss to a single measure,
nor did she explicitly
permit the recovery of anticipatory
expenditure.
Gageler CJ’s view is at odds with the plurality’s
characterisation of wasted expenditure. His Honour asserted that ‘[w]asted
expenditure is itself a category of
This position
aligns with the recent decision of
Soteria Insurance Ltd v IBM United Kingdom
where the Court of Appeal of England and Wales treated a claim
for wasted expenditure as distinct from a claim for loss of profits
determining that a clause excluding claims for loss of profit did not exclude a
claim for wasted
expenditure.
However, his Honour thought it unnecessary to go as far as Fuller and Perdue to
recognise a distinction between reliance and expectation
interests, nor the
object of ‘reliance interests’ in putting a plaintiff in the same
position as before the promise was
Instead, Gageler CJ argued that the plaintiff was entitled to compensation
because the defendant’s non-performance caused the
plaintiff to incur
expenditure that was ‘thrown
His Honour framed
this as a ‘legally cognisable respect in which the plaintiff is worse off
as a result of non-performance
in comparison to
performance’.
Nonetheless, by recognising and awarding damages for wasted expenditure as a
unique head of damage, Gageler CJ initially placed the
plaintiff in the
position they would have been in before the contract was made: that is, their
historical position.
plaintiff’s ‘prima facie
entitlement’,
place a plaintiff in a ‘better position than if the defendant had
performed’ the contract, for example, where
a plaintiff sought to recover
wasted expenditure under a loss-making
Against this, and
consistent with the approach taken by the New South Wales Court of Appeal, a
defendant may challenge a plaintiff’s
prima facie entitlement, with the
entitlement reduced to the extent the defendant proves the counterfactual: that
the expenditure
would not have been recouped, even if the contract was
plaintiff’s entitlement nevertheless exceeds the position they would have
been in had the contract been performed,
Gageler CJ imposes a
‘ceiling on the overall damages
recoverable’,
caps a plaintiff ‘at the expectation
This ensures consistency with the principle in
A fundamental divide thus arises in the High Court between the treatment of
wasted expenditure, reflecting the underlying disagreement
over the purpose and
calculation of damages for wasted expenditure.
A Principle of Facilitation of
Edelman, Steward, Gleeson and Beech-Jones JJ reframed how to prove damages
for wasted expenditure, through ‘a principle of facilitation
Importantly, the
principle has potential for broad application, serving as a general framework
regarding the ‘allocation of
the evidentiary and legal burdens of
where a defendant
has caused (or increased) uncertainty as to
The starting point is uncontroversial. The initial legal onus lies with the
plaintiff to prove a breach of contract resulted in loss,
measured against the
position the plaintiff would have been in had the contract been
A facilitation of
proof then occurs where ‘a breach of contract has resulted in (namely,
caused or increased) uncertainty about
the position that the plaintiff would
have been in if the contract had been
performed’.
This marks a
significant expansion from
which suggested that a
presumption would only arise where proof was
The principle facilitates the discharge of the plaintiff’s legal burden of
proof by ‘assuming (or inferring) in their
favour that, had the contract
been performed’, expenditure reasonably incurred in anticipation of, or
reliance on performance
of the contract would have been
Their Honours justify this facilitation principle by explaining that its
rationale is to overcome the ‘uncertainty in proof
of loss occasioned to
the plaintiff by the defendant’s
This principle is
framed as an ‘evidentiary
or ‘prima facie
rather than a
‘presumption’ that parties in commerce recoup their expenses, which
is ‘unrealistic’ as ‘bad
bargain[s]’ are ‘not
uncommon in the ordinary course of commercial
Curiously, the strength of the assumption or inference in favour of the
plaintiff depends on the extent of the uncertainty resulting
defendant’s breach.
implication is that the defendant’s burden of proof — when rebutting
the inference that the plaintiff would have
recovered their expenditure —
depends on the extent to which the breach causes uncertainty as to the
plaintiff’s position
under the relevant, non-breach counterfactual. This
means that the defendant’s burden will be heaviest where the uncertainty
as to the plaintiff’s counterfactual position derives entirely from the
breach, but will be lighter where the breach only results
in some uncertainty
when assessing the plaintiff’s position ‘but for’ the breach.
, the Council was required to ‘lead substantial
evidence’ to prove that the plaintiff would not have recouped its wasted
expenditure.
It failed to, and
the plaintiff was successful in establishing that it would have recovered its
wasted expenditure.
The principle of facilitation of proof represents a principled and
conceptually coherent approach that draws on cases from the law
of torts, the
law of contract, as well as cases concerning statutory claims. Arguably, the
flexibility of the approach has some appeal
given its potential to serve as a
general framework for addressing cases where a defendant creates uncertainty
position, but for the breach. However, Edelman,
Steward, Gleeson and Beech-Jones JJ’s analysis has two shortcomings.
their Honours fail to satisfactorily justify why the principle of
facilitation of proof will be enlivened merely because a defendant’s
‘breach of contract has resulted in (namely, caused or increased)
uncertainty’.
Second, the
majority’s fluctuating burden is unsupported by precedent and there are
legitimate concerns that it is impractical.
It seems likely that further
clarification in subsequent cases will be necessary to understand how the
principle ought to work in
The Threshold for Enlivening the
It is difficult to justify the low threshold for enlivening the principle of
facilitation of proof, particularly given contract claims
tend to involve
‘a degree of conjecture’ where ‘it can be said that it is the
defendant’s breach of contract
that has made conjecture
necessary’.
The facilitation principle appears to derive from
Armory v Delamirie
concerned a claim for trover (that is, conversion), where a
goldsmith (the defendant) wrongfully deprived the rightful owner (the
of his possessory title to a jewel. The defendant refused to produce the jewel.
In turn, Pratt CJ directed the jury to
‘presume the strongest against
[the defendant]’ when determining its value and assessing
This was because the
defendant’s wrongdoing, in withholding the jewel, was the sole cause of
the uncertainty as to the jewel’s
, and cases like it, affirm that the facilitation of
proof against a wrongdoer is not inherently
similarities between
are far from obvious. In
, the defendant actively withheld evidence that would have answered
the question of loss. By contrast, in
the defendant Council was
arguably in no better position than the plaintiff to produce evidence that would
assist in assessing the
plaintiff’s position had the contract been
Moreover, the lower threshold for the principle’s application is
difficult to justify because the cases relied upon by their
Honours confine the
application of the principle to instances where a defendant’s wrongdoing
has ‘made quantification
impossible,
for example where a
defendant destroys evidence,
where the defendant’s wrongdoing
‘preclude[s] the
ascertainment of the amount of damages with
and instances
where it is ‘very hard to learn what the value of the performance would
have been’.
Modern English
authorities, by contrast, are concerned with instances where a defendant’s
breach causes ‘considerable
uncertainty’
‘practical impossibility of proving
A facilitation
principle that arises merely because the defendant’s wrongdoing occasions
uncertainty as to the plaintiff’s position is a significant
jump from existing case law considered by their
A Fluctuating Burden that is Impractical and
Inconsistent with Precedent
Edelman, Steward, Gleeson and Beech-Jones JJ asserted that
‘[n]aturally ... the greater the difficulty in proof that results
defendant’s wrongdoing, the stronger the inference the court will be
prepared to draw against the
wrongdoer’.
To overcome
the potential overreaction of shifting the entire burden to the defendant, where
only minimal uncertainty as to loss
is caused, their Honour’s appear to
impose a fluctuating burden that depends on the degree of uncertainty as to loss
by the defendant’s wrongdoing. The rationale is that the wrongdoer,
rather than the injured party, ought to bear the ‘the
risk of uncertainty
that results’ from the
wrongdoing.
framework is difficult to justify with case law, and in practice. In support of
the premise, their Honours rely on
Porton Capital Technology Funds v 3M UK
Holdings Ltd
However, the reliance on
is overstated as in that case
Hamblen J rejected the application of the principle in
stating that as a matter of principle
‘should not be
extended further than is
necessary’.
Hamblen J consider the critical question of whether the strength of the
burden placed on the defendant varied according to
the uncertainty of loss
resulting from their wrongdoing.
It is not only inconsistent with precedent, but also impractical to impose a
burden on the defendant that varies according to the
extent their wrongdoing
affects the uncertainty of the plaintiff’s counterfactual position. Jagot
and Gordon JJ, writing separately,
were critical of that approach.
Gordon J stressed that it is not the role of a trial judge to
‘undertake a forensic assessment
of the gravity of the wrongdoer’s
conduct’ and ‘assess the
of the uncertainty that
results from the breach’ to adjust the burden placed on the wrongdoer to
prove the plaintiff would still
have made a
Instead, a trial
judge’s task is to assess the evidence before them to identify the
counterfactual position.
Jagot J acknowledges, this assessment may be influenced by the
‘nature of the particular contract or the allocation of risks
it’, but the strength of the ‘presumption’ remains
On the other hand,
Gageler CJ, perhaps also appreciating these difficulties, simplifies a
plaintiff’s task of proving and quantifying
loss, by treating wasted
expenditure as a unique head of
thereby avoiding the
imposition of a threshold of uncertainty, difficulty or impossibility, and the
need to shift burdens.
The expansion of a facilitation of proof to circumstances where a defendant
causes uncertainty as to the plaintiff’s loss is
therefore both
impractical and inconsistent with precedent. Nevertheless, when the facilitation
of proof principle is extended to
cases where the defendant’s wrongdoing
causes uncertainty as to loss, Gordon J’s approach ought to be
favoured as it
successfully clarifies the confusion in
adopting the principle of facilitation of proof presented by Edelman, Steward,
Gleeson and Beech-Jones JJ. However, Gordon
J’s approach avoids
the challenges that flow from an everchanging burden placed on wrongdoers that
varies according to the
uncertainty resulting from their breach and is
particularly unwieldly in cases like
defendant’s breach is not the sole cause of the uncertainty as to loss,
but adds to pre-existing
uncertainty.
Reasonable Expenditure
Damages for wasted expenditure have traditionally been limited to expenditure
that has been ‘reasonably
However, it
is unclear precisely what this limitation denotes and, in particular, the extent
to which it derives from the principle
articulated in
the appellants in
did not allege that the expenditure was not
reasonably incurred, their Honours nonetheless expressed some views on the
question of
remoteness in obiter dicta.
Both Gageler CJ and Jagot J, writing separately, adopted
in relation to the contemplation of wasted expenditure. Jagot J found
that the expenditure wasted by Cutty Sark fell within the second
, meaning that at the time of contracting, the loss could
reasonably have been contemplated by the parties as a probable result of
Gageler CJ, was of the view that ‘the Court of Appeal was
in applying
the ‘standard limiting principles, such as remoteness and
mitigation’ to damages for wasted
expenditure.
Edelman, Steward, Gleeson and Beech-Jones JJ proposed an alternative
method of applying
, suggesting that perhaps the remoteness
should be applied to the plaintiff’s lost potential
rather than its wasted
expenditure.
consistent with their position that wasted expenditure is a proxy for
expectation loss and only used to enliven the principle
of facilitation of
In practice, it means
that the remoteness limit applies to the overall expectation interest, the lost
potential revenue, rather than
wasted expenditure.
This also seems to
address the concerns that the foreseeability of wasted expenditure may not be in
the contemplation of the parties
at the time of contracting, while ‘the
prospect of a loss of future potential revenue would plainly be within the[ir]
knowledge’.
the plurality acknowledge the application of the rules of mitigation of loss,
which, in addition to the rules of remoteness
of loss, limit ‘loss which
is due to unreasonable or improvident actions of the plaintiff’, with the
onus of proof falling
Gordon J, consistently with earlier
authorities,
recognised the
existence of a reasonableness criterion to prevent damages for wasted
expenditure becoming a ‘form of
insurance’.
her Honour avoided referencing
, despite assessing reasonable
expenditure by considering whether the ‘nature and extent of the
expenditure ... was in the contemplation
Her Honour then considered the distinction between essential and incidental
expenditure. She concluded that the reasonableness criterion
is sufficient to
limit any remote damages and extended that reasoning to expenditure incurred
‘in performing or preparing to
perform the contract’, which she
found ought to be recoverable as wasted expenditure, so long as it was still
subject to the
reasonableness
For example, in
the expenditure was incurred ‘so that they could
derive benefit from the contract’, even though the ‘expenditure
not required by ... any contractual obligation’, the expenditure was
nonetheless wasted and
recoverable.
wrongdoer shows that the wasted expenditure is not reasonable, either because of
the type of expenditure, or the amount expended,
‘plaintiff’s expenditure was, on the balance of probabilities,
wasted anyway’, that expenditure would not
recoverable.
remains relevant in limiting the damages recoverable to expenditure that is
reasonably incurred.
V The Fundamental Divide
A fundamental divide arose between the plurality and Gageler CJ over how
loss and damage ought to be determined. Edelman, Steward,
Gleeson and
Beech-Jones JJ adopt an approach that is forward looking, aiming to
compensate the deterioration of a plaintiff’s
projected financial
position, to place the plaintiff in the factual position they would have been in
had there been no breach. On
the other hand, Gageler CJ’s approach is
backward looking, aiming to compensate the harm caused by reliance on a contract
was breached, (at least initially) placing the plaintiff in the position
had the contract not been
The distinction can be explained by reference to Campbell and Halson’s
universal formula for contractual damages:
E = d = e + r
is the overall expectation interest.
is contractual damages
is the net profit concept of expectation interest
is the reliance interest, which is taken to be ‘investment the
parties may make (part-) performing their obligations’
which is wasted due
to the breach.
Gageler CJ treated wasted expenditure and the net profit concept of
expectation interest, as separate heads of damage, which are combined
determine the overall contractual damages. His Honour identified wasted
expenditure as the amount expended by the plaintiff in
reliance on the
expectation of performance, which was wasted upon the defendant’s
This requires looking
backwards and puts the plaintiff in the position had the contract not been
entered, while the expectation interest
looks forward, placing the plaintiff in
the position had the contract been performed. By treating wasted expenditure as
head of loss, Gageler CJ determined the plaintiff’s prima
facie entitlement by reference to a historical approach to the calculation
loss, arguing that ‘[c]ompensable damage lies in the simple fact that the
plaintiff has incurred expenditure which, because
of non-performance, is
incapable of yielding any benefit or gain to the
plaintiff’.
over-compensation, the overall contractual damages are then ‘capped at the
expectation position’,
that is E, the overall expectation interest. This ensures adherence to the
fundamental principle in
Robinson v Harman
. But it remains unclear how
Gageler CJ calculates the ceiling on recovery, that is the overall
expectation interest.
In contrast, Edelman, Steward, Gleeson and Beech-Jones JJ calculated E, the
overall expectation interest, directly, with wasted expenditure
only used as a
proxy to assist in the calculation of the expectation interest. This method is
supported by economic theory, which
suggests that ‘perfect expectation
damages’ is the best remedy as it encourages the performance of contracts
and disincentivises
repudiation.
However, because
this method is entirely forward-looking, it is often difficult to estimate the
position the plaintiff would have
been in had the contract been performed. For
that reason, Gageler CJ’s approach is appealing as it simplifies a
plaintiff’s
method of proving wasted expenditure and does not require the
defendant’s wrongdoing to occasion uncertainty when proving
However, the treatment of wasted expenditure as a unique head of damage, is
difficult to reconcile with Australian precedent. Gageler
CJ argued that
his position accords with the reasoning of the High Court in
TC Industrial
But at best, on a close reading of these cases, the reasoning merely alludes to
treating wasted expenditure as a distinct category
Whilst, at worst,
could be taken to suggest the opposite, with the Court favouring
a single calculation of loss aimed at placing a plaintiff in the
position they
would have been in had the contract been
Nevertheless, there is some principled basis for Gageler CJ’s
approach. In England and Wales, for example, the object of an
award of wasted
expenditure has been recognised ‘to compensate the aggrieved party for
expenses incurred and losses suffered
in reliance on the
Notably, Owen also suggests that even where a plaintiff enters a
‘deliberate bad
they should
still be entitled to damages for wasted expenditure, albeit subject to a cap of
expectation loss.
example, where a plaintiff enters a contract that is initially loss-making with
the expectation of future contracts, a plaintiff
should be entitled to wasted
expenditure if ‘the breach has made the prospect of future profits
significantly lower than it
would have been had the contract been fully
performed’.
because ‘an innocent party’s reasonable
ought to be
protected. On a practical level, the emphasis placed on wasted expenditure,
rather than an expectation interest, may
be because ‘losing what one
previously possessed is commonly regarded as more serious than failing to get
something one was
damages for wasted expenditure as a unique head of damage, is easier to prove,
given it is the actual amount expended in
reasonable reliance on the
In practice, there may be little difference between the ultimate outcome
under the plurality’s approach or Gageler CJ’s
Gageler CJ imposes a ceiling on the overall damages recoverable, which is
the plaintiff’s overall expectation position.
This ceiling is the overall
expectation interest the plurality seeks to calculate directly. In the end, both
approaches ground themselves
in the orthodoxy of
Robinson v Harman
plurality places the plaintiff in the position they would have been in but for
the breach, while Gageler CJ ensures the plaintiff
is in no better position
than they would have been in but for the breach.
VI Conclusion
The High Court’s decision in
is significant for several
reasons. Not only does the decision clarify how plaintiffs should prove damages
for wasted expenditure,
but it also offers a general principle for dealing with
the allocation of evidential and legal burdens in circumstances where a
defendant’s
wrongdoing has caused (or increased) uncertainty regarding the
plaintiff’s non-breach position.
nonetheless raises
fundamental questions about the rationale for awarding damages for breach of
contract and, despite clarifying how
damages for wasted expenditure ought to be
proven, many questions remain unanswered. For example, how a Court will respond
for both loss of profits and wasted expenditure, and how it will
treat non-pecuniary benefits.
The principle of facilitation of proof aims to offer a general method of proof
‘to address and minimise the forensic disadvantage
However, the
principle does not emerge with clarity from precedent. Instead, greater
complexity is sown into and permitted to invade
Please cite this article as:
Sofia Mendes, ‘
Cessnock City Council v 123 259 932 Pty
: Clarifying Wasted Expenditure,
A Facilitation of Proof’ (2025) 47
Sydney Law Review
21399:1–18 <https://doi.org/10.30722/slr.21399>.
This work is licensed via CC BY-ND 4.0
<https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nd/4.0>.
Unmodified content is free to use with proper attribution.
* BEc/BAdvStudies (Hons I) (
), LLB (Hons I) (
Researcher to the Equity Division, Supreme Court of New South Wales. ORCID iD:
https://orcid.org/0009-0004-3121-2687.
Thank you to Professor Kimberlee Weatherall, Associate Professor David
Winterton and Dr Adam Waldman for their helpful feedback and
guidance in the
preparation of this case note.
A version of this case note was awarded the 2024 Peter Paterson Prize for
the best Bachelor of Laws or Juris Doctor student contribution
to the Sydney Law
Review unit of study.
Robinson v Harman
[1848] EngR 135
, 365 (Parke B) (‘
Robinson v Harman
The High Court of Australia affirmed this proposition in
Cessnock City
Council v 123 259 932 Pty Ltd
[2024] HCA 17
(2024) 98 ALJR 719
, 724 [6] (Gageler CJ),
732 [48] (Gordon J), 735 [60] (Edelman, Steward, Gleeson and
Beech-Jones JJ), 759 [190] (Jagot J) (‘
Commonwealth v Amann
Aviation Pty Ltd
[1991] HCA 54
(1991) 174 CLR 64
Andrew Burrows,
Remedies for
Torts, Breach of Contract, and Equitable Wrongs
(Oxford University Press,
2019) 80; GH Treitel, ‘Damages for Breach of Contract in the High Court of
Australia’ (1992)
108 (April)
Law Quarterly Review
McRae v Commonwealth
Disposals Commission
[1951] HCA 79
(1951) 84 CLR 377
also Gerald Ng, ‘The Onus of Proof in a Claim for Reliance Damages for
Breach of Contract’
(2006) 22(2)
Journal of Contract Law
Carr v JA Berriman Pty Ltd
[1953] HCA 31
(1953) 89 CLR 327
JA Berriman
TC Industrial Plant Pty Ltd
v Robert’s Queensland Pty Ltd
[1963] HCA 57
(1963) 180 CLR 130
) 414 (Dixon and Fullagar JJ, McTiernan J
Ibid 415 (Dixon and Fullagar
JJ, McTiernan J agreeing). In
, the plaintiffs incurred expenditure
on a salvage operation after purchasing an oil tanker from the Commonwealth
Disposals Commission.
The Commission provided the plaintiffs with the supposed
coordinates of the tanker and the plaintiff incurred expenditure on a salvage
operation ‘on the faith of the promise that there was a tanker in that
place’: at 414. However, the tanker did not exist.
Ibid 414 (Dixon and Fullagar
JJ, McTiernan J agreeing);
CCC Films (London) Ltd v Impact Quadrant Films
[1985] 1 QB 16
, 38, 40 (Hutchison J) (‘
) 106 (Brennan J).
JA Berriman
TC Industrial
Cullinane v British
“Rema” Manufacturing Co Ltd
[1954] 1 QB 292
TC Industrial
Ibid 142–3. Cf
), affirmed in
Anglia Television v Reed
[1972] 1 QB 60
, 64 (Lord Denning MR).
TC Industrial
David Campbell and Roger
Halson, ‘Expectation and Reliance: One Principle or Two?’
Journal of Contract Law
, 242; Donald Harris,
Remedies in
Contract and Tort
(Weidenfeld and Nicolson, 1988) 103–5; AI Ogus,
The Law of Damages
(Butterworths, 1973) 352–4.
) 105; Ogus (n
TC Industrial
) 140; GH Treitel,
The Law of Contract
(Stevens & Sons, 3
ed, 1970) 797; Edwin Peel,
The Law of Contract
(Sweet & Maxwell, 14
ed, 2015) 1129
) 105. See also
) 732–3 [49] (Gordon
TC Industrial
) 142; affirmed in
) 85 (Mason CJ and Dawson J).
TC Industrial
) 143. See the discussion of gross
receipts versus net profits in Campbell and Halson (n
This question was not
considered in
JA Berriman
TC Industrial
. However, the Court
appeared to accept that damages for wasted expenditure were available, even
though damages would not have been
impossible to calculate:
TC Industrial
JA Berriman
) 140. See also
) 729 [28] (Gageler CJ).
) 86–90 (Mason CJ and Dawson J),
105–7 (Brennan J), 126–7 (Deane J);
Meetfresh Franchising Pty Ltd
v Ivanman Pty Ltd
[2020] NSWCA 234
, [30]–[31] (Macfarlan JA, Bell P
and Meagher JA agreeing) (‘
’). Cf HK Lücke,
‘The So-Called Reliance Interest in the High Court’
(1994) 6(2)
Corporate and Business Law Journal
See generally, David
Winterton, ‘Reassessing “Reliance Damages”: The High Court
Cessnock City Council v 123 259 932 Pty Ltd
[2024] SydLawRw 4
(2024) 46(1)
Sydney Law Review
, 93–7; JW Carter, Wayne Courtney and GJ
Tolhurst, ‘Issues of Principle in Assessing Contract Damages’
Journal of Contract Law
, 177–9; David McLauchlan,
‘Reliance Damages for Breach of Contract’
New Zealand
, 430–40; Treitel, ‘Damages for Breach of Contract
in the High Court of Australia’ (n
) 738 [76] (Edelman, Steward, Gleeson,
Beech-Jones JJ).
Ibid 738 [80] (Edelman,
Steward, Gleeson, Beech-Jones JJ).
Ibid 738 [82] (Edelman,
Steward, Gleeson, Beech-Jones JJ).
Ibid 738 [84] (Edelman,
Steward, Gleeson, Beech-Jones JJ).
Ibid 738 [85] (Edelman,
Steward, Gleeson, Beech-Jones JJ).
Ibid 738 [84] (Edelman,
Steward, Gleeson, Beech-Jones JJ).
Ibid 736 [63] (Edelman,
Steward, Gleeson, Beech-Jones JJ).
Ibid 736 [63] (Edelman,
Steward, Gleeson, Beech-Jones JJ).
Ibid 741 [103] (Edelman,
Steward, Gleeson, Beech-Jones JJ).
123 259 932 Pty Ltd v
Cessnock City Council (No 2)
[2021] NSWSC 1329
, [178]–[179].
Ibid [210].
Ibid [215], [221].
Ibid [225], citing
v Baxendale
[1853] EngR 802
(1854) 9 Ex 341
123 259 932 Pty Ltd v
Cessnock City Council (No 2)
[2021] NSWSC 1329
123 259 932 Pty Ltd v
Cessnock City Council
[2023] NSWCA 21
(2023) 110 NSWLR 464
[121]–[124] (Brereton JA, Macfarlan JA agreeing at 466 [1],
Mitchelmore JA agreeing at 519 [171]).
Ibid 509 [135], 511 [140]
(Brereton JA).
Ibid 514–15 [149]
(Brereton JA).
Ibid 518–19 [170]
(Brereton JA).
Ibid 485 [64]
(Brereton JA).
Ibid 485–6 [65]
(Brereton JA).
Ibid 493 [92]
(Brereton JA), quoting
) [30]–[31].
Ibid 509 [135]
(Brereton JA).
Ibid 514–15 [149]
(Brereton JA).
Ibid 517 [159]
(Brereton JA).
) 743 [115] (Edelman, Steward, Gleeson and
Beech-Jones JJ).
Ibid 743 [117] (Edelman,
Steward, Gleeson and Beech-Jones JJ).
Ibid 744 [119] (Edelman,
Steward, Gleeson and Beech-Jones JJ) (citations omitted).
Ibid 733 [51] (Gordon
Ibid 743 [114], 758 [182]
(Edelman, Steward, Gleeson and Beech-Jones JJ) quoting
Yam Seng Pte Ltd v
International Trade Corporation Ltd
[2013] 1 Lloyd’s Rep 526, 553
[188] (Leggatt J), 733 [52] (Gordon J).
) 759 [191]–[192] (Jagot J); David
Winterton, ‘Clarifying the Basis for Recovering Reliance Expenditure as
Damages for
Breach of Contract in Australia’ (2025) 141 (January)
Quarterly Review
19, 21–2 (‘Reliance Expenditure as
) 725 [9] (Gageler CJ).
Soteria Insurance Ltd v
IBM United Kingdom Ltd
[2022] EWCA Civ 440
[2022] 2 All ER (Comm) 1082
) 725 [12] (Gageler CJ). See also
Winterton, ‘Reliance Expenditure as Damages’
) 23–4; LL Fuller and WR Perdue,
‘The Reliance Interest in Contract Damages: 1’
(1936) 46(1)
Law Journal
; American Law Institute,
Restatement (Second) of Contracts
(1981) § 349.
) 725 [12] (Gageler CJ).
McLauchlan (n
) 723 [3] (Gageler CJ).
AI Ogus, ‘Notes of
Cases: Damages for Pre-Contract Expenditure’
(1972) 35(4)
) 723–4 [2]–[3] (Gageler CJ);
Cessnock (NSWCA)
487–8 [73], 513 [146] (Brereton JA).
) 726 [16] (Gageler CJ).
Adam Kramer, ‘The New
Leading Case on Reliance or Wasted Expenditure Damages in Contract:
City Council v 123 259 932 Pty Ltd
[2024] HCA 17
’ (2024) 39(2)
Journal of Contract Law
) 724 [6] (Gageler CJ), citing
[1991] HCA 15
(1991) 172 CLR 60
) 746–7 [127] (Edelman, Steward,
Gleeson and Beech-Jones JJ). See also
Allen v Tobias
[1958] HCA 13
(1958) 98 CLR 367
Haley v Laing
O’Rourke Australia Management Services Pty Ltd (No 8)
FedCFamC2G 779
, [48] (Manousaridis J).
) 747 [129]. See ibid [53]–[56]
(Manousaridis J) where the principle was applied, in the context of an
employment contract,
to determine whether the contract was terminated lawfully.
Commonwealth v Sanofi
[2024] HCA 47
(2024) 99 ALJR 213
, 221 [14] (Gordon A-CJ,
Edelman and Steward JJ). Cf
Kisun v New Zealand
[2024] FCAFC 118
[46] (Bromwich, Abraham and Halley JJ).
) 735–6 [61], 746 [127] (Edelman,
Steward, Gleeson and Beech-Jones JJ).
Ibid 735 [61] (Edelman,
Steward, Gleeson and Beech-Jones JJ).
) 89 (Mason CJ and Dawson J), 126 (Deane
L Albert & Son v Armstrong Rubber Co
, 178 F 2d 182, 189
Cir, 1949). See also
Omak Maritime Ltd v Mamola Challenger
Shipping Co Ltd
[2011] 1 Lloyd’s Rep 47, 51 [22] (Teare J).
) 735–6 [61] (Edelman, Steward,
Gleeson and Beech-Jones JJ).
Ibid. See also
) 142 (Toohey J).
) 747 [128] (Edelman, Steward, Gleeson and
Beech-Jones JJ), citing
) 142 (Toohey J), 156 (Gaudron J), 165
(McHugh J);
Berry v CCL Secure Pty Ltd
[2020] HCA 27
(2020) 271 CLR 151
(Bell, Keane and Nettle JJ) (‘
’). See also
(2019) 266 CLR 544
, 575–6 [32] (Kiefel CJ, Bell, Gageler,
Keane, Nettle and Gordon JJ).
) 747 [128];
) 165–6 (McHugh J);
Aviation Pty Ltd v Commonwealth
[1990] FCA 55
(1990) 22 FCR 527
) 751 [150] (Edelman, Steward, Gleeson and
Beech-Jones JJ). See also Winterton, ‘Reliance Expenditure as
) 81, 87 (Mason CJ and
Dawson J), 156 (Gaudron J).
) 735–6 [61] (Edelman, Steward,
Gleeson and Beech-Jones JJ).
Ibid 758 [184] (Edelman,
Steward, Gleeson and Beech-Jones JJ).
Ibid 759 [186] (Edelman,
Steward, Gleeson and Beech-Jones JJ).
Ibid 735 [61] (Edelman,
Steward, Gleeson and Beech-Jones JJ).
Porton Capital Technology
Funds v 3M UK Holdings Ltd
[2011] EWHC 2895 (Comm)
[244] (Hamblen J)
Armory v Delamirie
(1722) 1 Strange 505;
[1722] EWHC J94
) 747 [130] (Edelman, Steward,
Gleeson and Beech-Jones JJ). Cf
McCartney v Orica Investments Pty Ltd
[2011] NSWCA 337
, [210] (Young JA) (‘
) [237]–[245];
[2005] EWCA Civ 753
, [205] (Parker LJ);
Double G Communications
Ltd v News Group International Limited
[2011] EWHC 961 (QB)
, [99] (Eady
In this case, the Council
may have been better placed to produce evidence, though generally defendants are
not: see, eg,
Blatch v Archer
(1774) 1 Cowper 63;
[1774] EngR 2
, 970 [65];
) 748 [132] (Edelman, Steward, Gleeson and
Beech-Jones JJ), quoting
Murphy v Overton Investments Pty Ltd
[2004] HCA 3
, 416 [74].
) 86 (Mason CJ and Dawson J), 105 (Brennan
J), 126 (Deane J), 154 (Gaudron J);
) 414 (Dixon and Fullagar JJ, McTiernan J
agreeing). See also
) 38 (Hutchinson J).
[29] (Bell, Keane and Nettle
JJ). See also
White v Lady Lincoln
[1803] EngR 541
(1803) 8 Ves Jun 363
32 ER 395 (Lord
Gray v Haig
[1855] EngR 469
(1855) 20 Beav 219
52 ER 587 (Romilly
Lupton v White
[1808] EngR 429
(1808) 15 Ves Jun 432
33 ER 817 (Lord
Indian Oil Corporation Ltd v Greenstone Shipping SA (Panama)
, 369 (Staughton J);
) [208], [214] (Young JA).
Story Parchment Co v
Paterson Parchment Paper Co
[1931] USSC 49
, 563 (1931), quoted in
) 747 [131] (Edelman, Steward,
Gleeson and Beech-Jones JJ).
L Albert & Son v
Armstrong Rubber Co
[136] (Edelman, Steward, Gleeson and Beech-Jones JJ).
Yam Seng Pte Ltd v
International Trade Corporation Ltd
[2013] 1 Lloyd’s Rep 536, 553
[188] (Leggatt J), quoted in
) 752 [152] (Edelman, Steward, Gleeson and
Beech-Jones JJ).
Omak Maritime Ltd v
Mamola Challenger Shipping Co
52–3 [33] (Teare J), quoting
) 40 (Hutchinson J). See
) 752 [152] (Edelman, Steward,
Gleeson and Beech-Jones JJ).
See generally
Partners Consulting Pty Ltd v Neville’s Bus Service Pty Ltd
[2019] FCAFC 119
, 418 [116] (Allsop CJ, Yates and O’Bryan JJ);
) [148]–[161] (Giles JA,
Macfarlan JA agreeing); [198]–[218] (Young JA).
) 748 [132] (Edelman, Steward, Gleeson and
Beech-Jones JJ).
Ibid 748 [131] (Edelman,
Steward, Gleeson and Beech-Jones JJ).
Ibid 749 [138] (Edelman,
Steward, Gleeson and Beech-Jones JJ), citing
) 735 [58] (Gordon J) (emphasis in
Ibid 768 [236] (Jagot
Ibid 728 [25] (Gageler
) 81 (Mason CJ and Dawson J). See also
) 412–13 (Dixon
and Fullagar JJ, McTiernan J agreeing).
) 769 [238] (Jagot J).
Ibid 723 [3] (Gageler
Ibid 724 [3] (Gageler
CJ). See also at 727 [23] (Gageler CJ), citing
) 743 [114] (Edelman, Steward,
Gleeson and Beech-Jones JJ).
Ibid 743 [114] (Edelman,
Steward, Gleeson and Beech-Jones JJ).
[120]–[121] (Edelman, Steward, Gleeson and Beech-Jones JJ), citing
Arsalan v Rixon
[2021] HCA 40
(2021) 274 CLR 606
, 624–5 [32];
TC Industrial
) 412–3 (Dixon and Fullagar JJ,
McTiernan J agreeing);
) 81 (Mason CJ and Dawson J).
) 734 [55] (Gordon J).
Ibid. Cf Marc Owen,
‘Aspects of the Recovery of Reliance Damages in the Law of Contract’
(1984) 4(3)
Oxford Journal of Legal Studies
Ibid 734 [53] (Gordon
Ibid 734 [54] (Gordon
Ibid 734 [56] (Gordon
See generally the
discussion on the components of compensatory damages in
Moore v Scenic Tours
[2020] HCA 17
(2020) 268 CLR 326
, 348–9 [63]–[64] (Edelman J). See
also Nicholas Tiverios and David Winterton, ‘The Nature and Availability
of “Negotiating
Damages” for Breach of Contract’ (2025) 48(3)
Melbourne University Law Review
(forthcoming).
Campbell and Halson (n
) 233. See also at 235.
) 724 [3] (Gageler CJ).
Ibid 725–6 [12]
(Gageler CJ).
) 65, citing; ibid 726 [16] (Gageler
‘Reliance Expenditure as Damages’
Robert Cooter and Thomas
Law and Economics
(Berkeley Law Books, 6
) 726 [14] (Gageler CJ).
Ibid 727 [21] (Gageler
JA Berriman
TC Industrial
Surrey County Council
v Bredero Homes Ltd
[1993] EWCA Civ 7
[1993] 1 WLR 1361
, 1369 (Steyn LJ) quoted in
‘Reliance Expenditure as Damages’
But compare
), which may be
inconsistent with the plurality in
[2024] HCA 42
(2024) 98 ALJR 1407
, 1434 [102] (Edelman J).
Adopting the language and
warning of Jagot J in
) 760 [193].
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (185 KB)
PDF format (420 KB)
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter