URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/journals/HRD/2007/25.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 15:01:47
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Mansour, Julia --- "Rights in Action? The justiciability of Economic, Social and Cultural rights in Australia" [2007] HRightsDef 25; (2007) 16(3) Human Rights Defender 17
Playing fair with housing rights during mega-events
Playing fair with housing rights during
mega-events
Claire Mahon
In less than a year all eyes will be on Beijing and its opening up to the
world as an Olympic Host City. Many concerns have been
raised about whether
Beijing is an appropriate venue for an event that prides itself on admirable
principles of fair play, given
China’s human rights record. Limitations on
foreign media coverage and the lack of freedom of the domestic press in China
we may never know the truth behind the shiny façade that will be
presented in August 2008. One thing that has been brought to
light and should be
of concern is the price that ordinary Beijing residents have already been made
to pay for hosting this international
event – over 1.5 million people have
been, or will be displaced or forcibly evicted in Beijing in preparation for the
Closer to home, in the lead-up to the Sydney Games in 2000, there were also
concerns that not everyone would enjoy ‘sharing
the spirit’ of the
Olympics. Organisations such as Rentwatchers rallied civil society and lobbied
government to ward off an
Atlantastyle
‘clean up’ of
escalations in housing costs.
While displacements in the Olympic corridor were
not as widespread or large-scale as originally feared, the development and
gentrification
process that accompanied the Sydney Games contributed
significantly to the rising unaffordability in housing, disproportionately
affecting poor and minority groups.
As a recent study has shown,
Sydney and Beijing are not isolated examples, although in comparison with other
Olympic Host Cities,
Sydney could be considered to be more of an example of best
practice than most.
The Centre on Housing Rights and Evictions (COHRE), a housing rights
organisation based in Geneva, has recently published a major
research project
analysing how more than 20 years of Olympic Host City experiences demonstrate an
alarmingly consistent story of
violations of the housing rights of local
inhabitants.
Olympic Games are plagued by evictions in the host city
(often forced and violent); escalations in housing costs creating housing
unaffordability; reductions in the provision of social and public housing; the
introduction of targeted operations such as street
sweeps to eliminate the
visibility of homelessness; adoption of legislative measures to more easily
allow expropriation of private
property, to increase police powers, or to
restrict civil liberties; discrimination against marginalised communities and
groups; and limited transparency toward and participation of local
The Olympic Games have brought displacement and housing instability for
millions: COHRE estimates that over two million people have
been displaced in
cities hosting the Olympic Games. Beginning in Seoul in 1988 with the forced
eviction of 720,000 people, the COHRE
study traces the legacy of discrimination
against low-income earners, homeless and other minorities who are often driven
the city in preparation for the big event. For example, of the 2,500
people displaced in Barcelona in 1992, many were Roma.
In Barcelona,
the effects of the Olympic Games were long-term and widespread, as the cost of
housing increased by approximately 140
percent, and the provision of public
housing decreased by 75 percent. A similar story was seen in Atlanta, where
30,000 poor and
low-income earners were displaced for the 1996 Games and over
2,000 public housing units were demolished. The 2004 Games in Athens
2,700 Roma residents, aggravating the discrimination they already faceed and
further damaging their ability to secure adequate
London, the preparations for the 2012 Games have already affected 1,000 people
through displacements from community housing
and escalations in housing
And it’s not just the socio-economic rights such as
housing and the flow on effects on work, education, and access to social
services, which are affected. In Beijing the impacts on civil and political
rights are obvious too – there are many examples
of housing rights
defenders who have been violently harassed and imprisoned for standing up for
those forcibly evicted, and tough
new laws have been introduced to stifle their
legal representatives.
Other mega-events don’t fare much better: over 400,000 people have been
displaced in Shanghai in preparation for the 2010 World’s
Fair and 300,000
people have been evicted in ‘slum upgrading’ projects in Delhi in
preparation for the 2010 Commonwealth
Games. These are but some examples. The
COHRE report shows that negative housing effects have resulted from sporting
events such
as the FIFA World Cup, the Asian Games, and even a non-land bound
event such as the America’s Cup. Evictions of poor people
and minority
groups and discrimination against homeless people have also been characteristics
of international cultural events: in
Greece many Roma were harassed and evicted
during the 2006 Cultural Capital of Europe celebrations, in Japan homeless
people were
forcibly removed from the areas surrounding the site of the World
Rose Convention, and in Nigeria and Thailand the Miss World and
Miss Universe
Beauty Pageants led to evictions of families. Large-scale political gatherings
have had similar effects: recently
hundreds of street children were rounded up
before the Commonwealth Heads of Government meeting to be held in Kampala,
late November 2007, and in the Philippines 12 land rights protesters
speaking out against the violent forced eviction of 30 families
outside the
ASEAN Summit languished in jail for many months. It is clear that throughout the
world mega-event organisers and host
cities and governments are showing scant
regard for the housing rights of the local population in their pursuit of the
tourist dollar,
foreign investment, international recognition and prestige.
These often ignored human impacts, in particular the flagrant violations of
the right to housing, are unacceptable. A celebration
of culture, a sporting
event, a political conference, or an Olympic Games, should not be marred by
trauma and loss of housing for
those ‘lucky’ enough to live in the
host city. For the Olympic Movement at least, such impacts are in violation of
Olympic Principles which rest on fair play and respect for others and
contrary to the recent commitments to promote sustainable Games,
positive housing legacies. For governments that fail to adequately protect the
housing rights of local populations, or
who are directly engaged or complicit in
the violations which take place, their international legal responsibility is
hosting of a mega-event without due consideration given to the
protection of housing rights is a violation of socio-economic rights.
Olympic sponsors and companies involved in the Games (including construction
companies and architectural firms) should take
note – protecting human
rights is everyone’s responsibility and abuses of housing rights in the
name of the Olympics
is not acceptable.
Yet it’s not all bad news. In some of the studies of Olympic cities
examples of ‘best practices’ were evident.
In Sydney for example, a
City of Sydney and the NSW
Police, affirmed that all homeless persons had the
right to remain on the street without harassment. This ensured a more humane
treatment of homeless people in 2000. Elsewhere, the participation of local
communities and the building of community activism was
also key in ensuring that
the concerns of the local residents can be taken into account. In many of the
Olympic experiences analysed,
strenuous advocacy was often what made the
difference between avoiding or mitigating negative effects and a disastrous
housing impact.
Another slowly emerging practice is the conducting of social (or more
specifically, housing) impact assessments, commonplace when
it comes to the
environment, but not yet a requirement in Olympic bids, despite the importance
of guaranteeing social sustainability.
Indeed, one of the main recommendations
of the COHRE report is that social impact assessments become as important in the
requirements for a bid city as environmental impact assessments.
Also important is ensuring that the findings and recommendations
of any social
impact assessments are implemented and supported by adequate policies and
In Vancouver, the host city of the 2010 Winter Games, housingrelated
commitments were also an important strategy for protecting human
rights in what
the officials hope will be the first socially sustainable Games. The Vancouver
Organising Committee has promised
no negative housing effects, and while there
appear already to be problems in implementing this promise, the commitment
more than any previous Host City has achieved.
In Sydney in 2000 attempts were made, albeit unsuccessfully, to introduce
legislative protections to control rent hikes; while such
steps to reduce the
negative impacts may be necessary, there is an even greater need to ensure that
the enormous expenditure that
is required
for a mega-event is channelled into housing-positive strategies as much as
possible. For example, mega-events such as the Olympic
Games could be a tool
for improving housing rights if accompanied by housing-positive regeneration
strategies for disadvantaged areas
and if Olympic venues, such as the Athletes
Village, are dedicated for use as social or low-cost housing after an event.
It is this hope that mega-events can be used as a positive catalyst for
improving the protection of housing rights that spurred COHRE
and its project
partners to accompany its critical report with a set of
Multi-Stakeholder
Guidelines on Mega-Events and the Protection and Promotion of Housing
These Guidelines seek to provide mega-event organisers,
host cities and governments, and many other actors (including participants,
spectators, residents, landlords and media) with ideas for how to turn the
negative associations between the Olympics and housing
rights into a positive
legacy for the future. Founded on international human rights laws and
standards, the Guidelines establish
10 essential criteria for mega-events which
aim to promote and protect housing rights. They demonstrate an attempt to end
and violation of international law that has hitherto accompanied such
While it may be too late to stop the 1.25 million evictions that have already
occurred in Beijing, or the 250,000 further displacements
expected in that city
before August 2009, it is hoped that the International Olympic Committee and
future Olympic host cities and
governments will pay more attention to protecting
housing rights in the future. As COHRE states, ‘it is possible (and
imperative)
for mega-events to be organised without forcibly evicting people,
without criminalising the homeless, and without rendering housing
unaffordable’.
It is also up to each of us, as participants,
spectators and viewers of such events to demand that housing rights are
very carefully before we open our cities as hosts to the world.
Claire Mahon is an international human rights lawyer based in Geneva where
she works as a consultant to NGOs and the United Nations,
and a PhD candidate at
the Graduate Institute of International Studies. She is the primary author of
the report Fair Play for Housing
Rights and the Multi-Stakeholder Guidelines on
Mega-Events and the Protection and Promotion of Housing Rights.
All of the documents referred to in this article are available at
www.cohre.org/mega-events
In the year leading up to the Atlanta Olympics of 1996, over 9,000 arrest
citations were issued to homeless people as part of a
deliberate attempt to
eradicate visible evidence of Atlanta’s enormous homeless community: Anita
Atlanta’s Olymipc Legacy
, COHRE, Geneva, 2007.
Hazel Blunden,
The Impacts of the Sydney Olympic Games on Housing
, COHRE, Geneva, 2007.
Centre on Housing Rights and Evictions (COHRE),
Fair Play for Housing
Mega-Events, Olympic Games and Housing Rights
, Geneva, 2007.
The project was supported by the Geneva International Academic Network
(RUIG/GIAN) and was undertaken in conjunction
with a number of partner
organisations.
Observatorio DESC,
Barcelona 1992: International Events and Housing
Focus on the Olympic Games
, COHRE, Geneva, 2007.
Greek Helsinki Monitor,
The Housing Impact of the 2004 Olympic Games
, COHRE, Geneva, 2007.
Claire Mahon,
Bidding to Host the 2012 Olympic Games: London’s
Preparations and Housing Concerns
, COHRE, Geneva, 2007.
COHRE has not released its ‘Olympic City Background Papers’ for
Beijing to the general public as it is concerned for
the safety of those
involved in researching and writing the Beijing background paper
(www.cohre.org/view_page.php?page_id=265) at
17 November, 2007.
Multi-Stakeholder Guidelines on Mega-Events and the Protection
Promotion of Housing Rights
, Geneva, 2007.
Fair Play for Housing Rights
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (26.2 KB)
PDF format (129 KB)
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter