URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/journals/UMelbLRS/2016/9.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 15:41:21
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Landau, I; Howe, J --- "Trade Union Ambivalence Toward Enforcement of Employment Standards as an Organizing Strategy" [2016] UMelbLRS 9
Trade Union Ambivalence Toward Enforcement of
Employment Standards as an Organizing Strategy
Ingrid Landau and John Howe*
First published in 2016 17 Theoretical Inquiries in Law
Trade unions in Australia have long played an important role in the
enforcement of minimum employment standards. The legislative framework
continues to recognize this enforcement role, but in a way that is more
individualistic and legalistic than in the past. At
the same time that the law
has evolved to emphasize the representation and servicing role of trade unions,
the Australian union movement
has sought to revitalize and grow through the
adoption of an “organizing model” of unionism that emphasizes
workplace-level
activism. This Article explores how these seemingly opposing
trends have manifested themselves in the enforcement-related activities
trade unions. Considerable diversity was found among the unions in relation to
the extent to which and how the unions performed
enforcement- related
activities. However, all five unions spent significant time and resources on
monitoring and enforcing employer
compliance with minimum standards and saw this
work as a core part of what they do. The case studies suggest, however, that the
in which this work is undertaken within unions and by whom has changed
significantly in recent decades. While there was evidence
that enforcement work
was used tactically by unions in certain cases, this was largely on an ad hoc
basis and there was little indication
that the enforcement work was integrated
into broader organizing objectives and strategies. Overall, the unions were
ambivalent,
if not skeptical, as to the capacity for enforcement work to grow
unions through building workplace activism and collective strength.
* Centre for Employment and Labour Relations Law, University of Melbourne.
IntroductIon
While the primary responsibility for monitoring and enforcing minimum employment
standards rests with the state, it is widely recognized
that trade unions can
— and in many jurisdictions do — play an important role in
supplementing state-based enforcement
The potential
benefits that trade unions can bring to compliance frameworks include greater
capacity to monitor employer compliance
with employment standards and to reach
workers, as a result of their presence in workplaces; independence from
employers; and expertise
in workplace matters as well as the industries and
sectors in which they operate.
Trade unions can play a role in
assisting and supporting individual workers who may have the legal right to
enforce their own entitlements,
but who may not be aware of their rights or how
to enforce them, find the costs associated with pursuing their claims through
courts prohibitive, or be reluctant to enforce their rights for fear of
employer reprisal and retribution.
Unions can also play an important
role in educating
, Janice Fine & Jennifer Gordon,
Strengthening Labor Standards
Enforcement Through Partnerships with Workers’ Organizations
& Soc’y 552 (2010); David Weil,
Individual Rights And Collective
Agents: The Role of Old and New Workplace Institutions in the Regulation of
Labor Markets
EmErging labor markEt inStitutionS for thE
twEnty-firSt cEntury 13 (Richard B Freeman, Joni Hersch & Lawrence Mischel
eds., 2004);
Trevor Colling,
What Space for Unions on the
Floor of Rights? Trade Unions and the Enforcement of Statutory Individual
Employment Rights
, 35 induS. l.J. 140, 144-45 (2006); Brooke Lierman,
“To Assure Safe and Healthful Working Conditions”: Taking Lessons
from Labor Unions to Fulfill OSHA’s Promises
, 12 loyola J. Pub. int.
l. 1 (2010); Leah F. Vosko & Mark Thomas,
Confronting the Employment
Standards Enforcement Gap: Exploring the Potential for Union Engagement with
Employment Law in Ontario,
, 56 J. induS. rEl. 631 (2014); Linda
Dickens, Delivering Fairer Workplaces Through Statutory Rights? Enforcing
Employment Rights
in Britain, Paper Presented at the 15th World Congress of the
International Industrial Relations Association, Sydney, Austl. (Aug.
Rebuilding the Law of the Workplace in the Era of Self-
, 105 colum. l. rEv. 319, 364 (2005); Fine & Gordon,
note 1; Tess Hardy,
Enrolling Non-State Actors to Improve Compliance with
Minimum Employment Standards
, 22 Econ. & lab. rEl. rEv. 117, 121-24
(2011); Weil,
Chris Arup & Carolyn Sutherland,
The Recovery of Wages: Legal
Services and Access to Justice
, 35 monaSh u. l. rEv. 96 (2009); Margaret
Regulating Enforcement of Workers’ Entitlements in Australia: The
New Dimension of Individualisation in Australia
, 17 lab. & induStry 41
(2006); Miles Goodwin
both workers and employers as to their obligations under labor laws.
The enforcement roles performed by unions may benefit not only those
workers who rely on these minimum employment standards, but also
the integrity
of the regime of labor regulation and its capacity to achieve broader social
objectives such as the promotion of fairness
in the labor
It is also the case, of course, that trade unions have a number of distinct
roles and objectives that go beyond assisting members
secure minimum employment
standards through the provision of legal advice and representation. These
include, for example, roles in
rule-making (through collective bargaining and
legislation), and in the development, administration and delivery of government
Unions also have organizational objectives which, while they
may vary according to such factors as size, industry, growth strategies,
leadership, and political orientation, invariably extend well beyond delivering
legal services to members.
In performing these roles and pursuing these objectives, trade unions operate
under a set of increasingly serious internal and external
constraints. These
include resource constraints arising from a sustained decline in membership and
correspondingly in power and influence,
and (in many jurisdictions) the
challenges associated with operating within an increasingly individualized and
legalistic environment.
All these considerations raise questions over the extent
to which unions are willing and able to perform enforcement-related roles
are or may be assigned to them under legislative frameworks.
This Article examines the extent to which and how the “service” role
of trade unions — more specifically their
role in assisting workers
enforce minimum employment standards — has evolved and how it fits with,
and is used as a means of
achieving, the broader union objective of recruiting
& Glenda Maconachie, Victimisation, Inspection and Workers’
Entitlements: Lessons Not Learnt?, Paper Presented at the Asia-Pacific
and Business History Conference, Melbourne, Austl. (Feb. 13-15,
note 1, at 14. Studies in the United Kingdom have found that union
members are much more likely than nonmembers to be aware of their
, Jo Casebourne, Jo Regan, Fiona Neathey & Siobhan
Employment Rights at Work: Survey of Employees 2005
Emp’t Studies, London: Dep’t of Trade & Industry, Emp’t
Relations Research Series, Working Paper,
Sheldon & Michael Quinlan,
Minimum Labour Standards and Their
Enforcement
, 22 Econ. & l. rEl. rEv. 1 (2011).
The Function of Trade Unions
, 34 induS. l.J. 1, 3 (2005)
(identifying five functions of trade unions, which overlap to some extent: a
service function, a representation
function, a regulatory function, a government
function, and a public administration function).
members. It focuses on Australia, where unions have long played a significant
role in the monitoring and enforcement of minimum labor
standards, and where the
union movement has in recent decades engaged in a concerted attempt to
revitalize and grow through the adoption
of an “organizing model” of
unionism. The Article is based on case-study research into the enforcement
practices of five
branch-level trade unions in Australia. Our research revealed
considerable diversity among unions in relation to the extent to which
they performed these types of activities. However all five unions continued to
spend significant time and resources on monitoring
and enforcing employer
compliance with minimum standards and to see this work as a key union function.
While we found some evidence
of enforcement work being used tactically, this was
largely on an ad hoc basis and there was little indication that unions had
their enforcement work into broader organizing objectives and
strategies. Overall, the unions were ambivalent, if not skeptical,
capacity for enforcement work to grow unions through building workplace activism
and collective strength.
In examining these issues, this Article seeks to make a modest contribution to
three broad strands of existing scholarship. First,
as noted above, there is now
a significant body of literature, largely from the legal and regulatory
disciplines, emphasizing the
positive role that unions can play in supplementing
state-based regulation of the labor market.
However, there is
relatively little empirical consideration of the extent to which unions are
willing to undertake these roles or
how they do so. Yet, as Trevor Colling
reminds us, “[p]roposals to make employment rights effective must be
informed by an
understanding of changing union roles.”
is also little consideration of how the enforcement-related roles of unions are
influenced and shaped by, and may differ according
to, national legislative and
strategic contexts.
Second, it has been suggested that the adoption by trade unions of a more active
role in enforcing minimum labor standards may potentially
ongoing decline in membership and influence, through providing a direct and
tangible means of demonstrating their
value to members and potential members, as
well as to society more broadly.
To date, however, there has been
little consideration of the extent to which such a view is consistent with
sources cited
Trade Union Roles in Making Employment Rights Effective
making EnforcEmEnt rightS EffEctivE: iSSuES of EnforcEmEnt and comPliancE
183, 183 (Linda Dickens ed., 2012).
Hardy & John Howe,
Partners in Enforcement? The New Balance Between
Government and Trade Union Enforcement of Employment Standards in Australia
22 auStralian J. lab. l. 306 (2009); Vosko & Thomas,
how trade unions perceive their role and functions, or the extent to which such
roles fit within unions’ own strategies for
revitalization and
The third area of inquiry that this Article draws upon, and seeks to contribute
to, is the small body of literature, emanating largely
from the United States
and the United Kingdom, which has sought to understand how unions engage with,
and use, the law.
Of particular relevance for this study is work
carried out by Colling examining the extent to which British trade unions engage
“legal mobilization,” a tactical approach through which
individual employment law is used for broader objectives, including
members and advance collective interests.
This Article is structured as follows. Part I provides the legal, institutional
and theoretical background for the study. It starts
with an overview of the
legal and strategic contexts in which trade unions carry out their enforcement-
related activities. It focuses
first on the evolution of the legal framework
under which unions are assigned, and carry out, enforcement-related roles and
It then turns to considering the evolution of union strategy in
Australia, focusing on the shift within recent decades towards an
“organizing model” and how enforcement-related activities are
understood to fit within this model of unionism. Section
I.C. explores the
“legal mobilization” thesis, which is the theoretical framework
drawn upon in this Article. Part II
of the Article draws upon empirical research
we conducted to consider the extent to which unions continue to perform
enforcement-related
activities and the extent to which they consider and use
enforcement of employment standards as a mobilization strategy to achieve
broader organizational objective of organizing workers. We draw together our
findings and offer some concluding observations
in the last Part.
InstItutIonaL and theoretIcaL Background
A. Evolving Legal Frameworks
In Australia, trade unions have historically performed a
significant, if not preeminent, role in the monitoring and enforcement of
minimum labor
the United States, see, for example, Weil,
note 1; and Estlund,
note 1, at 147;
Trevor Colling,
Court in a Trap? Legal Mobilization by Trade Unions in the
United Kingdom
(Warwick Papers in Industrial Relations, Working Paper,
2009), https://www2.
warwick.ac.uk/fac/soc/wbs/research/irru/wpir/wpir_91.pdf.
This important aspect of unions’ regulatory
function has historically been supported by Australia’s industrial law
in particular the federal conciliation and arbitration system that
operated for much of the twentieth century. Under this system,
trade unions
played a very significant role in both setting standards and monitoring and
enforcing compliance with them through awards.
Unions enjoyed a range of legal
supports for their enforcement activities, including rights of entry (originally
arising under terms
of awards and later through statute),
standing to seek recovery of wages and penalties for breaches of minimum
standards of employment in awards in the courts.
The shift in the early 1990s away from a system of labor regulation based on
conciliation and arbitration and awards to one based
on enterprise bargaining
diminished the relative importance of awards and, correspondingly, the
regulatory role of unions. At the
same time, the increasing emphasis given to
other means of setting minimum standards of employment, including enterprise
bargaining,
has presented further challenges to the enforcement capacity of
unions. This includes through the potential for union involvement
processes to soak up union resources and detract from monitoring and enforcement
functions. In 1996, the
Workplace Relations Act 1996
(Workplace Relations
Act) placed restrictions on the capacity of the federal industrial tribunal to
resolve disputes, thus further
reducing “the capacity of trade unions to
utilize the tribunal as a more informal mechanism of enforcement . . .
crEighton & andrEw StEwart, labour law 499-502 (5th ed. 2010); Laura
Making Labour Law in Australia: Industrial Relations, Politics and
, 136 QuEEnSland u. tEch. l.J. (1994); Hardy & Howe,
note 9; Lee,
note 3; Miles Goodwin, The Great Wage Robbery:
Enforcement of Minimum Labour Standards in Australia 163-64 (Mar. 2003)
(unpublished
Ph.D. Dissertation, Sch. of Industrial Relations and Organisational
Behaviour, Univ. of New South Wales); Glenda Maconachie &
Miles Goodwin,
Enforcing Minimum Labour Standards in Australia from 2010: Correcting or
Compounding Problems?, Proceedings of the
23rd Conference of the Association of
Industrial Relations Academics of Australia and New Zealand (AIRAANZ), Newcastle
(Feb. 4-6, 2009).
Being There: Changing Union Rights of Entry Under Federal Industrial
, 13 auStralian J. lab. l. 1 (2000); Hardy & Howe,
9, at 315; Lee,
note 3, at 48; Goodwin,
Conciliation
and Arbitration Act 1904
(Cth) s. 42A.
Hardy & Howe,
note 9, at 316.
note 9, at 319;
Workplace Relations Act 1996
These trends were further consolidated through the
Workplace Relations
Amendment (Work Choices) Act 2005
(Work Choices Act).
Historically, the prominence of unions in enforcing standards in Australia is
also partly attributable to the existence of a relatively
underdeveloped federal
state inspectorate.
The 1990s, however, saw the beginning of a
significant shift in the relative functions and powers of the federal government
inspectorate and trade unions.
Workplace Relations
, the former Coalition Government established a number of state agencies with
responsibility for monitoring and enforcing various
aspects of the new labor
relations system.
Following the passage of the Work Choices Act in
2005, the powers and resources of the federal labor inspectorate were
substantially
augmented, and it began to adopt a more active enforcement
Today, while the federal state inspectorate has been renamed the Fair Work
Ombudsman (FWO) under the Labor Government’s
Fair Work Act 2009
and its emphasis has been somewhat reoriented towards the promotion of
“harmonious, productive and cooperative workplace relations,”
the inspectorate has maintained similar focus and functions to its
predecessor
Relations Amendment (Work Choices) Act 2005
(Cth); Anthony Forsyth,
Arbitration Extinguished: The Impact of the Work Choices Legislation on the
Australian Industrial Relations Commission
, 32 auStralian bull. lab. 27
(2006); Hardy & Howe,
note 9, at 320-21.
first federal labor inspector was not appointed until the early 1930s and the
inspectorate was generally under-resourced and of
limited effectiveness until
the 1990s. Miles Goodwin & Glenda Maconachie,
Employer Evasion of
Workers’ Entitlements 1986-1995: What and Whose?
work 239 (Marian Baird, Rae Cooper & Mark Westcott eds., 2005); Hardy &
a detailed discussion of the development of the federal labor inspectorate and
the shift in the balance between union and state
enforcement, see Hardy &
Tess Hardy, John Howe & Sean
Mandate, Discretion and Professionalisation in an Employment
Standards Enforcement Agency: An Antipodean Experience
Pol’y 81 (2012).
included the Office of Workplace Services, the Office of the Employment Advocate
and the Australian Building and Construction
Commission. The focus of several of
the new state agencies (at least the two latter) was firmly on enforcing those
provisions of
the Work Relations Act that promoted statutory individual
agreements (referred to as Australian Workplace Agreements or AWAs), and
restricted the roles and functions of trade unions. This politicization of the
state inspectorate under the former Coalition
Government, as well as the ongoing
role of the inspectorates in prosecuting unions for breaches of workplace laws,
continues to influence
the nature and dynamics of the relationships between the
current federal state inspectorate and trade unions.
Work Act 2009
agencies. It has continued to enjoy significant enforcement powers and to be
relatively well-resourced, although government funding
has started to contract
in recent years.
The significant empowerment of the state
inspectorate since the 1990s, along with the imposition of significant
restrictions on unions’
regulatory functions (outlined further below), has
led some commentators to suggest that unions have gone from being
in enforcement” with the government inspectorate prior to
the 1990s, to becoming “the junior partner.”
increasing individualization of Australia’s labor relations framework
since the 1990s is also relevant to understanding
the enforcement role of unions
in Australia today.
Recent years have seen an increase in statutory
regulation of individual employment rights, with “legal rights being
to individuals with an accompanying capacity to enforce those rights
through legal action.”
This trend commenced with the
legislative entrenchment in the
Workplace Relations Act
, as amended by the Work
Choices Act, of a core set of minimum employment standards. These standards are
known as the Australian Fair
Pay and Conditions Standard and have been
consolidated by the
Fair Work Act
through the establishment of ten National
Employment Standards (NES) and modern awards.
Australian labor law
has also become more individualized in the manner in which employment standards
are enforced.
Prior to the 1990s, the task of enforcing awards was
largely left to the unions.
& Maconachie,
note 17; Hardy & Howe,
note 9, at 306.
dEEry & richard mitchEll, EmPloymEnt rElationS: individualiSation and union
ExcluSion — an intErnational Study
(1999). In a recent article, which
provides a more sophisticated typology of individualism and collectivism in
Australian labor
relations, Mark Bray and Joanna MacNeill observe that
individualism (or collectivism) can be found in at least three dimensions of
employment relations: the
of the employment relationship; the
social processes for the
of these rules; and the social processes
enforcement
of these rules. The first and third of these
dimensions are particularly relevant for our purposes. Mark Bray & Joanna
Individualism, Collectivism and the Case of Awards in
, 53 J. induS. rEl. 149 (2011). This trend is by no means limited
to Australia: for example, the Organisation for Economic Development
noted a shift in the dominant source of regulation away from voluntary
self-regulation at the collective level to formal
individual rights enforced
through the courts.
oEcd, oEcd EmPloymEnt outlook 2012, at 144-45
note 23, at 151.
pts. 2-2, 2-3.
& MacNeill,
1990 an individual employee who was not a union member did not have the right to
pursue legal action to enforce federal award
provisions.
Workplace Relations Act
and the Work Choices Act, enforcement of
provisions in legislation and awards became increasingly individualistic in
Fair Work Act
provides individuals with the capacity to enforce their
own legal rights under agreements and modern awards. It has also expanded
small claims jurisdiction (a quicker, easier and more informal avenue through
which to pursue claims within the court system),
and made available
a wider range of civil remedies (such as orders, injunctions, compensation and
reinstatement). The Act also recognizes
the role that unions play in enforcement
of minimum employment standards. However, in most cases these rights afforded to
to enforce the rules are rights to enforce the rules
on behalf of
individual employees.
A union can apply for an order in
relation to a contravention or proposed contravention of a civil remedy
provision if the employee
is affected by the contravention and the union is
entitled to represent the industrial interests of the employee.
the contravention relates to a workplace agreement or workplace determination
covering the union, the union can also make an application
in its own right
and/or on behalf of an employee.
While parties are generally
prevented from recovering costs in enforcement proceedings,
penalties may be ordered for breach of the relevant provisions and parties
(including unions) may seek for any applicable penalty
to be paid to themselves
rather than into consolidated revenue. There are also several industry-specific
regulatory schemes in Australia
in which trade unions play an important part in
setting, and monitoring compliance
An amendment to the
Industrial Relations Act 1988
(Cth) in 1990
explicitly permitted employees who were not party to an award to bring
enforcement proceedings.
& MacNeill,
note 23, at 159-60; Hardy & Howe,
note 9, at 2.
monetary limit for small claims has been increased to AU$20,000 and the small
claims jurisdiction has been conferred on the Federal
Circuit Court as well as
State and Territory Courts.
Fair Work Act
& MacNeill,
Whether or not a union is entitled to represent the
industrial interests of an employee is determined according to the membership
eligibility requirements of the union’s rules. These rules (including the
requirement for them to include conditions of eligibility)
are regulated by the
Fair Work (Registered Organisations) Act 2009
(Cth). While not discussed
further here, it should be noted that the
Fair Work Act
also provides unions,
for the first time, with the capacity to bring actions in the area of
antidiscrimination through an expanded
general protections regime.
with, minimum standards. These include those operating within the transport
and the textile clothing and footwear
B. Evolving Union Strategies
We have outlined the legal framework under which
Australian trade unions perform compliance-related work. The existence of
roles and rights under statute, however, tells us little about the
extent to which, and how, these powers are used by trade unions
and for what
purposes and with what effect. To further understand these issues, we submit, it
is necessary to examine the shift within
the Australian union movement towards
an organizing model of unionism. It is also necessary to consider how
“service-related”
activities of unions — and
enforcement-related activities more specifically — fit within this
theoretical model.
Since the early 1990s, the Australian union movement has sought to respond to
the decline in union density and power by moving towards
“organizing” model of unionism. Prior to this time, under “the
Australian unions’ variant of the ‘servicing’
trade unions relied heavily on institutional
support from governments and industrial tribunals. They also delivered for their
largely through securing strategic gains by means of legal argument
before tribunals and the extension of these wins by means of
the strong arbitral
power of these tribunals to other worksites.
This approach, under
which workplace power was “useful but not
essential,”
Sarah Kaine & Michael Rawling,
“Comprehensive
Campaigning” in the NSW Transport Industry: Bridging the Divide Between
Regulation and Union Organizing
, 52 J. induS. rEl. 183 (2010).
Karin Lukas,
Human Rights in the Supply Chain: Influence and
Accountability
un guiding PrinciPlES on buSinESS and human
rightS: foundationS and imPlEmEntation 151 (Radu Mares ed., 2012); Shelley
Australian Textile, Clothing and Footwear Supply Chain
human rightS at work: PErSPEctivES on law and
rEgulation 555 (Colin Fenwick & Tonia Novitz eds., 2010); Igor Nossar,
Richard Johnstone
& Michael Quinlan,
Regulating Supply Chains to Address
the Occupational Health and Safety problems Associated with Precarious
Employment: The Case of
auStralian J. lab. l. 137 (2004).
Peetz, Barbara Pocock & Chris Houghton,
Organizers’Roles
Transformed? Australian Union Organizers and Changing Union Strategy
induS. rEl. 151, 152 (2007).
Peetz & Janis Bailey,
Dancing Alone: The Australian Union Movement over
Three Decades
, 54 J. induS. rEl. 525 (2012).
became increasingly untenable in the 1980s and early 1990s when unions in
Australia (like many of their counterparts overseas) found
themselves faced with
a raft of external and internal challenges. These included increasing state and
employer hostility, structural
changes in the labor market, the shift towards
enterprise-level bargaining, a significant and sustained decline in union
and a crisis in organizational and workplace
In response to this perceived crisis, the sole peak union body in Australia, the
Australian Council of Trade Unions (ACTU), and others
argued that if unions were
to survive and grow, they needed to become less reliant on institutional
structures. It was argued that
unions should instead redirect their resources
towards building organizational power in workplaces and industries.
In embracing the organizing model and in the delivery of relevant
training, Australian unions were inspired and influenced by North
The embracement of an organizing model of unionism by the
ACTU led in 1994 to the establishment of Organizing Works — a program
designed to build the organizing capacity of affiliates through training young
union organizers. There is “no single account
of what constitutes the
organising model,”
and the concept is “clouded with
conceptual and practical problems in its operationalisation.”
Moreover, it has been observed that the organizing approach in Australia,
while influenced by overseas models, has diverged from and
adapted these
For our purposes, however, it suffices to note that
commonly identified elements or dimensions of an organizing approach include an
increased emphasis on growth (that is, the recruitment of new
Pocock & Houghton,
note 36, at 152-53; Peetz & Bailey,
note 37, at 531.
Summary rEPort: unitEd StatES miSSion on rEcruitmEnt and organiSation (1993)
(Austl.); actu, unionS@work: thE challEngE for
unionS in crEating a JuSt and
fair SociEty (1999) (Austl.); Rae Cooper,
Peak Council Organizing at Work:
ACTU Strategy 1994-2000
, 14 lab. & induStry 1 (2003). It should be
noted that key features of the organizing model, such as the emphasis on
workplace delegate structures, were not necessarily new to a number of
unions which had traditionally had activist models of unionism.
michaEl croSby,
PowEr at work: rEbuilding thE auStralian union movEmEnt 77-78 (2005); Peetz,
Pocock & Houghton,
note 36, at 154.
Carter & Rae Cooper,
The Organising Model and the Management of Change: A
Comparative Study of Unions in Australia and Britain
, 57 rElationS
induStriEllES 712 (2002).
Burchielli & Timothy Bartram,
What Helps Organizing Work? The Indicators
and the Facilitators of Organizing
, 51 J. induS. rEl. 687, 689 (2009).
Pocock & Houghton,
note 36, at 152.
members), as well as on the active involvement or mobilization of members and
delegates in union activities (member activism).
The organizing model is often contrasted to a “servicing” approach
to unionism, which is characterized by a transactional
relationship between the
union and its members whereby union officials deliver services and, in exchange,
union members pay dues.
This servicing approach to unionism often involves the
use of legalistic tactics that are removed from workplaces.
organizing model is also often associated with broader efforts to promote
collective identities among workforces and to recreate
labor as a social and
political movement.
Additional features of an organizing model of
unionism may include efforts to broaden union constituencies through attracting
categories of workers; to extend membership downwards to low-wage workers in
secondary labor markets; and to develop broad alliances
and campaigns across
national borders.
In Australia, the transition to an organizing approach began in the early 1990s.
However, its adoption has been complex and uneven
both across and within unions
and, as a previous study reminds us, “it would be a mistake to see all
unions as on a single
path, following a uniform strategy.”
is also important to note that accounts of an organizing model of unionism are
often normative — a model for rebuilding the
union movement — rather
than a descriptive account of how things work. Nonetheless, there is no doubt
that there has been “a
general strategic shift towards greater union
organizing especially through the contribution of active members and
in the Australian union movement. There is also no
doubt that this shift has been felt across the left and right factional
and that the approach has been, and continues to be,
actively encouraged and supported by the ACTU. Under an organizing model of
enforcement-related activity is seen as an essential task of a union,
but not as a principal or effective means of recruiting new
members. This is
largely because enforcement-related activity is almost always individual in
nature, and so it is perceived as inconsistent
Rae Cooper,
Getting Organised? A White Collar Union Response to Membership
, 43 J. induS. rEl. 422 (2001).
note 41, at 713.
Heery, Melanie Simms, Dave Simpson, Rick Delbridge & John
Organizing Unionism Comes to the UK
, 22 EmP. rEl. 38, 39
Pocock & Houghton,
note 36, at 155;
Pocock & Houghton,
note 36, at 155.
note 37, at 534.
with the collective nature of union activity.
A former director of
the ACTU Organizing Works program provides further insight into the way in which
enforcement-related work is
seen to “fit” within an organizing
theory of unionism. In his publication entitled
Power at Work: Rebuilding the
Australian Union Movement
, Michael Crosby acknowledges that members
“were much happier and more favourably disposed to the union if their
grievance was
settled in their favour.”
However, he argues
that a number of considerations militate against the embracement of an
“insurance model of unionism”
as a means of building Australian
unions. These include the individual nature of most grievances,
fact that most workers will not have a grievance during their working life and
so do not need a union solely for this purpose,
and the increasing restrictions
imposed by law on the capacity of unions to have workers’ grievances
addressed quickly and
easily through the industrial tribunal.
According to the organizing model, unions must continue to perform
compliance-related work, but this work should not be performed
overwhelmingly or
even to a large part by organizers. Proponents of an organizing approach
identify a number of strategies that can
be used to deal with grievances in
“the quickest and most efficient manner possible,” while freeing up
organizers to
organize members collectively.
This includes being
selective about what issues to take up; the “batching of grievances”
(in which union officials arrange
to sit down with an employer’s human
resource department on a regular basis to deal with a large number of cases at a
getting outside help with grievances (including possibly by relevant
government departments or agencies and labor law firms); and
the use of call
centers (a specific function or unit within the union that receives and
transmits communications from members and
potential members). This latter
tactic, described by Crosby as “the most powerful,” has the
potential to facilitate prompt
and efficient response to member’s concerns
and queries, enabling the union to track the efficiency with which member
are handled, while also effectively diverting the bulk of member
queries from organizers.
There are, however, certain circumstances in which compliance-related activities
are accorded greater significance due to their organizing
potential. This
involves situations where the pursuit of a compliance-related issue
note 40, at 106.
of only one member may be used as a basis for a campaign that affects a wider
group of workers and so provide the catalyst for collective
action. Crosby
explains: “If an individual issue has wide ramifications for a larger
group of members, then it can be pursued
collectively and the union’s
strength built in consequence . . . .”
It may also be the
case that enforcement-related activity is used as a single tactic within a
broader range of tactics. For some unions,
this integration of
enforcement-related activity into broader campaigns is achieved through
“comprehensive campaigning,”
by which unions use “a
combination of industrial, organizational, community and political activities in
pursuit of an articulated
strategic goal.”
C. Legal Mobilization Theory
As noted in our Introduction, one of the objectives of
this Article is to draw on our case studies to explore the extent to which
Australian unions have engaged in “legal mobilization,” whereby
individual employment law is used strategically to achieve
goals such as
recruitment of members and advancement of collective interests. Specifically,
our interest is in Australian unions’
use of enforcement of employment
standards as an organizing strategy. Drawing upon earlier work from the United
States and the United
Colling observes that unions’
use of individual statutory employment law has the potential to be a stage in
unions’ recruitment
of workers and the achievement of union recognition:
“Recognising unions’ expertise in individual representation
perhaps through the right to be accompanied at disciplinary
hearings), workers might come to desire collective voice in information
consultation, which in turn might eventually result in demand for full
collective bargaining rights.”
Colling suggests that union
use of the law is most likely to serve union objectives where it generates
inspirational effects
radiating effects. Inspirational effects
are those “confirming and consolidating of a sense of shared grievance
or aspiration among a group of
note 34, at 184.
the United States, see, for example, Tomiko Brown-Nagin,
Elites, Social
Movements, and the Law: The case of Affirmative Action
, 105 colum. l. rEv.
1436 (2005); and Holly J. McCammon
, Labor’s Legal Mobilization: Why and
When Do Workers File Unfair Labor Practices?
, 28 work and occuPationS 143
(2001). In the United Kingdom, Colling cites John kElly, rEthinking induStrial
rElationS, mobilization,
collEctiviSm and long wagES (1998); and Keith Ewing,
Trade Union Recognition — A Framework for Discussion
, 19 induS.
l.J. 209 (1990).
note 11, at 4.
workers and providing a belief that this can be pursued
successfully,”
radiating effects
are those that
may extend beyond the specific case to change behavior by employers and/or trade
union members. These effects, however,
are only likely to be achieved where
unions are able to successfully combine legal action with organizing
While Colling’s work is concerned with similar issues to those examined in
this Article, the broader scope of his inquiry (on
engagement by unions with the
law more broadly), in addition to the differing legal frameworks and historical
and institutional contexts
in which Australian unions operate, raises questions
over the extent to which these types of findings may be relevant and applicable
to the Australian context. Nevertheless, it seems logical to us that unions
might see their enforcement activity as, at the very
least, a stage in the
recruitment of members. In the next Part, we draw on our empirical findings to
discuss whether this assumption
is correct.
II. enforcIng and organIzIng In austraLIan unIons
To explore the extent to which, and how, Australian unions integrate their
enforcement-related activities into broader organizing
objectives, we draw on
evidence that was gathered in 2012 and 2013 as part of a broader study seeking
to empirically examine the
extent to which and how trade unions in Australia
monitor and enforce minimum employment standards concerning wages, hours of work
We draw upon the “legal mobilization”
concept introduced earlier in the Article to consider the extent to which these
enforcement-related activities appear to be influenced by the strategic shift
within the union movement towards the organizing model.
The study consisted of
qualitative case studies of five state branches of national trade unions,
involving in-depth, semi-structured
interviews with elected officials,
industrial/legal officers and organizers in each union, as well as analysis of
relevant material
provided by the unions.
The case studies were
undertaken on the condition of anonymity. The five participant unions covered a
broad range of industries, both
blue-collar and white-collar, mostly but not
exclusively
the preliminary findings of this study, see ingrid landau, SEan coonEy, tESS
hardy & John howE, ctr. for EmP’t
& labour rElationS law,
tradE unionS and thE EnforcEmEnt of minimum EmPloymEnt StandardS in auStralia,
rESEarch rEPort (2014)
study was funded by the Social Justice Initiative at the University of
in the private sector. The unions ranged in size from those with a branch
membership of several thousand to among the largest unions
in Australia.
A. An Overview of Compliance-related Activities
Our interviews confirmed that the task of securing
compliance by employers with minimum conditions of employment continues to
a critically important function of Australian trade unions, and to
take up a significant proportion of unions’ time and resources.
interviewees, for example, described the task of monitoring and enforcing
compliance by employers as “a core part of
what unions are
and as “bread and butter work for
This work was seen as an integral part of the
benefits offered by a union to its members, with interviewees from all five
unions emphasizing
that they would assist members who had concerns that they
were being underpaid or otherwise denied a lawful entitlement by their
It was emphasized that if unions were not to perform compliance-related work for
their members (but rather to refer members
to the state inspectorate), the
members would question why they were paying union dues.
studied also actively promoted legal services to members as a benefit of
membership (through, for example, union newsletters
and online material). It was
also pointed out that the interests of the union in enforcing minimum standards
lay both in ensuring
that members received their legal entitlements, and in
protecting their members’ wages and conditions through ensuring that
employers who complied with their legal obligations were not put at a
competitive disadvantage by noncompliant employers.
We found significant variation among the case-study unions, however, with
respect to the extent to which the interviewees felt their
union focused on
enforcement-related work relative to other common functions of unions such as
organizing and bargaining. While two
of the five unions noted that
compliance-related work constituted a very significant, if not the majority, of
their unions’
time and resources, the other three unions noted that their
union was much more focused on organizing and bargaining. The relative
with Industrial/Legal Officer, Union 4, in Melbourne, Austl. (Feb. 26,
with Elected Officer, Union 1, in Melbourne, Austl. (Sept. 17, 2012).
with Elected Officer, Union 4, in Melbourne, Austl. (June 26, 2013); Interview
with Industrial/Legal Officer, Union 1, in
Melbourne, Austl. (Oct. 8,
with Industrial/Legal Officer, Union 3, in Sydney, Austl. (Nov. 26,
emphasis placed on compliance work would appear to be attributable to three main
factors: levels of perceived noncompliance in the
relevant industry, the nature
of the union’s membership, and union strategy. The two unions in which
interviewees described
compliance-related work as being widespread
and “endemic”
taking up a great deal of the union’s time and resources represented
workers in industries widely recognized to have very
high levels of
noncompliance with minimum labor standards relative to other industries and high
proportions of vulnerable groups
of workers. These two unions also appeared to
have adopted strategies for growth which involved the promotion of the unions to
and potential members on the basis of their capacity to assist workers
in enforcing their rights.
While all five case-study unions continued to undertake a significant amount of
compliance-related work on behalf of members, interviewees
confirmed that the
of this compliance-related work had changed significantly in
recent decades. In this respect, the interviews confirmed the impact
of a number
of the developments discussed in Section I.A. of this Article, whereby the
enforcement-related activities of trade unions
have increasingly been channeled
through statutory mechanisms that are restrictive, individualistic and
legalistic in nature. Interviewees
observed that trade unions were facing a
declining capacity to enforce minimum standards, and this was attributed to the
in the legal restrictions on the capacity of unions to enforce rules
informally at the workplace (through such mechanisms as “no
start” and industrial action), as well as to a significant decline in
membership and resources. It was also noted
that parties and their
representatives were increasingly less likely to make efforts to resolve
disputes informally through negotiation
and more likely to seek legal
representation.
Overall, interviewees described union compliance-related work as being
increasingly legalistic, expensive, complex and bureaucratic.
As one organizer
who had worked in the union movement for over fifteen years observed, “[I]
t’s harder now . . . . You’ve
got to box smarter. Gone are the days
where you could turn around and say, ‘There’s been an
underpayment,’ or ‘You’ve
done the wrong thing, and
we’re going to sit everybody in the lunch sheds until you fix it’ .
An elected officer in another union explained, “I
reckon looking at it over the years that it has got more difficult to recover
people’s entitlements, because you used to have more scope to go to the
Interview with Elected Officer, Union 2, in Melbourne, Austl. (Oct. 17, 2012);
Interview with Organizer, Union 2, in Melbourne,
Austl. (Oct. 30, 2012).
with Industrial/Legal Officer, Union 2, in Melbourne, Austl. (Oct. 17,
with Organizer, Union 1, in Melbourne, Austl. (Nov. 13,
Relations Commission and not get bogged down in jurisdictional arguments than
you do today.”
It was also widely noted that the trend toward
juridification of compliance activity had compelled unions to engage more
with legal training, and to institute a sharper division of labor
between organizers and industrial and legal staff.
Most of the unions involved in our research had adopted structures and
organizational practices in which the enforcement and organizing
functions of
the union were separated, although to varying degrees. As outlined in Section
I.B. above, under an organizing model
of unionism, organizers should be
“freed” from much of the service-related work so that they can focus
on building workplace
activism. There are a number of strategies that unions can
put in place to achieve this objective, such as the “batching of
grievances,” referring complaints to government departments or agencies,
and the use of call centers to service member enquiries.
Empirical studies
conducted by other scholars have found that a number of Australian unions have,
in the process of moving to an
organizing model, adopted these types of
initiatives.
Our study found that some unions had separated their
compliance-related functions from organizing. Union 4, for example, had a
department and call center devoted to enforcing members’ rights,
and in Unions 3 and 5 there were separate units that carried
out the legal and
industrial work associated with enforcement. A union official in Union 2
expressed the view that the union would
have staff fully devoted to the
service-related work if resources permitted. In those unions that had separated
the enforcement and
organizing functions, interviewees identified a number of
rationales for this delineation. Only one union directly attributed the
organizational restructuring to the “organizing principle of the
Unions also identified other rationales for
delineating the two functions: ensuring that all compliance-related requests for
were effectively addressed; coping with the significant body of work
the enforcement function created; and in recognition of the
differing expertise
and skills needed by staff in this area (such as accounting skills in
determining the existence and quantum of
any underpayment).
with Elected Officer, Union 1,
, Carter & Cooper,
note 41 (observing that the decision
by the Community and Public Sector Union’s New South Wales Branch to
separate the servicing
and organizing functions of staff in the late 1990s
encountered some difficulties. This included resistance from some officials,
the fact that many organizers continued to struggle with high workloads given
their desire to continue to assist members with
grievances, and the fact that
previous practices of the union had created high member expectations with
respect to union services
in this area.).
with Industrial/Legal Officer, Union 4,
In four of our five case-study unions, however, organizers continued to play a
key role in the enforcement-related activities of
the union. Organizers were
generally tasked with monitoring compliance with the award or agreement in place
at the workplace, receiving
complaints, conducting any initial investigations,
raising the issue with the employer at first instance, and resolving the
at the workplace level where possible. Complaints were only referred
to the legal and industrial team where they could not be resolved
workplace level. Only one union appeared to have fully embraced the organizing
philosophy of completely freeing organizers
from grievance work so “the
organizer is able to focus upon growing the union and campaigning.”
In Union 4, any inquiries into existing rights and entitlements and
suspected cases of noncompliance were immediately referred to
a dedicated
servicing/ enforcement unit within the union. This approach, it was argued by
the interviewees, was desirable not only
because it freed up organizers to work
on “building power and improving our levels of membership and leadership
within various
industries,”
but also as it led to greater
professionalization, efficiencies and consistency in approach with respect to
the enforcement- related
Our finding that (with the exception
of Union 4) organizers continued to perform significant enforcement-related
activities suggests
that historical practices and models of unionism
It is also consistent with other studies, which have found
an ongoing dissonance between the theory of the organizing model and the
realities of the work undertaken by organizers in Australian
Our case studies also revealed ways in which unions may leverage
compliance-related activities so as to provide organizing opportunities.
our interviews found that most of the compliance-related work performed by the
case-study unions was reactive (that is, based
on and driven by complaints),
four of the five unions also adopted more proactive and strategic approaches
Interview with Elected Officer, Union 4,
has been observed that, under the conventional “servicing” model of
unionism in Australia, organizers undertook a large
proportion of the
enforcement-related work. Crosby observes that, until the ACTU instituted
Organizing Works, only one union in the
whole of Australia had organizers
dedicated only to the organizing of new members. croSby,
Peetz, Barbara Pocock and Chris Houghton found that in 2002-2003 organizers
reported spending approximately thirty percent of
their time on handling
individual grievances of members. This was slightly lower than two years earlier
(thirty-four percent of their
time). Peetz, Pocock & Houghton,
note 36, at 158-59.
to their monitoring and inspection activities. For three of the unions, these
proactive approaches took the form of visiting and
auditing specific groups of
employers within the context of broader campaigns targeted at organizing
specific workplaces, regions
or sectors. These campaigns often initially took
the form of organizers visiting a workplace, introducing themselves as being
the union and asking workers whether they had any concerns or problems in
their workplace. As an organizer explained,
Sometimes if it’s an individual who’s a nonmember, and it’s an
area that we need to build or grow, and we haven’t
had a lot of
involvement in, we can use that as a bit of a leverage in. So we’ll assist
that person and they go out and start
telling people, “Well, look. They
Our finding that unions may use their capacity to assist workers in identifying
and pursuing cases of noncompliance with minimum
employment standards as a means
through which to “get a foot in the door” and gain access by a union
to new workplaces,
is consistent with similar findings made by Colling with
respect to the use of the law by unions in the United Kingdom.
Some interviewees also reported the tactical use of compliance-related issues to
achieve bargaining objectives. One organizer explained:
So if you’re getting ready to do an enterprise agreement, or you want to
get an enterprise agreement in place for the first
time with that employer,
you’ll find out what the issues are in the workplace. And if there’s
noncompliance issues, you’ll
utilize those to sort of motivate people on
the ground to get involved, and to see what conditions they’re missing out
I suppose, what they’re entitled to, and you’ll turn it into an
overall strategy to bargain to get a better outcome for
For another interviewee, however, linking enforcement and bargaining objectives
was fraught as it “muddied the waters”
and there was the potential
for noncompliance to be bargained away in the sense that the employer may offer
to sign the enterprise
agreement on the basis that the union not pursue redress
for any former noncompliance.
We further found that organizing objectives may influence the strategies used by
unions to pursue suspected cases of noncompliance
by an employer with minimum
employment standards. Our interviewees revealed that unions
with Organizer, Union 1,
note 1, at 158.
with Organizer, Union 1,
with Industrial/Legal Officer, Union 4,
use a wide range of strategies to carry out their enforcement-related
activities. These range from informal approaches based on direct
negotiations
with employers at the workplace to the formal use of the legal system. They
include the provision of education and information
to workers, direct
negotiation with employers, public “naming and shaming” of
non-cooperative employers, industrial action,
and making use of other available
leverage or pressure (such as industry associations or companies higher up in
the supply chain).
They also include the use of industrial or administrative
tribunals and the initiation of court proceedings to recover underpayments
(in some cases) penalties against noncompliant employers.
Overall, however, most of the interviewees expressed a preference for settlement
of disputes at the workplace level by a delegate
or an organizer. There was also
a preference for, where union strength or resources in the workplace enabled it,
dealing with the
dispute “on the ground” rather than through
tribunal or court proceedings, as the latter was less effective in terms
organizing outcomes. This preference for settling grievances at the
workplace-level persists despite evidence of extensive experience
with, and use
of, the tribunal and courts by the unions. It also persists despite a
demonstrated willingness and preparedness by
unions to use these formal avenues
where necessary and regarded as of strategic value.
B. Does Union Enforcement Activity Assist with Organizing and
If So, How?
Although our interviews revealed that unions used
enforcement to leverage organizing and collective bargaining, the views among
unions with respect to the extent to which their roles in enforcing
minimum employment standards offered organizing opportunities
were mixed and
complex. As outlined in Section I.C. above, Colling has drawn on legal
mobilization theory to suggest that use of
the law is more likely to achieve
union objectives where it achieves
inspirational effects
, in the sense of
confirming a sense of shared grievances or aspiration among workers and
generating hope that change can be achieved;
radiating effects
sense of extending wins beyond the specific case to change behavior by employers
and union members. Our case studies revealed
considerable reluctance on the part
of unions to embrace
finding that unions have a strong preference for pursuing noncompliance by
employers through “informal” strategies
is consistent with
observations made by other scholars.
, william b crEighton,
william J ford & richard J mitchEll, labour law: tExt and matErialS 817
(2d ed. 1993); Lee,
note 3, at 47.
enforcement as providing either of these two types of effects, while at the same
time acknowledging that there were actual and potential
benefits in doing so. As
noted above, all the unions confirmed that access to legal services was a
benefit of membership, and all
promoted their legal services as such. For an
organizer in Union 5, for example, the provision of legal advice and
representation
was a core function of unions that could not be displaced:
The ACTU has been pushing for about ten years now about this moving from being a
servicing model union where you help fix members’
problems to being an
organizing union where you create structures to empower them to fix it
themselves in the workplace, and that’s
great. My view is it can only go
so far because you’ve got to give people something if you want their
money. If they ring up
and say “I’ve been underpaid,” you
can’t just say “well, get everybody that you work with upset enough
Another interviewee observed: “If we can’t effectively enforce their
rights, then people are going to question why the
hell bother being in a
There was also a widespread recognition of the
positive dynamic between a union demonstrating its effectiveness through
members in enforcing minimum employment standards, and membership
However, there was a divergence in views and approaches between some unions that
saw servicing as a key means through which to attract
members, and others that
saw enforcement as a small, useful but insufficient factor in organizing. For an
elected officer in Union
1, for example, the union focused much of its
compliance work on new workplaces, as “nine times out of ten we get a
recruitment
leap because people are not being paid correctly.”
It was further explained that the union’s enforcement work can
“complement” organizing work, and that it was used
little bit of a recruitment or organizing strategy, I suppose.”
In Union 2 as well, compliance-related issues appeared to be openly
recognized as key elements in the union’s recruitment of
new members, and
the union was promoted to a significant degree on its capacity to enforce the
law and solve problems. An interviewee
within this union explained that it was
common practice to link cases of noncompliance by a specific employer with
“an organizing
strategy about why it’s important
with Organizer, Union 5, in Sydney, Austl. (May 6, 2013).
with Elected Officer, Union 1,
with Organizer, Union 1,
for people to join the union, about what benefits are in it for
It was further explained:
[I]t’s definitely part of our organizing strategy. So I mean we’ve
sort of got a view as a union that we do a lot of
work that other people might
say is work for nonmembers in terms of compliance work, but our view is that
unless you are seen to
be relevant, and care, and active, in the most exploited
group of workers there is, then your reputation as a union, and people’s
likelihood of joining you and having confidence in you isn’t going to be
there anyway.
However, interviewees in other unions expressed unease over the proposition that
the union would actively recruit on the basis of
compliance-related issues. This
was seen as carrying a number of risks. For an interviewee in Union 3,
recruiting workers on the
basis that their employer had failed or was failing to
comply with minimum standards was not a sound organizing tool, leading only
“six month members.”
Another interviewee in Union 4
expressed unease with the notion that the union would rely on instances of
employer noncompliance with
minimum standards to organize workers:
I think . . . sometimes we’re getting into a situation where we’re
almost recruiting around the issue. So you might go
into a workplace and say,
“Look there seems to be an issue here. There’s a member here who has
sort of told us about
it but all of you guys aren’t members . . . . If you
join the union then we need to talk about whether we can sort of take
further or whatever.” And you see what I mean about it being a challenge
and something we’re grappling with, like
it’s quite fraught. I mean
you know unions generally don’t want to recruit simply around an
enforcement issue, or at
least that’s not our philosophy. I mean we want
people to join our union because they want to build power in their industry
improve standards.
This interviewee further argued that the union preferred to sign people up for
other reasons, not least because “the reality
is that . . . entitlement
enforcement is a messy process, and no-one comes out of it one hundred percent
with Industrial/Legal Officer, Union 2,
with Elected Officer, Union 2,
with Industrial/Legal Officer, Union 3,
with Elected Officer, Union 4,
with Industrial/Legal Officer, Union 4,
In expressing reservations over the proposition that unions should recruit
members on the basis of their capacity to provide services,
number of interviewees emphasized the dissonance between the pursuit of
individual rights and the collectivist nature of trade unions.
One interviewee
stressed: “It’s just not what we’re about. We’re not a
clearinghouse. We’re not an
insurance company. . . . [I]t doesn’t
build long-term power.”
Another emphasized:
“We’re an organization that you need to join not because you have a
problem but because you want the
benefits of being a member, and one of the
benefits is if you do have a problem we can help you.”
The view that unions were more than just service-delivery organizations also
emerged strongly when interviewees expressed their views
on the Australian state
labor inspectorate (the FWO). While it was generally conceded that the labor
inspectorate had a role to play,
the organization was not regarded by
interviewees as giving workers “the sense of involvement with their
workmates,”
the “sense of collectivism,” or the empowerment
regarded as necessary to achieve long-term sustainable change within
workplaces.
There was, however, evidence that enforcement-related issues were widely used
strategically by unions as a “catalyst”
for fostering collective
identities and action. While all the case-study unions explained that they had a
general policy of not assisting
nonmembers, they all conceded that such policies
were waived in certain circumstances, which included where cases of
noncompliance
affecting nonmembers presented organizing opportunities. One
interviewee likened noncompliance by employers to “fuel”:
can be easy to organize workers when they’re a bit angry, you know, and so
these kind of issues tend to make workers
angry and tend to make them want to do
something about it, and gives them impetus to join the union
Another observed that noncompliance issues may be
used “to build strength, so that once people realize that there’s
and some of them can be simple to fix, some hard, some simple, it gives
them confidence to deal with some of the broader, more difficult
An interviewee in one union explained that the union
was currently engaged in a process of considering how to best
finding echoes similar findings made in the United Kingdom.
note 1, at 151-52.
with Elected Officer, Union 4,
with Industrial/Legal Officer, Union 5, in Melbourne, Aust. (Apr. 22,
with Organizer, Union 1,
note 71; Interview with Industrial/ Legal
Officer, Union 4,
with Industrial/Legal Officer, Union 4,
with Organizer, Union 1,
leverage the significant volume of enforcement work it carried out in order to
complement the campaigning work undertaken by the
The use of compliance-related activity to, in a sense,
organize workers through helping build worker activism and foster a
collective identity would appear to echo findings made by other
scholars with
respect to “legal mobilization” by trade unions in other
it would appear to be consistent
with Colling’s suggestion that unions are more willing to use individual
statutory law where
it can be leveraged to achieve
inspirational effects
Nevertheless, the reluctance of the unions we studied to embrace enforcement
action as an effective organizing tool and the lack
of any overarching strategy
regarding the use of litigation suggests that these inspirational effects will
be on a case-by-case basis.
Colling concluded from his case studies of two
British unions that while the unions make extensive and sophisticated use of the
persistent and widespread skepticism concerning the potential of law to
achieve union objectives means that legal mobilization by
U.K. unions will
“likely remain contingent and incomplete.”
appears to be a similar skepticism among the unions we studied, suggesting that
legal mobilization in Australia is also likely
to be fragmented.
Moreover, there seemed little indication that enforcement was being used to
radiating effects
. According to Colling, this is achieved where
actual or threatened litigation is used to encourage employers to accommodate
objectives, but also to “encourage members to mobilize behind
issues, to support the objectives of litigation through broader
means including
campaigning and possibly industrial action.”
This is more
common in the United States, where the combination of fee incentives, the
availability of class actions, and the existence
of large employers with labor
cost-cutting strategies has led to a number of high-profile class actions, often
brought by unions.
However, in smaller jurisdictions such as
Australia, there are fewer incentives for large employment standards enforcement
Although there is evidence that trade unions in Australia have been
making increasing use of the class action, this has mostly been
as a strategic
lever in major industrial disputes.
Litigation does not seem to
have been planned or used as an express campaign strategy to support wider
organizing and profile-raising
note 11, at 27.
Becker & Paul Strauss,
Representing Low-Wage Workers in the Absence of a
Class: The Peculiar Case of s 16 of the Fair Labor Standards Act and the
Underenforcement
of Minimum Labor Standards
, 92 minn. l. rEv. 1317
Caruana & Vince Morabito,
Australian Unions — The Unknown Class
Protagonists
, 30 civil JuSt. Q. 382 (2011).
Legal frameworks in Australia have long recognized the significant role that
trade unions can and do play in the monitoring and enforcement
employment standards. While this recognition continues to be embodied in statute
today, it is done so in a manner that
is increasingly individualistic and
legalistic in nature. However, at the same time that legislative frameworks are
increasingly
channeling unions
service-related roles, the
Australian union movement has sought to revitalize and grow through the adoption
of structures and approaches
which shift attention and resources
from servicing of individual compliance-related issues towards organizing
and member activism. This Article has explored these somewhat
opposing trends
and dynamics, and the ways in which they manifest themselves within the context
of the everyday compliance activity
of trade unions.
Our research has found that trade unions in Australia spend a significant amount
of their time monitoring and enforcing employer
compliance with minimum
employment standards, and that they continue to regard the protection of
members’ minimum employment
standards under law as an integral part of
what they do. Indeed, for some unions, this concern with protecting
workers’ minimum
employment standards extends well beyond their
membership. Our research also demonstrates, however, that the way in which this
is undertaken within unions, and by whom, has changed significantly in
recent decades, and that these changes reflect, and have been
driven by, a
number of factors including changes to legislative frameworks and union
Consistent with findings in earlier studies on Australian union renewal, we
found that there is considerable dissonance between theoretical
organizing unionism and the realities of everyday compliance-related activities
within many Australian unions. In particular,
we found that in four out of the
five unions, organizers were still expected to perform a wide range of
enforcement-related tasks.
While this may be explained by a number of factors
(such as resource constraints and leadership), it may also be that the
compliance-related
roles assigned to unions under legislative frameworks
— roles hard fought for and won — have in fact impeded the shift
within Australian unions towards an organizing model
of unionism.
While there is considerable diversity among unions as to the extent to which
they focus on compliance-related work and how they go
case-study unions emphasized that access to these services is a key benefit of
union membership and that
the quality of the services provided in this area has
an immediate bearing on membership through increasing or decreasing member
satisfaction with the union. The relationship between the provision of
compliance-related services and attracting
new members
, however, is
clear. Our case studies revealed a diversity of views within unions as to the
extent to which compliance-related activity is perceived
as a legitimate and
effective means of attracting new members. While it is impossible to say with
certainty what determines this
divergence in approach, it would appear to be
influenced to a significant degree by perceived levels of noncompliance in the
the nature of union memberships, and the strategic approach adopted by
Overall, however, and despite the significant proportion of time and resources
spent by unions on enforcement-related activities,
our research has found little
evidence to suggest that the Australian union movement is moving towards, or
willing to embrace, a
model of unionism that emphasizes the representation and
servicing of individual workers over other union functions, despite legislative
nudges in this direction. Most interviewees were keen to emphasize the
fundamental differences between a union and other entities
that may perform
similar enforcement-related activities on behalf of workers, such as law firms
or the state inspectorate. There
was a clear reluctance among most interviewees
to be seen as adopting a servicing approach, and a skepticism that such work
individualistic and legalistic in nature — could help build the
collectivist values seen as necessary for successful union
organization. We
therefore found little evidence that those within the unions studied believed
greater engagement with legal mobilization
has the potential to contribute
significantly to union renewal.
In describing the compliance-related work undertaken by his union, one
interviewee stressed that enforcing minimum standards was
“a core part of
what unions are about.” Later in the same interview, though, the same
interviewee explained to us that
enforcing minimum standards was “just not
what we’re about.”
To us, the use of these two phrases
by the same interviewee embodies some of the ambiguities and tensions inherent
in a situation
in which trade unions are pursuing growth strategies focused on
building workplace activism and collective strength, within the confines
legislative and institutional structures which increasingly encourage and foster
their roles as legal advisors and advocates for
individual workers. So the
question remains: Can it be both? The answer — at least in Australia
— would appear to be
yes, it can.
with Industrial/Legal Officer, Union 4,
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (1.92 MB)
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter