URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/journals/UNSWLawJlStuS/2025/26.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 15:46:55
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Panadjam, Alda Mayo --- "Exit Stage Left: Legal Possibility of a Withdrawal from the United Nations" [2025] UNSWLawJlStuS 26; (2025) UNSWLJ Student Series No 25-26
EXIT STAGE LEFT: LEGAL POSSIBILITY OF A WITHDRAWAL FROM THE
UNITED NATIONS
ALDA MAYO PANADJAM
I INTRODUCTION
Humankind has evolved from simple simians to more complex beings capable of
abstract thought and complex ideas. However, the principle
ubi societas,
(‘where there is society, there is law’) is more or less
encapsulated in their every conduct toward each
Over time, the continuous
interaction of humans with each other reached the point where a certain group of
people in a certain territory
agreed to establish themselves as a nation state.
States are highly regarded as one of humanity’s most extraordinary
conceptions,
which was acknowledged by the then-Foreign Minister of Australia,
Julie Bishop, as ‘the foundation of humanity’s efforts
peaceful, safe and prosperous
societies’.
primary features of a state is its sovereignty, meaning that any given state has
a claim to ‘supreme authority and
control within a territory signifying
the coherence, unity, and independence of a territorially based political and
legal community’.
The concept of sovereignty that provides states with complete power,
authority, and the administration of law and violence within
their territory
does not prevent states from interacting with each other under international
Despite their sovereignty and
sheer power, states decided to sacrifice some of their sovereign powers to
facilitate the management
which led to the creation
of international organisations. Klabbers further argued that while it is not the
business of legal theorists
to try explaining why states co-operate, it is an
acceptable fact that cooperation through international organisations is a
method as the number
proliferates.
From the plethora of existing international organisations, the United Nations
(‘UN’) is at the forefront due to its degree
of influence, value,
and future.
The United States
President Franklin D Roosevelt initially championed the idea of the
following the Second World War,
and to a certain extent, the failure of the League of Nations. After receiving
support from 50 states,
the San Francisco Conference started on April 25, 1945,
to negotiate the constitutive document of the UN, which will eventually be
Charter of the United Nations
eventually grew to be the ‘universal’
organisation
membership, which encompasses virtually the whole world.
There is, however, a lingering legal question as to whether member states (a
sovereign entity) possess the ability to unilaterally
and voluntarily withdraw
from the UN. Interestingly enough, the
does not have an
explicit clause that allows member states to withdraw. At least on paper, the
only legal avenue to exit the UN is
through expulsion, understandably, a
non-preferred, involuntary
This legal question is
important to examine as states are sovereign creatures with a will of their own
to decide whether they wish
to enter or exit an international
organisation,
notwithstanding. Indonesia famously attempted to withdraw from the UN in 1965
due to its disapproval of Malaysia’s admittance
to the Security
. Notwithstanding
Indonesia’s resumption of UN membership in 1966, this remains the only
instance in history in which a state
exercises her sovereign powers to withdraw
from the UN.
This article will delve into the question of whether or not it is legally
possible for a state to unilaterally and voluntarily withdraw
from the UN.
Bearing the status as sovereign entities, it could be argued that states possess
an inherent right to withdraw from
international organisations, including the
UN. However, it is pertinent to examine further whether there is a certain
degree of intended
design from the drafters to open a way for member states to
withdraw or not, let alone deeper assessments from the point of view
of treaties on the state’s ability to withdraw from a treaty that does not
provide an explicit clause for withdrawal.
These questions will, however, be
answered from a legal perspective. Some commentaries on why states even wanted
to leave in the
first place will be provided, but only as additional context and
do not form a core part of this research. For greater certainty,
this essay is
not meant to encourage any state to withdraw from the UN, but rather to provide
an academic discourse on whether such
a course of action can ever be legally
II CHARTER-ED TERRITORY
The UN, over time, has become ubiquitous and famous (or notorious, if you
will) as the international organisation that almost always
appears daily in the
mainstream news, be it from doing productive, altruistic things for the world,
or the polar opposite. Considering
its ‘universal’
and the UN seemingly
taking up the mantle of global governance by managing the total effort of global
it is understandable
that the majority of the populace of the Earth treats the UN as the ‘world
hub of cooperation, humankind’s
political and diplomatic
Such extravagant
descriptions, however, should not betray the UN’s true nature as a treaty
The commonly accepted historical account of the inception of the UN was
Dumbarton Oaks in 1944 and the San Francisco Conference in
1945, where 50 states
sat down and forged the creation of the
It is worth noting
that the UN was devised and designed while the Second World War was still
raging, unlike the creation of the League
of Nations, which waited until the end
of the First World War.
was fairly apparent that the UN was mainly designed by the victors (or rather,
the then-eventual victors) of the Second
World War, primarily the United States,
Britain, and Soviet Union, non-Western influences also shaped the creation of
were incorporated into the core foundations of UN institutions and
which is the
has been called many things, from a constitutive treaty
document establishing the
United Nations
to a constitution of the
international legal order.
particularly deep schism of interpretation has confounded many international law
scholars to this day. However, for the purpose
of this research, I will treat
as what it is under international law, which is a treaty.
The embryo of the
was contained in the proposals of Dumbarton
Oaks, and further understandings on the right of veto for the big powers, as
talks on permanent seats in the Security Council, were agreed in
These political
agreements paved the way for the proper textual negotiations of the
in San Francisco, right at the end of the Second World War, from 25
April to 16 June 1945.
The negotiations were attended by representatives from 50 states and ended
with the unanimous adoption of the
, which was signed on 26
– containing 111 articles – finally entered into force on 24 October
1945 as it received the required number and combination
of parties to ratify the
treaty’s lofty objectives, including the ‘maintenance of
international peace and
(The UN Security
Council was seen as ‘the most crucial actor in terms of international
peace and security
) as well as
the controversial articles on the council and its veto powers, there is one
major feature (or lack of it) of the
that begs further legal
analysis: there seems to be no way out for states once they join, as the
does not have any articles on withdrawal.
Egon Schwelb rightly acknowledged that ‘the absence of such a provision
from the text of the
has caused uncertainty, confusion and
controversy’.
Since there
is a complete absence of matters regarding withdrawal in the
need to look deeper into the historical documents to divulge the intent and
reasons. The United Kingdom White Paper at Dumbarton
Oaks proposed that
‘[states] are not allowed to withdraw from the Organization.... This is
undoubtedly a great innovation in
international procedure, but it was thought to
be necessary if the Organization was to be able to adapt itself to the rapidly
world of today’.
This view was not shared by the representatives of the United States and the
Soviet Union, which argued that, respectively, ‘all
members would possess
the faculty of withdrawal’ and that ‘the right of withdrawal was an
expression of state
sovereignty’.
very beginning, there was a bifurcation of ideas on withdrawal, and those in
favour of allowing a withdrawal used the argument
of sovereignty.
A year later, in the San Francisco Conference, the issue of the possibility
of a withdrawal rose to the surface again. Amidst the
debate during the
Conference, Committee I/2 was recorded to be dismissive of the idea of
incorporating a withdrawal clause into the
and forwarded its
views to its parent body, the First
Commission.
The report of the
Commission went on to say that despite the absence of such a clause, there is no
intention to impair the states’
right of withdrawal, which is based on the
principle of sovereign equality of the
The 1946 UN Yearbook
– a truly valuable historical document – specifically chronicled the
conclusion reached by the First
Commission on the issues of withdrawal, noting
that ‘the question of withdrawal aroused much discussion in the
and there were
arguments that it would be contrary to the conception of
universality.
Despite that,
there was also a counter-argument which states that ‘a sovereign nation
could not be compelled to remain in the
organization against its
which plays into
the argument of state sovereignty to either enter or exit an international
organisation.
The First Commission decided to solve the question of withdrawal through a
declaration on withdrawal, which stipulates that ‘the
should not make express provision either to permit or to prohibit withdrawal
from the Organization’.
was also deemed that there is a duty for the nations to continue their
co-operation within the Organisation to preserve international
However, there is one
important position that the First Commission took in the case of withdrawal,
which allows that if ‘a
Member because of exceptional
circumstances
feels constrained
to withdraw, and leave the burden of maintaining of maintaining international
peace and security on the other Members,
it is not the purpose of the
Organization to compel that Member to continue its cooperation in the
Organization’.
Commission ultimately decided to abstain from recommending a formal clause
‘specifically forbidding or permitting
withdrawal’ under the
Examined from the point of view of the
, I have arrived at
these conclusions: First, the
does not explicitly provide a
clause on withdrawal; second, the
préparatoires,
in fact, laid the philosophical grounds for that
omission, with an emphasis that the UN cannot compel a Member to continue
cooperation
if they feel constrained to withdraw under exceptional
circumstances, and third, the drafters – weighing on the complexities
the legal question – abstained to omit the specific prohibition or
specific permission for withdrawal in the
. The answer to the
legal possibility to withdraw from the UN, therefore, has taken, at this point,
a tangible yet translucent shape,
but it has not manifested completely. This
examination thus continues to the realm of the law of treaties.
III SOVEREIGNTY AND TREATY OBLIGATIONS: UNSTOPPABLE FORCE
MEETS IMMOVABLE OBJECT?
Nagendra Singh observed that ‘anything which is not conceded in favour
of the international organisation is retained by the
Member-State, which by
virtue of its sovereignty must be vested with the residuary
‘states have claimed an inherent right of withdrawal arising out of the
principle of sovereignty or of democracy or
equality, and have contended that
this right exists wherever it has not been expressly barred or expressly
This opinion
– it must be noted – was held before the official codification of
the law of treaties through the
1969 Vienna Convention on the Law of Treaties
’). Singh’s perspective seems to have
reflected Bodin’s view that sovereignty ‘may incur obligations
domestically
or internationally only through his free and voluntary
agreement’.
Further guidance in the case
’s silence on the issues
of withdrawal can thus be found in
Article 56 of the
is titled ‘Denunciation of or withdrawal from a treaty
containing no provision regarding termination, denunciation or withdrawal’
and provides that ‘a treaty which contains no provision regarding its
termination and which does not provide for denunciation
or withdrawal is not
subject to denunciation or
withdrawal’.
article 56 allows two exceptions to the rule: the first one is if ‘it is
established that the parties intended to
admit the possibility of denunciation
or withdrawal,’ or if ‘a right of denunciation or withdrawal may be
the nature of the
Looking at how it
is drafted, Mark Villiger in his
Commentary on the 1969 Vienna Convention on
the Law of Treaties
VCLT Commentary
Waldock Report
, argued that it is apparent that the relationship
between the general rule and the exceptions was ‘carefully
and that it hit
the right balance between the community’s interest to maintain a stable
relationship and the need of states,
under certain circumstances, to make their
exit from a treaty.
Under the first exception in subparagraph 1(a),
allows withdrawal
if there is an establishment that the parties to a certain treaty intended to
admit the possibility of denunciation
or withdrawal. There is one important note
here that such intention may be had before, upon, or after the treaty’s
conclusion.
also held that informal agreements and
préparatoires
can be used to establish intention in the context of
subparagraph 1(a) exception.
this particular note, the qualification under the previous section of this essay
can arguably be satisfied because during the
San Francisco conference, the First
Commission has published a written declaration on withdrawal confirming their
understanding that
whenever a member is constrained by an exceptional
circumstances to withdraw, the UN has no obligation to compel them to continue
their co-operation. However, it is worth noting the choice of language used by
the First Commission, as it did not expressly state
that a member
; they only held that there is
no obligation to compel that state
to continue cooperation
The second exception rests on the idea that the nature of any given treaty
gives rise to the possibility of whether or not a state
may withdraw, when the
treaty does not explicitly say
In this exception, the
object and purpose of a treaty are included in the assessment of the
treaty’s nature, and a treaty with
an ‘intrinsically
temporary’ character is often regarded as one that permits unilateral
termination.
Ian Sinclair, a
prominent figure on the law of treaties, went so far as to provide a distinction
between the types of treaties that,
by their nature, allow for withdrawal and
those that do not.
assessment, treaties that allow for withdrawal include treaties on commerce,
military alliance, technical cooperation in economic,
social, and cultural
matters, as well as treaties on arbitration, conciliation, or judicial
settlement.
On the other hand,
Sinclair regarded treaties on the establishment of boundaries between states,
effecting a cession of territory,
granting of rights in a territory, creation of
international regime for a particular area, along with treaties on peace, of
disarmament,
or the maintenance of peace, as well as treaties on settlement of
an international dispute and human rights, are by nature not eligible
withdrawal or termination.
While it seems intuitive and comfortable to entirely rest the argument on
Sinclair’s observation, there is a legal lacuna that
needs to be
addressed. While it is not factually incorrect to think of the
as a treaty about the ‘maintenance of peace’, it could also be
argued that the
is primarily a treaty about the creation of an
international organisation. The fact that the UN has a primary objective to
international peace and security does not instantly qualify the
under Sinclair’s strict categorisation of treaty nature.
However, it must be noted that Klabbers further added that ‘the
offered by article 56 then, is of limited help when it comes to treaties
establishing international
organizations’,
a special nature of international organisations’ constitutive documents.
The alternative character of exceptions under article 56 of
reflects a reconciliatory approach to the perpetually clashing ideas of the
sanctity of a treaty
inherent right of denunciation of a sovereign Member
Specifically in the case
Oppenheim’s International Law
stated that
‘although the
itself does not expressly mention the right
of withdrawal, in the absence of an express prohibition to that effect the
the United Nations must be deemed to have preserved the right to
sever what is, in law, a contractual relation of indefinite duration
upon States far-reaching restrictions of their
sovereignty’.
line with the idea of states having the inherent right to withdraw from the
, although it poses another question of whether the
was legally designed as an unending contract between states.
It would be remiss to discuss the possibility of withdrawal without
mentioning the principle of
pacta sunt servanda
that requires all
subjects of international law to exercise their rights and duties under the law
in good faith, including fulfilling
obligations.
The principle is
the bedrock for any contractual agreement between legal persons, be it humans or
states. However, when it comes
to sovereign entities like states, there is an
ongoing debate between stability and change, which hints at the limits of the
pacta sunt servanda
is always in a perpetual tension against the flow of time and
evolving circumstances.
elegantly encapsulated the conundrum by stating that ‘to place too much
emphasis on stability, albeit an essential component
of every legal order, would
neglect the temporal dimension of law ... stability presupposes adaptability;
durability requires
On this particular aspect of
pacta sunt servanda
, Singh boldly claimed
that ‘it would be unsound to reason only in terms of
in that sphere of treaties which must be governed by the
constitutional
organisational principle, for there is a special rule
of law applicable in this particular sphere, which excludes the application
general maxim of international law on the analogy of
generalia specialibus
non derogat
essence, an organisational treaty like the
must indeed be
observed in good faith by the parties under
pacta sunt servanda
pacta sunt servanda
can only be observed through express provisions in
the treaty. Therefore, in the absence of a specific provision, ‘there can
be no question of the violation of the sanctity of a treaty in the event of a
unilateral withdrawal’,
realising that a Member State cannot be bound by anything absent from the
Therefore, the
pacta sunt servanda
argument lines up neatly with the ongoing argument of
sovereignty, in which a Member State cannot be bound by a condition to which
has not voluntarily agreed. In other words, if a withdrawal clause is not found
text, then states are legally eligible to withdraw, as
there is no express prohibition on withdrawal. In the end,
can only be applied to an express stipulation in a treaty, and
there can be no violation of a non-existent
This section has covered the many aspects of the law of treaties concerning a
withdrawal from the UN. First, the assessment of
, especially on
article 56 regarding withdrawal in the absence of a withdrawal provision, tells
a complete picture of a general rule
with its two exceptions, which are based on
sovereignty and contractual obligations. In the absence of a provision, a state
legally eligible to withdraw if – and only if – it
satisfies either one of the exceptions under article 56 of the
Second, there is no violation of the
pacta sunt servanda
principle when a
state wishes to withdraw from the
, as the principle only
applies to an express textual stipulation, and there can be no breach of
obligation for a provision that does
IV THERE AND BACK AGAIN: INDONESIA’S WITHDRAWAL FROM
THE UN, 1965 – 1966
To date, there has been no attempt from a Member State to withdraw from the
UN, barring the one instance where Indonesia performed
a brazen act of
withdrawal in 1965. The case began on 20 January 1965, when the Indonesian
Deputy Prime Minister and Minister of
Foreign Affairs, Subandrio, sent a letter
informing the then Secretary General that the Government of Indonesia decided to
from the UN.
decision was based on the election of Malaysia as a member of the UN Security
Council which was remarked in the letter as ‘circumstances
which have been
created by colonial powers in the United Nations so blatantly against our
anti-colonial struggle and indeed against
the lofty principles and purposes of
the United Nations Charter ... felt that no alternative had been left for
Indonesia but withdrawal
from the United
The Letter went
on to say that the decision to include Malaysia in the Security Council was a
‘mockery of the sense of the
Security Council
Before going further, it is important to understand the historical and
political situation at that time in Indonesia and its immediate
Indonesia was a fledgling nation-state only 20 years into its independence under
the leadership of the revolutionary President
Sukarno. The belief shared among
Indonesians at that time was that ‘Indonesian independence was won through
revolution and
the central Indonesian state created through the conspicuous act
of nationalist will’.
formation of Malaya, as such, caught the full attention of the Indonesian
political and military elites, who believed that independence
must never be
granted by imperialists and had to be
like Indonesia did
during the events leading to its independence. The tension between Indonesia and
Malaysia peaked in January 1963,
when Indonesia officially rejected the
Malaysian plan to create the Federation of Malaysia on the basis that it was not
as a decolonisation
Indonesia eventually
launched the confrontation (‘
Konfrontasi
’) against Malaysia
through a speech by Subandrio on 20 January 1963 in which he stated that Malaya
as a country was acting
as ‘the henchman of neo-imperialism and
neo-colonialism pursuing a policy hostile to
Indonesia’.
The matter,
from the Indonesian perspective, got worse when on 16 September 1964, the UN
favoured Malaysia in its conclusion affirming
the 9 July 1964 agreement between
Singapore, Sarawak, Sabah, and the Federation of Malaya that they should be
united under the banner
This course of events
was capped off by the election of Malaysia into the UN Security Council, which,
for Indonesia, was an inappropriate
recognition of a ‘colonial’
state by the world organisation, and as such, Indonesia submitted a letter to
withdraw from
the UN. The UN Secretary General replied to the letter, noting
Indonesia’s concerns as well as hoping that ‘in due time
[Indonesia]
will resume full cooperation with the United
For a full year, the withdrawal decision by Indonesia confounded legal
experts and reopened the substantive discussion of whether
a state can leave the
UN, in the absence of such a provision in the
. However, on 19
September 1966, the Ambassador of Indonesia to the United States of America sent
a telegram to the UN Secretary General
saying that Indonesia ‘has decided
to resume full cooperation with the United Nations and to resume participation
in its activities’.
crucial to note that in 1966, there was an ongoing seismic shift in the
Indonesian leadership, with a more pro-Western Suharto
taking over the
leadership from the more leftist
which led to the
signing of a peace treaty to officially end the
Konfrontasi
on 11 August
as well as a
reconsideration of Indonesia’s participation in the UN. The Office of the
Legal Affairs of the UN regarded the
telegram to simply mean that
‘[Indonesia’s] recent absence from the Organization was based not
upon a withdrawal from
the United Nations but upon a cessation of
co-operation’.
The brief Indonesian
showed a real-life example of the ‘endemic tension between
internationalism and national sovereignty concerning international
organizations’,
how domestic and international politics play a major part in them. This section
will focus on the possible legal arguments
for Indonesia’s withdrawal. The
first argument is the existence of a ‘special circumstance’ that
constrained them
to withdraw, consistent with the
préparatoires
. This argument was amplified
with the justification provided for under article 56(1) of the
the ground that there is an intention from the parties for the possibility of
withdrawal. Lastly, the Indonesian withdrawal did
not breach the
principle because there is no violation of a non-existent provision
. These arguments are intertwined and inseparable from
each other.
There are many legal interpretations on the Indonesian case based on the
First Commission’s report, along with its qualification
for the exception
provided for under article 56 of the
. Frances Livingstone recorded
that the Commission regarded the Declaration on Withdrawal during the San
Francisco Conference, as
‘to be as binding on States as insertion in the
Charter itself would have
despite its status
travaux préparatoires.
However, Schwelb is of the opinion that
‘the reason Indonesia gave for the withdrawal ... cannot reasonably be
classified as
an ‘exceptional circumstance’ justifying withdrawal
from the Organization’.
There is, however, a legal vacuum in determining this idea of ‘exceptional
circumstances’. Kelsen established that the
burden to define
‘exceptional circumstances’ falls to the shoulders of Member States
themselves,
meaning that
Indonesia was within its rights as a sovereign member to argue that the
inclusion of Malaysia in the Security Council
as an exceptional circumstance,
and it was qualified for a withdrawal using the First Commission’s
understanding. The existence
of the Declaration on Withdrawal
‘established’ that the parties intended to admit the possibility of
withdrawal,
and therefore, it
can also be argued that Indonesia qualified for the exception provided under
article 56 of the
. This, however, was strongly contested by Kelsen,
who argued that a sovereign state is bound by a treaty to which it is a party
as long as it pleases is incompatible with any idea of international law
binding upon the states
Feinberg, who posits a rather extreme opinion that ‘once a State decides
to enter an organization it is no longer free,
and its own wishes are no longer
Kelsen’s and Feinberg’s apathy with state sovereignty warrants
further critique, especially when it is generally accepted
that the principle of
sovereignty is ‘a pivotal principle of modern international
It is unthinkable
that a state’s sovereignty would disappear in the face of a treaty
constituting an international organisation.
Singh even went further by saying
that ‘it is indeed of little consequence whether it is sovereignty or
equality or democracy
which lies at the root of the residuary jurisdiction which
the normal ‘International Person’ possesses as a member of
international
organisation’.
This is the
most appropriate approach under this context because it goes further than just
simply using sovereignty as a silver bullet;
it made the most sense because then
the Member State is vested with the ‘residuary jurisdiction’ and the
right of withdrawal
is derived from that, unless expressly prohibited by the
Coming back to
the case at hand, there is obviously a fundamental conflict of legal
interpretation on Indonesia’s purported
withdrawal; however, Singh’s
argument on sovereignty, residuary jurisdiction, as well as non-violation of a
non-existent provision,
is a more logical and sound explanation from a legal
perspective.
In the end, Indonesia’s withdrawal was treated only as a cessation of
cooperation and not as a
withdrawal,
and by the request
of the Ambassador of Indonesia to the United States of America to the Secretary
General, Indonesia ‘has
decided to resume full cooperation with the United
crafted language of ‘cessation of cooperation’ traced its roots back
to the First Commission report, where
it ties comfortably with the term
‘...not the purpose of the Organization to compel that Member to continue
its cooperation
Organization’.
convoluted and labyrinthine language in the First Commission report was utilised
cleverly by the UN Legal Office to give off
the impression that Indonesia did
not perform a withdrawal (they did, in every legal sense) and that they only
suspended their cooperation,
which they also did, reflecting on the new
political reality in Indonesia.
V CONCLUSION
The UN has been – and still is – the world’s foremost
international organisation, which is regarded to be universal
However, this still does not betray the fact that the UN is still a treaty-based
entity with delegated functions provided
by its Member States that are fully
sovereign entities. Although the
itself does not provide express
provision on withdrawal, it must be understood that the general law of treaties
still applies, and
as such, there are caveats as to why states are allowed to
withdraw from the UN. The
travaux préparatoires
established the intent of the parties on the possibility of
withdrawal, while that intent is also a major part of an exception provided
under article 56 of the
on the possibility of states to withdraw
from a treaty without an express withdrawal provision. Prominent scholars also
pointed out
pacta sunt servanda
principle only covers express
provisions and therefore, an act of withdrawal from the UN is not a violation of
a treaty and still
falls within the sovereign right of a state. Indonesia has
tested the limits of withdrawal in its attempt to leave the UN in 1965,
caused by a changing political reality domestically, it decided to resume its
participation, as if it had never left. In
the end, there is no conclusive and
definitive solution to the debate between sovereignty and contractual
obligations with regard
to a withdrawal from the UN. However, this research can
confidently show that there is indeed a legal possibility, alongside some
qualifiers, for a state to withdraw from the UN.
The Author would like to acknowledge the pivotal role of
Lembaga Pengelola Dana Pendidikan Republik Indonesia
(Indonesia Endowment
Fund for Education Agency/LPDP) in providing the scholarship for the Author to
pursue his postgraduate degree
at the University of New South Wales, as well as
Dr Tim Clark for his guidance and feedback in the completion of this
Jan Klabbers,
Introduction to
International Institutional Law
(Cambridge University
ed, 2009) 1.
Julie Bishop, ‘State
Sovereignty and Territorial Integrity State Sovereignty: Challenges to the
Nation State’
Australian Year Book of International Law
Jean L Cohen,
Globalization
and Sovereignty: Rethinking Legality, Legitimacy and
Constitutionalism
(Cambridge University Press, 2012) 26.
Jan Klabbers,
Introduction to International Organizations Law
(Cambridge University Press,
ed, 2022) 16.
There are differences among
scholars as to the ‘real’ number: Brownlie in
Principles of
Public International Law
estimated 170 international organisations, while
Peter Bakker in
The Legal Position of Intergovernmental Organizations
took into account 350 international organisations.
Leon Gordenker,
Nations in International Politics
(Princeton University Press, 1971) 3.
Kirsten Nakjavani Bookmiller,
The United Nations
(Infobase Publishing, 2008) 30.
Amitav Acharya and Dan
Plesch, ‘The United Nations Managing and Reshaping a Changing World
(2020) 26(2)
Global Governance
Asoke Kumar Mukerji,
‘The Role of the United Nations in the Contemporary World’ (2017)
Indian Foreign Affairs Journal: A Quarterly of the Association of
Indian Diplomats
Expulsion is provided for
under article 6 of the
. However, the high threshold as well as
complex procedures that involve a political decision from the UN Security
Council, prevent
it from ever being used as of the date of writing. It can be
argued that suspension under article 5 can also be considered a ‘soft
exit’, although involuntary in nature.
Grigoriĭ Ivanovich
Theory of International Law
(George Allen & Unwin
Publishers, 1975) 349–50, cited in Michael Akehurst, ‘Withdrawal
from International Organisations’
(1979) 32(1)
Current Legal
Egon Schwelb,
Withdrawal from the United Nations: The
Indonesian Intermezzo’
(1967) 61(3)
American Journal of International
Acharya and Plesch (n 10).
International Organizations
(Routledge, 4
ed, 2015) 149.
Bookmiller (n 8) 12.
Acharya and Plesch (n 10)
222. They also argued that the true political inception of the UN was on 1
January 1942 with the Declaration
by United Nations of twenty-six states, where
President Roosevelt insisted that China be included in the top four powers and
India be treated as independent. Franz Cede went even further by saying
that the political impetus of the UN was established under
the Atlantic Charter
of August 1941, see Franz Cede and Lilly Sucharipa-Behrmann (eds),
United Nations: Law and Practice
(Brill, 2001) 6.
Bookmiller (n 8) 30.
Acharya and Plesch (n 10)
Pierre-Marie Dupuy,
‘The Constitutional Dimension of the UN Charter Revisited: Almost One
Quarter of a Century Later’
(2023) 25(1)
Max Planck Yearbook of
United Nations Law
Franz Cede and Lilly
Sucharipa-Behrmann (eds),
The United Nations: Law and
(Brill, 2001) 6.
Bookmiller (n 8) 35.
Charter of the United
Congyan Cai, Larissa van
den Herik and Tiyanjana Maluwa,
The UN Security Council and the
Maintenance of Peace in a Changing World
(Cambridge University Press,
ed, 2024) 1.
Schwelb (n 14) 661.
‘Origin and
Evolution’ [1946]
1946–47 Yearbook of the United Nations
Hans Kelsen noted that the
does not confer competence to decide the parameter of
‘exceptional circumstances’ and he arrived at the conclusion that
the authority to define such ‘exceptional circumstances’ lies on the
member states themselves: see, Hans Kelsen, ‘Withdrawal
from the United
(1948) 1(1)
The Western Political Quarterly
Nagendra Singh,
Termination of Membership of International Organisations
Sons Limited, 1958) 80–1.
Howard M Hensel,
Sovereignty and the Global Community: The Quest for Order in the
International System
(Ashgate, 2004) 37. It should also be noted that it is
legally possible for a state to also ‘freely and voluntarily’ agree
to a perpetual membership within a treaty through an express clause in that
Introduction to
International Institutional Law
Vienna Convention on the
Law of Treaties
opened for signature 23 May
1969, 1155 UNTS 331
into force 27 January 1980) art 56(1).
56(1)(a)–(b).
Commentary on the 1969 Vienna Convention on the Law of
(Martinus Nijhoff Publishers, 2009) 701.
Introduction to
International Institutional Law
Ian McTaggart
The Vienna Convention on the Law of
(Manchester University Press, 2
ed, 1984) 187,
cited in Villiger,
Commentary on the 1969 Vienna Convention on the Law of
(n 45) 702–3.
Introduction to
International Institutional Law
Termination of
Membership of International Organisations
Lassa Oppenheim,
International Law: A Treatise
, ed Hersch Lauterpacht (Longmans, Green and
Co, 1955) 411.
I I Lukashuk, ‘The
Principle Pacta Sunt Servanda and the Nature of Obligation Under International
(1989) 83(3)
American Journal of International
Christina Binder,
‘Stability and Change in Times of Fragmentation: The Limits of Pacta Sunt
Servanda Revisited’
(2012) 25(4)
Leiden Journal of International
Pierre-Marie Dupuy,
‘Evolutionary Interpretation of Treaties: Between Memory and
Prophecy’ in Enzo Cannizzaro (ed),
The Law of Treaties Beyond the
Vienna Convention
(Oxford, 2011) 123.
Termination of
Membership of International Organisations
Schwelb (n 14) 665.
Letter Dated 20 January
1965 from the First Deputy Prime Minister and Minister for Foreign Affairs of
Indonesia Addressed to the Secretary
General, UN Doc A/5857 (21 January
Joseph Chinyong
The Politics of Indonesia-Malaysia Relations: One Kin, Two
(RoutledgeCurzon, 2005) 79–80.
Cindy Adams,
Sukarno: An
Autobiography
(Bobbs Merrill, 1965) 300.
Conflict and Confrontation in South East Asia, 1961-1965:
Britain, the United States, and the Creation of Malaysia
University Press, 2001) 126.
Frances Livingstone,
‘Withdrawal from the United Nations: Indonesia’
(1965) 14(2)
International and Comparative Law Quarterly
Letter Dated 26 February
1965 from the Secretary-General to the First Deputy Prime Minister and Minister
for Foreign Affairs of Indonesia,
UN Doc S/6202 (26 February 1965).
Participation of Indonesia in the Activities of the United Nations’ (1966)
1966 United Nations Juridical Yearbook
Participation of Indonesia’)
(n 72) 276.
John Subritzky,
‘Britain, Konfrontasi, and the End of Empire in Southeast Asia,
1961-65’ (2000) 28(3)
Journal of Imperial and Commonwealth
Participation of Indonesia’ (n 76) 223.
Schwelb (n 14) 661.
Antonio Morelli,
Withdrawal from Multilateral Treaties
(Brill, 2021) 114.
Livingstone (n 75) 640.
Schwelb (n 14) 671.
See n 38. Strangely enough,
his belief that states decide their definitions of ‘exceptional
circumstances’ is at odds
with his general conviction that the treaty is
positioned way above national sovereignty.
Schwelb (n 14) 665.
Hans Kelsen,
the United Nations: A Critical Analysis of Its Fundamental Problem,
& Sons Limited, London, 1956)
122–3, cited in Aminat O Anoba,
‘Legality of Withdrawal from the United Nations’ (2017) 2
Crescent University Law Journal
Nathan Feinberg,
‘Unilateral Withdrawal from an International Organization’
British Yearbook of International Law
, 213, cited in Aminat O. Anoba,
‘Legality of Withdrawal from the United Nations’ (2017) 2
Crescent University Law Journal
Encyclopedias of International Law
(online at 19 April 2025) Sovereignty
Singh (n 41) 95.
Participation of Indonesia’ (n 77) 222.
‘Origin and
Evolution’ (n 33) 21.
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (84.8 KB)
PDF format (302 KB)
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter