URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/journals/UNSWLawJlStuS/2025/25.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 15:46:50
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Moran, Niamh --- "ADHD and Juvenile Justice: Assessing the New South Wales Detainee Behaviour Intervention Framework" [2025] UNSWLawJlStuS 25; (2025) UNSWLJ Student Series No 25-25
ADHD AND JUVENILE JUSTICE:
ASSESSING THE NEW SOUTH WALES DETAINEE BEHAVIOUR INTERVENTION FRAMEWORK
NIAMH MORAN
Those with ADHD have been found to be five times more prevalent in
juvenile detention settings ... Despite this, ADHD is rarely given
consideration when it comes to youth and criminal justice policy development and
I INTRODUCTION
The New South Wales (‘NSW’) Detainee Behaviour Intervention
Framework (‘DBIF’ or the ‘Policy’)
aims to minimise
re-offending for young people in juvenile detention using evidence-based
interventions.
The Policy reflects
an important shift away from punishment and towards rehabilitation as the
primary focus of juvenile justice.
Rehabilitative treatments are necessary to
address the complex behavioural impacts of Attention Deficit Hyperactivity
Disorder (‘ADHD’)
which disproportionately affect
in detention.
However, the Policy’s means of achieving rehabilitation through
targeting ‘criminogenic’ needs fails to adequately
consider the
broader psychological needs of children with ADHD. As a result, these children
may have limited access to the full range
of rehabilitative benefits intended by
the Policy. Furthermore, the Policy’s rehabilitation objectives are
obscured by language
shrouded in ‘risk management’, and undermined
by assuming a role (albeit reduced) for general and specific deterrence
responding to misbehaviour. This ambiguity has led to inconsistent and unduly
punitive implementation of the Policy, which is
likely to disproportionately
impact child detainees with ADHD. Adopting a clear and consistent approach to
rehabilitation with a
focus on psychological wellbeing may help minimise harmful
practices and improve interventions for children with ADHD.
First, this article considers the prevalence of
ADHD in juvenile detention and its impacts on children’s behaviour and
Second, it outlines the purpose and operation of the DBIF,
highlighting two examples of interventions: the Incentive Scheme, and
confinement as punishment. Third, it discusses how the Policy’s emerging
context both informs and limits its rehabilitation
objectives. Fourth, it
critically analyses the Policy’s assumptions and impact for children with
ADHD. Finally, this article
discusses options for reforming the DBIF in order to
improve interventions for children with ADHD, with broader implications for
promoting the psychological wellbeing of children in NSW detention.
II METHODOLOGY, SCOPE AND LIMITATIONS
Research on scholarly literature was conducted using the University of New
South Wales (‘UNSW’) Library database, Google
Scholar, the National
Library of Australia online database and research articles published on the
Youth Justice NSW (‘Youth
Justice’ or ‘YJNSW’)
The Young People in
Custody Health Survey (‘Ypights’) is the primary source of data on
the health needs of children in
NSW custody, including the prevalence of
children presenting with ADHD. The most recent survey was conducted in 2022,
however these
results are not yet published at the time of
The second most recent
YPiCHS was conducted in 2015.
10 year gap in recent data limits a precise understanding of the current health
needs of juvenile detainees in NSW. Therefore,
this article draws inferences
using the 2015 YPiCHS alongside research from other jurisdictions, both within
Australia and internationally.
It also observes trends across the 2003, 2009 and
2015 YPiCHS.
Youth Justice policy and relevant literature often use terms such as
‘re-offending’ and ‘recidivism’ synonymously
re-incarceration. The author acknowledges the significant issues with making
this kind of assumption. First, most children in
NSW custody have not yet been
found guilty for offence(s)
Second, the incarceration
of Aboriginal and/or Torres Strait Islander children is materially contributed
to by racist attitudes within
the police, the over policing of Aboriginal
communities, and the colonial context which surrounds Australia’s criminal
To assume that
modifying behaviour is the only means of reducing recidivism warrants
interrogation in every instance. The scope of
this article is properly
understood as evaluating the DBIF’s ability to modify behaviour, being
factor to re-offending. The effective management of behaviour is also
important to the wellbeing of children in custody. This article
focuses on the
benefits of managing behaviour effectively, which may partially impact, but also
transcend the effects on recidivism.
References to the DBIF or the ‘Policy’ include policies,
procedures and interventions that fall within this framework,
including the
Misbehaviour Policy and Incentive Scheme.
III BACKGROUND: CHILDREN WITH ADHD IN JUVENILE DETENTION
Children in juvenile detention appear significantly more likely to qualify
for an ADHD diagnosis than the general population. The
2015 YPiCHS revealed that
20.8% of children in NSW detention passed the ADHD threshold, compared to
roughly 6.3% of the general population
of children in NSW aged 12 to 17
It is safe to assume this
issue has not simply disappeared over time, despite recent gaps in YPiCHS data.
Similar trends are reported
in previous
and among adult
prisoners in NSW.
reviews have also found that higher rates of ADHD are common among juvenile and
adult prisoners overseas.
Therefore, the prevalence of ADHD among juvenile detainees remains a relevant
consideration for Youth Justice policy today.
ADHD can significantly impact behaviour. Children affected will likely
experience challenges regulating their emotions and
decision-making.
characterised by ‘a persistent pattern of inattention and/or
hyperactivity-impulsivity that interferes with functioning
development’.
Children who
meet the impulsivity criterion are likely to act hastily without considering the
consequences, creating a high risk
of potential harm to themselves or others.
They are often quick to anger, easily frustrated, and emotionally
overreactive.
Those with inattention are likely to struggle following directions or maintain
Recognising and
responding appropriately to ADHD symptoms in juvenile detention settings may
also benefit children without the disorder.
For example, the 2015 YPiCHS found
that most children in detention (59.4%) met the threshold for an attention or
behavioural disorder
These share common traits of
poor self-control and emotional
regulation.
Furthermore,
impulsivity and emotional sensitivity are generally heightened during childhood
and adolescence, when cognitive and
executive functions are not yet fully
developed. Therefore, juvenile justice policy targeting behavioural management
would be remiss
to ignore the significant and various impacts of ADHD.
Table 1: Attention and behavioural disorders in NSW juvenile detention,
Males (n=180)
Females (n=11)
Aboriginal (n=100)
Non-Aboriginal (n=92)
Total (N=192)
Attention deficit hyperactivity disorder
Attention deficit hyperactivity disorder NOS
Oppositional defiant disorder
Conduct disorder
Disruptive disorder NOS
Any attention/behavioural disorder
Children with ADHD in juvenile detention are especially vulnerable. ADHD
increases the risk of social alienation and low
self-esteem.
Those affected are
more likely to have anxiety or depression
These social and
mental impacts can be exacerbated in a custodial setting, where the risks of
bullying, exclusion, and anti-social
behaviour are heightened. Furthermore,
children with ADHD in NSW custody are more likely to have a substance dependency
which can prevent them
from accessing therapeutic
medication.
Therefore, it is
crucial that YJNSW delivers appropriate interventions that support children to
develop skills specific to managing
their ADHD.
Unfortunately, ADHD in juvenile detention often goes unrecognised and
This suggests
appropriate interventions are not being implemented, potentially rendering
children more vulnerable than
It is important that the
DBIF is equipped to effectively manage and support children with ADHD to protect
their wellbeing and potentially
the wellbeing of those around them. This article
will critically assess the assumptions and impact of the DBIF through this lens.
However, the implications for Youth Justice policy may extend beyond the impacts
on children with ADHD.
IV UNDERSTANDING THE DBIF
The DBIF is a broad framework of policies and procedures aimed at effective
behavioural management of children in NSW
Its primary goal is to
reduce re-offending.
The DBIF is
informed by a Risk-Need-Responsivity (‘RNR’)
designed to promote
rehabilitation through evidence-based, non-punitive
interventions.
outlines the DBIF, with reference to two examples of DBIF interventions: The
Incentive Scheme, and the use of confinement
as punishment for misbehaviour. It
then discusses the core RNR principles and how these shape the Policy.
A The Detainee Behaviour Intervention Framework
Interventions under the DBIF are intended to minimise harm and encourages
pro-social behaviour.
three types of interventions, shown at Table
Correlating guidelines and
procedures are included below where mentioned by the Policy.
Table 2: Interventions under the DBIF
Intervention
Proactive Interventions
Used to reduce the likelihood of an incident
Not mentioned.
Active Interventions
Used to de-escalate situations of increased risk and prevent harm from
Guidelines include negotiation and conflict resolution
techniques.
Reactive Interventions
Used as a last resort, in situations where harm has occurred or is being
threatened.
Procedures include Use of Force and Behaviour Management
De-escalation and harm prevention may help avoid excessive punishment of
children with ADHD who are more likely to engage in risky
Otherwise, there are
no specific interventions for addressing behaviours associated with ADHD or any
cognitive or psychological disorders.
Risk-Based Decision-Making
Interventions are guided by ‘risk-based decision-making’, defined
as ‘a process that enables the selection of the
pathway of least
risk’ to the health and safety of staff and
This process is
redacted by the Policy, although appears brief. Appropriate interventions are
not always covered by operational procedures.
Therefore, staff may also use
risk-based decision-making when ‘confronted with real and dynamic
situations.’
While YJNSW
is responsible for the supervision and training of this skill, staff are also
expected to develop their own
There is ample scope
for staff to adapt interventions to suit the needs of children with ADHD.
However, this discretion may rely
on staff educating themselves on recognising
ADHD symptoms and knowing how to respond appropriately.
Detainee Characteristics
Staff must take into account detainee characteristics that may contribute to
their behaviour, and choose interventions that best target
‘criminogenic
The DBIF lists
common social characteristics of children in detention, such as abusive family
relationships or history of drug and
The Policy advises that the
impacts on behaviour are further compounded by personality characteristics,
including a lack of motivation
and poor social
Finally, the Policy
notes that children in custody often have ‘very complex needs and high
levels of disabilities,’ including
around 30% of children in detention who
display symptoms consistent with
The Policy therefore
guides staff discretion to consider the needs of children with ADHD when
responding to behaviour. Some personality
characteristics may also be associated
with the disorder.
However, the
DBIF does not prescribe how these characteristics should be taken into account,
nor does it assist in recognising when
these characteristics are present.
B Examples of Interventions under the DBIF
Incentive Scheme
The Incentive Scheme is a type of Proactive Intervention designed to
encourage positive behaviour using a ‘token economy’
Under this system,
children earn points for good behaviour and working towards their individual
Children with enough
points will receive daily and weekly rewards, delivered in four stages. The
higher the stage, the more desirable
Children begin at Stage
1 on admission and may progress upward by achieving their goals or consistently
demonstrating positive
Alternatively, they
may regress down stages if they consistently respond poorly to meeting these
targets, or are involved in an
The purpose of
regression is to reset behavioural expectations or adjust personal goals.
However, regression must
be used as a
punishment.
The Incentive Scheme uses a 10-step process for determining daily rewards,
weekly rewards and stage progression, implemented by YJC
A simplified version is
shown at Figure 1.
Figure 1: Incentive Scheme Process Map
Rewards may be social, material or activity based. It is up the discretion of
the Youth Justice Centre (‘YJC’) to choose
what incentives they use.
However, the Policy provides examples which may assist YJCs in implementing the
Scheme. These include displaying
the child’s artwork or a certificate of
achievement (social rewards), providing a snack or stationery (material
rewards), and
watching a movie or playing football (activity
The use of personal goals provides opportunities for children with ADHD to
participate in the Scheme, where they may otherwise struggle
to consistently
demonstrate ‘good’ behaviour. The Policy also recommends that YJC
take into account a child’s developmental
capacity and the impact this has
on their ability to positively change their
However, there is limited guidance on how YJCs might adjust goals and
expectations to suit the varying developmental needs of children
with ADHD. In
particular, children with ADHD may find it especially challenging to correct
inappropriate behaviour due to neurobiological
inhibitory deficits associated
with the disorder.
They may also
experience an aversion to delayed rewards due to defective neurobiological
reward/motivation circuitry.
follows that immediate rewards are more likely to be effective in encouraging
those with ADHD to exercise inhibitory
However, the Policy
does not state any mechanism by which children with ADHD may receive rewards
immediately following positive behaviour.
Therefore, the extent to which the
Scheme takes into account children’s developmental needs appears limited
to the setting
of individual behavioural goals.
Confinement as Punishment for Misbehaviour
The DBIF states that the most effective methods for managing detainee
behaviour focus on pro-social modelling and positive
reinforcement.
Nonetheless, NSW
law permits the use of specific punishments for children in detention who are
found guilty of misbehaviour.
Misbehaviour can range from illicit drug use or stealing, to less serious
conduct like lying, or refusing to follow any lawful instructions
This last example affords
significant discretion to YJCs to determine what constitutes
misbehaviour.
Once an allegation
is made, the YJC manager has 24 hours to inform the child of the nature of the
allegation and the name of the
complainant before holding an
They must provide the
child with the opportunity to make a statement. During the inquiry, evidence is
heard to verify the alleged
misbehaviour and determine the most appropriate
response if the child is found guilty. This may include alternatives to
punishment,
such as teaching the child strategies for improving their behaviour
Punishments may only
be imposed after due consideration is given to its appropriateness and
effectiveness in managing the
In theory, this
allows YJC staff to consider whether misbehaviour was impacted by ADHD, and
whether strategy-based interventions
would be suitable to addressing these
psychological needs.
Furthermore, punishments ‘must reflect the seriousness of the
misbehaviour’.
Confinement
is the ‘highest tariff punishment’ according to the
Confinement may last up
to 12 hours for children under 16 years of age, or 24 hours for children who are
16 years or older.
It should be
served in the child’s room unless there is a specific reason why this
would not be possible. In this case, the
child may be confined to a specific
confinement/observation room.
The Inquiry officer must make a risk-assessment as to where the child will be
confined, taking into account several prescribed factors,
• risk to the safety of the young person, employees and other young
• self-harming concerns;
• threats to damage property or actual damage that has occurred;
• threats to employees and other young people; and
• threats to the security of the
There is scope within the Policy for YJC Staff to take into account the
circumstances of a child with ADHD to determine i) whether
punishment is the
most appropriate response, and if so ii) whether there are safety concerns in
using confinement as a punishment
for that child. However, these processes rely
on staff’s ability to recognise the specific needs of the child and
proactively
take them into account.
C Risk-Need-Responsivity Model
The DBIF is informed by the RNR
which comprises three key
principles to guide the rehabilitative treatment of
This section details
each principle and how it applies to the Policy.
The ‘risk principle’ requires the intensity of intervention to be
proportionate to the detainee’s risk of re-offending.
This involves
assessing and predicting risk based on static and dynamic risk factors. Static
risk factors are factors which cannot
be changed, such as the offender’s
criminal history. Dynamic factors are potentially changeable and may include
attitudes or education
This principle appears
to inform the DBIF’s approach to managing misbehaviour. The relevant
‘risk’ in this case
being the risk of future
‘misbehaviour’. For example, the DBIF states that ‘punishment
must reflect the seriousness
misbehaviour’.
Furthermore, the use of confinement as punishment is intended only as a last
resort, and only after alternative punishments have
considered.
The child’s
history of misbehaviour is considered as well as the appropriateness of
alternative strategies for improving behaviour
punishment.
The ‘Need principle’ states that interventions must target a
person’s ‘criminogenic’
These are needs that
contribute to an individual’s risk of
(theoretically)
‘treatable’.
example, the need for social acceptance might be ‘criminogenic’ for
an individual who vandalises property to impress
their peers. The DBIF relies on
the need principle to a significant extent. Staff must take into account the
criminogenic needs of
detainees when interacting with
Furthermore, Interventions
are intended to target individual criminogenic needs, such as substance abuse or
poor social skills. Children
are rewarded for meeting individual goals directed
towards addressing these needs under the Incentive Scheme.
The need principle also supports rewarding non-criminal or
‘pro-social’
Consequently, the
DBIF encourages positive reinforcement for pro-social behaviour as one of
‘the most effective methods of
managing ...
detainees’.
principle posits that the rehabilitative effects are greater when the rewards
are similar to those produced by criminal
For example, the use
of social rewards, such as praise and recognition, should be preferred for
children whose offending is linked
to a need for social acceptance. This type of
adaptation is possible under the DBIF’s Incentive Scheme.
Responsivity
The ‘responsivity principle’ states that rehabilitation is
advanced by interventions that are:
1. tailored to the learning style, motivation, abilities and strengths of the
offender, and
2. accompanied by cognitive behavioural
Responsivity is further divided into
responsivity.
General responsivity
supports interventions that assist offenders in
developing cognitive-behavioural and social skills. These may include, but are
limited to, skills in effective communication, self-control of impulses and
emotional regulation.
Incentive Scheme aims to encourage these skills through positive
reinforcement.
Specific responsivity
states that interventions must adapt to the
setting and relevant characteristics of the detainee, including their learning
and abilities.
to James McGuire, ‘This is not a matter of changing the methods that have
been found to work, rather one of modifying
their delivery or presentation to
maximize engagement and
participation.’
reflected in the DBIF, which states that ‘an understanding of detainee
characteristics enables staff to target their
interventions for individual
detainees more effectively and base them on identified criminogenic
The Incentive
Scheme personalises interventions on three levels. First, goals must be
responsive to the child’s individual
needs, characteristics and
behavioural challenges.
if children struggle to meet these goals, the YJC must take steps to provide new
strategies which may assist
Third, rewards should be
appropriate for the child’s age and cultural
background.
Under the risk and need principle, ADHD may be considered to the extent that
it contributes to offending or misbehaviour. Whereas
responsivity may consider
the impacts of ADHD more broadly in order to encourage offenders to participate
in treatment. Under the
risk principle, children who are severely impacted by
ADHD may be seen to warrant more intense interventions. This suggests ADHD
not be a mitigating factor when deciding whether to punish misbehaviour, but may
instead increase the likelihood of potentially
severe punishment.
IV POLICY CONTEXT
The DBIF is shaped by the political, economic and empirical context
surrounding its introduction on 1 November 2009. These contexts
Policy’s underlying motives, which have conflicting implications for its
potential to address complex behavioural
challenges.
A Rehabilitation over Punishment
The DBIF was introduced following shifts in juvenile justice policy away from
punishment as the primary form of
and toward offender
rehabilitation aimed reducing ‘anti-social behaviour’ and rates of
re-offending.
This shift was
partly due to emerging evidence that detention had no deterrent effect on
Nonetheless, the rates of
juvenile recidivism in NSW remained significantly high in the years preceding
Around the same time
(2005–08), NSW saw a significant increase in the number of children in
These findings
appeared to influence policy makers to prioritise prevention over punishment for
juvenile offending.
Additionally, the DBIF was introduced following growing empirical support for
rehabilitation as a means of reducing
recidivism.
In July 2009, NSW
announced a ministerial review into the juvenile justice system to ensure that
young offenders were being supported
to reduce the cycle of crime (the
The Strategic Review highlighted evidence supporting the use of therapeutic
interventions in juvenile detention, including Cognitive
Behavioural Therapy
(‘CBT’) and Aggression Replacement Training
that juvenile detention centres in the United States and European Union had
implemented therapeutic interventions and pro-social
modelling with apparent
Before the DBIF, NSW
implemented a non-custodial rehabilitation program which diverted offenders
through the Youth Drug and Alcohol
Court. Children who completed the program
were found to be less likely to re-offend than those who did
The observed positive
impacts of rehabilitative interventions have likely influenced the DBIF’s
objectives. Namely, to provide
empirically based interventions aimed at reducing
offending behaviour by addressing detainees’ individual needs.
Rehabilitation is also more cost-effective than punishment. Indeed, economic
pressure has been described as a ‘major catalyst’
in the shift
towards offender
rehabilitation.
emerged during significant economic pressures following the Global Financial
Crisis (‘GFC’).
This triggered widespread reviews into the delivery of NSW public services. The
Strategic Review estimated that significant costs
would be incurred if the rates
of recidivism continued to remain high. For example, additional juvenile
detention centres would be
required to meet the growing prison population, at an
estimated cost of AUD175.1 million over the following six
Alternatively, other
detention that successfully reduced
re-offending.
The Strategic
Review recommended similar rehabilitative approaches given the significant
budgetary pressures.
Therefore, the choice of RNR offender–rehabilitation model underpinning
the DBIF was likely informed by the need to reduce
economic pressure associated
with recidivism.
The DBIF’s emerging context suggests it should be motivated to provide
interventions that address the psychological needs of
children with ADHD. While
this process largely depends on staff discretion, it would appear consistent
with the Policy’s underlying
objectives to effectively reduce re-offending
and lower costs to the State.
B Rehabilitation in terms of Reducing
In light of the above, it is surprising that the DBIF does not explicitly
mention rehabilitation. Instead, the Policy refers to ‘reducing
re-offending’ through evidence-based interventions targeting
‘criminogenic
objectives seem to describe the process of
rehabilitation, while using
the language of risk management. Indeed, the Policy reflects the rise in
‘actuarial justice’
across western jurisdictions prior to its
implementation.
methods are used to predict an offender’s risk re-offending based on
whether they have characteristics said to be
associated with criminality. These
‘criminogenic needs’ become the basis for
interventions.
Actuarial justice is often delivered using a ‘managerialist’
approach. Managerialism refers to bureaucratic, process-driven,
and target-based
approaches to public policy.
It emphasises efficiency, accountability and bureaucratic process over criminal
justice philosophies such as rehabilitation or
punishment.
Managerialist
policy language more often incorporates economic concepts and avoids political
or value-driven language. This may explain
why the Policy often refers to
children as ‘clients’ and to counselling as a ‘Client Service
Meeting’. Rehabilitative
treatments are often referred to in disguise
– as ‘modes of
operation’,
strategies’,
‘interventions’, ‘services’, ‘programs’ and
‘activities’.
is unclear if the use of economic terms and ‘risk-based’ language
was a deliberate policy choice, perhaps to avoid
the perception of being
‘soft’ on crime. Alternatively, it may be an unintended consequence
of the private sector’s
increasing influence on public policy in the
decades leading up to the
In either case, the
Policy language appears to undermine the philosophical and value-driven elements
innate to offender rehabilitation.
However, value statements and guiding philosophies are common ways to inform
discretion. This is concerning given the Policy relies
heavily on staff
discretion to respond appropriately to detainee behaviour, so that interventions
may be responsive to a complex
range of needs. Children with ADHD are
particularly reliant on staff’s adaptability and proper use of discretion
in order to
receive appropriate care and effective interventions. Therefore, the
discord between language and purpose implies that full and effective
implementation of the DBIF may be limited.
VI POLICY ASSUMPTIONS
The incorporation of RNR, managerialism and statutory provisions permitting
punishment for misbehaviour, engender several assumptions
embedded in the DBIF
which may be inconsistent with the reality of managing children with ADHD and
other behavioural disorders.
A Cost-Benefit Model of Behaviour
The Incentive Scheme is modelled on the assumption that children in detention
behave in a way that seeks to maximise benefits and
reduce costs as much as
This implies a
level of self-control and regulation. However, the behaviour of children with
ADHD may be impacted by low motivation,
distrust, anger and impulsivity. In
fact, children without the disorder are likely to be impacted in similar ways
given the inherently
difficult experience of being
characteristics may reduce engagement with RNR interventions like the Incentive
This suggests the
Scheme may be less effective for many children in detention, unless it is able
to apply broader understandings
of behaviour beyond a cost-benefit model.
B YJC Discretion Conducting Risk-Assessments
Arguably, the Policy assumes that risk-based decision-making reduces the
influence of bias in promoting evidence-based
interventions.
social attitudes to youth are likely to influence staff and how they implement
behaviour interventions.
children in YJCs reported being unhappy with the way staff were treating
When interviewed, the
staff expressed views that children require punishment significant enough to
deter the behaviour in
The NSW Inspector
of Custodial Services (the ‘ICS’) criticised this approach as not
supported by evidence.
is a greater risk for this kind of bias to negatively impact children with ADHD
who are more likely to lack appropriate
self-control.
C Confinement as a Means of Deterrence
The Policy assumes that punishment, including confinement, may effectively
deter misbehaviour. For example, the NSW government rejected
the recommendation
by the ICS that children should not be confined for using bad language that is
not abusive or threatening. Instead,
the government responded that using
confinement to punish bad language can set a standard for respectful
On the other hand,
evidence suggests this is not the case. Children’s neurological, cognitive
and emotional functions are not
fully developed, making them more prone to
stress whilst being confined.
These effects may be exacerbated for children with ADHD as their neurological
and cognitive development may fall behind other children
As a result, the use of
confinement as a punishment may potentially increase the likelihood of children
engaging in anti-social
VII POLICY IMPACT
YJCs have shown mixed compliance with the DBIF. Where there is compliance,
children have received high quality therapeutic interventions.
Non-compliance
has generally manifested in unduly restrictive and punitive implementations of
both the Incentive Scheme and the use
of confinement. It is unclear whether the
Policy has made progress towards preventing incidents or reducing re-offending.
the wellbeing of children in detention is likely to be negatively
impacted by poor implementation, the effects of which may be disproportionately
felt by children with ADHD.
A Implementation and Compliance
Incentive Scheme
Most YJCs appear to generally comply with the Incentive
Common rewards
include allowing children to stay up past their bedtime, watch TV in their room,
or receive material goods like snacks
Some centres
offered a wide range of high-quality therapeutic programs and activities through
the Scheme. Activities included barista
courses, film-making projects, and even
opportunities to help train rescue
Many children were able
to participate in choosing their weekly incentives, and give general feedback as
to what incentives should
There is some
evidence of YJCs modifying their scheme based on feedback from children and
psychiatrists that it was too complex and
restrictive.
As a result,
incentive rewards were increased and provided more immediately following good
behaviour. This shows a willingness for
YJCs to adapt to the needs of the
detainees, in line with specific responsivity. Incorporating feedback from
psychiatrists and other
psychology experts is particularly important to meeting
the needs of children with ADHD, which may be addressed more effectively
immediate rather than delayed
On the other hand, not every centre appears to comply with the Policy. For
example, staff in Acmena YJC often reportedly lied to children
that they had not
met their daily points when in fact they had. This was intended to reduce the
number of children out of their rooms
The ICS found this
was problematic and unfairly
In some centres,
the Incentive Scheme effectively restricted the number of leisure activities
available to children of lower
This undermines the
Scheme’s purpose to reinforce pro-social behaviour through added
incentives, rather than removing or restricting
activities previously available.
Finally, some YJCs commonly used items like shampoo, conditioner and deodorant
as incentive rewards.
doubtful whether access to these items should be restricted.
YJCs that comply with the DBIF may still encounter problems. For example,
activities and items may be used as rewards in some centres,
accessible in others.
Children who are transported between centres report feeling frustrated when they
can no longer access activities they previously
enjoyed because access is
restricted under their new YJC’s Incentive
A second issue
observed across multiple YJCs was that incentive rewards were sometimes being
‘stockpiled’ and used to
pay off gambling debts. This is
particularly problematic as vulnerable children (including younger cohorts,
children with learning
difficulties, and physically smaller children) were more
likely to be taken advantage of in this
Furthermore, it
demonstrates that some children can circumvent the Incentive Scheme to gain
access to rewards through gambling and
peer pressure. In response, Frank Baxter
YJC reduced the number of incentives available, and listed the gym and fitness
as incentives.
this may mitigate the issue, it may also limit the impact of the Scheme.
Furthermore, recent evidence suggests that exercise-based
interventions can be
highly effective in reducing problematic behaviour associated with
Confinement as Punishment
Despite being the ‘highest
confinement is
currently the most used form of punishment (see Table 3). It is five times more
likely to be used than the second
most common form of punishment. Furthermore,
some centres regularly use confinement as a punishment for ‘minor
misbehaviour’.
reported case, a child was confined for 18 hours for using a swear
This is not the only
time a child has been confined for ‘bad
children thought confinement was fair for short periods or for more serious
behaviours. However, others questioned why they
were not given chores instead.
Many children found being locked in a room alone for long periods very
challenging on their mental
well-being.
Table 3: ‘Frequency of Punishment across all YJCS in NSW
Additional duties
Confinement to a place
Exclusion from a place
Restriction from leisure activities
Restriction from sport activities
Furthermore, not every child appears to be afforded procedural fairness in
the inquiry process. Some children felt pressured to plead
misbehaviour regardless of whether they thought this was true. One child
reported that ‘
If you tick the box ‘not guilty’ you receive
longer time. They will say to you “I was going to give you 8 [hours
confinement] but now it is 12 hours
[confinement]
This practice appears inconsistent with legal requirements to provide procedural
fairness in conducting misbehaviour
It may also have
disproportionate impacts on children with ADHD. Research suggests children with
ADHD are three times more likely
to confess to things they did not
Adding further pressure
is likely to exacerbate these effects. Furthermore, one study found children
with ADHD are more likely to
answer ‘I don’t know’ when
questioned by an authority whilst in
This can be
misinterpreted as intentionally
obstructive.
confinement practices appear largely inconsistent with Policy, which states
punishment should reflect the seriousness of
the behaviour and should be used as
a last resort.
B Impact on Policy Objectives
Rate and Severity of Incidents
The aim of Proactive interventions under the DBIF is to help prevent
incidents that create a risk of harm to children or
There is limited data
available on incidents prior to 2014. However, reports show marginal increases
in the rates of assaults occurring
YJCs in recent years (see Table
This does not mean that
the DBIF has not reduced rates of assault since its implementation. However, it
does show that the rates
of assault are highly prevalent (345 incidents in
2021–22) and do not appear to be declining. On the other hand, there has
been a significant decline in reported rates of self-harm since COVID-19
quarantine restrictions were
While this does not
necessarily reflect the impact of the DBIF, it does highlight the impact of
confinement practices on children’s
mental health.
Table 4: ‘Assault numbers in YJCs
2019/2021/22’
Assault category
Assault – physical
Young person on young person
Young person on staff
Assault – verbal
Young person on young person
Young person on staff
Assault with weapon
Young person on young person
Young person on staff
Currently, reported incidents in NSW are not quantified by ADHD status of the
child creating the risk. However, one study conducted
in a Scottish prison
showed detainees who were ADHD symptomatic were eight times more likely to be
involved in incidents, mainly
verbal and physical
aggression,
non-symptomatic detainees.
The study suggests that impaired behaviour control and cognitive function are
exacerbated by prison environments such that detainees
with ADHD are more likely
to behave in an unacceptable or aggressive
This implies some
potential for YJNSW to reduce incidents through effective treatment of ADHD
The 2015 study by Ann Dadich, Brian Stout and Hassan Hosseinzadeh found that
implementation of the DBIF did not seem to impact the
number of reported
In fact, the
relationship appeared counterintuitive, as YJCs with higher engagement in DBIF
training sometimes had higher rates of
incidents and
vice-versa.
However, it
observes that data was limited and therefore insufficient to establish any
causal relationship.
there is little evidence that the DBIF has impacted the rates of incidents
occurring in YJCs.
In 2020-21, the rate of juvenile detainees in NSW returning to sentenced
supervision within 12 months of release was
In comparison, the
overall rate of re-offending by young people released from custody was reported
as 65.6% when the DBIF was
introduced.
While the first
figure is more conservative (excludes unsentenced re-offenders, and is limited
to 12 months) this suggests that the
data underestimate, if anything, the
increase in rates of juvenile re-offending in NSW. The rise in recidivism may be
the product
of a wide range of factors. For example, juvenile detainees might
increasingly represent a more challenging group of offenders, while
less serious
offending is more often dealt with through diversionary programs. However, the
evidence suggests it is unlikely that
the DBIF has significantly reduced rates
of re-offending.
IX RECOMMENDATIONS
In order to address the psychological needs of children with ADHD in
detention, the DBIF must take a clear and consistent approach
to rehabilitation.
This approach should be evidence-based, adequately guide YJC staff discretion
and ensure programs are accessible
to all children.
A Prohibiting Confinement as a Punishment
Both the Australian Human Rights Commission and National Legal Aid have
recommended prohibition on the use of confinement as
punishment.
There is no
evidence that confining child detainees as punishment for misbehaviour reduces
the likelihood of incidents occurring
Therefore, the
practice appears inconsistent with other aspects of YJNSW behaviour management
policy that interventions should be
evidence-based.
inconsistent with the RNR foundations of the DBIF, which discourage punishment
as a form of behavioural management in
favour of a rehabilitative approach.
Although legislation permits the use of confinement as punishment, it does not
mandate it in
circumstances.
therefore open for YJNSW to prohibit this practice under the Policy.
On the other hand, the Policy permits segregation of detainees as a Reactive
measure to behaviour which poses an ‘immediate
and unacceptable’
risk of harm.
There is a risk
that punitive isolations may continue disguised as segregations. In fact,
evidence suggests this is already occurring
to some extent. Furthermore,
segregations have less checks and balances than confinements, which require
evidence be tested at an
inquiry and a finding of guilty be made. If this
finding is disputed by the child, there is an appeal process available to them.
Segregations are also not limited to 24 hours, although periods exceeding this
must be flagged with the NSW Ombudsman and carried
out in accordance with
risk-management plan overseen by a psychologist. Overall, prohibiting
confinement as a punishment may raise
significant concerns around potential
increases to segregation occurring as a result.
However, it would seem difficult to disguise relatively minor misbehaviours
such as ‘offensive language’ or ‘disobedience’
warranting segregation. This would require the YJC Manager to be satisfied that
the behaviour poses an ‘immediate and unacceptable’
risk of harm.
Therefore, prohibiting confinement as a punishment for misbehaviour may
nonetheless reduce punitive isolation practices,
notwithstanding the potential
that some of these practices may be disguised as non-punitive segregations.
Alternatives to Punishment: Life Space Crisis
Intervention
Life Space Crisis Intervention (‘LSCI’) is a behaviour management
tool which uses therapeutic and verbal strategies to
a crisis. It is designed to teach children to express themselves through words
and articulate their feelings.
LSCI involves six stages of progression:
1. De-escalation
2. Talking through the crisis
3. Choosing the appropriate course of action to restore control
4. Attempting to change the child’s perception of the
crisis/problem
5. Encouraging the child to think about how they might use new skills in
6. Preparing to return to normal activities
Evidence suggests that LSCI does not necessarily prevent challenging
behaviour. However, it is shown to reduce the number of incidents
and encourage
children to express their feelings and reflect on their
Furthermore, it
can set consistent expectations for children following a crisis
Finally, evidence
suggests it can promote positive relationships between staff and children in
care, resulting in both staff and
children feeling more safe and
One challenge is that some children may not be able to identify triggers or
explain why they behaved a certain way. This can make
it difficult for staff to
suggest alternative strategies for regulating their
Studies show
children with ADHD can experience challenges expressing themselves, especially
in a custody setting.
Furthermore, the success of the intervention may depend on the emotional
intelligence of both staff and children in detention. However,
some centres are
experimenting with sensory
as well as non-verbal
techniques focusing on use of eye-contact, gestures, tone of voice and special
The impact of
these alternative methods have not yet been properly evaluated. Although the
overall success of the scheme in promoting
the wellbeing of children in custody
means it is worth considering implementing as part of the DBIF.
B Good Lives Model Alternative to ‘Token
Economy’ Incentive Scheme
One problem with the DBIF is that interventions are limited to addressing
‘criminogenic’ needs. That is, dynamic characteristics
individual which are said to contribute to offending. However, children in
detention are likely to experience one or multiple
psychological disorder(s),
ADHD being particularly prevalent. Children in detention are therefore likely to
have complex psychological
needs which are not directly addressed by the Policy.
For example, a child with ADHD will not be rewarded under the Incentive Scheme
for engaging in CBT to treat the disorder unless their case manager has
identified that ADHD is related to their
The potential for
ADHD symptoms to be ignored is increased by inconsistent use of YJC
discretion.
Under the Good Lives Model (‘GLM’), however, rehabilitation is
achieved by enhancing the wellbeing or ‘good lives’
of offenders.
These objectives are broader than merely managing the ‘risk’ of
re-offending through targeting ‘criminogenic’
needs. By contrast,
GLM seeks to treat offenders’ physiological, social and self needs
regardless of whether they are said
to be criminogenic. This broadens
opportunities for addressing needs such as low self-esteem, anxiety, and
symptoms of ADHD, which
are not necessarily
‘criminogenic’.
Under this model, ‘Physiological needs are met by healthy functioning of
the body. Social needs are met by family life, social
support, meaningful work
opportunities, and access to leisure activities. Self needs are met by autonomy,
relatedness, and
competence.’
The GLM may also address challenges created by the DBIF’s reliance on
staff discretion to effectively implement interventions.
One study explains
that YJC staff experience tension between meeting the detainees developmental
and relational needs, and dealing
with pressures caused by societal attitudes
and organisational demands (including Policy
requirements).
This suggests
that staff, as members of society, are not immune from social attitudes towards
children in detention, which are historically
For example, around
half YJC staff reported that they hold authoritarian views around toward
managing children in
The DBIF, which
relies on staff discretion to effectively manage detainee behaviour, may allow
staff attitudes to impact how they
manage behaviour. This may explain the use of
disproportionate confinement periods and punitive restrictions of incentive
On the other hand, the article suggests that policy which is
prescriptive can also increase pressure on staff, creating challenges for
providing adequate care. This implies that addressing one
source of pressure is
likely to exacerbate the other.
One potential solution for addressing bias without increasing organisational
demands is to clarify and strengthen the rehabilitative
purposes of the Policy.
The GLM may provide staff with the necessary flexibility to adapt interventions
to the needs of detainees.
However, it avoids the use of actuarial and
managerialist language in favour of a rights-based approach that emphasises the
psychological
wellbeing of the individual child. Introducing GLM values into the
DBIF may help to guide staff discretion and mitigate bias. Furthermore,
incorporating the GLM into the DBIF would not necessarily require radical
change, as GLM developed from RNR and remains consistent
principles.
Therefore, Youth
Justice should consider implementing this model into the DBIF as this may
strengthen its focus on rehabilitation,
and prioritise the psychological needs
of children with ADHD.
X CONCLUSION
The DBIF exemplifies shifts in juvenile justice policy towards managerial and
risk-based approaches. As a result, it frames its objectives
in neutral terms
like ‘risk’, rather than value-led goals such as rehabilitation.
This may create problems for implementation
as staff may be more likely to
supplement risk-assessments with their own biases. As a result, the Incentive
Scheme and use of Confinement
may be implemented punitively, inconsistent with
the Policy’s underlying rehabilitation model. This can have a detrimental
impact on the wellbeing of children in detention, especially those with ADHD as
they are more likely to exhibit challenging behaviours
in the context of
juvenile detention. Furthermore, it does not appear to reduce re-offending.
YJNSW should consider removing confinement
as a punishment and introducing a GLM
which emphasise rehabilitation as a core value.
Corey J Lane, Mark David Chong and Geoff Kewley,
‘“Often Fails to Give Close Attention to Detail”:
Attention-Deficit
Hyperactivity Disorder (ADHD) in Criminal Justice Offender
Populations’
[2024] BondLawRw 4
(2024) 36(2)
Bond Law Review
NSW Department of Attorney General and Justice,
Juvenile Justice,
Detainee Behaviour Intervention Framework
November 2009) 3 (‘DBIF’).
The focus of this article is
persons aged 10 to 17 years, inclusively: see also
Children (Criminal Proceedings) Act 1987
(definition of ‘child’). Note that older offenders may
be kept in juvenile detention in some circumstances. However,
this cohort
comprise less than 10%: see Justice Health & Forensic Mental Health Network
and Juvenile Justice, NSW Government,
People in Custody Health Survey
(Full Report, November 2017) 11 [1.1.1]
2015 YPiCHS
’); ‘Youth Justice Profile’,
Youth Justice, NSW Government
(6 July 2024)
<https://www.nsw.gov.au/legal-and-justice/youth-justice/about/statistics/youth-justice-profile#toc-age-of-young-people-entering-youth-justice-nsw>.
See ‘Research Publications’,
Justice, NSW Government
<https://www.nsw.gov.au/legal-and-justice/youth-justice/about/research/research-publications>.
Young People in Custody Health
Youth Justice, NSW Government
<https://www.nsw.gov.au/legal-and-justice/youth-justice/about/research/custody-health-survey>.
2015 YPiCHS
In 2023–24, 75% of
children in NSW custody were being held on remand: ‘Young People in
Youth Justice, NSW Government
<https://www.nsw.gov.au/legal-and-justice/youth-justice/about/statistics/custody>.
See, eg, Amanda Porter,
Natalie Ironfield and Tamar Hopkins, ‘Racial Profiling, Australian
Criminology and the Creation of
Statistical ‘Facts’: A Response to
Shepherd and Spivak’ (2022) 4(2)
Decolonization of Criminology and
2015 YPiCHS
In 2003, 30% of children in
NSW custody presented with ADHD symptoms warranting possible referral or
intervention: Department of
Juvenile Justice (NSW),
2003 NSW Young People in
Custody Health Survey
(Key Findings Report, December 2003) 22
2003 YPiCHS
’). In 2009, 69.6% of children in custody were
found to have an ‘attention or behavioural disorder’: Devon Indig
al, Juvenile Justice, Department of Human Services (NSW),
2009 NSW Young
People in Custody Health Survey
(Full Report, March 2011) 17.
Elizabeth Moore et al,
‘Adult ADHD Among NSW Prisoners: Prevalence and Psychiatric
Comorbidity’ (2016) 20(11)
Journal of Attention Disorders
See, eg, Gabrielle Beaudry
et al, ‘An Updated Systematic Review and Meta-regression Analysis: Mental
Disorders Among Adolescents
in Juvenile Detention and Correctional
Facilities’ (2021) 60(1)
Journal of the American Academy of Child and
Adolescent Psychiatry
46, 54; Stephanie Baggio et al, ‘Prevalence of
Attention Deficit Hyperactivity Disorder in Detention Settings: A Systematic
Review and Meta-Analysis’ (2018) 9(331)
Frontiers in Psychiatry
Lane, Chong and Kewley (n
American Psychiatric Association,
Diagnostic and
Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders: DSM-5-TR
2015 YPiCHS
Extracted from table 13:
2015 YPiCHS
Geoff Kewley, Corey Lane and Mark Chong,
‘Understanding the Nature of ADHD and the Vulnerability of Those with the
Who Fall Foul of the Criminal Justice System’
[2024] BondLawRw 5
(2024) 36(2)
Bond Law Review
See ibid 56, 60; John
Kasinathan and Joey Le, ‘Attention Deficit Hyperactivity Disorder (ADHD)
and Young People in NSW Custody’
[2024] BondLawRw 8
(2024) 36(2)
Bond Law Review
Kasinathan and Le (n 21)
See Lane, Chong and Kewley
See ibid 9, citing DA
Andrews and James Bonta,
The psychology of criminal conduct
Publishing, 1994); James McGuire,
What Works: Reducing Reoffending
(Wiley, 1995).
DA Andrews and James Bonta,
The Psychology of Criminal Conduct
(Anderson Publishing, 5th ed, 2010)
The DBIF does not
expressly define ‘incident’, although it does state that Proactive
Interventions reduce the likelihood
breaches of security and procedures, and
risks of injury to staff and detainees: DBIF
(n 2) 7. For the purposes of
this article, an ‘incident’ refers to an event where a
detainee’s behaviour causes
harm to, or risks the safety of, themselves,
other detainees, or staff. This may include, for example, actual or attempted
harm (including self-harm), verbal threats of harm, and bullying or
intimidating other detainees.
The DBIF does not expand
on what is meant by ‘negotiation and conflict resolution
techniques’. Any training staff may
receive for these skills does not
appear to be publicly available.
New South Wales Department of Communities and
Justice, Youth Justice,
Use of Force Procedure
(Policy, 16 September
2020); New South Wales Department of Communities and Justice, Youth Justice,
Detainee Risk Management Plan (DRMP) Policy
(Policy, 30 September 2020),
Ibid 9, citing
For example, low
motivation, anxiety and depression, poor social skills: DBIF
New South Wales Department
of Communities and Justice, Youth Justice,
Incentive Scheme Policy
(Policy, 27 April 2020) 1, 4 (‘
Incentive Scheme
Ibid 5. Individual goals
include: goals relating to the YJC rules and responsibilities (for example,
completing chores or using
good manners); engagement with Case Plan activities;
and/or participation in programs and activities: at 6–7.
Ibid. Under NSW Law,
punishments may only be imposed on detainees found guilty of misbehaviour:
Children (Detention Centres) Act 1987
New South Wales Department
of Communities and Justice, Youth Justice,
Incentive Scheme Procedure
(Policy, 27 April 2020) 2.
Incentive Scheme
Lane, Chong and Kewley (n
Children (Detention
Centres) Act
(n 49) s 21(1).
See generally ibid s 3
(definition of ‘misbehaviour’);
Children (Detention Centres)
Regulation 2015
(NSW) sch 1
Children (Detention
Centres) Regulation
(n 58) sch 1 s 4.
New South Wales Department
of Communities and Justice, Youth Justice,
Misbehaviour Policy
July 2019) 5 (‘
Misbehaviour Policy
DA Andrews, James Bonta and J Stephen Wormith,
‘The Risk-Need-Responsivity (RNR) Model: Does Adding the Good lives Model
to Effective Crime Prevention?’ (2011) 38(7)
Justice and Behaviour
James RP Ogloff and Michael R Davis ‘Advances
in offender assessment and rehabilitation: Contributions of the
risk-needs-responsivity
(2004) 10(3)
Psychology Crime and
Misbehaviour Policy
Ogloff and Davis (n 70)
See ibid 232–3;
Ogloff and Davis (n 70)
Andrews, Bonta and Wormith
(n 69) 738.
Andrews, Bonta and Wormith
(n 69) 744.
James McGuire, ‘“What Works” to
Reduce Re-offending: 18 Years On’ in Leam Craig, Louise Dixon and Theresa
A Gannon (eds),
What Works in Offender Rehabilitation : An
Evidence-Based Approach to Assessment and Treatment
(Wiley-Blackwell, 2013)
20, 33; Andreas Beelmann and Friedrich Losel, ‘A Comprehensive
Meta-Analysis of Randomized Evaluations
of the Effect of Child Social Skills
Training on Antisocial Development’ (2021) 7
Journal of Developmental
and Life-Course Criminology
Incentive Scheme
(n 44) 4–5.
Ibid; Andrews and Bonta (n
29) 46; Andrews, Bonta and Wormith (n 69) 738.
McGuire (n 82) 32.
Incentive Scheme
(n 44) 5 [4.3], 13 [7.2], 14 [7.2.2].
Ibid 13 [7.2.1].
Ibid 11 [6.1].
Chris Cunneen et al,
Juvenile Justice: Youth and
Crime in Australia
(Oxford University Press, 2015) 23.
See, eg, Noetic Solutions,
A Strategic Review of the New South Wales Juvenile Justice System: Report for
the Minister for Juvenile Justice
(April 2010) 13 [45]; Astrid Birgden,
‘Therapeutic Jurisprudence and “Good Lives”: A Rehabilitation
Framework for
Corrections’ (2002)
Australian Psychologist
Noetic Solutions (n 91)
118–19[375].
In 2005, BOCSAR found that
68% of children appearing in court on criminal charges returned to court within
eight years: BOCSAR,
The Transition from Juvenile to Adult Criminal
(Report, May 2005) 9, cited in Noetic Solutions (n 91) 12 [42].
Noetic Solutions (n 91)
Ibid 12–13.
Ogloff and Davis (n 70)
235, citing James McGuire ‘Criminal Sanctions Versus Psychologically-Based
Interventions with Offenders:
A Comparative Empirical Analysis’
Psychology, Crime and Law
; McGuire (n 82) 20–1.
Noetic Solutions (n 91) 13
Noetic Solutions,
of Effective Practice in Juvenile Justice: Report for the Minister for Juvenile
(Report, January 2010) 40–2.
Ibid 49–50.
Noetic Solutions (n 91)
Ogloff and Davis (n 70)
NSW Government,
Budget Statement
(Budget Paper No 2, 2009) 1.
Noetic Solutions (n 91)
McGuire (n 82) 36.
Noetic Solutions (n 91)
See DBIF (n 2)
McGuire (n 82) 31, 35,
Noetic Solutions (n 91)
McGuire (n 82) 35.
Ann Dadich, Brian Stout
and Hassan Hosseinzadeh, ‘Reacting to and Managing Change within Juvenile
Justice’ 28(2)
Journal of Organizational Change Management
Dadich, Stout and
Hosseinzadeh (n 110) 317.
See above Part II.
See Leah Brogan et al,
‘Applying the Risk-Needs-Responsivity Model to Juvenile Justice’
(2015) 40(3)
Criminal Justice Review
See above Part III.
See Senate Legal and
Constitutional Affairs References Committee,
Inquiry into Australia’s
Youth Justice and Incarceration System
(Interim Report, February 2025)
15–18; Lee Shearer,
Ministerial Review into the Riot at Frank Baxter
Detention Centre 21 and 22 July 2019
(Report, August 2019) 11.
Inspector of Custodial
Services, NSW Government,
Use of Force, Separation, Segregation and
Confinement in NSW Juvenile Justice Centres
(Report, November 2018) 52
Kewley, Lane and Chong
NSW Government,
Response to the ICS Report on the Use of Force, Separation, Segregation and
Confinement
(Response, 8 June 2023) 3 [Recommendation 17]
<https://inspectorcustodial.nsw.gov.au/reports-and-publications/inspection-reports/youth-reports/use-of-force-separation-segregation-and-confinement-in-nsw-juvenile-justice-centres.html>
Response to UFSSC
Kewley, Lane and Chong
See Inspector of
Custodial Services, NSW Government,
Inspection of Six Youth Justice Centres
(Report, 2022) 48 (‘
ICS Report 2022
See Inspector of
Custodial Services, NSW Government,
Inspection of Six Youth Justice Centres
(Report, 2020) 49 (‘
ICS Report 2020
120) 118–19.
(n 129) 92, 107.
See above Part IV (B)
ICS Report 2020
(n 129) 34.
ICS Report 2020
(n 129) 49.
ICS Report 2022
(n 128) 49.
ICS Report 2020
(n 129) 34.
ICS Report 2020
(n 129) 107.
ICS Report 2022
(n 128) 104.
Lane, Chong and Kewley
(n 128) 92.
Extracted from the
ICS Report 2022
(n 128) 116.
(Detention Centre) Act
(n 49) s 20(3).
Lane, Chong and Kewley
ICS 2022 Report
(n 128) 34.
Extracted from the
ICS 2022 Report
(n 128) 34.
Other incidents included
‘damage to property’ and ‘self-injury’: Susan Young et
al, ‘Attention Deficit
Hyperactivity Disorder and Critical Incidents in a
Scottish Prison Population’ (2009) 46
Personality and Individual
Differences
Young (n 158) 267.
Dadich, Stout and
Hosseinzadeh (n 110) 324.
Australian Institute of
Health and Welfare, ‘Young People Returning to Sentenced Supervision
Youth Justice
(Web Page, 1 November 2024)
<https://www.aihw.gov.au/reports/youth-justice/young-people-returning-to-sentenced-supervision/data>.
These are the most recent figures available at the time of writing. Sentenced
supervision includes both detention and community-based
Noetic Solutions (n 91)
Australian Human Rights
Commission,
NSW Juvenile Justice: Human Rights and the Use of Force
(Submission to the NSW Inspector of Custodial Services, 31 May 2017) 9 [37];
National Legal Aid,
Inquiry into Australia’s Youth Justice and
Incarceration System
(Submission to the Senate Standing Committees on Legal
and Constitutional Affairs, October 2024) 4.
Incentive Scheme
(n 44) 5 [4.3].
Children (Detention
Centres) Act
(n 49) s 21(1)
Youth Justice, NSW
Government,
Segregation Procedure
(Policy, 4 August 2021) 1.
Rebecca Wade, ‘An
Examination of the Management of Challenging Behaviour in Ireland’s
Special Care System’ (PhD
Thesis, University of Limerick, 1 June 2024)
Lane, Chong and Kewley
Wade (n 171) 179.
Incentive Scheme
See above Part VII
See Birgden (n 91)
Dadich, Stout and
Hosseinzadeh (n 110) 381.
See, eg, Australian
Human Rights Commission,
‘Help Way Earlier!’ How Australia Can
Transform Child Justice to Improve Safety and Wellbeing
(Report, 2024)
120) 44, 52.
Ogloff and Davis (n 70)
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (8.44 MB)
PDF format (529 KB)
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter