URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/journals/UNSWLawJlF/2019/9.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 15:45:59
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
McLoughlin, Kcasey; Williams, Joan --- "An Age Of Diversity: Where To Next For The Judicial Diversity Project?" [2019] UNSWLawJlF 9; (2019) UNSW Law Journal Forum No 9
I INTRODUCTION
II THE JAC’S PROGRESS TOWARDS ACHIEVING GREATER JUDICIAL DIVERSITY
III (REVISITING) MERIT AND QUOTAS
IV THE ROLE OF JUDGES AND POLITICIANS: LESSONS FOR AUSTRALIA
V CONCLUSION
AN AGE OF DIVERSITY: WHERE TO NEXT FOR THE JUDICIAL
DIVERSITY PROJECT?
Debating Judicial Appointments in an Age of
(Graham Gee and Erika Rackley (eds), Routledge, 2018, ISBN
978-1-138-22535-0)
I INTRODUCTION
Debates about diversity – why it matters, what it looks like, and how
it might be achieved – continue to reverberate around
the world. There
have been discernible but all too often meandering gains in attempts to ensure
that judges better reflect the communities
from which they are drawn.
Notwithstanding these gains, important questions remain not only about the
justifications for judicial
diversity but, perhaps most interestingly, the
contested implications of judicial diversity. Gee and Rackley’s impressive
Debating Judicial Appointments in an Age of Diversity
provides a timely account of these debates
By reframing familiar
debates about merit, quotas, and the respective role of judges and politicians
in the selection process, they
ensure their collection is relevant beyond the
United Kingdom (‘UK’). Moreover, the extent to which the collection
together what are sometimes conflicting views in an attempt to move past
a seemingly insurmountable impasse between ‘insider’
‘outsider’ views means that it provides an instructive, thoughtful
and novel blueprint for considering (and reconsidering)
how to best advance the
judicial diversity project.
Gee and Rackley's edited collection grew out of an international conference
held at the University of Birmingham in November 2015,
which marked the
anniversary of the Judicial Appointments Commission’s
(‘JAC’) operation. The conference was attended by members
JAC, the judiciary, civil servants from the Ministry of Justice and the Supreme
Court of the United Kingdom, and practitioners
and academics from across the UK,
and internationally.
Although the
collection is primarily about the UK, contributions from academics and lawyers
from Australia, Canada and South Africa
expand the book’s reach. It is
noteworthy that the collection brings together contributions not only from
leading scholars,
but also practitioners, members of the judiciary and people
with personal experience of the JAC, including former lay and judicial
of the JAC, and the first Chief Executive of the Supreme Court of the United
Kingdom. These contributions are linked only
by their focus on diversity in the
making of judicial appointments and otherwise cover a broad range of topics,
including critiques
of the JAC, discussion of merit, diversity and quotas,
suggestions as to models for achieving greater judicial diversity, and
consideration
of the differing approaches to judicial appointments in Australia,
Canada and South Africa. The reflections obtained are remarkable
personal insights they provide into the experiences of those who have had
intimate dealings with the JAC and the judicial
appointments process.
To provide further context to the book’s examination of the JAC, prior
to 2005 the appointments system in the UK was substantially
the same as that
still operating in Australia. Ongoing criticism of that system eventually led to
the enactment of the
Constitutional Reform Act 2005
’) which, inter alia, created the
Despite its name, the JAC is a
recommending
rather than an
body, responsible for
recommending appointees to all courts up to and including the High
The JAC is comprised of six
judges, one solicitor, one barrister, one magistrate, and five laypersons, of
whom one serves as chair.
JAC’s regime, a judicial vacancy is advertised, and applications are
considered only
from those who formally
The Commission assesses
applications and prepares a short list for interview, following which it makes
recommendations for the relevant
appointment.
Gee and Rackley inform
us that, at the time of their writing, the JAC oversaw the appointment of
between 300 and 800 judges each
Of course, the Australian system of judicial appointments remains, formally,
entirely in the hands of the state and federal executive
governments.
Particularly at the
federal level (especially the High Court), it is an opaque system, which
‘incorporates neither transparency
nor genuine political
accountability’,
described in Lynch’s contribution to this collection as being subject to
‘unconstrained executive
discretion’.
There is no
formal requirement that judicial vacancies be
advertised,
nor that there be
any consultation between the Attorney-General and the judiciary as to the
appointees.
Similarly, at least
at the apex of Australia’s judiciary, there is no formal application
process, no formal system for the
checking of references, and no requirement
that candidates undertake
interviews.
Although there is
little doubt that the Australian judiciary is ‘of outstanding quality and
has enjoyed the public’s
confidence’, there are also concerns that
its members do not presently reflect – at least in terms of gender and
– the diversity seen in the Australian
population.
Granted even with
fluctuating commitment to reforming the judicial appointment process there has
been marked improvement in terms
of gender balance in both state and federal
But as McLoughlin has
elsewhere argued, only by ‘formalising a commitment to judicial diversity
across Australia’s judiciary’
will we ‘safeguard any gains so
that they are not at the whim of the politics of the day and further enhance the
capacity to
improve upon
It is fair to say that the Australian experience of judicial diversity has
been markedly different to that of the UK. Although it
may be argued that the
Australian experience of judicial diversity has advanced without a JAC-style
commission, this collection illuminates
the possibilities for reforming judicial
appointment and provides important insights into the strengths and weaknesses of
strategies, both conceptually and politically. The suggestion of the
introduction of a JAC-style commission into Australia has been
made many times
over recent decades
but there is
little political appetite for such a move.
In 2007, then Attorney-General
Robert McClelland instituted a number of reforms to the judicial appointment
process, which included
the introduction of publicly available selection
criteria for appointments, the requirement that vacancies be advertised, and the
use of advisory panels to make recommendations to the
Attorney-General.
Nonetheless,
the reforms specifically stopped short of placing judicial appointments into the
hands of a commission,
abandoned in 2013 when the Coalition Government came to
Although the recent
re-election of the Coalition Government suggests that reforms to the judicial
appointment process in Australia
(at least federally) might be off the table,
this is likely to amplify, rather than diminish, calls for reforms to the
appointment process.
Gee and Rackley identify their collection as having three objectives: to
illustrate the range of views and experiences of the JAC-run
regime; to identify
possible reasons for, and suggestions on how to respond to contrasting
assessments of those inside and outside
the regime, especially as those
assessments relate to the rate of progress on diversity; and to reframe in novel
and fruitful ways
some of the familiar debates that have led to impasse between
insiders and outsiders, including in relation to merit, quotas, and
respective role of judges and politicians in the selection
The collection includes 15 chapters and six personal reflection essays
drawing on experiences of ‘insiders’ and ‘outsiders’
alike. The collection begins with an introduction where Gee and Rackley not only
introduce the book’s contents, but also set
the scene recounting the first
10 years of the JAC. The following chapter contributed by Christopher Stephens
CBE likewise provides
an introduction to the first 10 years of the JAC, from the
perspective of his own experience. It is followed by a reflection from
Thomas Legg KCB QC, reflecting ‘as a voice from the past’ about his
experiences as Permanent Secretary to the Lord
Chancellor and Clerk of the Crown
in Chancery from 1989 to 1998. Alan Paterson OBE’s chapter ‘Power
and Judicial Appointment:
Squaring the Impossible Circle’ examines power
in the context of making judicial appointments, proposing a realignment of
distribution
of power in the UK which would provide a greater role for executive
or Parliament and therefore somewhat diminish the role of the
judiciary. Graham
Gee’s chapter similarly considers how much influence judges themselves
should have over judicial appointments.
The experience of judicial diversity in other jurisdictions is set out in
four separate chapters: Jan van Zyl Smit’s chapter
of commissions in judicial selection in the Commonwealth, Cora Hoexter’s
chapter about South Africa,
Andrew Lynch’s chapter about Australia and
Samreen Beg and Lorne Sossin’s joint chapter ‘Diversity,
Transparency
and Inclusion in Canada’s Judiciary’. The latter
chapter is followed by two reflections: one from Frances Kirkham CBE
on her role as judicial member of the JAC between 2006 and 2011, and another
from the late Noel Lloyd CBE reflecting on
his experiences as a lay member of
JAC between 2012 and 2018. As its title suggests, Alysia Blackham’s
chapter ‘Judicial
Diversity and Mandatory Retirement: Obstacle or Route to
Diversity?’ considers the relationship between mandatory retirement
diversity, and is followed by a reflection from Karon Monaghan QC, barrister and
joint author of the 2014 report
Judicial Diversity: Accelerating
Contributions from
Hilary Sommerlad, John Morison, Rosemary Hunter, Kate Malleson and a chapter
jointly written by Erika Rackley
and Charlie Webb each interrogate conceptual
understandings of diversity. Sommerlad’s chapter ‘Judicial
Diversity: Complexity,
Continuity and Change’ seeks to provide a
conceptual understanding for slow levels of progress in improving judicial
Chapters from Morison and Malleson revisit arguments about merit and
quotas and provide fresh insights about strategies for remedying
over-representation of men in the judiciary. Hunter’s chapter
‘Problems of Scale in Achieving Judicial Diversity’
attempts to
bridge the gap between different perceptions of the JAC’s progress and
Rackley and Webb’s chapter examines
the ongoing need to make the case for
diversity (and by extension, interrogate what we really mean by diversity).
Reflections from
Cordella Bart-Stewart (solicitor and Executive Director of the
Black Solicitors Network) and Jenny Rowe CB (first Chief Executive
Supreme Court of the United Kingdom) punctuate these chapters. Finally, and
perhaps fittingly, the collection concludes with
a chapter ‘Appointments
to the Supreme Court’ by Lady Hale DBE. Although the chapter was drafted
before Hale’s
elevation to President of the Supreme Court of the United
Kingdom, it nonetheless considers the evolution of the judicial appointment
process and the meaning and importance of diversity.
In this review we consider how this comprehensive collection contributes to
ongoing and important debates about judicial diversity.
In particular, we seek
to interrogate the conceptual and theoretical insights the book provides about
assessing the successes and
failures of the judicial diversity project. Finally,
we consider what insights might be drawn from the collection in order to inform
debate about reforming the Australian judicial appointment system.
II THE JAC’S PROGRESS TOWARDS ACHIEVING GREATER
JUDICIAL DIVERSITY
Borne out of criticism about the homogeneity of the judiciary, the JAC is
frequently on the receiving end of criticism for a perceived
failure to make
significant progress towards increasing
One strength of this
book is the extent to which the editors have sought contributions from both
‘insiders’ and ‘outsiders’
advocating for the JAC and
critical positions, respectively. The JAC position – typically articulated
by the JAC and its supporters
– maintains that the JAC is doing everything
it can to achieve greater judicial diversity, and that good progress is being
made. Reflections in this collection from the late Noel Lloyd CBE (a lay member
of the JAC from 2012–2019) and Frances Kirkham
CBE (a judicial member of
the JAC from 2006–2011) are illustrative of this position and paint a
decidedly more upbeat picture
than that advocated by critics, although both
acknowledge that there remains important work to be done. For example Lloyd
‘[g]ood progress has been made on increasing the proportion of
women at most levels (for example, in 2015/16, 44 per cent of
recommendations to
legal positions were women)’ but further acknowledges that progress at the
most senior levels and the ‘under-representation
of black and minority
ethnic individuals remains a significant
challenge’.
Whereas, the critical position – typically articulated by legal
academics including feminists and members of minority groups
profession – argues that progress has been ‘minimal, fragile and
disappointing’.
clearest criticisms of the JAC’s progress towards diversity – or
lack thereof – comes from Monaghan
who argues that, for senior
appointments, there is no evidence of sustained significant improvement since
the establishment of the
JAC, and suggests that ‘[i]f an increase in the
proportion of underrepresented groups in the senior judiciary is to be taken
the measure of the JAC’s success, then there is not much to
celebrate’.
Noting that ‘[i]nsiders and outsiders often have markedly differing
assessments of the scale of the diversity deficit, the pace
of progress so far
and the tools needed to address it’, Gee and Rackley observe that over the
last decade ‘constructive
debate has proved very challenging because views
diverge so markedly, with insiders and outsiders often seeming to speak past
Perhaps the
greatest triumph of this book then is the extent to which it attempts to create
a genuine dialogue to resolve this impasse.
To this end we found Hunter’s
chapter particularly enlightening in its attempt to bridge the gap between those
differing views,
through a reinterpretation of ‘the JAC position’
and ‘the critical position’. Hunter draws on the work of
Valverde in
Chronotopes of Law: Jurisdiction, Scale and
in an attempt to
shift the argument between the two groups to a level of abstraction that allows
immediate disagreements to be transcended,
such that both arguments might be
accepted as being ‘“correct” while effectively talking past
each other’.
In so doing,
Hunter looks at the chronotopes of spatiality, temporality and mood. Hunter
argues that the JAC position approaches
spatiality only in terms of England and
Wales, and so does not undertake international comparisons as to progress. As to
temporality,
she queries ‘what is the duration over which progress towards
judiciary ought to be
pointing out
that ‘from a critical perspective, equality has been a very long time
Hunter argues
that the JAC tends to view diversity in the context of its own processes rather
than in the context of the achievement
of a particular outcome, and has no
particular view as to the pace of
She argues that these
factors ultimately result in a mood of optimism, consistent with the JAC’s
view that good progress is
being made towards greater
The critical perspective, on the other hand, adopts an international gaze,
and so looks to global benchmarks to assess progress towards
diversity. Hunter
argues that, temporally, the critical gaze looks back to as early as the 1850s
and the first wave of feminism in
and its view of the
future is seen in terms of the desired outcome, being gender parity and
proportionate representation, which it
hopes will be achieved in a short period.
Hunter argues that projections that anticipate a long future are therefore
greeted with
dismay, and it follows, from the critical view, that if the current
system is likely to produce a long future, it needs to be
As a result, the
critical mood is one of urgency, impatience for change, and a ‘profound
pessimism’ about the prospect
for real progress towards
Adding to the chronotype analysis offered by Valverde, Hunter notes that
there is a difference between the JAC and the critical approaches
including the High Court, while appointments to the
Court of Appeal and the
Supreme Court are subject to a separate process and, Hunter argues, the JAC
views its jurisdiction through
that limited
On the other hand, the
critical view sees references to ‘the judiciary’ as typically
meaning the senior judiciary. As
such, the success that the JAC has seen in
increasing the appointment of women and Black, Asian and Minority Ethnic
judges at the lower levels is of limited value where
diversity does not reach the upper levels of the
Hunter argues that
the JAC adopts ‘the fiction’ that everyone who meets the statutory
criteria is eligible for judicial
appointment, which would include 40% women and
9% BAME candidates, whereas in practice, it is generally understood that only
with experience in the High Court will be appointed to the Court of
It follows that the only
effective way to increase diversity in the Court of Appeal is to increase
diversity in the High Court, and
this exercise falls clearly within the
JAC’s jurisdiction.
therefore argues for a change in the JAC’s perception of itself
‘only as receivers of recommendations, not as sources
applications’.
Hunter concludes that, through the above lens, it is possible to see that
both the JAC position and the critical position are ‘for
the most part,
rational and defensible. But they exist on fundamentally different
and that it is
therefore not possible to adjudicate in any meaningful way between them. She
goes on, however, to argue that the exception
is in relation to jurisdiction,
where some of the differences appear to be a product of self-imposed
restrictions which may not be
defensible.
contribution is insightful and compelling in its novel application of
Valverde’s thesis. From the Australian
perspective, Hunter’s
contribution – particularly read in conjunction with that of Gee’s,
discussed further below
– provides an important blueprint for policy
makers about how disagreements – either about the appropriateness of the
JAC system in the Australian context, or about balancing of judicial and
executive power – might be transcended to see progress
towards a more
transparent judicial appointments system.
III (REVISITING) MERIT AND QUOTAS
The concept of merit is deeply woven within the JAC’s processes.
Statutorily, the JAC is tasked with making recommendations
for judicial
appointments on the sole basis of merit, and that the recommended person be of
good character.
requires that the JAC ‘have regard to the need to encourage diversity in
the range of persons available for selection for
appointments’
that, where two candidates are considered to be of equal merit, the JAC is
permitted to recommend the more diverse
Of course the concept
of merit has elsewhere been problematised as being imbued with hierarchies of
class, race, and sex.
Nonetheless, a number of contributors take up the issue of merit critiquing
JAC’s approach which allows consideration of diversity
merit is equal, arguing that it creates a false dichotomy between merit and
diversity which requires
reconceptualisation.
The JAC has
received strong criticism as a result of its interpretation of the ‘equal
merit’ provision, in particular,
for its decision to apply the provision
only at the final stage of the appointments process, when it makes its
recommendations, and
not at the stage of shortlisting of candidates. In her
contribution to Gee and Rackley’s collection, Lady Hale DBE argues that
this application of the provision leads to a narrowing of options by the JAC
‘before it knows whether the candidates are truly
Rackley and Webb’s contribution to the collection draws in large part
on Rackley’s previous work; in particular, her prize-winning
Women, Judging and the Judiciary: From Difference to Diversity
Women, Judging and the Judiciary
’). They note that
there is now little argument that ensuring greater diversity amongst judges is
an important goal for a properly
functioning judicial appointment system. They
argue, however, that diversity ought not to be seen simply as an ends, but as a
and that the question of why judicial diversity is important leads us to
a greater understanding of why it ought to be pursued, and
reconceptualisation of merit and diversity as complementary, rather than
incompatible.
For Rackley and Webb there are three reasons judicial diversity ought to be
pursued. The first two have been discussed at length by
other commentators,
being first that judicial diversity is the outcome of equality of opportunity in
that judicial appointments are
open to all persons able to do the job
and, second, that judicial
diversity provides the judiciary with democratic legitimacy, by creating a
judiciary that is reflective
of the public it
The third argument
posited by Rackley and Webb is somewhat more novel. In this argument, the
primary reason for wanting judicial
diversity is grounded in recognition that
different judges have different specialties, and a judiciary that deals with a
different cases requires a selection of judges with specialisms
spanning that range. This interpretation is similarly based on recognition
judges, and particularly senior judges, are not just law-appliers, but
Understood this way
then it follows that a diversity of perspectives, observations and insights
drawn from different life experiences
and backgrounds is akin to this diversity
of perspectives drawn from different legal
specialisms.
They are cautious
to point out that their argument is not simply that because women might be
better placed to provide some insights,
women are able to provide
that insight. Rather, it is hoped that once these insights and arguments are
introduced, they become woven
into the common law, ‘adding to the stock of
insights and arguments to which any judge – man or woman – may have
perhaps useful here to emphasise that justifications for judicial diversity
matter – arguments that justify diversity
on the basis of the
‘difference’ judicial ‘others’ might make have been
rendered problematic (or at least
unpersuasive) because women (and other
minority appointments) have not necessarily evidenced this particular
manifestation of difference.
Importantly, while making a compelling argument about (various) justifications
for judicial diversity, Rackley and Webb demonstrate
a sophisticated awareness
of the contested consequences of diversity and in turn, the way in which this
informs a range of justificatory
If there is a deficiency in their contribution to this collection, it arises
from the fact that it does not deal with the questions
of what groups ought to
be represented in a ‘diverse’ judiciary. Ought we to focus only on
women and BAME candidates,
or should the scope be expanded to, for example,
LGBT+ persons, or persons with a disability? How should this greater diversity
implemented – for example, should quotas or targets be imposed –
and in what proportions should the identified groups
be represented within the
judiciary? These questions are taken up in more detail, however, in
Judging and the Judiciary
, wherein Rackley argues that the
‘trickle-up’ idea that, as women continue to enter the profession in
greater numbers,
they will naturally begin to enter the upper echelons of the
profession and therefore the judiciary, simply has not been borne out
She argues that there
is a need to increase diversity in the upper echelons of the legal profession
– and therefore the applicant
pool for judges – by removing the
barriers to women making it into those
In her book, Rackley
points out that the ‘difference’ argument may be the best route to
securing a representative bench,
because it goes directly to how judges judge
and the substantive impacts of a more diverse bench, rather than the less
tangible benefits
of public confidence and improved
opportunities.
Quotas of course link in to arguments about how merit is understood, and by
extension, how diversity is understood and valued. Although
quotas are not
considered in great detail in this collection, they are nonetheless revisited in
these debates. As Legg (a former
civil servant) recognises, ‘beneath the
visible tip of conscious and rational decision-making there inevitably lies a
subconscious
mass of assumptions, impressions and even
prejudices’.
Reflecting on
his own experiences, Legg notes ‘I came to realize how subjective the
concept of merit was, and how vague and
inexact a measure it was and
Perhaps reflecting a
relatively common stance, Legg does not rule out quotas but frames them as a
last resort. Similarly, suggestions
of quotas for the achievement of greater
judicial diversity have, historically, not been well received in Australia, even
who espouse an interest or commitment to enhancing judicial
Malleson, drawing on the work of Rainbow
theorises how quotas
might be reframed to reconceptualise how judicial diversity is understood. She
argues that it ought to be viewed
as an issue of
over-representation
the dominant identity group (in this instance, white male barristers from
affluent backgrounds), rather than in terms of
under-representation
non-traditional groups.
reframing the issue in this way, Malleson argues for the introduction of a cap
or ceiling on the proportion of persons representing
the dominant group, as
opposed to a floor or minimum requirement for persons from non-dominant
This in turn causes a
shift in onus from a situation where under-represented populations are required
to justify their belonging
(for example, through showing ‘merit’) to
one where over-represented groups are required to demonstrate why their
over-representation
In this way, quotas are not necessarily tied to a particular gender or race.
Rather, as power structures within society change, so
too does the onus to
substantiate ongoing over-representation. As a matter of practicality, this
means that, if the system operates
in such a way that, for example, women become
over-represented within the judiciary, they will be required to either justify
or relinquish
over-representation.
argues that, through this prism, quotas not only promote appointments on merit
but are a prerequisite to a merit-based judicial
appointment process. She argues
that ‘[w]hen quotas are designed as a ceiling rather than a floor, their
purpose is to
weaker candidates who are currently the
beneficiaries of the preferential treatment built into the system rather than
weaker candidates who are currently
This important
and persuasive reconceptualisation has the potential to disrupt accepted
understandings of inclusion, diversity, privilege
and opportunity, and by
illuminating the extent of over-representation of some groups might go some way
to at least diminishing the
political unpopularity associated with traditional
IV THE ROLE OF JUDGES AND POLITICIANS: LESSONS FOR
There is broad agreement amongst the contributors to this collection that
some degree of judicial involvement in the selection and
appointment of judges
is highly desirable. As Paterson observes, ‘they really do know better
than anyone what the job entails
and who might be some of the best
candidates’.
However, several commentators raise concerns about the consequences where
judicial influence is too great, key amongst them being
that the hegemony of the
judiciary tends to have a cloning effect on the selection of those they
This argument is taken
up in detail in Gee’s chapter, ‘Judging the JAC: How Much Judicial
Influence over Judicial Appointments
Is Too Much?’. Gee begins his
contribution with the acknowledgement that ‘[j]udicial involvement in
judicial appointments
is valuable. Judges possess unique perspectives on the
qualities required for judicial office as well as the needs of the judicial
He does not
dispute that judges should exercise influence over the appointments process, but
rather, considers the pertinent questions
are ‘how much, what sorts and at
which stages of the appointment
He argues that
discussion of these questions has been limited over the first decade of the
JAC’s existence, and notes the view
of ‘[a] handful of
academics’ – himself included – that judges today exercise too
much influence, is not
held by other JAC stakeholders, in particular the JAC and
the senior judiciary.
In support of the above comment, Gee refers to the 2015 publication of
Politics of Judicial Independence in the UK
Constitution
, of which he was one of the authors. That work identified the
basic dynamic at the heart of the JAC system, being that the Lord
Chancellor’s
relative retreat from involvement with appointments and the
running of the regime had been offset by the growing influences of judges,
in particular, of senior judges.
The authors of that work argued that judicial influence in the JAC-run system is
evident through their shaping of job descriptions,
designing of qualifying tests
and role-playing tasks, supplying of references, involvement with selection
panels, and provision of
views as statutory consultees on shortlisted
candidates.
They argued that,
despite widespread judicial recognition and genuine concern regarding the lack
of judicial diversity, judges had
‘resisted or diluted initiatives that
might have led to faster transformation of the
This critique was not well received by many JAC stakeholders, and following
the publication of that collection, ‘the JAC, several
senior judges and a
number of officials made it very clear to us that they viewed our critique about
judicial influence and its implications
for diversity as
collection, Gee reflects upon the various reasons the JAC and senior judges may
have rejected academic concerns about judicial
influence, including an
acknowledgement that those critiques might be ‘outdated, overstated or
simply wrong, whether in whole
He elects, however,
to consider another explanation as to the reluctance, being a lack of shared
understanding as to what it means
to talk of ‘judicial influence’,
which he argues has made it challenging to foster a constructive debate about
judges now exercise excessive
Gee therefore sets
out to identify a framework within which to assess judicial influence over
appointments in England and Wales,
in order to determine when it is ‘too
great’, ultimately developing five ‘rebuttable presumptions’
by reference
to which we might assess whether judges enjoy too much, too little,
or the right amount of influence.
Gee argues that judicial influence is too great if:
It contributes to squeezing out the scope for ministerial
involvement.
It seriously exacerbates accountability deficits in the selection
Judges repeatedly succeed in ensuring that the public interest is
subordinated to judicial
Judicial influence has become essentially unstructured, lacks transparency,
and is not subject to effective
Judges succeed in co-opting other stakeholders, including in ways that
undermine the JAC’s
independence.
Gee, the application of the rebuttable presumptions leads to the conclusion that
judges now exercise too much influence under
He maintains, however,
that the purpose of his contribution is not to persuade JAC stakeholders that
this assessment is correct,
but to assist those stakeholders in recognising and
remedying the fact that the issue of judicial involvement in the appointments
process has largely been neglected during the JAC’s first
As already noted, the
criticisms of the pre-JAC appointment system in the UK centred largely around a
concern that the influence
of the executive branch of government was too great,
and resulted in appointments on the basis of political expedience.
In the Australian context, it is ‘unconstrained executive
discretion’,
rather than
the involvement of the judiciary, that has been seen as a problematic when it
comes to judicial appointments. This is
an interesting and important contrast
but it does not necessarily diminish the potential for Australia to draw lessons
from the JAC
experience. Despite the difference in approaches between the two
seems like the
judicial diversity project in Australia has been more effective, there is still
much to glean from the JAC experience.
In this respect Gee’s contribution
might be salutary regarding the need to avoid allowing the pendulum to swing too
away from executive involvement. As Lynch argues in his insightful
chapter recounting the Australian experience of judicial diversity,
a comparison
of the two jurisdictions reveals that ‘in the desire to achieve maximum
independence from the political arms of
government, a model may underperform
against the objectives of accountability and judicial
diversity’.
concludes that ‘[p]reserving a sufficient degree of political
responsibility for the composition of the courts seems
prudent for the
attainment of a more diverse
This seems to get
to the nub of the issue in both jurisdictions; as Lynch convincingly argues,
without accountability the judicial
diversity project will be weakened because
the ‘executive can be inconsistent in its focus on diversity, while the
and the legal profession, spared any formal responsibility for
appointments, may be complacent about the issue and any action they
initiate to address it’.
We agree; the issue is squarely one of accountability. Although we do not think
there are persuasive arguments for the adoption of
a JAC-style judicial
appointment commission in Australia, we agree that in both the UK and Australia
the success or otherwise of
the judicial diversity project is about achieving
greater transparency in making these appointments and holding decision-makers
accountable
for improving diversity. In our view, the role of the executive in
Australia is not itself problematic, and any reforms to the appointment
in Australia need not diminish the overarching role of the executive branch
– formalising diversity as a relevant consideration
in making appointments
would entrench these considerations, creating a formal responsibility that would
transcend the whims and political
objectives of the government of the
V CONCLUSION
Debating Judicial Appointments in an Age of Diversity
authoritative and comprehensive collection about the justifications and
mechanisms for achieving a more diverse judiciary.
The collection will be of
interest not only to constitutional lawyers, but political theorists and
policymakers considering options
for achieving a more diverse judiciary and a
more transparent judicial appointments system. The collection more than meets
objectives – it will no doubt continue to shape and inform
debates about judicial appointments as we embark on an age of diversity.
view, though ostensibly relating to the UK experience and the JAC, it provides
valuable lessons for Australia and elsewhere.
The collection not only
illustrates the range of views and experiences of the JAC-run regime but also
responds thoughtfully to contrasting
assessments of those inside and outside the
regime. It revisits familiar debates that have led to impasse between insiders
and outsiders
and in so doing provides fresh insights into how these complex
issues relating to merit, quotas, and the respective role of judges
politicians in the selection process might be untangled.
* Lecturer, Newcastle Law School, Faculty of Business and Law, University of
Newcastle, Australia.
** Researcher, Newcastle Law School, Faculty of Business and Law, University
of Newcastle, Australia.
Graham Gee and Erika Rackley,
‘Introduction: Diversity and the JAC’s First Ten Years’ in
Graham Gee and Erika
Rackley (eds),
Debating Judicial Appointments in an Age
of Diversity
(Routledge, 2018) 1, 2–3
(‘Introduction’).
Alan Paterson, ‘Power and Judicial
Appointment: Squaring the Impossible Circle’ in Graham Gee and Erika
Rackley (eds),
Debating Judicial Appointments in an Age of Diversity
(Routledge, 2018) 32, 41–2.
Gee and Rackley,
‘Introduction’ (n 1) 6.
‘Commissioners’,
Appointments Commission
(Webpage) <https://www.judicialappointments.
gov.uk/commissioners>. See also Gee and Rackley, ‘Introduction’
Frances Kirkham, ‘Reflection’
in Graham Gee and Erika Rackley (eds),
Debating Judicial Appointments in an
Age of Diversity
(Routledge, 2018) 142, 142.
Lady Hale, ‘Appointments to the
Supreme Court’ in Graham Gee and Erika Rackley (eds),
Debating Judicial
Appointments in an Age of Diversity
(Routledge, 2018) 302, 310.
Gee and Rackley,
‘Introduction’ (n 1) 5.
Sir Harry Gibbs, ‘The Appointment
and Removal of Judges’
[1987] FedLawRw 9
(1987) 17(3)
Federal Law Review
Justice Ronald Sackville, ‘The
Judicial Appointments Process in Australia: Towards Independence and
Accountability’
(Speech, Sheraton on the Park, 27 October 2006).
Andrew Lynch, ‘Diversity without
a Judicial Appointments Commission: The Australian Experience’ in Graham
Gee and Erika
Rackley (eds),
Debating Judicial Appointments in an Age of
(Routledge, 2018) 101, 101.
See Elizabeth Handsley and Andrew
Lynch, ‘Facing Up to Diversity? Transparency and the Reform of
Commonwealth Judicial Appointments
[2015] SydLawRw 10
(2015) 37(2)
, 197 where they note that even the now abandoned McClelland
reforms did not extend so far as changing appointment procedures in respect
the High Court of Australia. They note, ‘[t]hose particular vacancies were
not advertised in order to procure expressions
of interest or nominations
directly from interested individuals themselves. Nor was an advisory panel
convened by the Attorney-General
to assist him or her in narrowing down
potential appointees for these positions’: ibid.
Sir Gibbs (n 8) 143–4.
See Lynch (n 10) 103; HP Lee,
‘Appointment, Discipline and Removal of Judges in Australia’ in HP
Judiciaries in Comparative Perspective
(Cambridge University
Press, 2011) 27, 28–30.
Simon Evans and John Williams,
‘Appointing Australian Judges: A New Model’
[2008] SydLawRw 16
(2008) 30(2)
See the Australasian Institute of
Judicial Administration’s most recent gender statistics, compiled in March
2019. These statistics
are illustrative of the continuing struggle to improve
gender diversity in Australia’s judiciary. Despite the ‘almost
equal’ composition of the High Court, women make up 36% of Commonwealth
judges. The Australian Capital Territory was the only
state or territory where
women make up more than half of the judiciary, with 54% of judges. In South
Australia, women make up 31%
of the State’s judges, Tasmania 24%, New
South Wales 37%, Victoria 42%, Northern Territory 35%, and 34% in Western
Australasian Institute of Judicial Administration, ‘Judicial
Gender Statistics’ (Statistics table, March 2019)
<https://aija.org.au/wp-content/uploads/2018/03/JudgesMagistrates.pdf>.
Kcasey McLoughlin, ‘The Politics
of Gender Diversity on the High Court of Australia’
(2015) 40(3)
Alternative Law Journal
, 170 (‘The Politics of Gender
Diversity’).
See, eg, Lynch (n 10) 102–4;
Sackville (n 9); Evans and Williams (n 14).
Lynch (n 10) 102–3.
Gee and Rackley,
‘Introduction’ (n 1) 4.
See Sir Geoffrey Bindman QC and Karon
Monaghan QC,
Judicial Diversity: Accelerating Change
(Final Report,
November 2014).
Karon Monaghan,
‘Reflection’ in Graham Gee and Erika Rackley (eds),
Judicial Appointments in an Age of Diversity
(Routledge, 2018) 198,
Noel Lloyd, ‘Reflection’
in Graham Gee and Erika Rackley (eds),
Debating Judicial Appointments in an
Age of Diversity
(Routledge, 2018) 146, 150–1.
Rosemary Hunter, ‘Problems of
Scale in Achieving Judicial Diversity’ in Graham Gee and Erika Rackley
Debating Judicial Appointments in an Age of Diversity
(Routledge,
2018) 240, 240. It is worth noting here that Hunter acknowledges at the outset
that she is not a ‘disinterested
observer, but a well-known proponent of
the critical position’: ibid.
Monaghan (n 23) 200.
Gee and Rackley,
‘Introduction’ (n 1) 3.
See Mariana Valverde,
Chronotopes
of Law: Jurisdiction, Scale and Governance
(Routledge, 2015).
Hunter (n 25) 241.
Ibid 241–7.
Ibid 243–4.
Ibid 244–5.
Ibid 247–8.
Ibid 248–9.
Ibid 240, 250.
Constitutional Reform Act 2005
(UK) ss 63(2)–(3) (‘
Ibid s 64(1). However, pursuant to s
64(2), s 64(1) is specifically noted to be ‘
subject to section
’ (emphasis added).
Ibid s 27(5A). This subsection was not
included in the Act until 2013, by the
Crime and Courts Act 2013
In the Australian context see, eg,
Margaret Thornton, ‘Otherness on the Bench: How Merit is Gendered’
[2007] SydLawRw 16
(2007) 29(3)
Sydney Law Review
; McLoughlin, ‘The Politics of
Gender Diversity’ (n 16).
John Morison, ‘Beyond Merit: The
New Challenge for Judicial Appointments’ in Graham Gee and Erika Rackley
Debating Judicial Appointments in an Age of Diversity
(Routledge,
2018) 223, 234.
Lady Hale (n 6) 312.
Erika Rackley and Charlie Webb,
‘Three Models of Diversity’ in Graham Gee and Erika Rackley (eds),
Debating Judicial Appointments in an Age of Diversity
(Routledge, 2018)
283, 284–5.
Ibid 285–8.
Ibid 289–93.
Ibid. Rackley expands on this argument
Women, Judging and the Judiciary: From Difference to Diversity
(Routledge, 2013) 99–100 (‘
Women, Judging and the
’). She notes that the Supreme Court, which is to appoint
judges on the basis of merit, is also under a statutory requirement
‘ensure that between them the judges will have knowledge of, and
experience of practice in, the law of each part of the
United Kingdom’: at
s 27(8). This statutory requirement is typically complied
with through the appointment of two justices from Scotland and one from
Ireland, and Rackley notes that this requirement is not seen as antagonistic to
appointment on merit, because it is recognised
that there is value in having
those perspectives represented when determining points of law related to those
Rackley finds that ‘if we could make the same
argument for women (and other under-represented groups) then we would have a
solution to the diversity problem without running against appointment on
merit’: at 100.
See, eg, Kcasey McLoughlin,
‘“A Particular Disappointment?” Judging Women and the High
Court of Australia’
(2015) 23(3)
Feminist Legal Studies
Rosalind Dixon, ‘Female Justices, Feminism and the Politics of Judicial
Appointment: A Re-Examination’
(2010) 21(2)
Yale Journal of Law and
Women, Judging and the
(n 55) 31–6.
Ibid 47–65.
Sir Thomas Legg,
‘Reflection’ in Graham Gee and Erika Rackley (eds),
Judicial Appointments in an Age of Diversity
(Routledge, 2018) 27, 29. See
also Morison (n 47) 228–32.
See, eg, Mark Dreyfus, ‘George
Brandis Has Failed the Test on Appointments to the Bench’
Mark Dreyfus
(Opinion, 18 December 2015)
http://markdreyfus.nationbuilder.com/george_brandis _has_failed_the_test_on_appointments_to_the_bench
See Rainbow Murray, ‘Quotas for
Men: Reframing Gender Quotas as a Means of Improving Representation for
(2014) 108(3)
American Political Science Review
Kate Malleson, ‘The Disruptive
Potential of Ceiling Quotas in Addressing Over-Representation in the
Judiciary’ in Graham
Gee and Erika Rackley (eds),
Debating Judicial
Appointments in an Age of Diversity
(Routledge, 2018) 259, 259.
Ibid 278–9.
Ibid 273 (emphasis in original).
Paterson (n 2) 54.
Ibid; Morison (n 48) 232.
Graham Gee, ‘Judging the JAC:
How Much Judicial Influence over Judicial Appointments Is Too Much?’ in
Graham Gee and
Erika Rackley (eds),
Debating Judicial Appointments in an Age
of Diversity
(Routledge, 2018) 152, 152.
Ibid 152–3.
Ibid 153, discussing Graham Gee et al,
The Politics of Judicial Independence in the UK’s Changing
Constitution
(Cambridge University Press, 2015).
Ibid 155–6.
Ibid 171 ff. Gee argues that, while
the Lord Chancellor remains an important driver of reform, even policy
development is a collaborative
enterprise, with judges possessing a much more
significant say than they did prior to the introduction of the JAC: at 172. He
notes that the Lord Chancellor’s involvement in individual
appointments is now very limited and that, in reality, the JAC’s
recommendations as to appointments are almost universally accepted: at 171.
Ibid 173 ff. Gee argues that the Lord
Chancellor remains accountable for the regime as a whole but has limited levers
to shape individual selection: at 173. He notes that there is no
reliable mechanism for holding judges to account for their considerable
influence over the selection regime: at 174.
Ibid 175 ff. Gee here refers, by way
of example, to the limited interpretation of the equal merit provision, which he
the result of judicial influence over the terms of its use, and that
there is evidence of judicial resistance to the policy in the
years since its
Ibid 177 ff. Gee recognises that
statutory consultation with judges has an important role to play in the
selection of candidates
but notes that his research revealed that such
consultation sometimes operated as a de facto ‘veto’ for senior
and that there remained concern amongst some in the JAC and the Ministry
expressed by judges
during that consultation.
Ibid 178 ff. Here Gee outlines that
the research that led to the publication of
The Politics of Judicial
Independence in the UK
Constitution
concerns that the JAC’s first two lay chairs seemed to have been coopted
by the senior judicial members of the JAC,
that the senior judges who sat on the
JAC at times exerted disproportionate influence on individual selections and the
policies, and that the JAC’s lay and legal commissioners might
be deferential to the judicial commissioners on questions of
both individual
appointments and policy.
Lynch (n 10) 101.
See McLoughlin, ‘The Politics of
Gender Diversity’ (n 16) 170.
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (124 KB)
PDF format (239 KB)
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter