URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/journals/IntTBLawRw/2004/2.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 15:05:27
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Gillies, Peter --- "Enforcement of International Commercial Arbitration Awards - the New York Convention" [2004] IntTBLawRw 2; (2004) 9 International Trade and Business Law Review 19
Enforcement of International Arbitration Awards- The New York Convention
Introduction
Reservations- Reciprocity; commercial in nature
Convention deals with international arbitral awards and non-domestic awards
Subject matter must be capable of settlement by arbitration
Dispute to be arbitrated unless agreement null and void, inoperative or incapable of being performed
Arbitrator’s jurisdiction to decide validity of arbitral agreement
Agreement null and void
The Article 4 requirements as to form in respect of an application for enforcement
The Article 5 grounds for resisting recognition and enforcement
Incapacity; agreement invalid
Party not given notice or otherwise unable to present case
Issue not within terms of arbitration, or award deals with matter not within scope of arbitration
Composition of arbitral authority or arbitral procedure not in accordance with the agreement or law of country of arbitration
Award not yet binding on parties or has been set aside or suspended in country of award
Award not arbitrable under the law of the country of enforcement
Public Policy
Adjournment of enforcement proceedings pursuant to Article 6 where application made to have award set aside or suspended
Further references
Enforcement of International Arbitration Awards- The
New York Convention
Peter Gillies
Introduction
If the arbitration of disputes arising from an international contract or
other legal relationship has ended with the rendering of
an award, and the party
against which the award is made refuses to honour the award, then the question
arises as to which law governs
the recognition and enforcement of this award.
Ultimately, the law governing enforcement is that of the state in which
enforcement
is sought, which will be a state where the losing party has assets.
If the state has implemented the New York Convention on the Recognition
Enforcement of Foreign Arbitral Awards of 1958 (the Convention), recognition and
enforcement will be according to the terms of
this Convention.
In practice, the Convention – as adopted into municipal law – is
the main vehicle for the recognition and enforcement
of international
arbitration awards. The Convention has been ratified by more than 130 countries,
including all of the major trading
The recognition and enforcement regime provided for in the Convention aims to
provide straightforward and effective procedures for
the enforcement of
international arbitral awards. It aims to promote uniformity in the principles
and processes applying to enforcement,
irrespective of the country in which
enforcement is sought. The place of enforcement will be chosen according to the
location of
recoverable assets, rather than the legal system of this state. It
is therefore important that the award be readily transportable
from state to
state without legal or other complications. The Convention intends that the
arbitral award be final and not subject
to review by the courts in the country
of recognition and enforcement. This, after all, is what the parties are to be
taken to have
intended in subscribing to an arbitral agreement. Accordingly, the
Convention limits the grounds (or defences) that a party resisting
enforcement
can plead, although it does not entirely preclude judicial review. The list of
grounds for refusing recognition and enforcement
is an exhaustive one. There is
no provision in the Convention for a general review of the award on the merits,
by a court in the
country where enforcement is sought.
The courts have manifested a pro-enforcement bias in hearing challenges to
recognition and enforcement, having regard to the parties’
agreement to
arbitration and to the objectives of the Convention. Even where a court finds a
defence to be established, it has discretion
to reject the challenge and to
order enforcement.
The Convention deals with the
recognition and enforcement
If a court enforces an award, necessarily, it will have recognised it.
Infrequently, recognition alone will be sought.
This might happen, for example,
where an award has been made pursuant to the arbitral agreement, and is final
and binding. Notwithstanding
this, a party seeks to litigate afresh issues
settled in the arbitration and embodied in the resulting award. The other party
res judicata
principle, that is, that the issue has been
conclusively and finally resolved between them by the agreed tribunal, and that
not open to a subsequent court or other tribunal to rehear the matter.
The statutes implementing the Convention in each state, by and large,
reproduce the terms of the Convention. They must, however, make
provision for
additional matters. One of these is the precise procedure for enforcement of the
award through the vehicle of the state’s
legal system. The chosen models
provision may be made for registering the award in the designated court, so
that it may be enforced as a judgment of the court;
provision may be made for application to the court for an order of
enforcement, or for the entering of a judgment mirroring the terms
of the award;
provision may be made for the range of enforceable remedies which an
arbitrator can grant; or provision may be made for suing on the
award as if it
was a debt, or suing for a breach of its terms as a breach of contract.
The implementing statute may need to deal with the meaning of the term
. This will be where the state in question has, at the time of
ratification, declared that it will apply the Convention only to differences
arising out of legal relationships which are considered as commercial under the
state’s law, pursuant to Article 1(3). The
statute may deal with the
circumstances in which an award is not to be considered as a
award, for the purposes of Article 1(1). The statute may deal with the
situation when some other legal regime, such as the UNICTRAL
Law on Commercial Arbitration applies to recognition and enforcement of
international commercial awards, instead of the Convention.
Other arbitration conventions or instruments may also be relevant. The
International Centre for the Settlement of Investment Disputes
(ICSID) was
established by the Washington Convention. The ICSID provides for the arbitration
of disputes between a state and a national
of another state. It is not commonly
The UNCITRAL Model Law on Commercial Arbitration – which was adopted by
UNICTRAL in 1985 - has a wider scope than the New York
Convention, although its
provisions dealing with recognition and enforcement more or less mirror those of
the Model Law. It will
be for the state that ratifies and implements the Model
Law along with the New York Convention to stipulate in statute law when each
regime is to apply. Where recognition and enforcement is concerned, little will
depend upon which regime applies, given that the
defences to recognition and
enforcement are uniform across both regimes.
The terms of the New York Convention will now be examined.
Reservations- Reciprocity; commercial in
Article 1(3) of the New York Convention provides that a signatory state may
declare stipulated reservations when acceding to the Convention.
First, it may
declare that it will apply the Convention to the recognition and enforcement of
awards made only in the territory of
another contracting state. Secondly, it may
declare that it will apply the Convention only to differences arising out of
legal relationships,
whether contractual or not, which are considered as
commercial under the national law of the state making such a declaration.
As to the first point, it has been held by a US court that this principle of
reciprocity is concerned with the state in which the
arbitration will occur and
whether that state is a signatory to the Convention – not whether both
parties are nationals of
signatory states.
Where the commercial reservation is concerned, the Convention does not define
the meaning of the term
. Where a state has declared this
reservation, the implementing statute may define the scope of
. It has been held in a US case, in reliance upon
the implementation statute, that seafarers’ contracts of employment are
from the scope of a
dispute for the purposes of the
Convention (the US having declared the commercial reservation).
another American case, it was held that, for the purposes of the Convention, a
dispute between corporate shareholders regarding
the proceedings of a stock
transaction was one arising from a commercial relationship.
Convention deals with international arbitral
awards and non-domestic awards
Article 1(1) of the Convention applies to the recognition and enforcement of
awards which are: (i) made in the state other than the
state where the
recognition and enforcement of such awards are sought, and arising out of
differences between persons, whether physical
or legal; or (ii) not considered
as domestic awards in the state where their recognition and enforcement are
The intent of the Article is to confine the application of the Convention to
awards which have a genuine international element. The
first category of awards
covers the standard case where the award is sought to be enforced in a state
other than the State where
the award was made. By definition, such an award has
an international element. In practice (although it is not obligatory) the
adversaries
will be domiciled in different states.
The second category consists of awards which are not considered domestic in
the country of enforcement even though, for example, the
place of rendition and
enforcement may be the same. This is illustrated in the US case of
Muller Corporation
where, although the US was the state
of both arbitration and enforcement, the award was held to be within the scope
of the Convention.
The foreign element arose from the fact that the parties were
domiciled in foreign countries. Although the Convention did not define
non-domestic
, the concept was to be construed broadly, having regard to
the goal of the Convention. That is, in order to encourage the recognition
enforcement of commercial arbitration agreements in international contracts, and
applying ‘that purpose to this case involving
two foreign entities leads
to the conclusion that this award is not domestic’.
US case, the court considered an arbitral agreement entered into between US
parties. The agreement related solely to matters
occurring in the US, but
provided for arbitration in London. Enforcement in New York was contemplated,
should an award be made. Consideration
of the US statute implementing the
Convention led the court to conclude that the arbitral agreement lacked the
requisite foreign
element. Therefore, any award resulting from the agreement
would not be within Article 1(1) of the Convention and thus would be
unenforceable
pursuant to the Convention.
Subject matter must be capable of settlement by
arbitration
Article 2(1) provides that each contracting state is to recognise an
agreement in writing under which the parties undertake to submit
to arbitration,
any or all differences which have arisen, or which may arise between them in
respect of a defined legal relationship,
whether contractual or not, concerning
a matter capable of settlement by arbitration.
The requirements as to form are examined below. The requirement that the
subject matter be capable of arbitration is a requirement,
that is, it is
legally arbitrable, under the law of the country of enforcement: ‘it seems
means legally capable, for any matter can
theoretically be arbitrated or compromised …’
that the matter has been arbitrated, it is a ground for refusing recognition and
enforcement of a resulting award that the
difference is not capable of
settlement by arbitration under the law of the country of enforcement (Art
2(a)). This defence is also
examined below.
Dispute to be arbitrated unless agreement null and
void, inoperative or incapable of being performed
Article 2(3) provides that the court of a contracting state, when seised of a
matter in respect of which the parties have made an
arbitral agreement, shall,
at the request of one of the parties, refer the parties to arbitration, unless
it finds that the agreement
is null and void, inoperative or incapable of being
This issue – essentially the validity of the agreement to arbitrate
– logically, will be raised prior to arbitration.
If it is not raised, or
it is raised unsuccessfully by a party, and this party later disputes the
recognition and enforcement of
the arbitral award, the issue of validity will
have to be disputed pursuant to one of the Article 5 defences. It might, for
be contended that the agreement was invalid, and the arbitrator acted
beyond jurisdiction, in terms of Article 5(1)(c).
Arbitrator’s jurisdiction to decide validity of
arbitral agreement
Before considering the factors bearing upon the determination of validity, it
will be convenient to consider whether an arbitrator
has the power to decide on
the validity of the arbitral agreement which appoints him or her. Two basic
agreements are discernible
in the arbitration context: the underlying contract
embodying the transaction between the parties and the agreement to submit to
arbitration any disputes arising from this underlying contract and its
performance. In practice, the arbitral agreement will usually
be provided for in
a clause in the underlying contract.
The starting point in resolving this issue – in essence, whether the
arbitrator can determine whether or not he or she has jurisdiction
recognise that one party to a contract cannot compel another to submit to
arbitration, unless the parties have agreed
to submit any dispute to
arbitration. Thus, the arbitration agreement must be valid and in existence at
the time of the purported
submission to arbitration.
It follows that the court will have jurisdiction to determine the threshold
issue, that is, whether or not a valid arbitral agreement
is in existence at the
relevant time. This was confirmed in the US case of
Apollo Computer Inc v
A party sought a permanent stay of arbitral proceedings,
contending that there was no agreement to arbitrate between the parties.
court found that the parties had agreed to submit issues to arbitration. As to
the contention that this foundation agreement
was no longer valid at the time
when arbitration was sought, this secondary issue fell to be determined by the
arbitrator. This was
because the foundation arbitral agreement provided for
arbitration pursuant to the Rules of Arbitration of the International Chamber
Commerce (ICC). Pursuant to these rules, the ICC’s Court of Arbitration
had determined that the arbitration should proceed
because it was satisfied as
to the prima facie existence of the arbitration agreement. The ICC rules further
provided for the delegation
to the arbitrator decisions involving the
(continued) existence and validity of a
prima facie
agreement to
Where, as will usually be the case, the arbitral agreement is contained in a
clause in the underlying contract, and it is contended
that the contract is
invalid, the question is whether this logically means that the court can decide
issues of both validity of the
agreement to arbitrate and of the underlying
contract? In deciding the threshold issue the court is necessarily deciding the
issue. The courts have resisted taking control of both issues and have
confined themselves to determining no more than is needed
to resolve the
arbitrator’s jurisdiction. They have done this by separating the arbitral
clause from the underlying agreement
and determining its validity in its severed
form. Assuming the clause is found to be valid, the issue of validity, overall,
to the arbitrator. This is consistent with respecting the parties’
agreement that substantive issues should be submitted to
arbitration rather than
to the courts. (Of course, sometimes a court’s determination that the
arbitral clause is valid will
be supported by reasoning that is sufficiently
persuasive to deter a party from raising the issue of the validity of the
contract during arbitration.)
The process of severing the arbitral clause from the overall agreement is
illustrated in the US case of
Société Nationale Algerienne pour la
Recherche, la Production, le Transport, la Transformation et la
Commercialisation des
Hydrocarbures v Distrigas Corporation
The court held that the clause necessarily had to be separated in a
dispute as to the validity of the overall contract. This was because
‘allowing an arbitration clause to be automatically invalidated along with
the principal agreement would be akin to destroying
precisely what the parties
had sought to create as a dispute resolution device’.
Accordingly, the court confined its attention to the validity of the
arbitral clause, determining it to be valid and referring the
arbitration.
Twi Lite International Inc v Anam Pacific Corp
court considered that the arbitral clause in a contract would be severed,
notwithstanding that the overall contract was alleged
to have been vitiated by
fraud. This was to compel the referral of the substantive claim – that the
principal contract was
null and void – to the arbitrator for decision.
Furthermore, none of the fraud claimed related to the arbitral provisions.
In the Australian case of
QH Tours Ltd v Ship Design and Management (Aust)
the court was concerned with a domestic arbitration
agreement, but the principles are logically applicable to an international
subject to the Convention. The court considered a challenge to an
arbitral clause in a principal contract. The party resisting arbitration
contended that because of the nature of the remedy it sought – an order
that the contract be declared to be void
pursuant to the
Practices Act 1974
(Cth) – the arbitrator was without jurisdiction. For
the arbitrator to determine the dispute and award the remedy sought (if
indeed the outcome of the projected arbitration), would necessarily mean that
the contract including the arbitral clause
would be determined to be void
. As such, it was contended, in this circumstance, the arbitrator was
logically without jurisdiction. The court held that the arbitral
clause could be
severed from the overall agreement. Given that the clause existed, it operated
to compel arbitration. The claimant’s
challenge to the validity of the
clause was based on a technical rather than a substantive complaint. To accede
to it would undermine
the arbitral process that the parties had contracted
Foster J commented:
Having regard to the specific nature of an arbitration clause … generally
speaking, it can
be regarded as severable from the main contract with the
result that, logically, an
arbitrator, if otherwise empowered to do so, can
declare the main contract void ab initio
without at the same time destroying
the basis of his power to do so.
Agreement null and void
Arbitration may be resisted on the basis that the arbitral agreement is null
and void, inoperative or incapable of being performed.
If the parties’
agreement to arbitrate is ineffective, then there is no legal basis for the
arbitration. Limitations on the
arbitrator’s jurisdiction to determine the
threshold issue of the arbitral agreement have been noted above.
It has been said of the
null and void, inoperative or incapable of being
clause that it is to be construed narrowly,
regard to the objectives of the Convention. These objectives are to promote
arbitration as a dispute resolution mechanism
where the parties have contracted
for this, and the presumption in favour of arbitration manifested by the
signatory countries in
their decision to accede to the Convention. In one case,
a claim that the contract had been procured by fraud and was therefore null
void, was ineffective in stalling arbitration. It was held that the arbitral
clause was to be properly severed from the main
agreement and that the matter be
referred to arbitration on the substantive claim of fraud.
In an American case, it was commented that the clause ‘must be
interpreted to encompass only those situations – such as
fraud, mistake,
duress and waiver – that can be applied neutrally on an international
If an arbitral agreement imposes a time limit to resort to arbitration, and
this time has expired,
prima facie
the agreement would be inoperative.
Cases in which a party has contended that arbitration was time barred are
examined below.
The Article 4 requirements as to form in respect
of an application for enforcement
Article 4(1) provides that a party applying to a court for recognition and
enforcement of an award must supply, at the time of application:
(a) the duly
authenticated original award or a duly certified copy thereof; and (b) the
original agreement referred to in Article
2 (that is, the arbitration agreement
or an agreement containing an arbitration provision) or a duly certified copy
thereof. Article
4(2) requires the production of a certified translation of
these documents where the originals are in a language other than that
country of enforcement.
Article 2(2) provides that the term agreement in writing shall include an
arbitral clause in a contract or an arbitration agreement,
signed by the
parties, or contained in an exchange of letters or telegrams. A US court has
held that notwithstanding the words
shall include
, this provision is
exhaustive as to what satisfies
an agreement in writing
This court held that arbitral clauses in marine insurance policies (in this
case protection and indemnity policies) satisfied the
Article 2(2) requirement
and thus in turn, Article 4(1).
In the court’s view, detailed
review of the conduct of the parties in negotiating the policies, demonstrated
that they had
manifested their consent to the arbitral clauses within the
meaning of the
exchange of letters or telegrams
, within Article 2(2).
This conduct included the submission by their brokers to the insurers (before
each renewal year) the assureds’
request for quotation by way of a
document known as a slip. Each slip contained details of the proposed policy.
The insurer effected
a contract of insurance by affixing its stamp to the
broker’s slip and endorsing it. The broker’s slip and the
certificate of insurance constituted an exchange of
evidencing an assent to contract. These documents were not in the
traditional sense letters, but the Convention concept was not to
be construed so
restrictively. It would be unworkable unless it was read expansively as
referring to written communications including
documents such these, and other
forms of communication such as faxes, telexes and emails.
summary, the court held that a valid agreement in writing between the parties
under the Convention had come into existence.
Furthermore, although the slip and certificate did not include the arbitral
clause, they incorporated it by reference to the policy
containing it.
A US court held that the Article 5(1)(a) requirement – that the party
seeking enforcement must provide a duly authenticated
original award (or a duly
certified copy of it) – is satisfied when the party submits (at the
minimum) a certified copy of
the award. It does not require that this party
produce either a duly authenticated original or a duly certified copy of a duly
authenticated
original. Such a reading of the Article was unduly restrictive.
‘Copies of the award and the agreement which have been certified
member of the arbitration panel provide a sufficient basis upon which to enforce
Enforcement was refused in an Italian case when the claimant failed to
produce the award and agreement as required by Article 4.
The Article 5 grounds for resisting recognition
and enforcement
Article 5 lists the grounds for refusing recognition and enforcement of an
award. Logically, these grounds can be invoked only after
an award has been
made. Article 5(1) sets out the five grounds which may be invoked by the party
resisting enforcement. Article 5(2)
provides for two additional grounds for
refusing recognition and enforcement, where the court can act of its own motion.
Collectively,
and informally, these grounds may be referred to as the seven
to enforcement. Article 5 envisages that the party against whom
the award has been made will take proceedings before a competent authority
practice, a court) for a ruling against enforcement, in the state where the
prevailing party seeks to enforce the award.
The preamble to Article 5(1) provides that recognition and enforcement of an
award may be refused, at the request of the party against
whom it is invoked,
only if that party furnishes to the competent authority where the recognition
and enforcement is sought, proof
of the facts grounding one of the defences
listed thereafter.
The preamble to Article 5(2) provides that recognition and enforcement of an
arbitral award may also be refused if the competent authority
in the country
where recognition and enforcement is sought is satisfied that the facts
grounding one of the grounds for refusal listed
thereafter are fulfilled.
The courts hearing challenges to enforcement have consistently referred to
the pro-enforcement bias inherent in the Convention. It
has been commented in an
American decision that the goal of the Convention was to encourage the
recognition and enforcement of international
arbitral agreements (and their
underlying contracts), and to unify the standards by which these agreements are
observed and awards
made pursuant to their enforcement in signatory
This international regulatory regime would be
significantly compromised if the courts in individual countries too readily
or applied it in such a manner as to create uncertainty as to the
binding effect of international arbitral awards duly made. Another
commented that:
The expansion of American business and industry will hardly be encouraged if,
notwithstanding solemn contracts, we insist on a parochial
concept that all
disputes must be resolved under our laws and in our courts … We cannot
have trade and commerce in world markets
and international waters exclusively on
our terms, governed by our law, and resolved in our courts.
The pro-enforcement bias is reflected in cases where challenges to
enforcement based upon the public policy defence have been rejected,
even though
the award or underlying contract is contrary to the law of the country of
enforcement (see below).
The court has a discretion not to refuse recognition and enforcement of an
award even if a defence is established. This is made clear
in the preambles to
Article 5(1) and V(2). (Recognition and enforcement
be refused.)
Rejecting a challenge to enforcement in, for instance, circumstances where the
party resisting enforcement has established
a defence, but in circumstances
raising technical rather than substantive issues, would be consistent with the
pro-enforcement bias
informing application of the Convention.
failure of a party to object, before or during arbitration, to the matter
subsequently complained of by this party will be influential
exercising its discretion not to refuse enforcement. In conventional terms, the
party may be described as being estopped
from relying upon the defence which has
been established.
The seven grounds for resisting recognition and enforcement of an award which
are provided for in Article 5 are exhaustive.
This is made clear by
the use of the word only in the preamble to Article 5(1), and limitation of the
court’s authority to
refuse recognition and enforcement on two grounds
pursuant to Article 5(2). In short, those who are provided defences by the
are explicitly limited by the Convention. This is consistent with the
objectives of the Convention, which include providing a uniform
framework for
and relative certainty in enforcement proceedings, no matter where they are
An Australian judge has commented
that, bearing in mind the
wording of the relevant implementing statute in Australia, the court has a
residual discretion to refuse
to enforce an award, even where none of the
defences stipulated in the Convention has been established. In effect, it was
that the grounds for refusing recognition and enforcement were not
limited to those stipulated in Article
5. This contention may be queried on the basis that had the Australian
legislature intended such a radical change in the operation
of the Convention in
Australia, this would have been expressly provided for in the statute.
It has been commented by an American court that the effect of the Convention
is that the enforcement court (in the absence of extraordinary
circumstances) is
not to conduct a review of the arbitrator’s findings. In particular, a
mistake of law or fact is insufficient
to refuse confirmation of an arbitral
This is consistent with the Convention’s objective in
making the arbitrator’s decision final, with no appeal being permitted
a court on the merits. If the situation was different, this would greatly
undermine the arbitral regime, whether it be that provided
for by the Convention
or otherwise. Review of the decision is only permitted, if at all, to the extent
provided for by the Article
5 defences. None of these provides for a general
review on the merits.
The party resisting enforcement pursuant to Article 5(1) has the burden of
proof imposed upon it to sustain the defence pleaded. This
is made explicit by
the preamble to Article 5(1), providing that this party must ‘furnish
… proof’ of the matters
grounding the defence. The preamble to
Article 5(2) is to like effect, providing that the competent authority may
refuse enforcement
that the grounds for refusal exist,
language consistent with a requirement that proof of these grounds must
Incapacity; agreement invalid
Article 5(1)(a) provides that recognition and enforcement of the award may be
refused: (i) where the applicant party proves that the
parties to the
arbitration agreement were, under the law applicable to them, under some
incapacity; or (ii) that the agreement is
not valid under the law to which the
parties have subjected it; or, (iii) failing any indication thereon, under the
law of the country
where the award was made.
The defence has seldom been invoked. It would be unlikely in practice that a
party to a contract with an international dimension would
be under an
incapacity. On occasions, the defence of sovereign immunity has been invoked. It
has been contended by a party against
which enforcement of an award was sought
that it was immune from the processes of the enforcement court because it
enjoyed state
immunity as a state or a state agency. In a US case, Libya
successfully raised a claim of state immunity to defeat enforcement of
arbitral award against it. In reliance upon Article 5(2)(a) of the Convention
(rather than Article 5(1)(a)), it was contended
that the dispute was not
arbitrable.
This case will be dealt with in more detail in the
review of Article 5(2)(a) below. The facts were exceptional, pivoting upon the
enactment of laws in Libya which nationalised oil assets. More typically, in the
instance of conventional contracts entered into
by the entity and a private
party, a claim of state immunity will be defeated on the basis that the entity
has waived its immunity
by agreeing to submit disputes to arbitration.
The second branch of Article 5(1)(a), logically, would rarely be invoked. If
a party believes that the agreement to arbitrate is invalid
under the law of the
arbitration agreement or the forum in which the award is made, this submission
would normally be raised earlier
(prior to the making of an award). Article 2(3)
provides in substance that the court of the state in which arbitration is sought
shall refer the dispute to arbitration unless it finds that the agreement is
null and void, inoperative or incapable of being performed.
Presumably, a party
who contests the validity of the agreement would seek a stay of arbitration in
the court, on the basis that the
agreement to arbitrate is
null and void, or
inoperative or incapable of being performed
. These are grounds of stay which
are broad enough to comprehend a plea of invalidity. If there is substance in
the plea, in the normal
course, an application for a stay would succeed. The
invalidity of the agreement to arbitrate could also be raised during the course
of arbitration, assuming that the issue was not raised prior to this time under
Article 2(3).
In the US case of
Twi Lite International Inc v Anam Pacific
a party to an agreement to arbitrate sought to stay
arbitration proceedings. The claimant contended that its agreement to the
arbitration
clause was null and void because it had been procured by fraud, was
unconscionable and was voidable on the grounds of fraud and misrepresentation.
The contention was found to be unpersuasive on the facts, especially having
regard to the pro-enforcement bias implicit in the Convention.
The matter was
referred to arbitration. The court noted also that, while the court would review
an arbitration clause alleged to
have been procured by fraud (as envisaged by
Article 2(3)), it would have been inappropriate for the court to review the
contract to determine whether it had been procured by fraud. This
latter issue was one for the arbitrator, should be it be raised
arbitration.
The defence would therefore only be invoked in unusual situations, such as
where the party pleading it had not previously raised it
and was not cognisant
of grounds for the plea prior to arbitration or, after having unsuccessfully
raised it during arbitration,
was confident that the arbitrator had ruled
wrongly on the issue.
In an Italian case, a party unsuccessfully attempted to invoke Article
5(1)(a). It was argued that the applicable law (US law and
the Convention as
implemented by it), did not recognise an arbitration clause which was printed on
the back of certain purchase orders
which were at the centre of the disputed
transactions.
A decision of the Administrative Tribunal of Syria, by implication, dealt
with Article 5(1)(a). The contest was one between a French
company and a Syrian
ministry. The parties had submitted their contractual dispute to arbitration in
Geneva, with the French party
prevailing. Enforcement was refused in Syria, on
the basis that the ministry had not sought authorisation from the Syrian Council
of State before agreeing to arbitration, as required by Syrian law. Accordingly,
the arbitral award was
non-existent
Party not given notice or otherwise unable to present
Article 5(1)(b) provides that a party may resist recognition or enforcement
of an award on the basis that the party: (i) was not given
proper notice of the
appointment of the arbitrator; or (ii) of the arbitration proceedings; or(iii)
was unable otherwise to present
The defence, or rather the cluster of defences, is, or rather are, concerned
with procedural irregularity sufficient to amount to
a denial of due process or
natural justice. The courts have construed the provision restrictively. An
American court has commented
that the defence ‘essentially sanctions the
application of the forum state’s standards of due process’.
It has been said that enforcement ‘may be denied only if there was a
procedural infirmity that rendered the proceedings fundamentally
caused prejudice to the complaining party’.
The procedural
irregularity must be more than merely technical. If the party had an opportunity
to raise the perceived procedural
unfairness during the arbitration and declined
to do so, then normally this will preclude application of the defence in
enforcement
proceedings.
In the American case of
Geotech Lizenz AG v Evergreen Systems Inc
challenge to enforcement failed based upon an alleged lack of notice.
The party resisting enforcement, Evergreen, did not participate in the
arbitration. It was, however, appraised of every step of the
arbitration
process, given every opportunity to participate, and fully apprised of the
perils of non-appearance. Its non-participation
was a matter of choice.
Furthermore, the fact that the arbitration was held in Switzerland (whereas
Evergreen was domiciled in the
US), did not justify its non-participation on the
ground that this would have been inconvenient. Evergreen had entered into an
after arm’s length negotiations, nominating Switzerland as the
forum of arbitration in the event of dispute. Likewise, in an
Italian case, the
absence of a party from the arbitration was held not to warrant non-enforcement
of the award.
The party resisting enforcement was an Italian
company, and the arbitration was held in the US. The court found that the
had been informed of the pending arbitration, and that it had refused
explicitly to participate in the process.
In the US case of I
nternational Standard Electric Corporation v Bridas
Sociedad Anonima Petrolera Industrial y Comercial
a claim was
rejected by a party resisting enforcement. A relevant procedural irregularity
occurred when the arbitrators would not
disclose the identity of a
. The expert testified on aspects of New York State law. The party
contended that the expert might have a conflict of interest. The
court found the
possibility theoretical and speculative. The complaint did not address a matter
of substance. Moreover, it was very
relevant that the party had not complained
of the matter during arbitration, when substantive arguments, if any, could have
put to the arbitral panel.
Enforcement was refused in another US case, on the basis that the party
resisting enforcement had improperly been denied an opportunity
to present its
case to the arbitral tribunal. At a prehearing conference, the party was told to
submit audited accounts receivable
ledgers rather than a vast collection of
invoices. Later, another arbitrator questioned the method of proof, in response
the party explained that it was proceeding according to an earlier
understanding. Without having made it clear that the actual invoices
required to substantiate its claim, the arbitrator subsequently found against
the party on the ground of lack of clear proof.
The party had proceeded on the
basis that the audited accounts were adequate for the purposes of arbitration.
As such, it had not
been given an opportunity to be heard ‘at a meaningful
time and in a meaningful manner’.
In the American case of
Karaha Bodas Co LLC v Perusahaan Pertambangan
Minyak Dan Gas Bumi Negara
enforcement was challenged on the
basis that the arbitral tribunal failed to grant it a continuance, in order that
it could prepare
a response to new allegations made by the opposing party, and
that it was unfairly denied discovery on a material issue. The challenge
unsuccessful, with the court finding that the party had ample time to prepare
its case and that it had not been unfairly denied
discovery. The hurdle for the
defence was high: ‘the issue is not whether this Court would have granted
the discovery or continuance.
The issue is whether the procedures employed met
the minimum requirements of fairness.’
In any event, the
procedural issues were well within the reasonable exercise of the arbitral
tribunal’s discretion and its
decisions did not prevent the party
‘from having a meaningful hearing; [they did] not rise to the level of
fundamental unfairness
necessary to deny enforcement of the arbitration
Issue not within terms of arbitration, or award deals
with matter not within scope of arbitration
Article 5(1)(c) provides that recognition or enforcement of an award may be
refused on the grounds: (i) that the award deals with
a difference not
contemplated by or not falling within the terms of submission to arbitration; or
(ii) it contains decisions on matters
beyond the scope of submission to
arbitration provided that, if the decisions on matters submitted to arbitration
can be separated
from those not submitted, that part of the award which contains
decisions on matters submitted to arbitration may be recognised and
The two branches of the defence overlap. The first allows contentions that the
issues raised were beyond the scope of the
arbitration agreement, while the
second allows submissions that some of these matters were beyond scope.
In substance, the Article provides a defence that the award does not relate
to matters which the parties have agreed may be submitted
to arbitration. If
this is so, then the arbitral authority has exceeded its jurisdiction, either
wholly or in part. The instrument
for determining this issue of arbitrability is
the parties’ arbitral agreement (or more usually, arbitration clause
the underlying contract). The Article then creates a defence that a
particular issue was not arbitrable according to the terms of
this agreement.
As such, the Article is to be distinguished from Article 5(2)(a), which
provides for non-recognition or enforcement where the dispute
is not arbitrable
under the law of the country where recognition or enforcement is sought.
An attempt to stay arbitration proceedings was rejected in the US case of
Twi Lite International Inc v Anam Pacific Corp
Although the
case was one where a stay was sought, rather than one involving a challenge to
enforcement of an award, it is instructive.
The issues in dispute were numerous
and included a claim of misappropriation of trade secrets. One of the
claimant’s claims
was that the issue in question was beyond the scope of
the arbitration provision. It was held that the clause was sufficiently broad
cover the issue. The clause provided for the arbitration of all disputes which
may arise between the parties, out of or in connection
with the (underlying)
agreement, or for the breach thereof.
The court in
drew a distinction between another
case where a clause was found to be insufficiently broad to encompass the
dispute in question.
The case dealt with a claim of misappropriation of trade
secrets, an issue not dealt with in the contract. In this latter case, the
arbitral clause covered disputes
arising out of
the agreement, but
omitted reference to claims
relating to
an agreement. The court construed
arising out
of as applying only to disputes ‘relating to
the interpretation and performance of the contract itself’, and not to a
collateral issue such as a claim of misappropriation of trade secrets.
If the award deals partly with issues which are properly arbitrable pursuant
to the agreement to arbitrate and partly with those which
are not then, in terms
of the article, the award may be enforced in respect of the first category of
issues, provided (as would normally
be the case) the two categories of finding
can properly be separated.
If a party contends that the matter was not within the terms of the
arbitration because the arbitration clause is no longer valid
or operative (if
ever it was), this would ordinarily be a matter for assessment pursuant to
Article 2(3). This would be resolved
prior to submission to arbitration or,
alternatively, would be raised during arbitration with a view to procuring a
determination
from the arbitral panel that it is without jurisdiction. However,
in the US case of
Henry v Murphy
a party resisted
enforcement of an award – without having raised this issue before or
during arbitration – on the basis
that the arbitrator was barred by a time
clause. The arbitration, by agreement, was heard in Ireland and proceeded
pursuant to Irish
law. The Irish statute of limitations imposed a six-year
limitation on arbitration proceedings. The arbitration took place beyond
time. Enforcement of the award was sought under the New York Convention. The
statute of limitations defence was rejected by
the court of enforcement, on the
basis that the party seeking to invoke it had not raised it before or during
arbitration.
Composition of arbitral authority or arbitral
procedure not in accordance with the agreement or law of country of
arbitration
Article 5(1)(d) provides for non-recognition or enforcement where the
composition of the arbitral authority or the arbitral procedure
accordance with the agreement of the parties or, failing such agreement, was not
in accordance with the law of the country
where the arbitration took place.
In a Hong Kong case, enforcement of an award made in China was resisted on
the basis that the arbitral panel was not composed of arbitrators
on the Beijing
list as specified in the agreement to arbitrate. Instead, arbitrators were drawn
from the Shenzhen list. Enforcement
was permitted in reliance upon the
court’s residual discretion, the party resisting enforcement having
participated in the
arbitration, knowing of the non-conformity with the
agreement and not having complained of this.
It is to be noted that where a complaint is made of a substantive procedural
irregularity amounting to a denial of due process, the
defence provided for in
Article 5(1)(b) is applicable.
If it is contended that the arbitral panel was wrongly constituted because
there was no valid agreement to arbitrate in the first
place, Article 2(1) or
(3) may be invoked.
Award not yet binding on parties or has been set
aside or suspended in country of award
Article 5(1)(e) provides that recognition and enforcement of an award may be
refused where the award: (i) has not yet become binding
on the parties; or (ii)
has been set aside or suspended by a competent authority of the country in
which, or under the law of which,
the award was made.
According to the cases, an award is binding when it is contractually binding
on the parties, pursuant to the terms of their agreement
to arbitrate, the
arbitration process having run its course and the award having been made. It
does not cease to be binding merely
because (in the event of non-compliance by a
burdened party) some further step has to be taken to have it enforced by a
because recourse may still be had to the court by way of proceedings
to resist enforcement. In the words of a US court, the ‘terms
merely refer to a contractual intent that the issues
joined and resolved in the arbitration may not be tried
court … even a
arbitral award is subject
to the defences to enforcement provided for in the New York
Convention’.
In an Italian case, an award rendered in the US was enforced in Italy.
According to the court, the award was binding when it is no
longer open to
attack in arbitral proceedings, according to the law where enforcement is
In the US case of
Fertiliser Corp of India v IDI Management Inc
(Fertiliser case)
an award made in India was sought to be
enforced in the US. It was contended that the award was not yet binding on the
parties because
it had not been reviewed for errors of law by an Indian court.
The award was currently before the Indian courts for ruling on a range
issues. The court held that an award was not precluded from being binding merely
because it is appealable, or even under current
challenge before a court.
Furthermore, Indian law recognised it to be not only binding on the parties when
made, but as having a
res judicata
effect which could be relied upon in
litigation of the same subject matter between the parties. In the court’s
view, an award
was binding if it could be said that recourse could not be had to
another (appellate) arbitral tribunal. The possibility of recourse
does not prevent it from being binding in terms of the article. This is because,
otherwise, an obstructive loser could
delay enforcement by bringing or
threatening to bring proceedings to have the award set aside or
Notwithstanding this conclusion as to the scope of the
first branch in the Article 5(1)(e) defence, the court stayed enforcement
proceedings pending the outcome of the Indian litigation, pursuant to Article 6.
This aspect of the case will be further commented
upon below.
In a Dutch case, likewise, it has been held that an award does not cease to
be binding merely because an action has been initiated
to set it aside. The
award had been made in France. The party resisting enforcement commenced
proceedings in a French court. The
Dutch court granted leave to enforce the
award, having regard to the purpose of the Convention – to enhance the
recognition
and enforcement of awards subject to a minimum number of
conditions.
The second branch of the Article 5(1)(e) defence permits the discretionary
refusal of recognition or enforcement, where the award
has been set aside or
suspended by a competent authority, in the country where recognition and
enforcement is sought. It is to be
distinguished from Article 6, permitting
adjournment of enforcement proceedings where application for the setting aside
or suspension
of an award by this competent authority referred to in Article
The decision of the court in the country where enforcement is sought to
decline enforcement is discretionary, whenever any of the
Article 5 defences are
made out. This is made clear by the preamble to Article 5. In the US case of
Chromalloy Aeroservices v The Arab Republic of Egypt
award had been made in Egypt and enforcement was sought in the US. The arbitral
agreement precluded appeal to an Egyptian court.
Notwithstanding this, the party
against which the award had been made appealed to an Egyptian court, which
suspended it and subsequently
made an order for its nullification. The US court
made an order for the enforcement of the award, in exercise of its discretion to
enforce it, notwithstanding fulfilment of the requirements of the defence
provided for in the second branch of Article 5(1)(e). It
was relevant that the
party resisting enforcement had provided no evidence that corruption, fraud or
undue means was used in procuring
the award, or that the arbitrators exceeded
their powers in any way. It was also relevant that US law presumed that arbitral
were binding. It was further relevant that the US courts had manifested a
pro-enforcement bias in relation to awards made under the
New York Convention.
There ‘are no reported cases in which a court of the United States has
faced a situation, under the Convention,
in which the court of a foreign nation
has nullified an otherwise valid arbitral award’.
Considerations of comity between nations favoured non-enforcement, but the
objectives of the Convention favoured enforcement. It was
relevant that Egypt
had made a ‘solemn promise to abide by the results of the
arbitration’.
For the purpose of Article 5(1)(e), the Convention does not specify or
otherwise limit the grounds upon which the court of the state
of rendition, may
set aside the award, thus potentially triggering an application for
non-recognition or enforcement under the Article.
It is for this reason that the
court from which an order for enforcement is sought will logically need to be
vigilant against attempts
to stymie enforcement of awards which have been set
aside on insubstantial grounds. This approach is reflected in the Chromalloy
case, above.
A US court has held that in an action to set aside an award as contemplated
by Article 5(1)(e), the applicable law controlling the
application and its
determination is that of the state which made the award.
Article 6 may be compared with Article 5(1)(e). Article 6 provides for the
adjourning of enforcement proceedings where an application
has been made to the
court for the setting aside or suspension of an award in the country in which,
or under the law of which, that
award was made. Article 6 is further commented
upon below.
Award not arbitrable under the law of the country of
enforcement
It is provided in Article 5(2)(a) and (b) that the competent authority
(usually, the court) in the country of enforcement may, of
its own motion,
refuse to recognise and enforce an award in defined cases. Refusal is
discretionary.
Pursuant to Article 5(2)(a), this may be done where the subject matter of the
difference is not capable of settlement under the law
of the country of
enforcement.
has been described as meaning
, because ‘any matter can in theory be arbitrated or
compromised’.
The issue was touched upon in the US case of
Parsons & Whitmore
Overseas Co Inc v Société Generale de l’Industrie du Papier
In the court’s opinion, the party resisting
enforcement did not raise a substantial issue of arbitrability. The claim that
the national interest of the US, as the state of enforcement, in some way made
the dispute non-arbitrable was rejected. It was commented
that there ‘is
no special national interest in judicial, rather than arbitral, resolution of
the breach of contract claim underlying
the award in this case’.
The court commented obiter that a US court might be expected to decline
enforcement of an award involving arbitration of an antitrust
claim in view of
domestic arbitration cases. Such cases have determined that this issue is not
arbitrable and must be determined
by the judiciary. On the other hand, ‘it
may well be that the special considerations and policies underlying "a truly
international
… call for a narrower view of
non-arbitrability in the international rather than the domestic
In the later case of
Mitsubishi Motors Corp v
Soler Chrysler-Plymouth Inc
the court held that an
international arbitration could not arbitrate on US antitrust issues, commenting
that ‘decisions as
to antitrust regulation of business are too important
to be lodged in arbitrators chosen from the business community –
particularly
those from a foreign community that has had no experience with or
exposure to our law and values’.
The US interest in judicial
resolution of antitrust issues could not be described as parochial in the sense
petty provincialism
In a Belgian case, enforcement of an award made in Switzerland was refused on
the basis that Belgian law precluded an agreement for
the submission of a
dispute to arbitration before the end of the contract from which it arose, with
the result that the dispute was
not arbitrable.
This might be
thought to reflect an unduly parochial attitude towards application of the
Convention. The parties had, after all,
agreed that any arbitration was to be
conducted in Switzerland pursuant to Swiss law. In favour of the decision, the
underlying contract
was one for the granting of a motor vehicle sales franchise,
wholly or partially within Belgian territory. This was a class of contract
was closely regulated by Belgian law, a feature of which was the vesting of a
right in the concessionaire to invoke the protection
of Belgian law, except
where he has renounced the right by an agreement after the end of the contract
pursuant to which the concession
was granted.
In an American case, enforcement of a foreign arbitral award in a US court
was refused on the basis that the dispute was not arbitrable
and by application
of the act of state doctrine (namely, sovereign immunity). It was not arbitrable
because of the application of
the doctrine of sovereign state immunity. The
party resisting enforcement was a state which had nationalised certain oil
an act which had given rise to the subject of arbitration. In the view
of the court, expropriation of the assets of an alien within
the boundaries of
the sovereign state are considered to be classic acts of state immunity from
judicial scrutiny. If it was so immune,
it would likewise be non-arbitrable, and
the court could not review any arbitral award pertaining to the topic.
Public Policy
Article 5(2)(b) provides that recognition and enforcement of an arbitral
award may be refused if the competent authority in the country
where recognition
and enforcement is sought finds that recognition and enforcement would be
contrary to the public policy of that
The ground is more commonly invoked than most of the grounds, but with
indifferent success. The courts have given the clause a restricted
defeating attempts to treat it as a
defence comprehending
grounds of resistance to enforcement not specifically enumerated in the
preceding clauses in Article 5.
The public policy defence has been described as one which should be
‘construed narrowly’,
so that the enforcement of awards
may be denied on this basis ‘only where enforcement would violate the
forum state’s
most basic notions of morality and justice’.
It was said in an Indian case that the public policy exception was
enlivened only where enforcement would be contrary to: ‘(i)
fundamental
policy of Indian law; or (ii) the interests of India; or (iii) justice or
morality.’ An English judge commented
that the public policy principles
captured in essence ‘principles of morality of general
application’.
A United States authority holds that the
defence applies ‘only where
enforcement
would violate [the forum
state’s] most basic notions of morality and justice’.
In Germany, it has been commented that for the arbitral proceeding to
deviate from domestic rules is not necessarily sufficient to
ground the public
policy defence. What is needed is ‘an infringement of international public
policy’; the arbitral proceedings
must ‘have been affected by a
serious shortcoming touching upon fundamental principles of economic and
constitutional life’.
A Swiss court commented that a
procedural irregularity, in arbitral proceedings, would not ground the public
policy defence. This
would be the case unless it was such a violation of Swiss
law as to amount to ‘a violation of fundamental principles of our
system, which would contrast in an unbearable manner with our feelings of
In an Ontario case, it was commented that the award
must ‘be contrary, not merely to Ontario law, but contrary to the
morality of the community in Ontario’.
It is generally accepted that the mere fact that the recognition or
enforcement of the award (or for that matter, the contract upon
which it is
based) is contrary to the law of the forum state, does not
the public policy exception.
Municipal law is of course infinitely
variable in its details, across the range of states. A technical or even a
substantive illegality
of a parochial kind ought not to render an award
unenforceable as a matter of form, otherwise the enforcement of awards would be
seriously compromised. Thus, the usual approach of the courts has been to look
to international norms in public policy and to minimise
the significance of
inconsistencies with local law.
The Italian Court of Appeal in Florence enforced an award made in the US
under the rules of the American Arbitration Association.
notwithstanding a challenge to enforcement based on the fact that the
arbitrators’ reasons for decision were not stated
in the award. The public
policy defence was not enlivened by the fact that the statement of reasons in an
adjudicator’s decision
was a principle in the Italian constitution.
‘The fact that reasoning constitutes a principle of the Italian
Constitution
is not important because what is fundamental in Italian law of
procedure may not be considered as such by foreign legislative and
authorities.’
In the Indian case of
Renusagar Power Co Ltd (India) v General Electric Co
the Supreme Court of India refused to stay enforcement of
an award on the public policy ground, rejecting claims that the award violated
technical provisions in Indian legislation. The court remarked in any event that
‘contravention of the law alone will not attract
the bar of public policy
and something more than contravention of the law is required’.
Enforcement would be refused, as noted above, if such enforcement would be
contrary to the fundamental policy of the law, or the interests
justice or morality.
In the English Court of Appeal case of
Westacre Investments Ltd v
Jugoimport-SDPR Holding Co Ltd
the enforcement of an award
made in Switzerland in relation to a contract governed by Swiss law was
challenged on the basis that
the contract was unenforceable in England. This was
because one of its terms involved the purchasing of personal influence over
officials. The court held by majority that because the arbitrators
had considered and rejected this bribery claim and there was no
fresh evidence
adduced on the issue, it was inappropriate for the court to go behind the award
and investigate the claim afresh.
Furthermore, there was nothing to
suggest incompetence on the part of the arbitrators, nor was there reason to
suspect collusion
or bad faith in the obtaining of the award.
third member of the court would have investigated the claim afresh.
An English court refused to stay enforcement on the public policy ground. The
court rejected a claim that the public policy of England
was violated where the
two parties were each citizens of countries between which a state of war had
existed from a date after formation
of the contract. The claim was rejected on
the basis that such a change in the political situation would have dissolved the
by operation of a rule of English common law or international
An Australian court held that an alleged arbitral award was not an award
within the meaning of the Convention because it was in the
interlocutory orders rather than a final award. Even if it were an award, public
policy would preclude its enforcement.
This is because the orders comprised in
this award were of a drafted type that would not be made in Queensland,
particularly without
undertakings as to appropriate security, but also because
of double vexation and practical difficulties in interpretation and
enforcement.
The public policy defence was rejected in a Swiss case. It was contended that
Swiss public policy had been violated because one of
the members of the arbitral
tribunal did not sign the award, a requirement imposed neither by Swiss law nor
by the Convention.
In a German decision, the participation of a
legal consultant in the arbitral proceedings, including drafting the award,
not a member of the arbitral panel, did not enliven the defence. This
was so, even if the activity of a consultant in this role would
have required
the express agreement of the parties in a German domestic arbitration (an issue
which had not been settled).
In another German case, it was
insufficient that one of the parties had appointed the arbitrator, rather than
the appointment being
jointly agreed to. The respondent had not shown any
violation of the arbitrator’s duty of neutrality, nor that the arbitrator
had a relationship with the party which appointed him, which would have raised
any concerns.
The public policy defence has also been employed as a catch-all defence, in
order to ground a defence which cannot be comprehended
under the more specific
grounds for refusing recognition and enforcement in Art 5 (which exhaustively
defines the grounds for refusal).
For example, a line of American cases has seen
the public policy defence invoked in situations where it has been argued that
award was made in
manifest disregard
of the law (a defence to
enforcement in the domestic arbitration context impliedly provided for in the
Federal Arbitration Act, specifically
Adjournment of enforcement proceedings pursuant to
Article 6 where application made to have award set aside or suspended
Article 5 provides that if an application for the setting aside or suspension
of the award has been made to a competent authority
(usually, the court),
referred to in Article 5(1)(e), the authority before which the award is sought
to be relied upon may, if it
considers it proper, adjourn the decision on the
enforcement of the award and may also, on the application of the party claiming
enforcement of the award, order the other party to give suitable security.
Article 5(1)(e) provides,
, that enforcement may be refused
where it has been set aside or suspended by a competent authority of the country
in which, or under
the law of which, the award was made. Given the provision of
this ground of refusal, it is logical to provide for the adjournment
enforcement proceedings where application has been made to this competent
authority for the setting aside or suspension of the
Article 6 was invoked in the US case of
Fertiliser Corp of India v IDI
Management Inc
The US sought to enforce an award made in
India. At the time enforcement was sought the losing party had commenced
proceedings before
an Indian court. They challenged the award on the basis that
arbitrators had exceeded their jurisdiction by awarding consequential
despite an express clause in the contract to the contrary. The court noted that
it had an unfettered grant of discretion
under Article 6. The court noted that
the objectives of the Convention were to liberalise enforcement procedures,
limit defences
and place the burden of proof upon the party opposing
enforcement. By implication, these considerations disposed the court towards
applying a stringent standard to adjourning the proceedings. However, the court
granted the adjournment sought ‘in order to
avoid the possibility of an
inconsistent result’.
Accordingly, the matter would be
adjourned until the Indian court had rendered its decision.
The decision may be contrasted with the Dutch case of
SPP(Middle East)
Ltd(Hong Kong) v The Arab Republic of Egypt
and cases dealing
with Article 5(1)(e), where a court enforced an award notwithstanding that the
award had been set aside by a court
in the place where the award was made (see
above). Consideration of the purposes of the Convention would not favour
adjourning proceedings.
On the other hand, the presence of Article 6 in the
Convention cannot be ignored. The Convention clearly envisages that adjournment
may be appropriate in certain circumstances. The substantive merits of the case
made (at least on a prima facie view) by the party
challenging the award in the
place of rendition will logically inform the exercise of the discretion under
Article 6. Furthermore,
a refusal to adjourn proceedings might not (all things
being equal) save time or expense. If proceedings had not been adjourned in
Fertiliser case
, presumably, the US court would had to have heard
arguments directed towards establishing the same defence under Article 5, that
was to be heard by the Indian court.
Further references
• Binder, P,
International Commercial Arbitration in UNCITRAL Model
(London: Sweet & Maxwell, 2000) chapter 8.
International Commercial Arbitration: American Principles and
Practice in
Global Context
(New York: Transnational Publishers Inc, 1997).
International Trade Law
(Sydney: LBC, 1999) chapter 8.2.
Redfern, A and Hunter, M,
Law and Practice of International Commercial
Arbitration
(3rd edn, London: Sweet and Maxwell, 1999) chapter 10.
Sarcevic, P, (ed),
Essays on International Commercial Arbitration
(London: Graham & Trotman, 1989) chapter 9.
• Schaffer, R, Earle, B and Agusti, F,
International Business Law
and its Environment
(Cincinnati, Ohio: West Educational Publishing Co, 1999)
Van den Berg, A,
The New York Arbitration Convention of 1958: Towards a
Uniform Judicial Interpretation
(Netherlands: Kluwer, 1981).
Aksen, G, ‘American arbitration accession arrives in the age of
Aquarius: United States implements United Nations Convention
on the Recognition
and Enforcement of Foreign Arbitral Awards’
Southwestern
University Law Review
Chukwumerije, O, ‘Enforcement of foreign awards in Australia: the
implications of Resort Condominiums’
Australian Dispute
Resolution Journal
Garnett, R, ‘The current status of international arbitration
agreements in Australia’ (1999) 15
Journal of Contract Law
100 10 YB Com Arb 487, 489–90 (District Court of
Amsterdam, 1985).
Gaillard, G, ‘Enforcement of a nullified foreign award’
New York Law Journal
Kolkey, D, ‘Attacking arbitral awards: Rights of appeal and review in
international arbitrations’
International Lawyer
Paulsson, J, ‘Rediscovering the New York Convention: further
reflections on Chromalloy’ (1997) 1
Mealey’s International
Arbitration
Taherzadeh, M, ‘International arbitration and enforcement in US
federal courts’ (2000) 22
Houston Journal of International Law
Volz, J and Haydock, R, ‘Foreign arbitral awards: Enforcing the award
against the recalcitrant loser’
William Mitchell Law Review
Bernini, G, ‘The enforcement of foreign arbitral awards by national
judiciaries: a trial of the New York Convention’s
workability’ in Schultsz, J and Van den Berg, A (eds),
Arbitration: Essays on International Arbitration
(Netherlands: Kluwer, 1982)
Kaplan, N, ‘A case by case examination of whether national courts
apply different standards when assisting arbitral proceedings
and enforcing
awards in international cases as contrasting with domestic disputes. Is there a
worldwide trend towards supporting
an international arbitration culture?’
in Van den Berg, A (ed),
International Dispute Resolution: Towards an
International Arbitration Culture
(The Hague: Kluwer Law International,
Ratnapala, S and Haller, S, ‘International Commercial
Arbitration’ in Moens, G and Gillies, P (eds),
International Trade and
Business: Law, Policy and Ethics
(London: Cavendish, 1998) chapter 11.
Schultsz, J, ‘Recognition and enforcement of foreign arbitral awards
without a convention being applicable’ in Schultsz
J and Van den Berg, A
The Art of Arbitration: Essays on International Arbitration
(Netherlands: Kluwer, 1982) 295.
* MA, LLM Syd, PhD NSW, Law Division, Macquarie University.
United Nations Commission on International Trade Law.
See, eg, in Australia the
International Arbitration Act 1974
(Cth) provides
that the Convention governs the enforcement of foreign arbitral awards, but the
Model Law applies to local awards
made in respect of international disputes,
except where the parties have expressly opted out of the Model Law.
EAST Inc v M/V ALAIA
[1989] USCA5 1215
876 F 2d 1168
(5th Cir, 1989).
Food Corp of India v Mardestine Compania Naviera
YB Com Arb 270;
Sumitomo Corp v Parakopi Compania Maritima, SA
(SDNY, 1979).
Jaranilla v Megasea Maritime Ltd
171 F Supp 2d 644
, 646 (La, 2001).
710 F 2d 928 (2nd Cir, 1983). Consideration of the US statute implementing
the Convention fortified this conclusion 933-34.
Jones v Sea Tow Services Freeport New York Inc
[1994] USCA2 820
30 F 3d 360
Cir, 1994).
Mitsubishi Motors Corp v Soler Chrysler-Plymouth
[1983] USCA1 399
723 F 2d 155
(1st Cir, 1983).
[1989] USCA1 507
886 F 2d 469
(1st Cir, 1989).
Filanto SpA v Chilewich International Corp
(SDNY, 1992), holding that it is for the court to decide whether the
arbitral agreement exists, and if it does, it is for the arbitrator
issues regarding the existence of the underlying contract.
, 612 (1987).
, 609, citing
Lummus Co v Commonwealth Oil Refining Co
, 280 F 2d 915,924 (1st Cir), cert denied,
(1960); see also
Filanto SpA v Chilewich International Corp
789 F Supp 1229
(SDNY, 1992).
1996 WL 637843 (ND Cal).
[1991] FCA 637
[1991] 33 FCR 227.
, 234–37, applying
Heyman v Darwins Ltd
Reports, House of Lords, Appeal Cases 356.
QH Tours Ltd
Twi Lite International Inc v Anam Pacific Corp
, 1996 WL 637843 (ND
Cal), where it was claimed that the contract containing the arbitral clause was
procured by fraud;
Oriental Commercial and Shipping Co Ltd v Rosseel
609 F Supp 75
(SDNY, 1985).
Ibid, Twi Lite International Inc
Ledee v Ceramiche Ragno
[1982] USCA1 283
684 F 2d 184
,187 (1st Cir, 1982);
Mitsubishi Motors Corp v Soler Chrysler-Plymouth
[1983] USCA1 399
723 F 2d 155
Cir, 1983);
Oriental Commercial and Shipping Co Ltd v Rosseel NV
(SDNY, 1985).
Chloe Z Fishing Co Inc v Odyssey Re (London) Ltd,
Supp 2d 1236
(SD Cal, 2000), where the court held that Article 2(2) prescribes a
mandatory, not a minimum requirement.
Compagnie de Navigation et Transports SA v MSC (Mediterranean
Shipping Co),
21 YB Com Arb 690, 697 (Switzerland, 1996), minimising the
need for a signature having regard to modern forms of communication.
Bergesen v Joseph Muller Corp, 710 F 2d 928, 934 (2nd Cir, 1983).
Vicere Livio v Prodexport (Italy v Romania), 7 YB Com Arb 345 (1981).
Sumitomo Corp v Parakopi Compania Maritima SA,
477 F Supp 737
1979); Seven Seas Shipping (UK) Ltd v Tondo Limitada, 99 Civ 1164 (DLC, 1999).
The Bremen v Zapata Off-Shore Co
(1972), cited in
Société Nationale Algerienne pour la Recherche, la Production, le
Transport, la Transformation et la Commercialisation des
Hydrocarbures v
Distrigas Corp
, 612 (D Mass, 1987).
China Nanhai Oil Joint Service Corp v Gee Tai Holdings Co
, 20 YB Com Arb 671 (1995), 678–79 (objection to an award because
the arbitrators were drawn from list A and not list B; defence
established but
rejected in exercise of the court's discretion). See also
Aeroservices v The Arab Republic of Egypt
939 F Supp 907
, 909 (DDC, 1996).
China Nanhai Oil Joint Service Corp
Karaha Bodas Co LCC v Perusahaan Pertambangan Minyak Dan Gas Bumi
190 F Supp 2d 936
, 943 (SD Texas 2001);
Parsons & Whittemore
Overseas Co Inc v Société Generale de l'Industrie du Papier
[1974] USCA2 836
508 F 2d 969
,973 (2nd Cir, 1974);
Yusuf Ahmed Alghanim &
Sons WLL v TOYS 'R' US Inc
[1997] USCA2 518
126 F 3d 15
(2nd Cir, 1997).
Resort Condominiums International Inc v Bowell
(1993) 118 ALR 655
675–78. The judge, Lee J, held that the alleged award was not an arbitral
award within the scope of the Convention, being
in the nature of interlocutory
orders and not a final award. Even if it was an award, he considered that he had
a residual discretion
to refuse recognition independently of the Convention
defences which were provided for in the implementing statute. This was because
this statute, the
International Arbitration Act 1974
that the court ‘may, at the request of the party against whom it is
invoked, refuse to enforce the award if that
party proves that’ [the
defences in Article 5(1)(a) are listed in the remainder of
Lee J saw it
to be significant that the term only was not used in this preamble to
contrast to Article 5(1)(a), the preamble to which states that recognition and
enforcement may be refused ‘only if the
party’ [proves one of the
defences enumerated below]; see the comment by Chukwumerije, O,
‘Enforcement of foreign awards
in Australia: the implications of Resort
Condominiums’ (1994) 5 Aust Dispute Resolution Journal 237.
Karaha Bodas Co LCC v Perusahaan Pertambangan Minyak Dan Gas Bumi
190 F Supp 2d 936
, 943 (SD Texas, 2001).
Karaha Bodas Co LCC v Perusahaan Pertambangan Minyak Dan Gas
Bumi Negara
190 F Supp 2d 936
, 943 (SD Texas, 2001) that the party
resisting enforcement bears the burden of proof has been confirmed by the courts
many times.
Libyan American Oil Co v Socialist People's Libyan Arab Jamahirya
482 F Supp 1175
(Colombia, 1980).
Libyan American Oil Co v Socialist People's Libyan Arab
482 F Supp 1175
, 1178 (Colombia 1980), citing
International SA v Federal Republic of Nigeria
465 F Supp 824
(DDC, 1978).
See also the discussion of the issue in the decision of an arbitration panel in
Southern Pacific Properties (Middle East) Ltd (Hong Kong) v Arab Republic of
9 YB Com Arb 111 (1983). The panel rejected Egypt’s claim of
sovereign immunity, endorsing the view that it would be anomalous
to conclude
that a state, because of its supreme position and qualities, should be unable to
give a binding promise (119).
1996 WL 637843 (ND Cal).
Citing Prima Paint Corp v Flood & Conklin Manufacturing Co
[1967] USSC 172
, 404 (1967).
Bobbie Brooks Inc v Lanificio Walter Banci SaS (US v Italy)
Com Arb 289, 290-91 (Court of Appeal, Florence, 1979).
Fougerolle SA (France) v Ministry of Defence of the Syrian Arab
15 YB Com Arb 515
Iran Aircraft Industries v AVCO Corp
[1992] USCA2 1072
980 F 2d 141
, 145 (2nd Cir,
Karaha Bodas Co LLC v Perusahaan Pertambangan Minyak Dan Gas Bumi
190 F Supp 2d 936
, 949 (SD Texas, 2001), citing
Compagnie des
Bauxites de Guinée v Hammermills Inc
, 1992 WL 122712, 5 (DDC) (PM).
697 F Supp 1248
(EDNY, 1988).
Bobbie Brooks Inc v Lanificio Walter Banci SaS (US v Italy)
Com Arb 289, 290–91 (Court of
Appeal, Florence, 1979).
745 F Supp 172
(SDNY, 1990).
International Standard Electric Corp v Bridas Sociedad Anonima
Petrolera Industrial y Comercial
F Supp 172, 180 (SDNY, 1990).
Iran Aircraft Industries v AVCO Corp
[1992] USCA2 1072
980 F 2d 141
(2nd Cir, 1992), citing
Mathews v Eldrige
[1976] USSC 20
, 333 (S Ct, 1976);
Armstrong v Manzo
[1965] USSC 81
, 552 (1965).
190 F Supp 2d 936
(SD Texas, 2001).
Karaha Bodas Co LLC v Perusahaan Pertambangan Minyak Dan Gas Bumi
, 190 F Supp 2d
, 951 (SD Texas, 2001), fn 15. 50
, 952. 51 1996 WL 637843 (ND
Twi Lite International Inc v Anam Pacific Corp,
1996 WL 637843 (ND
Tracer Research Corp v National Environmental Services Co
1292 (9th Cir, 1994).
Lexis 227 (US Dist, 2002).
Compare, a party resisting enforcement of an award in the English case of
Ford & Co Ltd
Compagnie Furness (France)
(1922) 12 LlL Rep
281, on the same ground, that is, that the arbitration was time barred, was
successful. This party had raised the
issue prior to arbitration and had
declined to participate in it. The case predated the New York Convention, but
the outcome would
logically be the same had it applied to enforcement.
China Nanhai Oil Joint Service Corp v Gee Tai Holdings Co Ltd,
YB Com Arb 671, 679 (1995).
Iran Aircraft Industries v AVCO Corp
[1992] USCA2 1072
980 F 2d 141
, 145 (2nd Cir,
1992), citing
I/S Stavborg v National Metal Converters Inc
[1974] USCA2 418
500 F 2d 424
427 (2nd Cir, 1974).
Bobbie Brooks Inc v Lanificio Walter Banci SaS (US v Italy),
Com Arb 289, 291 (Court of Appeal, Florence, 1978).
517 F Supp 948
(SD Ohio, 1981).
Fertiliser Corp of India v IDI Management Inc
517 F Supp 948
(SD Ohio, 1981), noting the comments of Professor Gerald Aksen, General Counsel
of the American Arbitration Association.
Southern Pacific Properties (Middle East) Ltd (Hong Kong) v The Arab
Republic of Egypt,
10 YB Com Arb 487, 489–90 (District Court of
Amsterdam, 1985).
939 F Supp 907
(DDC, 1996).
, 912ff. In
Hilmarton Ltd v Omnium de Traitement et de
Valorisation (OTV) Revue de l'Arbitrage
1994 (see extracts in 20 YB Com Arb
663 (1995)), an award which had been set aside in Switzerland was enforced by a
French court.
Yusuf Ahmed Alghanim & Sons WLL v TOYS 'R' US Inc
[1997] USCA2 518
126 F 3d 15
(2nd Cir, 1997). See also
International Standard Electric Corp v Bridas
Sociedad Anonima Petrolera, Industrial y Comercial
F Supp 172, 178 (SDNY, 1990).
Mitsubishi Motors Corp v Soler Chrysler-Plymouth Inc
[1983] USCA1 399
723 F 2d 155
(1st Cir, 1983).
[1974] USCA2 836
508 F 2d 969
(2nd Cir, 1974).
Citing Scherk v Alberto-Culver Co,
42 USLW 4911
, 4914 (1974).
Parsons & Whittemore Overseas Co Inc v Société Generale de
l'Industrie du Papier (RAKTA)
[1974] USCA2 836
508 F2d 969
, 974 (2nd Cir, 1974).
[1983] USCA1 399
723 F 2d 155
(1st Cir, 1983).
Mitsubishi Motors Corp v Soler Chrysler-Plymouth Inc
[1983] USCA1 399
723 F 2d 155
162 (1st Cir, 1983).
Audi-NSU Auto Union AG (FR Germ) v SA Adelin Petit & Cie (Belgium),
5 YB Com Arb 257
(Court of Appeal of Liege, 1979).
Libyan American Oil Co v Socialist People's Libyan Arab Jamahirya
482 F Supp 1175
, 1178–79 (Colombia, 1980).
Parsons & Whittemore Overseas Co Inc v Société Generale
de L'Industrie Du Papier (RAKTA)
[1974] USCA2 836
508 F.2d 969
, 974 (2nd Cir, 1974),
Joseph Smith J, citing
Loucks v Standard Oil Co
(1918). See also
Mitsubishi Motors Corp v Soler Chrysler-Plymouth
[1983] USCA1 399
, 164 (1st Cir, 1983);
Renusagar Power Co Ltd v General Electric Co
(India v US),
20 YB Com Arb 681, 701 (Supreme Court of India, 1995);
Henry v Murphy
Lexis 227 (US Dist, 2002), 11 (confirming the judicial
bias in favour of narrow construction).
Parsons & Whittemore Overseas Co Inc v Société Generale
de L'Industrie Du Papier (RAKTA)
[1974] USCA2 836
508 F 2d 969
(2nd Cir, 1974).
Renusagar Power Co Ltd v General Electric Co (India v US),
Com Arb 681, 702 (Supreme Court of India, 1995).
Lemenda Trading Co Ltd v African Middle East Petroleum Co Ltd
[1988] QB 448
Phillips J, cited in
Westacre Investments
Inc v Jugoimport-SDPR Holding Co Ltd
[1999] 3 All ER 864
Waterside Ocean Navigation Co v International Navigation Ltd
[1984] USCA2 620
, 152 (2nd Cir, 1984);
Europcar Italia SpA v Maiellano Tours Inc
[1998] USCA2 379
156 F 3d 310
, 315 (2nd Cir, 1998);
Henry v Murphy
, Lexis 227 (US Dist
Seller (Nationality not indicated) v Buyer (Nationality not indicated),
17 YB Com Arb 503, 505 (Federal Supreme Court, Germany, 1992). See also
German (FR) Charterer v Romanian Shipowner,
12 YB Com Arb 489, 490
(Federal Supreme Court, Germany, 1987).
KS AG v CC SA,
20 YB Com Arb 762, 763–64 (Execution and
Bankruptcy Chamber, Canton Tessin, Switzerland, 1995).
Arcata Graphics Buffalo Ltd v The Movie (Magazine) Corp
, Lexis 530
(Ont Sup CJ, 1993).
Bobbie Brooks Inc v Lanificio Walter Banci SaS (US v Italy),
Com Arb 289, 292 (Court of Appeal, Florence, 1978);
Renusagar Power Co Ltd v
General Electric Co (India v US),
20 YB Com Arb 681, 701 (Supreme Court of
India, 1995);
Westacre Investments Inc v Jugoimport-SDPR Holding Co Ltd
[1999] 3 All ER 864
Seller (Nationality not
indicated) v Buyer (Nationality not indicated),
17 YB Com Arb 503, 505
(Federal Supreme Court, Germany, 1992);
KS AG v CC SA,
20 YB Com Arb 762
(Execution and Bankruptcy Chamber, Canton Tessin, Switzerland, 1995).
Bobbie Brooks Inc
20 YBCom Arb 681, 701 (1995).
Renusagar Power Co Ltd (India) v General Electric Co (US)
Com Arb 681, 701 (1995).
[1999] 3 All ER 864.
Westacre Investments Ltd v Jugoimport-SDPR Holding Co Ltd
r Mantell and Hirst LJJ.
Dalmia Dairy Industries Ltd v National Bank of Pakistan
Lloyd’s Rep 223.
Resort Condominiums International Inc v Bolwell
(1993) 111 ALR 655
KS AG v CC SA,
20 YB Com Arb 762, 763–64 (Execution and
Bankruptcy Chamber, Canton
Tessin, Switzerland, 1995).
Seller (Nationality not indicated) v Buyer (Nationality not indicated),
17 YB Com Arb 503, 505 (Federal Supreme Court, Germany, 1992).
German (FR) Charterer v Romanian Shipowner,
12 YB Com Arb 489, 491
(Federal Supreme Court, Germany, 1987).
Parsons & Whittemore Overseas Co Inc v Société
Generale de L'Industrie Du Papier (RAKTA)
[1974] USCA2 836
508 F 2d 969
, 977 (2nd Cir,
1974), citing a
Wilko v Swan
[1953] USSC 112
1953). Its invocation in the
case was unproductive. See also
Yusuf Ahmed Alghanim & Sons, WLL v TOYS 'R' US Inc (HK)
[1997] USCA2 518
126 F 3d 15
(2nd Cir, 1997), where the manifest disregard of the law defence was
unsuccessfully invoked in a case governed by the New York Convention.
517 F Supp 948
(SD Ohio, 1981).
Fertiliser Corp of India v IDI Management Inc
517 F Supp 948
(SD Ohio, 1981).
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (197 KB)
PDF format (161 KB)
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter