URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/journals/UNSWLawJlF/2019/5.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 15:46:05
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Head, Michael --- "Another Expansion Of Military Call Out Powers In Australia: Some Critical Legal, Constitutional And Political Questions" [2019] UNSWLawJlF 5; (2019) UNSW Law Journal Forum No 5
I INTRODUCTION: CAUSES FOR CONCERN
II WIDE POWERS
III BEYOND TERRORISM
IV EXPANDED CALL OUT POWERS IN MORE DETAIL
A Greater ADF Powers Once Called Out
B Weakened Accountability
C Underlying Legal, Constitutional and Political Questions
ANOTHER EXPANSION OF MILITARY CALL OUT POWERS IN AUSTRALIA:
SOME CRITICAL LEGAL, CONSTITUTIONAL AND POLITICAL QUESTIONS
MICHAEL HEAD
I INTRODUCTION: CAUSES FOR CONCERN
Since the turn of the century, extensive statutory provisions have been
introduced, for the first time, specifically empowering Australian
ministers, or if ‘pre-authorised’, the Chief of the Defence Force
(‘CDF’), to call out the Australian
Defence Force
(‘ADF’) to deal with either possible ‘domestic violence’
– including a perceived threat
to ‘Commonwealth interests’
– or a likely danger to ‘declared
infrastructure’.
None of these terms are defined in the legislation, nor are other key
phrases, effectively handing vague and potentially far-reaching
governments and military commanders. Once deployed, military personnel can
exercise extraordinary powers over civilians,
overturning basic legal and
democratic rights.
In late 2018, for the third time since
and again with little public
debate or scrutiny, Australia’s Parliament gave several government
ministers and/or the CDF new
or extended powers to mobilise the armed forces,
potentially to put down civil
As in 2000 and 2006, the Labor Party joined a Liberal-National Coalition
Government in passing the legislation, with only minor amendments.
The already
broad call out powers inserted into the
Defence Act 1903
Defence Act
’) in 2000, and significantly expanded in 2006,
were widened again by the
Defence Amendment (Call Out of the Australian
Defence Force) Act 2018
Amendment Act
Like the measures of 2000 and 2006, the 2018 legislation was depicted in
Parliament and the media largely as a means of protecting
the population against
terrorist attacks.
The measures
were said to be a response to a 2014 hostage-taking incident at a Sydney
café, officially described as a ‘terrorist
act’, and the
recommendations of a subsequent Coroner’s
Yet the legislation allows
the Prime Minister or other ‘authorising’ ministers to call out the
military, or pre-authorise
deployment, on a much broader basis than combating
terrorist-related activities.
Moreover, Part IIIAAA of the
Defence Act
, which contains the call out
provisions, states that these powers are in addition to any other legal powers
to deploy the armed forces
domestically. Little defined powers are said to
exist, derived either from the ancient prerogatives of the British Monarchy, the
common law rights of citizens, a ‘nationhood’ Executive power
arguably implicit in the 1901
Constitution
, the powers of the
Governor-General under the
Constitution
, or even martial
Previous language to this
effect, first introduced in 2000, is retained in
section 51ZD
which states: [t]his Part
does not affect any utilisation of the Defence Force that would be permitted or
required, or any powers
that the Defence Force would have, if this Part were
disregarded.
The latest expansion of military call out powers came on top of numerous
suites of ‘counter-terrorism’ and other legislation
to increase the
powers of the police and intelligence agencies since
So, in addition to boosting
the legal powers and capacities of the civilian security agencies to
unprecedented peacetime levels,
successive governments have insisted on the
necessity to be able to order the domestic deployment of the military
The amended
Defence Act
further erodes a centuries-old principle
– reinforced by the abolition of the absolute Monarchy in Britain –
those in power from unleashing the military against the
The indefinite ‘war
on terrorism’, first proclaimed by the United States (‘US’)
government and its allies
in 2001, has again provided the pretext for measures
previously regarded as a threat to fundamental civil
While the latest legislation, like the 2000 and 2006 amendments, was
justified in Parliament and the media as a means of combating
statements by
government representatives pointed to the fact that the wording of the
provisions permits the use of the armed forces
for other purposes.
When the Defence Amendment (Call Out of the Australian Defence Force) Bill
2018 (‘the Bill’) was first tabled in June
2018, Attorney-General
Christian Porter told journalists the military could be used to restore order in
case of ‘widespread
That statement
was not subsequently explained. Nor was it retracted.
Former Special Air Service (‘SAS’) officer Andrew Hastie,
Chairman of the Parliamentary Joint Intelligence and Security
Committee, told
the House of Representatives in November 2018 he was ‘very pleased’
that the Bill would ‘unlock’
the capabilities of the country’s
two Special Forces units – the SAS Regiment in Perth and the
Commando Regiment in Sydney. He stated:
They benchmark against Five Eyes special operations and law enforcement
units, so they have world’s best practice at their fingertips.
have significant combat experience acquired through ADF operations in
Afghanistan over the past decade or so ... They are
surgical in the application
of lethal force. Culturally – this is a key point between our police and
military – they’re
ruthlessly mission focused, particularly when it
comes to resolving these sorts of
situations.
While Hastie couched his remarks in terms of countering terrorism-related
incidents, his references to Afghanistan, the US-led ‘Five
operations and ‘surgical’ use of lethal force are notable.
Australia’s Special Forces have been under
investigation, accused of war
crimes against civilians during the ongoing war in
Afghanistan.
The Five Eyes
network – the US, United Kingdom (‘UK’), Canada, Australia and
New Zealand – conducts global
mass surveillance, particularly targeting
people deemed a threat to any of the five governments
As detailed below, the amended
Defence Act
expands the
military’s powers, including to kill people, beyond situations where
commanders claim it is necessary to protect
a life. Lethal force can be used to
protect ‘declared infrastructure’ or end ‘threats to ...
public health or public
In addition,
military personnel have been further protected from legal liability by adding a
new defence of acting in ‘good
Under the new provisions, government ministers can issue call out orders if
they consider that potential ‘domestic violence’
could pose a
‘threat’ to ‘Commonwealth interests’, even if the
relevant state or territory government does
not request the call out, or even
disagrees or objects.
personnel will have great powers, including to use lethal force, detain
civilians, issue directives, search people and premises,
question people and
seize documents.
These features
of the legislation raise constitutional and legal issues, as well as those of
civil rights.
It will be suggested in this article that these provisions
could facilitate the use of military force to suppress social unrest.
II WIDE POWERS
It is incontrovertible that the legislation is not confined to dealing with
terrorism. In fact, the word terrorism does not appear
Part IIIAAA
Defence Act
. Rather, the government can order the military to many
undefined term.
Moreover, in ‘specified circumstances’ the ministers can
authorise a ‘contingent call out’, handing the call
out powers to
Supported by the Labor
Party opposition, the Government refused to amend the Bill to define
‘specified circumstances’.
Instead, in response to two Parliamentary
it changed the Bill’s Explanatory Memorandum to declare: ‘[w]hat
constitutes specified circumstances will depend on the
situation in
Such a response
undercuts any claim that Parliamentary scrutiny narrowed the scope of the
legislation.
The Government also rejected calls made in Parliament and Committee Inquiry
submissions to define ‘domestic violence’.
The Explanatory
Memorandum was revised to state: ‘[p]eaceful protests, industrial action
or civil disobedience would not fall
within the definition of “domestic
violence”’.
section 39(3)(b) of the amended
Defence Act
states that this caveat does
not apply if there is a ‘reasonable likelihood of: (ii) serious damage to
property’. The
Defence Act
provides no definition of ‘serious
damage’. The likelihood of allegedly ‘serious’ danger to
property could
be cited to set troops against strikers, demonstrators or
participants in civil disobedience, without any objective measure of
seriousness.
‘Domestic violence’ is an undefined term embedded in
section 119
Constitution
. Derived from the
United States
Constitution
it refers to serious civil unrest that endangers the existing order, but its
extent remains unclear.
Previously, because the
Constitution
left police powers in the hands
of the Australian states, the ADF could be called out only if a state or
territory was ‘not,
or is unlikely to be, able to protect’ itself or
Commonwealth interests ‘against the domestic
That language retained a semblance of consistency with
section 119
Constitution
, which states: ‘[t]he Commonwealth shall protect every
State against invasion and, on the application of the Executive Government
the States, against domestic violence’. Nevertheless, constitutional doubt
exists whether such a military mobilisation could
proceed if a state government
This constitutional limit has been further eviscerated by the 2018
amendments. The Prime Minister or two ‘authorising ministers’
– now including the Home Affairs Minister – have the power to
mobilise the ADF if they decide it ‘would be likely
to enhance’ the
state or territory’s ability to protect itself or Commonwealth
This revised
threshold means it is no longer necessary for the government to assert that a
state or territory is, or could be, unable
to provide the required protection.
Furthermore, in the cases of ‘Commonwealth interests’ and
‘declared infrastructure’ a call out can override
territory governments and police forces.
Section 37(7)
Defence Act
states that an authorising minister must notify the government of an affected
state or territory ‘as soon as reasonably practicable’
authorising a ‘Commonwealth interests’ order, but failure to do so
‘does not affect the validity’ of
section 38(2)
provides that a ‘Commonwealth interests
order’ can be made whether or not the relevant state or territory requests
order. In that event, an authorising minister must consult that government
before authorising the order, but that consultation cannot
prevent or override
the order. In addition,
section 38(3)
states that no such consultation is
required for a call out order if ‘the authorising ministers are satisfied
that, for reasons
of urgency, it is impracticable to comply with’
Nor is an authorising minister required to consult in relation to an
expedited call out order under
The same powers apply to
urgent or expedited orders to protect ‘declared
infrastructure’.
These provisions provide great leeway to pre-empt or defy state and territory
objections. In effect, the state and territory governments
have no say in the
matter. The Explanatory Memorandum asserted: [i]t is the Commonwealth’s
prerogative to make orders for the
protection of its own interests, and it does
not need a request from a state or territory to make or vary such an
Expanded powers have been created for ministers to order a ‘contingent
call out’ that pre-authorises the CDF to deploy
It now extends to cover
Commonwealth and state and territory
Although no call out orders have been issued since 2000, ‘contingency
callouts’ have been ordered for numbers of political
and sporting events.
In a Senate Committee submission, the Attorney-General’s Department
stated: [s]uch orders have been regularly
made as part of security measures to
protect major Commonwealth events (for example, the G20, Commonwealth Games, and
the ASEAN summit)
from circumstances involving air
Arguably, these operations have functioned as dress rehearsals for military
mobilisations, designed also to accustom the population
to ADF operations, such
as air force fly overs and troop deployments, in major
III BEYOND TERRORISM
In 2000 and 2006, the call out legislation was presented to Parliament as
essential to deal with potential threats to major sporting
events – the
2000 Sydney Olympics and the 2006 Melbourne Commonwealth Games respectively
– even though no specific terrorist
dangers were cited, no plots were ever
reported, and no attacks
In 2018 the main
explanation provided by both the Government and the Labor Party was that
military resources should be available
to respond to a terrorist attack like
that which allegedly occurred in a December 2014 Sydney Lindt Café
Then Prime Minister Malcolm Turnbull first foreshadowed the 2018 Bill in
mid-2017, citing a Coroner’s Report on the hostage-taking
event, conducted
by lone gunman Man Haron Monis.
The Government and the media labelled the siege a terrorist emergency and
claimed it demonstrated the need for the Special Forces
regiments to intervene
with lethal force. Great doubts, however, exist about Monis’ actions and
motivations. He was a mentally
disturbed individual who had been in close
Great doubts also
surround the entire political and geo-strategic agenda of the US-led ‘war
on terror’, which has not
only laid waste to societies throughout the
Middle East and produced the worst refugee crisis since World War II, but also
a breeding ground for
More broadly, the expansion of military call out powers in Australia is part
of an international trend. Since the turn of the century,
greater powers to
deploy the armed forces domestically, and for purposes beyond terrorism, have
been adopted in comparable countries
with an English-derived legal system,
including the US, UK and Canada, and other key countries like Germany, Italy and
Moreover, large
contingents of troops have been mobilised in some countries, such as the US, UK,
France, Belgium and Italy, on various
pretexts, from averting terrorist attacks
(UK, France, Belgium) to dealing with street crime (Italy) and preventing an
of refugees (the
The international character of these phenomena itself points to underlying
economic and political factors, which this article suggests
are related to
growing social inequality, rising domestic class tensions and worsening global
economic and military conflicts.
Notably, this process has been accompanied also by expansions of military
spending, reassertions of executive powers to launch military
conflicts without
Parliamentary approval, and preparations for war between the major
One expression of that
trend was the 2018 US
National Defense Strategy, which stated:
‘[i]nter-state strategic competition, not terrorism, is now the primary
US national
In particular,
the document named China and Russia as such
‘competitors’.
This article assesses the ‘peacetime’ application of the call out
provisions. Any major war involving Australia, however,
would have immense
internal implications for civil rights, not least because the domestic powers of
the military, as well as the
police and intelligence services, would further
expand, as happened in World War I and
IV EXPANDED CALL OUT POWERS IN MORE DETAIL
Division 2 of Part IIIAAA of the
Defence Act
now sets out four types
of call out orders:
call out to protect Commonwealth interests;
contingent call out to protect Commonwealth
call out to protect states and territories; and
contingent call out to protect states and territories.
Divisions provide for expedited call out orders, specified area declarations and
infrastructure declarations.
These provisions, as in
section 33(2)
, increase the power to deploy the ADF
to respond to ‘domestic violence’ that is occurring across multiple
state and territory
Section 34(1)(d)
extends contingent call out
powers to be available in relation to land and maritime threats, in addition to
aviation threats.
Before the 2018 amendments,
Part IIIAAA
already contained sweeping powers to
call out the ADF and conferred great powers on ADF personnel once
According to the 2018
Bill’s Explanatory Memorandum, the amendments would ‘streamline the
legal procedures for call out
of the ADF’ and ‘enhance the ability
of the ADF to protect states, self-governing territories, and Commonwealth
onshore and offshore, against domestic violence, including
terrorism’.
As stated in an Addendum to the Explanatory Memorandum – tabled to
respond to questions raised in two Parliamentary Committee
– crucial terms
remain undefined. Paragraph 163A, inserted into the Explanatory Memorandum,
The term ‘Commonwealth interests’ is not defined in the Bill. For
the purposes of Part IIIAAA, ‘Commonwealth interests’
would include
the protection of: Commonwealth property or facilities; Commonwealth public
officials; visiting foreign dignitaries
or heads of state; and, major national
events, including the Commonwealth Games or
These words, in addition to being legally non-binding, are vague. What is
‘Commonwealth property’? What is a ‘major
Likewise, paragraph 165A stated: [t]he term ‘domestic violence’
is not defined in the Bill but refers to conduct that
is marked by great
physical force and would include a terrorist attack, hostage situation, and
widespread or significant
What is ‘great physical force’? What is ‘significant
Paragraph 182A said the lower threshold regarding state or territory capacity
‘is not intended to impermissibly expand the circumstances
in which the
ADF might be called out, or result in the ADF being called out in response to
minor incidents that police routinely
and appropriately deal
However, it
provided no assurance against this or wider use of the ADF. Instead, it asserted
that the authorising ministers would
consider the ‘same factors’ as
under the previous threshold. If that were true, the amendment would serve no
Paragraph 182A insisted that the new threshold in sections 33 to 36
recognised that ‘calling out the ADF to respond to an incident
significant and exceptional act, and ensures that it is not to be done in
relation to incidents that are within the ordinary
capability of
legislation does not specify that. Rather,
section 35(2)
Defence Act
states that the ADF can be deployed if that ‘would be likely to
enhance the ability of the state or territory to protect the
state or territory
against the domestic violence’.
Similarly, the
Defence Act
does not define the ‘specified
circumstances’ in the Act to issue a contingent call out order. Paragraph
205A stated:
‘[t]here are a range of specified circumstances that could
give rise to a contingent call out
This language is
meaningless. Paragraph 205C said ‘typically’ the circumstances would
be similar to the 2014 G20 Leaders’
Summit in Brisbane, the 2018 Gold
Coast Commonwealth Games and the 2018 ASEAN-Australia Summit, where contingent
call out orders
were issued for aviation
However, the
legislation contains no such limits.
A new definition of ‘declared infrastructure’ has been
inserted to replace the previous definition of ‘designated
infrastructure’. This amendment creates an almost open-ended power to
deploy the armed forces, because ‘declared
infrastructure’ is
defined to mean any infrastructure, or a part of infrastructure, that is
declared by authorising ministers
section 51H.
That section permits a
declaration where ‘there is a threat or damage to disruption to the
operation of the infrastructure
or the part of the infrastructure’ where
the damage or disruption would ‘directly or indirectly endanger the life
or cause serious injury to, any
In addition to pre-authorised contingent call outs, the legislation, via
section 51U
, provides for ‘expedited orders and declarations’ in a
‘sudden and extraordinary emergency’ (also undefined).
Minister or two authorising ministers can verbally issue such orders and
declarations. Such orders ‘need not be in
writing’. A mere phone
call from the Prime Minister to the CDF would suffice.
This ‘extraordinary’ power was previously created by the 2006
amendments, but the 2018 Bill extended it to cover ‘declared
infrastructure’ and ‘specified area’ declarations, and to
include the Home Affairs Minister and acting authorised
ministers in the list of
those holding the power.
Section 51U(4)(a) makes clear that the making of expedited orders or
declarations does not require the authorising ministers to be
satisfied of the
‘particular matters’ in sections 33(1), 34(1), 35(1), 36(1) or
51H(2). That is, the ministers do not
have to consider that there is a likely
threat of ‘domestic violence’ or danger to ‘Commonwealth
or ‘declared infrastructure’. In effect, the
alleged existence of a ‘sudden and extraordinary emergency’
override these thresholds.
A Greater ADF Powers Once Called Out
The 2018 Bill
expanded the already considerable powers available to
the ADF once deployed, consolidating them into four divisions of Part IIIAAA
Defence Act
: ‘reasonable and necessary’ powers ordered by
the CDF (Division 2); ‘special powers’ generally authorised
authorising minister (Division 3); powers exercised in ‘specified
areas’ (Division 4); and powers to protect ‘declared
infrastructure’ (Division 5).
Division 2 powers are subject to directions given by the Defence Minister to
the CDF, and ‘must not stop or restrict any protest,
dissent, assembly or
industrial action’ except if there is a ‘reasonable
likelihood’ of death, injury or ‘serious
There is also a
requirement ‘as far as reasonably practicable’ to utilise ADF
personnel in cooperation with state and
territory police forces and for tasks
requested by a police officer.
Division 3, which is designed for the most heavily-armed Special Forces
deployments, contains the most extensive powers.
Part IIIAAA
previously provided
powers to prevent, put an end to, and protect persons from, acts of violence.
Sections 46(5)(b)
(5)(c) expand these ‘special powers’ to also
authorise the ADF to take action to prevent, put an end to, or protect persons
from, threats to a person’s life or safety, or to public health or public
The terms ‘safety’, ‘public health’ and ‘public
safety’ are vague and open to wide interpretation.
According to the
Explanatory Memorandum:
These additional limbs are intended to allow the ADF to put an end to threats
which have not yet materialised into acts of violence.
They are also intended to
make clear that the ADF can act in relation to generalised threats which may not
be directed toward any
specific person but towards the community in
Sections 46(5)(d)
and (e) extend these powers to shooting down planes and
sinking vessels – which could endanger hundreds of lives – so
as an order to do so is not ‘manifestly unlawful’.
In addition,
section 46(7)
empowers ADF members to free hostages, control
movements of people or means of transport, evacuate people, search persons,
or things, seize items, detain people, require detained people to
provide identification, patrol and cordon off areas, question people
production of documents.
Subsection 46(9)
allows an ADF member to do anything
incidental to these powers.
also removes the previous requirement for ADF personnel to wear
uniforms and identification when exercising the Division 3 powers,
although the
requirement remains when invoking most other powers. The Explanatory Memorandum
This is because the tasks that the ADF will be required to perform under
Division 3 are higher end military actions and may involve
the Special Forces.
These tasks may require the ADF to operate in a covert manner where uniforms
would be detrimental. ADF Special
Forces soldiers have protected identity status
because they are associated with sensitive
capabilities.
This raises the likelihood of Special Forces troops taking ‘higher end
military actions’ against civilians without being
recognised as ADF
personnel, or else not being identified and therefore not held accountable for
killings or other violent acts.
SAS soldiers could, for example, burst into a
person’s home, provoking an alarmed response from someone inside who did
realise they were ADF personnel, and then shoot the person in alleged
self-defence.
Also expanded are the Division 4 powers for ‘specified areas’.
First, the Division abolished the previous distinction
between General Security
Areas and Designated Areas, allowing the full suite of powers to be exercised
within a specified area.
Second, these powers are significantly broadened.
Section 51A
now allows ADF
personnel also to search for a person who is likely to pose a threat to a
person’s life, health or safety or
public health or public safety, as well
as things and people ‘connected’ (another undefined term) with the
domestic violence
or threat specified in the call out order. According to the
Explanatory Memorandum:
The ability to search for persons connected with the domestic violence allows
the ADF to search for people who do not pose a threat
themselves, and who have
not yet committed an offence, but who may be seeking to assist others in
carrying out acts of
Section 51A(2)(a)
now permits a generic written authorisation to search all
premises in the specified area. This opens up the prospect of troops conducting
sweeps through entire suburbs. The Explanatory Memorandum stated: [t]hese
purposive powers will permit the ADF to undertake a coordinated,
thorough, and
systematic search of a specified area, or part of a specified area, to either
find the threat, or to clear the area
Subsections 51A(2)(c)
and (d) further allow an ADF member to search a person
who is at or near premises, because the ADF member believes on reasonable
grounds that the person has any thing that may be seized or is a ‘person
who may be detained’ in relation to the call
This detention power is also expanded. The phrase ‘person who may be
detained’ is defined in
as a person ‘who is likely to
pose a threat to any person’s life, health or safety, or to public health
or safety’,
or who has committed an offence related to the domestic
violence or threat specified in the call out order, and whom it is necessary,
a matter of urgency, to detain’. This power thus covers considerable
ground, well beyond the alleged commission of an offence
(the previous limit),
to a suspected future threat.
Also removed is a previous requirement that a search authorisation state the
name, rank and service number of the member in charge
of the search. The
Explanatory Memorandum simply asserted that this requirement was
‘impractical’.
occupier of a premises or their representative, if present at the time of a
‘entitlement’ ceases, however, if the occupier or their
representative ‘impedes’ the search. It
may be rendered meaningless
anyway as a protection against abuses – such as material being planted
– because two or more
parts of the premises can be searched at the same
making it difficult for
the occupier to monitor the simultaneous searches.
Previously, the
Defence Act
did not permit the ADF to search for
people who could pose a threat.
Section 51D
now provides ADF members with those
powers if they reasonably believe a person is ‘likely to’ pose a
threat to, inter
alia, ‘public safety’. Soldiers can also establish
barriers or cordons, check identities, direct people, search, question
detain people and compel the production of documents. Previous powers to search
vehicles and people are extended to those leaving
a ‘specified
area’, as well as those entering it. Some of these powers also were
previously available only in the offshore
Similar power expansions apply in Division 5, covering ‘declared
infrastructure’. In particular, powers to prevent, or
put an end to, acts
of violence are extended by
section 51L
to prevent or put an end to threats to a
person’s life, health or safety, or to public health or public safety.
B Weakened Accountability
Section 51N
Defence Act
expands the power to use lethal force.
An ADF member must believe on reasonable grounds that using such force was
necessary to protect
the life of, or to prevent serious injury to, a person
(including the member). Now, deadly force can be used also where it is
believed necessary to ‘protect the declared
infrastructure’
it is ‘reasonable and
to give effect
to an order to shoot down a plane or sink a vessel.
Section 51S
adds a far-reaching new defence of ‘good faith’. This
protects ADF personnel from both criminal and civil liability,
even if they
acted under an invalid order, provided that ‘the powers were exercised or
purportedly exercised in good
The Explanatory
Memorandum stated: [t]his proposed provision is necessary to ensure that
individual ADF members have operational
certainty that they will not be held
responsible for procedural or other defects in the making of a call out order,
declaration or
authorisation.
Potentially, however, the defence could do much more than that. It could
shield all military personnel, including commanders, from
criminal or civil
prosecution for unlawful acts, as long as they can argue ‘good
faith’ – a defence that would
be difficult to
Again, the Government refused to amend the Bill to limit the scope of this
defence. Instead, paragraph 446A was inserted into the
Explanatory Memorandum to
assert that it was ‘not intended to remove legal liability in instances
where an ADF member has exceeded
their legal authority in circumstances that
cannot be characterised as minor or
technical’.
That assurance
has no legal effect.
The lack of accountability was further underpinned by the Government and the
Labor Party rejecting a Greens amendment. It would have
made call out orders
disallowable instruments, thus able to be struck down by either House of
Parliament, and required that Parliament
sit within six days of any call out
order being made. A similar Greens amendment was defeated when the Defence
Legislation Amendment
(Aid to Civilian Authorities) Bill (2006) was
C Underlying Legal, Constitutional and Political
The 2018 Bill has amplified many of the legal, constitutional and political
issues posed by the 2000 and 2006 legislation. This initial
article cannot
examine them in detail. None have been tested yet, because no call out has
occurred (except for contingency call outs)
since 2000. Many questions remain
from the last large-scale domestic mobilisation of soldiers, near Sydney in
1978, after the still
unexplained Hilton Hotel bombing. It was not clear by what
legal authority the call out
Suffice to say that a Pandora’s Box of legal questions still exists,
such as the scope and effect of the ‘good faith’
defence, the
meaning of terms like ‘public safety’ and the
‘reasonableness’ of lethal force, as well as the
innate difficulties
of securing judicial review of military operations conducted in the name of
national security.
Likewise, it seems that a plethora of constitutional doubts has been
deepened, particularly by the greater capacity of the Federal
Government and the
ADF to deploy troops without any state or territory request and to disregard
state and territory objections. Not
only do the provisions arguably exceed the
boundaries of
section 119
Constitution
, they may also lack a
sufficient connection to the defence power or other federal heads of
Politically, the key question is: why have these powers been created on the
pretext of combatting terrorism when the provisions are
far wider? The only
conclusion that can be drawn is that preparations are being made to mobilise the
armed forces domestically for
purposes other than counter-terrorism, such as to
deal with ‘rioting’ or other forms of civil unrest.
A decade ago, in discussing the 2000 and 2006 legislation, this author drew
attention to the underlying likelihood of these powers
being employed to deal
with convulsive social and political unrest under conditions of worsening social
inequality, economic breakdown
and rising global geo-strategic
Those concerns have
been amplified by the latest amendments.
* Professor, School of Law, Western Sydney University.
Defence Act 1903
Part IIIAAA
Defence Act
Defence Legislation Amendment (Aid
to Civilian Authorities) Act 2000
Defence Legislation Amendment
For details of these debates and the
earlier amendments to
Defence Act
, see Michael Head,
Calling Out the Troops: The Australian Military and Civil Unrest: The Legal
and Constitutional Issues
(Federation Press, 2009) 13–21,
See, eg, Andrew Greene, ‘Shakeup of
Defence “Call-Out” Powers Will Make It Easier for Police to Request
Backup During Terror Attacks’,
(online at 28 June
2018) <https://www.abc.
net.au/news/2018-06-28/military-call-out-powers-up-for-debate-legislation-in-parliament/9916636>.
State Coroner of New South Wales,
Inquest into the Deaths Arising from the Lindt Café Siege: Findings
and Recommendations
(Report, May 2017).
Calling Out the Troops
(n 3) 122–35; Cameron Moore,
Crown and Sword: Executive Power and the
Use of Force by the Australian Defence Force
(ANU Press, 2017)
The author notes that, at the time of
publication, the
Amendment Act
was not yet incorporated into the
Defence Act
. The references are to the
Defence Act
For a summary up to 2014, see Andrew
Lynch, Nicola McGarrity and George Williams (eds)
Inside Australia’s
Anti-Terrorism Laws and Trials
(NewSouth, 2015).
Calling Out the Troops
For a critique, see Michael Head,
Crimes Against the State: From Treason to Terrorism
(Ashgate, 2011)
Greene (n 4); see also Head,
Calling Out the Troops
(n 3) 28–31.
Paul Karp, ‘Military Could Be On
Call for Sieges and Riots, Attorney General Says’,
The Guardian
(online at 28 June 2018) <
https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2018/jun/28/military-could-be-on-call-for-sieges-and-riots-attorney-general-says
Commonwealth,
Parliamentary
, House of Representatives, 18 October 2018, 10436–9 (Andrew
Nick McKenzie and Chris Masters,
‘Police Investigate Ben Roberts-Smith over Alleged War Crimes’,
The Sydney Morning Herald
(online at 29 November
2018) <https://www.smh.com.au/national/police-investigate-ben-roberts-smith-over-alleged-war-crimes-20181126-p50ihb.html>.
Scarlet Kim et al, ‘Newly
Disclosed Documents on the Five Eyes Alliance and What They Tell Us about
Intelligence-Sharing Agreements’,
(online at 23 April 2018)
https://www.lawfareblog.com/
newly-disclosed-documents-five-eyes-alliance-and-what-they-tell-us-about-intelligence-sharing>;
Head, ‘Leaked Documents Expose Plans for Internal Surveillance by
Australia’s Electronic Spy Agency’,
World Socialist Web Site
(online at 2 May 2018)
<https://www.wsws.org/en/articles/2018/05/02/asde-m02.html>.
Defence Act
Defence Act
Defence Act
Defence Act
Defence Act
Defence Act
Senate Legal and Constitutional
Affairs Legislation Committee, Parliament of Australia,
Defence Amendment
(Call Out of the Australian Defence Force) Bill 2018
[Provisions]
September 2018); Parliamentary Joint Committee on Human Rights,
Human Rights
Scrutiny Report
(Report 12, November 2018).
Addendum to the Explanatory
Memorandum,
Defence Amendment (Call Out of the Australian Defence Force) Bill
(Cth) 3 [205A] (‘Addendum to the Explanatory Memorandum’).
Ibid 2 [165A].
Calling Out the Troops
Defence Act 1903
, later amended by the
Defence Amendment (Call Out of the
Australian Defence Force) Act 2018
Calling Out the Troops
3) 61–74, 148–61.
Defence Act
Defence Act
Defence Act
Explanatory Memorandum,
Amendment (Call Out of the Australian Defence Force) Bill 2018
(Cth) 49 [263]
(‘Explanatory Memorandum’).
Defence Act
Defence Act
Senate Legal and Constitutional
Affairs Legislation Committee (n 22) 5 [1.15].
Calling Out the Troops
‘Military to Gain New Terror
(online at 17 July 2017)
<https://indaily.com.au/
news/2017/07/17/military-gain-new-terror-powers/>.
Mark Kenny, ‘Lindt Siege
Findings: Malcolm Turnbull Flags Changes to Make Defence Force Intervention
The Sydney Morning Herald
(online at 25 May 2017)
<https://www.smh.com.au/
politics/federal/lindt-siege-findings-malcolm-turnbull-flags-changes-to-make-defence-force-intervention-easier-20170524-gwc705.html>.
State Coroner of New South Wales (n 5)
53–72, 93–101.
William Blum,
Rogue State: A Guide
to the World’s Only Superpower
(Zed Books, 2002) 133–4,
145–6, 155; Andrew J Bacevich,
American Empire: The Realities and
Consequences of US Diplomacy
(Harvard University Press, 2002); Deepak
Breeding Ground: Afghanistan and the Origins of Islamist
(Potomac, 2011).
Michael Head and Scott Mann,
Domestic Deployment of the Armed Forces: Military Powers, Law and Human
(Ashgate, 2009) 5–17.
See, eg, Elisabeth Braw, ‘For
Not-Quite-Wars, Italy Has a Useful Alternative to
Traditional Troops’,
Defense One
(online at 16 April 2018)
<https://www.defenseone.com/ideas/2018/04/todays-not-quite-wars-italy-has-alternative-traditional-troops/147457/>.
Michael Head and Kristian Boehringer,
The Legal Power to Launch War: Who Decides?
(Routledge 2019),
Jim Mattis,
Summary of the 2018
National Defense Strategy of the United States of America
(US Department of
Defense, 2018) 1.
Head and Boehringer (n 43)
Calling Out the Troops
Explanatory Memorandum (n 31) 2
Senate Legal and Constitutional
Affairs Legislation Committee (n 22); Parliamentary Joint Committee on Human
Rights (n 22).
Addendum to the Explanatory Memorandum
(n 23) 2 [163A].
Ibid 2 [165A].
Ibid 2 [182A].
Ibid 3 [182A].
Ibid 3 [205A].
Ibid 4 [205A].
Defence Act
Defence Act
Defence Act
Addendum to the Explanatory Memorandum
(n 23) 56 [307].
Ibid [332].
As happened in 1989 when New South
Wales Special Weapons and Operations Section (‘SWOS’) police
officers shot and killed
David Gundy, who had reacted angrily when armed men
burst into his house in a mistaken early morning raid: see Commonwealth, Royal
Commission into Aboriginal Deaths in Custody,
Report of the Inquiry into the
Death of David John Gundy
Defence Act
Explanatory Memorandum (n 31) 64
Ibid 64 [358].
Ibid 65 [363].
Defence Act
Defence Act
s 51N(3)(ii).
Defence Act
s 51N(1)(a).
Defence Act
s 51S(2)(b).
Explanatory Memorandum (n 31) 79
Calling Out the Troops
3) 177–84, 187–99.
Addendum to the Explanatory Memorandum
(n 23) 7 [446A].
Commonwealth,
Parliamentary
, Senate, 26 November 2018, 8613 (Nicholas McKim).
Calling Out the Troops
Ibid 166–70, 177–82.
Ibid 63–74, 148–61.
Ibid 2–4, 204–21.
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (120 KB)
PDF format (214 KB)
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter