URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/journals/MqJlBLaw/2007/14.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 15:21:04
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Trone, John; Moens, Gabri�l --- "The International Arbitration Act 1974 (Cth) as a Foundation for International Commercial Arbitration in Australia" [2007] MqJlBLaw 14; (2007) 4 Macquarie Journal of Business Law 295
International Arbitration Act 1974
(Cth) as a Foundation for International Commercial Arbitration in Australia
I Introduction
II The Commonwealth Act
III The UNCITRAL Model Law
IV The ICSID Convention
V Conclusion
The International Arbitration Act 1974 (Cth) as a
Foundation for International Commercial Arbitration in Australia
GABRIëL MOENS
I Introduction
International commercial arbitration has become a common means of settling
commercial disputes. As a Singaporean judge observed, international
arbitration
has become a popular form of dispute resolution due to
the attractiveness of resolving commercial disputes between international
parties according to the manner and law of their choice,
by arbitrators of their
choice, and unfettered by domestic rules (designed in part, to cater to domestic
The flexibility of the arbitration process compared to the judicial process
has thus been a major influence favouring the growth of
international
arbitration. The absence of a right to appeal an arbitral award and the ease of
the enforcement of awards have also
encouraged the growth of
arbitration.
This article examines the main elements of the most important international
schemes for commercial arbitration with particular attention
application within Australia. The second part of this article outlines the
Australian federal legislation concerning international
arbitration. The third
and fourth parts discuss arbitration under the UNCITRAL Model Law and the ICSID
Convention, the most prominent
regimes for international commercial
arbitration.
Several limitations to the scope of this article should be noted. It does not
deal with the arbitration rules of the various national
arbitration centres such
as the Australian Centre for International Commercial
Arbitration,
the American
Arbitration Association,
London Court of International
Arbitration.
The conciliation of international business disputes is beyond the scope of
this paper.
It also does not
discuss the New York Convention concerning the recognition and enforcement of
arbitral awards.
However, it does
examine recognition and enforcement under the Model Law and the ICSID
Convention.
II The Commonwealth Act
The Model Law and ICSID are implemented by the Commonwealth
International
Arbitration Act 1974
(hereafter referred to as the ‘
Commonwealth
). The Commonwealth law modifies and supplements the application
of these international instruments.
The Federal Act is supplementary to State laws regarding commercial
arbitration.
These State Acts can
apply to international
arbitrations.
If the parties
exclude the application of the Model Law to their arbitration, the relevant
State Act will apply.
Commonwealth Act
provides that upon the application of a party, a
court shall stay proceedings by a party to an arbitration agreement against
party where the proceedings involve the determination of a matter that
is capable of settlement by
arbitration.
The duty of the
court is mandatory: it must stay the proceedings and refer the parties to
arbitration.
However, the court
may not refer to arbitration a claim that is not within the scope of the
arbitration agreement.
The parties may validly agree that they may not apply for a stay, and the
court will enforce that
A party may also
waive the right to apply for a
A party does not lose the
right to apply for a stay simply because they did not seek a stay in prior
interlocutory proceedings.
A court shall not make a stay if it considers that the arbitration agreement
is ‘null and void, inoperative or incapable of
performed’.
enforceability of the arbitration agreement is determined in the light of
applicable State and federal legislation and the common
Several cases have considered whether an arbitration agreement had become
unenforceable. For example, the Federal Court held that
it was required to
refuse a stay where the arbitration agreement had become inoperative due to a
subsequent agreement between the
In another case the
Victorian Supreme Court held that the arbitration agreement became inoperative
where a party had applied for
security for costs on the basis that the dispute
would be determined by the courts. That party thereby waived its right to rely
the arbitration agreement, having unequivocally opted for litigation rather
than arbitration.
The Federal Court held that if the parties agree to resort to litigation, a
pre-existing arbitration clause will become inoperative
as having been abandoned
by the parties.
Finally, the New
South Wales Supreme Court held that if the dispute is settled, the arbitration
clause becomes inoperative in relation
It is not clear whether an Australian court has the power to overturn a
decision of an arbitrator who has refused to apply a mandatory
provision of
national law that the parties have purported to exclude by
An example of such a
mandatory national law is the prohibition against misleading and deceptive
conduct in the Commonwealth
Trade Practices
which may not be
excluded by contract.
The Full Federal Court observed that the federal Parliament had not excluded
Trade Practices Act
from the operation of the
International
Arbitration Act
. By contrast, Parliament did expressly exclude specific
provisions of the sea carriage of goods legislation from the operation of
International Arbitration
However, the court also
pointed out that the case at hand did not involve any statutory provision
prohibiting contracting out of
the operation of a particular
III The UNCITRAL Model Law
A Introduction to the Model Law
The Model Law on International Commercial
Arbitration
was adopted by the
United Nations Commission on International Trade Law (UNCITRAL). The Model Law
is not a treaty.
binding in international law.
provides a template for national laws regarding international commercial
arbitration.
It has been
implemented in many jurisdictions, including Australia,
UNCITRAL has also introduced Arbitration
Those Rules may be
adopted by agreement between the
By contrast, the Model
Law is a template for national laws. The Rules are also expressed in slightly
different terms to those of
B Implementation in Australian Law
Commonwealth Act
provides that the Model Law has the force of
Australian law.
The Act provides
that the parties may opt out of the Model Law, but they must do so in
Commonwealth
also contains a number of optional
provisions.
The parties may
agree in writing that these provisions will apply to the settlement of their
These optional
provisions are referred to in the relevant places throughout this article.
C Interpretation of the Model Law
There are a large number of foreign judicial decisions interpreting the Model
which facilitates
commentary upon its provisions. When applying an international commercial law
regime, the courts should consider
the decisions of foreign courts interpreting
the same provisions, so that there will develop a consistent international
jurisprudence
regarding their
application.
For example, the
courts of many nations have treated foreign decisions applying the United
Nations Convention on Contracts for the
International Sale of Goods as
persuasive authority.
Some of the decisions have made express observations about the interpretation
of the Model Law. For example, a Canadian court held
that the Model Law should
receive a ‘broad remedial interpretation’, in line with ‘the
public policy that parties
who agree to resolve their differences by arbitration
should be held to that
The Singapore
High Court observed that party autonomy is a central feature of the Model
Indeed many of its
provisions are expressed to be subject to the contrary agreement of the
Commonwealth Act
contains a specific rule concerning one source of
material that may assist in the interpretation of the Model Law. It provides
UNCITRAL documents may be consulted for the purpose of interpreting the
D Definition of International Commercial
Arbitration
Because of difficulties in arriving at a satisfactory definition, the Model
Law does not define the word
‘commercial’.
However, a footnote in the Model Law states that the word ‘should be given
a wide interpretation so as to cover matters arising
from all relationships of a
commercial nature, whether contractual or
An arbitration is an international arbitration if the parties to the
arbitration agreement had their places of business in different
states at the
time the agreement was made.
arbitration may also be an international one even if both parties have their
places of business in the same state. There are four
such situations. Firstly,
if the place of arbitration is in a different State. Secondly, if a substantial
part of the obligations
under the parties’ commercial relationship are to
be carried out in a different
Thirdly, if the subject
matter of the parties’ dispute is ‘most closely connected’
with a different state. Finally,
if the arbitration agreement expressly provides
that its subject matter concerns more than one
Under the Model Law the question of which disputes are arbitrable is
determined by national law.
award may be set aside if the court determines that under domestic law the
subject-matter of the dispute cannot be settled by
arbitration.
E Non-intervention by the Courts
The Model Law provides that as regards the matters that it regulates, no
court shall intervene except as provided for by the Model
For example, a
Singaporean court held that because the Model Law did not empower a court to
grant an interlocutory injunction in
relation to a challenge to an arbitrator or
an application to set aside an award, the court did not have power to grant that
The tone of the wording of this provision suggests that judicial intervention
should be exceptional. However, the UNCITRAL commentary
on the draft suggests
that this provision simply requires that judicial intervention be authorised by
the Model Law. The provision
‘does not itself take a stand on what is the
proper role of courts’.
Furthermore, this provision restricts judicial intervention only in relation to
matters governed by the Model Law. It does not limit
judicial intervention
concerning matters that are not governed by the Model
F Arbitration Agreements
An arbitration agreement is defined as an agreement by which the parties
agree that disputes within their legal relationship will
be submitted to
arbitration. The agreement may be a contractual provision or a separate
A Hong Kong court
held that a clause providing that disputes ‘shall’ be settled by
arbitration did not allow the parties
an alternative means of settlement through
litigation in the courts.
arbitration clause will not be construed as permitting litigation unless the
availability of that alternative means of settlement
The agreement must be written. An agreement is written if it appears in a
document signed by the parties, or if it appears in an exchange
communications, or if the agreement is alleged in a statement of claim but not
denied by the defence.
Kong court held that an arbitration clause could be incorporated into a contract
between the parties by reference to a clause
contained in a contract between
different parties.
G Referral to Arbitration
Where an action relating to the subject matter covered by the arbitration
agreement is brought before a court, the court must refer
the matter to
arbitration if a party makes that request no later than when they make their
first submission regarding the substance
If the agreement is
valid, the court must refer the matter to
arbitration.
However, the court need not refer the matter to arbitration if it considers
that the arbitration agreement is ‘null and void,
inoperative or incapable
of being performed’.
Hong Kong decision held that an arbitration clause was not inoperative or
incapable of being performed where the clause provided
for arbitration according
to the rules of an arbitration organisation that did not exist. The court held
that the parties intended
that their disputes would be settled by arbitration,
and that the arbitration would be held under the law of the place of
arbitration.
The Model Law provides that it is not inconsistent with an arbitration
agreement for a party to request interim measures of protection
from a court,
either prior to or during the arbitration
This provision allows a
court to grant interim measures in support of an
arbitration.
It is not itself a
source of jurisdiction to order interim
The court’s
power to order such measures derives from its domestic
Finally, a subpoena is not
an interim measure of
protection.
H Formation of the Tribunal
The parties may agree upon the number of
arbitrators.
If the parties do
not agree, there shall be three
arbitrators.
The parties may
agree upon the process of appointment of the
arbitrators.
If they do not
reach agreement regarding the process, in the case of a three arbitrator panel,
each party shall appoint one, and
the two arbitrators shall appoint the
I Challenges to Arbitrators
A person who is approached as a prospective arbitrator must disclose any
circumstances that might create ‘justifiable doubts’
their independence or impartiality. An arbitrator is under a continuing duty to
disclose any such circumstances that arise
proceedings.
A challenge to an arbitrator may be made only on the grounds of justifiable
doubts regarding their independence or impartiality or
because they do not have
the qualifications that were agreed between the
The parties may agree
upon the procedures for a challenge to an
arbitrator.
In the absence of an
agreement upon the procedure, a party may make a written challenge within 15
days of becoming aware that the
tribunal has been formed or becoming aware of
the disqualifying circumstances. The tribunal decides whether to uphold or
challenge, unless the arbitrator withdraws or the other party accepts
the challenge.
If the challenge to an arbitrator does not succeed, the challenger may
request the competent court to decide upon the
Commonwealth
provides that the Supreme Court of the State and Territory that is the
place of the arbitration is the competent
The arbitration
proceedings may continue and conclude while the court deliberates upon the
challenge. The court’s decision
is not subject to
J Jurisdiction
The tribunal may rule upon its own
The tribunal thus
‘Kompetenz-Kompetenz’.
An arbitration clause contained within a contract is not rendered invalid by the
invalidity of the remainder of the contract. The
arbitration clause may thus be
valid notwithstanding the invalidity of the remainder of the
The arbitration clause
will be invalid if the defect is such as to render void the entirety of the
contract, including that
If the tribunal decides as a preliminary matter that it does have
Commonwealth
provides that the Supreme Court of the State and Territory that is the
place of the arbitration is the competent
A Canadian court held that in so doing the court applies a deferential
standard in reviewing the decision of the arbitral tribunal:
reasonableness, deference and
A Hong Kong
court held that a ruling by the tribunal was in substance a preliminary decision
on jurisdiction, not a decision on the
merits, despite its self-description as
an ‘interim
The court’s decision is not subject to appeal and the tribunal may
continue its proceedings while the court determines the
While the Model Law
provides for an appeal to the competent court where the tribunal decides that it
does have jurisdiction, it does
not provide for an appeal to the court where the
tribunal decides that it does not have
K Place of Arbitration
The parties may agree upon the place of arbitration. If they do not agree,
the tribunal will determine the place of arbitration, considering
circumstances of the case, including the convenience of the
parties have agreed upon the place of arbitration, that place does not alter
even though the tribunal conducts all of the
hearings in another location. The
place of arbitration must be distinguished from the ‘venue of
L Procedure
The parties must be treated equally and each must be given a ‘full
opportunity’ to make their
Naturally, that does not
shield a party from its own strategic mistakes in the
proceedings.
The parties are
free to agree upon the procedural rules applying to the
If the parties do
not agree, the tribunal shall conduct itself in a manner that it considers
appropriate, though this power is limited
by the other restrictions imposed by
the Model Law.
The tribunal
thus has ‘considerable latitude’ in deciding upon procedural
The claimant must submit a statement of claim and the respondent must submit
a defence, each within the time limits agreed by the
parties or as determined by
the tribunal.
The parties may
amend or supplement the statement of claim or defence during the proceedings.
However, the tribunal may refuse to
allow them to do so if it considers it
inappropriate in view of the delay
If the claimant does not file its statement of claim, the proceedings will be
terminated. If the respondent does not file a defence,
the proceedings shall
continue and the failure will not be treated as an admission of the
claimant’s case. If a party does
not appear at the hearing or offer
evidence, the tribunal may render an award on the material before it. The
defaulting party may
show sufficient cause why it did not submit these documents
or failed to appear or offer
Under the optional provisions of the
Commonwealth Act
tribunals may jointly consolidate two or more arbitral proceedings on the ground
that they involve a common question of
law or fact or the relief claimed in the
proceedings relates to the same transaction or
transactions.
M Oral Hearings
The tribunal may decide whether to hear oral argument or evidence, or whether
to decide the matter on written materials
If a party asks that
oral hearings be held, the tribunal shall hold them unless the parties agreed
that no oral proceedings would
Commonwealth Act
provides that a party may represent themselves at
oral hearings before the tribunal. A party may also be represented by a legal
practitioner
from any jurisdiction or by any other person they may
The tribunal may appoint experts to report to it regarding specialist
matters. The tribunal may require a party to provide information
to the expert,
or to permit the inspection of property by the
If a party requests,
the expert shall appear at an oral hearing so that they may be questioned about
their evidence.
The tribunal may request the assistance of a competent court in taking
evidence. The court may assist as permitted by its jurisdiction
and subject to
its rules concerning the taking of
procedure the assisting court may take discovery evidence from third
The grant of a
subpoena also falls within this procedure for judicial
assistance.
All of the information communicated to the tribunal by a party must be given
to the other party. The tribunal is required to give
to the parties any expert
reports and evidentiary documents that it may rely upon in reaching its
The evidentiary
material that must be disclosed by the tribunal is that which was created by
third parties, not the research materials
prepared by the tribunal in the
process of making its
O Interim Measures
The tribunal may order a party to undertake interim measures of protection
regarding the subject matter of the
A failure by a party
to take those interim measures may be taken into account in awarding damages
under the final award.
tribunal may also require the provision of security in relation to these interim
P Applicable Law
The tribunal will decide the substance of the dispute in accordance with the
rules of law chosen by the parties. The choice of a particular
legal system will
be construed as the choice of its substantive law, not its rules relating to the
conflict of laws, unless there
is an express stipulation to the
If the parties do
not chose the applicable conflict of laws rules, the tribunal will apply the law
determined by the conflicts rules
that it regards as
applicable.
The tribunal must decide in accordance with the terms of the specific
contract, and must take into account relevant trade
Unless the parties
have expressly provided that it may do so, the tribunal may not decide the
ex aequo et bono
(on the basis of what is fair and right) or as
amiable compositeur
However, such a
procedure is permissible where the parties so
The award must be made in written
It must be supported by
written reasons, unless the parties have agreed
Q Issue of the Award
The issue of a final award ends the arbitral
proceedings.
The tribunal may
also terminate the proceedings if the claimant withdraws their claim, if the
parties so agree or if the tribunal
considers that continuance is
‘unnecessary or
impossible’.
The tribunal may issue a correction or interpretation of its
It may also make an
additional award regarding matters raised in the proceedings but not determined
in the award.
For example,
where the tribunal was required to determine costs, but omitted to do so, a
party could require the tribunal to award
costs under an additional
In providing for the
issuance of an additional award, the drafters of the Model Law intended to
prevent an award being invalid for
R Interest and Costs
The optional provisions of the
Commonwealth Act
provide for the
payment of interest and the award of costs. Unless there is a contrary agreement
between the parties, where a tribunal
orders the payment of money, it may order
the payment of interest at a ‘reasonable rate’ from the date when
of action arose until the date of the
The tribunal may also
order the payment of interest upon unpaid moneys under the award beginning from
the date of the award.
In the absence of a contrary agreement between the parties, the award of the
costs of the arbitration are at the tribunal’s
discretion.
(The Model Law
itself makes no provision for costs, which were left for determination according
to domestic law).
S Setting Aside an Award
Only a party to the dispute may apply to set aside an
An application to set
aside an award must be made within three months of the date when the applicant
received the award.
Law does not provide for any extension of this three month
However, it has been
held that the amendment of an application to add a further ground after the
three month period had elapsed was
a procedural matter which was not regulated
by the Model Law.
The parties may not contractually restrict their right to apply to set aside
an award on the grounds set out in the Model
A court may only set
aside an award under the procedure established by the Model
Commonwealth
provides that the Supreme Court of the State and Territory that is the
place of arbitration is the competent court for these
A court may only
intervene if the court is situated within the place of
arbitration.
Tribunal decisions are to be accorded ‘broad deference and
respect’ and there is a ‘powerful presumption’
tribunal operated within the limits of its
The court may not set
aside an award for an error of fact or
An application to set
aside an award is not an appeal on the
The court may only set aside an award in seven
circumstances.
The first five
circumstances are dependent upon proof by the
The last two are
based upon a finding by the
Firstly, the applicant may show that a party to the arbitration agreement was
under an incapacity.
Secondly, the arbitration agreement was invalid under the law that was chosen by
the parties, or if no law was indicated in the contract,
under the law of the
State where the application was
Thirdly, the applicant did not receive proper notice of the arbitral
proceedings or of an arbitrator’s appointment, or the applicant
to present their case for some other
Fourthly, the award
deals with matters beyond the scope of the submission to
arbitration.
This ground
reflects the basic principle that an arbitral tribunal may determine only those
matters that are referred to it for
settlement.
If those matters
beyond jurisdiction may be severed from the matters within jurisdiction, only
part of the award will be
Fifthly, the composition of the tribunal or its procedure was not in
accordance with the agreement between the parties, except where
the agreement
was contrary to a mandatory provision of the Model
Alternatively, where
there was no relevant agreement between the parties, the composition of the
tribunal or its procedure was not
in accordance with the Model
Sixthly, if the court
determines that under domestic law the subject-matter of the dispute cannot be
settled by arbitration.
Seventhly, the court may set aside the award if it finds that the award
conflicts with the public policy of this
An obvious example of
where an award conflicts with the public policy of most nations would be where
the award was tainted by corruption
The public policy is that of the state in which the set aside application is
made. As a result, the formulations of the applicable
standards vary from nation
to nation. For example, a Canadian court held that if an arbitral tribunal
operating under the Model Law
breaches ‘the principles of fundamental
justice’ the award will be
In Canada that
standard is an important constitutional limitation upon the powers of
government.
Another Canadian decision held that to be set aside on this ground the award
‘must fundamentally offend the most basic and explicit
principles of
justice and fairness’ of the jurisdiction ‘or evidence intolerable
ignorance or
corruption’.
the court did not find it necessary to determine the validity of this
The appellate court
held that the procedure adopted by the tribunal ‘did not offend our
principles of justice and fairness
in a fundamental
The Singapore Court of Appeal held that this ground has a
‘narrow’ operation. An award will be set aside where its enforcement
‘shock the conscience’ … [or is] ‘clearly injurious to
the public good or … wholly offensive to the
ordinary reasonable and fully
informed member of the public’ …, or where it violates the
forum’s most basic notion
of morality and
A New Zealand decision held that an award should be set aside if its
enforcement would ‘shock the conscience’ or abuse
the integrity of
the court’s
This ground has a procedural as well as a substantive aspect. In Canada the
most serious procedural irregularities can constitute
a infringement of public
Obviously, the
continuation of the arbitration following the withdrawal of a party does not
constitute a procedural irregularity,
since it is specifically authorised by the
Sometimes the legislature may provide specific elaboration about what falls
within this ground. For example, the
Commonwealth Act
provides that an
award conflicts with Australian public policy if its making was ‘induced
or affected by fraud or corruption’
or it was made in breach of natural
justice. This provision is expressed to be for the avoidance of
The New Zealand
legislation expressly provides that a breach of natural justice in the making of
the award is contrary to public
If a party so requests, the court may suspend its proceedings to allow the
tribunal to reconvene so that it may take action that would
remove any ground
for setting aside the award.
This power to suspend proceedings is not limited to procedural
T Recognition and Enforcement of Awards
The issue of recognition of an award commonly ‘arise[s] when a court is
asked to grant a remedy in respect of a dispute that
has been the subject of
previous arbitral
proceedings.’
Enforcement goes further than recognition, in that the court is asked to
‘ensure that [the award] is carried out by using such
legal sanctions as
are available’.
The Model Law provides that an arbitral award will be recognised as binding
and will be enforced by the competent court, irrespective
of the nation in which
the award was rendered.
one exception, the grounds for refusing to recognise or enforce an award are the
same as the grounds for setting aside an
There is an additional
ground for refusing recognition or enforcement:
the award has not yet become binding on the parties or has been set aside or
suspended by a court of the country in which, or under
the law of which, that
award was made.
The Model Law itself does not contain an express time limitation upon
enforcement of an award, but awards may be subject to domestic
Chapter VIII of the Model Law deals with the recognition and enforcement of
arbitral awards. The
Commonwealth Act
provides that where both Part II of
the Act and Chapter VIII of the Model Law would apply to an award, only Part II
of the Act will
Part of the Act gives effect to the New York
Convention.
optional provisions of the
Commonwealth Act
, the parties may agree that
the provisions of the Model Law relating to the recognition and enforcement of
arbitral awards apply
to orders for interim measures of protection and the
giving of security in relation to such interim
U Miscellaneous
If a party is aware of a non-compliance with the Model Law or the arbitration
agreement but fails to object ‘without undue delay’
arbitration, they waive their right to
Commonwealth
provides that an arbitrator is not liable in negligence for their acts
or omissions in that capacity, but is liable for
IV The ICSID
A Australian Implementation
Australia ratified the ICSID Convention on 2 May
Commonwealth
provides that the substantive provisions of the Convention have the
force of Australian law.
These provisions deal with the jurisdiction of ICSID, conciliation, arbitration,
replacement and disqualification of arbitrators,
costs, and the place of
arbitration.
B Scheme of the Convention
The large number of published ICSID
provide useful
illustrations of the scope and operation of the provisions of the Convention.
While there is no formal doctrine of
precedent in ICSID
arbitrations,
in practice
ICSID tribunals pay close attention to previous tribunal decisions.
C The Centre
The Convention establishes the International Centre for Settlement of
Investment Disputes (hereafter ‘the Centre’ or
Centre provides facilities for international commercial arbitration of
investment disputes.
a Panel of Arbitrators, to which each Contracting State may designate four
The Chairman of the
Administrative Council may designate ten members, each of whom must have a
different nationality.
qualifications are an important qualification for membership of the
In designating members
of the Panel, the Chairman is required to ensure that it includes members from
the major legal systems of
D Consent to Arbitration
The ICSID arbitration system is based upon the consent of the
A Contracting State
does not consent to arbitration simply by ratifying the
Convention.
The State gives
its consent to arbitration through a contract, its domestic legislation or a
So far as treaties
are concerned, Australia is not a party to any multilateral investment treaties.
Australian bilateral investment
treaties provide for ICSID arbitration of
disputes between a Party and an investor from the other
E Jurisdiction
The arbitral role of the Centre is subject to the jurisdictional limitations
prescribed by the Convention. If these limitations are
not satisfied, ICSID will
not assume jurisdiction over the dispute, even if the parties have agreed to
ICSID arbitration.
The Centre has jurisdiction over any legal dispute ‘arising directly
out of an investment’ between a Contracting State
and a national of a
different Contracting State. The parties must have given their written consent
to ICSID arbitration.
Centre thus has jurisdiction over disputes between States and private parties
(or government-owned
corporations).
However, the
Centre has no jurisdiction over disputes between private parties or between
or disputes between a
State and its own
F ‘Legal Dispute’
The Convention does not include a definition of ‘legal dispute’.
A ‘legal dispute’ is a disagreement about
legal rights or
obligations, not over ‘moral, political, economic or purely commercial
G ‘Investment’
The Convention also does not define ‘investment’. The definition
of ‘investment’ will be determined with the
consent of the parties,
such as by a definition included in a bilateral investment
‘investment’ has a broad
However, the
discretion of the parties in defining an investment is not
An arbitral
tribunal identified the following characteristics of an investment: ‘a
certain duration, a regularity of profit
and return, an element of risk, a
substantial commitment and … a significant contribution to the host
development’.
example, a loan or the purchase of bonds may constitute an investment under the
Convention.
The dispute must
arise directly out of the investment, but it is not necessary that there be a
direct investment.
H ‘National of a Contracting
The term ‘national of a Contracting State’ is defined as any
natural person who had the nationality of a Contracting State
other than the
State which is party to the dispute. However, it does not include a person of
the nationality of the State which is
party to the dispute. The term also means
any juridical person of the nationality of a Contracting State other than the
State which
is party to the
‘National of a Contracting State’ also means any juridical person
of the nationality of the State party to the dispute
but which the parties have
agreed should be treated as a national of another Contracting State due to its
foreign control.
For example,
if a British company controlled an Australian subsidiary that undertook work on
behalf of the Australian federal government,
the parties could agree that the
Australian subsidiary would be treated as a British
The Convention allows the parties a broad measure of discretion in agreeing
that a body should be treated as a national of another
Contracting State due to
its foreign control.
treatment is dependent upon agreement between the parties. The corporation will
not be so treated unless the parties have agreed
I Constituent Subdivisions and Agencies
If the national government designates a constituent subdivision or agency by
a notification to the Centre, an ICSID arbitration claim
may be brought directly
against that subdivision or agency rather than the national government
If a constituent
subdivision is not designated by the federal government, ICSID has no
against that
subdivision.
All Australian states and territories other than Western Australia have been
designated in this manner.
Over a period of 15 years, the Western Australian government opposed designation
of the state.
ratification of the Convention the Commonwealth government has not sought the
state government’s agreement to
designation.
Failure to designate a constituent subdivision does not prevent a claim being
brought in relation to the conduct of that State government.
The national
government bears international responsibility for breaches of a bilateral
investment treaty by a State
government.
A claim may thus
be brought against the national government itself regarding actions taken by a
State government.
The consent to arbitration of a constituent subdivision or agency must be
approved by the Contracting State, except where that State
has informed the
Centre that approval is not
J Exclusion of Other Remedies
Consent to ICSID arbitration is deemed to be consent to arbitration to the
exclusion of other remedies, unless the consent states
arbitration process is thus exclusive of other remedies such as the domestic
judicial process.
An investor
is also precluded from seeking both ICSID arbitration and diplomatic
protection.
A Contracting State may not bring an international claim in respect of an
investment dispute to which one of its nationals has consented
to submit to
ICSID arbitration, unless the other State does not comply with the award issued
in the arbitration.
exclusion of such diplomatic measures is necessary for the introduction of a
system of arbitration between an investor and a
Contracting
The prohibition upon
diplomatic protection does not proscribe efforts to settle the
K Exhaustion of Local Remedies
A Contracting State may require that local remedies be exhausted prior to
resort to international
arbitration.
The State must
impose that requirement in the instrument by which it has given its consent to
arbitration, such as a bilateral investment
treaty or national statute. If the
State does not impose that requirement as part of its consent, a claimant will
not need to exhaust
If the State did
not impose that requirement as part of its consent, the State cannot later
impose such a requirement once an investor
has availed itself of the right to
bring an arbitration
L Types of Dispute
A Contracting State may notify the Centre of the type of disputes that it
would and would not consider submitting for arbitration
A Contracting State
or a national of a Contracting State may request arbitration of a
Secretary-General must register the request unless it is manifestly beyond the
M Formation of the Tribunal
An arbitral tribunal consists of an odd number of arbitrators as agreed
between the parties.
majority of the arbitrators shall have nationalities different from those of the
parties. However, this rule does not apply if
all arbitrators have been
appointed by agreement between the
An arbitrator may
not be appointed as a member of the tribunal if they have been previously
involved as a conciliator or arbitrator
N Disqualification of Arbitrators
A party may seek the disqualification of an arbitrator on the ground that the
arbitrator manifestly does not possess the qualifications
A party may also
seek disqualification on the ground that the arbitrator was ineligible for
appointment.
members of the tribunal decide whether the member should be
disqualified.
O Competence and Applicable Law
The tribunal is the ‘judge of its own
competence.’
tribunal may determine a challenge to its jurisdiction either as a preliminary
matter or in the main
The tribunal applies the rules of law that have been agreed between the
parties. That agreement may be written or
If the parties have not
agreed upon the applicable law, the tribunal shall apply the law of the
Contracting State that is party to
the dispute, including its rules of private
international law. The tribunal shall also apply public international law that
is applicable
The tribunal cannot make a decision of
(it is not clear)
based on the law’s silence or
However, if the
parties agree the tribunal may decide the matter
ex aequo et bono
basis of what is fair and
P Representation
Commonwealth Act
provides that a party to ICSID proceedings may
represent themselves. A party may also be represented by a legal practitioner
any jurisdiction or by any other person of their
The non-appearance of a party before the tribunal is not an admission of the
other party’s case.
a party does not appear, the tribunal shall grant a period of grace to that
party before making an award, unless it is satisfied
that the party will not
The tribunal may allow a non-party to make a written submission as an
amicus curiae
. In deciding whether to permit the filing of an amicus
submission, the tribunal must have regard to the extent to which the non-party
would assist the determination of the dispute by bringing some knowledge or
perspective that differs from that of the parties and
whether the non-party has
a ‘significant interest’ in the arbitration proceeding. The amicus
submission must not ‘disrupt
proceedings or unduly burden or unfairly
prejudice either
A claimant has the onus of proving the facts that support their
The tribunal may ask
the parties to produce documents and other
‘substantial measure of discretion’ in ordering the parties to
produce evidence.
The parties
are under a duty to cooperate with the tribunal in producing evidence that has
been requested by the
The arbitrators may
also inspect the scene of the
The tribunal shall
decide upon the admissibility of evidence and its probative
R Provisional Measures
The tribunal may ‘recommend’ provisional
measures that should be taken to preserve the rights of a party to the
While the Convention
uses the word ‘recommend’, these measures are
compulsory.
An ICSID tribunal has described provisional measures as ‘an
extraordinary measure which should not be granted
Such measures
are subject to the requirements of necessity and urgency. They will be ordered
when they are necessary to preserve
a party’s rights and where the need
for intervention is
Provisional measures may relate to both substantive and procedural
For example, the
tribunal may issue provisional measures relating to the preservation of
If requested by a party, the tribunal shall determine incidental, additional
or counter-claims that arise directly out of the subject
matter of the dispute,
provided that those claims are within the scope of the consent of the parties to
arbitration.
In exceptional
circumstances the tribunal may reopen proceedings before it has given its award,
based upon ‘decisive’
new evidence or a ‘vital need’ for
further detail about particular
T The Award
The award must be given in
The members of the
tribunal may issue individual concurring or dissenting
The full text of
the award will be published only with the consent of the
However, ICSID may
publish extracts from the tribunal’s legal
The tribunal
decides by a majority of the votes of all members of the
At the request of a party the tribunal may issue an interpretation of the
meaning or scope of the
The request must
relate to a dispute between the parties regarding the ‘meaning or
scope’ of the operative part of the
It must also have a
‘practical’ effect upon the enforcement of the
U Revision or Rectification of the Award
Either party may request that the tribunal revise its
The application must
be based on a fact that would ‘decisively affect the award’. The
tribunal and the applicant must
have been unaware of that fact when the award
was rendered. The applicant’s unawareness of that fact must not have been
to its own negligence.
application for revision must be brought within three years of the date of the
making of the award. The application must also
be brought within 90 days of the
date when the fact was
discovered.
The tribunal may
stay enforcement of its award while it considers the request for revision. There
is an automatic provisional stay
where the applicant requests a
The tribunal is empowered to rectify a clerical or arithmetical error in an
award, upon the application of a
This power does not
permit revision of the tribunal’s ‘substantive findings’ or a
reconsideration on the merits
V Annulment of the Award
Either party may request that the award be
An application for
annulment is not an appeal.
An annulment committee may not substitute its own interpretation of the law or
facts for that of the
The Chairman of the Administrative Council of ICSID appoints a committee to
determine an application for annulment. The committee’s
members are chosen
from the Panel of
Arbitrators.
There are numerous exclusionary rules concerning membership of the committee,
intended to ensure the impartiality of its members.
Members of the committee may
not have sat on the challenged Tribunal decision. They may not have the same
nationality as a member
of the Tribunal or either party to the dispute. They
must not have been designated to the Panel by either the State against whom
claim is brought or the State whose national has brought the claim. Finally,
they may not have acted as conciliator in the
An application for annulment may be based on one or more of five grounds.
These grounds are the improper constitution of the Tribunal,
a manifest excess
of power by the Tribunal, the corruption of one of its members, a ‘serious
departure from a fundamental rule
of procedure’, and a failure to state
the reasons for the award.
The application may only be based upon these grounds and no
Some elaboration may be given about several of these grounds. The manifest
excess of power must be ‘self-evident rather than
the product of elaborate
interpretations one way or the
For example,
there may be a manifest excess of power where the tribunal was ‘asked to
adjudicate on one of two possible boundary
lines submitted by the parties [but]
chooses a third line’.
Another example is where the Tribunal completely fails to apply the proper
An example of a fundamental rule of procedure is ‘the right to be heard
before an independent and impartial
violation must be a ‘serious’ one. A violation is
‘serious’ if it influenced the Tribunal to hand down
a decision that
was ‘substantially different’ from what it would have decided if it
had applied the rule.
The duty to give reasons means that the tribunal must provide reasons that
show its reasoning on matters of fact and law. This duty
is violated if the
reasons given are ‘contradictory or
frivolous’.
However, in
general the adequacy of the reasons given is not considered by an annulment
Once again there are time limits for the making of such an application. An
application for annulment based upon grounds other than
corruption must be
brought within 120 days of the date of the making of the award. An application
based upon corruption must be brought
within three years of the date of the
making of the award. The application must also be brought within 120 days of the
the corruption was
discovered.
The Committee may stay enforcement of its award while it considers the
request for revision. There is an automatic provisional stay
where the applicant
requests a stay.
granting a stay, the Committee may require that the requesting party post a bank
guarantee for its full
to prevent the use of
a stay application as a means to delay enforcement of the award.
If the award is annulled the dispute will be submitted to a new tribunal if
either party so requests.
parts of the original award that were not annulled are
res judicata
between the parties.
W Recognition and Enforcement
An award binds the parties and may not be appealed except as provided by the
Convention.
All Contracting
States shall recognise ICSID awards as
and must enforce the
pecuniary obligations of an award as if it was a final judgment of one of their
own courts.
Commonwealth Act
designates the Supreme Court of each State and
Territory as the competent court for the recognition and enforcement of an
The Supreme Court may
enforce an award as if it had been made under the law of that State or
The enforcement provision of the Convention do not affect the operation of
the foreign state immunity laws of the State in which enforcement
However, if a
Contracting State does not comply with the award it may be subject to various
counter-measures.
of non-compliance the other State is not precluded from undertaking diplomatic
protection on behalf of its
The other State may
also bring the dispute before the International Court of
X Costs and Interest
There has been no consistent practice regarding the award of costs in ICSID
proceedings.
The tribunal
assesses the costs of the proceedings as part of the Award. These costs comprise
the expenses of the parties relating
to the proceedings, the fees and expenses
of the tribunal and the charges for the use of the
The tribunal has the
power to order the payment of compound interest as part of the
V Conclusion
Commonwealth Act
has given the UNCITRAL Model Law and the ICSID
Convention the force of Australian law. The widespread adoption of these
international
instruments has made them a strong foundation for international
commercial arbitration in Australia.
BA, LLB, PhD (Qld)
JD (Leuven), LLM
(Northwestern), PhD (Sydney), GCEd Qld, FCIArb
John Holland Pty Ltd v Toyo
Engineering Corp (Japan)
[2001] 2 SLR 262
Gavan Griffith and Andrew D
Mitchell, ‘Contractual Dispute Resolution in International Trade: The
UNCITRAL Arbitration Rules
(1976) and the UNCITRAL Conciliation Rules
[2002] MelbJlIntLaw 8
Melbourne Journal of International Law
The Centre’s website is
at http://www.acica.org.au/.
The Association’s
website is at http://www.adr.org/.
The Court’s website is
at http://www.lcia-arbitration.com/. For a commentary, see Peter Turner and Reza
Mohtashami,
A Guide to the LCIA Arbitration Rules
(forthcoming 2008).
See Eric van Ginkel,
‘The UNCITRAL Model Law on International Commercial Conciliation’
Journal of International Arbitration
Convention on the
Recognition and Enforcement of Foreign Arbitral Awards
, New York, 10 June
1958, 330 UNTS 3
, Aust TS 1975 No 25.
House of Representatives
, 3 November 1988, 2399.
American Diagnostica Inc
v Gradipore Ltd
(1998) 44 NSWLR 312
, 322-3. See also
AWB (International)
Ltd v Tradesmen International (Pvt)
[2006] VSCA 210.
Simon Greenburg and
Christopher Kee, ‘Can you Seek Security for Costs in International
Arbitration in Australia?’
Australian Bar Review
International
Arbitration Act 1974
Abigroup Contractors Pty
Ltd v Transfield Pty Ltd
(1998) 217 ALR 435, [79]-[80];
[1998] VSC 103
APC Logistics Pty Ltd v CJ Nutracon Pty Ltd
[2007] FCA 136
Australian Granites Ltd v Eisenwerk Hensel Bayreuth Dipl-Ing Burkhardt
[2001] 1 Qd R 461
Pan Australia Shipping
Pty Ltd v The Ship ‘Comandate’ (No 2)
[2006] FCA 1112
(2006) 234 ALR 483
[2006] FCA 1112.
Abigroup Contractors Pty
Ltd v Transfield Pty Ltd
(1998) 217 ALR 435, [98]-[99], [109];
La Donna Pty Ltd v
[2005] VSC 359
(2005) 194 FLR 26
[2005] VSC 359.
Australian Granites Ltd
v Eisenwerk Hensel Bayreuth Dipl-Ing Burkhardt GmbH
[2001] 1 Qd R 461
International
Arbitration Act 1974
HIH Casualty &
General Insurance Ltd (in liq) v Wallace
[2006] NSWSC 1150
(2006) 204 FLR 297
, [44], [54],
[56], [77];
[2006] NSWSC 1150.
Bakri Navigation Co Ltd
v Owners of Ship ‘Golden Glory’ Glorious Shipping SA
La Donna Pty Ltd v
[2005] VSC 359
(2005) 194 FLR 26
, [25]-[27], [30];
[2005] VSC 359.
Pan Australia Shipping
Pty Ltd v The Ship ‘Comandate’ (No 2)
[2006] FCA 1112
(2006) 234 ALR 483
[2006] FCA 1112.
Shanghai Foreign Trade
Corp v Sigma Metallurgical Co Pty Ltd
(1996) 133 FLR 417
See Peter Megens and Max
Bonnell, ‘The Bakun Dispute: Mandatory National Laws in International
Arbitration’
Australian Law Journal
Trade Practices Act 1974
Comandate Marine Corp v
Pan Australia Shipping Pty Ltd
[2006] FCAFC 192
(2006) 157 FCR 45
[2006] FCAFC
Comandate Marine Corp v
Pan Australia Shipping Pty Ltd
[2006] FCAFC 192
(2006) 157 FCR 45
[2006] FCAFC
UNCITRAL Model Law on
International Commercial Arbitration
, New York, 21 June
1985, 24 ILM 1302
). For a commentary, see Peter Binder,
International Commercial Arbitration and Conciliation in UNCITRAL Model Law
(2nd ed, 2005). Summaries of judicial decisions concerning the
Model Law appear on the UNCITRAL website:
http://www.uncitral.org/uncitral/en/case_law.html.
Aust TS 1999 No 38 p
Dell Computer Corp v
Union des consommateurs
2007 SCC 34
Griffith and Mitchell,
above n 2, 185.
By provincial legislation
International
Commercial Arbitration Act
(RSA, c I-6.6);
International
Commercial Arbitration Act
(RSBC 1996, c 233);
International
Commercial Arbitration Act
(RSO 1990, c I.9).
Arbitration
(cap 341) (HK).
International
Arbitration Act
(cap 143A) (Sing).
Arbitration Act 1996
(NZ) Sch 1.
Arbitration and
Conciliation Act 1996
Arbitration
(International Commercial) Act 1998
UNCITRAL Arbitration
1976, 15 ILM 701.
The parties may also
provide that if there is a conflict between their contract and the UNCITRAL
Rules, the contract will prevail.
Ever-Gotesco Resources and Holdings Inc
v Pricesmart Inc
192 F Supp 2d 1040
, 1043-4 (SD Cal 2002).
Pieter Sanders, ‘Has
the Moment Come to Revise the Arbitration Rules of UNCITRAL?’
Arbitration International
International
Arbitration Act
International
Arbitration Act
International
Arbitration Act
International
Arbitration Act
Some decisions applying the
Model Law are reported in
Model Arbitration Law Quarterly Reports
(1995-2004). Numerous decisions are summarised in Henri C Alvarez, David W
Rivkin and Neil Kaplan,
Model Law Decisions: Cases applying the UNCITRAL
Model Law on International Commercial Arbitration (1985-2001)
Pan Australia Shipping
Pty Ltd v The Ship ‘Comandate’ (No 2)
[2006] FCA 1112
(2006) 234 ALR 483
[2006] FCA 1112.
German Bundesgerichtshof,
VIII ZR 121/98
, 24 March 1999; Franco Ferrari, ‘Applying the CISG
in a Truly Uniform Manner: Tribunale di Vegavano (Italy), 12 July 2000’
Uniform Law Review
Chicago Prime Packers Inc v Northam
Food Trading Co
320 F Supp 2d 702
, 709 fn 11, 712, 714 (ND Ill
Xerox Canada Ltd v MPI
Technologies Inc
2006 CanLII 41006, [44], [48] (Ont SC).
ABC Co v XYZ Co Ltd
[2003] 3 SLR 546
[2003] SGHC 107.
International
Arbitration Act
Yearbook of
the United Nations Commission on International Trade Law
to Art 1(1).
Fung Sang Trading Ltd
v Kai Sun Sea Products and Food Co Ltd
[1992] 1 HKLR 40
Comandate Marine Corp v
Pan Australia Shipping Pty Ltd
[2006] FCAFC 192
(2006) 157 FCR 45
, [198], [200];
[2006] FCAFC
34(a)(b)(i).
Mitsui Engineering &
Shipbuilding Co Ltd v Easton Graham Rush
[2004] 2 SLR 14
Yearbook of
the United Nations Commission on International Trade Law
General Distributors Ltd
v Casata Ltd
[2006] NZSC 8
[2006] 2 NZLR 721
[2006] NZSC 8.
Grandeur Electrical Co
Ltd v Cheung Kee Fung Cheung Construction Co Ltd
[2006] HKCA 305
[2006] 3 HKLRD 535
Grandeur Electrical Co
Ltd v Cheung Kee Fung Cheung Construction Co Ltd
[2006] HKCA 305
[2006] 3 HKLRD 535
Astel-Peiniger Joint
Venture v Argos Engineering & Heavy Industries Co Ltd
[1994] HKCFI 276
[1995] 1 HKLR 300
Paquito Lima Buton v
Rainbow Joy Shipping Ltd Inc
[2007] HKCA 68
The Commonwealth Act contains a similar provision. See
International Arbitration Act 1974
Lucky-Goldstar
International (HK) Ltd v Ng Moo Kee
[1993] 2 HKLRD 73
Front Carriers Ltd v
Atlantic & Orient Shipping Corp
[2006] 3 SLR 854
[2006] SGHC
Swift-Fortune Ltd v
Magnifica Marine SA
[2006] SGCA 42
, [31], [33].
Front Carriers Ltd v
Atlantic & Orient Shipping Corp
[2006] 3 SLR 854
, [17], [21];
Swift-Fortune Ltd v Magnifica Marine SA
[2006] SGCA 42
Vibroflotation AG v
Express Builders Co Ltd
[1994] HKCFI 205
[1995] 1 HKLR 239
International
Arbitration Act
Yearbook of
the United Nations Commission on International Trade Law
Computer Corp v Union des consommateurs
2007 SCC 34
Yearbook of
the United Nations Commission on International Trade Law
International
Arbitration Act
ACE Bermuda Insurance
Ltd v Allianz Insurance Co of Canada
(2005) 390 AR 342
Yugraneft Corp v Rexx Management Corp
2007 ABQB 450
Incorporated Owners of
Tak Tai Building v Leung Yau Building Ltd
[2005] 2 HKLRD D2
; [2005] HKEC
349, [17]-[18].
PT Asuransi Jasa
Indonesia (Persero) v Dexia Bank SA
[2007] 1 SLR 597
, [45], [68];
PT Garuda Indonesia v
[2002] 1 SLR 393
, [23]-[24], [36], [38].
Corporacion
Transnacional de Inversiones v STET International
(1999) 45 OR (3d) 183
204; affd (2000) 49 OR (3rd) 414.
Jardine Lloyd
Thompson Canada Inc v Western Oil Sands Inc
(2006) 380 AR 121
2006 ABCA 18.
International
Arbitration Act
International
Arbitration Act 1974
Jardine Lloyd
Thompson Canada Inc v Western Oil Sands Inc
(2006) 380 AR 121
, [39]-[41],
264 DLR (4th) 358
2006 ABCA 18.
Vibroflotation AG v
Express Builders Co Ltd
[1994] HKCFI 205
[1995] 1 HKLR 239
Methanex Motunui Ltd
[2004] 3 NZLR 454
, [148], [153]-[156].
Yearbook of
the United Nations Commission on International Trade Law
Yearbook of
the United Nations Commission on International Trade Law
General Distributors
Ltd v Casata Ltd
[2006] NZSC 8
[2006] 2 NZLR 721
, [12], [43], [46], [71], [143], [147];
[2006] NZSC 8.
General Distributors
Ltd v Casata Ltd
[2006] NZSC 8
[2006] 2 NZLR 721
, [11], [34], [143];
[2006] NZSC 8.
International
Arbitration Act
International
Arbitration Act
International
Arbitration Act
General Distributors
Ltd v Casata Ltd
[2006] NZSC 8
[2006] 2 NZLR 721
, [40], [124];
[2006] NZSC 8.
Methanex Motunui Ltd
[2004] 3 NZLR 454
ABC Co v XYZ Co
[2003] 3 SLR 546
[2003] SGHC 107.
ABC Co v XYZ Co
[2003] 3 SLR 546
, [4], [11];
[2003] SGHC 107.
Methanex Motunui Ltd
[2004] 3 NZLR 454
, [108]-[111].
International
Arbitration Act
PT Garuda Indonesia v
[2002] 1 SLR 393
, [21]. See
Arts 1(2), 20.
Corporacion
Transnacional de Inversiones v STET International
(1999) 45 OR (3d) 183
191, 192, 204; affd (2000) 49 OR (3rd) 414.
Corporacion
Transnacional de Inversiones v STET International
(1999) 45 OR (3d) 183
192; affd (2000) 49 OR (3rd) 414;
Xerox Canada Ltd v MPI Technologies Inc
2006 CanLII 41006, [144] (Ont SC).
Government of the
Republic of the Philippines v Philippine International Air Terminals Co Inc
[2006] SGHC 206
34(2)(a)(i).
34(2)(a)(i).
34(2)(a)(ii).
34(2)(a)(iii).
PT Asuransi Jasa
Indonesia (Persero) v Dexia Bank SA
[2007] 1 SLR 597
[2006] SGCA
34(2)(a)(iii).
34(2)(a)(iv).
34(2)(a)(iv).
34(2)(b)(i).
34(2)(b)(ii).
Yugraneft Corp v Rexx
Management Corp
2007 ABQB 450
Xerox Canada Ltd v
MPI Technologies Inc
2006 CanLII 41006, [110] (Ont SC).
Canadian Charter of
Rights and Freedoms
Corporacion
Transnacional de Inversiones v STET International
(1999) 45 OR (3d) 183
Corporacion
Transnacional de Inversiones v STET International
(2000) 49 OR (3rd) 414,
Corporacion
Transnacional de Inversiones v STET International
(2000) 49 OR (3rd) 414,
PT Asuransi Jasa
Indonesia (Persero) v Dexia Bank SA
[2007] 1 SLR 597
[2006] SGCA
Downer-Hill Joint
Venture v Government of Fiji
[2005] 1 NZLR 554
Corporacion
Transnacional de Inversiones v STET International
(1999) 45 OR (3d) 183
194; affd (2000) 49 OR (3rd) 414.
Corporacion
Transnacional de Inversiones v STET International
(2000) 49 OR (3rd) 414,
International
Arbitration Act
Methanex Motunui Ltd
[2004] 3 NZLR 454
, [101], [111].
United Mexican States
v Metalclad Corp
(2001) 95 BCLR (3d) 169
2001 BCSC 1529.
Yugraneft Corp v Rexx
Management Corp
2007 ABQB 450
Yugraneft Corp v Rexx
Management Corp
2007 ABQB 450
36(1)(a)(v).
Yugraneft Corp v Rexx
Management Corp
2007 ABQB 450
, [52], [71]-[72].
International
Arbitration Act
The Association’s
web site, above n 4.
International
Arbitration Act
International
Arbitration Act
Convention on the
Settlement of Investment Disputes between States and Nationals of Other
, Washington, 18 March
1965, 575 UNTS 159
, Aust TS 1991 No 23
). For commentaries on the Convention, see K V S K
ICSID Convention: The Law of the International Centre for Settlement
of Investment Disputes
(2000); Christoph Schreuer,
The ICSID Convention:
A Commentary on the Convention on the Settlement of Investment Disputes between
States and Nationals of Other
(2001); Lucy Reed, Jan Paulsson and
Nigel Blackaby,
Guide to ICSID Arbitration
(2004). ICSID has also adopted
two sets of Rules. See
Rules of Procedure for the Institution of Conciliation
and Arbitration Proceedings
Institution Rules
of Procedure for Arbitration
Proceedings
Arbitration
1639 UNTS 409.
International
Arbitration Act
(Chapters II to VII).
ICSID decisions are
reported in
ICSID Reports
(1993-) and
ICSID Review-Foreign Investment
Law Journal
(1986-). Many recent decisions are available on the ICSID
website at http://www.worldbank.org/icsid.
Malaysian Historical
Salvors Sdn Bhd v Government of Malaysia
(Jurisdiction)
, 10 May 2007,
Concesionada de Venezuela CA v Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela
(Jurisdiction)
, 27 September 2001, 6 ICSID Rep 419, [94]; 16 ICSID
Rev-FILJ 469.
Tradex Hellas SA v
Republic of Albania
(Jurisdiction)
, 24 December 1996, 5 ICSID Rep 47;
14 ICSID Rev-FILJ 161, 186-7; Reed, Paulsson and Blackaby, above n 186, 22.
Agreements on the
Promotion and Protection of Investments:
, 23 August 1995, Aust
TS 1997 No 4, Art 13(3)(a);
, 9 July 1996, Aust TS 1999 No 37, Art
, 11 July 1988, Aust TS 1988 No 14, Art 12(4);
, 30 September 1993, Aust TS 1994 No 18, Art 11(3)(a);
3 May 2001, Aust TS 2002 No 19, Art 13(2)(b);
, 15 August 1991,
Aust TS 1992 No 19, Art 12(3)(a);
, 26 February 1999, Aust TS 2000
No 14, Art 12(3)(a);
, 17 November 1992, Aust TS 1993 No 19, Art
, 6 April 1994, Aust TS 1995 No 9, Art 12(2)(b);
, 24 November 1998, Aust TS 2002 No 7, Art 13(2)(b);
, 7 February 1998, Aust TS 1998 No 23, Art 13(2)(b);
, 23 August 2005, Aust TS 2007 No 20, Art 13(4)(a);
, 3 September 1990, Aust TS 1991 No 38, Art 14(2)(b);
December 1995, Aust TS 1997 No 8, Art 13(2)(b);
Philippines
, 25 January
1995, Aust TS 1995 No 28, Art 13(2)(b);
, 7 May 1991, Aust TS 1992
No 10, Art 13(3)(a);
, 21 June 1993, Aust TS 1994 No 10, Art
, 12 November 2002, Aust TS 2007 No 22, Art 13(2)(b);
, 16 June 2005,
[2003] ATNIF 9
, Art 13(2)(a);
September 2001, Aust TS 2003 No 10, Art 13(2)(b);
, 5 March 1991,
Aust TS 1991 No 36, Art 12(2)(b). These treaties are available at
http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/other/dfat/treaties/.
As at 9 May 2007 India, Laos,
Mexico, Poland and Vietnam were not yet parties to the ICSID Convention.
Reed, Paulsson and
Blackaby, above n 186, 14.
Ceskoslovenska
Obchodni Banka AS v Slovak Republic
(Jurisdiction)
, 24 May 1999, 5
ICSID Rep 335, [16]-[17]; 14 ICSID Rev-FILJ 251.
Ceskoslovenska
Obchodni Banka AS v Slovak Republic
(Jurisdiction)
, 24 May 1999, 5
ICSID Rep 335, [16]; 14 ICSID Rev-FILJ 251;
Maffezini v Kingdom of Spain
(Jurisdiction)
, 25 January 2000, 5 ICSID Rep 396, [74];
Schreuer, above n 186,
Fedax NV v Republic
of Venezuela
(Jurisdiction)
, 11 July 1997, 5 ICSID Rep 186, [15];
Fedax NV v Republic
of Venezuela
(Jurisdiction)
, 11 July 1997, 5 ICSID Rep 186, [21],
37 ILM 1378
Joy Mining Machinery Ltd v Arab Republic of Egypt
(Jurisdiction)
2004, 44 ILM 73
, [42]; 19 ICSID Rev-FILJ
Ceskoslovenska
Obchodni Banka AS v Slovak Republic
(Jurisdiction)
, 24 May 1999, 5
ICSID Rep 335, [64]; 14 ICSID Rev-FILJ 251;
Tokios Tokelès v Ukraine
(Jurisdiction)
, 29 April 2004, 11 ICSID Rep 313, [73]; 20 ICSID Rev-FILJ
Concesionada de Venezuela CA v Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela
(Jurisdiction)
, 27 September 2001, 6 ICSID Rep 419, [97], [99]; 16 ICSID
Rev-FILJ 469;
Joy Mining Machinery Ltd v Arab Republic of Egypt
(Jurisdiction)
2004, 44 ILM 73
, [49]-[50]; 19 ICSID Rev-FILJ
Joy Mining Machinery
Ltd v Arab Republic of Egypt
(Jurisdiction)
2004, 44 ILM
, [53]; 19 ICSID Rev-FILJ 486. For somewhat different definitions, see
Consorzio Groupement LESI-Dipenta v People’s Democratic Republic of
, 10 January 2005, [13];
Saipem SpA v
People’s Republic of Bangladesh
(Jurisdiction)
, 21 March 2007,
Fedax NV v Republic
of Venezuela
(Jurisdiction)
, 11 July 1997, 5 ICSID Rep 186, [29];
Fedax NV v Republic
of Venezuela
(Jurisdiction)
, 11 July 1997, 5 ICSID Rep 186, [24],
37 ILM 1378.
See similarly,
Ceskoslovenska Obchodni Banka AS v Slovak
(Jurisdiction)
, 24 May 1999, 5 ICSID Rep 335, [71]-[72]; 14
ICSID Rev-FILJ 251.
Reed, Paulsson and
Blackaby, above n 186, 17.
Tokios Tokelès v
(Jurisdiction)
, 29 April 2004, 11 ICSID Rep 313, [25]-[26];
20 ICSID Rev-FILJ 205;
Aguas del Tunari SA v Republic of Bolivia
(Jurisdiction)
, 21 October 2005, 20 ICSID Rev-FILJ 450, [283].
Tokios Tokelès v
(Jurisdiction)
, 29 April 2004, 11 ICSID Rep 313, [44]-[45],
[50]; 20 ICSID Rev-FILJ 205.
Cable Television of
Nevis Ltd v Federation of St Kitts and Nevis
, 13 January
1997, 5 ICSID Rep 106, [2.22], [2.28], [2.33]; 13 ICSID Rev-FILJ 327.
See Ross P Buckley,
‘Some Jurisdictional Difficulties with Australia’s Ratification of
the ICSID Convention’
Asia Pacific Law Review
Representatives Hansard
, 28 September 1993, p 1280;
, 21 February
Representatives Hansard
, 15 October 1992, p 2355;
, 28 September
1993, 1280; 1 December 1995, 4505; 9 September 1996, 3797; 14 May 1997, 3667; 22
November 1999, 12352; 27 September
2001, 31823.
Metalclad Corp v
United Mexican States
, 30 August 2000, 5 ICSID Rep 212, [73];
119 ILR 615
Compañía de Aguas del Aconquija SA v Argentine
(Annulment)
, 3 July 2002, 6 ICSID Rep 340, [96];
ADF Group Inc v United States of America
, 9 January 2003,
6 ICSID Rep 470, [166]; 18 ICSID Rev-FILJ 193;
Azurix Corp v Argentine
, 14 July 2006, [50].
Compañía de
Aguas del Aconquija SA v Argentine Republic
, 21 November
2000, 5 ICSID Rep 299, [51];
Compañia de Aguas del Aconquija
SA v Argentine Republic
(Annulment)
, 3 July 2002, 6 ICSID Rep 340,
125 ILR 58.
Ceskoslovenska
Obchodni Banka AS v Slovak Republic
(Jurisdiction)
, 1 December 2000,
5 ICSID Rep 358, [35]; 15 ICSID Rev-FILJ 530.
Banro American
Resources Inc v Democratic Republic of the Congo
, 1 September
2000, 17 ICSID Rev-FILJ 382, [20], [23];
Tokios Tokeles v Ukraine
(Procedural Order No 3)
, 18 January 2005, 11 ICSID Rep 352, [21].
Banro American
Resources Inc v Democratic Republic of the Congo
, 1 September
2000, 17 ICSID Rev-FILJ 382, [15], [21].
Concesionada de Venezuela CA v Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela
(Jurisdiction)
, 27 September 2001, 6 ICSID Rep 419, [138]; 16 ICSID
Rev-FILJ 469.
Maffezini v Kingdom
(Jurisdiction)
, 25 January 2000, 5 ICSID Rep 396, [22];
Generation Ukraine
Inc v Ukraine
, 16 September 2003, 10 ICSID Rep 236, [13.5];
44 ILM 404.
Various requirements for the contents of the request are set out in
Institution Rules
Institution Rules
Arbitration Rules
Art 57. See
Arbitration Rules
Art 57. See
Arts 37-40.
del Desarrollo de Santa Elena SA v Costa Rica
, 17 February
2000, 5 ICSID Rep 157, [63];
39 ILM 317.
International
Arbitration Act
Arbitration Rules
Arbitration Rules
Salini Costruttori
SPA v Hashemite Kingdom of Jordan
, 31 January 2006,
Art 43. See
Arbitration Rules
r 34(2)(a).
Aguas del Tunari SA v
Republic of Bolivia
(Jurisdiction)
, 21 October 2005, 20 ICSID
Rev-FILJ 450, [25].
Arbitration Rules
Art 43. See
Arbitration Rules
Arbitration Rules
Art 47. See
Arbitration Rules
Maffezini v Kingdom
(Procedural Order No 2)
, 28 October 1999, 5 ICSID Rep 393,
Tokios Tokelés v Ukraine
(Provisional
, 1 July 2003, 11 ICSID Rep 310, [4].
Maffezini v Kingdom
(Procedural Order No 2)
, 28 October 1999, 5 ICSID Rep 393,
Tokios Tokeles v
(Procedural Order No 3)
, 18 January 2005, 11 ICSID Rep 352,
Biwater Gauff
(Tanzania) Ltd v United Republic of Tanzania
(Procedural Order No 1)
31 March 2006, [71].
Biwater Gauff
(Tanzania) Ltd v United Republic of Tanzania
(Procedural Order No 1)
31 March 2006, [92].
Art 46. See
Arbitration Rules
Arbitration Rules
Various requirements for the contents of the award are set out in
Arbitration
Arbitration Rules
Arbitration Rules
Arbitration Rules
Wena Hotels Ltd v
Arab Republic of Egypt
(Interpretation)
, 31 October 2005,
Wena Hotels Ltd v
Arab Republic of Egypt
(Interpretation)
, 31 October 2005, [87].
Arbitration
Arbitration Rules
Compañia de
Aguas del Aconquija SA v Argentine Republic
(Supplementation and
Rectification)
, 28 May 2003, 8 ICSID Rep 490, [25]; 19 ICSID-Rev FILJ
Arbitration
Wena Hotels Ltd v
Arab Republic of Egypt
(Annulment)
, 28 January 2002, 6 ICSID Rep 129,
[18], [22];
Repsol YPF Ecuador SA v Empresa Estatal
Petróleos del Ecuador
(Annulment)
, 8 January 2007, [38], [86];
CMS Gas Transmission Co v Argentina
(Annulment)
, 25 September
2007, [43]-[44].
CMS Gas Transmission
Co v Argentina
(Annulment)
, 25 September 2007, [136], [158].
Wena Hotels Ltd v
Arab Republic of Egypt
(Annulment)
, 28 January 2002, 6 ICSID Rep 129,
CMS Gas Transmission Co v Argentina
(Annulment)
, 25 September 2007, [43].
Wena Hotels Ltd v
Arab Republic of Egypt
(Annulment)
, 28 January 2002, 6 ICSID Rep 129,
41 ILM 933.
Wena Hotels Ltd v
Arab Republic of Egypt
(Annulment)
, 28 January 2002, 6 ICSID Rep 129,
41 ILM 933.
Wena Hotels Ltd v
Arab Republic of Egypt
(Annulment)
, 28 January 2002, 6 ICSID Rep 129,
CMS Gas Transmission Co v Argentina
(Annulment)
25 September 2007, [49]-[51].
Wena Hotels Ltd v
Arab Republic of Egypt
(Annulment)
, 28 January 2002, 6 ICSID Rep 129,
41 ILM 933.
Wena Hotels Ltd v
Arab Republic of Egypt
(Annulment)
, 28 January 2002, 6 ICSID Rep 129,
41 ILM 933.
Wena Hotels Ltd v
Arab Republic of Egypt
(Annulment)
, 28 January 2002, 6 ICSID Rep 129,
41 ILM 933.
Wena Hotels Ltd v
Arab Republic of Egypt
(Annulment)
, 28 January 2002, 6 ICSID Rep 129,
Compañia de Aguas del Aconquija SA v Argentine
(Annulment)
, 3 July 2002, 6 ICSID Rep 340, [64];
CMS Gas Transmission Co v Argentina
(Annulment)
, 25 September
2007, [54].
Arbitration Rules
Mitchell v Democratic
Republic of the Congo
(Stay of Enforcement)
, 30 November 2004, 20
ICSID Rev-FILJ 587, [33];
MTD Equity Sdn Bhd v Republic of Chile
of Execution)
, 1 June 2005, [29];
Repsol YPF Ecuador SA v Empresa Estatal
Petróleos Del Ecuador
(Procedural Order No 1)
, 22 December 2005,
20 ICSID Rev-FILJ 629, [8]-[9];
CMS Gas Transmission Co v Argentine
(Stay of Enforcement)
, 1 September 2006, [36], [38].
Arbitration Rules
Amco Asia Corp v
Republic of Indonesia
(Jurisdiction)
, 10 May 1988, 1 ICSID Rep 543,
89 ILR 552.
International Arbitration Act
International
Arbitration Act
International
Arbitration Act
Mitchell v Democratic
Republic of the Congo
(Stay of Enforcement)
, 30 November 2004, 20
ICSID Rev-FILJ 587, [41].
Compañía de
Aguas del Aconquija SA v Argentine Republic
, 21 November
2000, 5 ICSID Rep 299, [94];
Salini Costruttori SPA v Hashemite
Kingdom of Jordan
, 31 January 2006, [102].
Arbitration Rules
rr 28, 34(4).
del Desarrollo de Santa Elena SA v Costa Rica
, 17 February
2000, 5 ICSID Rep 157, [97]-[98], [103];
39 ILM 317.
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (516 KB)
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter