URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/journals/LegEdDig/2013/41.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 15:13:37
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Hutchinson, T; Duncan, N --- "Defining and describing what we do: doctrinal legal research" [2013] LegEdDig 41; (2013) 21(3) Legal Education Digest 32
Defining and describing what we do: doctrinal legal research
T Hutchinson and N Duncan
Deakin Law Review
, Vol 17, No.1, 2012, pp 83-119
Now, more than ever, it is imperative that academic lawyers, working within
an increasingly sophisticated research context, explain
and justify what they do
when they conduct ‘doctrinal research’. Lawyers need to explicate
their methodology in terminology
similar to that used by other disciplines.
The doctrine in question includes legal concepts and principles of all types
– cases, statutes, and rules. ‘Doctrine’
has been defined as
‘[a] synthesis of various rules, principles, norms, interpretive
guidelines and values. It explains, makes
coherent or justifies a segment of the
law as part of a larger system of law. Doctrines can be more or less abstract,
non-binding’. It follows that doctrinal research is research
into the law and legal concepts.
The research landscape in universities has changed significantly in the last
20 years. There is more emphasis on group, interdisciplinary
and empirical
research rather than there was under the older paradigm, particularly common in
law faculties, of an individual legal
researcher working alone.
In Australia, the operating grant is no longer ‘as of right’ but
tied to research outcomes and student numbers. In the
United Kingdom,
universities are faced with the withdrawal of government grants to cover
teaching; they are now replaced by student
fees of up to £9000 and intake
controls linked to entry qualifications. The importance of research outputs has
prompted a ‘publish
or perish’ mentality. Academics are being
directed towards publication in refereed or peer reviewed journals with academic
audiences, rather than practitioner journals where, arguably, their research may
have more impact. Authoring student texts or disseminating
research knowledge to
the broader community generally receives less ‘kudos’.
Governments in both Australia and the UK have recognised the importance of
research for economic development. All aspects of university
operation are being
regulated more directly than ever before in Australia, with the establishment of
the Tertiary Education Quality
and Standards Agency (TEQSA) and a new Australian
Qualifications Framework (AQF), to ensure consistency in accreditation of new
and high quality outcomes.
In the UK, an incoming Labour government in 1997 increased funding for all
aspects of higher education. This period of relative largesse
was curtailed by
the global economic crisis and in 2009 the government identified cuts of a total
of £398 million in the Annual
Grant for higher education.
The economic downturn appears to have been weathered better in Australia. The
2010 election returned another Labor government. The
government promised $5.2
billion in outlays during the next five to six years including ‘improved
resourcing of the indirect
costs of research’.
Since taking office, Labor has commissioned a number of studies of the
university sector. In 2008, the Bradley Review underlined the
urgent need for
increased funding for Australia’s universities. The report concluded that
‘[f]or Australia to improve
its relative performance against other
nations, additional, ongoing and significant public investment in higher
education will be
required’. December 2008 saw the publication of the
Australian House of Representatives Standing Committee Report into Research
Training which again pointed to the need for government nurturing of the higher
education research sector. The Report notes the ‘years
of neglect’
of the sector and the ‘inadequate funding’ as being a
‘fundamental obstacle to building Australia’s
full research
In 2008 the Australian federal government announced that the Excellence in
Research for Australia (ERA) initiative was to replace
the previous
government’s Research Quality Framework (RQF) program. In 2005 the UK
government announced that the Higher Education
Funding Council for England
(HEFCE) would replace the Research Assessment Exercise (RAE) with the Research
Excellence Framework (REF)
– a more bibliometrics-oriented method of
assessment, also designed to test economic and social impact.
The primary focus of the UK REF is to identify excellent research of all
kinds, assessed through a process of expert review, and informed
research citation data. There is significant additional recognition given to
researchers who build on excellent research
to deliver demonstrable benefits to
the economy, society, public policy, culture and quality of life. This endeavour
is administered
by four panels, each of which is divided into sub-panels. The
Law sub-panel is linked into Panel C which places it firmly in the
the social sciences disciplines as opposed to the humanities.
A strongly bibliometric approach which may be appropriate in scientific
fields of endeavour is not entirely meaningful to lawyers.
The use of metrics
within the legal discipline is proving highly controversial. Of course, this is
because there are no effective
metric measures of citation for law. Quality of
research within the discipline of law is normally evaluated not only by the
of research papers by other researchers, but also by the referencing of
pertinent research by the courts or law reform bodies. This
is not the type of
citation measure that is customary for other disciplines. This category of
citation is not included in the most
reputable research citation indexes which
cover the discipline of law.
The Excellence in Research for Australia (ERA) initiative is administered by
the Australian Research Council (ARC) and was developed
by that body, in
conjunction with the Department of Innovation, Industry, Science and Research,
to assess research quality using
a combination of metrics and expert review by
committees comprising experienced, internationally-recognised experts. These
evaluations,
similar to the UK REF, are informed by four broad categories of
indicators including research quality, research volume and activity,
application and indicators of recognition.
There is some ambivalence as to where law as a discipline ‘fits’
within the broader research community. ERA evaluates
research within eight
discipline clusters. The 2009 trial evaluated the Humanities and Creative Arts
(HCA) cluster which contains
Law and Legal Studies along with Built Environment
and Design, Studies in Creative Arts and Writing, Language Communication and
History and Archaeology, and Philosophy and Religious Studies. By
contrast, Law was in a different social science grouping under
the superseded
Coalition government Research Quality Framework (RQF) scheme.
In this very competitive context, where discipline funding is based on
measurable criteria and outcomes, and where interdisciplinary
panels examine
their work, it is apparent that academic lawyers need to be able to explain
their research in terminology that demonstrates
its credentials to those outside
law’s community of practice.
Research published in the United Kingdom in 2004 demonstrates that relatively
few projects by UK law school academics in ‘core
law’ research areas
were being externally funded. Michael Doherty and Patricia Leighton defined
‘core law’ as doctrinal
or ‘black letter’ work. Their
study noted that funded projects tended to be ‘undertaken by economists,
social policy
specialists, and those in inter-disciplinary research units that
could, but typically do not, involve legal researchers.’
Australian universities have experienced major growth in Higher Degree by
Research (HDR) completion rates for Law in the last two
decades. Statistics show
an increase from a PhD completion rate for Law and Legal Studies in Australia of
six students in 1988 to
42 in 1998 (with approximately 20 Masters completions
for both years of the study). The annual figure for 2008 had risen to 79
with an additional 16 Masters by Research completions).
Statistics for HDR enrolments in the field of law supplied by the Department
of Education, Employment and Workplace Relations (DEEWR)
provide a snapshot of
the total numbers of students enrolled in HDR courses in Law and Legal Studies
(090900-090999) at individual
Australian universities each year during the
period from 2004 to 2008.The total enrolments increased from 795 in 2004 to 982
The increasing numbers of students enrolled in higher degree research in law
bodes well for the continued growth of research in the
discipline, along with
the development of a more sophisticated researcher profile.
A Higher Degree by Research (HDR) paper stands as evidence of the
candidate’s research expertise. For this reason, the students,
supervisors
and examiners need to consider the research methodology that they are using.
A survey of postgraduate research in Australian law schools undertaken 10
years ago demonstrated that only 20 per cent of all doctoral
research projects
could be described as purely ‘doctrinal’. A more recent examination
of HDR theses submitted to the
Australasian Digital Thesis Program website in
the five year period 2004-9, reveals that most of the legal theses had a
component, even though only a few students overtly identified the
study they were conducting as being to any extent ‘doctrinal’.
examination of the database took place in October 2010 and covered a reading of
60 theses available digitally.
The analysis demonstrates that the doctrinal methodology is rarely
discussed, even when a ‘methodologies’ chapter is
included in the
thesis. Methodologies’ chapters in the theses examined appear more
frequently and are more prominent when the
thesis involves a surveyor
interviews. These methodologies ordinarily require ethics clearance from the
university but even this
crucial step in the research process is not always
acknowledged overtly. An examination of the database demonstrates that only 16
of the 60 theses include a methodologies chapter (26.6 per cent), 21 discuss
methodologies as part of another chapter, and one deals
with the methodology in
an appendix. Non-doctrinal methodologies are treated more expansively, with
extensive descriptions and lengthy
chapters. Where the thesis represents
traditional legal research, significantly less, and sometimes no attention is
given to explaining
the methods used in conducting the research.
This small study of a selection of law theses demonstrates that lawyers are
not conforming to the formalities of describing methodology
in the same way that
occurs in other disciplines. Perhaps there is not the same need to articulate
the method for an audience from
within the law paradigm. However, academic
lawyers are now participating in broader interdisciplinary environments than
they previously
did, where there is little knowledge of doctrinal research
processes and where there are different expectations in relation to explanations
of research methodologies.
We need to distinguish ‘law’ as a practical discipline exercised
within a professional setting, ‘law’ as a
body of normative rules
and principles (‘the law’) and ‘law’ as an academic
discipline.
By the 1980s, law was well established as an academic discipline in
Australia. The Pearce Committee reviewed the research coming out
Australian law schools. It categorised the research as encompassing: (1)
Doctrinal research
– ‘Research which provides a systematic
exposition of the rules governing a particular legal category, analyses the
relationship
between rules, explains areas of difficulty and, perhaps, predicts
future developments’; (2)
Reform-oriented research
‘Research which intensively evaluates the adequacy of existing rules
and which recommends changes to any rules
found wanting’; and (3)
Theoretical research
– ‘Research which fosters a more
complete understanding of the conceptual bases of legal principles and of the
effects of a range of rules and procedures that touch on a particular
area of activity.’
The 1982 landmark study on the state of legal research and scholarship in
Canada, the
Arthurs Report
, included a fourth category covering
non-doctrinal methodologies: (4)
Fundamental research
– ‘Research designed to secure a deeper understanding of law as a
social phenomenon, including research on the historical,
philosophical,
linguistic, economic, social or political implications of law.’
In some respects perhaps all that the Committee was saying is what the
Nuffield Inquiry has been saying more recently – that
we need much more
empirical research about the law and its effects in society.
All the reports agreed that doctrinal legal research was the most
accepted methodology in the discipline of law. The 2009
CALD (Council of
Australian Law Deans) Standards refer to the necessity for students to be able
to achieve research methodology skills
akin to the ‘doctrinal’,
(a) the intellectual and practical skills needed to research and analyse the
law from primary sources, and to apply the findings of
such work to the solution
of legal problems.
(b) the ability to communicate these findings, both orally and in
There are obviously varying degrees of complexity within doctrinal legal
research. Different forms of legal research necessitate variations
There is firstly the problem-based doctrinal research methodology used by
practitioners and students. This approach is directed to
solving a specific
legal problem and normally includes the following steps: (1) Assembling relevant
facts; (2) Identifying the legal
issues; (3) Analysing the issues with a view to
dictionaries,
legal encyclopaedias, textbooks, law reform and policy papers,
loose leaf services, journal articles); (5) Locating primary material
legislation, delegated legislation and case law; (6) Synthesising all the issues
in context; and (7) Coming to a tentative
conclusion.
Even though the practitioner’s advice to the client, whether it is
verbal or in writing, is invariably concise and pragmatic,
it may nevertheless
involve very complex aspects of the law. Therefore the practitioner lawyer often
specialises in a particular
legal area, and certainly would not need to
slavishly follow research steps such as undertaking ‘background’
The core doctrinal methodology used by the practitioner is also used by the
judge. However, the degree of complexity evidenced in
a judge’s decision
demonstrates another level of doctrinal work. The judge, in determining a case
and handing down a decision
between opposing parties in the court, is writing
not only for the parties and their counsel, but also for a more general
The judge’s decision needs to be justified and fully
Is this all that law academics too are doing when they research? Finding
solutions to practical problems? The doctrinal methodology
is not always
predicated on a specific legal ‘problem’ or directed to locating
one answer or conclusion. Academic
researchers choose both the topic and the
breadth and depth of investigation. The doctrinal method is similar to that
by the practitioner or the judge, except that the academic researcher
(or HDR student) is not constrained by the imperative to find
a concrete answer
for a client.
The researchers’ philosophical stance frequently determines the
research questions, progress and possible outcomes of academic
However, the ‘perspective’ or theoretical stance often lies
unstated. Pauline Westerman argues that, within
the dominant paradigm,
‘the legal system itself functions as a theoretical framework that selects
facts and, highlights them
as legally relevant ones’.
The process and the output of the doctrinal research is different among the
various research and writing genres, though facets of
the underlying research
methodology is similar.
Doctrinal method is normally a two-part process, because it involves first
locating the sources of the law and then interpreting and
analysing the text.
Most would argue that the law is rarely certain. However, if we take legislation
as an example, the laws are
passed by parliament and the words are written down.
It is at the next step where the law or rule is interpreted and analysed within
a specific context that the outcome becomes ‘contingent’ or
conditional on the expertise, views and methods of the individual
researcher.
Before analysing the law, the researcher must first locate it. Even a mere
description of the scope of such an exercise makes the
breadth of the
undertaking more apparent to the ‘outsider’. Having located this
wealth of documents, the second step
is more nebulous. Is it actually possible
to plan and describe this second aspect of the doctrinal research methodology in
an intelligible
way for an ‘outsider’?
Those studying the methodologies of lawyers point to a number of techniques
used within the synthesising process once the documents
are located and read.
The application of such techniques, along with a description of, for example,
the use of deductive logic, inductive
reasoning and analogy where appropriate,
would constitute the second part of the methodology.
Every research project, no matter what methodology is being used, needs a
literature review as a precursor to further study –
a nexus to that which
has been done before.
The literature review is basically asking: What Testimony is available on
your topic? ‘Testimony’ can include the secondary
literature –
texts, journal articles, government reports, policy documents, law reform
documents and media reports. Just like
any other research, doctrinal research
requires background research of secondary commentary and sources as a first
Doctrinal research also requires a trained expert in legal doctrine to read
and analyse the law – the primary sources: the legislation
and case law.
Doctrinal research is not simply the locating of secondary information. It
includes that intricate step of ‘reading,
analysing and linking’ the
new information to the known body of law.
What kind of discipline is law and how should we categorise its main research
method? There seems to be no accepted and stable classification
preference for
the law discipline within the research schemes.
Lawyers have attempted to set the doctrinal method apart and have said that
what we do is ‘different’. Doctrinal method
certainly distinguishes
itself from ‘empirical’ or evidence-based methods. Empirical data
comes about from ‘observing
and/or measuring social phenomena’.
There are aspects of ‘empirical’ or factual notions within doctrinal
as legislation and judgments may be seen as social phenomena, but these
are different because they are ‘legitimated’
by the sovereignty of
the source (parliament or court) rather than because they are the
‘naturally occurring’, observable
phenomena usually used in
empirical work.
Some commentators, in discussing the issue of delineation of methodology,
have sought to draw a distinction between the ‘internal
which is used in doctrinal legal research and which reflects the viewpoint of
the participant in the legal system studying
the texts of the law, and the
‘external method’ which reflects ‘the conceptual resources of
extra-legal disciplines’
and involves studying the law in practice using
empirical methodologies.
The majority of contemporary legal researchers acknowledge that it is
important to build on doctrinal research conclusions by using
sociological or
other ‘outsider’ perspectives.
If we accept that the doctrinal method is a two-part process of locating
‘the law’ or doctrine and then analysing the
texts, it might be
argued that doctrinal research has aspects of both quantitative and qualitative
methodologies within it. However,
can the law (legislation and case law) be
categorised as data?
Many aspects of the law are contingent on context, and need to be interpreted
and analysed for meaning. Therefore the analytical,
legal reasoning aspect of
the process is necessarily a qualitative one. When a researcher undertakes
doctrinal work, the outcome
is totally dependent on the voice and experience of
the individual.
As with any social science research, the doctrinal methodology is undertaken
according to accepted discipline standards and rules.
It requires an ability to
achieve a high level of analysis and critique. However, this process is
different from social scientific
thought. Doctrinal research focuses on legal
principle generated by the courts and the legislature. It differs from other
science research because it involves ‘[t]he search for the
particular rather than the general’ and ‘the non-probabilistic
nature of statements of law’.
Historical research is an example of a methodology that is in some way
aligned to doctrinal research. Historical research involves
developing an
understanding of the past through the examination and interpretation of
evidence. Evidence exists in the form of texts,
physical remains of historic
sites, recorded data, pictures, maps, artifacts, and so on. The
historian’s job is to find evidence,
analyze its content and bias,
corroborate it with further evidence, and use that evidence to develop an
interpretation of past events
that holds some significance for the present.
Historians use libraries to: locate primary sources (firsthand information
as diaries, letters, and original documents) for evidence; find secondary
sources (historians’ interpretations and analyses
of historical evidence);
and verify factual material as inconsistencies arise.
Unlike historical research which seeks to find the truth through considering
the perspective and view of every actor whatever their
social status or role in
events, and through examining the whole conceivable range of data, doctrinal
research for the most part
focuses on ‘privileged voices’. The legal
researcher examines primary sources in order to draw logical conclusions about
what the law is in those instances where it is not immediately self-evident from
those sources. By contrast, the historical researcher
examines primary sources
as evidence of fact.
Content analysis has also been compared to doctrinal research. Content
analysis identifies patterns in text and the themes in bodies
of documents.
Critical legal scholars use the technique to identify meaning behind the words
of judicial and legislative text. It
is a way of deconstructing text rather than
reading and synthesising meaning from the text. It is, therefore, distinguished
most doctrinal analysis.
The conclusion from this study is that the doctrinal research methodology is
a discrete method. However, it is not sufficiently delineated
for the current
research environment.
In the past, the under-description of the doctrinal method has not been
problematic because the research has been directed ‘inwards’
legal community. However, in a modern interdisciplinary framework, where the
research is being directed, read and more importantly
‘judged’ by
those outside a narrow legally trained discipline, articulation of method is
vital – especially if
funding is tied to quality, and quality depends on
methodological clarity.
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (791 KB)
PDF format (4.73 MB)
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter