URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/journals/MqLawJl/2019/7.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 15:21:26
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Toohey, Lisa; Moore, Monique; Dart, Katelane; Toohey, Dan --- "Meeting the Access to Civil Justice Challenge: Digital Inclusion, Algorithmic Justice, and Human-Centred Design" [2019] MqLawJl 7; (2019) 18 Macquarie Law Journal 133
MEETING THE ACCESS TO CIVIL JUSTICE CHALLENGE: DIGITAL INCLUSION, ALGORITHMIC JUSTICE, AND HUMAN-CENTRED DESIGN
Access to justice is crucial for a well-ordered society and a functioning economic system. This article focuses on what technology
offers as a ‘fourth wave’ in access to justice, namely a unique range of mechanisms to help meet the extensive legal
need in Australia. The article sets out a number of case studies to illustrate the scope of technological change in civil justice,
ranging from specialist delivery of legal information to automation platforms. Evident amongst the possibilities offered by technology
are also concerns and challenges for ensuring that access to justice is appropriately realised. This paper explores two of the most
significant challenges — digital inclusion and algorithmic justice. Two very different potential solutions are then discussed
— Black Box Tinkering and human-centred design, referred to contextually as Legal Design.
I INTRODUCTION
II CIVIL JUSTICE NEED IN AUSTRALIA
III RESPONDING TO CIVIL JUSTICE NEEDS — FOUR WAVES OF ACCESS TO JUSTICE
IV RIDING THE FOURTH WAVE — TECHNOLOGICAL CHANGE IN CIVIL JUSTICE
V CORE CONSIDERATIONS FOR BETTER ACCESS TO JUSTICE
C Solution 1: Black Box Tinkering
VI CONCLUSION
MEETING THE ACCESS TO CIVIL JUSTICE CHALLENGE: DIGITAL
INCLUSION, ALGORITHMIC JUSTICE, AND HUMAN-CENTRED DESIGN
LISA TOOHEY,* MONIQUE MOORE,** KATELANE
DART,*** DAN TOOHEY****
Access to justice is crucial for a well-ordered
society and a functioning economic system. This article focuses on what
offers as a ‘fourth wave’ in access to justice, namely a
unique range of mechanisms to help meet the extensive legal
need in Australia.
The article sets out a number of case studies to illustrate the scope of
technological change in civil justice,
ranging from specialist delivery of legal
information to automation platforms. Evident amongst the possibilities offered
by technology
are also concerns and challenges for ensuring that access to
justice is appropriately realised. This paper explores two of the most
significant challenges — digital inclusion and algorithmic justice. Two
very different potential solutions are then discussed
— Black Box
Tinkering and human-centred design, referred to contextually as Legal
I INTRODUCTION
Access to justice is a foundational pillar of our society; a promise that all
who need the assistance of the law should be able to
access our courts and other
institutions of justice. As Genn observes, the existence of justice institutions
is a public good, crucial
for a well-ordered society and for a functioning
Cappelleti and Garth set out two requirements for access to justice —
first, that the system must be accessible, with access
not contingent on
financial means or expertise. Secondly, that any system delivering access to
justice must ensure that results ‘are
individually and socially
Further, they note that the concept of access to justice has changed
substantially over time, with the mechanisms by which we can
‘make rights
effective’ developing along with successive reforms to the civil justice
system. By virtually any measure,
the Australian civil justice system has
struggled to provide accessibility, with cost and complexity being the two
primary obstacles
to achieving access to justice in the civil sphere.
There is great promise in the potential for technology to help make rights
effective for the millions of individuals with civil justice
problems. Susskind
argues that technology will greatly accelerate changes in legal practice,
resulting in a commoditised, segmented
and unbundled approach to the delivery of
While some lawyers lament the impact this will have on their traditional
monopoly, others, especially younger professionals, embrace
the disruptive
possibilities that technology offers to make legal knowledge, processes and
institutions available for all who need
them — and that
redesigned civil justice processes should be more than an abstract topic for
discussion; the collective knowledge and tools to make
it happen are available
today. Our current access to justice crisis serves as a call to reimagine and
redesign public justice processes
for civil disputes, centred on the needs of
the public.
However, focusing on access cannot come at the cost of individual and
systemic justice. There is an increasing body of literature
that identifies the
risks and challenges of safely, ethically, and effectively using ‘big
data’, particularly in the
but also in the civil law.
In this article we approach these questions as relative novices in the field of
technology, but with a
concern for the systemic possibilities and concerns of
technology in ensuring access to civil justice.
Part 2 of this article sets out the context of civil justice need in
Australia, before focusing in Part 3 on how successive ‘waves’
access to justice have offered innovation to address issues of access,
efficiency and cost. Technology offers what might be termed
wave’ in access to justice. Lawyers have been quick to identify that it
offers enormous potential for civil
cases, which are often (although not always)
relatively high volume, low value disputes. In Part 4, we draw together current
perspectives
on this fourth wave as a method for delivering access to justice,
highlighting examples of technological innovation with the potential
improve the user experience of civil justice.
In Part 5 we identify two emerging challenges to technological solutions that
are very important to consider when it comes to effective
solutions to the
access to justice. The first relates to digital inclusivity, and the challenge
of addressing the digital divide
amongst users. The second is Algorithmic Bias
and the need for algorithmic justice — a concept that recognises the
concerns about the design of artificial intelligence
(‘AI’) and other algorithm-based justice innovations and recognising
the potential for unintended negative impacts on human rights. We then explore
two very different potential solutions to ameliorate
these concerns. First,
Black Box Tinkering — a method that offers opportunity for greater
transparency in developing algorithms.
This solution is focused on examining
solutions that have already been created. Secondly, human-centred design, or
more contextually
specific, Legal Design thinking — a concept that
focusses on embedding user-driven insights into how technological solutions
created from the outset. Here, we advocate for the use of Legal Design thinking
methodologies to ensure technological solutions
are designed from the outset to
meet the needs of end users of legal technology, and not just the needs as they
are perceived by
system experts such as lawyers and policymakers.
II CIVIL JUSTICE NEED IN AUSTRALIA
As Sandefur has noted, the idea of a ‘civil justice problem’ is
not how a typical member of society is likely to conceptualise
the problem that
they are having with their former or current spouse, their bank, their phone
company, their employer, or the local
council. Sandefur observes, ‘people
often describe these situations using terms that suggest that they may not see
actionable, in the sense of being something one would try to do
something about or change’.
The landmark Australian study of legal need, undertaken by the Law and Justice
Foundation of New South Wales (‘the Legal Need
Study’), nonetheless
clearly depicts the ubiquity of civil disputes and their negative impact on the
lives of ordinary
Generalising from their large dataset, it should be expected that approximately
42 per cent of Australian adults have experienced
a civil justice problem in the
last twelve months — with large numbers of people experiencing substantial
problems resulting
from housing disputes, family disputes, disputes with
government, or consumer disputes.
Another critical finding from the Legal Need Study was the impact of social
disadvantage on legal need. For example, the data showed
that people living with
a disability were 2.2 times as likely to experience legal problems when compared
with the general population.
Unemployment correlated with a 1.6 times increase, and single parents were twice
as likely to experience legal
These factors also
increased the severity of legal problems that were encountered:
... [t]hat is, when compared to their counterparts, people aged 15–64
years, people with a disability, single parents, people
with post-school
qualifications, people who had been unemployed, people who had lived in
disadvantaged housing and people whose main
language was English had
significantly higher odds both of experiencing legal problems overall and of
experiencing substantial legal
At the same time, those most likely to experience legal problems are also
unlikely to have the means to pay for legal advice. The
2014 Productivity
Commission Inquiry Report on
Access to Justice Arrangements
cost of legal services prevented effective access for the vast majority of
Australians.
Chief Justice Wayne
Martin, in his address to the Community Legal Centres Association of Western
Australia, explained:
The hard reality is that the cost of legal representation is beyond the reach of
many, probably most ordinary Australians... In practice
access [to the legal
system] is limited to substantial business enterprises, the very wealthy, and
those who are provided with some
assistance.
This quote indirectly recognises a second group that is often overlooked in
the context of access to justice, which is small and medium
sized enterprises
(‘SMEs’). A 2018 study by the Australian Small Business and Family
Enterprise Ombudsman adopted a different
methodology to that of the Legal
Study, asking SMEs about their experience with ‘business
disagreements’.
that while the surveyed SMEs were willing to consult lawyers, they seldom
proceeded to more formal dispute resolution
options due to the costs — not
just financial, but also time costs and the impact on their health and
Where SMEs did pursue
formal dispute resolution, the reported average cost was $130,000 per
an amount that would
cause financial strain to many small businesses.
Other studies on legal need have focused on information provision. For
example, a study funded by the
Australasian Institute of Judicial
Administration focusing upon information provision in family law disputes found
that people involved
in parenting disputes ‘struggled to negotiate the
complex legal information environment, including identifying and reconciling
different sources of
information’.
Participants in that study also reported that even if they obtained formal legal
advice, they did not rely on it, did not feel it
was accessible, and overall
formal advice was ranked fairly evenly in the participants’ minds with
non-personalised but more
accessible advice found
participants greatly favoured personalised interactions over online sources, but
again ranked formal sources such as advice
lines similarly with the utility of
speaking to friends and
colleagues.
III RESPONDING TO CIVIL JUSTICE NEEDS — FOUR WAVES
OF ACCESS TO JUSTICE
In early 2019 the New South Wales Government established an
Justice Innovation Fund
, seeking innovative solutions from not only legal
professionals but ‘community groups, creative and digital agencies, and
entrepreneurs’, to access to justice
Similarly, the
Victorian Legal Services Grants Program, which traditionally supported a range
of programs designed to advance access
to justice, focused its 2019 round on
innovation and technology, funding technological solutions to access to justice
problems impacting
communities.
However, even
before the advent of technological solutions, governments have long sought
mechanisms to overcome cost and other access
In his magnum opus on access to justice, Cappelletti describes the evolution
of these mechanisms as being like waves in the access
The first wave,
emerging in the 1960s, was the creation of legal aid schemes to allow litigants
of limited financial means to access
legal services. As Justice Ronald Sackville
explains; in Australia it was not until mid-1970s that the Whitlam Government
established
the Australian Legal Aid Office, and established legal aid as a
government concern, albeit one that was subsequently taken over by
governments.
The limitations of
legal aid, however, are well documented — including an inevitable lack of
adequate resources to provide access
for all. At the time of the 2013
Productivity Commission Report, only 8 per cent of households met the income and
asset test for
legal aid, ‘leaving the majority of low and middle-income
earners with limited capacity for managing large and unexpected legal
Cappelletti’s second wave reflects the paradox of many legal rights
— that they are relatively low value, so as to make
individual enforcement
unlikely due to an inefficient use of resources. But at a societal level these
disputes are significant and
impact large numbers of people. This is known as
the problem of ‘diffuse interests’:
The basic problem they present — the reason for their diffuseness —
is that either no one has a right to remedy the infringement
of a collective
interest or the stake of any one individual in remedying the infringement is too
small to induce him or her to seek
enforcement
Consumer disputes represent a classic example of diffuse interests. As the
Legal Need Study identified, they are routine transactions
for most people, and
are the most likely category of legal issue that people are likely to encounter,
with over 20 per cent of the
surveyed participants indicating that they had
experienced a consumer issue in the last
Further, the study notes,
consumer disputes tend to more disproportionately impact those already
experiencing socioeconomic disadvantage:
‘[A]ge, disability status and
education were the strongest significant predictors of experiencing consumer
problems, and main
language, employment status, family status, main income and
gender were also
significant’.
The primary response of the justice system to the diffusion problem is to
establish procedural rules to assist with procedural barriers
to representing
diffuse interests, such as modifying the civil procedure rules of standing, and
facilitating the pursuit of rights
that belong to a group rather than an
individual. In Australia, these have included mechanisms for class actions,
the use of ombudsmen,
as well as allowing public interest matters to be pursued
under the fiat of the Attorney-General as ‘guardian of the public
interest’ in a process known as a relator
The advantages but also
the many shortcomings of both of these instruments are now well documented
— in the case of a relator
action, they are seldom used, and the giving of
a fiat is a non-reviewable exercise of the Attorney-General’s discretion.
Relator actions are idiosyncratic ... proceedings are conducted by counsel
for the relator upon the undertaking that the relator will
indemnify the
Attorney-General against any cost order and that it will observe any limitation
upon the submissions to be made. In
law, the relator proceeding is treated as an
action conducted and controlled by the Attorney-General rather than the
Class actions in Australia have been the subject of an Australian Law Reform
Commission inquiry in 2018.
Final Report was critical of many aspects of class actions as they have evolved,
including the involvement of litigation funders
changing the dynamic of a class
action and impacting the essential features of class action
litigation.
Ombudsmen should be considered the triumph of the ‘second wave’
and the unsung heroes of the Australian civil justice
system. The first
ombudsman office was established in Western Australia in 1971, and by the end of
the millennium had spread to 9
different ombudsmen around the country, at both
state and federal level.
years on there are well over 20 ombudsmen, both publicly-funded and
industry-funded, all with different remits and
While the operation of
each role is subject to its own policies and procedures, typically ombudsmen
have investigative and reporting
powers, and a civil dispute resolution mandate
that will allow them to assist consumers with grievances against government
departments
or businesses under their jurisdiction. Resolution suggestions made
by an ombudsman will typically be non-binding on the consumer
but depending on
the scheme may be binding rather than advisory for the business. Ombudsman
schemes are a relatively low-cost method
of offering access to justice for a
high volume of consumer disputes — for example, the Telecommunications
Ombudsman was established
in 1993 as an independent organisation funded though
compulsory contributions from telecommunications
businesses.
In 2017-2018, the
Telecommunications Ombudsman processed over 160,000 complaints, primarily from
residential customers, with a median
complaint value of $429, and commenced over
17,000 conciliations. Over two thirds of resolutions involved a financial
some kind for the
The ‘Third Wave’, at the time of Cappelletti and Garth’s
writing, was emerging as new ways to ‘relate and
adapt the civil process
to the type of dispute’ and the recognition that ‘traditional
contentious litigation in court
... might not be the best possible way to
provide effective vindication of
In other words
this third wave represented a shift of emphasis, acknowledging that courts
should not necessarily be the dominant
institutions for the resolution of civil
disputes. Cappelletti and Garth emphasise the need for civil justice processes
to be proportionate
to what is required in an individual dispute; a concept that
is now recognised in the litigation context in most Australian civil
rules as the ‘overriding purpose’.
This third wave has therefore seen not only an expansion of tribunals
directed towards simplifying processes to reduce costs and the
need for legal
representation but, importantly, legislated support for mediation or
conciliation as a precondition to adjudication
of the issues. The
Trader and Tenancy Tribunal Act
(NSW) had an object of enabling
proceedings to be determined in an ‘informal, expeditious and inexpensive
Its successor,
the New South Wales Civil and Administrative Tribunal, sought to ‘resolve
the real issues in proceedings justly,
Case management
within the courts was also subject to the same imperative.
Civil Procedure Act 2005
(NSW) included provisions granting the courts
broad discretionary powers to ‘facilitate the just, quick and cheap
of the real issues in the
proceedings’.
The Act also
directs courts to consider the proportional relationship between the
‘importance and complexity of the subject-matter
in dispute’ with
the costs of the proceedings.
The Uniform Civil Procedure Rules also contain extensive powers for courts to
refer parties to external dispute resolution providers
where it is considered
appropriate. By doing so, the courts help to facilitate access to justice by
diverting away cases not needing
judicial attention and freeing court time for
those cases where litigation is of real individual or systemic value.
Since the time of Cappelletti and Garth’s original analysis, much has
changed. This is due in large part to post-1970, third
wave attempts to improve
access to civil justice through the establishment of alternative dispute
mechanisms that effectively sparked
a movement towards use of technology. While
Susskind focusses on the prospects for legal careers and the future nature of
legal practice,
his observations are equally relevant to the future of access to
justice. We argue that the same factors identified by Susskind
as precipitating
an ‘evolve or perish’ imperative also represent a fourth wave of
access to justice. Specifically, Susskind
identifies that disruptive legal
technologies can replace ‘mundane legal work’, that legal services
will become unbundled
and commoditised, and that ‘new ways of sourcing
will emerge and these will often be combined in the conduct of individual
of legal work’ known as
‘multi-sourcing’.
also points to legal consumers sharing and recycling legal work, and only
sourcing bespoke advice when it is absolutely
The flipside for
access to justice is this — a diverse ecology of technologically-driven,
primarily online service providers,
both public and private, delivering legal
services that no longer rely on costly individual human intervention. Some
current manifestations
of this fourth wave are set out in Part IV below.
IV RIDING THE FOURTH WAVE — TECHNOLOGICAL CHANGE
IN CIVIL JUSTICE
In this section we set out a number of case studies to illustrate the scope
of the fourth wave of access to justice. The field of
legal technology has
changed rapidly — for example, in a cutting edge symposium published in
Harvard Journal of Law and Technology
in 2012, technological advances
of that time included court and legal aid websites (mostly text albeit with data
management systems
and standard classification technology behind
mobile and search engine
optimisation to make material more accessible, and an increasing focus on
multimedia content. Other innovations
at that time included remote assistance
via live online chat or forums, and the emergence of interactive, question-based
of court documents through technology such as A2J Author and
self-validating smart forms.
In a very short space of time, there has been a veritable explosion of new
companies, initiatives and technologies, making a comprehensive
impossible. Instead, our emphasis is on a survey of innovations that have the
potential to greatly impact access to justice
in civil disputes.
Technological Advancements in Conventional Service
This category of fourth wave initiative focusses on existing public service
providers such as courts offering new ways of delivering
conventional services.
For example, in many jurisdictions e-Courts have become commonplace, as have
electronic filing and online
call-overs. Sourdin categorises this as
‘supportive justice
technology’.
Other types
of technology include audio-visual links, which help minimise attendance costs
for some types of proceedings, and as
a result in New South Wales over 70 per
cent of court appearances now take place by video
Electronic discovery and
electronic data rooms have become commonplace in complex
litigation.
Technologies to Better Distribute Conventional Legal
Information
Perhaps the greatest promise of technology is its potential to democratise
law by narrowing the gap between experts and non-experts
and facilitating
self-help. There is nothing new about the idea of websites and self-help centres
providing user-friendly, free or
low cost online tools like court forms, videos
and legal information. In America, state-wide websites like LawHelp by Pro Bono
were developed to specifically to address access to justice concerns in the
wake of shrinking legal aid
In Australia, a free
domestic violence website, Ask LOIS, was launched by the Women’s Legal
Service NSW in 2012.
provides free legal online resources and information for issues relating to
family law, divorce, and domestic and family
violence. Some of the free
educational tools include free online monthly workshops, a resource library,
case studies and a domestic
violence service
Legal advice can also be provided in ‘kit’ form, where technology
is largely used to disseminate free advice to a large
audience — as
opposed to the advice being delivered in a technological form per se. For
example, a recent collaboration between
The Law School at the University of
Newcastle (UON), University of Technology Sydney (UTS) and the NSW State
Government developed
and launched an online first-in-class support kit to aid
lawyers in identifying and combating elder
This kit was distributed
in soft copy (.pdf format) as well as paper copy.
There is also a tendency to convert legal information into a standalone app.
While there is a great deal of variation in the content
of different apps, they
all can be accessed directly from a user’s mobile phone or other device,
avoiding the need to use a
For example, Penda is a free app developed by the Women’s Legal Service
Queensland (WLSQ) in collaboration with the Financial Rights Legal Centre with
Funding from Financial Literacy Australia, to support
victims of domestic family
violence by providing free ‘financial, person safety and legal
information’ along with nationwide
Penda was launched
with much fanfare at the Parliament House in 2017, with hopes that it will help
break the cycle of domestic and
Unbundled Generators of Legal
Documentation
The unbundled service model, which is a focus of Susskind’s
disaggregates the steps in
the lawyer-client relationship, allowing the possibility of clients completing
part of the required work
themselves, and greatly reducing the cost of pursuing
their civil matter.
wide variation on how unbundled services are delivered and enabled through
technology. For example, it can allow potential
litigants to seek general
strategic advice, from a paid or pro bono service, but undertake drafting work
themselves. Legal document
generators such as LawHelp and A2J accelerate the
production of legal documents and reduce the need for a lawyer to develop a full
understanding of the client’s legal issues. The client can create their
own legal document simply by filling in an online form.
In Australia, the
Consumer Action Law Centre assists potential litigants by using a guided form to
generate a letter of complaint
to the litigant’s financial services
provider. The guided form also generates a letter of demand for a refund to
target ‘sham’
insurance companies that offer ineffective extended
warranties.
Technology often provides a tangible financial benefit for those seeking
civil justice, particularly when recovery amounts outweigh
legal fees. It can
also lead to the client having the best of both worlds by remaining in control
of their own legal matter at the
same time as obtaining small discrete segments
of legal representation when it is most needed. For example, as early as 2009,
website LawHelp Interactive ‘generated more than 145,000 forms’
for pro bono solicitors, legal aid advocates and self-represented
individuals in
the United States.
services are also being segmented and ‘unbundled’ in technological
offerings from specialists to law firms and
in-house lawyers. The traditional
focus has been on legal precedents and information, but new start-ups like the
UK startup FromCounsel_,
are focusing on using a greater level of AI to
supplement expert legal counsel
In Australia, legal services provider Plexus offers a subscription-based
service called Promotion Wizard that allows companies running
promotions to
generate customised terms and conditions via an interactive module. In addition
to generating terms and conditions,
the service also generates documentation to
apply for the correct state -or territory- based
Plexus also has a
partnership with the Victorian Department of Justice, creating rule based expert
systems to help community lawyers
process youth justice
These services are based
on branched decision making using automation
This is generally seen
as a precursor to genuine machine learning that many consider the foundation for
In each of these examples, the end user is able to generate legal documents
without requiring detailed knowledge of the relevant laws
or needing to clearly
understand how their individual situation correlates with the law. These
technologies are reliant to varying
degrees on the user understanding and
correctly interpreting their situation, and inputting it correctly, meaning that
threshold barriers for potential litigants to make use of the
technology. While these services can be greatly empowering to some
others who are on the wrong side of the ‘digital divide’ (discussed
below) will struggle to benefit.
Chat Bots, ‘Big Data’, and
Artificial Intelligence-Driven Technology
The advent of smart phones has also opened other opportunities for mobile
apps to increase access to justice using
AI is a broad category that
can include natural language processing to answer questions (as in the
technology, or Alexa, or Siri),
several variants of machine learning, through to
robotics. One of the most sophisticated examples of usable AI today is Google
an intelligent voice activated assistant that can make phone calls and
interact with callers at the other
In the USA, the chatbot
AI-powered legal counsel app, DoNotPay stands as the benchmark civil action
legal app used to ‘sue
anyone by pressing a
Initially it was
the brainchild of 18 year old Joshua Browder who created the app to tackle
parking tickets.
Today it claims
to offer nationwide legal advice in the United States aimed at protecting
individual rights against a range of corporate
and state violations such as
unfair pricing practices, breaches of data and privacy laws, and the issuance of
unfair bank fees.
The legal apps field is expected to develop rapidly. Examples include the
JustFix.nyc app, which connects tenants with legal and support
services when
facing difficulties dealing with neglectful
and the RightsNOW
app, which is designed to provide real-time legal information by a verbal answer
to a spoken question.
the same way, the Google search function is being transformed by AI through
automatic analysis of web content and machine
AI is expected to play
a growing role in these legal apps, although at the present time, much of what
is touted as AI is not what
consumers might expect, and some is more aptly
described as marketing hype.
The use of technology by government agencies, courts and tribunals can
potentially reduce the cost of providing existing labour-intensive
services, and
allow savings to be diverted to provision of additional services to fill the
access to justice gap. This increase in
access to justice through technological
efficiencies can be expected to grow significantly. However, it will not be
without controversy,
especially to the extent governments show increased
reliance on use of algorithms, ‘big data’ and AI to assist in
This will be
discussed further below.
Automation Platforms
A final category of technological innovation is that of automation platforms,
which provide services to institutions that advance
access to justice, but
typically do not engage in the provision of any legal services. Drupal is an
open source content management
platform that is used by a range of for-profit
institutions. Drupal has led to the creation of DLaw, an open source code but
subscription-based
library for the creation of public information websites such
as Legal Aid websites. The service increases the level of appeal of
websites and
enhances their useability for a range of users without the need for technical
programming expertise, meaning that legal
information providers with even a
basic level of knowledge can increase access to legal information by providing
mobile-friendly
and disability-accessible
information.
An additional level of sophistication is offered by the Australian innovation
Josef, an automation platform that is available to both
law firms and pro-bono
service providers and provides the tool for non-technologically minded lawyers
to create chatbots. As the
founders of Josef explain, ‘the builder allows
any legal organisation or community legal centre to build their own chatbot
based on their area of expertise and then once they’ve built they can
launch it themselves without the need for a developer
or any coding
experience’.
Complaints Assist is one example of a platform built using this technology. It
was created and funded by a Melbourne-based
health law firm and could be
considered as a part pro-bono and part marketing
V CORE CONSIDERATIONS FOR BETTER ACCESS TO JUSTICE
The previous parts of this article have set out the possibilities that
technology can offer to advance access to justice. In this
Part we offer a
critical examination of three important and distinct challenges that technology
presents for the genuine advancement
of access to justice. As indicated in the
introduction above, it is widely accepted that access to justice encompasses
both procedural
and substantive justice — so it is not enough to offer
more people the chance to seek redress in the civil justice system if
results do not maintain a satisfactory level of integrity and accuracy.
Conversely, accurate results from a technical perspective
cannot be achieved if
those results are achieved in an untimely way, at great expense, or in a way
that is not accepted by society
or consistent with human rights frameworks.
With these goals in mind, we identify two key challenges that must be met in
order to deliver access to justice imperatives —
digital inclusivity and
algorithmic justice. We then discuss two technological solutions that assist in
facilitating this —
black box tinkering and inclusive human-centred
design. We set out each of these in turn below.
Challenge 1: Digital Inclusivity
Critics of legal technology often argue that proponents ignore challenges
faced by users in adopting and adapting to legal tech innovations.
barriers include cost, digital exclusion, and trust. The digital divide severely
impacts the impact of technological solutions
in communities where they are most
needed. For example, older people, people with disabilities, indigenous people,
people from lower
socioeconomic communities, rural and remote communities, and
people for whom English is a second language, represent both groups
legal need but also the least capable of accessing digital services. Simply
having access to a device or internet connection
is also insufficient. There is
a question of how more vulnerable groups have the time, language skills and even
mental bandwidth
to deal with complex information in a digital environment.
Studies identifying the phenomenon referred to as ‘mental bandwidth’
define it as ‘the amount of space available in one’s head for
processing’.
These studies
have discovered that those living with high levels of financial stress or living
in poverty show decreased ability
to cognitively process additional or new
information. As such, technological advancements must be those that take into
consideration
the sociological challenges faced by end users.
In October 2018, the Law Council of Australia was commissioned by the
Australian Human Rights Commission to produce recommendations
to government,
community and business on aspects relating to human rights and
technology.
In the Report titled
Human Rights and Technology
, the Law Council of Australia voiced
concerns that ‘unequal access to technologies can exacerbate inequalities,
where access is affected by factors such as socio-economic
status, geographical location and cultural or linguistic
diversity’.
Perhaps the
most telling comments were these:
...technological innovations can affect societal inequality ...A key
concern identified by Justice Project stakeholders was that
policymakers
frequently overlook the realities of target groups’ digital exclusion (and
underlying language and literacy barriers),
in their overreliance on online
solutions at the expense of more effective and targeted
strategies.
Underlying this Report was the recognition that the voices of ‘target
groups’ were being ignored. However, gathering data
on key groups is
problematic. For example, there is often limited information on the digital
literacy of users of legal
and the diverse needs
of disabled users and non-neurotypical users is still poorly featured in
technological developments.
In response to this, research is starting to identify and track digital
exclusion impacts on legal technology introductions and advances.
exclusion relates to a group or an individual’s ability to access, use and
interact with digital technology. Recognition
that digital exclusion, literacy
and accessibility is becoming a global concern is evidenced by the growth in
global reports tracking
digital exclusion — such as the Lloyds Bank UK
Consumer Digital Index and the Australian Digital Inclusion Index, both of which
seek to identify barriers to a user’s digital availability, affordability,
relevance and readiness.
In 2018, the Australian Digital Inclusion Index produced a Report
Measuring Australia’s Digital Divide: The Australian
Digital Inclusion Index
In that Report, it was
found that whilst Australia had made some inroads over the years, more work was
They reported that the
most digitally excluded groups included (in ascending order) ‘low income
households (41.3), mobile-only
users (42.7), people aged over 65+ (46.0), people
who did not complete secondary school (47.4) and people with disability
There were also substantial differences between rural and urban areas,
particularly for Indigenous
Australians.
Other research has
suggested that a lack of digital literacy skills can result in high levels of
vulnerability within groups, including
fundamental human rights concerns such as
restrictions on the ability of members within these groups to vote and obtain
gainful employment.
Some aspects of digital inclusivity may improve over time. For example, the
number of individuals with access to affordable internet
continues to increase,
as the price of devices and network access decreases. This allows technology to
become more accessible to
marginalised groups. However, care needs to be taken
to ensure that these groups, already identified as being amongst the most likely
to experience civil disputes significantly impacting their
can locate, discriminate
between, and apply information and advice that they require. Hough points out
that online services have
to be created in a variety of formats for individuals
with differing technological abilities.
Hough’s work also articulates the spectre of ‘a digital divide
that institutionalizes a two-tiered system incapable of
delivering appropriate
justice to low-income
There is an
argument that mainstreaming of digital resources will allow this two-tiered
system to emerge even more strongly as market
forces impact the legal
profession.
As technological
options expand, we can expect that the pool of lawyers providing face-to-face
legal advice to clients will shrink
due to forces of supply and demand. As the
legal profession contracts, the digital divide will increase in the sense that
well-connected and wealthy will retain access to human lawyers, with
others relying on online information and potentially AI to meet
Challenge 2: Algorithmic Bias and the Algorithmic Justice
Algorithms provide the processes or rules to enable machine learning and
Algorithms are often
discussed in terms of their capabilities to detect online social or preference
patterns, such as when viewers
watch a YouTube video and similar or related
videos are suggested on the
Algorithms have also
been used for facial recognition purposes ranging from opening an iPhone to
judging a beauty contest.
Algorithms are often viewed as an access to justice panacea. As it relates to
legal practice, algorithms power AI developments to
create ‘smart
contracts’ based on block chain technology that are described as automated
contingency contracts based
on ‘“if-then”
statement’.
In Australia,
smart contracts are a reality, having already come into use by companies like
AgriDigital, who piloted the ‘world’s
first ever sale using a pilot
blockchain ledger and smart contract
Algorithms have also been used to automate due diligence for property and
merger and acquisition work. Recently Allens’ innovative
award-winning
Real Estate Due Diligence App (REDDA) used AI to simplify due diligence for real
estate leases.
This was heralded
by the then Allens’ Chief Legal & Technology Services Officer Beth
Patterson as providing ‘...real-time
access to flagged issues, faster
turnaround and greater efficiency in a large
Given these
developments are relatively new, there is currently little case law or
legislation in place. However, commentators agree
that like any other legal
aspect, applicable laws will guide disputes arising from the use of smart
contracts and due diligence
Concerns often arise,
however, as to which parties will straddle the cost and responsibility burden
when algorithmic breakdowns occur.
Regardless of the possible costs, often bias impacts on how technology
delivers justice. Algorithmic Bias refers to situations when
one group or
individual is unfairly favoured or discriminated over another. A great example
of bias relates to the case between Vishal
Vora and online retailer eBay. In
reported on a case filed in the United Kingdom by
Vishal Vora against eBay concerning the company’s buyer return policy
in 2013. Here, Vora claimed the return policy was biased against
sellers, effectively encouraging increases in fraudulent
Vora disclosed to the
that that on two occasions involving the sale of a Baby Bjorn
bouncer and an iPhone, eBay had automatically refunded buyers without
assessment of claims, or evidence of
In the case of the Baby
Bjorn bouncer, Vora reported that he discovered evidence that the item was being
used on social media despite
claims otherwise by the buyer. This transpired to
Vora who demanded the buyer return the item, only to have the buyer report him
to the local police.
result, Vora ultimately took the buyer to court, at a cost of £70, only to
be awarded £65.
Vora was able to settle out of court with eBay for an undisclosed amount for a
refund involving the sale of the iPhone, the
case of the Baby Bjorn bouncer
highlights the perils of seeking civil remedies against
individuals.
Algorithmic Bias not only occurs when the rules that form part of an
algorithm in technology are inherently biased. It can also occur
technology ‘glitches’ or fails to perform the required rules
resulting in a bias, or worse, when there is a
combination of both scenarios. In
Australia, the ‘Robodebt Scandal’ involving Centrelink’s
automated computer system
designed to detect welfare fraud, provides a possible
example of the worst case scenario. In 2016, Centrelink developed and commenced
use of a computer system that effectively sought to uncover welfare fraud and
accidental overpayments by matching tax records to
The benefit of the
system was that it removed a layer of human oversight, instead automatically
generating letters of demand to welfare
recipients that included explanations
for any discrepancy between tax records and welfare
The efficiency of
the system meant that Centrelink was able to detect and send letters in respect
of 20,000 discrepancies a
This far outweighed the
old system where human oversight only identified some 20,000 discrepancies per
However, there were problems both with the algorithm used and the sudden
ramping up of number of discrepancies found. A Senate Committee
Report found
‘the system was so flawed that it was set up to
algorithms used often falsely calculated debt as owing due to the averaging of
taxable income over the year, instead of
only reducing the amount of welfare
payable at the times of the year the welfare recipient was earning more than the
threshold amount.
the sudden increase in debt letters resulted in millions of phone calls being
unanswered as welfare recipients tried to
alleged debt. Welfare recipients were therefore redirected to online resources
that were not easily
accessible or understandable to many people. It is
therefore claimed some people paid the incorrect amount when they could properly
have disputed it. Other people apparently had payments improperly stopped when
they were unaware of the claim because the letter
was sent to the wrong address,
or when they were unable to speak to a staff member or understand the online
resources they were redirected
As the highly automated system continued, many alleged debts were sold to
private debt collectors with the onus on the debtor to prove
the amount of debt
calculated. This was a highly problematic outcome for a vulnerable population
with the debt recovery system going
back over a six year period despite online
departmental advice that welfare recipients were only required to keep records
report found ‘this lack of procedural fairness disempowered people,
causing emotional trauma, stress and
The use of this
automated process was strongly criticised for unfairly targeting a vulnerable
segment of the population,
well as breaching the Government’s model litigant policy by sending
official demands for a debt based on a computer generated
approximation instead
of actual evidence.
claims have resulted in the Victorian Legal Aid filing a test case in the
Federal Court of Australia in February 2019, on behalf
of Ms Masterton against
the Department of Human Services, the regulatory body at the heart of the
Robodebt Scandal.
Similar scenarios concerning failed algorithms have been identified also in
criminal justice contexts, involving the use of machine
learning and AI to
assist judges. In the United States, there has been controversy over use of the
Correctional Offender Management
Profiling for Alternative Sanctions
(‘COMPAS’) sentencing tool that uses AI and machine learning to
predict the chance
recidivism.
Another issue is
the use of AI and data analysis for law enforcement. These criminal law examples
are equally instructive for the
civil justice context, where similar challenges
arise. The use of this technology is growing rapidly but has largely escaped
or political accountability to
In NSW, for example, it
was identified in the criminal law context that the algorithm used by law
enforcement to select suspects
was racially
Only 3 per cent of
the State’s population is Indigenous and yet despite this, of those chosen
by the algorithm, more than 50
per cent were Aboriginal or Torres Strait
One problem with machine learning is that the exact basis for the
decision-making by the computer is often unclear to human operators.
creates a concern that rights to procedural fairness are breached because the
algorithm on which the decision is made is not
transparent.
significant problem is concern about whether the decision-making is biased
(perhaps due to machine learning from a biased
this concern being
compounded by the lack of transparency of the basis for the decision.
The brief discussion above highlights the need for better oversight by the
legal community into algorithmic process used in
technology.
In the State of the Profession Address to the NSW Young Lawyers in Sydney on 21
September 2017, Justice Margaret Beazley commenced
her speech by stating:
It goes without saying that law is not and will not be immune from the influence
of the algorithm. The challenge for the legal system
in general and the legal
profession in particular is, I am going to suggest, twofold. First, there is the
question of how to keep
up to date with new technologies. And secondly, there is
the question of how best to use technology to serve our clients and further
administration of justice. This second point is fundamental to the efficient and
effective administration of the legal
Justice Margaret Beazley observed that it was the duty of the legal system
and legal practitioners to develop knowledge of emerging
technology and not
leave the development ‘in the hands of technology
In other parts of the world, the University of Helsinki’s Legal Tech
Lab stands at the forefront of discussing questions of
algorithmic fairness and
justice by design, considering how the architecture of technology must import
concepts of access, justice
and fairness. They encapsulate the problem of
algorithmic justice in the following terms:
It is not possible to understand automation bias simply from the perspective of
legal scholarship, as this requires insight into
how algorithms reflect
structural biases of their training data and how such shortcomings could be
avoided. For example, removing
possibly discriminating factors is not sufficient
and bias in the formal sense of computer science differs from the term’s
socio-legal
Avoiding algorithmic injustice is challenging, due largely to the
inaccessible nature of technology for most non-experts. Desai and
caution the use of ‘wild data,’ stating systems using public data
will require ‘ongoing monitoring and
evaluation’ to ensure models
remain accurate. This warning comes in the wake of Microsoft’s failed
Twitter chat-bot Tay.
The benign system was initially designed with a teenage
girl’s persona but quickly became racist and foul-mouthed when fed
information from online
In the legal tech
sector, the 2016 Alameda County rolled out a new court case-management system,
resulting in the wrongful arrest,
imprisonment and forced registration as sex
offenders of community
Solution 1: Black Box Tinkering
Desai and Kroll call for technical accountability and make a case to suggest
that the creators of technology should make known or
publish algorithms so they
can be analysed.
Perel and Elkin-Koren
warn that transparency of algorithms is insufficient of itself to ensure
accountability. Simply publishing a
coded and mathematically complex algorithm
is not enough to meet the information needs of non-experts. Similarly, the
of input and output data would only serve to produce vast quantities
of information which is uninterpretable and incapable of scrutiny
majority of the
Instead, Perel and
Elkin-Koren propose a reverse engineering technique coined ‘Black Box
Tinkering’, a method that would
involve presenting an algorithm with
different scenarios to reveal ‘the [inner] blueprints of its decision
Unlike observational studies, Black Box Tinkering can reflect on more than
just what is publicly disclosed, and also examine the practical
workings of the
algorithm. For example, a recent experiment using this tinkering method
conducted by King, Pan, and Roberts on China’s
political censorship on
social media platforms revealed that social media content was utilised in over
60 per cent of the sites under
review. Consequently, the Chinese public now know
their social media submissions are automatically targeted. This in turn allows
the public to ‘demand that algorithmic systems comply with public
interests such as due process, equal protection, and freedom
expression’.
However, Black Box Tinkering is unlikely to be suited to all types of AI, or to
always provide the specificity needed for public
confidence or procedural
This is of a special concern for software used by the Government in
decision-making that may raise questions about the integrity of
Government’s processes. It is advised that software is programmed to
allow for the evaluation of applicable guarantees.
It should be clear to
competent observers that ‘the evidence explain[s] both the goals of the
system and the fact that it meets
In the Australian context, the country’s Chief
Scientist has proposed the creation of a certification mark — a so called
‘Turing Stamp’ to indicate to consumers that a particular piece of
technology uses algorithms that meet a benchmark level
However, from a
computer science perspective, any requirement that would allow humans to be
completely satisfied of a transparent
algorithm and ability of the system to
clearly meet its goals is likely to place limitations on use of systems based on
machine learning,
where the nature of the decision making is typically not
easily explainable in human terms. This restriction may therefore seem
unfeasible,
and a realist would expect that the development of new technology
will continue to outpace the regulation of the new technology.
Solution 2: Human-Centred Design: The Emergence of Legal
It would be unthinkable to design a utilitarian object such as a chair
without regard for the consumer, the end user for whom it is
intended that the
object will become a part of their daily lives. If the chair was intended to
serve as a piece of assistive technology
to help a physically frail person to
stand up and sit down with greater ease, but the chair was actually more
cumbersome to use than
a regular chair, then it would be considered an
outrageous failure. To those who approach the world from a design perspective,
litigation would have to be considered an outrageous failure — while
its expressed aim is to allow ordinary people to vindicate
their rights, the
system is designed to be used primarily by highly-skilled experts whose services
are out of reach of the intended
beneficiary of the system. There is thus a
great deal of work to be done to ensure that the civil justice system is
redesigned with
the end user in mind.
Margaret Hagan, from the Stanford Legal Design Lab, was one of the first to
coin the term Legal Design. Hagan defines it as a user
focused ideology viewed
as a process, mindset and set of mechanics to achieve human-centred design:
Legal Design is the application of human-centered design to the world of law, to
make legal systems and services more human-centered,
usable, and satisfying.
Legal Design is a way of assessing and creating legal services, with a focus on
how usable, useful, and engaging
these services are. It is an approach with
three main sets of resources — process, mindsets, and mechanics —
professionals to use. These three resources can help us conceive,
build, and test better ways of doing things in law, that will engage
and empower
both lay people and legal
professionals.
Technological innovation in the absence of Legal Design is fraught with
Likewise, efforts to
merely gather user-feedback in the absence of implementing a solution also have
damaging implications,
leaving users frustrated as they attempt to navigate accessing justice. However,
for years, legal systems have struggled to properly
break down barriers to
justice using human-centred design tools readily available, instead relying
heavily on legal practitioners
and government agencies to speak on behalf of
users. This has caused advocates of Legal Design to observe that ‘new
legal technologies
and services, whether aiming to help people expunge their
criminal records or to get divorced in more cooperative ways, have not
adopted by the general public. Instead, it is primarily lawyers who use
Central to Legal Design is the mindset that users are key to innovating legal
systems. This ideology fits with the basic access to
justice tenets set out by
the United Nations, where access to justice focuses on fulfilment of the rule of
law, aimed at making the
delivery of justice impartial and
non-discriminatory.
adopting that mindset, the Legal Design methodology becomes iterative involving
‘five main steps: understanding, synthesis,
brainstorming and prototyping,
testing and refinement’, where technology is one of many tools to achieve
User insights have unfortunately not been a central feature of civil justice
innovation, and testing and refinement is often done
by experts rather than end
users. The time taken to elicit proper user insights will impact on user
adoption. For instance, a satellite-connected
legal kiosk project in Arizona
Computers that Speak of the Law
failed because the intended
beneficiaries in Navajo and Hopi communities were not consulted in the process,
resulting in the communities
finding that the kiosks created for them were not
sufficiently user friendly.
This lesson is reinforced by Salter and Thompson who emphasise that technology
needs to take into account users throughout the entire
process. They observe
generally speaking, one of the biggest challenges in designing a justice system
around the public is the necessary shift in emphasis
away from the needs of
people who provide justice processes towards the people who use them. There
needs to be a rebalancing between
the interests and perceptions of the people
who work in the justice system, and the public for whom they work. This
rebalancing requires
a break with
As such, technology’s role in shaping solutions only plays a part when
it can increase the effectiveness of user experience
by simplifying, aiding or
empowering the user to engage with the legal system. Alex Smith, the innovation
manager of global law firm
Reed Smith, was recently quoted saying:
‘[w]hile tech is exciting, it’s important to map and redesign the
system properly...
The people and process driving the justice system are
probably more important in such sensitive areas as any
technology’.
Legal Design is a new and exciting field for lawyers with an interest in
access to justice. While it is still emerging as a distinct
field of academic
inquiry, Legal Design offers a structured method to encourage an iterative and
user-focused process of law reform
and innovation that allows for
miscalculations and mistaken assumptions to be made and corrected before a
purported solution is released
to an end user. It offers the ability to
integrate methods of information delivery that suit a range of users, for
example through
the integration of visual law. This allows for a greater
understanding by ordinary people of their rights and obligations in contexts
such as an employment
A second advantage of Legal Design thinking is that it explicitly embraces
interdisciplinary thinking; another aspect of innovation
that has often been
overlooked in many parts of the civil justice system. As Holloway states:
...design thinking looks beyond the immediate boundaries of the problem to
ensure the right question is being addressed. Using interdisciplinary
design thinking incorporates diversity and leverages different paradigms and
tool sets from each profession to analyze, synthesize,
and generate insights and
new ideas. The interdisciplinary nature of design thinking also ensures that
innovations are naturally
balanced between the technical, business, and human
dimensions.
The potential contribution of Legal Design to access to justice is only just
starting to be realised. Yet, it is important to point
out that technological
innovation is not the only output of Legal Design, and in fact, a critical
feature of Legal Design theory
is that it cannot be started without the end user
in mind. The process requires a genuine understanding of the end user(s),
an emphasis on practitioners immersing themselves in that user’s
world so they can design interventions based on end user perspectives,
than from a pre-determined solution. Legal Design also requires practitioners to
be comfortable with using creative means,
as opposed to solely analytical means
to solve difficult problems.
VI CONCLUSION
This article has painted a picture of the need for innovation in the civil
justice context, pointing to the need for real and effective
access to justice
to meet the unmet legal need in Australia. It has then tracked some of the
major trends in technological innovation,
and the core questions that remain for
using technology to achieve improved access to civil justice. Since the 1970s,
various mechanisms
have been deliberately introduced into the civil justice
system to facilitate access to justice, with varying degrees of success.
advent of low-cost legal technology will forever change the access to justice
landscape. One major consequence is that reform
is now no longer the sole domain
of governments using legislation and policy-driven reform. Instead, private
providers and those
with a passion for change can themselves innovate, and they
face relatively low entry barriers. For the first time in history,
non-government
actors can engage with civil justice issues and make a real
difference to those whose lives or livelihoods are impacted by civil
Those currently riding the fourth wave promote legal technology as a panacea at
best and, at the very least, an objective-tool
capable of offering simplified,
cost effective access to civil justice.
However, the decision to create and deploy legal technology to enhance access
to justice always carries numerous design considerations,
many of which are
value-laden in relation to accessibility, digital exclusion, efficiency, cost,
fairness and equity. It remains
to be seen whether the current plethora of
hackathons and seed grants designed to inspire next generation legal
entrepreneurs will
revolutionise the system, or instead create a bewildering
array of disconnected and competing apps without overall addressing the
complexity of the law and its processes.
Three key points are worth reiterating for future policy and research. First,
there is a mistaken assumption that digital exclusion
and literacy divides are
largely resolved, leading many to assume that technology can plug gaping pro
bono gaps left from diminishing
legal aid budgets. These assumptions need to be
challenged with ongoing clear data – not just on the capacity of citizens
access tools, but their ability to effectively use and understand them.
The second challenge can be easily identified but less easily resolved
— namely that enthusiasm for innovation can overshadow
the complexities
required to properly administer justice. Caution should not obstruct attempts to
engage in these fourth wave reforms,
but caution is certainly required. As the
Australian Human Rights Commissioner Edward Santow has observed: at the same
time the technology
offers the promise of ‘foster[ing] inclusion and
accessibility’, there are potential human rights
implications.
We argue that
the way forward is vigilant and active engagement by legal actors from across
the sector, supported by and supporting
the broader community. It is essential
that legal practitioners actively participate in the creation of legal
technology, or at the
very least, provide ongoing legal analysis and empirical
research, making legal technology accountable to upholding sound legal doctrines
and principles.
Great care needs to be taken to ensure that algorithms are created in a
socially responsible fashion, and do not to serve to entrench
already existing
prejudices and assumptions in the legal system, or trample on due process
considerations. Koulu cautions that a
failure to do this will cause algorithms
to be yet an additional barrier to access to justice rather than a facilitator
to justice.
Similarly Justice Steven Rares observes:
a system of justice is an institution for the redress of grievances. It can only
command the respect of a society's members if they
trust that it is an
impartial, equal, transparent and principled system that gives effect to the
rule of law.
The third challenge is one of emphasis. It is important that technological
innovation should not displace non-technological innovation,
as the refinement
and improvement of substantive and procedural laws is an ongoing task. Equally,
it is imperative that broad stakeholder
perspectives be incorporated into the
development process — with none more important than those being impacted
by the technology,
or end users. In the past, the law has been accused of
failing to listen to the voices of the most vulnerable, instead opting to
consider policy-maker views over the end user. Failure to address end user and
societal needs has come at a price from a literal
cost and efficiency
standpoint, and more importantly an access to justice stance; resulting in
poorly devised systems being unapproachable,
inaccessible or inherently biased.
In this paper we suggest that approaches like Legal Design, which places an
emphasis upon the end user, should be used as a plank
for future legal
technology. To date, Legal Design approaches are relatively nascent concepts for
legal practice, education and research.
Little exploratory research and even
lesser empirical data exists to give guidance to legal practitioners,
technological developers,
academia and policy makers on Legal Design approaches,
usage, applicability or effectiveness. They nonetheless offer a useful set
precepts for thinking about legal innovation, and an important framework for
keeping user needs and experience front and centre
of reform processes.
Likewise, more research and guidance is required to aid legal practitioners and
educators on the necessary skills
and capabilities required to develop a
‘Legal Design’ mindset that places emphasis on experimentation.
There is also
the question of what other innovative approaches are being
utilised in legal practices to achieve better access to civil justice
and how these innovations are impacting on legal practice business models and
the institutions what administer civil justice
(such as courts and tribunals).
These are just a few possible areas ripe for future exploration and testing to
ensure that legal
technology enhances and optimises access to civil justice.
* Professor and Deputy Dean (Research), University of Newcastle Law
** PhD candidate, University of Western Australia & Research Assistant,
University of Newcastle.
*** Student, University of Newcastle.
**** Solicitor and Clinical Teacher, University of Newcastle.
Hazel Genn, ‘What Is Civil Justice For? Reform, ADR, and
Access to Justice’
(2012) 24(1)
Yale Journal of Law & the
Mauro Cappelletti and Bryant
Garth, ‘Access to Justice: The Newest Wave in the Worldwide Movement to
Make Rights Effective’
(1978) 27(2)
Buffalo Law Review
(‘The Newest Wave’).
Richard Susskind,
of Lawyers? Rethinking the Nature of Legal Services
(Oxford University
Press, 2010) ch 2.
Shannon Salter and Darin
Thompson, ‘Public-Centred Civil Justice Redesign: A Case Study of the
British Columbia Civil Resolution
Tribunal’ [2017] (3)
McGill Journal
of Dispute Resolution
Lyria Bennett Moses and Janet
Chan, ‘Algorithmic Prediction in Policing: Assumptions, Evaluation and
Accountability’
(2018) 28(7)
Policing & Society
Rebecca L Sandefur,
‘Bridging the Gap: Rethinking Outreach for Greater Access to
Justice’ (2015) 37(4)
University of Arkansas at Little Rock Law
Christine Coumarelos et al,
Legal Australia-Wide Survey: Legal Need in Australia
(Report No 7, 2012),
cited in New South Wales Department of Justice, ‘Civil Justice Action
Plan: Improving Access to Justice
for Everyday Problems’ (December 2018)
<https://www.justice.nsw.gov.au/lsb/Documents/LSB/civil-justice-action-plan.pdf>.
Christine Coumarelos et al,
Legal Australia-Wide Survey: Legal Need in Australia
(Report No 7, 2012)
Legal Need Study
Australian Productivity
Commission,
Access to Justice Arrangemen
ts (Inquiry Report No 72, 2014)
Chief Justice Wayne Martin,
‘Creating a Just Future by Improving Access to Justice’ (Address,
Community Legal Centres
Association Western Australia, 24 October 2012) 3.
Australian Small Business
and Family Enterprise Ombudsman,
Access to Justice: Where do Small Businesses
(Report, 2018) 21.
Ibid at 15.
Ibid at 17.
Jonathan Crowe et al,
‘“I’ll just Google that!” Online Searches and the
Post-Separation Family Law Information
Experience’ (2019) 44
Alternative Law Journal
Jonathan Crowe et al,
‘Bargaining in the Shadow of the Folk Law: Expanding the Concept of the
Shadow of the Law in Family
Dispute Resolution’
[2018] SydLawRw 12
(2018) 40(3)
‘A Civil Justice
Action Plan for New South Wales: Factsheet — December 2018’,
South Wales Department of Justice
(Web Page, December 2018) 1
<https://www.justice.nsw.gov.au/lsb/Documents/LSB/civil-justice-strategy-fact-sheet.pdf>.
‘Victorian Legal
Services Board Grants Program: 2019 Funding Round Open’,
Legal Services Board
(Web Page, 6 December 2018)
http://lsbc.vic.gov.au/?p=6259
Mauro Cappelletti,
‘Alternative Dispute Resolution Processes within the Framework of the
World-Wide Access-to-Justice Movement’
(1993) 56(3)
Justice Ronald Sackville,
‘Some Thoughts on Access to Justice’
(2004) 2(1)
New Zealand
Journal of Public and International Law
Australian Productivity
Commission 2014 (n 12).
Cappelletti and Garth,
‘The Newest Movement’ (n 2) 194.
Legal Need Study
Christos Mantziaris,
‘The Federal Division of Public Interest Suits by an
Attorney-General’
[2004] AdelLawRw 10
(2004) 25(2)
Adelaide Law Review
Australian Law Reform
Commission,
Integrity, Fairness and Efficiency — An Inquiry into Class
Action Proceedings and Third-Party Litigation Funders
(Report No 134,
Ibid 153-177.
Dennis Pearce,
‘Ombudsmen in Australia’ in Rob Gregory and Philip Gidings (eds)
Righting Wrongs: The Ombudsman in Six Continents
(IOS Press, 2000) 93,
See, eg, ‘Industry
Ombudsmen & Dispute Resolution’,
Australian Competition and
Consumer Commission
<https://www.accc.gov.au/contact-us/other-helpful-agencies/industry-ombudsmen-dispute-resolution>.
‘About Us’,
Telecommunications Industry Ombudsman
<https://www.tio.com.au/about-us>.
Telecommunications Industry
Annual Report 2017-2018
(Report, 2018) 14.
Cappelletti and Garth,
‘The Newest Movement’ (n 2) 225.
Consumer, Trader and
Tenancy Tribunal Act 2001
, as repealed by
Administrative Tribunal Act 2013
Civil and Administrative
Tribunal Act 2013
Civil Procedure Act 2005
Susskind (n 3)
Jane Ribadeneyra,
‘Web-Based Legal Services Delivery Capabilities’
(2012) 26(1)
Harvard Journal of Law & Technology
Tania Sourdin,
‘Justice in the Age of Technology: “The Rise of Machines is Upon
[2017] (139)
​ ‘$19.3 million
technology boost for NSW Courts’,
New South Wales Department of
(Web Page, 26 June 2017)
<https://www.justice.nsw.gov.au/Pages/media-news/media-releases/2017/technology-boost-for-nsw-courts.aspx>.
See, eg, ‘Litigation
using Electronic Discovery’,
Federal Court of Australia
http://www.fedcourt.gov.au/law-and-practice/practice-documents/practice-notes/gpn-tech/electronic-discovery
Ribadeneyra (n 43).
‘Ask LOIS’, Women’s Legal Service NSW (Web Page) <
https://www.wlsnsw.org.au/training/ask-lois-website/
Ben Murphy, ‘Legal
toolkit launches to combat elder abuse’ (28 March 2019)
20; ‘First-of-its-kind resource aids legal practitioners in
identifying elder abuse’,
The National Tribune
(Web Page, 21 March
<https://www.nationaltribune.com.au/first-of-its-kind-resource-aids-legal-practitioners-in-identifying-elder-abuse/>;
‘First-of-its-kind resource aids legal practitioners in identifying elder
University of Newcastle: Newsroom
(Web Page, 20 March 2019)
<https://www.newcastle.edu.au/newsroom/featured-news/first-of-its-kind-resource-aids-legal-practitioners-in-identifying-elder-abuse>.
Women’s Legal
Services QLD, ‘Penda App Launched at Parliament House,
Page, 12 September 2017)
<https://penda-app.com/2017/09/12/penda-app-now-available-for-download/>.
Susskind (n 3).
Brescia et al, ‘Embracing Disruption: How Technological
Change in the Delivery of Legal Services Can Improve Access to Justice’ (2014
15) 78(2) Albany Law Review 553, 564.
See ‘Resources and
Consumer Action Law Centre
<https://consumeraction.org.au/resources-and-toolkits/>.
‘About Us’,
(Web Page) <https://www.lawhelp.org/about-us>.
FromCounsel_
<https://www.fromcounsel.com/product.html>.
<https://www.plxs.com.au/promotion-wizard/>.
Plexus Gateway
<https://legalgateway.co/general/plexus-impact>.
Andrew Mellett,
‘Legal A.I.: High on Artificial, Low on Intelligence’
(Web Page, 17 November 2017)
<https://www.plxs.com.au/legal-a-i-high-on-artificial-low-on-intelligence/>.
Lois R Lupica, Tobias A
Franklin and Sage M Friedman, ‘The Apps for Justice Project: Employing
Design Thinking to Narrow the
Access to Justice Gap’
(2017) 44(5)
Fordham Urban Law Journal
Jeffrey Grubb,
‘Google Duplex: A.I. Assistant Calls Local Businesses To Make
Appointments’ (YouTube, 8 May 2018)
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=D5VN56jQMWM>.
Jon Porter, ‘Robot
lawyer DoNotPay now lets you “sue anyone” via an app’,
(Web Page, 10 October 2018)
<https://www.theverge.com/2018/10/10/17959874/donotpay-do-not-pay-robot-lawyer-ios-app-joshua-browder>.
See ‘About Us’,
justfix.nyc
(Web Page) <https://www.justfix.nyc/our-mission>.
<https://www.rightsnowapp.com/our-product>.
Cade Metz, ‘AI is
transforming Google Search. The rest of the web is next’,
(News Article, 4 February 2016)
<https://www.wired.com/2016/02/ai-is-changing-the-technology-behind-google-searches/>.
Julia Dressel and Hany
Farid, ‘The Accuracy, Fairness, and Limits of Predicting Recidivism’
(2018) 4(1)
Science Advances
‘Websites’,
OpenAdvocate
(Web Page) <https://openadvocate.org/websites/>.
George Nott, ‘Legal
chatbot builder Josef making justice more accessible’,
Computerworld
(News Article, 7 June 2018)
<https://www.computerworld.com.au/article/642083/legal-chatbot-builder-josef-making-justice-more-accessible/>.
See ‘Reporting
Healthcare Complaints’,
Health Complaints Assist
<https://healthcomplaintsassist.com.au/>.
The term ‘mental
bandwidth’ has been popularised in mainstream media and used loosely. It
is, however, a technical term
used in the field of psychology and sociology:
see, eg, Avik Basu, Jason Duvall and Rachel Kaplan, ‘Attention Restoration
Exploring the Role of Soft Fascination and Mental Bandwidth’
Environment and Behaviour
Law Council of Australia,
Submission to Australian Human Rights Commission,
Human Rights and Technology
(25 October 2018).
See Tania Sourdin and Naomi
Burstyner, 'Justice Delayed Is Justice Denied' [2014] (4)
Victoria University
Law and Justice Journal
46, 54–5; researchers have also found that in
New South Wales, the court database, ‘JusticeLink’ did not even
the number of self-represented litigants: Suzie Forell et al,
Insights in Civil Justice: NSW Supreme Court
(Report, October 2018) 13.
Lloyds Bank UK Consumer Digital Index 2019
(Report, 2019).
Julian Thomas et al,
Measuring Australia’s Digital Divide: The Australian Digital Inclusion
(Report, 2018).
Amy Antonio,
‘Democratising the Digital Divide: Civics and Citizenship Curriculum,
Australian Aboriginal Communities and Social
(2013) 31(1)
Social Educator
Legal Need Study
Bonnie Rose Hough,
‘Let’s Not Make It Worse: Issues to Consider in Adopting New
Technology’
(2012) 26(1)
Harvard Journal of Law & Technology
See, eg, Mark Lloyd,
‘The Digital Divide and Equal Access to Justice’
(2002) 24(4)
Hastings Communications and Entertainment Law Journal
Nellie Bowles, ‘Human
The New York Times
(online, 23 March
<https://www.nytimes.com/2019/03/23/sunday-review/human-contact-luxury-screens.html>
An algorithm is defined as
‘a procedure for solving a mathematical problem ... in a finite number of
steps that frequently involves
repetition of an operation ... commonly used
nowadays for the set of rules a machine (and especially a computer) follows to
a particular goal’:
Merriam-Webster
(online at 17 June
2019) ‘algorithm’ (def 2).
Amanda R Matos, ‘Can
Algorithmic Justice Save Us From the Coming Artificial Intelligence
Dystopia?’,
Feministing
(Web Page, 17 November 2017)
http://feministing.com/2017/11/17/can-algorithmic-justice-save-us-from-the-coming-artificial-intelligence-dystopia/
Sam Levin, ‘A beauty
contest was judged by AI and the robots didn’t like dark skin’,
The Guardian
(online, 9 September 2016)
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/sep/08/artificial-intelligence-beauty-contest-doesnt-like-black-people>.
Michael Bacha, ‘Smart
contracts in Australia: Just how clever are they?’,
PiperAlderman
(Web Publication, 16 August 2017)
<https://www.piperalderman.com.au/publications/ip-technology-telecommunications/article/28836>.
Levin (n 92); see also
Allens Linklaters, ‘REDDA Recognised at PCA Awards’ (Media Release,
14 May 2018).
Allens Linklaters,
‘REDDA Recognised at PCA Awards’ (Media Release, 14 May 2018).
Bacha (n 94).
Anna Timms,
‘“Sitting duck” eBay sellers take a stand against the
The Guardian
(online, 13 January 2019)
<https://www.theguardian.com/money/2019/jan/13/ebay-sellers-scams-buyer-protection
Shalailah Medhora,
‘Over 2000 people died after receiving Centrelink robo-debt notice,
figures reveal’,
ABC Triple J Hack
(Web Page, 18 February 2019)
<https://www.abc.net.au/triplej/programs/hack/2030-people-have-died-after-receiving-centrelink-robodebt-notice/10821272>;
see also Anna Timms, ‘When eBay goes wrong, who pays the price?’,
The Guardian
(online, 17 February 2014)
<https://www.theguardian.com/money/2014/feb/17/ebay-goes-wrong-debt-collectors>;
Anna Timms, ‘eBay
accused of failing its sellers as fraudulent buyers
manipulate the system’,
The Guardian
(online, 21 May 2017) <
https://www.theguardian.com/money/2017/may/21/ebay-accused-failing-sellers-buyers-manipulate-system-protection
Shalailah Medhora,
‘Over 2000 people died after receiving Centrelink robo-debt notice,
figures reveal’,
ABC Triple J Hack
(Web Page, 18 February 2019)
<https://www.abc.net.au/triplej/programs/hack/2030-people-have-died-after-receiving-centrelink-robodebt-notice/10821272>.
Senate Standing
Committee on Community Affairs, Parliament of Australia,
Design, Scope,
Cost-Benefit Analysis, Contracts Awarded and Implementation Associated With the
Better Management of the Social Welfare
System Initiative
(Report, 21 June
Medhora (n 104).
Paul Karp and Christoper
Knaus, ‘Centrelink robo-debt program accused of enforcing
“illegal” debts’,
The Guardian
(online, 4 April 2018)
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2018/apr/04/centrelink-robo-debt-program-accused-of-enforcing-illegal-debts>.
Cameron Houston and
Chris Vedelago, ‘Centrelink wipes “robo-debt” at centre of
test case’,
The Sydney Morning Herald
(online, 5 May 2019)
<https://www.smh.com.au/national/centrelink-wipes-robo-debt-at-centre-of-test-case-20190505-p51kac.html>.
Dressel and Farid (n
Andrew G Ferguson,
‘Policing Predictive Policing’
(2017) 94(5)
Washington University
Deven R Desai and Joshua
A Kroll, ‘Trust but Verify: A Guide to Algorithms and the Law’
(2017) 31(1)
Harvard Journal of Law and Technology
137 US 2290
Osonde A Osoba and
William Welser IV,
An Intelligence in Our Image: The Risks of Bias and Errors
in Artificial Intelligence
(Report, 5 April 2017).
Desai and Kroll (n
Justice Margaret
Beazley, ‘Law in the Age of the Algorithm’ (Address, State of the
Profession New South Wales, 21 September
2017) 1 [2].
Ibid 2 [6].
‘Legal Tech Lab:
University of Helsinki Legal Tech Lab
(Web Page, 13
October 2018)
<https://www.helsinki.fi/en/networks/legal-tech-lab/research>.
Hannah Francis,
‘Microsoft’s teenage chatbot, Tay, turns into a racist, abusive
The Sydney Morning Herald
(online, 25 March 2016)
<https://www.smh.com.au/technology/microsofts-teenage-chatbot-tay-turns-into-a-racist-abusive-troll-20160325-gnqvro.html>.
Margaret Hagan,
‘Participatory Design for Innovation in Access to Justice’ (2019)
120, 121 (‘Participatory Design’).
Maayan Perel and Niva
Elkin-Koren, ‘Black Box Tinkering: Beyond Disclosure in Algorithmic
Enforcement
(2017) 69(1)
Florida Law
Desai and Kroll (n
Alan Finkel, ‘What
will it take for us to trust AI?’,
World Economic Forum
Article, 12 May 2018)
<https://www.weforum.org/agenda/2018/05/alan-finkel-turing-certificate-ai-trust-robot/
Margaret Hagan,
(Open Law Lab, 2017) (
Law by Design
Hagan, 'Participatory
Design' (n 125).
Julia Perry et al,
Access to Justice Roundtable: Proceedings of a Workshop July 2002
(Report, 2002).
‘Participatory Design’ (n 125) 120.
United Nations and the Rule of Law
<https://www.un.org/ruleoflaw/thematic-areas/access-to-justice-and-rule-of-law-institutions/access-to-justice/>.
Salter and Thompson (n
Jonathan Ames,
‘Technology is driving force of legal shake-up’,
(Web Page, 19 February 2015)
<https://www.raconteur.net/risk-management/technology-is-driving-force-of-legal-shake-up>
in Magda Ibrahim, ‘How technology is granting public access to
justice’ (Web Page, 30 November 2018)
<https://www.raconteur.net/risk-management/technology-public-access-justice>.
Comic Book Contracts
<https://www.comicbookcontracts.com/>.
Matthew Holloway,
‘How Tangible is Your Strategy? How Design Thinking Can Turn Your Strategy
Into Reality’ (2009) 30(2–3)
Journal of Business Strategy
Edward Santow,
‘Putting Human Values into the Machine’
(2018) 27(3)
Human Rights
Riikka Koulu, Lila
Kaillo and Jenni Hakkarainen,
Law and Digitalization: An Agenda for the
(Report No 1, May 2017) 7.
Justice Steven Rares,
‘Is Access to Justice a Right or a Service?’ (Speech, Access to
Justice: Taking the Next Steps
Symposium, 26 June 2015).
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (419 KB)
PDF format (0.992 MB)
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter