URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/journals/ANZCompuLawJl/2022/5.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 14:14:00
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Walker-Munro, Brendan; Ioannou, Ruby; Mount, David --- "The Hacker Strikes Back: Examining the Lawfulness of Offensive Cyber under the Laws of Australia" [2022] ANZCompuLawJl 5; (2022) 94 Computers & Law, Article 5
I WHAT IS HACKING BACK?
II LEGISLATIVE AUTHORITY FOR HACKING BACK IN AUSTRALIA
A Legal Authority for NIC Hacking Back
B Legal Authority for ADF Hacking Back
C Legal Authority for Police Hacking Back
D Conclusion to Section 2
III WHEN CAN AUSTRALIA HACK BACK?
A Size of Proposed Intervention by Agency
B Scale, Scope and Sophistication of the Target Offender or
Person of Interest
C Quantum and Impact of Actual and Anticipated Harms
D Likelihood of Collateral Damage
IV CONCLUSION & LESSONS LEARNT
THE HACKER STRIKES BACK: EXAMINING THE LAWFULNESS OF
“OFFENSIVE CYBER” UNDER
THE LAWS OF AUSTRALIA
WALKER-MUNRO,
Over the past ten years, criminal offending utilising or involving computers
and information systems has risen to become one of the
most prevalent global
security threats. With a low cost to entry and high potential benefits,
cybercrime is a significant challenge
for traditional forms of law enforcement
investigation. In response, many Western democracies have passed laws permitting
of policing and intelligence agencies to “hack back”
– that is, to use computers to attack, infiltrate, damage
or disrupt the
information systems of criminal offenders. Yet the contours and boundaries of
those laws are underexamined in the
literature. How do these agencies pursue
criminals operating extraterritorially? On what legal basis can police,
intelligence services
or even the military attack the computers of a criminal
group? This paper seeks to chart the legal parameters of the use of cyber
capabilities by Australian national security agencies on a domestic
In August 2020,
The Australian
newspaper published details of a
discussion paper authored by the Department of Home
According to the report,
the Department was proposing legislative amendments to the
Security of
Critical Infrastructure Act 2018
(Cth) (“the SOCI Act”) which
would have permitted the Australian Signals Directorate (ASD) –
Australia’s
top secret signals intelligence agency – to intervene in
times of emergency. In those terms, the emergency was deemed any
and serious cyber threat’ to Australia’s
‘economy, security or sovereignty, including threat to
Once such an emergency
situation arose, ASD would then be empowered to ‘take direct action to
actively deny, disrupt and respond
to malicious activity with corresponding
powers and immunities’.
recently, ASD was named in a ‘joint standing operation’ with the
Australian Federal Police to target cybercriminals
and foreign
Though the methodology of
ASD remained highly classified, it was apparent from the report that Australia
was contemplating the ability
of ASD to “hack back”; that is, to use
ASD’s own cyber capabilities against the would-be criminals.
But what does hacking back mean in legal terms? The exact circumstances in
which hacking back might be contemplated, which types of
emergency situations
qualified, and exactly what those powers and immunities authorise is not well
understood in the literature.
Even more concerningly, since many digital
connections are transnational, there exists significant capacity for hacking
unique geostrategic position, with an abundance of natural wealth,
citizens, and high performing economies – all of which are rich targets
for cybercrime. Notwithstanding, this topic
is under-described in the current
legal discourse.
The hack back phenomenon is not solely limited to Australia. In 2021, the
International Institute for Strategic Studies (IISS) published
its report into
the cyber capabilities of 15 countries. The IISS report claimed that the United
States (US) ‘capability for
offensive cyber operations is probably more
developed than that of any other country, although its full potential remains
undemonstrated’.
Following closely behind the US in cyber offensive capability were other members
of the Five Eyes intelligence alliance – including
the United Kingdom
(UK), Australia and Canada – but also ally States such as Israel, France
and Japan. States with traditionally
counter-Anglo interests were also included
such as China, Iran and Russia.
The concerns here are far from academic. Not only do individual officers of
the Executive need to be properly empowered for undertaking
what are illegal
acts if conducted by a member of the public, but Australia must maintain proper
respect for the rules-based global
order. The legislative underpinnings of
hack-backs are also important from the perspective of paying respect to
international sovereignty.
In other words, how might it be legal for one country
(such as Australia) to attack the software or hardware owned by a criminal
located in a second country, but passing through the digital connectivity
infrastructure of a third country? Opportunities
for major diplomatic or
political incidents are manifest.
This paper will therefore seek to make some inroads into understanding and
mapping the legality of “hacking back” under
Australian law –
in particular, its position as a tool of state intervention in the same vein as
covert operations or spying.
The focus of that analysis will be solely upon the
domestic legislation of Australia that creates or permits opportunities for
back. Beyond the necessary discussion of aspects of international law
that might create domestic obligations, this paper will not
deal with any
instrument or custom of international law.
Part 1 will introduce the idea of “hacking back” as a conceptual
vehicle, exposing some of the issues which pose challenges
for various
legislation in Australia. Section 2 will examine the legal provisions which
would enable deployment of cyber offensive
capabilities inside Australia’s
territorial boundaries. A brief history of the Acts permitting calling-out of
cyber offensive
assets will also be explored. Section 3 will then discuss the
circumstances under which our national security agencies should be
utilise their capabilities domestically. Concepts of emergency and necessity
will be examined to formulate principles under
which it could be considered
permissible for Australia to hack back, as well as highlighting a significant
deficit in the existing
research literature around this topic. Finally, the
paper will close with some summarising observations in Section 4.
I WHAT IS HACKING
In order to understand the legalities of hacking back in context, it is
important to establish exactly what the paradigm refers to.
Unsurprisingly,
though States might have been quick to admit the existence of cyber units with
these types of capabilities, they
have been far more circumspect about exactly
what those capabilities could allow or
Early examinations of
cyber capabilities generally grouped together by intention, distinguishing those
that were considered “offensive”
(being in an attacking or proactive
capacity) from those that were “defensive” (being in a responsive or
reactive capacity).
Pragmatically
though, the definition between offensive and defensive has been obliterated. The
joint US and Israeli cyber operation
codenamed “Olympic Games”
– which allegedly included the deployment of the Stuxnet worm against
Iranian nuclear
centrifuges – and the Russian WannaCry and NotPetya
ransomware attacks were really both offensive and defensive in nature (at
according to their instigators).
This difficulty is compounded by a lack of common language. Both US and UK
military doctrine treat offensive capabilities in a similar
way as defensive
ones, by considering ‘cyber operations’ as the projection of power
into the online, digital or virtual
environments through the use of computer or
information systems.
legalised aspects of offensive cyber in 2018 under its counterterrorism laws but
used the more euphemistic “active cyber”
‘prevent[ion of] threats before they reach Canadian (and possibly allied)
targets’ – to describe their
activities.
New Zealand remains
staunchly in the defensive camp, despite possessing what some have called
offensive capabilities.
Australia’s cyber security strategy does not define offensive or defensive
Australia’s international cyber engagement
However, both the-then
Prime Minister of Australia
Australian Signals Directorate
both made public statements in which they announced the existence of
Australia’s offensive capabilities in this domain.
The predominant problem with both differentiating by intention or language
appears to be trying to view cyber operations through the
same lens as
traditional kinetic warfare where, instead of two sides exchanging bullets or
artillery, warfare in the cyber domain
has tried to incorporate the idea of a
back-and-forth exchange of viruses, worms and
Much of the literature
acknowledges that in the online world the traditional doctrines of warfare break
down, non-State and State
actors are indistinguishable and the lines between
crime, terrorism and open war are impossible to
“Hacking back” exemplifies these difficulties in both intention
and language. The term generally covers those ‘proactive
steps a victim of
a cyberattack takes against their assailant in order to retaliate against their
incorporating dimensions that are both defensive (retaliating against an
attacker) and offensive (employing methods to manipulate,
damage or destroy the
attacker’s systems). By referring to the steps taken by
“victims”, the literature also acknowledges
that “hacking
back” applies to non-State actors where ‘government departments and
law enforcement agencies are
unable or unwilling to effectively respond to
cybercrime’.
Hacking back
is also equally plagued by different terms, with ‘active defence’,
‘retaliatory hacking’ and
‘counter hacking’ being used
interchangeably with “hacking back” in the
literature.
This paper will take a broad view of the term “hacking back”,
with a view that it describes the actions taken by both
State and non-State
actors in response to a cybersecurity threat or incident to ‘manipulate,
deny, disrupt, degrade, or destroy
targeted computers, information systems or
belonging to or
supporting the actions of an attacker. There are several reasons for taking this
approach. The first is that this
definition incorporates those aspects of
previous definitions on which scholars
Secondly, this definition
recognises the growing role of non-State actors in responding to cybersecurity
(and permits examining
their call for greater legitimacy and legal protection, which will be dealt with
later). Thirdly, it focuses
the inquiry solely on responsive acts and thus
excludes proactive or “first strike”
capabilities.
Fourthly, this
definition places the concept of “intercepting communications”
(using interception warrants issued under
Telecommunications
(Interception and Access) Act 1979
(Cth) or its international equivalents)
outside of the scope of the paper, as the defined act of hacking back involves
solely retaliatory
or reactive responses.
These definitions now having been established, we wish to examine how
Australia currently legitimises the use of hacking back by its
national security, intelligence agencies, police, and the Australian Defence
Force (ADF). These agencies are not only the
most likely first responders to the
adversarial States, cybercriminal
groups, politically motivated extremists and
“lone wolf” actors
– but also those traditionally funded and empowered to undertake such
II LEGISLATIVE AUTHORITY
FOR HACKING BACK IN AUSTRALIA
The national security apparatus of Australia is, at least by reference to its
enabling legislation, notoriously fragmented: one recent
legislative reviewer
called the oversight of law enforcement and intelligence agencies ‘a
dog’s breakfast’.
Intelligence agencies – being those constituting the National Intelligence
Community (NIC)
predominantly covered by the provisions of the
Intelligence Services Act
(Cth) (“IS Act”). The only exception for this paper for NIC
agencies is ASIO, which draws its powers from the
Australian Security
Intelligence Organisation Act 1979
(Cth) (“the ASIO Act”). The
AFP are also excepted from the IS Act, which are also given powers as constables
Crimes Act 1914
”), but are still
considered part of the NIC.
Australia’s military forces – the Army, Navy and Air Force
operating under the unified banner of the ADF – can draw
their operating
legitimacy from two locations. The first is in statute, more specifically the
powers accruing to Defence members
participating in a “call out
order” issued by the Governor-General under
Part IIIAAA
(Cth) (“the
Defence Act
Part IIIAAA
actions are
reserved for responses to “domestic violence” where the ‘use,
or potential use, of force (including
intrusive or coercive acts) is required by
Defence members’ in situations of threats to Commonwealth interests or at
of the States or
Territories.
The other source of
operational legitimacy for deployment of the ADF comes from the Crown
prerogative which permits the Governor-General
to direct the ADF to ‘be
anywhere’ and thereby undertake such operational activities as he or she
Finally, the policing forces at the State and Territory level are usually
dependent entirely upon the enabling legislation in each
of their jurisdictions.
However, amendments to the
Surveillance Devices Act 2004
(Cth) (SDA) in
introduced a series of
warrants capable of supporting hacking back for State and Territory police.
Generally speaking, such warrants
permit police officers to hack into a computer
– whether located in Australia or elsewhere – and modify, alter,
or destroy information on any such computer or
Whether or not those
provisions enable the populist concept of “hacking back” to occur is
a rather more nuanced question.
Legal Authority for NIC
Hacking Back
The NIC operates on what can largely be considered a geographical divide
– agencies such as the Australian Secret Intelligence
Service (ASIS),
Australian Signals Directorate (ASD), Australian Geospatial-Intelligence
Organisation (AGO) and the Defence Intelligence
Organisation (DIO) have a
foreign remit, to collect and process intelligence and to conduct operations
involving threats not located
within Australia. Given these agencies are largely
bound by the limitations in the IS
their utilization is
predominantly connected to preventing or disrupting foreign
or assisting the ADF
with military operations
Two recent examples
include the targeting of Islamic State assets during “Glowing
and assisting
Australian Federal Police investigate the hackers behind the theft of health
insurance information from Medibank
Conversely, the Office of National Intelligence (ONI) is constituted under a
separate Commonwealth Act
has only leadership and coordination roles within the NIC ecosystem. ONI is
limited by statute to the leadership and ‘evaluation
of matters’
involving the NIC, but not the NIC agencies themselves, and to advise the Prime
Minister on the results of such
evaluations. These evaluations are curtailed to
the extent that they may or do ‘inappropriately impact on, or encroach on
functions, powers and responsibilities’ of members of the
A strong prospect for the authorisation of NIC agencies to conduct
“hacking back” under a legitimate framework is contained
in the ASIO
Effectively, the ASIO Act
empowers the Director-General of ASIO to seek a warrant from the
Attorney-General if:
...he or she is satisfied that there are reasonable grounds for believing that
access by the Organisation to data held in a computer
(the target computer) will
substantially assist the collection of intelligence in accordance with this Act
in respect of a matter
(the security matter) that is important in relation to
necessary test for the Attorney-General to issue such a warrant is three-fold.
Firstly, the warrant must specify a target computer
by reference to some
defining characteristic that separates the target computer from unrelated,
nearby or connected devices.
Secondly, there must exist a security matter upon which the Organisation has
collected, or is proposing to collect, intelligence.
Thirdly, the
Director-General must hold a reasonable belief based on reasonable grounds that
the Organisation gaining access to the
target computer will be
‘substantially assist’ the collection of intelligence in respect of
that security matter.
These tests place important boundaries around the exercise of ASIO’s
hacking back power. The concept that a warrant cannot authorise
expedition” – usually described as an exercise of statutory power in
the absence of reasonable grounds,
conducted in the hope of finding some
evidence which justifies the intrusion – has been long established in the
common law.
In this case, a
computer access warrant must be directed towards a target computer, defined with
some precision in order to comfort
the Attorney-General that the
Organisation’s access to that computer is both possible and reasonable to
achieve the objectives
of the warrant.
Further, the use of a computer access warrant under the ASIO Act requires a
connection to a security matter both generally but also
in relation to the
collection of intelligence from the target computer. This must be a matter
related to security as it is defined
requiring that ASIO by
necessity limits the circumstances in which a warrant of this type might be
sought or granted (although ASIO
does have a derivative use provision enabling
them to copy any data relating to a security matter which was
mentioned in the
Finally, any “hacking back” conducted under a computer access
warrant may only alter, damage or destroy data on that computer
for the purpose
of obtaining access to the data the subject of the warrant and/or concealing the
activities of ASIO.
access warrant does not authorise ASIO or its officers or agents to alter,
damage or destroy data for any other purpose
(i.e., disrupting or preventing
crime), though the Act curiously only protects
use of a computer
or telecommunications network by persons involved with the target computer and
remains silent about
For completeness, there are two other forms of warrant which might also be
relied upon by ASIO to conduct “hacking back”
activities. An
‘identified person warrant’ may be issued by the Attorney-General on
the application of the Director-General
of ASIO, and where the Attorney-General
is satisfied of two conditions: firstly, that a named person is involved in
activities prejudicial
to security; and secondly that the issuing of the warrant
will, or is likely to, ‘substantially assist the collection of
intelligence
relevant to
Once issued,
the warrant may be directed to that named person’s electronic devices if,
and only if, ASIO can satisfy the Director-General
or Attorney-General at a
later time that the data sought ‘will substantially assist the collection
of intelligence relevant
to the prejudicial activities of the identified
ASIO may then
‘if necessary to achieve that purpose, add, copy, delete or alter other
data in the target
but are bound
by the same prohibitions on loss or damage as computer access
The second form of warrant under which a computer might be hacked back is
under a foreign intelligence
Rather than a separate
class of warrants, foreign intelligence warrants are those issued under the same
provisions above (sections
25A and 27C) but are directed not to
“security” matters but “foreign intelligence” matters
which arise within
These warrants, again requested by the Director-General and granted by the
Attorney-General, carry an additional threshold test.
Prior to issuing a foreign
intelligence warrant, the Attorney-General must receive advice from the Defence
Minister or Foreign Affairs
Minister to the effect ‘that the collection of
foreign intelligence relating to that matter is in the interests of Australia's
national security, Australia's foreign relations or Australia's national
economic well-being’.
Foreign intelligence warrants also do not authorise the damaging of computers
which would interfere with lawful
Having thus exhausted all the hacking provisions under the ASIO Act, it
remains to consider whether any of the other NIC agencies
might be able to
conduct cyber offensive activities within the domestic territory of Australia.
IS Act agencies – including
ASIS, AGO and ASD – function under the
framework of Ministerial authorisation and
directions.
A direction imposes
obligations on an NIC agency to refrain from conducting certain activities in
respect of Australian persons,
whether those activities are the production of
intelligence,
assistance to
military operations by the ADF
or the prevention or disruption of
unless the Minister
authorises those activities.
To provide such an authorisation, the Minister must be satisfied of numerous
however, this is not
the greatest difficulty which faces IS Act agencies in attempting to “hack
back” within Australia’s
boundaries. The limitation placed upon
these agencies by the IS Act clearly excludes much of their capabilities from
operating inside
Australia on their own initiative. For example, ASIS may only
collect intelligence about ‘the capabilities, intentions or activities
people or organisations
outside Australia
’, or ‘undertake
such other activities as the responsible Minister directs relating to the
capabilities, intentions or
activities of people or organisations
added in all cases).
AGO and ASD have similar limitations placed upon them. AGO for example is
limited to producing various forms of geospatial intelligence
on persons and
organisations ‘outside
Australia’,
whilst ASD is
limited to preventing or disrupting cybercrime ‘undertaken by people or
organisations outside
Australia’.
agency’s core remit relates to activities undertaken within the
territorial boundaries of Australia and in fact excludes
those activities by
operation of statute. There are however, several interesting loopholes which
might permit IS Act agencies participating
in the use of “hacking
back” without offending the limitations imposed on them.
The first is where these agencies have functions bestowed upon them by the IS
Act which do not carry the “outside Australia”
caveat. In the case
of ASIS this is counter-intelligence
(i.e., ‘the
identification and neutralization of the threat posed by foreign intelligence
services, and the manipulation of
those services for the manipulator’s
), and for ASD
this is their technological protection function (i.e., to ‘protect
specialised technologies acquired in connection
with the performance’ of
any of ASD’s other functions under the IS
Broadly speaking, both ASIS and ASD might be permitted to conduct hacking
into an offender’s computer where that offender was
geographically located
inside Australia if, and only if:
• In the case of ASIS, they reasonably believed that the offender was
working for, or acting on behalf of, a ‘foreign
hacking back activities were reasonably necessary to fulfil ASIS’
counterintelligence functions; or
• In the case of ASD, the offender was attempting to steal, subvert,
damage or destroy some particular specialised technology
which ASD had acquired
in the performance of its other IS Act functions, i.e., specialised
cryptographic, communication or computer
technologies.
The vagueness of these terms should give IS agencies cause for caution;
however, there are more pressing issues. In both cases, the
conduct of either or
both of ASIS or ASD in hacking back a domestic Australian offender would require
both a Ministerial direction
and authorisation, and a Ministerial direction
be issued in respect of activities which would require a warrant
under the ASIO Act (such as a computer access
Even in the event that
a direction could be issued, the Minister would need to be satisfied, as a
precondition to the giving of an
authorisation that ‘there are
satisfactory arrangements in place to ensure that the nature and consequences of
acts done in
reliance on the authorisation will be reasonable, having regard to
the purposes for which they are carried
The reasonableness
of the acts done will be difficult to justify in circumstances whereby the same
activities justifying ASIS or
ASD’s involvement would also more reasonably
justify ASIO’s jurisdiction as a matter affecting Australia’s
The second pathway under which hacking back might be contemplated is under
the assistance functions accruing to IS Act
not only as discrete
functions of their agencies but also under sections 13 and 13A of the IS Act.
These activities do not automatically
mandate Ministerial directions or
authorisations, though they may be covered by other directions or authorisations
depending on the
activities being contemplated. Whether providing assistance to
the AFP, a State or Territory Police Force, a specialist regulator
Department, there is the possibility that the Minister could issue an
authorisation for activities involving the deployment
of such capabilities
inside Australia for the purpose of its assistance functions.
The necessary test for the Minister is – hinging on use of the word
“may” in section 9(2) of the IS Act –
dependent solely on
whether he or she was reasonably satisfied that an authorisation would permit
activities necessary for the proper
performance of one of the relevant IS
agency’s functions, there are satisfactory control arrangements in place
to not exceed
the authorisation, and those arrangements can ensure that the
‘nature and consequences of acts done in reliance on the authorisation
will be reasonable’.
This construction too should be treated with some scepticism. The cooperation
provisions in the IS Act explicitly limit the boundaries
of cooperation with a
government agency to the performance of the cooperating agency’s
functions. For example, the AFP has
policing and investigative functions to deal
with cybercrime.
function to ‘provide material, advice and other assistance... on matters
relating to the security and integrity of
information that is processed, stored
or communicated by electronic or similar
and the IS Act
permits ASD to assist the AFP with the performance of the investigation
Yet the exact
practical assistance which ASD can provide is circumscribed by application only
to persons and organisations located
Though this
limitation is specifically carved out when IS Act agencies cooperate either with
ASIO or each other, the nature of such
support is specifically limited to what
is asked by the requesting agency, i.e., IS Act agencies cannot venture outside
the parameters
of their lawful functions where this has not been specifically
ASIO activities would
need to be authorised by a warrant under the ASIO Act, and IS Act agencies
– even those cooperating with
one another – would be limited by the
application to persons and organisations outside Australia.
In summary, the above analysis shows that the deployment of Australian
“hack backs” by the IS Act agencies (ASIS, AGO
and ASD) would not be
lawful if it was deployed inside Australia, both by reference to the powers and
functions of those agencies.
Instead, ASIO appears to retain the primary
access warrants; however, this capability is limited to only the
collection of intelligence about the activities of the offender
and would not
extend to disrupting or destroying the offender’s data or systems in
response to an incident. The question of
whether ASIO or the IS Act agencies
could assist either of the ADF or Police forces to do so will be answered in the
subsequent sections.
Legal Authority for
ADF Hacking Back
The ADF first established an Information Warfare Division in 2017 as part of
its Joint Capabilities Group, with a specific remit to
conduct cyber operations
alongside traditional forms of military operations and armed
A year after its
establishment, in 2018 the Australian Strategic Policy Institute then examined
the publicly available information
regarding how ADF capability worked alongside
ASD, concluding that ‘[a]ny offensive cyber operation in support of the
planned and executed under the direction of the Chief of Joint Operations
and, as with any other military capability, is governed
by ADF rules of
engagement’.
time, ADF personnel and materiel have focused on the domain of cyber in
extensive training and capability development
In other words,
deployment of offensive cyber capabilities – “hacking back”
– by the ADF would be conducted
under the imprimatur and legality of a
military operation and not an intelligence operation.
So, what are the legal parameters of a military deployment in which hack
backs might be used? And could Australia ostensibly be a
location in which such
a deployment could occur?
The answer is not straightforward. Firstly, Australia has a very complex
system relating to domestic deployment of its military force
under call out
orders contained in Part IIIAAA of the
Defence Act
These deployments are
either to protect Commonwealth interests from real, perceived, or anticipated
or in response to a
request from a State or
In both cases, there
is also likely to be a need for the Governor-General to be satisfied that a
state of ‘domestic violence’
exists – a term that lacks
definition anywhere on Australia’s statute
– but would likely
require substantial threat of or actual loss of life or Commonwealth
Secondly, the ADF is commanded by the
Governor-General
through the
Chief of the Defence Force.
the King’s representative in Australia, the Governor-General may also
choose to deploy the ADF under the prerogative of
the Crown or under doctrine of
neither of which
would require authorisation by an Act of Parliament nor a decision by a
The ADF could also
undertake certain “pre-deployment” actions and functions under its
own initiative and without vitiating
the exercise of either executive
or the Crown
prerogative.
Lastly, whilst the High Court of Australia might have been willing to impose
boundaries on the executive prerogative in
these boundaries
are not as persuasive to military deployments. This is generally because the
call out order regime contains a caveat
provision in
section 51ZD
, essentially severing any need for the ADF to rely upon call out orders in
every situation in which they proposed to deploy their
capabilities:
‘[t]his Part does not affect any utilisation of the Defence Force that
would be permitted or required, or any
powers that the Defence Force would have,
if this Part were
disregarded’.
Whether the activating condition is the making of a call out order or the
ADF’s inherent capability to deploy in response to
an emergency situation
will in turn determine the legality of ADF use of “hacking back”
capabilities. For example, assuming
that a call out order has been made by the
Governor-General – and it matters not whether the situation involves a
State request
or the protection of Commonwealth interests – the deployment
of ADF cyber capabilities is a command decision for the Chief
of the Defence
Force. If the hacking back is proposed in the context of a broader Police
investigation or response, the use of ADF
assets to do so would not only need to
be ‘reasonable and necessary’ to achieve a purpose consistent with
the originating
call out order,
but also at the request of the Police Force of the hosting State or
Assuming it remained within the scope of the call out order, the ADF’s
use of hacking back capabilities could either be explicitly
authorised by the
Minister in an authorisation under the
, or apply by virtue of the
Minister’s declaration of a specified
or in defence of critical
infrastructure.
Hacking back
could then be used by the ADF under a call out order if they needed to support
more traditional security operations
such as achieving the capture or recapture
of an asset, in response to a hostage situation or to put an end to the state of
On the other hand, the use of ADF assets to perform more traditional policing
roles such as search and
for evidentiary
purposes is ultimately unsupportable in law, as the search powers available
under a call out order must be observed
Nor do search powers
under call out orders generally permit ‘remote’ or
‘online’ search and seizure, whether
conducted under a search
determination
or the power to
The exercise of hacking back powers to search an offender’s computer by
military forces also butts up uncomfortably against
the common law privilege
against self-incrimination.
Alternately, if the ADF deploys its cyber assets domestically under Crown or
executive prerogative, it could operate without the constraints
and requirements
of Ministerial authorisations and simply rely on the balance of Crown power to
support it ‘responding to emergencies
or keeping the
There are two
significant problems with such a suggestion, especially in the contentious field
of cyberattacks and military forces
more generally.
The first issue is that the deployment of military forces without a statutory
footing offends the ‘very old common law proposition
that the Royal
prerogative does not extend to entering private property for the purposes of
keeping the peace’.
Though the ADF has an absolute ability to protect and maintain the laws of the
Commonwealth, this ability flounders in the absence
of a clear and present
danger to the Commonwealth itself – and, if such a danger existed, would
justify the making of a call
out order in the first place.
The second issue arising from the use of prerogative to deploy military
forces is that the ADF loses the power and protection of the
Defence Act
doing so. Not only are its officers and personnel open to criminal or civil
liability in the pursuit of their
but they lose all
manner of statutory powers that could arise under the issue of a call out order
or Ministerial authorisation. Deployments
of ADF personnel during the management
of the COVID-19 epidemic in Australia are instructive in this regard: they
derived their powers
from the various biosecurity and emergency management
declarations, not from the provisions of the
Finally (and for completeness) it is worth examining the assistance
provisions of the IS Act previously covered as they might apply
to domestic
military operations. The position of ASD is complicated – they are not
strictly part of the ADF even if they may
employ or second ‘any officer,
sailor, soldier or
and thus cannot
be given orders by the
Governor-General.
ADF may request ASD assistance either pursuant to the exercise of Defence
or as a request under
the IS Act.
Both have their
difficulties. It is possible to conceive a scenario where the Police make a
request of the ADF who then make a request
of ASD who might then collaborate
with ASIO... hardly an efficient use of time or resources. It might also be seen
by the Inspector-General
of Intelligence and Security – the oversight body
of IS Act agencies – as a way of sidestepping legitimate regulatory
controls built into the law.
Having concluded this analysis of the ADF’s hacking back capabilities,
it seems unlikely that deployment of military cyber capability
Australia’s territory would be
prima facie
lawful under the
Defence Act 1903
. Even accounting for the support provisions enabling IS
Act agencies, without the very clear authority granted to the ADF by the
Governor-General in the form of a call-out order, the use of hacking back
capabilities by military personnel inside Australian territory
seems to be
extremely vexed.
This of course neglects collective effects of the residual powers of
statehood available to
Governor-General’s command
and the common law
doctrine of necessity
where a State can act in its own self-defence.
Under that collection of legal powers and immunities, the ADF can respond to a
threat to Australia’s national security as:
[t]he conduct of war appears to be a prerogative power of the Crown and military
forces exist primarily to execute this prerogative
on the sovereign’s
behalf... the exercise of martial law in the factual circumstances of a war or
insurrection is an aspect
of prerogative power and not the common-law doctrine
of necessity available to any person. This is a preferable view because it is
not for any person to exercise the military power of the Crown or to claim to do
those circumstances where the ADF is required to deploy domestically to confront
a foreign threat, it would be permitted to utilise
the full range of its
warfighting capabilities (including “hacking back” and similar
information warfare style methodologies).
We therefore turn finally to the legal status of policing hack backs.
Legal Authority for
Police Hacking Back
The final pathway for examining Australian legislative support for hacking
back falls now to the status of policing forces under the
Surveillance
Devices Act 2004
(Cth) (“SDA”), but also those bodies charged
with various forms of integrity investigation such as the Australian Commission
for Law Enforcement Integrity, Australian Criminal Intelligence Commission
(ACIC), and the independent standing anti-corruption commissions
of the States
and Territories.
Each of the
State and Territory police forces are also recognised as ‘law enforcement
agencies’ and their members (including
secondees) as ‘law
enforcement
The SDA creates and maintains a warrant scheme for both Commonwealth law
enforcement as well as State and Territory law enforcement
investigating State offences with a Federal
This is highly
relevant to discussions around cybercrime and online malfeasance, as one of the
core provisions of these types of
offences are those which have ‘involved
an electronic
communication’.
Divisions 4 (computer access warrants), 5 (data disruption warrants) and 6
(network activity warrants) of the SDA create the framework
of most relevance to
the discussion in this paper.
Computer access warrants under the SDA bear some similarity to their ASIO Act
counterparts; however, the applicant is a ‘law
enforcement
Director-General of ASIO) and the issuing authority is an ‘eligible
‘nominated AAT [Administrative Appeals Tribunal]
Attorney-General). The same test for reasonable grounds applies to the
consideration of the application, but the criteria
upon which those reasonable
grounds are based changes significantly under the SDA (however, only the
‘relevant offence’
grounds are in scope
The issuing authority must also consider numerous criteria in deciding
whether to make a computer access warrant including the nature
and gravity of
the alleged offence,
whether alternative
methods might obtain the same evidence or
information,
and the likely
value of evidence or intelligence
Like an ASIO
warrant, if the issuing authority is satisfied then the warrant must
sufficiently particularise both the alleged offences
and the target computer
which is the subject of the
But there are difficulties with the use of computer access warrants as a
vehicle to hacking back offending targets; again, like their
ASIO equivalents
the warrant only authorises access to the computer, not damage or disruption.
Law enforcement officers are permitted
to access and obtain the data subject to
the warrant only – this does not authorise deletion, modification,
destruction or
damage to any data or
Concealing the access
also does not authorise the use of disruptive, destructive, or damaging
methodologies beyond the bare minimum
necessary to achieve the purposes of the
Nor do network activity warrants permit any broader forms of “hacking
back” in the terms described in this
Like computer access
warrants, the purpose of network activity warrants is to map out and obtain
evidentiary information relevant
to a ‘criminal network of
individuals’.
turn is defined as a ‘electronically linked group of individuals’
who use, communicate or facilitate the commission
of a relevant offence using
online or digital methods.
These warrants are also more restricted in their application, in that only the
chief officer of the AFP or ACIC may apply for a network
and that data on the
target computer relates to the network of individuals and is ‘relevant to
the prevention, detection or
frustration of one or more kinds of relevant
Destruction
or damage to data or systems is generally not
The final form of warrant – data disruption warrants – are also
limited to law enforcement officers of the AFP or Australian
Commission.
In order to bring
an application, relevant offences must have been or are about to be committed,
and the disruption of data in a
target computer must achieve either the
frustration of the commission of the relevant offence relating to that data
(data-based warrant
frustration of offences of a similar kind (offence-based
). Data disruption
warrants also requiring an endorsement from a more senior officer within the
agency who has ‘relevant skills,
knowledge, and experience to endorse the
making of applications for the issue of data disruption
list of matters to be considered by an eligible Judge or nominated AAT member is
daunting and comprehensive.
Quite unlike computer access warrants and network activity warrants, data
disruption warrants clearly fall within the parameters of
back” as this paper describes it. Data disruption warrants may be applied
for unsworn, permitting law enforcement
to respond quickly to incidents as and
when they occur (noting the requirement to provide a sworn application within 72
the making of the
application
). The warrants
precisely authorise and permit the damage, deletion and destruction of data
which is subject to the warrant as well
as authorising the alteration, copying
or deletion of
any other data
on the target computer whilst the warrant
is in force – so long as the disruption of offending named in the warrant
is achieved.
Although the
usual caveat of restricting damage that would impinge on lawful uses of the
target computer applies,
contextually the bar is much lower given that the purpose of the warrant is
disruption and not evidence gathering.
It is also apposite to note that the provision of assistance to law
enforcement – either by IS Act agencies or by ASIO –
is much cleaner
and easier under the imprimatur of a data disruption warrant. Both ASD
capabilities (leveraging the technical expertise
) and ASIO (who have
a specific law enforcement assistance
) could be brought to
bear under the supervision and direction of law enforcement capabilities.
Equally, were ADF assets to deploy
following a call out order or exercise of
executive prerogative, their subordination to law enforcement and incorporation
warrant regime would clothe them in an appropriate degree of legal
protection. The construction of the SDA also seems to prefer this
approach, as
it requires a data disruption warrant to ‘authorise the doing of specified
things ... in relation to the
relevant target
added). The Act thus remains entirely agnostic about
specified things, whether it is a law enforcement officer, ASD or ASIO agent, or
military officer or enlisted.
Conclusion to Section
The strongest support under Australian law for the use of “hacking
back” capabilities appears to be under the SDA as a
primarily law
enforcement focused exercise. The use of such capabilities under either the
intelligence agencies or military forces
of Australia, acting alone or in
concert, are riddled with statutory imperfections and linguistic difficulties.
Far from being an academic concern, this lack of precision not only
compromises the legitimacy of such operations but potentially
renders both
intelligence and military personnel liable to criminal charge or civil suit. The
use of such a controversial capability
cannot be supported by reference to
imprecise legal frameworks and ambiguous prerogatives.
By focusing on law enforcement as the primary counter-cybercrime agency in
Australia, we achieve a degree of ‘coherence and
consistency between the
essential elements of the regime and correlative authorisations elsewhere in
legislation’.
Australia do it better? The next section will examine whether Australia should
alter its laws to better reflect circumstances
under which it may use its
“hacking back” capabilities in the future.
III WHEN CAN AUSTRALIA
Having examined some of the various legal frameworks under which
“hacking back” would be legitimised, there remains a
policy question
at what point recourse to those frameworks should be had. Obviously not all
cyber incidents and not all cyber-crimes
would qualify for an immediate and
overwhelming response by national security agencies and might breach
Australia’s obligations
under international
On the other hand,
failing to respond adequately to a cybersecurity incident may result in further
damage and cost which could have
been avoided. What is therefore required is a
policy that has ‘the aim of normalizing uncertainty...[and] the aspiration
the uncertainty, the exceptional, be
There are international examples of how such a policy could be formulated.
Kesan and Majuca describe that hack backs should only be
allowed where three
conditions can be met: one, that obtaining a court order or similar restraint is
unlikely to be successful; two,
there is a serious prospect that the hack back
will not impact innocent third parties; and three, the damage to the victimised
cannot be adequately
The trigger for
engaging in such activities appears to largely follow a cost-benefit analysis
dependent on the likelihood of success
by the defender versus the likelihood of
collateral damage, mistakes in attribution, lack of legitimacy and the
possibility of normalising
destructive
Another benchmark available in international law is the doctrine of
countermeasures, being the engagement in ‘measures that
would otherwise be
contrary to the international obligations of an injured State vis-à-vis
the responsible State, if they
were not taken by the former in response to an
internationally wrongful act by the latter in order to procure cessation and
reparation’.
doctrine, “hacking back” would only be permitted under two
conditions: firstly, the State engaging in a prior
wrongful act must be
identifiable and attributable for that act; and secondly, the hack response must
produce a temporary result
that is ‘instrumentally directed to induce the
responsible state to cease its
violation’.
The obvious
limitations upon such a trigger are the cessation of the originating
cyberattack, as well as any response that would
threaten human rights or amount
to an unacceptable use of
A third form of policy construction was envisaged by Lahmann, where he
examined the lawfulness of Germany’s 2005 Aviation Security
which permitted the executive to shoot down planes hijacked by terrorists in a
9/11 scenario – and the potential
for the Act to ‘directly affect
innocent individuals and their human
Lahmann’s view, such regimes needed to abide by four
conditions:
• An operative cyber emergency regime needs to comprise precise and
workable definitions of key concepts;
• The regime should only require consideration of stakeholder interests
if they will foreseeably and directly be negatively
affected by the
“hacking back” operation;
• The regime should eschew
attribution (which may not be
technically possible at the time) in favour of
assessment of the
legitimacy of the “hacking back” action; and
• As a State with a cyber offensive capability, it has a duty to put
some legal process in place that follows principles of
the rule of law and
ensures consistency.
A fourth, more consequentialist approach by Carr and Schmitt described six
criteria: severity, immediacy, directness, invasiveness,
measurability, and
presumptive legitimacy.
However, it is worth observing that any “hack back” which meets all
six criteria is suggested to amount to an armed attack
which would warrant a
military response. As we are focusing the use of State capabilities against
non-State actors within a domestic
threat scenario, and in many (but not all)
circumstances these use of an “armed attack” cannot be
All of these benchmarks stipulate that “hacking back” must not be
conducted in an unfettered manner and requires some
form of soft limitations,
even if the law permits that conduct to be engaged in. For example,
Germany’s 2005 Aviation Security
allow the shooting
down of a hijacked plane – a concept also authorised under Australian
– the question
remains whether the Executive could
legitimately
do so in every
circumstance. Another obvious limitation for each of these proposed policy
frameworks listed above is that they take
the approach of “hacking
back” as an activity by one State against another, as opposed to our
present analysis which
involves the activity of a State (Australia) against
non-State actors located within its own territory.
In fact, the literature is all but silent on the legitimacy of hacking back
as a tool of State power. Arguments broadly seem to centre
on three themes: is a
hack back effective, proportionate, and preferable compared to other less
intrusive and less damaging
The methodologies of
hack back are also highly relevant: actions which install “beacons”
– forms of spyware which
identify or flag the attacker’s computer or
keystrokes – are generally considered a more appropriate and rational
than erasing or modifying data in the target system, or ultimately the
State’s use of ransomware or
cyberweapons.
Given the lack of academic consideration in this area, we will propose four
matters that national security agencies in Australia (or
other States) should
have regard to prior to or during the conduct of hacking back activities. These
matters draw the important link
between what is
authorised under
Australian law from the preceding sections and what is
legitimately
warranted. In so doing, we synthesise Lahmann’s analysis of the
international doctrines of emergency and necessity with
Size of Proposed
Intervention by Agency
Under both an ASIO Act and SDA warrant, different levels of interference in a
target computer might be warranted. Whilst the warrant
must describe what
methodologies the warrant authorises can be
exactly whether
the effect those methodologies result in is appropriate will vary dependent on
the circumstances. We have provided
a non-exhaustive spectrum of these effects
in Figure 1.
. Spectrum of possible
effects of “hacking back”
Consider the following by reference to Figure 1. It may be sufficient for
investigators to simply gain access to the data on a target
computer under an
ASIO Act or SDA warrant, and from there directly monitor what activity occurs
(including communications between
the various parties of interest). This has the
benefit of being conducted covertly and may not necessarily involve any physical
to the data in the target computer. A warrant authorising this type of
effect might be more reasonable in circumstances involving
preparatory or
anticipatory offences where the “hacking back” might be supplemented
traditional law enforcement techniques
or procedures.
An escalation could involve the installation of “beacons” as
described earlier (which flag or identify the physical location
of the target
computer or persons of interest) or spyware (which might allow for remote
monitoring, logging of keystrokes, etc.).
Beyond those measures, the spectrum in
Figure 1 displays increasingly more obvious forms of harm and damage, such as
encrypting the
target’s data (and thus rendering it
), deleting or
destroying it, or manipulating a system or some of its connected components to
generate a kinetic or real-world
Deploying a
“hack back” which causes real-world harms would need to be reserved
for the most serious of incidents and
really as a last resort for fear of
normalizing
cyber-attacks.
Scale, Scope and
Sophistication of the Target Offender or
Person of Interest
A technical method of determining the scale, scope and sophistication of the
target offender is to examine which “layer”
is being attacked. Under
the Open System Interconnection (OSI) model, each system contains seven layers
(moving from highest to lowest
levels of abstraction):
• Application layer
• Presentation layer
• Session layer
• Transport layer
• Network layer
• Data link layer
• Physical layer
Attacks which target the lower layers are generally more favoured in attacks
against infrastructure involving national
whereas those
attacking the higher layers are traditionally associated with wider network or
social engineering incidents.
Agencies should then have regard to the nature of the offenders that can be
identified and assessed. Is the suspected person a foreign
State actor, or an
agent acting on behalf of a foreign principal? Or are they merely a motivated
opportunist or “lone wolf”?
What resources are they suspected or
known to have, either in respect of ‘relevant
‘security matter’
(which could ground an application for a warrant)? If they have or are already
launching a cyberattack of some kind, how much time
and space do they have to
perform follow-up or secondary attacks? Have they made specific threats against
known vulnerabilities or
targets, or are the threats vague and lacking in
Each of these questions shapes the form of the cyber response that is
warranted under either of the ASIO Act or SDA. Obviously a well-resourced,
highly motivated actor working on behalf of a foreign State will require a
stronger and more decisive “hacking back”
response than that used
against an individual. In the same manner, offenders with a deep resource pool
and the capabilities to conduct
follow-up offences should be considered for more
serious interventions to disable future incidents and discourage repetition. The
nature of the target also helps shape the degree to which different national
security agencies might need to coordinate their responses
to “hacking
back” – the more sophisticated, the more coordination is needed.
Quantum and Impact of
Actual and Anticipated Harms
The third matter that national security agencies should have regard to
involves the severity of actual or anticipated harms to the
affected systems. In
the early days of a cybersecurity incident or attack, this may be difficult to
achieve; alternately, in the
case of recent ransomware attacks against critical
infrastructure like a hospital or gas pipeline the actual harms can be more
A mere risk-benefit analysis is
insufficient.
back” by national security agencies to protect a piece of critical
infrastructure
anticipatory or
circumstances) might well invoke a higher order
response, even if the scope of the proposed harms to that infrastructure was of
lesser nature. Situations where harms have already occurred – such as
the conduct of a terrorist attack, or the use of a weapon
of mass destruction
for example – which might automatically warrant higher-order national
security responses than anticipatory
or preparatory actions, or where
investigations into conduct are still covert.
A better rule of thumb might be to look to the emergency doctrine in
international law referred to by Lahmann and consider whether
the actual or
anticipated harms involve “grave and imminent peril” to an
“essential interest” of
This is especially
the case where warrants may be obtained
pre-emptively.
In cases where
national security agencies are contemplating a higher order “hacking
back” response, they ought to give
consideration to whether their target
poses a grave and imminent threat to an essential interest of Australia, and be
articulating exactly what those forms of threat and interests
Articulating how threats meet those definitions would also be useful for
issuing authorities, to assist them in determining whether
the issue of warrants
is reasonable, necessary and proportionate. Independent arbiters in each warrant
regime, being the Commonwealth
Ombudsman for the
and the Inspector-General
of Intelligence and Security in respect of
would also be better
placed to assess the legitimacy of each warrant granted if the application for
them was couched with reference
to those terms.
Likelihood of
Collateral Damage
Finally, agencies should have regard to the likelihood of possible harms to
innocent third parties, whether they are other users of
a system or network, or
in the case of mistaken attribution, i.e., an actor used an interposing computer
system to disguise their
digital footprint, resulting in agencies “hacking
back” into the wrong system. Lahmann counselled that “hacking
back” regimes should only consider and protect those private actors whose
interests would ‘foreseeably and directly be
ways in which he envisaged the regime could take account of these interests
would be the issue of warnings to owners or
custodians of affected systems of an
imminent “hack back”, permitting those owners or custodians time to
implement less
intrusive or damaging interventions that might address the
original incident.
For obvious reasons, the notion of law enforcement (AFP) or intelligence
agencies (ASIO) issuing warnings ahead of a hack back activity
those agencies could be responding to serious criminal offences or threats to
national security – is hardly a
practical one. However, both the ASIO Act
and SDA do import requirements involving the consideration of stakeholders who
affected. Both ASIO Act and SDA warrants incorporate provisions which
require the applicant to give, and the issuing authority to
consider, reasonably
foreseeable impacts on innocent third
Both warrants also
do not extend to authorising the damage of systems which are not contained
within the scope of the warrants, and
which might be foreseeably affected by the
If something were to go wrong, there are mechanisms in Australian law to hold
national security agencies accountable if they have
erroneously targeted an
entirely uninvolved system or acted
disproportionately.
has a specific head of statutory power under which an aggrieved person may
obtain compensation from the
Commonwealth.
In any event,
the oft-cited case of
involved allegations against ASIS operatives who, during a training exercise
brandished firearms in a hotel, took a
manager hostage, and caused criminal
damage to the premises – clearly shows that illegal acts undertaken by
organs of Australia’s
national security apparatus will not be excused
unless explicitly authorised by statute or order of the court.
supports the proposition that any act undertaken by an agency of the State
involving “hacking back” that is not authorised
by law will attach
civil liability to the Crown.
IV CONCLUSION &
LESSONS LEARNT
By examining Australia’s statutory frameworks for deployment of
“hacking back” capabilities amongst its intelligence,
military and
law enforcement arms, there are several observations that we can make in
conclusion.
Firstly, Australian law largely prohibits the granting of Ministerial
authorisations and directions for “onshore” or domestic
and the recent
Richardson Review of the legislation of NIC agencies recommended against any
such laws being changed.
all other cases, the ASIO Act and SDA require the issue of a warrant (either by
the Attorney-General or by a Judge or authorised
AAT member respectively) on
their satisfaction of certain matters. However, the same agencies would largely
be authorised to conduct
hack backs in the case of protecting critical
infrastructure from cyber offensive activities – especially in response to
or emergent situations.
In the context of the ASIO Act, the modification or deletion of data must be
relevant to the security matter for which the warrant
is being sought, subject
to the limitations imposed regarding interfering with lawful use of computers or
causing loss or damage
For the SDA, an
officer of the AFP or ACIC must set out their reasonable suspicion that
‘disruption of data held in the target
computer is likely to substantially
assist in frustrating the commission’ of offences either involving the
data in the target
computer, or relevant to the
application.
The relative
satisfaction of those issuing authorities is not reached lightly, and promotes a
degree of consistency across the situations
in which “hacking back”
will be conducted by our national security agencies.
Secondly, these statutes place ambiguous and imprecise boundaries on the
lawful mechanism for counter-cybercrime capability to be
used in a domestic
threat scenario. The closest legitimate analogue is the issue of data disruption
warrants under the SDA to law
enforcement officers; however, the exact pathway
to satisfying the issuing authority, the nature of what is authorised under a
disruption warrant, and the overlap of such warrants with cooperation
provisions in the ASIO Act and IS Act in respect of domestic
targets remain
unnecessarily ambiguous. The cybercrime being targeted would also need to be
relatively large in scale and/or organised.
It is highly unlikely that Australia
would deploy significant cyber offensive capabilities against foreign (or
domestic) scammers
or individual instances of cybercrime.
Thirdly, though Australia’s legislation is broadly compliant with
normative customs regarding “hacking back”, the
policy parameters of
such activities require significant academic and governmental examination. By
subjecting the capability to a
specific warrant regime, the Australian
government has clearly established a need to place legislative protections and
around this most contentious of powers. Yet much more research needs
to be conducted into determining appropriate policy controls
and thresholds at
which certain methodologies might be employed under SDA data disruption and ASIO
computer access warrants.
Fourthly, Australia’s data disruption warrant regime needs to be
deconflicted from the perspective of ASD. Given its unique
position as an IS Act
agency, as well as an agency that supports military operations and law
enforcement, the precise jurisdiction
of ASD operations conducted in a domestic
environment (i.e., inside Australian territory or against Australian residents
or citizens)
needs to be narrowed down with far greater precision. A Ministerial
direction is perhaps the most appropriate action in that case.
In concluding, we also observe that our examination of “hacking
back” focuses solely on the Australian experience, and
neglects that of
the other Five Eyes countries with whom they may share methodology (New Zealand,
Canada, US and UK). We also have
not considered the actions or examined the
legitimacy of others active both in cyberspace and the Indo-Pacific region we
share, such
as Pakistan, India, China, North Korea or Singapore. Further, the
voice of our intelligence agencies – represented in the form
of empirical
studies of their methods and techniques – is sorely lacking in the debate.
All three areas are fruitful avenues
for future research.
Yet in our jurisdiction there exists patchy legal frameworks in which
security translates poorly from being a physical concept. Australia
have reconciled itself to the idea that its national security agencies –
either ASD or the AFP – can hack
into the computers of cybercriminals no
matter where they are in the world, and no matter how challenging an intrusion
into foreign
sovereignty that may be. If those capabilities suffer from a lack
of both transparent legality and legitimacy when theoretically
domestic threats, that is a situation that cannot be allowed to continue.
Alternately, though we seem more than capable of deploying “hacking
back” capabilities, Parliament may have chosen the
very deliberate means
of excising them from being used
to combat domestic threats.
Given Australia’s uncertain future and contested geostrategic position in
the Indo-Pacific, the
importance of ensuring its national security agencies
operate with the powers and functions they need within an appropriate
accountability
and regulatory framework, cannot be understated.
Senior Research
Fellow, T.C. Beirne School of Law, University of Queensland.
Assistant, University of Queensland.
Lecturer in
Cyber Criminology, School of Social Science, University of Queensland.
Simon Benson, Geoff Chambers,
‘“Hack back” powers to repel cyber attack’,
(online, 12 August 2020).
Ry Crozier, ‘Australia
sets up 100-strong permanent “operation” to target hackers’,
(online, 12 November 2022)
<https://www.itnews.com.au/news/australia-sets-up-100-strong-permanent-operation-to-target-hackers-587691>.
International Institute for
Strategic Studies,
Cyber Capabilities and National Power: A Net Assessment
(Final report, 28 June 2021)
<https://www.iiss.org/blogs/research-paper/2021/06/cyber-capabilities-national-power>,
Ibid, 10-12.
Allie Coyne, ‘Australia
has created a cyber warfare unit’,
(online, 30 June 2017)
<https://www.itnews.com.au/news/australia-has-created-a-cyber-warfare-unit-467115>;
Jeremy Fleming,
‘Director's speech at Cyber UK 2018’ (Speech,
CyberUK18 Conference, 12 April 2018),
<https://www.gchq.gov.uk/pdfs/speech/director-cyber-uk-speech-2018.pdf>,
7; Michael S. Rogers, Evidence to Senate Committee on Armed Services, United
States, 27 February 2018,
<https://www.armedservices.senate.gov/imo/media/doc/Rogers_02-27-18.pdf>,
1-3; National Defence (Canada), ‘Strong, Secure, Engaged: Canada’s
Defence Policy’ (online), <https://www.canada.ca/content/
dam/dndmdn/documents/reports/2018/strong-secure-engaged/canada-defence-policy-report.pdf>,
41; Ed Caesar, ‘The Incredible
Rise of North Korea’s Hacking
Army’, The New Yorker (online, 19 April 2021)
<https://www.newyorker.com/magazine/2021/04/26/the-incredible-rise-of-north-koreas-hacking-army>.
Martin C. Libicki,
Cyberdeterrence and Cyberwar
(Report, RAND Corporation, 2009); Kenneth
Lieberthal, Peter W. Singer,
Cybersecurity and U.S.-China Relations
(Washington DC, Brookings Institution, 2012); Adam P. Liff, ‘Cyberwar:
A New ‘Absolute Weapon’? The Proliferation
of Cyberwarfare
Capabilities and Interstate War’ (2012) 35(3)
Journal of Strategic
401; Lucas Kello, ‘The Meaning of the Cyber Revolution: Perils
to Theory and Statecraft’ (2013) 38(2)
International Security
Timothy J. Junio, ‘How Probable Is Cyber War? Bringing IR Theory Back in
to the Cyber Conflict Debate’ (2013) 36(1)
Journal of Strategic
James P. Farwell, Rafal
Rohozinski, ‘The New Reality of Cyber War’ (2012) 54(4)
107, 109; Mary Ellen O'Connell, ‘Attribution and Other
Conditions of Lawful Countermeasures to Cyber Misconduct’ (2020)
Notre Dame Journal of International Comparative Law
Joint Chiefs of Staff,
Cyberspace Operations
(JP 3-12, Department of Defense, 8 June 2018)
<https://www.jcs.mil/Portals/36/Documents/Doctrine/pubs/jp3_12.pdf>;
Cyber Primer
(Third edition, October 2022)
<https://assets.publishing.service.gov.uk/government/uploads/
system/uploads/attachment_data/file/1115061/Cyber_Primer_Edition_3.pdf>.
Stephanie Carvin,
‘Zero D’Eh: Canada Takes a Bold Step Towards Offensive Cyber
Operations’,
(blog, 27 April 2018)
<https://www.lawfareblog.com/zero-deh-canada-takes-bold-step-towards-offensive-cyber-operations>.
Tom Pullar-Strecker,
‘“Open secret” NZ has offensive cyber capability, security
firm says’,
(online, 1 December 2021)
<https://www.stuff.co.nz/business/127156155/open-secret-nz-has-offensive-cyber-capability-security-firm-says>.
Commonwealth of Australia,
Australia’s Cyber Security Strategy 2020
(P-20-02344, 2020).
Department of Foreign
Affairs and Trade (Cth),
Australia’s International Cyber Engagement
(October 2017).
Malcolm Turnbull,
‘Launch of Australia’s Cyber Security Strategy Sydney’ (Press
Statement, 21 April 2016).
Jackson Graham,
‘“Uncomfortable” debate about offensive cyber attacks
increasingly public as security environment
The Mandarin
(online, 22 November 2021) <https://www.themandarin.com.au/
175558-uncomfortable-debate-about-offensive-cyber-attacks-increasingly-public-as-security-environment-shifts/>.
James P. Farwell, Rafal
Rohozinski, ‘The New Reality of Cyber War’ (2012) 54(4)
Thomas Rid, ‘Cyber War
Will Not Take Place’ (2012) 35(1)
Journal of Strategic Studies
John Stone, ‘Cyber War Will Take Place!’ (2013) 36(1)
Strategic Studies
101; Richard A. Clarke, ‘The risk of cyber war and
cyber terrorism’ (2016) 70(1)
Journal of International Affairs
Tarah Wheeler, ‘In cyberwar, there are no rules’ (2018) 230
Foreign Policy
34; Christopher J. Finlay, ‘Just war, cyber war, and
the concept of violence’ (2018) 31(3)
Philosophy & Technology
Valeska Bloch, Sophie Peach,
Lachlan Peake, ‘The Hack Back: The Legality of Retaliatory Hacking’
(2018) 37.4
Communication Law Bulletin
Gavin Smith, Valeska Bloch,
The hack back: The legality of retaliatory hacking
(Blog, Allens
Linklaters, 17 October 2018)
<https://www.allens.com.au/insights-news/insights/2018/10/pulse-the-hack-back-the-legality-of-retaliatory-hacking/>.
Jay P. Kesan, Ruperto P.
Majuca, ‘Hacking Back: Optimal Use of Self-Defense in Cyberspace’
(2010) 84(3)
Chicago-Kent Law Review
1; Benjamin Baker,
‘Considering the Potential Deterrence Value of Legislation Allowing
Hacking Back’ (2018) SSRN: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3319530;
Hacking Back: Self-Defense, Self-Preservation or Vigilantinism
(PhD thesis, Utica College, 2020); Hannah Gallagher, ‘Recognising a Right
to Hack Back-Tom and Jerry in Cyberspace?’
(2022) 25(1)
Trinity College
of Law Review
Tom Uren, Bart Hogeveen,
Fergus Hanson,
Defining Offensive Cyber Capabilities
(Final report, ASPI,
4 July 2018)
<https://www.aspi.org.au/report/defining-offensive-cyber-capabilities>. We
also use the word
“computer” broadly, as it can include mobile
devices and Internet of Things (IoT) enabled systems.
Ibid; Bloch, Peach &
Peake, n 16; Gallagher, n 18; Josh Gold,
The Five Eyes and Offensive Cyber
Capabilities: Building a ‘Cyber Deterrence Initiative
(Report, NATO
Cooperative Cyber Defence Centre of Excellence, 2020); Brendan Walker-Munro,
‘White Hat, Black Hat, Slouch Hat:
Could Australia’s Military Cyber
Capability be Deployed against Threats Inside Australia?’ (2023)
Federal Law Review
, in proof.
Tom Kulik, ‘Why the
Active Cyber Defense Certainty Act Is a Bad Idea’,
Above the Law
(blog, 29 January 2018)
<https://abovethelaw.com/2018/01/why-the-active-cyber-defense-certainty-act-is-a-bad-idea/>.
Leonard Spector,
‘Cyber Offense and a Changing Strategic Paradigm’ (2022) 45(1)
Washington Quarterly
Helen Wong,
Security: Law and Guidance
(Bloomsburg Professional, New York, 2018)
Dennis Richardson,
Comprehensive Review of the Legal Framework of the National Intelligence
(“the Richardson Review”) (Volume 1, December 2019)
Australian Security
Intelligence Organisation (ASIO), Australian Secret Intelligence Service (ASIS),
Australian Signals Directorate
(ASD), Australian Geospatial-Intelligence
Organisation (AGO), Defence Intelligence Organisation (DIO), Office of National
Intelligence
(ONI), Australian Federal Police (AFP), Australian Criminal
Intelligence Commission (ACIC), Australian Transaction Reports and Analysis
Centre (AUSTRAC), and the Department of Home Affairs.
D. L. Johnston,
Assistance to the Civil Community Policy
(Department of Defence, 31 August
Cameron Moore,
Sword: Executive power and the use of force by the Australian Defence Force
(ANU Press, 2017) 169.
As a result of the passing
Surveillance Legislation Amendment (Identify and Disrupt) Act 2021
, Divs 4-6.
IS Act, s 7.
Ibid, s 7(1)(c).
Ibid, s 7(1)(d).
Australian Signals
Directorate,
Annual Report 2019-20
(Final report, Canberra, 12 October
Mamoun Alazab, ‘A new
cyber taskforce will supposedly ‘hack the hackers’ behind the
Medibank breach. It could put
a target on Australia’s back’,
Conversation
(online, 16 November 2022)
<https://theconversation.com/a-new-cyber-taskforce-will-supposedly-hack-the-hackers-behind-the-medibank-breach-it-could-put-a-target-on-australias-back-194532>.
Office of National
Intelligence Act 2018
ASIO Act, s 25A.
Ibid, s 25A(2).
Ibid, s 25A(3A)(c)-(e).
Warwick McKean,
‘Searches and Sandwiches’ (1978) 37(2)
The Cambridge Law
200-202 <https://www.jstor.org/stable/4506084>.
ASIO Act, s 4.
If the data ‘appears
to be relevant to the collection of intelligence by the Organisation in
accordance with this Act’;
ibid s 25A(3A)(b).
Ibid, s 25A(4)(a) and
Ibid, s 25A(5).
Ibid, s 27C(2).
Ibid, ss 27C(3)(c)(ii) and
27E(4). Authorisations must be requested and granted in writing: ibid, s 27J(1)
Ibid, s 27E(2)(c).
Ibid, s 27E(5)
Ibid, s 27A.
And would therefore be the
remit of other NIC agencies: IS Act, s 6, 6B and 7.
ASIO Act, s 27A(1)(b).
Ibid, s 27A(3D).
IS Act, s 8 and 9.
Ibid, ss 8(1)(a)(i), (iaa)
Ibid, ss 8(1)(a)(ia) and
Ibid, s 8(1)(a)(iii).
Broadly, see ibid, ss 9(1),
(1A) and (1AAA).
Ibid, s 6(1)(a) and (e).
Ibid, s 6B(1)(a).
Ibid, s 7(1)(c).
Ibid, s 6(1)(c).
Carl Anthony Wege,
‘Hizballah’s Counterintelligence Apparatus’ (2012) 25(4)
International Journal of Intelligence and Counterintelligence
IS Act, s 7(1)(da).
Criminal Code
IS Act, s 7(1)(e)(i).
Ibid, s 8(1B).
Ibid, s 9(1)(c).
In fact, s 4 of the ASIO Act
includes ‘acts of foreign interference’, ‘espionage’ and
‘attacks on Australia’s
defence system’ as matters of national
Ibid, ss 6(1)(ba) (ASIS);
6B(1)(b), (c), (e) and 6B(2) (AGO); s 7(1)(ca), (d), (e) and 7(2) (ASD).
Ibid, s 9(1)(a)-(c). Section
9(1)(d) does not apply, as the authorisation does not relate to activities of
ASIO: ibid, ss 8(1)(a)(ia)
Australian Federal Police
s 8(1)(b)(i)
(1)(bf)(i).
Ibid, s 7(1)(ca).
Ibid, s 13(1)(a).
Ibid, s 13A(1)(b) and
Greg Austin,
‘“Cyber revolution” in Australian Defence Force demands
rethink of staff, training and policy’,
The Conversation
<https://theconversation.com/cyber-revolution-in-australian-defence-force-demands-rethink-of-staff-training-and-policy-80317>.
ASPI, n 19, 7.
Marcus Thompson, ‘The
ADF and Cyber Warfare’ (2016) 200
Australian Defence Force Journal
43; Jonathon C. Ladewig, ‘Australia’s Readiness for a Complex Cyber
Catastrophe’ (2018) 14(2)
Australian Army Journal
57; Ben Johanson,
‘Asymmetric Advantage in the Information Age: An Australian Concept for
Cyber-Enabled “Special Information
Warfare”’ (2018) 14(2)
Australian Army Journal
79; Linda Reynolds, ‘Stronger cyber
defences for deployed ADF networks’ (Media release, 12 August 2020)
<https://www.minister.defence.gov.au/media-releases/2020-08-12/stronger-cyber-defences-deployed-adf-networks>;
Australian Cybersecurity Magazine, ‘Australian Defence Force pilots cyber
training program’ (online, 8 September 2020)
<https://australiancybersecuritymagazine.com.au/australian-defence-force-pilots-cyber-training-program/>.
Defence Act
Including the partner
provision in the
Constitution
Samuel White, Andrew Butler,
‘Reviewing a Decision to Call out the Troops’
[2020] AIAdminLawF 11
, 58; Samuel White, ‘Keeping the Peace of the iRealm’
[2021] AdelLawRw 1
Adelaide Law Review
Constitution
Defence Act
R v Home Secretary of
State for the Home Department, Ex parte Northumbria Police Authority
Moore, n 29, 169.
Being ‘a capacity to
engage in enterprises and activities peculiarly adapted the government of the
nation and which cannot otherwise
be carried on for the benefit of the
Victoria v Commonwealth and Hayden
[1975] HCA 52
(1975) 134 CLR 338
Pape v Commissioner of Taxation
[2009] HCA 22
(2009) 239 CLR 1.
David Letts, Rob McLaughlin,
‘Military Aid to the Civil Power’, in Robin Creyke, Dale Stephens,
Peter Sutherland (Eds.),
Military Law in Australia
(The Federation Press,
Alexandria, 2019) 117-128.
for Immigration and Border Protection & Anor
[2015] HCA 1
(2015) 255 CLR 514.
, where the
High Court did not believe the Commonwealth could ‘having failed to enter
through the front door...enter through
the back door and in effect achieve the
same result by that means of entry’: ibid, [141].
(3). The obligation is imposed by
, and subject to
ss 40(1)(a)(ii)
s 46(7)(i).
s 51D(2)(j).
s 51L(3)(h).
ss 46(1)(a)
permits an ADF member to search persons, locations or things for things that may
be seized, or persons who may be detained,
in relation to the call out order
– the Act does not appear to limit such searches to the physical
Defence Act
See for example
National Crime Commission
[2013] HCA 29
(2013) 248 CLR 92.
Burmah Oil Co Ltd v
Lord Advocate
[1964] UKHL 6
[1965] AC 75
R v Secretary of State for the Home
Department; Ex parte Northumbria Police Authorit
[1989] 1 QB 26.
Entick v Carrington
(1765) 19 St Tr 1029; cited in Samuel White, ‘To Kill The
Queen’s Enemies (And Keep the Peace As Well)’,
Australian Public
(blog, 23 February 2022) <https://www.auspublaw.org/blog/
2022/02/to-kill-the-queens-enemies-and-keep-the-peace-as-well>.
Defence Act
Defence Act
Zoe Lippis, ‘The
Defence Act 1903
(Cth): A guide for responding to Australia's large-scale
domestic emergencies’
[2022] MelbULawRw 6
(2022) 45(2)
Melbourne University Law Review
Defence Act
ss 46(7)(i)
IS Act, s 13(1)(a).
Ibid, Note to s
Including nationhood
powers exercisable by Australia as a sovereign nation.
Vested by the
Constitution
Moore, n 29, 144-145.
Australian Federal Police Act 1979
ss 4AA(1)(c)
Ibid, ss 13 and 27C.
Ibid, s 27C(1).
Ibid, s 27C(2)(a).
Ibid, s 27C(2)(c).
Ibid, s 27C(2)(d).
Ibid, s 27C(2)(e).
Ibid, s 27D(1)(a),
(b)(ii), (b)(vii)-(ix) and 27D(4).
Ibid, s 27E(2)(c), (d)
Ibid, s 27E(7) and
Ibid, s 27KP(1)(c), (d),
and (e)(ii).
Ibid, s 27KK(1).
Ibid, s 7A.
Ibid, s 27KK(1).
27KK(1)(b)(ii).
Ibid, s 27KP(6).
Ibid, s 27KA(1).
27KA(1)(c)(i).
27KA(1)(c)(ii).
Ibid, ss 27KBA(4)(b) and
(5)(b), 27KBB(4)(b) and (5)(b).
Ibid, s 27KC(1)-(3).
Ibid, s 27KA(4) and
Ibid, s 27KE(2)(c)(vi),
(d) and (e)
Ibid, s 27KE(7).
IS Act, s 7(e) and
ASIO Act, ss 17(1)(f) and
SDA, s 27KE(1).
Letts and McLaughlin, n
For example, the Budapest
Convention on Cybercrime: Roderic Broadhurst, Lennon Y. C. Chang,
‘Cybercrime in Asia: Trends and
Challenges’, in Jianhong Liu, Bill
Hebenton, Susyan Jou (Eds.),
Handbook of Asian Criminology
(Springer, New
York, 2013) 49-63.
William Vazquez Irizarry,
‘Exception and Necessity: The Possibility of a General Theory of
Emergency’ (2013)
<https://law.yale.edu/sites/default/files/documents/pdf/sela/VazquezIrizarry_Eng_CV.pdf>
Kesan and Majuca, n 20,
Mils Hills, ‘The
Deregulation and Swarming of Cyberwarfare: The Need for and Limitations of Law
in Enabling Aggressive Hacking-back
and Pre-Emption’ (2014) 3(1)
Journal of Law and Cyberwarfare
43; Lennon Y.C. Chang, Lena Y. Zhong,
Peter N. Grabosky, ‘Citizen co‐production of cyber security:
Self‐help, vigilantes,
and cybercrime’ (2018) 12(1)
and Governance
UN International Law
Commission,
Draft Articles on Responsibility of States for Internationally
Wrongful Acts
, UN GAOR, 53d Sess, Supp No 10, UN Doc A/56/10 (2001) art
Oona Hathaway, ‘The
Drawbacks and Dangers of Active Defense’ (Paper presented to the 2014 6th
International Conference
on Cyber Conflict, Tallinn, 2014) 45.
Eliza Fitzgerald,
‘Helping states help themselves: Rethinking the doctrine of
countermeasures’
[2016] MqLawJl 5
(2016) 16(1)
Macquarie Law Journal
; Gary Corn,
Eric Jensen, ‘The use of force and cyber countermeasures’ (2018)
Temple International and Comparative Law Journal
Henning Lahmann,
‘Hacking Back by States and the Uneasy Place of Necessity within the Rule
of Law’ (2020) 80(1)
Heidelberg Journal of International Law
Jeffrey Carr,
Cyber Warfare: Mapping the Cyber Underworld
(O’Reilly, New York,
2010); citing Michael N. Schmitt, ‘Computer Network Attack and the Use of
Force in International
Law: Thoughts on a Normative Framework’
Columbia Journal of Transnational Law
Defence Act
(3)(a)(iii), which permits a member of the Defence Force to use
lethal force to destroy an aircraft or vessel in limited circumstances.
Ronald L. D. Pool, Bart
Custers, ‘The police hack back: Legitimacy, necessity and privacy
implications of the next step in fighting
cybercrime’ (2017) 25(2)
European Journal of Crime, Criminal Law and Criminal Justice
123; Dennis
Broeders, ‘Private active cyber defense and (international) cyber
security—pushing the line?’ (2021)
Cybersecurity,
DOI:10.1093/cybsec/tyab010.
Lauren Fiotakis,
‘Beacons: A Viable Solution to the Ever-Evolving Problem of Corporate Data
Breaches’ (2021) 19(3)
Northwestern Journal of Technology and
Intellectual Property
ASIO Act, s 25A(3A)(b);
SDA, s 27KE(1) and (2).
With respect to law
enforcement using “ransomware” style programs in a law enforcement
context, see Paul Ohm, ‘The
investigative dynamics of the use of malware
by law enforcement’ (2017) 26
William & Mary Bill of Rights
303; Vania Mia Chaker, ‘Chimaera Unleashed: The Specter of
Warrantless Governmental Intrusion Is a Phantom That Has Achieved
Greater Life
in the Ether of Internet Communications’ (2018) 22(2)
Technology Law & Policy
Such as how the Stuxnet
worm operated to unbalance nuclear centrifuges: Farwell and Rohozinski, n 8.
Lahmann, n 155, 469; see
also Jason Healey, ‘The implications of persistent (and permanent)
engagement in cyberspace’
(2019) 5(1)
Journal of Cybersecurity
tyz008; Homer A. La Rue, ‘Outsourcing the Cyber Kill Chain: Reinforcing
the Cyber Mission Force and Allowing Increased Contractor
Support of Cyber
Operations’ (2021) 12(1)
Journal of National Security Law & Policy
Bernard Everett,
‘Optically transparent: The rise of industrial espionage and
state-sponsored hacking’ (2013) 10
Computer Fraud & Security
Lynne Yarbro Williams,
‘Catch Me if You Can: A Taxonomically Structured Approach to
Cybercrime’ (2008)
Forum on Public Policy
SDA, s 27KA(1)(a).
ASIO Act, s 25A(2).
Charlie Osborne,
‘Colonial Pipeline ransomware attack: Everything you need to know’,
(online, 13 May 2021)
<https://www.zdnet.com/article/colonial-pipeline-ransomware-attack-everything-you-need-to-know/>;
Milmo, ‘NHS ransomware attack: what happened and how bad is
The Guardian
(online, 12 August 2022)
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2022/aug/11/nhs-ransomware-attack-what-happened-and-how-bad-is-it>.
Eva Ignatuschtschenko,
‘Assessing Harm from Cyber Crime’, in Paul Cornish (Ed.),
Oxford Handbook of Cyber Security
(Oxford University Press, Oxford, 2021)
127-141, 134.
Such as anything defined
Security of Critical Infrastructure Act 2018
(Cth), Div 2 of
See for example the
treatment of those terms in Michael Schmitt (Ed.),
Tallinn Manual 2.0
on the International Law Applicable to Cyber Operations
(Tallinn, 2017)
Involving ‘one or
more relevant offences of a particular kind... are about to be, or are likely to
be, committed’: SDA,
ss 27KA(1)(a) and 35B(1)(a). See also Sayako Quinlan,
Andi Wilson,
A Brief History of Law Enforcement Hacking in the United States
(Report, New America, September 2016)
<https://d1y8sb8igg2f8e.cloudfront.net/documents/History_Hacking.pdf>.
ASIO Act, 34HB.
Lahmann, n 155, 474.
ASIO Act, s 25A(2) and
(3A); SDA, s 27KA(3) and 27KC(1)(b).
ASIO Act, s 25A(5); SDA,
ss 27KC(2)(cb), (cc) and (cd).
Lahmann, n 155, 475.
[1984] HCA 67
ASIO Act, s 27A(9);
Telecommunications (Interception and Access) Act 1979
The Richardson Review, n
29, [3.84] and [9.121]-[9.125].
ASIO Act, s 25A(4)(a) and
(b); cf. s 25A(5).
SDA, s 27KA(1)(c).
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (1.25 MB)
PDF format (436 KB)
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter