URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/journals/UNSWLawJl/2025/16.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 15:45:18
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Matthews, Ingrid; Stobbs, Nigel --- "Affirmative Consent and Patriarchal Paradigms of Power in the Criminal Law" [2025] UNSWLawJl 16; (2025) 48(2) UNSW Law Journal 470
I INTRODUCTION
A Queensland
B New South Wales
II MALE VIOLENCE AND LESS THAN HUMAN VICTIMS
A Feminist Perspectives and Indigenous Epistemologies
B Continuum of Carceral Colonialism
C Lawmakers
D Enforcement
E Criminal Process and Guilt
A Therapeutic Jurisprudence and Alternative Approaches
B Conventional Measures
1 Police Activity Data
2 Public Awareness and Community Education Campaigns
IV CONCLUSION
AFFIRMATIVE
CONSENT AND PATRIARCHAL PARADIGMS OF POWER IN THE CRIMINAL LAW
INGRID MATTHEWS
AND NIGEL STOBBS
Recent affirmative consent amendments are accompanied by ambitious
political claims and public campaigns. Patriarchal paradigms of
power shape and
determine reforms along a continuum – from pre-drafting submissions and
recommendations to parliamentary debates
and media coverage, through to
criminalisation and punishment. These processes are run by colonial institutions
– parliaments,
police, courts, prisons – which, in turn, are on a
timeline from invasion. Drawing on the scholarship of therapeutic jurisprudence
and feminist perspectives informed by Indigenous epistemologies, this article
interrogates the criminal law as a function of colonial
white patriarchy. By
‘stretching the timeline’ to its foundations in carceral
colonialism, the criminal law can be revealed
as unfit for the purpose of
reducing or stopping male violence. By situating the criminal process as law of
the colonising power,
affirmative consent amendments and public awareness
initiatives are examined against the known needs of victims.
I INTRODUCTION
This article examines the structural limitations of legislative reform in the
area of sexual violence with a focus on two Australian
and New South Wales (‘NSW’). The analysis draws on feminist
perspectives informed by Indigenous
epistemologies and the scholarship of
therapeutic jurisprudence to review changes enacted by, and acceptable to,
patriarchal societies.
One technique for applying a decolonial lens to the laws
of the colonising power is ‘stretching the
beyond recent changes to the known outcomes of legislative incrementalism, which
are defined by the values and norms
of colonial white
established from 1788 in
violation of Aboriginal laws of
The capacity of criminal law
to stop, reduce or mitigate sexual violence, and to prevent compound traumas
perpetuated by its own
processes, is assessed on terms. These terms include the
normative architecture of institutions of crime and justice; pre-drafting
inquiries, reports and submissions; the formally stated purposes of statutory
amendments and political promises regarding the scope
of their impact; and the
utility of public awareness initiatives. This article presents evidence that the
expansion of the criminal
law does not prevent, decrease or halt male violence,
interrogates the means by which criminality is created and measured, and argues
that reform of the criminal process is not fit for the stated purposes of
affirmative consent amendments, which is to increase the
rate of convictions and
decrease the rate of sexual violence. Feminist perspectives informed by
Indigenous epistemologies recognise
the ontology of legal pluralism, where
sovereignty and the laws of the land are unceded and the material and emotional
needs of victims
are prioritised.
A Queensland
In September 2024, Queensland became the latest jurisdiction to legislate an
affirmative consent model after a somewhat convoluted
and piecemeal reform
process that amended the
Criminal Code Act 1899
Qld Criminal Code
’) to introduce an affirmative model
of consent.
These changes were
enacted as a result of recommendations made by the Women’s Safety and
Justice Taskforce, partly in response
to the minimal and heavily criticised
legislative changes which followed the Queensland Law Reform Commission
recommendations in
At the time of the QLRC’s investigation, the relevant provisions of the
Qld Criminal Code
had been enacted in 2000 as a result of the 1989
Taskforce on Women and the Criminal
Prior to 2000, the
Criminal Code
did not contain a definition of consent for the purpose of
rape or sexual assault. However, the absence of consent was an express
of both offences, and the elements of rape also referred to
‘consent’ obtained by means of ‘false and fraudulent
representations about the nature or purpose of the
The relatively soft amendments following the QLRC recommendations were met
with dismay and disappointment by survivor advocacy groups
and academic
commentators. A common theme among these criticisms was that the position of the
professional legal bodies was endorsed
by the QLRC and gave the
‘superficial appearance of progressive
The Queensland Law
Society and the Bar Association of Queensland saw an affirmative consent model
as both functionally unnecessary
and contrary to the interests of
This also seems to have
been the position of Legal Aid Queensland, which suggested that the ‘more
appropriate way to bring
education’.
The Queensland
Council for Civil Liberties noted in its submission that a legislative model
requiring affirmative consent does not
‘adequately recognise the deep
subjectivity and diversity of human sexual
experience’.
Conversely,
Women’s Legal Service Queensland supported the adoption of an affirmative
consent model, highlighting the ‘move
away from normative understandings
of sexual relationships predicated on male assertiveness and female acquiescence
and the constraints
of binary and traditional roles’ and asserting that
this would ‘change the way that victims relate [to] and believe in
legal system’.
The new statutory regime in Queensland now includes a detailed definition of
consent for the purposes of rape and sexual assault
Consent means
‘free and voluntary agreement’, where such consent may be withdrawn
at any time.
Dispelling one
archaic rape myth, there is now express provision that a person who does not
offer physical or verbal resistance to
an act is not, by reason only of that
fact, to be taken to consent to the
Furthermore, all participants must consent to sexual activity, meaning that
each person must say or do something to seek the relevant
consent and that
consent must be communicated to the party who seeks
Consent is deemed not
to be present where a person is asleep,
unconscious,
or significantly
affected by drugs or alcohol to the extent that they are unable to provide
Stealthing, the act of
removing or tampering with a condom without the other person’s knowledge
or consent, now constitutes
the offence of rape in relation to what may have
otherwise been a consensual sexual
It is heartening that in what has often been seen as a relatively
conservative criminal jurisdiction, the Queensland statute now expressly
provides that there is a lack of consent where a participant is a sex worker and
‘participates in the act because of a false
or fraudulent representation
that the person will be paid or receive some reward for the
New provisions modify the defence of mistake of
for the purposes of rape
and sexual assault offences. The
Qld Criminal Code
now provides that if a
defendant asserts that they held an honest and reasonable, but mistaken, belief
that another person consented
to the act, such belief will not be reasonable
unless the defendant took active steps to confirm
B New South Wales
On 23 November 2021, the NSW Parliament passed the
Crimes Legislation
Amendment (Sexual Consent Reforms) Bill 2021
(NSW) (‘NSW Sexual Consent
Reforms Bill’), codifying what is widely referred to as ‘affirmative
The NSW Sexual Consent Reforms Bill is 13 pages long and inserts
painstaking details of what is not to be assumed as consent, presumably
statute-bar excuses commonly raised to defend clients on trial for sexual
violence-related charges. The
Crimes Legislation Amendment (Sexual Consent
Reforms) Act 2021
NSW Consent Reforms Act
commenced on 1 June 2022 alongside Phase 3 of a campaign branded
#MakeNoDoubt.
Both initiatives
were recommendations from the NSW Law Reform Commission (‘NSWLRC’)
Consent in Relation to Sexual
A week prior to commencement, the New South Wales Bar Association (‘NSW
Bar Association’) released a media statement asserting
the amendments
‘are likely to result in significant
injustice’.
Troublingly,
these claims appear to assume that, in many instances, people in established
respectful relationships will falsely report
an allegation of sexual
The NSW Bar Association stated:
Frequently instances of consensual sexual intercourse occur in the absence of
words where it cannot be said that such instances are
problematic. ‘The
Attorney General’s proposals would mean that many instances of sexual
activity would be considered
non-consensual and criminal sanctions for a wide
range of unproblematic sexual activity would follow, particularly within
established
respectful relationships’ Mr McHugh [SC]
While this language is gender-neutralised, the sentiment is a function of
patriarchal values such as protecting male reputation and
liberty and
positioning powerful males like Mr Michael McHugh SC as a
at the direct cost of sexual violence victims who do engage with the criminal
process – a tiny minority –
being presumed liars by the
profession.
In a media release headlined ‘Education the Key to Embedding Respect in
Intimate Relationships’, the Law Society of New
South Wales (‘NSW
Law Society’) expressed a different set of reservations while
foregrounding, as did the Women’s
Legal Service Queensland, the role of
public awareness. President of the NSW Law Society, Joanne van der Plat observed
outcome of affirmative consent amendments, stating: ‘[T]he Law
Society remains concerned that the new “affirmative consent”
may result in lengthier trials, more potential for appeals and retrials, or
increased focus on the conduct of complainants
during sexual assault
While restrained in her language, the sentiment is clear. A model that adds
pages of definitions to what comprises sexual acts and
what does not comprise
consent is an open door to practitioners who prioritise winning over wellbeing
in ways that produce antitherapeutic
The stated objects of the
NSW Consent Reforms Act
Crimes Act 1900
in relation to consent to certain sexual
activities that, in the absence of consent, are sexual offences; to amend the
Criminal Procedure Act 1986
in relation to directions to juries; and for
other purposes’.
According to the
explanatory note, the objects of the amendments are
to recognise that:
(i) every person has a right to choose whether to participate in a sexual
activity, and
(ii) consent to a sexual activity must not be presumed, and
(iii) consensual sexual activity involves ongoing and mutual communication,
decision-making and free and voluntary agreement between
the persons
participating in the sexual
NSW Consent Reforms
, and the division where its
provisions now sit (‘[s]exual offences against adults and
children’),
detailed definitions of sexual acts. The first few subsections define
‘sexual intercourse’
and ‘sexual
Eventually,
‘sexual assault’ is defined in subdivision 2: ‘Any person who
has sexual intercourse with another person
without the consent of the other
and who knows that the other person does not consent to the
sexual intercourse
is liable to imprisonment for 14
One way to signal that sexual violence is taken seriously by the criminal law
would be to repeal the knowledge element emphasised
above and redefine sexual
assailants as
any person who has sexual intercourse with another person
without the consent of the other person
. This would dramatically shift the
organising logic of defence arguments in sexual violence cases without
abolishing the capacity
to create reasonable doubt because the same two elements
– sexual intercourse without consent – must be proven. Current
cultural norms, such as believing accused men while treating victims as presumed
would not be entrenched
by statutory implication. The law would require affirmative consent by
Instead, the knowledge element is retained, which means that reasonableness
and belief continue to regulate ‘knowledge about
These concepts
emerge from a complex interplay of parliamentary supremacy, judicial authority
to define or redefine legal terms,
and social construction of
The institutions and
relationships involved in this process produce and maintain sexual and racial
hierarchies of a colonial white
patriarchy, established only relatively recently
Referring to the reform package of legislative amendments and #MakeNoDoubt
campaign, then NSW Attorney General Mark Speakman promised
that ‘consent
reforms are not just about holding perpetrators to account, but changing social
behaviour with clearer rules
of engagement to drive down the rate of sexual
behaviour’ here refers to sexual violence and ‘clearer rules of
engagement’ are codification of affirmative
consent, while the ‘rate
of sexual assaults’ is a statistical output based on police data. As with
other public pronouncements
noted above, these stated purposes are
gender-neutralised despite widely documented evidence that almost all sexual
violence is committed
by adult males against women and
In Speakman’s
telling, ‘perpetrators’ of sexual violence are implied to be
confused or ignorant rather than asserting
power and control according to
current norms and values. Confusion or ignorance, however, remain within the
scope of available defences
in the legal language of reasonableness and belief
in NSW and mistake of fact in Queensland. It is not that any single sentiment
expressed by a Bar Association President or conservative Attorney-General
indicates unfitness for purpose when it comes to sexual
violence and the
criminal law. The problem is a system designed and run for and by this
demographic – white males born into
privilege – who repeatedly
indulge in ‘moves to
confusion, codified mistake) and prioritise institutional reputation
(headmasters, cardinals, executives of all kinds) over
well-being.
This article opens with an account of male violence and the criminal law from
a feminist perspective informed by Indigenous epistemologies,
contradistinction to carceral white feminist
viewpoints.
alternative approaches within the architecture of the criminal law before
returning to questions about the impact and
efficacy of legislative
incrementalism to reduce sexual violence and deliver justice. The discussion
then turns to the urgent needs
of victims, in the form of material and emotional
support, which are too often missing from legal debate, arguing that legal
must be anchored in, and accountable to, meaningful change outside and
beyond the criminal law. We conclude that legislative changes
surrounding public discourse continuously reconstitute the paradigmatic power
dynamics of the criminal law and its host society.
II MALE VIOLENCE AND LESS THAN HUMAN
A Feminist Perspectives and Indigenous
Epistemologies
Understanding colonial white patriarchy as a form of social organisation
draws on the work of Goenpul Quandamooka Distinguished Professor
Moreton-Robinson and others.
Among the epistemologies and worldviews shared by First Nations scholars and
knowledge keepers are understandings of more than human
and more than human
sovereignties.
Kombumerri and
Wakka Wakka philosopher Aunty Dr Mary Graham writes: ‘The land, and how we
treat it, is what determines our
human-ness. Because land is sacred and must be
looked after, the relation between people and land becomes the template for
and social relations. Therefore all meaning comes from
To unceded Aboriginal lands, the colonising power brought a rigid class
hierarchy that, for almost its entire history, excluded everyone
‘human-ness’ except propertied adult males. In their form of social
organisation, full ‘human-ness’
is signalled by the enfranchisement
of citizenship.
It was not until
1928 that the United Kingdom finalised parity in the franchise across gender,
age and property ownership. Indeed,
the myth of egalitarianism in Australia can
be traced to the drafters of the
Constitution
choosing not to
exclude white women and not to exclude unpropertied men from the franchise. Yet
‘universal’ suffrage
has not, to date, seen colonial white
patriarchal society recognise everyone as fully human. The Anglo-original
first-class citizen,
propertied (literally ‘entitled’) and
enfranchised white male adult, remains the most privileged of persons, who makes
and remakes institutions and processes in his image and his interests.
The archetypal persistence of the fully human citizen is also evidenced by
Australian and British politicians using ‘non-citizen’
as a powerful
rhetorical device to rationalise contemporary transportation of asylum seekers
and refugees.
The less than
human designation of unpropertied, impoverished and dispossessed people, of
racialised and disabled people, and of
women and children, is reflected in
onshore and offshore incarcerated populations. Colonial white patriarchy
achieves protection
of the rights and interests of propertied white males
through exercising civic, legislative and discretionary powers, from
consultation
and pre-drafting stages, parliamentary debates, law making,
political narratives and media coverage, and through each step of a
fundamentally
unchanged criminalisation process. In this context, the criminal
law of all Australian jurisdictions is situated as the law of the
power, encompassing police investigations, prosecutions, pleas, trials,
sentencing and punishment. This is not the law
of the land. A defining
distinction between the two is more than human obligations and less than human
designations.
B Continuum of Carceral Colonialism
The foundational structure of Australian society is the penal
As Amangu Yamatji
historian Crystal McKinnon articulates, its central organising principle is
carceral colonialism.
structures and principles of colonial white patriarchy shape and determine
Australian institutions and processes, simultaneously
remaining ubiquitous and
largely invisible to their beneficiaries. When threatened by exposure or
disruption – such as truth-telling
or shrinking the carceral footprint by
raising the age of criminal responsibility – the establishment can be seen
the cost of obstruction and delay against the strategic reassertion of
control through postponement, exoneration and
This pattern is evident in obstruction and resistance to lengthy,
resource-intensive and emotionally costly campaigns to criminalise
violence and rape in marriage.
Neither reform has ended male violence. Indeed, the expansion of the criminal
law into domestic violence directly correlates with
a rapid rise in the
over-incarceration of women and an even more rapid over-incarceration of
Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander
women, as noted by the Australian Law
Reform Commission in its 2017
Pathways to Justice: An Inquiry into the
Incarceration Rate of Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander Peoples
More than forty years of
feminist advocacy for effective responses by the criminal law to male violence
in the home has seen domestic
violence continue unabated. The criminalisation
and incarceration of domestic violence victims is consistent with the values and
logic of colonial white patriarchy: coopting changes it cannot obstruct,
regrouping and reasserting modes of
As noted by Legal Aid
Police officers are responding to domestic violence related call-outs by
arresting female defendants or making dual arrests. This
has been the case even
where men are unable to demonstrate they are fearful of their female partner or
that their female partner’s
violence is characterised by
Expansion of the criminal law via policing powers invariably results in
excessive impacts on colonised, racialised and impoverished
populations,
particularly children and young
This known outcome is
conventionally described as ‘disproportionate’ or
‘over-representation’ in the literature,
suggesting the solution
lies in representation or
proportionality.
Disproportionate incarceration of Indigenous people, however, is a function of
the criminal law and enforcement as colonial institutions.
This issue is global
– affecting Māori people in New Zealand, Palestinians in Israel, and
Native American people in Canada
and the United States of America –
because colonisation perpetually seeks elimination, containment and replacement
Domestic and Family Violence ‘protection’ order regimes in every
Australian jurisdiction are on the same continuum as
custodial sentences
imported into the
Summary Offences Act 1988
Offences Act
’), the NSW Police Suspect Targeting Management Plan
reintroduction of consorting
mandatory minimum
custodial sentences in Western
arrests’ in the Northern
criminalisation of
youth bail breaches in
Queensland;
and harsher and
stricter bail and parole
conditions,
‘post-sentence
usually in the form of more police powers and harsher
sentences, experts predict
the harmful impacts on targeted
populations.
Typically, these
predictions are reported as warnings, concerns or risks. Sometime later, as in
the examples below, the ‘risk’
is found to have been realised
exactly as predicted.
tends to receive less media coverage than the initial ‘trigger’ for
the expansionist crime
• In the following six months after the introduction of the
Summary Offences Act
, there was a 293% increase in police reports of
offensive behavior (compared to July 1986–January 1987). In the period
prisoners per 100,000 adult population rose by 45% and the number
of prisoners rose by an average of 15% per year, a tripling of
the average 5%
annual increase in
• ‘The STMP exacerbates the marginalising impacts of extensive
police contact for Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander
peoples by further
stigmatising young people in their
communities.’
• ‘During the review period, 1,797 (42%) of the 4,257 people who
were the subject of the consorting law identified as
Aboriginal. When looking at
use of the consorting law by general duties officers, the proportion of people
subject to the consorting
law who were Aboriginal was
• Research indicates that 81% of the 119 juveniles dealt with under
Western Australia’s mandatory sentencing laws are
Aboriginal and there is
clear evidence that Aboriginal youth are less likely to access diversionary
options and more likely to be
processed through the courts than non-Aboriginal
• ‘Since their introduction, the disproportionate application and
effect of the arrest and detention powers on Indigenous
people in the N[orthern]
T[erritory] has been
These knowable and predictable outcomes reflect the colonial violence of the
criminal law and its enforcement by police. Far from
the solution lying in
proportionality or representation, the problem lies in seeking change from or
holding faith in constitutively
violent institutions and agents of colonial
white patriarchy.
C Lawmakers
When Speakman told ABC Radio that affirmative consent reform is designed to
‘make sure women feel safe in our
he projected far beyond what criminal law reform can achieve. His claim is a
political promise alone, resting on a chain of false
assumptions: that
redefining consent will result in more convictions; that more convictions will
result in more reports to police;
that police will deal sensitively and
adequately with reports of sexual violence; and that flow-on effects will have a
impact on violent men. Between initial reports to police and
incarceration are sexual violence suspects, accused and defendants,
been investigated, arrested and charged; who have entered a guilty plea or
received a guilty verdict; and, finally, been
sentenced to ‘do time’
in an institution that is culturally defined,
, by the constant
threat – and material reality – of sexual
Each step is
obstructed or enabled through the exercise of discretionary powers of police,
prosecutors and the judiciary, and contested
by lawyers whose professional
bodies have characterised affirmative consent as unnecessary or against the
interests of justice. People
who are incarcerated for acts of sexual violence
are a minuscule proportion of the sexually violent
population.
Material safety for women and children can only be realised by stopping male
violence. The guarantee offered by Speakman assumes that
sexual assailants who
are reported, investigated, arrested, charged and prosecuted are now less likely
to be acquitted, more likely
to plead guilty or more likely to be found guilty,
and that this projected result will reduce sexual violence in the community.
is the purported operational utility of the amendment. Each of these steps
requires public time and money, along with exhaustive
emotional and financial
costs borne by victims, and for violent males to respond to political
pronouncements, legal processes and
criminal sanction for others. It is worth
noting that if each stage of the envisioned criminalisation process and
punishment regime
is completed, the assailant is incarcerated and disappears
from public view, unless or until media outlets cover their impending
D Enforcement
‘An estimated 8.3% of women (61,100) who experienced sexual assault by
a male said the police were contacted about the most
recent incident, including
7.7% (56,500) who contacted the police
themselves.’
Victims of sexual violence rarely report to the police. They may not tell
anyone at all, they may disclose to a trained professional,
or they may confide
in friends, family, colleagues or neighbours. There is usually a lengthy time
lag between victimisation as a
child and disclosure as an adult, with some
studies reporting that disclosure occurred for the first time during research
interviews.
Police are among the
last responders to sexual violence – other women are almost always the
As a male-dominated institution, police forces reflect and align with the
patriarchal value of believing violent males. Police attitudes
toward victims of
sexual violence are notoriously
would curl the way some people in those stations talk about domestic violence,
or god forbid sexual assault victims,’
one officer told the
Australian public broadcaster, on condition of anonymity, while describing
extreme misogyny and violence toward
colleagues in the NSW Police
The leap of logic from increasing the number of convictions to more victims
reporting to the police assumes that police are not part
of the problem, and
indeed, that police are available and willing to investigate rape complaints
effectively. Perhaps the most troubling
element of such promises is when more
women, who become ‘willing to trust that “things have
changed”’, are
exposed to ‘real rape’ myths that
continue to shape and determine public attitudes and police
despite the
‘increasing emphasis ... placed on improving the training police receive
in responding to family, domestic and
E Criminal Process and Guilt
If the police do take a sexual violence complaint seriously and allocate
resources to an investigation, the attitudes and discretionary
prosecutors, defence counsel and the judiciary – as encapsulated by legal
professional associations – come
into play. Prosecutors can determine that
a case has no reasonable prospects of success, where reasonableness is defined
by the values
and norms of a male-dominated judiciary in a patriarchal society.
Defence counsel could (but rarely do) decide against hostile cross-examination,
which proceeds on the basis that winning is not only the primary goal but also
necessitates creating reasonable doubt through the
sole strategy of painting the
witness-victim as a liar. In addition to myriad decisions on admissibility,
dismissal, the framing
of summing up and the framing of jury directions, the
judiciary is ultimately responsible for setting and following precedents in
system established by the colonial power that conforms to the norms of
patriarchal power paradigms.
Affirmative consent amendments must be read in the context of the
intimidating formalities of the court, patriarchal values and norms,
perceptions of credibility, weight and probity that have been crystalised by
centuries of male-only decision-making. Each step
is made more complex by
affirmative consent amendments, adding lengthier definitions rather than
repealing knowledge elements defined
by reasonableness and belief. More layers
of complexity expand the scope of argument, where the adversarial system is
for the legal profession and detrimental to victims. The literature
on attitudes toward victims of sexual violence suggests that
legislative
incrementalism cannot displace the entrenched norms and values of lawyers
operating within the patriarchal power paradigms
of the criminal law.
Baked into sentencing acts are guidelines for judges to factor into
punishments what someone else may or may not do in an unknown
future time and
There is no more
disproven theory in criminology than deterrence. The evidence that harsher
sentences have no deterrent effect and
that incarceration produces worse life
outcomes on every measure is well
established.
In addition to the
illogic of punishing potential future deeds in an unknown time and place, some
of punishment with ‘offence
prevalence’ provisions. As Mirko Bagaric and Theo Alexander have explored
at length, offence
prevalence also has no logical
yet it necessarily
compounds the known harms produced by increasing incarceration.
Incarcerating more people for longer cannot result in a safer society
(‘community safety’) because prisons are violent
and criminogenic.
Sexual violence as part of custodial punishment is a consistent and recurring
theme in narratives about prisons
and prisoners. Incarceration causes trauma and
worse outcomes on every measure, from physical and mental health and drug use to
attendance, employment, civic engagement, housing security and a host of
other variables studied by researchers across a wide range
disciplines.
Because prison does
not result in better outcomes in any area, more convictions and longer custodial
sentences cause a net increase
in institutionalisation and trauma. Meanwhile,
popularising rhetoric (‘don’t drop the soap’) entrenches
violence as a desired outcome of the criminal
The more violence created by more incarceration, the less safe the society.
Almost all prisoners are eventually released and the trauma
incarceration is largely absorbed by impoverished families and underfunded
services. The political economy of crime and
justice primarily directs resources
to police, prisons and surveillance industry salaries and products – none
of which prioritise
women being safe from male violence. The focus on women
‘feeling safe’ obscures facts about perpetrators, who usually
their victims. Neutralised claims about women’s feelings obscure the
realities of sexual violence and reproduce ‘stranger
danger’ myths.
According to Tom Sullivan et al, the 2021–22 Australian Sexual Offence
Statistical collection shows most
alleged sexual
were male (93%) and 2
in 3 (66%) were known to the
In women’s prisons, almost all incarcerated people are themselves
survivors of male violence. As mentioned above, rates of sexual
violence, as
with all forms of violence, are higher in prisons than in the
Russell Hogg found
that recorded prisoner violence against prisoners ‘is about two and a half
times the rate of assault in
the general community’, and an equivalent
‘dark figure’ (unreported to reported) ratio of 4:1 would make the
rates in prison 11 times higher than in the
Paid staff inside prisons also commit state-sanctioned acts of violence with
almost complete impunity. In a swingeing critique of
‘the punishment
bureaucracy’, Alec Karakatsanis observes that in his ‘ten years of
experience, “law enforcement”
essentially ignores uncontroverted
evidence of rampant sexual violence against
prisoners’.
That prison
itself operates in an architecture of violence puts the lie to claims for
incapacitation as a purpose and function of
carceral punishment. For
‘incapacitation’ to have any meaning as a rationale for
incarceration, prisoners who are victimised
inside must also be regarded as less
than fully human.
While contemplating the harm caused by incarceration, we note that almost all
domestic and family abusers and rapists walk freely
and anonymously in the
community. The notion that a legislative amendment can produce confidence or
surety for women to ‘feel’
that they will no longer be victimised by
violent males is absurd. Such notions are produced by a long line of
continuously reinscribed
and convoluted reasoning, based on false and disproven
assumptions about male violence, policing, the criminal process, deterrence,
punishment and prisons. Even if a custodial sentence does eventuate,
incarceration is as unfit for purpose as the criminalisation
process when it
comes to stopping sexual violence.
Expanding the scope of male-dominated and male-coded discretionary powers of
police, prosecutors and the judiciary is highly unlikely
to achieve the stated
purpose of reducing sexual violence. There is no evidence to suggest that
reformist incrementalism or non-performative
can redress 250 years of
carceral colonialism on unceded Aboriginal
– a system that has
yet to be decolonised in any meaningful way. Stretching the timeframe reveals
the structural futility of
putting forward legislative amendments to address
male violence in a system governed by the values of colonial white patriarchy.
Fears that positive consent would be ‘contrary to the interests of
justice’, ‘reverse the onus of proof’ and
somehow deny the
‘subjectivity and diversity of human sexual experience’ are social
and cultural dynamics worth unpacking
deconstructing.
interrogate incrementalism as a function of stubborn resistance to change by
beneficiaries of the status quo. The architecture
of the criminal law derives
from and perpetuates the norms of colonial white patriarchy, which continue to
centre the accused male
as the party whose agency and autonomy require the
law’s protection.
Additionally, we can ask whether situating the adversarial legal paradigm at
the centre of responses to sexual violence legitimises
and perpetuates a broader
normative adversarialism at the expense of,
, victim agency,
autonomy and dignity.
liberal political order almost exclusively focuses on the rights and liberties
of the individual as the benchmark for human flourishing
when the individual is
not, by definition, a social unit. This produces incommensurable
rationalisations for hierarchies of oppression,
which are only reconciled by the
group dominating our material and conceptual worlds.
As northern empires rose and fell over millennia, through eras marked by
slavery, feudalism and industrial slaughter, more than 500
distinct Aboriginal
and Torres Strait Islander societies sustained continental co-existence from
Creation, or ‘according to
the common law from “time
immemorial”, and according to science more than 60,000 years
Organised around
connection to the cosmos, kin and Country; accountability and obligation; and
reciprocity and respect, custodians
of the oldest continuing cultures on earth
demonstrate the longest and most successful international and social relations
history of humanity.
Meanwhile, a culture of conflict continues to hold sway across institutional
responses to sexual violence.
It has long been accepted that the law itself has agency, which includes a
capacity for ‘antitherapeutic’ effects and
consequences.
David Wexler
and others posit that harmful consequences of the working of the law’s
agency are often iatrogenic.
Given the overwhelming and continuing failure of the legal system to
meaningfully protect the safety and dignity of women subjected
violence, the law’s tolerance for this ongoing harm begins to look like
intention. In a direct challenge to the filtering
function of intention in
criminal law – where men are believed and their stated intentions accepted
– feminists have
argued that impact is a more useful and accurate rubric
than intention.
decolonial scholars have theorised ‘settler moves to innocence’ to
capture the privilege of claiming good
intentions, even when causing obvious and
extreme harm on a mass scale,
such as the forced removal of entire generations of children from their Country,
kin and culture.
In this context, we evaluate incremental reform by its own
as well as according
to feminist perspectives informed by Indigenous epistemologies – the
organising principles of the laws
of the land and meaningful material and
emotional support for victims outside and beyond the criminal law. Whatever the
stated goals
of reform, the formal legislative objectives and political
promises, our collective goals must remain reducing sexual violence and
delivering justice.
In the following sections, we review alternative approaches to the
adversarial system, critique the conventional evaluative model
that relies on
police activity (‘crime rates’) data and consider the literature on
the impact of community legal education.
These evaluative fields illustrate how
the laws of consent and surrounding public discourse continuously reconstitute
paradigmatic
power dynamics of the criminal law and its host society –
colonial white patriarchy.
A Therapeutic Jurisprudence and Alternative
Therapeutic jurisprudence (‘TJ’) perspectives examine how laws,
legal procedures and the roles of legal professionals
impact the emotional and
psychological wellbeing of victim-witnesses in sexual violence related matters.
The focus of criminal processes
on a forensic determination of criminal
responsibility and due process as the core criteria for success produces
overwhelmingly antitherapeutic
consequences. TJ itself would emphasise a
compassionate, victim-centred approach that seeks healing and empowerment for
which is compatible with due process as it currently plays out in the
criminal trial.
Those peak professional bodies promoting the view that affirmative consent
models are ‘both functionally unnecessary and contrary
to the interests of
justice’ and that such a model would give merely a ‘superficial
appearance of progressive change’
(with which anti-carceral feminists can
are clearly flagging
that the emotional and psychological harm suffered by victims who are left
without a resolution or an opportunity
to heal is not iatrogenic. It is a
self-serving and accepted cost of the way the system works in a society where
self-interest is
coded as rational. Given that affirmative consent is
nevertheless now law, we turn to the question of what other reforms or
innovations
are possible to centre the wellbeing of the victim.
While multiple options for reform and innovation have been suggested and
trialled across jurisdictions, government support and resourcing
initiatives remain far from guaranteed – especially in contrast to the
traditional adversarial trial process. Approaches
informed by a TJ perspective
include specialised domestic violence and sexual violence courts, diversion and
alternatives to prosecution,
therapeutic sentencing options, trauma-informed
judicial approaches and reimagined treatment program
Within the adversarial system, some reforms are being trialled to respond to
the need for a deeper and more informed approach to the
reception and assessment
of evidence in light of reports from Fair
and the Women’s
Safety and Justice Taskforce report in
Queensland.
The Fair Agenda
model for prerecorded testimony in sexual assault cases is envisioned as a
nationwide rollout, while courts in Queensland
are piloting the use of a Sexual
Offence Expert Evidence Panel to allow for relevantly qualified court-appointed
experts to give
evidence in proceedings. Input from the expert panel will inform
the court, firstly, about whether the accused’s cognitive
or mental health
impairment at the material time was a substantial cause of them not saying or
doing anything to ascertain whether
the victim consented to the sexual act.
Secondly, expert panel members will give ‘counterintuitive evidence’
violence to counter the prevalence and persistence of rape myths
and the social, psychological and cultural factors that may affect
the behaviour
of victims.
In some jurisdictions, the police provide mechanisms for victims of sexual
violence to report full details of their experience without
that report
triggering a prosecution. The details provided are then used by the police as
‘intelligence’ which may be
used to inform current or future
investigations of other sexual violence
Describing its
version of this mechanism, the Queensland Police Service claims that Alternative
Reporting Options (‘AROs’)
an extremely useful healing strategy for the survivor and an effective
investigative strategy for law enforcement agencies. Survivors
empowered by knowing that the information they possess and provide could be used
to solve reported offences of a similar
It is debatable whether the main focus of an ARO is an ‘extremely
useful healing strategy for the survivor’ or ‘an
investigative strategy for law enforcement
report is most likely anonymous, the victim would be unaware of what, if any, is
the effect of their disclosure and any ‘healing’
effect is unclear.
Additionally, there is no data available on how often the ARO process is
accessed by victims and their experiences
of it. Survivors are alert to the
delays and realities of a system that claims to be keeping them safe. Many do
not express a desire
for their attacker to go to prison, so research is needed
on who would access this option and
Although the problem-solving court model has evolved to include a wide range
and number of specialist family and domestic violence
courts (both in Australia
and overseas), dedicated sex offender treatment courts (akin to the drug
treatment courts) do not appear
to have gained
A core element of
the specialist domestic violence court in Southport Queensland is the simple
court docket, designed for what health
services would call ‘continuity of
care’ for the victim. This is the kind of incrementalism we can endorse
small and not resource intensive change that shifts the way the
criminal law and quasi-criminal processes, like Apprehended Violence
applications, tend to treat victims as a vehicle for saviour
narratives.
As Nicholas
Abercrombie, Stephen Hill and Bryan S Turner have long articulated, it is the
state that has asserted a monopoly not
only on the authority to inflict
punishment through deprivation of liberty, but also on the lawful infliction of
The branding of punishment as ‘justice’ operates to legitimise
the workings of the system and the wages and salaries of
its agents, who remain
unaccountable for failing to reduce, or even recognise, the trauma experienced
by victims of sexual violence.
At the same time, penal populism discourse
encourages the public to accept the logic of securing punishment as an
all-encompassing
rationale for violence and trauma inflicted by the system
Judges and court staff can play a therapeutic role by acknowledging the harm
experienced by survivors, validating their trauma and
expressing empathy.
However, calls for training judges in social and cultural skills, rather than
implementing law reforms, are less
prominent than the frequent and mostly
fruitless calls for the police to undertake cultural competency or awareness
training. This
is no less urgent, given the combined and highly discretionary
powers of both the judiciary and the police to determine life outcomes
mostly colonised, racialised, impoverished and relatively young underclass of
criminalised persons. In its report on affirmative
consent amendments, the
NSWLRC explicitly added the need for education programs targeting judicial
officers (and prosecutors, defence
lawyers and police officers) in its public
awareness campaign
recommendations.
It may well be that, in contrast to resource-intensive initiatives like
#MakeNoDoubt, the activism of high-profile survivors can better
capture the
public imagination; and have a greater impact on legal literacy and rape
A noticeable
development in the long-running saga of accused and adjudicated rapist Bruce
Lehrmann was widespread coverage noting
the trauma-informed approach of Lee J in
what was, procedurally, a defamation
The choices of the
main character in this saga reflect a known dynamic, as Astrid Birgden
[T]he criminal justice system with its emphasis on punishment, retribution,
and incapacitation (i.e., punishment and protection) often
disincentives for sex offenders to undergo treatment. The confrontational
adjudicative process of traditional courts encourage
advocacy of innocence,
discourage acceptance of responsibility, and influence subsequent acceptance of
treatment once sentenced.
One option for reforming the sentencing process could involve the relevant
victims of crime agency offering a structured reparative
mediation process
initiated at the request of the victim. The dialogue and outcomes of that
process could then be considered by the
court when determining the sentence.
This would be akin to the victim impact statement procedure but more kinetic, in
that the victim
would have the opportunity to seek answers
B Conventional Measures
Evaluation and impact are, or should be, central to all reform processes. Yet
the digital age has seen the rise of actuarialism to
rationalise ever-widening
techniques of social control.
Metrics become an end with no means, uncoupled from the material needs and
conditions of overlapping and intersecting criminalised
and victimised
populations. Meeting bail and parole conditions, such as attendance at
appointments or submission of urine samples,
are logged as key performance
indicators without any connection to quality of life for the person subjected to
these forms of state
surveillance.
Obedience of
the criminalised subject defines success for the system, with even
non-compliance resulting in reincarceration, repackaged
as the system
‘working’ as designed. Similar models can be seen elsewhere:
is measured by
media outputs designed for ‘outrage
eyeballs’ and ‘hate
harvesting’, badged as ‘engagement’ regardless of public
interest or the integrity
of institutions.
Stanley Cohen has theorised that ‘net-widening’ extends the reach
of the carceral state by ensnaring people who would
previously have been dealt
with by ‘catch and
sprawling bureaucracy of programs, orders, breaches, monitoring and compliance
reaches further into impoverished and heavily
policed communities, prison
populations remain stagnant or increasing, while criminalised people are trapped
in cycles of poverty,
stigma and surveillance under oppressive state control.
As highlighted by Jonathan Simon and Giane Silvestre, the flipside of these
shifts is a malleable middle class ‘managed by fear
of crime and the
increasing validity of victim
beneficiaries are those drawing income and profits from carceral institutions
and agencies, from the billions of public and household
and business dollars
funnelled into the securitisation industry – wealth that ultimately
derives from production of fear and
commodification of the criminalised
underclass. What goes unmeasured in a metric dominated penology includes the
opportunity cost
of redirecting public resources away from victims of male
violence, who are primarily women and children, to surveillance industry
spending. Technologies like ankle monitors, which in NSW are monitored by prison
(‘corrections’) staff who call in breaches
to the police, entrust
victim safety to male-dominated sectors without pre-screening or oversight as to
their attitudes, such as
contempt for women or empathy with violent men.
Police Activity Data
Leaving aside the imponderability of counting ‘crimes’ not
committed and evaluations muddied by metrics, the primary measure
policy impact remains medium- and long-term trends derived from analysing police
activity data. The criminal law can punish,
and official agencies can measure
changes in the number of sexual assaults reported to the police over time.
Neither punishment nor
reporting data is a measure of reducing sexual violence.
As previously mentioned, prisons are a site of heightened sexual violence,
making it a mathematical certainty that incarcerating more people for longer
produces a net increase in sexual violence. This material
reality is in stark
contrast to the political claim that affirmative consent reforms –
legislative and educative – aim
to ‘drive down rates of sexual
assault’. This goal is not realised through reducing the frequency,
severity or prevalence
of sexual violence. It is realised through analysis of
police activity data. Notwithstanding that presumptive innocence is the
cornerstone
principle of criminal law, this analytic output is misleadingly
labelled ‘crime rates’. While many criminological studies
triangulate police data with self-reports and other victim corpora, ‘crime
rates’ remain the dominant metric in the public
domain, where crime
narratives are disseminated, and fear of crime is produced.
Recorded increases in police reports of male violence are bookended by the
possibility (or likelihood) that the increase reflects
greater awareness and,
therefore, higher reporting rates. In this example, an increase in the frequency
or prevalence of male violence
is listed last among the four possible reasons
for ‘changes in crime rates’: ‘Changes in crime rates may be
to changes in reporting behaviour, increased awareness about forms of
violence, changes to police practices, and/or an increase in
sexual assault
incidents.’
This is a typical disclaimer for upward trends in male violence reporting
data. Administrative criminology agencies like the NSW Bureau
Statistics and Research (‘BOCSAR’) are careful to not assume an
uptick in reports of male violence reflect increased
rates of assault –
because statisticians know the data are solely comprised of reports to the
Statisticians know the data are comprised of reports to the police, yet
increased reporting rates are used as a measure of reform
impact – whether
tied to legislative change, policing practices or public education campaigns. At
the same time, even long-term
trends produced and mediated by statistical
criminologists are carefully bookended by the possibility that increases in
sexual assault
‘rates’ reflect increases in victims reporting to
police rather than an actual rise in sexual
It is frustrating to continuously reiterate that actual changes in sexual
violence-related ‘crime’ can only be measured
by guilty pleas and
verdicts. High-profile figures like Bruce Lehrmann and Christian Porter are
carefully reported as ‘allegedly’
guilty, having not yet disproven
the ‘presumption of innocence’ and with ‘no findings
against’ them.
every data point that makes up so-called ‘crime rates’ also
represents a person with the legal right to presumptive
innocence. The data
point is an interaction with the police, not with a tribunal of fact.
The reliance on ‘sexual assault rates’ as a measure of impact is
problematic on multiple and entrenched levels. Disclaimers
regarding low numbers
of reports relative to sexual violence prevalence imply that the preferred
action for victims to take is reporting
to the police. This, in turn, implicitly
reinscribes victim-blaming: did she report it to the police? Why didn’t
to the police at the time? These questions derive directly from the
patriarchal norm of disbelieving women (victims) and protecting
the reputation,
liberty and livelihoods of men (perpetrators). In addition to obscuring the fact
that the police and courts systematically
inflict trauma on victims and that
victims reach evidence-based positions on who (if anyone) to tell, the system
itself would be
rapidly overwhelmed if every act of sexual violence was reported
to the police.
provide an in-built excuse for the predictable failures
of incremental reform.
This is not merely a function of the fact that very few victims report sexual
violence to the police. The
statement above refers to ‘changes’ in
reporting and policing or increases in awareness or assaults. This seemingly
detail reveals a glaring omission: lower reporting of sexual violence
during a given period is not generally attributed to deteriorating
practices or the absence of awareness campaigns like Only 100% is Consent
(Queensland) and #MakeNoDoubt (NSW).
Public Awareness and Community Education
The #MakeNoDoubt campaign was rolled out in three phases (December 2018, May
2022 and October 2022).
are multiple intersecting and overlapping explanations for running these types
of campaigns in conjunction with policy development
and legislative change.
Parallel awareness campaigns concede that the public at large do not – and
cannot be presumed to –
know the law, regardless of the convenient legal
fictions over which the judiciary may
It acknowledges
that if the question is legislation or education, the answer is both.
As part of the affirmative assent policy development process, the NSWLRC
recommended ‘information about the changes to the law
resulting from our
recommended reforms be incorporated in consent education initiatives in the
broader community’
notes that this would be a long-term
A number of
submissions expressly supported the need for community
Distinct from
community education was a recommendation to target education programs to
judicial officers, prosecutors, defence lawyers
It is difficult for sector advocates to publicly oppose a comprehensive
legislative and education package with the stated goal of
reducing sexual
violence. Law Reform Commission recommendations (in each jurisdiction) are the
primary vehicle for mobilising legislative
reform. Enormous amounts of work go
into literature reviews and compiling compelling evidence of the need for
change. When the subject
matter is male violence, much of this work is done by
dedicated women working for underfunded organisations, as well as by feminist
activists, advocates and academics. Despite the fact these are repeatedly proven
propositions, another round of submissions sets
out the vast and urgent need for
behavioural and attitudinal change, resources, education, and for the law to
take male violence
seriously. This time, surely, the master’s tools will
dismantle the master’s
Under the first National Action Plan to Reduce Violence against Women and
their Children (2010–22) $40.8 million was allocated
over four years for
‘Stop it at the Start’
Internal evaluative
criteria included influencers recalling or talking about the campaign and
reconsidering or changing a behaviour
towards others. On this measure,
‘49% of all influencers took an action as a result of the
In contrast,
the BOCSAR reports that police-recorded incidents of domestic violence-related
assault ‘have steadily increased
over the mid to long term (five, ten and
15 year periods) to 414.2 per 100,000 population in the 12 months to December
In this way, presumed awareness campaign impacts are reified in research
outputs. The practice is understandable, given male violence
against women is
consistently estimated by criminologists to reflect the largest of estimated
‘dark figures’ –
the gap between reported actions (such as
rape) and their prevalence in the community. The disclaimer is also
self-defining. As mentioned,
what statistical criminologists refer to as
‘crime statistics’ are, in fact, aggregations and analyses of police
of police activity. Guilty pleas and verdicts – charges that have
been conceded or proven and are therefore actual crimes –
are recorded
separately.
The ‘dark figure’ is thus a direct function of a patriarchal
system not holding violent men to account. The fact that
most victims do not
report male violence to the police is not the reason male violence has not
stopped. What would law enforcement
do with all these reports? How many prisons
would be built if every violent male were punished by the most serious of
sentences –
incarceration? The criminal law is ultimately a patriarchal
system maintained by its ‘monopoly on the legitimate use of
illogical to expect armed agents of this system, with their wide discretionary
powers to enact violence against the public,
to be fit for the purpose of
stopping male violence in a patriarchal society. The master’s tools will
never dismantle the master’s
The evidence rarely shows a net reduction in male violence, and data
indicating an increase in reports is silent on the effectiveness
responses. Inquiries into police responses to male violence, in contrast, are
invariably damning. A consistent feature
of such investigations is the problem
of police themselves being perpetrators and protecting their colleagues, who are
reported for
domestic violence, from
accountability.
This pattern
reflects the wider workplace culture of protecting each other from
accountability for enacting violence (‘use
of force’) against
members of the public.
From a feminist perspective, public money spent on advertising – while
the budget line item is labelled ‘domestic violence’
‘consent’ – represents gendered redistribution of tax revenue.
Most victims of male violence are women and children,
whereas the campaign
ad-spend goes to male-dominated industries and beneficiaries in advertising,
media and politics. Most advertising
and media executives are men and
male-dominated industries have their own lengthy record of protecting violent
Meanwhile, male
violence directly causes hardship and poverty, including homelessness, for women
and children.
In addition to creative, production and marketing costs, there are
ad-placement strategists and media platforms. This redirects public
from victims and support services to for-profit sectors. A mainstream ad-buy
also invariably coincides with free, positive
coverage in news bulletins and on
chat shows, where media outlets benefit from government advertising revenue.
This makes awareness
campaigns attractive to politicians who want to be seen as
taking action on male violence.
Developed by strategic creative group Frost* collective and production agency
Entropico, with market research from Snapcracker, the
campaign is aimed at
empowering young people to check consent before engaging in sexual activity ...
[The digital campaign] will
run for 12 weeks across social media, including
Instagram, Facebook, TikTok and Snapchat, as well as Spotify, YouTube and
This is a description of #MakeNoDoubt Phase 3, with its launch coinciding
with the NSW affirmative consent amendments coming into
The question is
whether this transfer of resources to industry results in greater public good
than, say, essential services for victims.
From a feminist perspective informed
by Indigenous epistemologies, the answer is to ask, and transfer resources to,
Aboriginal Community-Controlled
Organisations delivering essential place-based
IV CONCLUSION
The criminal law and its host system, the common law, directly reflect rigid
class hierarchies of the colonising power. Population
size and methods of
oppression may shift, but the discretionary power to criminalise and punish
remains concentrated in the hands
of a judiciary drawn from the upper echelons
and police forces founded in the colonial logic of the elimination of the
In this article, we have drawn on the scholarship of therapeutic
jurisprudence and feminist perspectives informed by Indigenous epistemologies
analyse legislative incrementalism as fundamentally unfit for the purpose of
reducing sexual violence. We argue that affirmative
consent reforms rely on
disproven assumptions of deterrence and problematic metrics derived from police
activity data within a system
that itself produces and distributes trauma
through ridicule and disbelief, hostile cross-examination and punishment by
incarceration
at sites of known and heightened sexual violence.
For many decades, research findings have reported
‘disproportionate’ impacts of the criminal law on Aboriginal and
Strait Islander peoples, including criminal law reforms that are said to
be enacted in response to male violence. Conventional analyses
conclude that the expansion of the criminal law impacts more heavily on
‘marginalised’ or ‘vulnerable’
communities. This misses
the point. Criminalisation
a form of marginalisation. Criminalisation
poverty for some while delivering power, victims and secure
incomes to others.
The assumption is that such changes are well-intentioned and enacted in good
faith – despite evidence of disutility and harm,
some of which we have
listed here. Yet the law of the colonising power has not been decoupled from its
organising logic of elimination,
containment and replacement. It is not enough
to redefine sexual acts and roll out awareness campaigns when expanding the
the criminal law invariably also expands and redistributes violence
across society. Institutional power relationships are entrenched,
not shifted,
when new laws and associated narratives are compromised by prioritising male
reputation and male liberty. Stepping back
from the currency of reform and
zooming in on the iterative logic of colonial carcerality throughout the
criminal process offers
an explanatory framework independent of vested interests
and bold claims made by those whose livelihoods derive from violent systems
designed to dispense punishment.
Finally, we turn to the question of recommendations, which we ultimately
answered in the negative. One suggestion canvassed during
the writing of this
article was a carceral evaluation mechanism for criminal law reform, similar to
the oversight established by
Human Rights (Parliamentary Scrutiny) Act
(Cth). We venture that such a proposal carries the same shortcomings as
other kinds of reformist incrementalism. It has no veto power.
compelled to listen to or follow what such a committee recommends. It may open
up decarceral conversations – but
we know ‘public debate’ does
not produce good law. Indeed, the ‘balance’ model of mainstream
media guarantees
that toxic and harmful views are widely broadcast. Even a
decolonial model, comprised of Elders and other knowledge keepers, would
authorised to nullify or override the structural dominance of those who
prioritise reputation and freedom of the powerful.
As such, we can only
recommend that no serious strategy to genuinely reduce the incidence and
prevalence of sexual violence rely
on expansion of the criminal law.
Ingrid Matthews is a lecturer in criminology and law at the
University of New South Wales Faculty of Law and Justice and associate
Australian Human Rights Institute. She specialises in decolonial curriculum
development, the jurisprudence of colonisation
and the creation of criminality
in colonised populations.
Nigel Stobbs is a barrister, senior lecturer and Director of
the Compassion Informed Law Research program, Queensland University
Technology. He specialises in therapeutic jurisprudence, publishing
and Practice of Therapeutic Jurisprudence
9. The authors thank the anonymous reviewers
and Research Assistant Shelly Kolstad for their assistance.
This phrase is introduced in Ingrid Matthews and
James Arvanitakis, ‘Whose Island Home? Art and Australian Refugee
[2019] (13)
University of New South Wales Law Society Court of
19. Alongside ‘surrogate start points’, it was
developed further in the first author’s PhD, in which Matthews and
Arvanitakis (n 1) was one of six publications in its examinable portfolio:
Ingrid Matthews, ‘Digitising and Decolonising Legal
Education’ (PhD
Thesis, Western Sydney University, 2021) (unpublished, copy on file with
author). On deep time and colonial
time, theorised for the purpose of decentring
colonial start points and history written by invaders (‘winners’),
Ann McGrath, Laura Rademaker and Jakelin Troy (eds),
Everywhen: Australia
and the Language of Deep History
(University of Nebraska Press, 2023).
Aileen Moreton-Robinson,
The White Possessive: Property, Power, and Indigenous Sovereignty
(University of Minnesota Press, 2015) 3–18 (‘
Irene Watson,
‘Aboriginal Laws and the Sovereignty of Terra Nullius’ (2002) 1(2)
Borderlands
<https://webarchive.nla.gov.au/awa/20030624015313/http://www.borderlandsejournal.adelaide.edu.au/vol1no2_2002/watson_laws.html>.
Criminal Law (Coercive
Control and Affirmative Consent) and Other Legislation Amendment Act 2024
(Qld). This statute also introduces new criminal offences for coercive control
and engaging in domestic violence or associated domestic
violence to aid a
respondent. Additionally, it establishes a court-based domestic violence
perpetrator diversion scheme for adults,
which will commence in 2025.
Queensland Law Reform
Commission,
Review of Consent Laws and the Excuse of Mistake of Fact
(Report No 78, June 2020) (‘
QLRC Review of Consent
Criminal Law Amendment Act
Criminal Code Act 1899
(Qld) s 348(2)(e) (‘
Qld Criminal Code
’), as amended by
ibid pt 3. The 2000 amendments provided that consent, for the purposes of these
offences, means ‘consent
freely and voluntarily given by a person with the
cognitive capacity to give the consent’:
Qld Criminal Code
348(1). Additionally, a person’s consent to an act is not freely and
voluntarily given if it is obtained by force; threat
or intimidation; fear of
bodily harm; exercise of authority; false and fraudulent representations about
the nature or purpose of
the act; or a mistaken belief, induced by the accused,
that the accused was the person’s sexual partner: at s 348(2).
Jonathan Crowe,
‘Queensland Rape Law “Loophole” Could Remain after Review
Ignores Concerns about Rape Myths and
The Conversation
(online, 4 August 2020)
<https://theconversation.com/queensland-rape-law-loophole-could-remain-after-review-ignores-concerns-about-rape-myths-and-consent-141772>.
The many and varied
expressions of human sexuality, and the many and varied contexts in which sexual
interactions take place, mean
that assessments of whether consent was given are
best made on a case by case basis on the evidence in each case. Prescriptive
of general application are apt to lead to injustice.
QLRC Review of Consent Report
(n 5) 85, quoting the Queensland Law
Where it is operative, the
current provisions allow a jury to determine the facts and context of the
actions having regard to all
the circumstances in each case. The use of the
general phrase ‘freely and voluntarily given’ in conjunction with
non-exhaustive, broad list of circumstances ensures the trier of fact can
apply the definition in section 348 in a flexible and meaningful
way ... the
current provisions provide a suitable framework within which actions can be
appropriately measured against community
standards on a case by case basis.
QLRC Review of Consent Report
(n 5) 84, quoting Legal Aid Queensland,
Criminal Law Practice.
[The Queensland Council for
Civil Liberties] submitted that creating an affirmative consent model would
involve a practical reversal
of the onus of proof. This, it was submitted, would
particularly be the case if legislation were introduced requiring the person
seeking to engage in sexual activity to take steps to ascertain consent.
QLRC Review of Consent Report
(n 5) 85, citing the Queensland Council
for Civil Liberties.
QLRC Review of Consent
(n 5) 84, quoting the Women’s Legal Service Queensland.
Qld Criminal Code
348(1)–(2).
Ibid s 348(3).
Ibid s 348AA(1)(a), which
expressly provides that a person does not consent to an act where that person
does not say or do anything
to communicate consent.
Ibid s 348AA(1)(e).
Ibid s 348AA(1)(c).
Ibid s 348AA(1)(n).
Ibid s 348AA(1)(l).
Ibid s 348A(3).
We return to the
#MakeNoDoubt campaign below: see below Part III(B)(2). Its website remains
current at the time of writing: Department
of Communities and Justice, ‘No
Doubt about Consent Campaign’ (Media Release, 13 April 2023)
<https://dcj.nsw.gov.au/news-and-media/media-releases-archive/2022/no-doubt-about-consent-campaign.html>.
New South Wales Law Reform
Commission,
Consent in Relation to Sexual Offences
(Report No 148,
September 2020) (‘
NSWLRC Consent Report
New South Wales Bar
Association, ‘Consent Proposals Could Result in Significant
Injustice’ (Media Release, 25 May 2021)
<https://inbrief.nswbar.asn.au/posts/08b347d11316f1372f3414b4c466afe4/attachment/25.5.21%20MR%20CONSENT.pdf>
Proposals Injustice’).
Rape myths about the
likelihood of false accusations persist among a significant proportion of the
general public. The National
Community Attitudes towards Violence against Women
Survey (NCAS) found in 2017 that 42% of people believe it is common for sexual
assault allegations to be used as a way of ‘getting back at men’ and
31% believe that allegations are due to women regretting
a consensual sexual
encounter: Australia’s National Research Organisation for Women’s
Are We There Yet? Australians’ Attitude towards Violence
against Women and Gender Equality
(Summary Report, 2017)
<https://ncas.anrows.org.au/wp-content/uploads/2019/04/300419_NCAS_Summary_Report.pdf>.
‘Consent Proposals
Injustice’ (n 25).
Aileen Moreton-Robinson,
‘Towards an Australian Indigenous Women’s Standpoint Theory’
(2013) 28(78)
Australian Feminist Studies
<https://doi.org/10.1080/08164649.2013.876664>.
Law Society of New South
Wales, ‘Education the Key to Embedding Respect in Intimate
Relationships’ (Media Release)
<https://www.lawsociety.com.au/news-and-publications/news-media-releases/education-key-embedding-respect-intimate-relationships>.
Crimes Legislation
Amendment (Sexual Consent Reforms) Act 2021
Consent Amendment Act
Explanatory Notes,
Legislation Amendment (Sexual Consent Reforms) Bill 2021
Crimes Act 1900
(NSW) div 10 (‘
’). We do note the shift to more
precise language in the division. The division where these amendments now sit
was previously
headed, in part, as ‘[o]ffences in the nature of
rape’. The new division heading moves away from naturalising language
is a central feature of rape myths, minimisation and denial. Namely, the
‘boys will be boys’ and ‘male urges’
school of cliches
and excuses. Contemporary versions of naturalising and excusing sexual violence
continue to be produced, particularly
among ‘incels’ (short for
‘involuntary celibacy’, where a core belief is male rights of access
bodies for sex).
There are a great many
sources, with contemporary literature on this dating back at least to the
germane work of Carol Smart,
Women, Crime and Criminology: A Feminist
(Routledge, 1976). For a recent overview, see Jan Jordan,
Tackling Rape Culture: Ending Patriarchy
(Routledge, 2022)
<https://doi.org/10.4324/9781003289913>. Specific studies of police and
judicial attitudes summarised in
this sentence (where police and the judiciary
belong to the same society and culture as produces the norms, yet cause far more
damage by enacting these attitudes towards victims) in England and Wales,
North America, Australia and online include: Louise Ellison
and Vanessa E Munro,
‘Taking Trauma Seriously: Critical Reflections on the Criminal Justice
(2016) 21(3)
International Journal of Evidence and Proof
<https://doi.org/10.1177/1365712716655168>; Deborah Tuerkheimer,
‘Incredible Women: Sexual Violence and the Credibility
(2017) 166(1)
University of Pennsylvania Law Review
; Holly Johnson,
‘Why Doesn't She Just Report It? Apprehensions and Contradictions for
Women Who Report Sexual Violence to the
(2017) 29(1)
Journal of Women and the Law
; Caroline Dick, ‘Sex, Sexism, and
Judicial Misconduct: How the Canadian Judicial Council Perpetuates Sexism in the
Legal Realm’
(2020) 28(2)
Feminist Legal Studies
<https://doi.org/10.1007/s10691-020-09431-5>; Camilla Nelson, ‘The
“Most Maligned” Witness in the Christopher
Dawson Case: Gender,
Power, Media and Legal Culture in the Digitally Distributed Live-Streamed
(2024) 20(1)
Crime, Media, Culture
<https://doi.org/10.1177/17416590231168330>.
NSW Crimes Act
32) s 61HK(1)(c).
See Kylie Burns,
‘Judges, “Common Sense” and Judicial Cognition’
Griffith Law Review
<https://doi.org/10.1080/10383441.2016.1259536>.
Moreton-Robinson,
White Possessive
(n 2). The characterisation of patriarchy as
relatively young in Australia reflects the historical reality that colonial
white patriarchy
came to Kamay (Botany Bay) and Warrane (Circular Quay) on
Dharawhal and Darug lands and waters, with the British invasion and colonisation
from 1788 onwards. Patriarchy is much older elsewhere, estimated to be between
6,000 and 10,000 years old: Marilyn French,
Beyond Power: On Women Men, and
(Abacus Books, 1986).
Department of Communities
and Justice, ‘Affirmative Consent Becomes Law in NSW’ (Media
Release, 1 June 2022)
<https://dcj.nsw.gov.au/news-and-media/media-releases-archive/2022/affirmative-consent-becomes-law-in-nsw.html>.
The Australian Bureau of
Statistics (ABS) reports that 97% of sexual assault offenders are male:
Australian Bureau of Statistics,
‘97 Per Cent of Sexual Assault Offenders
Are Male’ (Media Release, 2 February 2022)
<https://www.abs.gov.au/media-centre/media-releases/97-cent-sexual-assault-offenders-are-male>.
The ABS has also cross-verified reported crime data with its Personal Safety
Survey (victim self-report data) to find that approximately
four times as many
women (1.6 million) as men (385,000) had experienced sexual assault; and more
than twice as many women (1 million)
as men (412,000) reported their first
instance of sexual assault before 15 years old: ‘Sexual Violence:
Victimisation’,
Australian Bureau of Statistics
(Web Page, 24
August 2021)
<https://www.abs.gov.au/articles/sexual-violence-victimisation>. For an
international overview of
persistent, known facts about rape, see Kathleen Daly
and Brigitte Bouhours, ‘Rape and Attrition in the Legal Process: A
Comparative
Analysis of Five Countries’ (2010) 39(1)
565 <https://doi.org/10.1086/653101>.
Eve Tuck and Wayne Yang,
‘Decolonization Is Not a Metaphor’ (2012) 1(1)
Decolonization:
Indigeneity, Education and Society
Royal Commission into
Institutional Responses to Child Sexual Abuse
(Final Report, 2017)
<https://www.childabuseroyalcommission.gov.au/final-report>.
See Ann Deslandes et al,
‘White Feminism and Carceral Industries: Strange Bedfellows or Partners in
Crime and Criminology?’
(2022) 4(2)
Decolonization of Criminology and
Moreton-Robinson,
White Possessive
(n 2). See also Alison Whittaker, ‘White Law,
Blak Arbiters, Grey Legal Subjects: Deep Colonisation’s Role and Impact
Defining Aboriginality at Law’
[2017] AUIndigLawRw 2
Australian Indigenous Law
Zoe Todd, ‘Fish, Kin
and Hope: Tending to Water Violations in
Amiskwaciwâskahikan
Treaty Six Territory’ (2017) 43 (Spring–Summer)
<https://doi.org/10.1086/692559>.
Shaa Smith et al,
‘Ethics and Consent in More-than-Human Research: Some Considerations
From/With/As Gumbaynggirr Country’
(2022) 47(3)
Transactions of the
Institute of British Geographers
<https://doi.org/10.1111/tran.12520>.
Mary Graham, ‘Some
Thoughts About the Philosophical Underpinnings of Aboriginal Worldviews’
(1999) 3(2)
The language of full
human-ness directly reflects Indigenous epistemologies around
‘more-than-human’ kin or species
kin: Todd (n 46). See also ibid;
Irene Watson,
Aboriginal Peoples, Colonialism and International Law: Raw
(Routledge, 2015) (‘
<https://doi.org/10.4324/9781315858999>. This worldview has then been
turned back on to the patriarchy generally, and
the English class system in
particular, as the version of patriarchy imposed on Aboriginal and Torres Strait
Islander peoples here.
These systems create classes of persons who are less than
human, to rationalise seizing control of their lives and their lands. For
history of the English model, see Dale Spender,
Women of Ideas: And What Men
Have Done to Them
(Routledge, 1982)
<https://doi.org/10.4324/9781003537557>. For the creation of sub- or
non-human categories of person by colonisers,
see Frantz Fanon,
The Wretched
of the Earth
, tr Constance Farrington (Grove Press, 1963) 38–40. On
patriarchy relegating women to sub- or non-human status, see French
Maria Giannacopoulos,
‘Offshore Hospitality: Law, Asylum and Colonisation’
(2013) 17(1)
Law Text Culture
, 171 <https://doi.org/10.14453/ltc.815>; see
Matthews and Arvanitakis (n 1).
During the post-war,
pre-‘history wars’ era, white males like Geoffrey Blainey, Robert
Hughs and Thomas Kenneally debated
the national character in these terms: should
the British colonies that now constitute the Commonwealth of Australia be
as convict outposts or as nation-building projects, albeit within an
empire? From the 1980s, this period was disrupted by historian
Henry Reynolds,
whose research on the Frontier Wars reached a huge audience. Reynolds exposed
the ‘Great Australian Silence’,
first theorised by WEH Stanner some
30 years earlier, and was directly involved in bringing
Mabo v Queensland [No
[1992] HCA 23
(1992) 175 CLR 1
against the state of Queensland. These earlier
iterations of the Australian story are beyond the scope of this article, except
observe that – unless and until it is dismantled – colonial white
patriarchy continues to shape and determine contemporary
Australia and its
criminal law.
Crystal McKinnon,
‘Enduring Indigeneity and Solidarity in Response to Australia’s
Carceral Colonialism’ (2020)
<https://doi.org/10.1353/bio.2020.0101>.
Since 2008, when Kevin Rudd
delivered the National Apology to the Stolen Generations, formal apologies and
crafted apologia as damage
control have become increasingly popular with senior
police. In recent years, the Victoria Police Commissioner delivered an apology
at the Yoorrrok Justice Commission, the Northern Territory Police Commissioner
apologised at the annual Garma Festival, and the Western
Australian Police
Commissioner apologised to the family of Ms Dhu, who was killed in custody by
inhumane treatment and medical neglect.
In 2016, Australian
Women’s History Network managing editor Lisa Featherstone reviewed this
phenomenon with the headline question:
‘[r]ape in marriage: [w]hy was it
so hard to criminalise sexual violence?’: Lisa Featherstone, ‘Rape
in Marriage:
Why Was It So Hard to Criminalise Sexual Violence?’,
of the Australian Women’s History Network
(Blog Post, 7 December 2016)
<https://www.auswhn.com.au/blog/marital-rape/>. For a more scholarly
account, see Lisa Featherstone,
‘“That's What Being a Woman Is
for”: Opposition to Marital Rape Law Reform in Late Twentieth-Century
(2017) 29(1)
Gender and History
<https://doi.org/10.1111/1468-0424.12281>.
Australian Law Reform
Commission,
Pathways to
Justice: An Inquiry into
the Incarceration Rate of Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander Peoples
(Final Report No 133, December 2017) 351–2 [11.19]–[11.21].
Susan Faludi,
The Undeclared War against Women
(Vintage Publishing, 1993); Michelle
The New Jim Crow: Mass Incarceration in the Age of
Colorblindness
(Penguin Books, 2010).
Legal Aid NSW, Submission
No 34 to Standing Committee on Social Issues, Parliament of New South Wales,
Inquiry into Domestic Violence Trends and Issues in NSW
(19 September
In 2023, the NSW Law
Enforcement Conduct Commission (‘NSW LECC’) reported its findings on
disproportionate targeting
of both Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander peoples
and young people by police under consorting laws: see Law Enforcement Conduct
Commission,
Review of the Operation of Amendments to the Consorting Law under
Part 3A Division 7 of the Crimes Act 1900
(Report, February 2023)
LECC Consorting Report
’). Targeted criminalisation of
Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander peoples and of young people intersects to
produce the
outcome of First Nations children being targeted under the laws.
This is reflected in the rate at which First Nations children are
incarcerated,
which is even more ‘disproportionate’ (more than half of all
children in every jurisdiction) than adults
(around a third, nationally): see
‘Youth Detention Population in Australia 2024’,
Institute of Health and Welfare
(Web Report, 13 December 2024)
<https://www.aihw.gov.au/reports/youth-justice/youth-detention-population-in-australia-2024/contents/summary/first-nations-young-people-in-detention>;
‘The Health and Wellbeing of First Nations People in Australia’s
Prisons 2022’ (Publication, Australian Institute
of Health and Welfare, 29
May 2024) 1
<https://www.aihw.gov.au/getmedia/9e2c3486-1c45-40e6-883f-ed2d3e329da2/aihw-phe-342-The-health-and-wellbeing-of-First-Nations-people-in-Australia-s-prisons-2022.pdf?v=20240508153645&inline=true>.
Almost all criminology
literature describes targeted criminalisation and incarceration of Aboriginal
and Torres Strait Islander
peoples as ‘over-representation’ or
‘disproportionate’ – from renowned scholars in leading
to specialist scholarly books and first year text books: see, eg, Rob
White, Santina Perrone and Loene Howes,
Crime Criminality and Criminal
(Oxford University Press, 3
ed, 2019); Ana Rodas et al,
Crime, Deviance and Society: An Introduction to Sociological Criminology
(Cambridge University Press, 2020). Government campaigns, eg, Closing the Gap,
and agencies, eg, the NSW Bureau of Crime Statistics
and Research
(‘BOCSAR’), also ensure this misleading characterisation is
continuously reinscribed in public discourse:
‘Aboriginal
Over-representation in the NSW Criminal Justice System’,
NSW Bureau of
Crime Statistics and Research
(Web Page, 8 April 2025)
<https://bocsar.nsw.gov.au/topic-areas/aboriginal-over-representation.html>.
We contend that this
usage misrepresents perhaps the best known fact about the
criminal process: that we incarcerate the people of this country at horrific
rates. Prisons are not democracies and passive voice phraseology obscures the
racism of the criminal law and its function in maintaining
colonial rule. The
language also does not support its own implications – unless
‘proportionate’ or ‘representative’
incarceration of
Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander peoples is somehow a solution to sexual
violence. This is no more the case
for Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander
peoples than for other instances of sexual violence, as argued throughout.
Patrick Wolfe,
‘Settler Colonialism and the Elimination of the Native’
(2006) 8(4)
Journal of Genocide Research
<https://doi.org/10.1080/14623520601056240>.
Vicki Sentas and Camilla
Pandolfini, Youth Justice Coalition,
Policing Young People in NSW: A Study of
the Suspect Targeting Management Plan
(Report, 2017). Six years, and many
thousands of unlawful stops later, the NSW LECC released its report into STMP:
Law Enforcement
Conduct Commission,
An Investigation into the Use of the NSW
Police Force Suspect Targeting Management Plan on Children and Young People:
Operation Tepito
(Final Report, October 2023). This report was so damning
the NSW Police agreed to suspend use of STMP operations against all minors
immediately, in October 2023; and against adults as well by end December
NSW Crimes Act
32) s 93X. The provision specifically excludes children under 14 years old; and
in its statutory 10 year review the NSW LECC recommended
the relevant section be
amended to exclude all children and young people: see
LECC Consorting Report
(n 58) 29 (Recommendation 2).
Criminal Code Amendment
Act (No 2) 1996
s 4, with s 5 prohibiting suspension of the
mandatory minimum penalty of 12 months’ imprisonment.
Police Administration
Amendment Act 2014
Police Administration Act
(NT) div 4AA. The laws were challenged in 2015 after a senior Warlpiri man,
Kumanjayi Langdon, died three hours after being detained
by police using the
North Australian Aboriginal Justice Agency Ltd v Northern
[2015] HCA 41
(2015) 256 CLR 569.
Strengthening Community
Safety Act 2023
Qld Community Safety Act
Bail Act 1980
Bail Act 2013
The South Australian
government has introduced a complex regime of ‘indeterminate’
sentences for those designated serious
child sex offenders where, in certain
circumstances, the sentence does not expire by the passage of time but must be
extinguished
by order of the Supreme Court:
Criminal Law Consolidation Act
Crimes High Risk
Offenders Act 2006
(NSW). A challenge to the Western Australian
Offenders Act 2020
(WA) failed to persuade the High Court that post-sentence
detention breaches separation of powers:
Garlett v Western Australia
(2022) 277 CLT 1.
An excellent overview of
the establishment of Apprehended Violence Order (‘AVO’) regimes can
be found in Jane Wangmann,
‘Incidents v Context: How Does the NSW
Protection Order System Understand Intimate Partner Violence?’
[2012] SydLawRw 32
Sydney Law Review
The use of ‘regime’ here may be
queried by some. This word choice is justified in the context of a growing body
of evidence
that police have used AVOs as an instrument of criminalisation, in
particular, the criminalisation and incarceration of Aboriginal
documented by Anna Kerr and Rita Shackel, ‘Equality with a Vengeance: The
Over-incarceration of Women’
rapid recent rise in incarceration of women directly correlates with the rise
and expansion of AVO regimes is an outcome
of the criminal law and consistent
with the argument in this article, that the criminal law is not (and cannot be)
a violence prevention
mechanism. The continuing reliance of some (white, or
carceral) women on criminal law as a vehicle for [their] safety is critiqued
Ann Deslandes et al, ‘White Feminism and Carceral Industries: Strange
Bedfellows or Partners in Crime and Criminology?’
(2022) 4(2)
Decolonization of Criminology and Justice
<https://doi.org/10.24135/dcj.v4i2.39>.
Arguably the most tragic
and ongoing example of this pattern can be observed in recent changes to bail
and police detention in Queensland,
where the same government that passed the
Human Rights Act 2019
(Qld) subsequently suspended it, twice,
to pass laws that criminalise and incarcerate more children and young people
through criminalisation
of bail breaches including breaches by young people
Qld Community Safety Act
Qld Bail Act
(n 65) s 29(3)) and
through designating police watchhouses as youth detention centres (
Protection (Offender Reporting and Offender Prohibition Order) and Other
Legislation Amendment Act 2023
(Qld)). As predicted, these changes have
directly enabled severe trauma and led to severe overcrowding as documented by
submissions
to the Queensland Police Service
Watch-House Review
(announced on 6 August 2024): see, eg, Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander
Legal Service (Qld), Submission to Queensland Police
Watch-House
(17 December 2024); Queensland Family and Child Commission,
Submission to Queensland Police Service,
Watch-House Review
2024); Queensland Council of Social Service, Submission to Queensland Police
Watch-House Review
(10 December 2024). A similar story in New
South Wales accompanied the one-year review and extension of its harsher bail
for young people, as directly captured by this headline: Rudi
Maxwell, ‘The Number of Kids Refused Bail in NSW Has Spiked.
The Premier
Sees It as a Win, but Critics Say It's a Fail’,
(online, 21
February 2025).
A moral panic tends to
follow the power curve mode of media coverage: see Bob Hodge and Ingrid
Matthews, ‘Critical Incident
Analysis and the Semiosphere: The Curious
Case of the Spitting Butterfly’ (2011) 17(2)
Cultural Studies
300 <https://doi.org/10.5130/csr.v17i2.1722>.
Roseanne Bonney, NSW Bureau
of Crime Statistics and Research,
NSW Summary Offences Act 1988
1989) 15–17.
Sentas and Pandolfini (n
LECC Consorting Report
Neil Morgan, Harry Blagg
and Victoria Williams, Aboriginal Justice Council,
Mandatory Sentencing in
Western Australia and the Impact on Aboriginal Youth
(Report, December 2001)
Anna Rienstra, ‘The
“Paperless Arrest”: Chapter III and Police Detention Powers in the
Northern Territory’,
Australian Public Law
(Blog Post, 9 November
2015) <https://www.auspublaw.org/blog/2015/11/the-paperless-arrest>.
‘New Consent Laws in
Radio National Breakfast
(ABC Radio National, 1 June 2022)
<https://www.abc.net.au/listen/programs/radionational-breakfast/new-consent-laws-in-nsw/13909498>.
Andy Kaladelfos and Yorick
Smaal, ‘Sexual Violence and Male Prisons: An Australian Queer
(2019) 31(3)
Current Issues in Criminal Justice
<https://doi.org/10.1080/10345329.2019.1641881>.
Nationally, only around 8%
of sexual assaults are reported to police: ‘Sexual Violence’,
Australian Bureau of Statistics
(Web Page, 23 August 2023)
<https://www.abs.gov.au/statistics/people/crime-and-justice/sexual-violence/latest-release>
Violence Statistics’). See also Elaine Craig,
Trials on Trial: Sexual Assault and the Failure of the Legal Profession
(McGill-Queen’s University Press, 2018).
‘Sexual Violence
Statistics’ (n 79).
Catherine Esposito,
‘Child Sexual Abuse and Disclosure: What Does the Research Tell Us?’
(Research Paper, New South
Wales Department of Family and Community Services,
<https://dcj.nsw.gov.au/documents/service-providers/deliver-services-to-children-and-families/child-protection-services/child-sexual-abuse-disclosure-research.pdf>.
Deborah Tuerkheimer,
‘Incredible Women: Sexual Violence and the Credibility Discount’
(2017) 166(1)
University of Pennsylvania Law Review
<https://dx.doi.org/10.2139/ssrn.2919865>; Jodie Murphy-Oikonen et al,
‘Unfounded Sexual Assault: Women’s Experiences
of Not Being Believed
by the Police’ (2022) 37(11–12)
Journal of Interpersonal
NP8916 <https://doi.org/10.1177/0886260520978190>.
Lia Harris and Sarah
Gerathy, ‘Current and Former NSW Police Force Officers Reveal
“Toxic” Workplace Culture,
Bullying and Sexism’,
(online, 25 September 2024)
<https://www.abc.net.au/news/2024-09-25/stateline-nsw-police-current-former-officers-bullying-culture/104390418>.
See Holly Johnson,
‘Why Doesn’t She Just Report It? Apprehensions and Contradictions
for Women Who Report Sexual Violence
to the Police’
(2017) 29(1)
Canadian Journal of Women and the Law
<https://doi.org/10.3138/cjwl.29.1.36>.
Christopher Dowling,
‘Police Training in Responding to Family, Domestic and Sexual
Violence’ (Trends and Issues in Crime
and Criminal Justice Paper No 689,
Australian Institute of Criminology, 18 April 2024) 2.
In New South Wales and
Queensland, general and specific deterrence fall under the same provision: see
Crimes (Sentencing Procedure) Act 1999
Penalties and
Sentences Act 1992
Dieter Dölling et al,
‘Is Deterrence Effective? Results of a Meta-analysis of Punishment’
(2009) 15(1–
European Journal on Criminal Policy and Research
<https://doi.org/10.1007/s10610-008-9097-0>; Damon Petrich et al,
‘Custodial Sanctions and Reoffending: A Meta-analytic
Review’ (2021)
Crime and Justice
353 <https://doi.org/10.1086/715100>; Mirko
Bagaric and Theo Alexander, ‘(Marginal) General Deterrence Doesn’t
And What It Means for Sentencing’
(2011) 35(5)
Criminal Law
; Alec Karakatsanis, ‘The Punishment Bureaucracy: How to
Think about “Criminal Justice Reform”’ (2018–19)
Yale Law Journal Forum
Mirko Bagaric and Theo
Alexander, ‘The Fallacy of Punishing Offenders for the Deeds of Others: An
Argument for Abolishing
Offence Prevalence as a Sentencing Aggravating
Consideration’
[2016] SydLawRw 2
(2016) 38(1)
Sydney Law Review
Michael Muller-Smith,
‘The Criminal and Labor Market Impacts of Incarceration’ (Working
Paper, 18 August 2015)
<https://sites.lsa.umich.edu/mgms/wp-content/uploads/sites/283/2015/09/incar.pdf>;
Anna Haskins, Mariana Amorim and Meaghan Mingo, ‘Parental Incarceration
and Child Outcomes: Those at Risk, Evidence of Impacts,
Methodological Insights,
and Areas of Future Work’
(2018) 12(3)
Sociology Compass
e12562:1–14 <https://doi.org/10.1111/soc4.12562>; Dave
Bewley-Taylor, Mike Trace and Alex Stevens, ‘Incarceration
Offenders: Costs and Impacts’ (Briefing Paper No 7, The Beckley Foundation
Drug Policy Programme, June 2005)
<https://www.iprt.ie/site/assets/files/5943/incarceration_of_drug_users.pdf>.
Kristine Levan, Katherine
Polzer and Steven Downing, ‘Media and Prison Sexual Assault: How We Got to
Drop the Soap” Culture’ (2011) 4(2)
International Journal of Criminology and Sociological Theory
While this article follows
humanising language protocols, it does not substitute or otherwise remove the
word ‘offenders’
from direct quotes or the titles of cited
publications. On humanising language, this article looks to Language Guides
published by
Community Restorative Centre, the National Network of Incarcerated
and Formerly Incarcerated Women and Girls and the University of
New South Wales
Criminology Lived Experience Advisory Panel. Except for the purposes of
critique, this article would choose not to
reproduce quotes or publications that
refer – as do so many politicians, commentators and almost all police
– to presumptively
innocent people as ‘offenders’.
Tom Sullivan et al,
Australian Institute of Criminology,
Sexual Offending in Australia
(Statistical Report No 47, 11 July 2024) 9, 26.
Kaladelfos and Smaal (n
Russell Hogg and John
Scott, ‘Masculinity, Sexuality, and Violence in the Australian Convict
Colonies’ in Tess Bartlett
and Rosemary Ricciardelli (eds),
Masculinities: International Perspectives and Interpretations
(Routledge,
Karakatsanis (n 87)
See Sara Ahmed, ‘The
Nonperformativity of Antiracism’ (2006) 7(1)
<https://doi.org/10.2979/MER.2006.7.1.104>.
See McKinnon (n 52).
The many and varied
expressions of human sexuality, and the many and varied contexts in which sexual
interactions take place, mean
that assessments of whether consent was given are
best made on a case by case basis on the evidence in each case. Prescriptive
of general application are apt to lead to injustice
QLRC Review of Consent Report
(n 5) 85, quoting the Queensland Law
Extending the dynamics of
conflict and aggression from the private sphere and into the criminal justice
process perhaps inevitably
ensures that mere incremental and procedural reforms
reflect public policy debates stoked by anger and (to some extent) designed
shock. As David Yamada observes, this results in by-products of fear, anxiety
and trauma. He concludes that ‘[w]hen policymaking
processes, outcomes,
and implementations fuel these negative emotions, they often constitute denials
of human dignity’: David
C Yamada, ‘On Anger, Shock, Fear, and
Trauma: Therapeutic Jurisprudence as a Response to Dignity Denials in Public
International Journal of Law and Psychiatry
35 <https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ijlp.2018.06.009>.
Referendum Council,
‘Uluru Statement from the Heart’ (Statement, First Nations National
Constitutional Convention, 26
‘International’ here refers to Aboriginal and Torres Strait
Islander ways of maintaining relations between nations across
the continent and
populated islands. See Watson,
See Michael Karlberg,
Beyond the Culture of Contest: From Adversarialism to Mutualism in an Age of
Interdependence
(George Ronald Publisher, 2004); Lindsay Farmer et al,
The Trial on Trial: Volume 1
(Bloomsbury Publishing, 2004); Geoffrey
Davies, ‘The Reality of Civil Justice Reform: Why We Must Abandon the
Essential Elements
of Our System’
(2003) 12(3)
Journal of Judicial
Administration
; Marc Galanter and Mark Edwards, ‘Introduction: The
Path of the Law Ands’
Wisconsin Law Review
Hostettler,
Fighting for Justice: The History and Origins of Adversary
(Waterside Press, 2006).
This is a view largely
formulated and championed by the therapeutic jurisprudence approach: see, eg,
David B Wexler, ‘Two
Decades of Therapeutic Jurisprudence’
Touro Law Review
Ibid 21; Nigel Stobbs,
‘The Nature of Juristic Paradigms: Exploring the Theoretical and
Conceptual Relationship between Adversarialism
and Therapeutic
Jurisprudence’
(2011) 4(1)
Washington University Jurisprudence Review
<https://doi.org/10.2139/ssrn.2314747>.
We refer here in
particular to the origins and development of Victim Impact Statements, as a
direct response to the crucial element
of ‘intent’ in sexual
violence acquittals, emerged from resurgent (third-wave) feminism of the 1970s
and 1980s. ‘Intention
vs impact’ as an explanatory framework has
since been applied in other areas, most prominently, workplace harassment,
and mental health, and sociological studies of transgression, shame
and the now-infamous ‘non-apology’.
Tuck and Yang (n
Termed the ‘Stolen
Generations’ in Australia and ‘Residential Schools’ in North
America, these genocidal
eugenics programs were deliberately designed to
‘kill the Indian and save the man’, in the words of architect
Whitmer (1882): Xabier Irujo, ‘Genocide, Kill the Indian and Save
Nevada Today
(online, 8 October 2021)
<https://www.unr.edu/nevada-today/news/2021/genocide-kill-indian-save-man>.
Yet when inquiries, reports
and apologies were eventually undertaken, many
protested that children were forcibly removed, institutionalised and abused with
intentions’. On this practice in Canada, see Tamara
Starblanket,
Suffer the Little Children: Genocide, Indigenous Nations and the
Canadian State
(Clarity Press, 2018). On Stolen Generations in
Australia, the equivalent saying was ‘breed out the colour’. For a
account on the policy, its impacts and direct function in relation to
colonisation of land, see Barbara Cumings, ‘Assimilation,
Gender and Land
in the Northern Territory After Kruger: Postcards from the Factual
Substratum’
[1998] UNSWLawJl 20
(1998) 21(1)
University of New South Wales Law Journal
For an official and white-centred account, see Russell McGregor,
‘“Breed Out the Colour” or the Importance of Being
White’ (2002) 33(120)
Australian Historical Studies
Incremental changes to
legislation reflect the reality that deliberate and conscious changes in policy
are not always teleological
or goal-oriented. Legal reform is ‘often an
accumulation of a myriad of minor changes in practice ... their extent unnoticed
until analytically identified [and] ... often contradictory and conflicting,
reflecting political and communal ambivalence about
the direction of criminal
justice policy’: see Arie Freiberg, ‘Therapeutic Jurisprudence in
Australia: Paradigm Shift
or Pragmatic Incrementalism?’
(2003) 20(2)
Law in Context
David C Yamada,
‘Therapeutic Jurisprudence: Foundations, Expansion, and Assessment’
(2021) 75(3)
University of Miami Law Review
See above nn
Catharine Richmond and
Melissa Richmond, ‘The Future of Sex Offense Courts: How Expanding
Specialized Sex Offense Courts Can
(2015) 21(2)
Cardozo Journal of Law and Gender
Astrid Birgden, ‘Maximizing Desistance: Adding Therapeutic Jurisprudence
and Human Rights to the Mix’
(2015) 42(1)
Criminal Justice and Behavior
See Fair Agenda,
Improving the Court Experience: A Model for Pre-recording Testimony in Sexual
Assault Cases
(Report, November 2024); Australasian Institute of Judicial
Administration,
Specialist Approaches to Managing Sexual Assault Proceedings:
An Integrative Review
(Report, 2023).
Women’s Safety and
Justice Taskforce,
Hear Her Voice:
(Report, 2021)
<https://www.publications.qld.gov.au/dataset/womens-safety-and-justice-taskforce>.
The Queensland Government
is piloting recommendations 43 and 80.
See, eg, Queensland
Police Service, ‘Adult Sexual Assault’ (Brochure)
https://www.police.qld.gov.au/sites/default/files/2020-03/ARO%20Brochure.pdf>.
‘Alternative
Reporting Options’,
Queensland Police
(Web Page, 27 July 2023)
<https://www.police.qld.gov.au/units/victims-of-crime/support-for-victims-of-crime/adult-sexual-assault/alternative-reporting>.
An ARO is lodged by completion of an online form (which can be done anonymously)
and the relevant site declares: ‘If you
want a suspect
prosecuted but would like the police to know about an event of sexual violence
for intelligence purposes, please continue
using ARO. Your participation with
the ARO is voluntary.’ Interestingly, the site seems to take the position
that reports are
assumed to be prima facie genuine, in that it requests the
lodger to ‘provide as much detail as possible regarding the circumstances
leading up to, during and after the sexual assault/rape’ and that
‘[t]he more detail regarding the offender’s behaviour
and what they
did will greatly assist police in how this information is used’.
The Australian Law
Reform Commission (‘ALRC’) notes in its Issues Paper, issued in
association with its inquiry into
justice responses to sexual violence in
Australia, that the range of reasons why victims do not report include: distrust
of and lack
of faith in the police or the justice system; poor responses from
family, friends, carers, or services to an attempted disclosure;
living in a
regional, rural, or remote area; insufficient information about the justice
process and associated support; or fear of
consequences in other aspects of
their lives (such as loss of employment, impact on family, visa status, or
cultural recriminations).
However, the ALRC also expressly acknowledges that
‘some victim survivors do not want to engage in the criminal justice
because they do not want the person responsible for sexual violence to
go to jail’. See Australian Law Reform Commission,
Justice Responses to
Sexual Violence
(Issues Paper No 49, April 2024)
<https://www.alrc.gov.au/wp-content/uploads/2024/04/ALRC-JRSV-Issues-Paper-2024.pdf>.
John Q La Fond and Bruce
J Winick, ‘Sex Offender Reentry Courts: A Cost Effective Proposal for
Managing Sex Offender Risk
in the Community’ (2003) 989(1)
the New York Academy of Sciences
The term AVO is used
here in a general sense and includes similarly named processes and orders in
other jurisdictions, such as Domestic
Violence Orders (‘DVOs’) and
Interpersonal Violence Orders (‘IPVOs’).
This definition is
quoted in Adrian Barton and Nick Johns,
The Policy Making Process in the
Criminal Justice System
(Routledge, 2012) 7: ‘A set of institutions
comprising the legislature, executive, central and local administration,
police and armed forces ... it acts as the institutional system of
political domination and has a monopoly of the legitimate use
NSWLRC Consent
(n 24) 199 [10.32].
High profile survivor
activism and government expenditure on awareness raising are not necessarily
mutually exclusive, as high profile
campaigners for action on sexual violence
intersect with government funded awareness raising in various ways. Chanel
Contos, who
established the Teach Us Consent campaign, was promised $8 million
by the Morrison government for the campaign – it was later
reported the
money did not eventuate. Survivor and activist Grace Tame, as Australian of the
Year, was committed to a range of public
events. The work of Sharna Bremner at
End Rape on Campus Australia led to the establishment of the National Student
Ombudsman which
opened in March 2025.
See, eg, Olivia Cleal,
‘Consent Advocates Praise “Trauma-Informed” Findings from
Justice Michael Lee against Bruce
Women’s Agenda
(online, 16 April 2024)
<https://womensagenda.com.au/latest/consent-advocates-praise-trauma-informed-findings-from-justice-michael-lee-against-bruce-lehrmann/>.
Astrid Birgden,
‘Therapeutic Jurisprudence and Sex Offenders: A Psycho-Legal Approach to
Protection’ (2004) 16(4)
Sexual Abuse: A Journal of Research and
351, 354 <https://doi.org/10.1177/107906320401600407>. On
the language of ‘offenders’, see above n 91.
On distinguishing
restorative and reparative processes, see Kathleen Daly, ‘Reparation and
Restoration’ in Michael Tonry
Oxford Handbook of Crime and
Criminal Justice
(Oxford University Press, 2011) 207. On the Indigenous
origins and co-option of restorative justice, and therefore the need to explore
alternative frameworks in this space, see Juan Tuari, ‘The Plastic Shamans
of Restorative Justice’ in Chris Cunneen et
International Handbook on Decolonizing Justice
(Routledge, 2023) 43.
Malcolm Feeley and
Jonathan Simon, ‘The New Penology: Notes on the Emerging Strategy of
Corrections and Its Implications’
(1992) 30(4)
Criminology
<https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1745-9125.1992.tb01112.x>.
Tabitha Lean, ‘Why
I Am an Abolitionist’,
Overland Literary Journal
(Web Page, 8 June
<https://overland.org.au/2021/06/why-i-am-an-abolitionist/#:~:text=Going%20to%20prison%20is%20like,That%20life>.
Stanley Cohen,
Visions of Social Control: Crime, Punishment and Classification
Press, 1985).
Jonathan Simon and Giane
Silvestre, ‘Governing through Crime’ in Pat Carlen and Leandro Ayres
França (eds),
Alternative Criminologies
(Routledge, 2018) 75.
‘Sexual Assault
Reported to Police’,
Australian Institute of Health and Welfare
(Web Page, 9 December 2024)
<https://www.aihw.gov.au/family-domestic-and-sexual-violence/responses-and-outcomes/police/sexual-assault-reported-to-police>.
At the time of writing,
the BOCSAR website explains its source data as follows: ‘BOCSAR's crime
data consist of criminal incidents
reported to, or detected by, police and
recorded on the NSW Police Force's Computerised Operational Policing System
At the top of the page there is reference to ‘how we count
“crime”’ where the quotation marks around ‘crime’
signal that actual criminal convictions (guilty pleas or verdicts) and what
BOCSAR calls ‘crime data’ or ‘crime
statistics’ are two
very different things. Even before the paragraph disclosing that all
‘crime data’ derives from
police activity reports (COPS), the
website states:
There are a few cautionary notes that are important to know before using
BOCSAR's crime statistics. Irrespective of how trends in
recorded crime are
presented, their interpretation is a difficult task.
Recorded crime statistics for
offence categories
accurately reflect the actual level of crime in the community.
‘Using Crime Statistics’,
NSW Bureau of Crime Statistics and
(Web Page) (emphasis in original)
<https://bocsar.nsw.gov.au/statistics-dashboards/crime-and-policing/using_crime_statistics.html>.
A small-scale media
mentions of the phrase ‘no
findings against [Bruce Lehrmann]’. This
indicates significant re-inscription of presumptive innocence, not as a function
actual innocence or successful defence but deriving from juror misconduct.
There is no single
government website with composite information on the campaign, or not that we
were able to locate. The dates
were gathered from multiple point in time
sources, including advertising industry sites and tender documents. We were
the stages design (and number of for-profit agencies involved) by an
industry report at Mumbrella. See Kalila Welsh, ‘DCJ Launches
Affirmative Consent Education Campaign “Make No Doubt”’,
(online, 27 May 2022)
<https://mumbrella.com.au/dcj-launches-new-affirmative-consent-education-campaign-make-no-doubt-739127>
(‘Mumbrella Make No Doubt’).
As famously (or perhaps
infamously) declared by Barwick CJ in
Watson v Lee
[1979] HCA 53
(1979) 144 CLR 374
379 [5], ‘to bind the citizen by a law, the terms of which he has no means
of knowing, would be a mark of tyranny’.
Unfortunately – and indeed,
by patriarchal design rather than unintended consequence – the criminal
law continues to
extend and re-extend the benefit of doubt to powerful men long
past the point that principles of charity should apply and doubt has
exhausted. A notable sexual assault case in this context is that of Jarryd
Hayne, an Aboriginal man who would normally be subject
to targeted
criminalisation by agents of the law of the colonising power. Hayne had reached
such status that he instead enjoyed the
benefit of doubt normally reserved for
white males, with one jury failing to reach a verdict and two subsequent jury
convictions
overturned on appeal. See
Hayne v The King
[2024] NSWCCA
NSWLRC Consent
(n 24) 194 [10.7].
Ibid 203 [10.42].
Ibid 203 [10.43]. See,
eg, NSW Young Lawyers Criminal Law Committee, Submission No 86 to New South
Wales Law Reform Commission,
Consent in Relation to Sexual Offences
December 2019) 8. See also:
The development and implementation of an extensive evidence-based education
campaign about the drivers of gender-based violence, respectful
relationships
and ethical sexual practice, developed by experts, that challenges rape myths,
male entitlement and victim-blaming
attitudes. This needs to be part of a
comprehensive primary prevention strategy which includes preschools, schools,
tertiary institutions,
workplaces, sporting clubs, media and entertainment.
Significant and ongoing investment is required.
Women’s Legal Service, Submission No 27 to New South Wales Law Reform
Commission,
Consent in Relation to Sexual Offences
(22 February 2019)
NSWLRC Consent
(n 24) 199 [10.32].
This somewhat despairing
call references the now-famous phrase and eponymous essay by Audre Lorde,
‘The Master’s Tools
Will Never Dismantle the Master’s
House’ in Cherríe Moraga and Gloria Anzaldúa (eds),
Bridge Called My Back: Writings by Radical Women of Color
(Third Woman
Press, 1981).
See ‘Stop It at
the Start Campaign’,
National Plan to Reduce Violence against Women and
Their Children
(Web Page, 1 October 2021)
<https://plan4womenssafety.dss.gov.au/initiative/stop-it-at-the-start-campaign/>.
Karen Freeman,
‘Domestic and Family Violence Trends in NSW: July 2010 to June 2022’
(Bureau Brief No 167, NSW Bureau
of Crime Statistics and Research, October 2023)
Barton and Johns (n
Lorde (n 139).
These problems are
persistent and well-established. For recent findings in New South Wales see Law
Enforcement Conduct Commission,
Review of NSW Police Force Responses to
Domestic and Family Violence Incidents
(Report, June 2023) (‘
’). For recent findings in Queensland, see Independent
Commission of Inquiry into Queensland Police Service Responses to Domestic
Family Violence,
A Call for Change
(Report, November 2022) (‘
Call for Change
LECC DV Report
A Call for Change
For a horrific selection
of first-hand accounts of sexual violence in the advertising industry, see Zoe
Scaman, ‘Mad Men.
Furious Women.’,
Musings of a Wandering Mind
(Blog Post, 4 July 2021)
<https://zoescaman.substack.com/p/mad-men-furious-women>.
Kate Fitz-Gibbon et al,
National Plan Victim-Survivor Advocates Consultation
(Final Report,
February 2022); ‘Housing’,
Australian Institute Health and
(Web Page, 25 February 2025)
<https://www.aihw.gov.au/family-domestic-and-sexual-violence/responses-and-outcomes/housing>.
‘Mumbrella Make No
Doubt’ (n 133).
Consent Amendment Act
(n 30) came into force on 1 June 2022. Phase 3 of
#MakeNoDoubt ran for 12 weeks from 25 May 2022: see ‘No Doubt about
Campaign’ (Media Release, 31 October 2022)
<https://dcj.nsw.gov.au/news-and-media/media-releases-archive/2022/no-doubt-about-consent-campaign.html>;
Tasmin Rose, ‘New Affirmative Consent Campaign Tackles Issue Head-On,
Experts Say’,
The Guardian
(online, 25 May 2022)
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2022/may/25/new-affirmative-consent-campaign-tackles-issue-head-on-experts-say>.
Dechlan Brennan,
‘Culturally Safe Support More Important than Ever as Aboriginal
Organisations Promote Indigenous-Led Solutions’,
National Indigenous
(online, 8 July 2024)
<https://nit.com.au/08-07-2024/12417/culturally-safe-support-more-important-than-ever-as-aboriginal-organisations-promote-indigenous-led-solutions>.
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (205 KB)
PDF format (375 KB)
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter