URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/journals/CanLawRw/2022/4.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 14:51:34
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Cripps, Mizcedes --- "How Does Australian Copyright Law Respond To Obscenity In An Era Of Digital Technology?" [2022] CanLawRw 4; (2022) 19(1) Canberra Law Review 52
How Does Australian Copyright Law Respond To Obscenity In
An Era Of Digital Technology?
Mizcedes Cripps*
Does ‘obscenity’ – a capacious concept – preclude
excluding the economic
and moral rights of authors and publishers in a way that might foster copyright
infringement (conventionally
characterised as piracy) alongside signalling the
law’s distaste for particular expression. This article considers the
by Australian copyright law to obscene expression in the era of digital
technology, salient because that technology provides opportunities
creation of heterogenous still images, moving images, audio and text by
individuals and by corporations alongside global
distribution on a mobile to
mobile or social media platform basis. The article discusses the fluid nature of
obscenity and divergent
positions about whether content that is subjectively
offensive or illegal is excluded from copyright protection.
I Introduction
Does obscenity preclude protection under copyright
law, an exclusion that might signal law’s disquiet regarding the obscene
yet potentially offer a charter to entities engaging in large-scale infringement
that would often be characterised as piracy? This
article explores an
under-researched topic. It considers the response of Australian copyright law to
obscene content – i.e.,
images, text and other works that might be
prohibited outright or restricted under for example the
Commonwealth
Classification (Publications, Films and Computer Games) Act 1995
– in the digital environment.
There is a very substantial Australian and overseas literature on the history
of censorship, the characterisation of obscenity and
debate about morality as
the basis of law.
Moreover there is
an increasingly rich theoretical and polemical literature from a wide range of
perspectives, including ‘sex
positive’ feminists, gay writers and
kink advocates who question a hegemony that seeks to delegitimise divergent
practice and
expression in network and other
environments.
However there is very
little literature on the copyright status of obscene content and the
consequences of that status.
Since ancient times, a
wide array of creative people have attained notoriety through sexually explicit,
politically subversive, or
blasphemous works. Some of the most famous directors,
writers, artists and actors in history ‘are known for their sexually
provoking works’.
Those works
have been the focus of historic and contemporary disagreements about law’s
response to eroticism (in some instances
conflating what is erotic with what is
pornographic, in other words requiring restriction or prohibition) and what some
deem offensive
content. One may think of, for example, Goya’s
which was confiscated by the Spanish Inquisition in 1815 because of
its ‘provocative and obscene
Oscar Wilde’s
The Picture of Dorian Gray
and Radcliffe Hall’s
The Well of
Monsieur Dupont
by Paul de Kock, seized by Australian customs officials in 1901 ‘in
the interests of public
and more recently,
the adult movie
Deep Throat
directed by Gerard Damiano in
photographs by Bill
and Andres Serrano’s
Piss Christ
which continues to arouse ‘significant public
controversy’.
Digital communication technology, such as social media, facilitates the
proliferation of ‘obscene, immoral, blasphemous, libellous’
irreligious works;
Broadway musical Avenue Q famously suggesting that the ‘Internet is for
Nowadays young
people and their older peers engage in practices such as sexting and the
production/dissemination of DIY adult content
by consumers, facilitated through
access to the ubiquitous mobile phone and 4G networks – what one reviewer
of this article
dubbed ‘an adult video studio in your pocket’. There
is disagreement about the scale and demographics of the production,
distribution
and consumption of digital content – still/moving images and text –
that Australian law would hold to be
obscene. Statistics are contested and
empirically uncertain.
one frequently repeated estimate is that the ‘online adult entertainment
industry’ generates approximately $100
billion worldwide per
(over ‘3,000
dollars’ being spent every second) and amounts to nearly 30% of all
internet traffic.
Perceptions of what could or should be restricted as obscene – harmful
to viewers of varying sensibilities and resilience –
are subjective. Most
people for example now flock to see a Goya or Hockney nude, do not regard
as sado-masochistic
pornography
and are unfussed
contingent, with Saudi Arabia for example
criminalising some content that
Australian law considers unremarkable (and not criminalising images of
executions that Australia
would ban as ‘extreme violence’) and
Australia revisiting its online content regulation regime ahead of an election
which the major parties are conscious of the dangers of being seen by
religious or other stakeholders to be ‘soft on
Despite the prevalence of obscene material online and outstanding work by
scholars such as Robert Darnton on the archaeology of print
censorship,
scholars have
‘underexplored’ the protection of this ubiquitous but ostensibly
non-conventional subject matter under
this subject matter has ‘lurk[ed] at the fringes’ of the copyright
perceived as less
illustrative of copyright conundrums such as the ‘Napster
It may also reflect
perceptions within the legal academy that copyright scholarship and obscenity
are necessarily worlds apart.
Given that law concerning technology tends to march ‘in the rear and
limping a little’, this article aims to assess if
and how badly Australian
obscenity in an era of digital
technology.
Such an evaluation
appears crucial considering that Internet Service Intermediaries (ISIs), such as
Google, have started acting as
‘gatekeepers’
‘information
a role that
enables them to shape norms, culture and discourse within
communities
on a basis that is
both self-interested and that anticipates the calls for state intervention
evident in documents such as the Australian
Competition & Consumer
Commission’s
Digital Platforms
report. Notably, this raises
questions about the normative responsibility of ISIs in identifying and taking
down obscene works, which
will not be the focus of this article.
Firstly, this article provides a brief discussion of copyright law, including
the criteria for subsistence, legislative history, and
the philosophical
justifications. The discussion is deepened by an examination of the definition
of “obscenity” in relation
to copyright. Secondly, this article
compares United States (US) and European copyright law approaches to obscene
works. In so doing,
it considers the impact that differing philosophical
justifications for copyright protection, and a constitutionally-enshrined right
to freedom of expression – which Australia
– has on censorship.
Finally, this article critically examines the adequacy of Australian copyright
law when applied to obscenity,
particularly in an era of digital technology, in
light of the prior discussion concerning the US and European approaches to
Importantly, the article’s scope is limited to obscene works that are
available on open digital networks – for example
on blogs, web-based fan
sites, digital platforms such as Twitter and YouTube and relationship services
such as Grindr – rather
than illegal works on the ‘dark web’.
Access to the dark web generally requires an explicit invitation to access the
content or join a community, and the use of specific
The effect of digital communication technology on legal and policy frameworks
has often been exaggerated. Notably, for some commentators
in the 1980s and
early 1990s, the rise of digital communication technology ‘presaged an
end’ to intellectual property
(IP) and indeed to the
Most famously, Barlow
argued that copyright, being founded on the control of physical reproductions
and enforcement by public/private
actors within a state-based legal system, was
simply extraneous online, where the technology was designed to undo control and
was transmitted was ‘liquid’; existing ‘either as pure
thought or something very much like
Today, Barlow’s cyber-libertarian opinions seem archaic
Lessig highlighting that technology is flexible and can be used – or
required by law – to regulate or prevent copying
and to ‘reimpose
that the internet
appeared to
Furthermore, as Zittrain has contended, consumers may ‘actively seek
out’ more ‘controlled’ technology if
dependable.
Aspects of Barlow’s reasoning hold, in that digital communication
technology has had ‘far-reaching’ consequences
for IP law, and
specifically copyright.
the subject matters of intellectual property rights (IPRs) are
intangible,
IP rules are
‘grounded in real-world
For example,
patent law grants rights in inventions,
understood as an
‘artificially created state[s] of
ascertained through their ‘effect’ in the real
author’s expression fixed in a tangible medium, such as
a painting,
photograph, video or
The protection
is concerned with sufficient originality, rather than artistic merit. As noted
above, at various times and in different
have been deemed obscene and thus for example properly confiscated and destroyed
by agents of
the state alongside punishment of the author, publisher, consumers
and intermediaries.
following section
provides an overview of copyright law,
including the philosophical justifications, legislative history, and the
criterion for subsistence
of copyright.
A Copyright Law – A Brief Overview
of ‘works’,
ranging from books,
computer programs,
catalogues,
television broadcasts
sound recordings.
Berne Convention for the Protection of Literary and Artistic Works
Berne Convention
’), alongside the global TRIPS
agreement under the auspices of the World Trade Organization, provides
underlying framework for
Berne Convention,
works’ and ‘subject-matter other than works’ automatically,
arising upon creation;
‘conditioned upon fulfillment of
formalities’,
registration or publication.
Unlike industrial IP, such as trade
there are no
requirement concerning the decency or morality of copyrightable
However, the
provides members with ‘considerable flexibility to define
which situations are covered, depending upon their own conception
protection of public
Countries are
allowed to impose additional requirements, such as public interest
considerations,
as copyright is
a creature of domestic statute, and is accordingly
territorial.
Generally, the requirements for copyright subsistence are: that a work is
‘reduced to writing or some other material
as opposed to
‘information;’
the form is a recognised subject
and that there has been
an expenditure of intellectual
‘judgement’.
common law countries only confer copyright protection to original authored
works. Originality became a criterion for subsistence
(UK) and the
(Cth), the precursors of
Australia’s much amended
Under British copyright law, a ‘work must not be copied from another
work ... it should originate from the
Similarly, in
Australia, the threshold of originality is
The work does not need to
be inventive,
‘literary merit’
have any artistic value;
however, it ‘cannot be essentially dictated by the nature of the
information.’
The work, or
subject matter other than a work, must also be sufficiently connected to
Moreover the
requirements for copyright protection vary according to the type of
‘subject matter’
also differ depending on whether the work is ‘published’ or
unpublished.
Under US copyright law, there must be a ‘modicum of
creativity’,
‘originality’ is a constitutional
requirement.
In contrast, many
European civil law countries do not explicitly utilise the term
“original” within their legislation,
opting for a range of phrases,
which include ‘personal intellectual creations’ (Germany); and
‘works of the mind’
Although copyright statutes generally reflect international treaties and
agreements, such as the
Berne Convention
, there are a number of
differences between common law and civil law countries. These differences are
often due to varying philosophical
approaches to the matter. Although the
arguments used to justify copyright protection have taken many forms, they can
into two general types of philosophical approaches.
The first, which is most commonly used in common law countries, such as
comes under the
general label of utilitarian-based arguments, which focus on promoting the
creation, production, and dissemination
Importantly,
utilitarian-based arguments for copyright protection can be traced back to the
enactment of the first English copyright
legislation: the
Statute of Anne
(8 Anne, c 19) of 1709;
which is ‘the significant forebear of United Kingdom, and, therefore,
Australian copyright
legislation’.
The second set of arguments, which are often categorised as natural rights
arguments, see the ‘foundation of the rights of an
author in the very
nature of things.’
set of arguments has ‘never been particularly fashionable’ in common
law jurisdictions
and is at odds
with the hegemony evident in the TRIPS Agreement and emerging
bilateral/multilateral Free Trade Agreements such as
the contentious
TransPacific Partnership Agreement.
In most jurisdictions, copyright confers exclusive positive intellectual
(IPR) for varying periods
‘original’ creative
and “makers”
of other ‘subject
These IPR may be
‘described as proprietary in
character’,
having been
conceptualised as a ‘bundle of rights’, obligations, and
responsibilities,
including: the
right to exclude others; the rights of possession, use, and enjoyment; and the
right of transfer.
Authors can
for example be commissioned by a publisher, licence to a distributor or sell
their proprietorial rights to a commercial
entity, illustrated over the past
year by private equity groups paying hundreds of millions of dollars to buying
the catalogues of
music figures such as David Bowie.
and moral rights,
‘well established in European
In Australia, only
authors who are ‘individual human
beneficiaries of moral rights,
being: the ‘right to attribution of
authorship’,
‘right of integrity of
authorship’,
‘right not to have authorship of the work falsely
attributed.’.
Australian moral rights have been the subject of ongoing criticism; with
Weatherall arguing they are of little value for
most authors, having ‘been
hedged about with so many limitations ... that they became ‘pretend-y
Given that a depiction of sexual activity and what is sometimes dubbed as
sexualised image may be sufficiently original and fixed
to meet the above
requirements for protection both economic rights owners and holders of moral
rights have an interest in whether
deeming a work to be obscene precludes
The following section provides an explanation of “obscenity” in
relation to copyright, and highlights a lingering uncertainty.
Obscenity: The Lingering Uncertainty
Historically, the term obscenity has not been defined.
In the early modern period the
piracy of text and graphic content (printed and retailed surreptitiously,
primarily to elite markets
rather than the lower classes) appears to have been
common, with rights owners not going to court to enforce their rights regarding
infringement. That non-assertion of rights was unsurprising, given that the
creation, distribution and possession by consumers of
particular content was
addressed under common law as ‘offensive’ expression (a criminal
offence that was not restricted
to what we now conceptualise as pornography) or
‘disturbance of the peace’ and might have also been addressed under
law such the 1534
Notably it has been
suggested that conviction of Pope’s adversary Edmund Curll in 1727 for
Venus in the Cloister
introduced a specific notion of
obscenity as an obscene
Lord Eldon in
Walcot v. Walker
ruled that where a work was ‘of
such a nature’ that it was immoral, obscene, blasphemous, libellous or
seditious (and
as such contrary to law) the author could maintain ‘no
action at law’ regarding contract, copyright or other
Lord Eldon similarly denied Robert Southey an injunction against
the pirate of his work, on the basis that the work was immoral,
‘calculated to do injury to the public’ and thus not attracting
A common law test of obscenity was developed in
increasing state capacity
In that matter, Cockburn CJ stated that the
test of obscenity is
whether the tendency of the matter charged as obscenity is to deprave and
corrupt those whose minds are open to such immoral influences,
and into whose
hands a publication of this sort may
Despite being widely
test was not immune to criticism, with Bok J arguing that
strictly applied, this rule renders any book unsafe, since a moron could
pervert to some sexual fantasy to which his mind is open
the listings in a seed
catalogue. Not even the Bible would be
Importantly, the term obscenity was not restricted to sexually explicit
Instead, it
encompassed all works which went against ‘community
As a result
obscene works have included manifestations of hate speech,
pornography,
violent material,
sedition of
law enforcement, lese-majesty and depictions of drug
Presently, a definition of obscenity remains
in fact ‘may be
indefinable’.
Boyce suggest that obscenity is best treated as a placeholder ‘for
contested meaning’, and hence, should always
be regarded ‘as if
there were quotation marks around’
Although there have been
numerous attempts to define
a subjective test
I shall not today attempt further to define the kinds of material I
understand to be embraced ... and perhaps I could never succeed
in intelligibly
doing so. But I know it when I see
Notably, in Australia, the absence of a wholly satisfactory judicial and or
regulatory definition of obscenity has resulted in ‘a
particularly
disjointed and fractured [enforcement]
arrangement’.
this is because there is a complex network of ‘parallel and sometimes
overlapping’
Commonwealth, state, and territory classification systems, which are intended to
prevent the publication and dissemination of obscene
Historically that
meant the Commonwealth (consistent with the Customs and Telecommunication powers
Constitution
) addressed distribution on a non-exclusive basis, with
different states/territories having rules that their peers regarded as more/less
liberal and idiosyncratic. Moreover, as part of that disjointed regime the
‘tribunal of fact’ is left to decide whether
often leading to
‘inconsistent’
In deciding whether a work was obscene, courts have considered the intended
availability,
‘literary or artistic merit’ of the
Judicially, it is the
potential effect of the work ‘on its likely audience that matters’;
the work in question should
not be ‘judged against the society as a whole
...unless they are part of the likely
Courts have also distinguished between works ‘kept in proper custody
and under responsible control’, compared to works
that have been widely
disseminated, determining that such works ‘which, however unsuitable for
indiscriminate distribution
to the curious adolescent, are perfectly appropriate
for study by the serious
Importantly,
Finkelstein J argues that ‘a judge is not well suited to the task’
of deciding whether a work is obscene
and, as often as not, will reach the wrong
result ... [h]ere, in Australia there have been many ill-considered
decisions’.
Do the US and European copyright law approaches to obscenity offer insights
relevant for copyright, noting that recognition as a copyright
work does not
mean an obscene expression is necessarily protected from action under censorship
or other law that might result in
punishment of the copyright holder?
III Legal Responses Applicable to Obscenity
In most countries, copyright law does not require copyrightable works not to
be indecent or immoral, though some jurisdictions may
restrict the
enforceability of copyright in specific
circumstances.
As previously
noted, international copyright
do not specifically
exclude indecent or immoral works from protection,
Consequently, in many jurisdictions, copyright protection is considered to be
‘content neutral’; obscene works are treated
like any other creative
In part, this is
because the right to freedom of expression seems to be in conflict with
content-based restrictions on
the following paragraphs seek to address whether a sufficiently original obscene
works could be denied copyright protection
on public policy grounds. In doing
so, this article focuses on comparing the United Kingdom (UK), US, French, and
German copyright
approaches.
Obscenity: The United States and European Approaches
As noted above, copyright law is a ‘common law’ concept, which
originated in the UK.
contemporary UK copyright law (ie statute), obscene works are not formally
precluded from copyright
protection,
although the case
law concerning the status of pornography remains
Glyn v Weston Feature Film Company
, for example, the court
incidentally acknowledged that obscene works could be protected, despite
eventually refusing to grant an
injunction for copyright infringement in the
plaintiff’s dramatic work because the ‘episode described in the
plaintiff’s
novel, and which she alleges has been pirated by the
defendants, is in my opinion grossly immoral in its essence, in its treatment,
and in its tendency’.
Recently, in
Hyde Park v Yelland
, the court recognised that ‘in
principle public policy can prevent copyright enforcement completely’,
acknowledging that
UK courts still have the power to ‘override’
was cited and contrasted in the Full Federal Court’s 2006
judgment in
Venus Adult Shops v Fraserside
, with Finkelstein J
The true basis for denying protection to obscene works is not clear. One
possibility is that there can be no copyright in an obscene
work. Another is
that there is copyright but the court will not lend its assistance to the owner
because of the nature of the work,
that is the court will not interfere on
public policy grounds. This latter approach is well and good in a case where the
being asked to grant discretionary relief, for example, an injunction
or an account of profits. It is an oft stated principle that
when a plaintiff
seeks equitable relief he must have clean hands. ...
Glyn v Weston Feature Film Company
[1916] 1 Ch 261
refused protection to a novel which advocated free love and justified adultery.
It is not clear whether he founded his
decision in the absence of copyright or
whether he simply refused to allow copyright to be enforced on the basis that
the novel was
"of a tendency so grossly immoral". There are passages in his
judgment which support each position.
Finally, so far as the English cases are concerned, in
Hyde Park Residence
Ltd v Yelland (CA)
[2001] Ch 143
, Aldous LJ suggested that the rule could be
justified on the basis that courts have an inherent jurisdiction to refuse to
allow their
processes to be used in certain circumstances. He noted (at 160),
that "the courts will not give effect to contracts which are, for
illegal, immoral or prejudicial to family life because they offend against the
policy of the law". He then referred to s
171(3) of the
(UK) which provides that: "Nothing in this Part affects any rule of law
preventing or restricting the enforcement of copyright, on
grounds of public
policy or otherwise." He said this made it clear that the jurisdiction to
decline hearing a case could be exercised
in a copyright case. The Australian
Where does this leave us? For my own part, I do not accept that there is no
in the Copyright
Act. In my opinion the court does not have power to create the exception. I am
prepared to assume, in conformity
with the early cases, that, in some
circumstances, public policy may require a court to deny to a pornographer the
relief that Parliament
has provided to all copyright owners, but then only when
the relief is discretionary. Even so, prima facie at least, the owner is
entitled to discretionary relief, for example, an injunction to restrain the
unauthorised publication of his work. The pornographic
nature of the work will
be of relevance in a claim for damages only when it is illegal to sell the work.
If an author cannot sell
his work he cannot suffer damage.
I take this approach because, to my mind, there are insurmountable
difficulties standing in the way of denying copyright or copyright
protection to
works that may be regarded as obscene or pornographic. For one thing there is no
satisfactory definition of what is
obscene or pornographic. The inquiry will
inevitably involve both moral and political considerations. The inquiry will be
complicated
because the question will often depend upon the audience which the
publication is likely to reach. If Parliament requires such an
issue to be
considered by a judge then, of course, the judge must consider it. But, in
truth, a judge is not well suited to the task
and, as often as not, will reach
the wrong result.
A similar approach has been adopted in the US, in that obscene works are not
formally precluded from copyright
protection.
There are three
other similarities concerning copyright in obscene works.
Firstly, both the UK Parliament in
and the authors of the
Constitution
recognised ‘the desirability of enhancing the public welfare by granting
to authors an exclusive right, though limited in duration,
to enjoy commercial
exploitation of their published
creations.’
both in the UK and the US this right has been conferred by
Thirdly, both
countries have historically denied the benefits of copyright protection to the
authors of obscene,
misleading,
blasphemous,
libellous and irreligious
immoral works,
which neither
the common law nor equity would protect, regardless of the provisions of those
Importantly, the
contemporary US copyright law approach does differ from the UK.
Under US copyright law, obscene works may be registered with the Copyright
Office; registration is a precondition ‘for enforcing
Notably, there are two seminal cases that support this view. The first is
Mitchell Bros
, where the copyright owners of a porn movie sued two groups
of defendants for obtaining and exhibiting copies of the plaintiff’s
Behind the Green
The second case is
Jartech, Inc v Clancy
, where the defendant made ‘abbreviated
copies’ of the plaintiff’s obscene movies, and reproduced images
within a book.
cases rejected the argument that obscenity could be a defence to copyright
infringement.
The Fifth Circuit in
Mitchell Bros
found that:
There is not even a hint in the language [of the Copyright Act] that the
obscene nature of a work renders it any less a copyrightable
“writing”. There is no other statutory language from which it can be
inferred that Congress intended that obscene material
could not be copyrighted.
Moreover, ... the history of content-based restrictions... suggests that the
absence of such limitations
in the Copyright Act of 1909 is the result of an
intentional policy choice and not simply an
In the US, unlike the UK, the prevailing view is that ‘even illegality
is not a bar to copyrightability;’ this view arises
from a greater focus
on balancing the need to protect society from obscenity against potential
encroachment on constitutional
In specific,
content-based restrictions are generally held to be ‘contrary to the First
Amendment’,
consequently, are limited to a small set of historically dependent categories,
including fraud.
civil law countries, such as France and Germany, are even more dissimilar to the
The French and UK copyright law approaches are ‘well known’
The product of the
French Revolution, French copyright law arose from a quite different tradition,
whereupon: ‘the most sacred
and legitimate, the most unchallengeable and
personal of all the properties is the oeuvre, the fruits of a writer's
The outcome
was a legal framework in which:
the author, a real person, has intellectual rights [in the work] and in
consequence is sovereign in deciding its expression, disposition
distribution. Authors further have “moral rights”, to protect their
good name, their reputation and their works;
the fact that these things are
integral to the act of creation justifies these rights being
“perpetual” and
“inalienable”.
Therefore, in the French tradition, author’s rights are personal
rights, which is treated as a ‘natural right growing
out of natural
By contrast, the
common law tradition can be summarised by the opening words of the UK copyright
act: ‘Copyright is a property
In a recent
case in France, the Tribunal de Grande Instance de Lyon (Tribunal) affirmed that
obscene works can be characterised by
the personality of the director and of the
author, and consequently, would be individualised enough to benefit from
Although the case was decided on trade mark infringement and unfair
competition grounds, the Tribunal had the opportunity to clarify
the conditions
under which a pornographic movie would attract copyright
protection.
Notably, the
defendant argued that the movies – being of a pornographic nature –
were precluded from copyright
protection.
The Tribunal
rejected the defendant’s argument, highlighting that pornographic works
are ‘based largely on scenes of
fornication between individuals ... in
various places ... However, the choices that underlie a movie, the conception
and the design
of such work can be original and, as such, be protected under
Despite originating from the French tradition, Germany has adopted a similar
approach to the UK, in that pornographic works that depict
intercourse in a primitive way’ are not entitled to copyright protection,
as they do not appear to be a ‘personal
intellectual
The following section critically examines the Australian copyright law
approach to obscenity.
IV The Australian Approach
Assuming that the criterion for subsistence of copyright are
Australia has
forcefully ‘repudiated’ content-based restrictions for
industrial IP, such as trade
public interest and
morality must be considered when deciding to grant the relevant monopoly.
However, under the
there are no provisions which impose a
public interest or morality test for copyrightability.
Venus Adult Shops v Fraserside Holdings Ltd,
the court highlighted
that there is no ‘public interest defence’ to copyright infringement
in Australia.
In that case,
the court held that ‘there is no legislative or other warrant for the
introduction of such a concept into the
law of this
Moreover, the
court unequivocally repudiated content-based restrictions on
basis under existing Australian copyright law for a finding that copyright does
not subsist because the content of the
relevant work or subject matter offends
against community values or
standards.’
The repudiation of the UK copyright law approach was unequivocal:
‘there is no basis for a conclusion that the scope of copyright
is qualified by a reference to community standards and the content of the
As noted above, the
concurrence by Finkelstein J was just as forceful, with a full rejection of the
notion that copyright cannot
attach itself to a pornographic work, and further
dismissal of the idea that courts have the power to create such policy-based
categories.
Australian courts have instead adopted an
approach similar to the US – where courts have consistently held that
‘illegality
is not a bar to
– in which limited remedies are available to copyright owners, to
‘leave the parties as they find
For example an
injunction might be granted for copyright infringement in Australia. However,
the damages available to the plaintiff
would be reduced if ‘there is no
market value’ for the obscene
not precluding obscenity from copyright protection.
Importantly these critics
advance three main arguments.
Firstly, scholars, such as Bartow, argue that copyright owners of obscene
works ‘frequently’ engage in copyright
As previously
noted, utilitarian-based copyright law is designed to ‘create incentives
for creative effort’.
Conversely, copyright law also creates an incentive for copyright trolling:
‘a latent financial incentive for entrepreneurs
to monetise a protected
work that is being allegedly infringed by engaging in large-scale litigation,
even when the harm experienced
by the rights holder is
‘Trolling’ is not isolated to obscene works or copyright law;
rather, it is a widespread IP
– while similar to their other IP counterparts, patent trolls – are
the product of two unique features
of copyright law.
The first feature is the incentive created by statutory damages, the second
is the joinder of claims and
Many of the cases
involving copyright trolls feature an additional ingredient – pornography.
Sag and Haskell argue that the
extravagant threat of statutory damages plus
exorbitant legal costs, combined with the embarrassment of being accused of
downloading
obscene material, enable copyright trolls to ‘leverage
settlements from the guilty and the innocent
The issue of
misuse, and is in need of change. However,
courts have the capacity ‘to
stop this occurrence’.
For example, courts can sever mass copyright infringement lawsuits, therefore
assuaging some procedural obstacles for defendants
and ‘ensuring that
plaintiffs are not unfairly taking advantage of the judicial process’ for
Secondly, Dworkin argued that courts should ‘intervene to prevent the
author or copyright holder from enforcing or exercising
those rights
fully’ on grounds of public
namely, to protect
the ‘susceptible’ public from ‘dangerous and unacceptable
argument reflects the rationale for copyright, in that IPR will be conferred on
every creative work, or subject matter
other than a work, from the time of its
creation. From practical perspective, if an obscene bereft of copyright
protection, the public
interest is more likely to be harmed than protected, as
the obscene work could be disseminated without any risk of copyright
infringement
and other parties could replicate the work without
restriction.
This would ultimately undermine the reason why copyright protection was denied
in the first instance, which was to protect the public
“unacceptable and dangerous
Thirdly, there is a prevailing view that the withholding of copyright
protection from obscene works would ‘reduce the incentives
creation and
distribution’.
According to the economic theory behind copyright protection, authors of works
who do not receive copyright protection will be de-incentivised,
underproduce creative works.
Notably, this argument fails to recognise the new economic reality of digital
technology, and ‘altruistic’ motivations
for content creation and
In an era of digital technology, widespread content dissemination provides
its own economic incentives, as the most successful creators
are able to
incentivise ‘the creation of entire
ecosystems.’
Online content creators are able to ‘generate profit’ through
distribution of content, whether legal or illegal, can ‘potentially
generate awareness and attract
online content creators are able establish a ‘personal brand’
through pay-per-view performances on Only Fans,
or through crowdfunding
websites, such as Patreon.
Here, the control based ‘bundle of rights’ granted by copyright
protection are rendered
irrelevant.
Whereas, moral
rights and personality rights, which have been treated with
‘paucity’ in Australia, are
For some creators, the ability to disseminate what others construe as obscene
works is an important aspect of ‘creating social
transformation’ and
converting new users to their social or political
For example,
empirical research into user generated pornographic works suggests one major
motivation behind user generated works
is to create and engage in
‘close-knit
communities’.
Unfortunately, Australian copyright law – as distinct from for example the
2022 e-safety regime – has largely failed
to respond to obscenity in an
era of digital technology, and instead, continues to pursue a system of
monolithic rights protection,
referred to as a ‘one-size-fits-all’
The ‘one-size-fits-all’ approach made sense when the number of
works protected was limited to a one category, being printed
Today, however,
‘creative production continues to be protected under uniform and solid
entitlements, even though the scope
of protectable subject matter has been
extended to many different categories of
The current
approach assumes that all authors, owners, intermediaries and users share
similar characteristics and motivations, ultimately
creating costs of both under
and over protection of obscene
Conferring legal rights to copyright owners ‘involves a cost to
society’, including ‘the increased cost of “inputs”
the creative process as well as the opportunity cost of the investment in the
creation of new works.’
Moreover, the absence of appropriate copyright protection may not affect the
amount being invested in the production of obscene works,
‘but rather the
kind of content
Intriguingly, this effect is not necessarily a negative one; with Oliar and
Sprigman arguing that ‘the shift in the nature
of content’ being
produced cannot be easily assessed in terms of what type of investment is more
socially desirable.
V Conclusion
Firstly, this article provided a brief overview of copyright law, which
proceeded by a comprehensive explanation of the definition
“obscenity” in relation to copyright. Secondly, this article
compared the US and European copyright law approaches,
including the UK, France,
and Germany, to obscene works. Finally, this article critically examined the
adequacy of Australian copyright
law when applied to obscenity, particularly in
an era of digital technology, in light of the prior discussion concerning the US
European approaches to copyright law. Australian copyright law is marching
‘in the rear and limping a little’, in its
response to obscenity in
an era of digital technology;
with the current ‘one-size-fits-all’ approach creating costs of both
under and over protection of obscene
Presently, Australian
enough” to spur the optimal degree
creativity.’
* BAIS, LLB (University of Canberra).
For examples, see Edward de Grazia,
Girls Lean Back
Everywhere: The Law of Obscenity and the Assault on Genius
(Knopf, 1992);
Nicole Moore,
The Censor's Library, Uncovering the Lost History of
Australia's Banned Books
(University of Queensland Press, 2012); and H L A
Law, Liberty and Morality
(Stanford University Press, 1963).
Points of entry to the
literature include Elisa Glick, ‘Sex positive: Feminism, queer theory, and
the politics of transgression’
(2000) 64(1)
Feminist Review
Jessica Joy Cameron,
Reconsidering radical feminism: Affect and the politics
of heterosexuality
(UBC Press, 2018); Laura Kipnis,
Bound and gagged
(Duke University Press, 1998); Margo Kaplan, ‘Sex-positive law’
(2014) 89(1)
New York University Law Review
; and Theodore Bennett,
‘“Unorthodox Rules”: The Instructive Potential of BDSM Consent
for Law’ (2018) 4(1)
Journal of Positive Sexuality
Enrico Bonadio and Nicola
Lucchi (eds),
Non-Conventional Copyright: Do New and Atypical Works Deserve
Protection?
(Edward Elgar, 2018).
Janis Tomlinson, ‘Burn
It, Hide It, Flaunt It: Goya’s Majas and the Censorial Mind’ (1991)
Art Journal
See Simon Stern,
‘Wilde’s Obscenity Effect: Influence and Immorality in the Picture
of Dorian Gray’ (2017) 68(286)
The Review of English Studies
and Leigh Gilmore, ‘Obscenity, Modernity, Identity: Legalizing “The
Well of Loneliness” and “Nightwood”’
(1994) 4(4)
Journal of the History of Sexuality
Patrick Mullins,
of Portnoy: How Penguin Brought Down Australia’s Censorship System
(Scribe, 2020) 6. See also Deana Heath,
Purifying Empire: Obscenity and the
Politics of Moral Regulation in Britain, India and Australia
University Press, 2010) 118.
See Vincent Barnett,
‘“The most profitable film ever made”: Deep Throat (1972),
organized crime, and the $600 million
gross’ (2018) 5(2)
Porn Studies
131; and Jon Lewis,
Hollywood v. Hard Core: How the Struggle over
Censorship saved the Modern Film Industry
(New York University Press, 2002).
David Marr,
(Text Publishing, 2008).
See Bede Harris, ‘Pell v
Council of Trustees of the National Gallery of Victoria: Should Blasphemy Be a
Crime – The “Piss
Christ” Case and Freedom of
Expression’
[1998] MelbULawRw 9
(1998) 22(1)
Melbourne University Law Review
Angelique Chrisafis, ‘Attack on “blasphemous” art work fires
debate on role of religion in France’,
(online, 19 April
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2011/apr/18/andres-serrano-piss-christ-destroyed-christian-protesters>;
and Daniel Ray, ‘How 20
-Century Artists Rescued the
Crucifixion’,
The Spectator
(online, 27 March 2021)
<https://spectator.com.au/2021/03/cross-purposes-3/>.
Venus Adult Shops Pty Ltd
v Fraserside Holdings Ltd
[2006] FCAFC 188
, [81] (French and Kiefel JJ)
Venus Adults Shops Pty Ltd v Fraserside Holdings Ltd
also Kate Darling, ‘IP Without IP? A Study of the Online Adult
Entertainment Industry’
Stanford Technology Law Review
Tim Harford, ‘Does
Pornography still drive the internet?’,
(online, 5 June
2019) <https://www.bbc.com/news/business-48283409>.
Mark Ward, ‘Web porn:
Just how much porn is there?’,
(online, 1 July 2013)
<https://www.bbc.com/news/technology-23030090>.
Piet Bakker and Sara Taalas,
‘The Irresistible Rise of Porn: The Untold Story of a Global
Industry’ (2007) 1(1)
Observatorio
99. See also Chris Morris,
'Things are looking up in America’s Porn Industry’,
(online, 21 January 2015)
<https://www.nbcnews.com/business/business-news/things-are-looking-americas-porn-industry-n289431>
Bonadio and Lucchi (n 3)
Shân Short,
‘Come Again? Bernini's St Teresa as a Site/Sight for the Writing of Male
Desire’ (1989) 8(1)
Australian Journal of Art
78; and Donald
Posner, ‘Caravaggio's homo-erotic early works’ (1971) 34(3)
Bruce Baer Arnold,
‘Safe, but for whom? Commonwealth e-safety changes’
Robert Darnton,
Forbidden Best-Sellers of Pre-Revolutionary France
(Norton, 1995); and James
A Steintrager, ‘What Happened to The Porn in Pornography? Rétif,
Regulating Prostitution, and
The History of Dirty Books’ (2006) 60(3)
Symposium: A Quarterly Journal in Modern Literatures
‘Foreword’ in Enrico Bonadio and Nicola Lucchi (eds),
Non-Conventional Copyright: Do New and Atypical Works Deserve Protection?
(Edward Elgar, 2018) xi, xi. See also Steven Brown, ‘Porn piracy: an
overlooked phenomenon in need of academic investigation’
(2014) 1(3)
Porn Studies
Suzor Nicolas,
‘Free-Riding, Cooperation, and Peaceful Revolutions in Copyright’
Harvard Journal of Law & Technology
; Lee Marshall,
‘Metallica and Morality: The Rhetorical Battleground of the Napster
Wars’ (2002) 1(1)
Entertainment Law
1; Darren Palmer and Ian J
Warren, ‘Global policing and the case of Kim Dotcom’ (2013) 2(3)
International Journal for Crime, Justice and Social Democracy
Mount Isa Mines Ltd v
[1970] HCA 60
(1970) 125 CLR 383
, 395 (Windeyer J) (‘
Mount Isa Mines Ltd v
’). See also Michael Kirby, ‘The Fundamental Problem of
Regulating Technology’ (Speech, Conference on the Ethical
Governance of
Information & Communications Technology and the Role of Professional Bodies,
1 May 2008).
See Laura Rengifo,
‘Internet Intermediaries Liability: Participative Networking Platforms and
Harmful Content’ (Research
Paper, University of Wellington, 2016) 4
<https://researcharchive.vuw.ac.nz/xmlui/bitstream/handle/10063/5225/paper.pdf?sequence=1>;
and Nicolas Suzor,
Lawless: The Secret Rules That Govern Our Digital Lives
(Cambridge University Press, 2019) 90. Cf Nicolas Suzor, Bryony Seignior and
Jennifer Singleton, ‘Non-consensual Porn and the
Responsibilities of
Online Intermediaries’
[2017] MelbULawRw 16
(2017) 40(3)
Melbourne University Law Review
David Bollier, ‘Why We
Must Talk about the Information Commons’
(2001) 96(2)
Law Library
, 276. See also Lawrence Lessig, ‘The Creative
(2001) 65(1)
Montana Law Review
See Marcelo Thompson,
‘Beyond Gatekeeping: The Normative Responsibility of Internet
Intermediaries’ (2016) 18(4)
Vanderbilt Journal of Entertainment &
Technology Law
783; and Noah Tsika, ‘Blue transfusions: internet porn
and the pirating of queer cinema’s sex scenes’ (2017) 4(2)
Nationwide News Pty
Ltd v Wills
[1992] HCA 46
(1992) 177 CLR 1
Australian Capital Television Pty Ltd v The
Commonwealth
[1992] HCA 45
(1992) 177 CLR 106
Unions NSW v New South Wales
(2013) 252 CLR 530.
Robert Gehl,
‘Power/freedom on the dark web: A digital ethnography of the Dark Web
Social Network’ (2016) 18(7)
New Media and Society
1219; Gabriel
Weimann, ‘Going Dark: Terrorism on the Dark Web’ (2016) 39(3)
Studies in Conflict & Terrorism
195; and Jani McCutcheon and Jordan
Leahy, ‘Illegal Copyright Works and the Remedial Discretion of the
Court’ (2019) 9(3)
Queen Mary Journal of Intellectual Property
Kimberlee Weatherall,
‘IP in a Changing Information Environment’ in Kathy Bowrey, Michael
Handler and Dianne Nicol (eds),
Emerging Challenges in Intellectual Property
(Oxford University Press, 2011) 1, 3 (‘
John Barlow, ‘The
Economy of Ideas’,
(online, 3 January 1994)
<https://www.wired.com/1994/03/economy-ideas/>. See also David Johnson and
David Post, ‘Law and
Borders: The Rise of Law in Cyberspace’
Stanford Law Review
; and Siva Vaidhyanathan,
Copywrong: The Rise of Intellectual Property and How it Threatens Creativity
(New York University Press, 2001).
Lawrence Lessig,
Other Laws of Cyberspace, Version 2.0
(Basic Books, 2
Jack Goldsmith and Tim Wu,
Who Control the Internet? Illusions of a Borderless World
University Press, 2006) 52.
Jonathan Zittrain,
Future of The Internet and How to Stop It
(Yale University Press, 2008) 106,
Mary Neilsen,
‘Copyright in the Digital World’ (Brief, Parliamentary Library,
Parliament of Australia, 2013)
<https://www.aph.gov.au/About_Parliament/Parliamentary_Departments/Parliamentary_Library/pubs/BriefingBook44p/Copyright>.
In re Dickens;
Dickens v Hawksley
[1935] Ch 267.
Weatherall,
Grant v Commissioner of
[2006] FCAFC 120
International Business
Machines Corporation v Commissioner of Patents
[1991] FCA 625
(1991) 33 FCR 218
(Burchett J). See also
Welcome Real-Time SA v Catuity Inc
[2001] FCA 445.
Merchandising
Corporation of America v Harpond
[1983] FSR 32
Greenfield Products
Pty Ltd v Rover-Scott Bonnar
(1990) 17 IPR 417.
See Brad Sherman,
‘What Is a Copyright Work?’ (2011) 12(1)
Theoretical Inquiries in
99. See also Xiyin Tang, ‘Copyright and the expanded field: on
land art and other new mediums’ in Enrico Bonadio and Nicola
Lucchi (eds),
Non-Conventional Copyright: Do New and Atypical Works Deserve Protection?
(Edward Elgar, 2018) 23; and
Desktop Marketing Systems Pty Ltd v Telstra
Corporation Ltd
(2002) 55 IPR 1, 42 (Lindgren J) (‘
Marketing Case
University of London
Press Ltd v University Tutorial Press Ltd
[1916] 2 Ch 601
University of London Press Ltd
JR Consulting & Drafting Pty Ltd v
[2016] FCAFC 20.
Apple Computer Inc v Computer Edge Pty Ltd
(1983) ATPR 40.
A-One Accessory
Imports Pty Ltd v Off Road Imports Pty Ltd
(1996) 34 IPR 306.
Sawkins v Hyperion
Records Ltd
[2005] EWCA Civ 565
(2005) 64 IPR 627.
Galaxy Electronics
Pty Ltd v Sega Enterprises Ltd
(1997) 75 FCR 8.
Network Ten Pty Ltd v
TCN Channel Nine Pty Ltd
[2004] HCA 14
(2004) 218 CLR 273.
CBS Records Australia
Ltd v Telmak Teleproducts (Aust) Pty Ltd
(198) 17 FCB 48.
Berne Convention for the
Protection of Literary and Artistic Works
, signed 9 September
(entered into force 5 December 1887) (‘
Ibid arts 2-3, 5. See also
Dev Gangjee,
‘Copyright formalities: A return to registration?’ in Rebecca Giblin
and Kimberlee Weatherall (eds),
What if we could reimagine copyright?
(ANU Press, 2017) 213, 213.
Trade Marks Act 1995
Patents Act 1990
Designs Act 2003
Cosmetic, Toiletry and Fragrance Association Foundation v Fanni Barns Pty Ltd
(2003) 57 IPR 594.
Marrakesh Agreement
Establishing the World Trade Organization
, opened for signature 15 April
1994, 1867 UNTS 3
(entered into force 1 January 1995) annex 1C (
Agreement on
Trade-Related Aspects of Intellectual Property Rights
) art 27(2)-(3)
Australian-US Trade Agreement,
18 May 2004,
[2005] ATS 1
(entered into force 1 April 2005)
’). See also
Plant Genetic Systems
(1995) OJEPO 545.
See Vincenzo Zeno-Zencovich,
Sex and the Contract: From Infamous Commerce to the Market for Sexual Goods
and Services
(Martinus Nijhoff, 1
ed, 2011) 40.
Nicolas Diebold, ‘The
Morals and Order Exceptions in WTO Law: Balancing the Toothless Tiger and the
Undermining Mole’
(2008) 11(1)
Journal of International Economic Law
Berne Convention
(n 42) art 17. See also
Murray v Benbow
(1822) 1 Jac 474
General v Guardian Newspaper Ltd
[1990] A.C. 109; and Ida Azmi,
‘Intellectual Property Laws and Islam in Malaysia’ (PhD Thesis,
Queen Mary University of
London, 1995).
Butterworth and Co
(Publishers) Ltd v Ng Sui Nam
[1987] RPC 485
Bulun Bulun and Milpurrurru
v R & T Textiles Pty Ltd
[1990] 2 S.C.R. 467.
Millar v Taylor
[1769] EngR 44
(1769) 98 ER 201.
also Matthew Rimmer, ‘The Pirate Bazaar: The Social Life of Copyright
Law’ (PhD Thesis, The University of New South
Wales, 2001) 10
http://classic.austlii.edu.au/au/journals/UNSWLawTD/2001/1.pdf
s 22(1). See also
Australian Video Retailers Association Ltd v Warner Home
Video Pty Ltd
[2001] FCA 1719
Boomerang Investments Pty Ltd v Padgett
(Liability)
[2020] FCA 535
Kogan v Martin
[2019] EWCA Civ 1645.
Hollinrake v
[1894] UKLawRpCh 158
[1894] 3 Ch 420.
Ice TV Pty Ltd v Nine
Network Australia Pty Ltd
[2009] HCA 14
(2009) 239 CLR 458
’). See also
Blackie & Sons Ltd v Lothian Book
Publishing Co Pty Ltd
[1921] HCA 27
(1921) 29 CLR 396
Donoghue v Allied
Newspapers Ltd
[1938] Ch 106
Victoria v Pacific Technologies
(Australia) Pty Ltd (No 2)
[2009] FCA 737
(2009) 177 FCR 61.
46) s 10(1).
Dick v Yates
(1881) 18 Ch 76.
(n 57) [45].
Macmillan & Co Ltd v Cooper
(1923) 40 TLR 186.
Sands & McDougall
Pty Ltd v Robinson
[1917] HCA 14
(1917) 23 CLR 49.
University of London
(n 35) 609.
Desktop Marketing
(n 34); and
Interlego AG v Croner Trading Pty Ltd
[1992] FCA 624
(1993) 39 FCR
See also Graham Dutfield and Uma Suthersanen, ‘The Innovation
Dilemma: Intellectual Property and the Historical Legacy of Cumulative
Creativity’
(2004) 4(1)
Intellectual Property Quarterly
Telstra Corporation Ltd v
Desktop Marketing Systems Pty Ltd
[2001] FCA 61.
SW Hart & Co Pty Ltd
v Edwards Hot Water Systems
[1985] HCA 59
(1985) 159 CLR 466
, [8] (Wilson J). See also
Catnic Components Limited v. Hill and Smith Limited
(1982) RPC 183
(n 54) [33].
University of London Press Ltd
(n 35) 608-10; and
Manufacturing Co v Alfred Hold & Co Ltd
[1987] NZHC 56
(1987) 10 IPR 612.
Australian Chinese
Newspapers Pty Ltd v Melbourne Chinese Press Pty Ltd
[2003] FCA 878.
Fairfax Media
Publications Pty Ltd v Reed International Books Australia Pty Ltd
[2010] FCA 984
, [30] (Bennett J).
Mark Davison, Ann Monotti
and Leanne Wiseman,
Australian Intellectual Property Law
University Press, 4
ed, 2020) 65.
ss 32(1)-(3), 89-91.
Ibid ss 29, 92.
Feist Publications Inc v
Rural Telephone Service Co Inc
[1991] USSC 50
, [12] (1991).
Harper & Row v Nation
Enterprises
[1985] USSC 128
, 547 (1985).
Urheberrechtsgesetz
[Copyright Law] (Germany) 9 September 1965, UrhG, 2021, art 2(2); and
Droit D’Auteur
[Intellectual Property Code] (France) art L111-1.
(n 57) 471.
Cf Robert French, ‘A Public Law Perspective on Intellectual
(2014) 17(3)
The Journal of World Intellectual Property
Robert Hurt and Robert
Schuchman, ‘The Economic Rationale of Copyright’
(1966) 56(1)
American Economic Review
See also Davison, Monotti and Wiseman (n 67)
Statute of Anne
Anne, c 19) (‘
Statute of Anne
EMI Songs Australia Pty
Ltd v Larrikin Music Publishing Pty Ltd
(2011) 276 ALR 35, [37].
Francis Kase,
Through Continental Europe: Its Development, Legal Theories and Philosophy
(FB Rothman & Co, 1971) 8. See also Horacio Spector, ‘An outline
of a theory justifying intellectual property and intellectual
property rights
(1989) 8(1)
European Intellectual Property Review
Fritz Machlup and Edith
Penrose, ‘The Patent Controversy in the Nineteenth Century’ (1950)
Journal of Economic History
Yanner v Eaton
[1999] HCA 53
(1999) 201 CLR 351
, [17] (Gleeson CJ, Gaudron, Kirby and Hayne JJ).
ss 33-34, 93-96.
Cummins v Bond
[1927] 1 Ch 167.
Ibid pt IV.
French (n 76) 63. Cf Peter
A Philosophy of Intellectual Property
(Dartmouth, 1996) 208-14.
See Wesley Hohfeld,
‘Fundamental Legal Conceptions as Applied in Judicial Reasoning’
(1917) 26(8)
Yale Law Journal
; Kevin Gray, ‘Property in in thin
(1991) 50(2)
Cambridge Law Journal
, 259; Stuart Green,
Thirteen Ways to Steal a Bicycle: Theft Law in the Information Age
(Harvard University Press, 2012) 73, 205.
Green (n 88) 253-257. See
(n 43) s 31.
Berne Convention
(n 42) art 6
Robert Merges,
Intellectual Property
(Harvard University Press, 2011) 173.
Elizabeth Adeney,
‘Australia’s experience of moral rights’
(2019) 14(4)
Journal of Intellectual Property Law & Practice
(n 46) ss 195AN(1), (3).
s 193. See also
Corby v Allen & Unwin Pty Ltd
[2013] FCA 370
(2013) 297 ALR 761.
s 195AI(1). See also Burton Ong, ‘Why moral rights matter: Recognising the
intrinsic value of integrity rights’
(2002) 26(3)
Columbia Journal of
Law and the Arts
s 195AC(1). See also
Meskenas v ACP Publishing Pty Ltd
[2006] FMCA 1136
(2006) 70 IPR 172.
Kimberlee Weatherall,
‘“Pretend-y Rights” on the Insanely Complicated New Regime for
Performers’ Rights in
Australia, and How Australia Performers Got
Gypped’ in Fiona Macmillan and Kathy Bowrey (eds),
New Directions in
(Edward Elgar, 2005) 171, 173. See also Brent
Salter and Alan Hui, ‘Empirical Studies of Moral Rights in Cases of
and Musical Works’ (Panel Paper, 16 July 2010)
<https://papers.ssrn.com/sol3/papers.cfm?abstract_id=1641472>.
See Anthony Dickey,
‘The Legal Concept of Obscenity in Western Australia’
[1972] UWALawRw 2
(1972) 10(3)
University of Western Australia Law Review
[1948] VicLawRp 47
[1948] VLR 445
Treasons Act
Henry VIII, cap. 13).
Pat Rogers and Paul
Baines, ‘The Prosecutions of Edmund Curll, 1725–28’ (2004)
The Library
176; Colin Manchester, ‘A history of the crime of
obscene libel’
(1991) 12(1)
The Journal of Legal History
David Saunders, ‘Copyright, obscenity and literary history’ (1990)
Walcot v. Walker
[1802] EngR 162
(1803) 7 Ves. 1.
[1817] EngR 351
(1817) 35 ER 1006
R v Hicklin
LR 3 QB 360
R v Hicklin
Ibid 371 (Cockburn CJ).
Crowe v Graham
[1968] HCA 6
(1968) 121 CLR 375
Crowe v Graham
Commonwealth v
66 Pa. D & C. 101
, 125 (1949) (Bok J). See also Erik Bachman,
Literary Obscenities: U.S. Case Law and Naturalism after Modernism
(Pennsylvania State University Press, 2017) 16.
John Calder
(Publications) Ltd v Powell
[1965] 1 QB 509.
Crowe v Graham
105) 384-5. See also
Mackinlay v Wiley
[1971] WAR 3
[1973] USSC 190
446 (Herring CJ).
Candida Harris, Judith
Rowbotham and Kim Stevenson, ‘Truth, law and hate in the virtual
marketplace of ideas: perspectives
on the regulation of Internet content’
(2009) 18(2)
Information & Communications Technology Law
Eldar Haber,
‘Copyrighted Crimes: The Copyrightability of Illegal Works’
Yale Journal of Law and Technology
Criminal Code
Amendment (Sharing of Abhorrent Violent Material) Act 2019
(Prohibited Imports) Regulations 1956
Customs (Prohibited
Exports) Regulations 1958
See Norman Robbins,
‘The Law on Obscenity... Utterly Obscene’ (1973) 22(4)
Coordinator
475, 477; and Michael Bess, ‘Enhanced Humans versus
“Normal People”: Elusive Definitions’ (2010) 35(6)
Journal of Medicine and Philosophy
Jacobellis v Ohio
[1964] USSC 164
, 197 (1964) (‘
‘What’s Left? Hate Speech, Pornography, and the Problem for Artistic
Expression’
(1996) 84(6)
California Law Review
, 1506, 1508;
and Bret Boyce, ‘Obscenity and Community Standards’
(2008) 33(2)
The Yale Journal of International Law
See Harry Whitmore,
‘Obscenity in Literature: Crime or Free Speech’
[1963] SydLawRw 1
; and Jeffrey Rosen, ‘The End of Obscenity’ (2004)
The New Atlantis
Senate Legal and
Constitutional Affairs References Committee, Parliament of Australia,
of the National Classification Scheme: Achieving the Right Balance
June 2011) 175. See also Australian Law Reform Commission,
Classification
– Content Regulation and Convergent Media
(Final Report No 118,
February 2012) 361 (‘
’); and Australian Home
Entertainment Distributors Association, Submission CI 1152 to Australian Law
Reform Commission, Parliament
of Australia,
National Classification Scheme
(November 2011) 8
<https://www.alrc.gov.au/wp-content/uploads/2019/08/ci_1152a_aheda_.pdf>.
Convergence Review
Committee, Parliament of Australia,
Convergence Review
(Final Report,
March 2012) 40. See also Australia Law Reform Commission,
56-9; and Department of Communications and the Arts (Cth),
Australian Classification Regulation
(Report, January 2020) 5.
For example, see:
Commonwealth
Classification (Publications, Films and Computer Games) Act
Classification (Publications, Films and Computer Games)
(Enforcement) Act 1995
Classification (Publications, Films and
Computer Games) (Enforcement) Act 1995
Classification
(Publications, Films and Computer Games) (Enforcement) Act 1995
Classification (Publications, Films and Computer Games) Act 1995
Classification (Publications, Films and Computer Games) Enforcement Act
Classification (Publications, Films and Computer Games)
Enforcement Act 1995
Classification of Publications, Films and
Computer Games Act 1985
Classification of Publications, Films and
Computer Games Regulations 1985
Classification of Computer Games
and Images Act 1995
Classification of Films Act
Classification of Publications Act 1991
Crowe v Graham
Mullins (n 5) 102.
Alex Antoniou,
R v Peacock
: Landmark Trial Redefines Obscenity Law’ (2013)
Graduate Journal of Social Science
Associated Newspapers Ltd
[1959] VicRp 10
[1959] VR 57.
William Heinemann Ltd
v Kyte-Powell
[1960] HCA 32
(1960) 103 CLR 351
Antoniou (n 117) 90.
Kyte-Powell v William
Heinemann Ltd
[1960] VicRp 67
[1960] VR 425
Venus Adult Shops v
(n 10) [18]-[19].
and Patents Act 1988
(UK) s 171(3) (‘
Berne Convention
(n 42); and
See Vincenzo
Zeno-Zencovich,
Sex and the Contract: From Infamous Commerce to the Market
for Sexual Goods and Services
(Roma TrE-Press, 2
Bonadio and Lucchi (n 3)
See Dominika
Bychawska-Siniarska, Council of Europe,
Protecting the Right to Freedom of
Expression under the European Convention on Human Rights
(2017); and Eric
Freedom of Speech
(Oxford University Press, 2
2005) 51-3.
Jeremy Phillips,
‘Copyright in Obscene Works: Some British and American Examples’
Anglo-American Law Review
Ashdown v Telegraph
[2001] EWCA Civ 1142
, [29]. Cf Ronan Deazley, ‘The Myth of
(2003) 62(1)
Cambridge Law Journal
Patents Act
See Jeremy Phillips,
‘Copyright in Obscene Works: Some British and American Problems’
(1977) 6(3)
Anglo-American Law Review
Glyn v Weston Feature
[1916] 1 Ch 261
Glyn v Western Feature
Hyde Park Residence
Ltd v Yelland & Ors
[1999] RPC 655
Hyde Park v
Venus Adult Shops Pty
Ltd v Fraserside Holdings Ltd
[2006] FCAFC 188
, [13]-[18]. See further
Vivid Entertainment v Digital Sinema Aust.Pty Ltd & Ors
[2007] FMCA
and Jani McCutcheon and Jordan Leahy, ‘Illegal copyright works and the
remedial discretion of the court’ (2019) 9(3)
Queen Mary Journal of
Intellectual Property
Nova Products,
Inc. v Kisma Video, Inc.
, 02 Civ. 3850, (2004).
Statute of Anne
United States
Constitution
art 1§ 8 (‘
Constitution
Phillips (n 130) 138.
and Patents Act
(n 123); and
Digital Millennium Copyright Act 1998
Digital Millennium Copyright Act
Stockdale v Onwhyn
[1826] EngR 761
(1826) 5 B&C 173
Broder v Zeno Mauvais Music Co.,
Hime v Dale
(1803) 2 Camp. 27
Cain v Universal Pictures Co., Inc,
47 F. Supp.
Wright v Tallis
[1845] EngR 1091
(1845) 1 CB 893
Stone & McCarrick Inc. v Dugan Piano Co.,
Glyn v Western
Feature Film
(n 131); and
Hoffman v Le Traunik,
Attorney General v
Guardian Newspapers Ltd (No 2)
[1988] UKHL 6.
Pamela Samuelson,
‘Will the Copyright Office be obsolete in the Twenty-first Century?’
(1994) 13(1)
Cardozo Arts & Entertainment Law Journal
also Rebecca Giblin, ‘Reimagining copyright’s duration’ in
Rebecca Giblin and Kimberlee Weatherall (eds),
What if we could reimagine
(ANU Press, 2017) 177.
Mitchell Brothers Film
Group v Cinema Adult Theater
[1979] USCA5 1626
604 F.2d 852
, (1979) (‘
Jartech, Inc v Clancy
[1982] USCA9 124
666 F.2d 403
Jartech, Inc v Clancy
Jartech, Inc v Clancy
(n 144) 407.
Mitchell Bros
132) 854. See
Martinetti v Maguire,
16 F. Cas. 920
, (1867); and
Bleistein v Donaldson Lithographing Co.,
, (1903). See also
Zechariah Chafee, ‘Coming into Equity with Clean Hands’
(1947) 47(8)
Michigan Law Review
; Dan Schneider, ‘Authority of the Register
of Copyrights to Deny Registration of a Claim to Copyright on the Ground of
(1975) 51(3)
Chicago Kent Law Review
691; and Darling (n
FlavaWorks, Inc, v
689 F.3d 754
, 755 (2012) (‘
’). See also
Liberty Media Holdings, LLC v Swarm Sharing Hash File,
821 F. Supp.2d
444, (2011).
Eric Barendt, ‘Free
Speech in Australia: A Comparative Perspective’
[1994] SydLawRw 13
(1994) 16(1)
, 153. See also
FCC v League of Women Voters
[1984] USSC 165
United States v
132 S. Ct. 2537
, 2544 (2012);
United States v Stevens
, 468-72 (2010); and Derek Bambauer, ‘Copyright = Speech’
(2015) 65(2)
Emory Law Journal
Jane Ginsburg, ‘A
Tale of Two Copyrights: Literary Property in Revolutionary France and
(1990) 64(5)
Tulane Law Review
Daniel Becourt,
‘The French Revolution and copyright, for a new universalism’,
International Copyright Review
(online, 5 January 1990)
<https://www.la-rida.com/fr/article-rida/1858?lang=fr>.
Mike Holderness,
‘Moral Rights and Authors’ Rights: The Keys to the Information
(1998) 1(1)
The Journal of Information, Law and Technology
Kase (n 77) 8.
Patents Act
(n 123) s 1.
TGI de Lyon [The Courts
of First Instance], ch. 10 cab. 10 J, 7 February 2017.
See Landgericht
München I [Regional Court of Munich], 7 O 22293/12, 29 May 2013
Malibu Media LLC v Telefonica Germany GmbH & Ors
See Ann Bartow,
‘Copyright Law and Pornography’
(2012) 91(1)
Oregon Law Review
Feminist legal scholars, such as Ann Bartow, argue that ‘banal
erotic’ positions (such as heterosexual intercourse in
the missionary
position) are uncopyrightable; and hint that any sex position that is prevalent
in pornography and in real life may
belong to the public domain by virtue of the
doctrines of ‘merger’ and
scènes à faire.
where a sexually explicit or pornographic work is protected by copyright, such a
right would be thin at best when it comes to
ordinary sex scenes: meaning that,
if someone reproduced these scenes without also appropriating the plot, dialogue
or story arch,
it would be rather difficult for a judge to establish copyright
infringement.
Marc Randazza,
‘Freedom of Expression and Morality-based Impediments to the Enforcement
of Intellectual Property Rights’
(2015) 16(1)
Nevada Law Journal
(n 48) s 42.
See also Richard Shears, ‘Australian firm wins right to call itself Nuckin
Futs despite outrage’,
(online, 19 January 2012)
<Australian firm wins right to call itself Nuckin Futs | Daily Mail
Commissioner of Patents
[1972] HCA 38
(1972) 126 CLR 611
Bristol-Myers Squibb Co v
FH Faulding & Co Ltd
[2000] FCA 316.
Venus Adults Shops Pty
Ltd v Fraserside Holdings Ltd
(n 10) 211.
Collier Constructions
Pty Ltd v Foskett Pty
[1990] FCA 562
, [62] (Gummow J), affd
Adults Shops Pty Ltd v Fraserside Holdings Ltd
Venus Adults Shops Pty
Ltd v Fraserside Holdings Ltd
(n 10) [84].
147). See also
Belcher v Tarbox,
[1973] USCA9 539
486 F.2d 1087
, 1088 (1973).
Venus Adult Shops
(n 10) [22].
Bartow (n 160) 1.
Sony Corp. v Universal
City Studios
[1984] USSC 14
, 450 (1984).
Luke Curran,
‘Copyright Trolls, Defining the Line between Legal Ransom Letters and
Defending Digital Rights: Turning Piracy
into a Business Model or Protecting
Creative from Internet Lawlessness’ (2013) 13(1)
John Marshall Review
of international Property Law
See Robert Merges,
‘The Trouble with Trolls: Innovation, Rent-seeking, and the Patent Law
Reform’ (2010) 24(4)
Berkley Technology Law Journal
See Matthew Sag,
‘Copyright Trolling: An empirical study’
(2015) 100(1)
Matthew Sag and Jake
Haskell, ‘Defense Against the Dark Arts of Copyright Trolling’
(2018) 103(1)
Iowa Law Review
Christopher Civil,
‘Mass Copyright Infringement Litigation: Of Trolls, Pornography,
Settlement and Joinder’ (2014) 30(1)
Syracuse Journal of Science &
Technology Law
Gerald Dworkin,
‘Judicial Controls of Copyright on Public Policy Grounds’ in Jan
Kebel and Gerard Mom (eds),
Intellectual Property and Information Law: Essays
in Honour of Herman Cohen Jehoram
(Kluwer Academic Publishers, 1998) 141,
Mullins (n 5) 5.
See Rachel Yurkowski,
‘Is Hyde Park Hiding the Truth? An Analysis of the Public Interest Defence
to Copyright Infringement’
(2001) 32(1)
Victoria University of
Wellington Law Review
Bartow (n 160) 5. See
also Kurt Schmalz, ‘Problems in Giving Obscenity Copyright Protection: Did
Jartech and Mitchell Brothers
Go Too Far?’
(1983) 36(2)
Vanderbilt Law
See Hurt and Schuchman (n
74). Cf French (n 73).
Eric Johnson,
‘Intellectual Property and the Incentive Fallacy’
(2012) 3(2)
Florida State University Law Review
, 650. See also Giancarlo Frosio,
‘A History of Aesthetics from Homer to Digital Mash-ups: Culminative
Creativity and the Demise
of Copyright Exclusivity’
(2015) 9(2)
Satish Sambisan, Donald
Siegel, and Martin Kenney, ‘On Open Innovation, Platforms, and
Entrepreneurship’ (2018) 12(3)
Strategic Entrepreneurship Journal
Susanne Kopf,
‘“Rewarding Good Creators”: Corporate Social Media Discourse
on Monetisation Schemes for Content
Creators’ (2020) 6(4)
Social Media
Darling (n 9) 750.
See Zach Blumenfeld,
‘Selling the Artist, Not the Art: Using Personal Brand Concepts to Reform
(2019) 42(2)
The Columbia Journal
of Law & the Arts
Hohfeld (n 85).
Adeney (n 92) 316.
Kim-Marlène Le and
Julien Pénin, ‘Appropriation under Low Intellectual Property
Regimes: The Role of Communities
in the Online Alternative Adult Entertainment
Industry’ (2017) 21(3)
Management International
Darling (n 10) 718.
Michael Carroll,
‘One Size Does Not Fit All: A Framework for Tailoring Intellectual
Property Rights’ (2009) 70(6)
American University Washington College of
1361, 1363.
Tim Dornis,
‘Non-conventional copyright: an economic perspective’ in Enrico
Bonadio and Nicola Lucchi (eds),
Non-Conventional Copyright: Do New and
Atypical Works Deserve Protection?
(Edward Elgar, 2018) 455, 455.
Lydia Loren, ‘The
Pope’s Copyright? Aligning Incentives with Reality by Using Creative
Motivation to Shape Copyright
Protection’
(2008) 69(1)
Louisiana Law
Darling (n 10) 765.
Dotan Oliar and
Christopher Sprigman, ‘There’s no free laugh (anymore): The
emergence of Intellectual Property Norms
and the Transformation of Stand-up
(2008) 94(8)
Virginia Law Review
Mount Isa Mines Ltd v
Dornis (n 215).
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (430 KB)
PDF format (509 KB)
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter