URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/journals/AboriginalLawB/1997/21.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 14:42:03
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Ormond-Parker, Lyndon --- "A Commonwealth Repatriation Odyssey" [1997] AboriginalLawB 21; (1997) 3(90) Aboriginal Law Bulletin 9
A Commonwealth Repatriation Odyssey
By Lyndon Ormond-Parker
`You seek to say that because you are Australians you have the right to study
and explore our heritage because it is a heritage shared
by all Australians,
white and black. From our point of view we say--you have come as invaders, you
have tried to destroy our culture,
you have built your fortunes upon our lands
and the bodies of our people, and now, having said sorry, want a share picking
bones of what you regard as a dead past. We say that it is our past,
our culture and heritage and forms part of our present life.
As such it is ours
to share on our terms.'
For the past thirty years, the Commonwealth has had the Constitutional
authority to introduce national legislation for the repatriation
of Aboriginal
and Torres Strait Islander ancestral remains and cultural property. Yet despite
ratifying a number of international
instruments which specifically address this
matter, the Commonwealth is yet to formulate a national repatriation policy,
enact national legislation. This absence of a `blanket coverage'
national policy effectively denies the right of Aboriginal and Torres
Islander communities to have many of their ancestors' remains repatriated to
their home lands. This has created tremendous
discontent within the Aboriginal
community, and is a reflection of the continuing neo-colonial attitudes of many
institutions.
Moreover, whilst a series of disparate Commonwealth, State and Territory
heritage protection laws have been enacted, many do not
acknowledge Aboriginal
and Torres Strait Islander ownership and control of cultural property.
Rather, ownership of this kind of intellectual
and spiritual property has been vested in the Crown. Nevertheless, some
museums have developed policies which address repatriation of
ancestral remains, and the return of some secret/sacred objects to
communities of origin.
In Australia, there are currently two major national policies addressing this
matter. The first is an Interim Policy formulated by
the Australian Aboriginal
Affairs Council on the
Return of Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander
Cultural Property and Its Return to Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander
, which is still in draft form. The second is Museums Australia's
Previous Possessions, New Obligations
policy. Whilst the former
acknowledges full ownership, control and management by Indigenous communities
of their cultural property,
the latter subordinates these rights depending on
their scientific value.
In an attempt to retain Indigenous cultural property, many institutions argue
they have a duty to preserve and display objects of
benefit to the wider
community, and to conduct research on items of scientific or educational value.
However, many Indigenous communities
around the world, including Aboriginal and
Torres Strait Islander communities in Australia, argue that appropriating
ancestral remains
violates the sanctity of the dead and undermines the rights
of their ancestors.
A paper presented by the Brisbane-based Foundation for Aboriginal and Islander
Research Action at the 1989 World Archæological
Congress on
`Archæological Ethics and the Treatment of the Dead' summarised the
feeling of many Indigenous communities: `[i]n
Aboriginal ... law there will be
no spiritual peace until the dead are returned to the place of their birth and
have received their
last rights in accordance with their traditions.'
Developments at the international level
Over the past few decades, numerous countries, institutions and other bodies
have adopted policies for the repatriation of Indigenous
cultural property and
guidelines for undertaking research of an anthropological or
archæological nature within Indigenous communities.
Nevertheless, these
have often been difficult to implement, not necessarily ratified by all, and
above all, do not necessarily take
into account Indigenous peoples' rights.
At the international level, the main policy development for the repatriation of
Indigenous cultural property has been formulated
under the auspices of the
United Nations. Initially, during the 1960s, United Nations attention was
directed to the fate of cultural
property stolen by occupying states during
war, colonisation and other situations.
Following this, in 1970, the United Nations Educational, Scientific and
Cultural Organisation (UNESCO) adopted the Convention on
the Means of
Prohibiting and Preventing the Illicit Import, Export and Transfer of Ownership
of Cultural Property ([1990] ATS 2).
Whilst there are over 80 parties to this
Convention, many of the important market states have not ratified it, and some,
Britain, are no longer members of UNESCO. For this reason, Zambia
has been unable to progress a claim for the return of a skull from
In 1986, the Commonwealth introduced the
Protection of Movable Cultural
Heritage Act 1986
(Cth) which partially fulfiled its obligations under the
UNESCO Convention. However, under this Act, movable cultural property is
defined in terms of its importance to the nation. Such a definition is of
course at odds with the inalienable rights of Indigenous
communities to own,
control and manage their cultural property.
Similar concerns about the protection of cultural and intellectual property
were expressed in 1993 at the United Nations Working
Group on Indigenous
Populations, which considered the Principles and Guidelines for the Protection
of the Heritage of Indigenous
Peoples. The Aboriginal and Torres Strait
Islander Commission's (ATSIC's) submission to the Working Group emphatically
stated that
`Indigenous peoples' ownership and custody of their heritage must
continue to be collective, permanent and inalienable, as prescribed
customs, rules and practices of each people.'
An Australian policy and legislative odyssey
In Australia, campaigns for the return of Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander
ancestral remains progressed during the 1970s as
part of the general land
rights movement. Australian museums became increasingly aware of Indigenous
concern regarding the scientific
use of cultural property, and were approached
for the return of ancestral remains and secret/sacred cultural material. The
most publicised
repatriation at the time occurred with the return of the
remains of Truganini to Tasmania. As a result of this pressure, and increasing
public support, some Australian museums began changing their policies governing
the collection of ancestral remains. For example,
in 1972, the Queensland
Museum resolved to no longer accept newly disinterred Aboriginal remains. Since
this time, controversy over
repatriation has prompted many museums to develop
policies for the return of ancestral remains held in their collections.
In the early 1990s, the Commonwealth attempted to develop a national policy on
the repatriation of Aboriginal ancestral remains and
cultural property from
within Australia and overseas. In February 1990, the Australian Aboriginal
Affairs Council (AAAC), which is
composed of Indigenous Affairs Ministers from
the Commonwealth, State and Territory levels, established a `Task Force on the
of Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander Cultural Property'. The Task
Force was subsequently widened to include representatives from
communities.
In December 1993, the Council of Australian Museums Association (CAMA) (now
known as Museums Australia) adopted principles to direct
the future management
of Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander cultural property at a national level.
A major development of the
Previous Possessions: New Obligations
is that museums are reclassified as `custodians' rather than `owners', and that
decisions regarding the future of ancestral
remains are the responsibility of
the Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander community.
Nevertheless, whilst this policy has been seen as progressive in that it
respects the wishes and concerns of Aboriginal and Torres
Strait Islander
communities, it raises a number of problems for Indigenous Australia. In the
first instance, it only covers member
museums, and other institutions holding
ancestral remains, such as universities, are not bound by this policy.
Second, many Indigenous communities see the Museums Australia policy as an
example of neo-colonial dispossession which categorises
Aboriginal and Torres
Strait Islander communities as curios in the historical landscape of Australia.
Mick Dodson, the Aboriginal
and Torres Strait Islander Social Justice
Commissioner, has also noted that the policy fails to deal with the
anachronistic museum
legislation under which museums currently operate; that it
deals with Indigenous ownership in an ambiguous manner; and that it is
the assumption that museums are the most appropriate institutions to harbour
Indigenous cultural heritage. Dodson has further
`[g]iven the fact that, in general, governments have ownership of Indigenous
cultural objects in museums and other collecting institutions,
Indigenous peoples are disempowered through museum and other legislation
relating to collections of our cultural property,
Aboriginal and Torres Strait
Islander peoples are very unequal partners in this much vaunted partnership
relationship. It is a partnership
in which the State remains firmly in
Finally, the Museums' policy fails to seriously address issues of
administration, funding and management of the repatriation of those
covered by the policy. Whilst lack of funding is often given as a major reason
for the failure of museums to return provenanced
ancestral remains to
communities, such failure may just as be easily attributed to an inability on a
museum's part to make repatriation
an urgent priority.
In October 1993, in an attempt to address the inadequacies of Commonwealth,
State and Territory policies and legislation, the AAAC
Ministerial meeting
issued recommendations, based on the draft policy, which became a set of
`National Principles for the Return
of Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander
Cultural Property'. These National Principles were a major development in the
Commonwealth's
repatriation odyssey because, unlike the Museums Australia
policy, they affirm Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander communities
of their cultural property, and assert the pre-eminent role of these
communities in the recovery and care of their property.
Nevertheless, Bob Weatherall, a prominent Aboriginal community member who was
formerly on the AAAC National Task Force, publicly
`I am continually frustrated by the rhetoric and persistence of government to
make decisions that disregard our Native Title Rights
to our cultural property
... There does not exist a legislative mechanism suitable to Aboriginal and
Torres Strait Islander people
to control the trading of our cultural property
between collecting institutions.'
Moreover, although the Commonwealth, States and Territories have agreed with
these National Principles, they have shown no substantive
commitment to
developing accompanying policies or allocating the necessary funding for
implementation. For example, after four years,
Queensland's
Policy on the
Protection and Return of Significant Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander
Cultural Property
is still in draft form. Indeed, Queensland's Office of
Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander Affairs is to transfer all responsibility
for Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander cultural heritage to the mainstream
Department of Environment, and Arts Queensland.
This gross inaction contrasts with the prompt manner in which ATSIC acted upon
the AAAC National Principles. Less than a month after
the National Principles
were issued, ATSIC had formulated its
Policy on the Protection and Return of
Significant Cultural Property
. This policy commits ATSIC to providing
funding to facilitate repatriation, for the necessary research to provenance
Aboriginal and
Torres Strait Islander cultural property, and to inform relevant
communities of the existence of their ancestral remains. The ATSIC
policy also
recommends that the States and Territories `must accept primary financial
responsibility' for the return of significant
cultural material within their
respective areas.
Finally, whilst the AAAC principles and Museums Australia policy were released
after the High Court delivered its
Mabo v Queensland [No. 2]
[1992] HCA 23
decision, neither policy takes into account the affect of native title
rights on Aboriginal cultural and intellectual property. Following
Löfgren, Paul Burke notes:
`[t]his is precisely what Neil Löfgren argues. He holds that Aboriginal
... law, as it relates to intellectual and cultural
rights, is the longest
surviving form of intellectual property law in existence today. [Kamal] Puri
adds support to this position
when he observes, in
Mabo v Queensland
their Honours took the view that the traditional interest of native title
inhabitants were to be respected even though those interests
were of a kind
unknown to the common law.'
Indeed, Löfgren has proceeded to articulate a common law Aboriginal
knowledge system based on
sui generis
Aboriginal rights.
He further argues that the failure of the Commonwealth,
States and Territories to legislatively acknowledge these Aboriginal rights
breaches the equal protection of property rights found by the High Court in
Mabo v Queensland [No. 2]
[1992] HCA 23
, affirmed by the
Title Act 1993
(Cth), guaranteed by Australia's ratification of the
International Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Racial
Discrimination
([1975] ATS 40), and protected by the equality provisions
contained in the
Racial Discrimination Act 1975
Concluding comments
In conclusion, there is an obvious need for a national policy on the
repatriation of ancestral remains held in all Australian museums,
universities,
private collections, and other institutions which will assist Aboriginal and
Torres Strait Islander communities in
facilitating the unconditional return of
their cultural property.
Indeed, the Coalition's Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander Policy commits
the Coalition Government to `assist in the return of
culturally significant
items that form part of the heritage of Indigenous communities'.
ATSIC's report to the Commonwealth on native title social
justice measures (
Recognition, Rights and Reform
) has also proposed the
Government must `adopt a national policy for protection and return of
significant cultural property for Commonwealth
institutions and ensure that
similar policies are applied in States and Territories'.
The framework for such a national policy must, at a minimum, acknowledge
Aboriginal and Torres Strait ownership, control, administration
and management
of cultural property. It must also address the issue of unprovenanced ancestral
remains and their care, the need for
land for reburials, and the issue of
protection of burial sites. Anything less would be a breach of Aboriginal and
Torres Strait
Islanders' rights of inheritance, property ownership and equality
before the law, and their Indigenous rights to cultural integrity.
A first step in achieving a national policy would be a nation-wide summit or
forum of relevant community people to address the various
issues associated
with the repatriation and caring of ancestral remains and cultural property.
A major hurdle in this odyssey, however, is
that the Commonwealth, States and Territories have, as usual, failed to reach
The author would like to dedicate this article to Bob Weatherall and others
who have continually lobbied governments and museums for
the return of their
ancestral remains. Without this pressure, little progress would have been made
in this area.
R F Langford, `Our Heritage--Your
Playground', (1983) 16
Archæology Australia
Even though the
Aboriginal Heritage Act
(SA) recognises traditional ownership, it does not vest ownership of
Aboriginal heritage in the Aboriginal community.
R Worl, `NAGPRA: Symbol of a New Treaty',
(1995) 7 (3)
Federal Archæology
Foundation for Aboriginal and Islander
Research Action (FAIRA), `Archæological Ethics and the Treatment of the
Dead', Unpublished
Conference Paper (World Archæological Congress,
University of South Dacota, 7-10 August 1989), p 1.
R Worl, `NAGPRA: Symbol of a New Treaty',
(1995) 7 (3)
Federal Archæology
Ibid, p 232.
Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander
Commission (ATSIC), `The Australian Contribution 1994; UN Working Group on
Indigenous Populations,
Twelfth Session 20-29 July 1994' (ATSIC Office of
Public Affairs, Canberra, 1995), p 128.
C Fforde, Unpublished Thesis (1996),
Department of Archæology, University of Southampton.
M Dodson, `HORSCAA Inquiry into Aboriginal
and Torres Strait Islander Culture and Heritage', unpublished submission
(Aboriginal and
Torres Strait Islander Social Justice Commission, Sydney,
1995), p 22.
Council for Aboriginal Reconciliation,
`Valuing Cultures: Recognising Indigenous Cultures as a Valued Part of
Australian Heritage',
AGPS, Canberra, 1994, p 27.
B Weatherall, `Press Release', Foundation
for Aboriginal and Islander Research Action, 18 October 1994.
Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander
Commission, `Policy on the Protection and Return of Significant Cultural
Property' (November
1993), p 3.
P Burke, `Native Title and Intellectual
Land, Rights, Laws: Issues of Native Title
(Issues Paper 10),
April 1996, p 8.
N Löfgren, `Aboriginal Common Law
Knowledge', Vol 3,
Aboriginal Law Bulletin
(unreported, High Court, 23 December 1996) per Kirby J at 185.
N Löfgren, `Aboriginal Community
Participation in Sentencing', Unpublished Conference Paper (National Labor
Lawyers Conference,
Australian National University, 5 October 1996).
Federal Coalition, `Aboriginal and Torres
Strait Islander Affairs Policy', Electoral Policy Document (1996).
Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander
Commission, `Recognition, Rights and Reform: A Report to Government on Native
Title Social
Justice Measures' (1995), p 109.
N Löfgren, `Added Impetus for
Legislative Protection of Aboriginal Cultural and Intellectual Property
Arts & Entertainment Law Review
R Weatherall, personal comments between
Bob Weatherall and the author, February 1997.
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
No downloadable files available
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter