URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/journals/CanLawRw/2021/20.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 14:51:11
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Comyn, Mallory --- "Locked Up And Drugged Up: Regulating The Use Of Chemical Restraint In Residential Settings" [2021] CanLawRw 20; (2021) 18(2) Canberra Law Review 202
II THEORIES OF DISABILITY
A The Theories of Disability
B Disability and Control
C Antinomy of Restraint: Enhancement Technologies, Liberty and Autonomy
1 Chemical Restraint as a Rights Violation
2 Chemical Restraint as a Method of Upholding Rights
3 Chemical Restraint as an Ethical Antinomy
III CHALLENGES FOR CHEMICAL RESTRAINT REGULATION
A The Experiences of Staff and Patients
B Challenges for Regulation
IV JUDICIAL TREATMENT OF CHEMICAL RESTRAINT
A Australia
V A REGULATORY MODEL FOR IMPLEMENTING THE CRPD
A The CRPD and Legal Disability
B Chemical Restraint as a ‘Minimally Sufficient Action’ Instead of a ‘Last Resort’
C A Risk-Based Chemical Restraint Regulatory Framework
1 Policy Suggestions to Reduce Restraint Abuse
Locked Up And Drugged Up: Regulating The Use Of Chemical
Restraint In Residential Settings
Mallory Comyn*
This article considers law regarding the use of chemical restraint in
Australian residential settings, building on the Royal Commission
into Aged Care
Quality & Safety disclosures regarding the alarming extent of neglect and
abuse in Australia’s aged care
facilities. It identifies international and
domestic principles alongside benchmark overseas regimes
I Introduction
From its establishment in 2018 to its Final Report in May 2021, the Royal
Commission into Aged Care Quality and Safety (‘ACRC’)
revealed to
the public the alarming extent of neglect and abuse in Australia’s
residential aged care facilities. Of particular
concern were findings that
people are being medicated so that ‘everyone looks fine ... they’re
all clean and tidy and
they’re not crying
Medication is often
used as a form of behavioural control rather than treatment (known as
‘chemical restraint’), yet
this was not the first-time concerns have
been raised about this practice: coroner’s courts have established that
Australians
have died as a result of chemical
Though this issue is further clouded by the lack of comprehensive national
data on the use of these practices,
evidence at the ACRC hearings revealed that family consent was typically not
being sought before increasing or introducing new medications
recipients,
that medication was
provided without an official diagnosis of a mental health
and that the staff in
these facilities were not being trained to administer
pro re nata
(unscheduled) medication.
scientific literature is also dominated by concerns about the range of potential
side effects.
On the more serious
end, these medications have been shown to increase rates of
cerebrovascular adverse
The nature of chemical restraint requires that research and doctrine is drawn
from sources dealing with mental health disorders as
well as other health-care
settings such as hospitals. However, there is significant overlap between the
circumstances and legal challenges
faced by persons with mental health illness,
cognitive disabilities and intellectual
disabilities
such that these
groups are comparable. Nevertheless, due to word length limitations, the policy
suggestions here will be limited
to residential aged care in Australia.
With several reports
released in recent years on the conditions in residential aged care,
particularly regarding the use of chemical restraint in
these facilities, states
are under increasing pressure to eliminate the use of chemical restraint against
persons with disabilities
as a violation of a person’s human
However, the author of
this article was unable to identify any published study indicating that complete
elimination of chemical restraint
is a viable
alternative.
This suggests that
there is a genuine need for original research exploring solutions for this
problem, not only because, even where
legislation exists to prevent abuse, it
may not be compliant with to Australia’s obligations under the
Convention of the Rights of Persons with Disabilities
also because the concerning levels of chemical restraint abuse necessitate a
This article takes an interdisciplinary approach to the research question,
combining doctrinal research, legal and regulatory theory,
as well as insights
from empirical and scientific studies on chemical restraint. Working within a
reformist paradigm of legal research,
this article draws its primary sources
from both Australian and Canadian case law and tribunal decisions to provide the
context required to answer the following questions. First, the
judicial interpretation of the issues presented by chemical restraint
important because the law, as a form of communication, provides direct insights
into the social response to pertinent
in this case, how the
norms embodied in the CRPD have been implemented in practice. Second, this can
be subjected to the lens of
regulatory theory to provide a critical
perspective
and contextual
for the issue of chemical
restraint and how it can be viably regulated.
To justify this comparative approach, there is a long tradition of comparing
Australian and Canadian law as these jurisdictions provide
a suitable balance of
similarity and dissimilarity for comparative
The issue of chemical
restraint is topical in both jurisdictions. Both jurisdictions are federations
that have received English law,
meaning that there are similar institutions,
battles between federal and provincial governments, and extra layers of
complexity to
ratifying and implementing international
agreements.
However, measures that have been effective in one context cannot be simply
transplanted to another. For example, a key difference
is that Australia does
not have a federal bill or charter of rights. In Canada, as will be discussed
Charter of Rights and Freedoms
plays a significant part in determining how chemical restraint is practised
and regarded. However, the reality of the Canadian restraint
experience is
unlikely to be so different that Australia could afford to ignore the lessons
Though doctrine and theory are necessary to understand the substantive law on
chemical restraint, alone such a methodology cannot
deal with the broader
context, both social and scientific, that this practice occurs
As empirical research is
beyond the scope of this article, secondary resources are drawn from a wide
variety of sources to form a
part of the evidence base for its reform
suggestions. Research into this area acknowledges that there are several terms
the same meaning as ‘chemical restraint’, which include
‘forced medication’, ‘forced sedation’,
sedation’ and ‘emergency tranquilisation’. When searching
articles, a variety of terms were used
to access a broader range of literature.
This article begins with a discussion of theories of disability in Part II.
This part outlines the main conceptualisations of ‘disability’
the past few centuries, before evaluating the ethical implications of chemical
restraint, drawing on the work of Michel Foucault,
Immanuel Kant and others.
Part III addresses some of the key regulatory challenges for chemical restraint,
focusing on how regulation
must be built on a strong legal foundation to ensure
coherence, particularly in light of the ethical dilemmas posed in Part II. Part
IV presents a comparative doctrinal overview of case law and tribunal decisions
from both Australia and Canada to examine how these
countries are implementing
the new norms introduced by the CRPD. This significance of these doctrinal
trends for regulation of aged
care is explored in Part V. This part evaluates a
model for chemical restraint regulation within the norms imposed by the CRPD. It
argues that while the CRPD is unable to truly address the root cause of legal
disability, it remains relevant as an aspirational
target. The part then
concludes with a few key policy recommendations. Part VI concludes the article,
drawing together the arguments
from the previous part.
II THEORIES
OF DISABILITY
This part outlines the evolution of the concept of ‘disability’,
and what this has meant for persons with disabilities
who encounter the medical
field. Part A begins by discussing the history of disability and forced
treatment, with particular attention
paid to the work of Michel Foucault. Part B
concerns the different conceptualisations of ‘disability’ that have
over the past few decades. Part C argues that chemical restraint
presents a Kantian ‘antinomy’ — a diabolical ethical
such that the solution to prevent abuse is not as simple as banning the practice
Theories of Disability
The concept of what constitutes ‘disability’ has changed
significantly over the last few centuries, beginning with a pre-Enlightenment
‘spiritual’ model, to a post-Enlightenment medical model, and
finally, the modern social
Most Western conceptions
of disability have centred around disability as a ‘deviance’ from
social norms of behaviour.
Responses to disability centre around
‘fixing’ this deviation, based on normative judgements of what it
means to be ‘human.’
Under traditional moral philosophy the human
capacity for free, rational and moral choice has been the centre of
personhood.
For persons with
intellectual and cognitive disabilities, rationality-based personhood has been,
and continues to be, used to deny
the full array of rights ascribed to others.
This is often in an attempt to force treatment that may resolve the
under the guise of such treatment being in a
person’s ‘best interests’.
This presumption is a legacy of previous conceptualisations of disability.
The spiritual model was underpinned by the idea of disability
misfortune that deserved a compassionate response, and a manifestation of
The aim was to drive out
that evil so as to cleanse a person of their
disability.
This aim persisted
under the medical model, except that the religious imperative was replaced by a
scientific lens: disability could
be explained by medical (ie biological)
defects that could be cured.
Under this model, the locus of the disability is within the
individual,
who can therefore be
‘fixed’. The medical model ultimately failed on two grounds: it led
to a number of cruel, inefficient
treatments being practised on persons with
disabilities (discussed below), while at the same time, many medical
practitioners ignored
the consequences.
In contrast, the social model of disability has gained popularity in recent
decades, with its biggest achievement being the coming
into force of the
introduced the social model paradigm to international
The social model explains
that disability is the gap between a person’s abilities and what society
expects a person to do
‘disability’ should be contrasted with ‘impairment’ as
two distinct concepts. The former is structural,
as well as culturally and
historically specific, and the latter is individual and
Therefore, ‘[t]he
problem is not the person with disabilities; the problem is the way that
normalcy is constructed to create
the “problem” of the disabled
This model argues
that instead of trying to force a person to live in a world not built for them,
it is the environment that should
While this model has been important in improving the political visibility of
persons with disabilities, it is not without its flaws:
the social model risks
insinuating that impairment is
and, in practice,
removing all socially imposed barriers to full participation would be almost
impossible.
The CRPD does not
address these concerns either, as it does not provide an answer about what
States should do when social intervention
does not ‘make rights
for a person with
disabilities.
Despite its impracticalities, the social model is useful to reveal the
complexities of the impairment/disability dynamic. This dynamic
has been the
subject of study under critical disability theory, which has emerged as a mode
of challenging traditional, ableist conceptions
of disability. Critical
Disability Theory explores how labels such as disabled/abled and
impaired/non-impaired have ‘obscured
connections between people with and
without impairment’
drawing on the work theorists such as Foucault to dissect disability in terms of
its connection to knowledge and
Foucault’s theories offer particular insight into the ways that being
designated as ‘disabled’ has enabled the maltreatment
with disabilities for centuries: the sharpening distinction between normal and
abnormal in medical knowledge caused the
‘systemic closure of
opportunities for agency’ for persons with
disabilities,
who were then
transformed from ‘human beings into human
The work of
Foucault focuses on the creation of this human subject, by examining how
knowledge and discourse ‘systematically
form the objects of which they
in addition to how
power itself is both productive as well as dynamically linked to fields of
For example, medical
knowledge creates the categories of normal/abnormal, which in turn informs how
certain people are to be treated
by the law and medical professionals. Foucault
also wrote of ‘subjugated knowledge’ such as that held by a
psychiatric
nurse which is excluded from the formal discourse, described as a
‘whole set of knowledges that have been disqualified as inadequate
their task or insufficiently elaborated: naïve knowledges, located low down
on the hierarchy, beneath the required level
of cognition of
scientificity.’
From a purely Foucauldian perspective, even though he never explicitly
addresses disability/impairment,
both the social model and the medical model of disability are coercive: power
and knowledge are used to demand the correct performance
of a person’s
social roles, while also controlling a person who does not have the desired
physiological traits.
past, methods of doing so have included electroconvulsive shock therapy, deep
sleep therapy and the introduction of psychotropic
medication, all of which are
‘treatments’ that became popular at the height of the medical
The treatments were
designed to ‘fix’ the impairment and to normalise the person, yet
often had severe side effects in
trying to do so.
The social model is also coercive in that it discursively equates disability
with oppression:
creates disability such that this model attaches persons with disabilities with
an ‘oppressed’
It becomes impossible
to find a person with a disability that is not oppressed to some
That is not to say that
the social model should be rejected: Foucault recognised that ‘[d]iscourse
transmits power and produces
power; it reinforces it, but it also undermines and
exposes it, renders it fragile and makes it possible to thwart
By limiting
disability to being socially constructed, the social model asks society to
question social conventions and environmental
designs that it takes for granted,
but it also denies that impairment is an observable attribute of an individual
that forms an essential
aspect of their
This disregards the
lived experience of people with disabilities. Such experience should itself be
considered as a ‘subjugated
that must be
brought to the forefront of all discussions concerning disability policy.
and Control
Theorists stress the importance of respect for autonomy because patients and
residents in residential and healthcare settings will
inevitably ‘occupy a
subordinate position to their healthcare
In the past,
the subordinate position occupied by persons with disabilities and other
has resulted in
barbaric treatment, either under the guise of scientific advancement or because
such treatments were seen to be in
the person’s ‘best
interests’. Tracing the history of treatments such as electroconvulsive
shock therapy (‘ECT’),
deep sleep therapy (‘DST’) and
psychotropic medication, in light of their effects of disability rights, is
understand the rhetoric surrounding modern chemical restraint.
Introduced to Australia in
ECT has been the subject
of increasingly tight regulation, following the lead of the United
ECT can be administered
in a modified and unmodified form, with unmodified ECT labelled
‘particularly
because it does
not involve anaesthesia or muscle relaxants. ECT, like chemical restraint, is a
subject of debate because of its
lack of long-term research, risk of brain
injury, and the idea that the benefits outweigh any risks
DST was used in conjunction with ECT. It was a practice where patients were
sedated for a duration of between two
using a cocktail of
medications to keep a patient
unconscious.
DST appeared on the
public radar in Australia in 1967 when the Sydney Morning Herald revealed
concerning reports of the level of
medications given to a 23 year old woman who
died at Chelmsford Private Hospital while receiving the
Similar to the
history of uncovering the aged care quality issues, the Chelmsford Royal
Commission brought public attention to the
Justice Slattery, in
the Royal Commission reports, was severely critical of the behaviour of medical
professionals at Chelmsford:
many doctors were aware of the dangers of DST at
the time it was being practised, proving that safeguards have little benefit
medical professionals are not willing to report
colleagues.
The events at Chelmsford brought public attention to abusive practices
against vulnerable people, but they were far from an isolated
incident. Other
Australian institutions for vulnerable people have also been characterised by
disease, neglect, overcrowding and
A key part of the process
to close such institutions, both in Australia and abroad, was the introduction
of psychotropic medications.
Arguably, these medications had some positive effect on the daily lives of
people with mental disabilities: because they were able
‘socially acceptable
institutionalisation rates decreased, psychotropic medication may have played a
part in the emergence of new philosophies
healthcare.
However, another way
of looking at this is that psychotropic medication created the possibility of
restraining a person’s behaviour
without the need for physical restraints,
thus resulting in the advent of chemical restraint and its abuse. From a
Foucauldian lens,
‘power’ — in this case, that of the medical
field and the professionals that work in this area — creates
the field of
possible action,
chemical restraint becomes a viable option.
of Restraint: Enhancement Technologies, Liberty and Autonomy
Enhancement technologies are ‘the application of biotechnological
devices aimed at augmenting human physical and mental
with the aim to
‘preserve and augment the vitality of the body and to enhance the
happiness of the soul’.
These technologies are the subject of much debate: from a conservative
bioethical position, enhancement technologies threaten the
foundation of what it
means to be human
post humanist position, a ‘human’ is a constantly evolving subject,
such that enhancement technologies are
the next form of
Dignity is a central
part of the discussion, often drawing from the Kantian concept of dignity
grounded in reason and moral agency.
From a conservative perspective,
enhancements are a threat to human dignity: it is the acceptance of limitation
that defines humanity
such that ‘[w]ith biotechnical interventions ... we
cannot really own the transformations nor experience them as genuinely
post-humanist, dignity is expressed through human
such that enhancements
might make people more efficient or ‘capable of independent
initiative’.
these perspectives are necessarily wrong: they are an ‘antinomy in which
the concepts of human nature, human goods
and flourishing vie with progress and
choice, with no way to compare the opposing
metaphors.’
Patrick Kermit employs the idea of ‘Kantian antinomies’ in his
exploration of the use of Cochlear
These antinomies are
mutually exclusive concepts that can each be, simultaneously,
Antinomies contain a
thesis and an antithesis that can argue their own consistency by demonstrating
that the other is inconsistent
thus both statements are ‘true’. In relation to understanding
‘truth’, Foucault’s focus on discourse
as ‘games of
reveals how
particular objects or concepts are ‘systematically
by the discourse
around them. ‘Truth’ has an ethical dimension, such that where it
can be proved that a ‘truth’
is only, for example, a social
convention, then this creates a powerful argument for altering society because
it implies the space
liberation.
Returning then to
the social model’s impairment/disability divide, it is clear that
‘disability’ is a discursively
created concept, as are the
behaviours of concern that necessitate chemical restraint as a response.
However, impairment is not:
it is a natural state that results from biology.
ECT, DST and chemical restraint are all attempts at correcting biology. In
the most basic sense, they should be considered enhancement
technologies,
however they are often also criticised for their impact, perceived or real, on a
person’s autonomy.
Focusing on chemical restraint, as an enhancement technology that alters a
person’s neurochemistry, the technique can be theorised
in two opposing
ways: either as a rights violation or as a mode of upholding a person’s
rights. If one of these is ontologically
‘the truth’ then this would
carry weight for future disability policy, the dispute being whether or not to
restrain a person exhibiting behaviours of concern. However, if both
are ‘true’, then there is no simple solution to
the use of chemical
Restraint as a Rights Violation
Beginning with the proposition that chemical restraint is a rights violation,
the obvious place to start is with the CRPD as a source
of human rights. The
CRPD reinforced that persons with disabilities bear the same rights as all other
forced treatment is
therefore banned under the CRPD. The Committee in its General Comment on Article
12 explained that ‘forced
treatment by psychiatric and other health and
medical professionals is a violation of the right to equal recognition before
and an infringement of the rights to personal integrity (art. 17);
freedom from torture (art. 15); and freedom from violence, exploitation
abuse (art. 16).’
overriding the decisions and wishes of persons with disabilities, only where
this would not be done for persons without a disability,
this is discriminatory
and a violation of their rights to ‘the full and equal enjoyment of all
human rights and fundamental
From a theoretical point of view, chemical restraint is also damaging because
it contributes to forced normalisation of persons with
disabilities: liberal
societies valorise freedom of the individual, and society is structured around
this ideal, with the individual
striving for autonomy in all
It follows that the
right to choose what happens with one’s own body is
fundamental,
even more so when
considering that that chemical restraint does not cure a person’s
impairment, and that psychotropic medication
can have serious
side-effects
to the extent that
chemical restraint can result in early
These points, taken
together with the legal considerations under the CRPD, support the claim that
chemical restraint is a rights
Restraint as a Method of Upholding Rights
The antithesis of the above proposition is that chemical restraint instead
upholds a person’s rights, in a way that can be described
‘empowerment by protection’. There are two arguments that lend
support to this antithesis: the first is based on a social
argument about a
person’s ability to participate in society, and the second is based on a
relational conception of autonomy,
which is to be contrasted with the
traditional individualist
Beginning again with
the obligations under the CRPD, the CRPD enforces an individualist approach to
autonomy, in that autonomy is
‘the freedom to make one’s own
Further, while
it is true that the CRPD reinforces the rights of persons with disability not to
be subjected to forced interventions,
the CRPD also requires States to take
effective and appropriate measures to ‘enable persons with disabilities to
maintain maximum independence, full physical, mental, social and
vocational ability, and full inclusion and participation in all
Empowerment is a way that this full inclusion and participation can be
achieved, in that the theory of empowerment works to reduce
the effects of
social or personal blocks that prevent a person from exercising power over their
participation in society is premised on an ability to adhere to social
and this dynamic is
recognised by the Committee on the Rights of Persons with
Disabilities.
normative standard is the exact critique that the social model makes, this
assumes that Western liberal societies are
much more heterogenous than they
actually are.
The real concern
is not difference itself, but where the line should be drawn in restricting
difference.
This ‘line’ is critical for persons with cognitive and
intellectual impairments that cause behaviours of concern, because
behaviours will limit a person’s ability to fully participate in society:
these can be ‘personal’ blocks
(ie ‘impairment’-based)
rather than social ones (ie ‘disability’-based). For example, if
someone without
the ‘excuse’ of an intellectual disability kicked or
punched another person, this would be dealt with in the criminal
justice system,
which blocks a person from full participation in their community. It is easily
accepted that such behaviours are
‘where the line is drawn’ when it
comes to restricting difference. If there is no way of managing such
behaviour will result in social isolation.
This is particularly important for persons with cognitive or intellectual
disabilities, for whom denying dependence on social networks
is to deny the
reality of their daily existence. Yet, this is not what the CRPD intends:
liberal autonomy, such as that which is
upheld by the
is challenged, for
example, by the prevalence of
and anosognosia
(the clinical inability to be aware of one’s disease or
impairment)
in some persons
with cognitive impairments:
exercising an autonomous choice to refuse chemical restraint becomes literally
impossible when a person is unable to understand the
full facts of their own
condition. Empowerment is therefore reliant on protecting a person, where
autonomy is instead ‘created
by, dependent on, and exercised through
relationships with other
relationships that people form are an intrinsic part of perceiving events: no
one is ever truly able to make a completely autonomous
choice, separate from the
broader web of influence the person lives in. One such choice that may need to
be made is the choice to
control a person’s behaviour via medication.
Therein lies the problem: as long as unconditional individualist autonomy and
unconditional participation remain goals of a liberal
society, disability will
always have to be managed.
‘Empowerment’ on these assumptions without management through
protective policies and actions is not possible. That is
not to say that there
are no socially created barriers for persons with cognitive and intellectual
disabilities that ought to be
acknowledged.
If anything,
this operates to strengthen the social model’s societal critiques, in that
the very foundation of liberal societies
is disabling to people with cognitive
and intellectual impairments: freedom is both limited by, and given by, the same
social structures.
CRPD operates to reinforce the same structures, by presuming an aspiration for
all persons with disabilities for full autonomy,
while ignoring the objective
impacts of impairment on a person’s ability to do so: this is the idea of
leaving a person ‘rotting
with their rights
On this view,
fully unconditional participation or autonomy is an impossible goal for certain
people without the use of chemical
Restraint as an Ethical Antinomy
Both of these perspectives have merit and can demonstrate flaws in the other.
The first is based on several Articles of the
such that there is a
valid claim that chemical restraint is rights violation. The second argues that
full social participation, also
guaranteed under the
is dependent on the
ability to participate in society that, for some, can only be achieved with
pharmacological intervention. Thus,
chemical restraint is best regarded as a
theoretical antinomy, to which the practical policy answer is highly dependent
on a realist
interpretation of the situation at hand requiring the use of
restraint. While this argument is likely to be contentious, and would
rejected on the basis of the social model, it is also pragmatic to understand
that a significant cultural shift will be required
to change prescribing and
administration habits in health
but simultaneously, it
would be discriminatory to deny people medication if that were to improve their
health outcomes. Therefore,
rather than arguing that the practice must be banned
outright, it is more useful to discuss ways in which the practice can be
to reduce the potential that it will be abused, such that the benefits
no longer outweigh the risks.
III CHALLENGES
FOR CHEMICAL RESTRAINT REGULATION
This part discusses the issue of regulating chemical restraint, primarily how
agencies and institutions can be structured for the
development of personal and
interpersonal rights.
examines the experiences of staff and patients, as Foucault’s source of
‘subjugated
to determine
what are the key challenges for regulating chemical restraint. It discusses
barriers to eliminating restraint at the
industry level down to the experiences
of nurses and patients. Part B outlines the key challenges for regulation, with
how regulation should be structured to create a coherent system.
Traditional regulatory theory focuses on the ability of agencies to
efficiently allocate scarce resources to achieve goals and safeguard
standards, with dispute resolution on the basis of rights left to the
Yet, this results
in a fragmented approach because the case law will only address certain time
periods, environments or
By leaving rights
ultimately to the judiciary, this misses valuable opportunities for regulation
to be the preferred method of ‘organising
relations.’
together, case law and regulation can serve ‘to constitute market
relations, to provide the frameworks for rights and
processes that allow markets
to work, and to protect markets from
fragmentation.’
this article, the market is residential settings, and the framework is that
which will decide if chemical restraint has a place
in modern disability policy.
Any such framework is dependent on whether the risks of chemical restraint can
be adequately minimised
compared to its benefits.
Experiences of Staff and Patients
There is increasing pressure to eliminate the use of all restrictive
practices in Australia
on a number of programs internationally that have been able to successfully
reduce the rates of restraint
However, no published
studies have managed to present a viable model eliminating all use of seclusion
and restraint.
disregarded ‘subjugated
knowledges’
involved in chemical restraint incidents should therefore be examined to
understand why these elimination attempts have
Care workers recognise that there is a tension between human rights and duty
when restraint
practices are used but a majority do not believe that it would be possible to
maintain a safe environment if restraints
eliminated.
Restraint removal
is also associated with heightened levels of work and
For nurses, the risk
of personal physical and psychological injury during care presents a significant
challenge to reducing restraint:
for example, in one study implementing an
initiative to reduce restraint, it was found that though the number of restraint
went down, the level of staff injury remained relatively level,
indicating that there is always a risk of significantly violent or
persons causing injury.
Beyond concerns for personal safety, some nurses still feel vulnerable to
accusations of negligence should a patient, staff member
or visitor be injured,
if that injury could have been prevented through
One nurse framed
this as balancing a ‘duty of care to 30 people or human rights for
The reactions of people who have been restrained are also complex, but
overwhelmingly, the responses to restrictive practices are
negative, namely that
these events cause an immediate escalation of
embarrassment,
However, there have
been instances where people who have been forcibly medicated have reported
positive effects
feeling calmer,
mental state,
and liking the
sleep-inducing effect that medication
Some patients also
prefer medication over
which, as an
alternative to chemical restraint, can cause feelings of loneliness and
This supports the
conclusion that there is a risk of poor outcomes and compliance with healthcare
plans where people feel they are
not involved in their own
Overall, many view
chemical restraint in any instance as ‘a form of
and emphasise
that medication should be used as a last resort. However, there is also evidence
to suggest that time assuages anger
understands why restraint was clinically
but this is
dependent on the person’s trust in their care
There are several studies
that show the importance of the therapeutic care relationship in helping a
person understand a restraint incident. From a Foucauldian
perspective, where
the relationship between the patient and the care provider is itself a power
dynamic, this relationship will influence
whether a restraint incident is
perceived as positive or negative: for example, where psychiatric patients are
given the opportunity
to ‘debrief’ with workers after a seclusion
event, and are able to understand why a restrictive practice occurred, this
been shown to assist with the coping
Yet, residential
aged care facilities are seen as the place where people go to
This view serves to
uphold an organisational and societal culture that aged care is only about
meeting minimum standards over a person’s
Inside these
residential facilities, mistreatment is rampant and is often blamed on resource
constraints
that flow on to
affect staff levels, organisational culture and training.
Beginning at the top level, the aged care industry itself has a poor
reputation and therefore struggles to attract the ‘right’
constraints have a direct impact: the sector is viewed as
underfunded,
glamorous’ than other nursing
more stressful due
to unsustainable high resident to staff
and lacking in career
development opportunities that marks aged care as a ‘dead end
introduction of ‘zero hour’ contracts to residential aged care as
well as lower wages than the acute care sector
makes the industry less
attractive to qualified
This itself decreases
the industry’s reputation because it is then seen as requiring less
complex skills, with little incentive
to continue
The reputation feeds the organisational culture at individual institutions.
Several studies promote the need for attitudinal changes
in health care
but in practice this
is difficult because the industry’s poor reputation means that
‘workers are often frustrated and
demotivated doing roles that they deem
Residential settings must develop policies that cultivate an organisational
culture of respect for the people in their care. Even
something as simple as
fostering positive relationships between care workers and the people in their
care has been shown to increase
autonomous participation for people in
residential care.
Organisational culture is dependent on its policies, and this can either
solidify or break interpersonal care relationships. Nurses
have complained that
when a restraint practice is banned, it has not been replaced with any other
form of intervention, which has
led to ‘staff being knocked out [and]
broken bones.’
have stated that removing other types of restraint simply leads to increased
chemical restraint,
there is a concerning lack of knowledge about restraint, its effects, and
alternative practices
Nurses, generally,
are likely to report feeling undertrained to sufficiently care for persons with
intellectual disabilities.
The lack of training has been shown to contribute to a lack of empathy and
understanding for the distress of people being
but nurses still
feel as if reducing restraint is impossible without increased staffing
Fundamentally, if
the people who are the ones using chemical restraint do not believe it can be
eliminated, then efforts to do so
will almost certainly fail.
for Regulation
From a regulatory perspective, chemical restraint and residential settings
present a number of risks to be managed: it is a ‘social
that creates ‘social effects of concern’ that therefore must attract
regulatory attention.
CRPD further justifies regulating chemical
providing the new
normative basis for regulation designed to achieve equality for persons with
disability. Regulatory quality further
depends on the policy objectives —
in this case, preventing the abuse of chemical restraint — and balancing
benchmarks of success, which are likely to be contentious issues as
different stakeholders will have different values and
priorities.
Despite the
controversial nature of allowing chemical restraint at
anticipatory
regulation is likely to be the proper response to the dangers of chemical
restraint abuse: an ideal regime should be structured
to foster the relationship
between residential facilities and residents in a manner that supports the
foundational rights of persons
disabilities,
such as those
presented by the CRPD.
Any such regime must be responsive to the changing political and social
environment around residential facilities, particularly how
actors will respond
to attempts to regulate them.
Julia Black and Robert Baldwin offer five key factors influencing the success of
responsive risk-regulation: ‘(1) the behavior,
attitudes, and cultures of
regulatory actors; (2) the institutional setting of the regulatory regime; (3)
the different logics of
regulatory tools and strategies (and how these
interact); (4) the regime's own performance over time; and, finally, (5) changes
each of these
regulation also poses a number of additional questions, including: 1) whether
regulation should err on the side of caution and
‘over-regulating’ the
2) whether regulation
should be ‘blame-oriented’ or with a greater focus on
‘collective or corporate
and 3) how to
reduce risks when risks have to be traded off against other
These sociological factors and theoretical questions determine the strategies
used to ensure compliance. Braithwaite presents these
strategies via a
regulatory pyramid comprising strategies arrayed hierarchically with the least
interventionist options forming the
These strategies should
align with the normative characterisation of the problem to be
For example,
risk-based approaches may attempt to modify behaviour via performance
All of these components of a regulatory system are difficult to effectively
design in the context of chemical restraint, because the
practice is influenced
by a broad range of social, institutional and economic factors. The research
outlined above indicates that
some of the key challenges to effective regulation
of restraint that emerge in this area are: 1) lack of resources, 2) lack of
and 3) negative beliefs about vulnerable people. This indicates that
there is a mismatch between the normative foundation of the
existing regulation
for chemical restraint, and the positive elements of the regulatory
A useful comparative regime is OH&S, because the regime rests on an
analogous logic to residential facilities: ‘Because
employers control the
conditions of employment, the onus of protecting workers from occupational
disease and injury was to rest with
underpinned by a variety of laws that create the foundational rights for
workers, such that a significant part of OH&S
regulatory work is ‘to
secure relational justice, [so] it naturally aspires to provide satisfactory
responses to relational
Regulation,
then, does not work alone: as the law is how regulation is upheld, and is what
dictates the ‘fundamental rights’
that any proposed regime relies
on, the law around chemical restraint, disability, and rights needs to be
evaluated before a firm
answer can be given about the place of chemical
restraint in residential facilities.
JUDICIAL TREATMENT OF CHEMICAL RESTRAINT
This part outlines the judicial treatment of chemical restraint in both
Australia and Canada, with Part A devoted to Australian case
law and tribunal
decisions and Part B concerning Canada. Part C compares the doctrine of both
countries, to identify commonalities
between the ways the two nations approach
the issues raised by chemical restraint and the norms imposed by the CRPD. The
of this overview is to scrutinise the sources of power that contribute
to the normalisation of chemical restraint, in violation of
the obligations
under the CRPD. In determining these patterns — being the way that the law
creates the ‘conditions of
legitimate interaction among
individuals’
becomes possible to see how decisions and judgments should be considered as a
reflection of modern social issues.
To begin with, the 2009 Vic MHRB case of
is pertinent because
it discusses the high threshold for justifying the forced administration of
medication for a beneficial purpose
despite serious side-effects.
‘P’ was under a community treatment order that allowed for
involuntary administration of
medication to reduce sexual disinhibition, along
with treatment for schizophrenia. Injections of the hormone drug Depo Provera
in severe osteoporosis, but when the dosage was reduced on three
separate occasions, P’s treating team noted a return of sexual
disinhibition or inappropriate sexualised
P appealed the
extension of his community treatment order and argued that the involuntary
administration of the drug constituted
cruel, inhuman and degrading treatment
under s 10(b) of the
and s 19A of
Mental Health Act 1986
The Board noted that the impacts of P’s medication were ‘far more
intense than would be routinely provided to involuntary
and commented
that ‘[i]n the Board’s view, [P’s treating teams] had at all
times attempted to act in P’s
interests.’
Nonetheless, the complexity of P’s case posed a challenge for the Board
when considering adverse side effects when weighed
against the therapeutic
In reaching its
decision, the Board acknowledged the ‘inherent conflicts between a
patient’s right to, and the state’s
responsibility to provide,
treatment for the mental illness and protection of the person’s individual
human rights.’
Ultimately, it found that the high threshold – where the involuntary
administration could ‘no longer be justified in
a free and democratic
and where the
treatment could constitute cruel, inhuman or degrading
been met. Despite the physical harm the medication was causing, the reality of
dealing with severe behaviours of
concern created a
balance for the Board to consider.
The challenge of balancing rights and protection caused by severe behavioural
issues were further considered in
concerned a child who ‘at the age of 11 years old has been unable to be
successfully managed within the community
even though management has included
what is little short of a chemical straight
moved repeatedly between juvenile justice detention and residential care, but
when her mental health unit unexpectedly
decided to discharge her, the Director
General of the Department of Community Services made an urgent ex parte
application for orders
including the forced administration of sedative
medication. Slattery J considered the rights under the
Convention on the
Rights of the Child
‘relevant although not a conclusive
consideration’,
though the CROC is not incorporated into domestic law, the ratification of the
CROC gives rise to an expectation that decisions
will be made with regards to
those rights.
acknowledging that restricting the liberty of a child should only be done with
great caution
Article 37 of the CRC emphasises the child’s dignity and the need to use
detention/restrictions of liberty as a
last resort for a short period of time,
Slattery J found that there was simply no reasonable alternative available and
The notion that there is ‘no reasonable alternative’ to chemical
restraint is a common theme in Australian case law. For
example, in the case of
concerning an ex-nurse who now resided in an aged care facility and who’s
family strongly opposed the use of sedative
medications on her, the South
Australian Civil and Administrative Tribunal noted that ‘[i]t is not
obvious on the evidence
before me, but it is possible that her level of anxiety
and distress is compounded by some remaining understanding that she has a
cognitive impairment and is residing in an aged care facility. This is very
regrettable and no doubt distressing for
Nonetheless, even
orders that were ‘clearly intrusive and restrictive of EUY’s rights
and personal autonomy’ were
necessary’.
Even where necessity is a defining factor in a case, Australian courts do
consider the seriousness of interfering with a person’s
liberty, but
professional support is often a key element in findings for allowing restrictive
practices. For example, in
the orders sought
for indefinite detention of a 16-year-old with involuntary sedation, were
‘radical’ and Brereton J ‘approached
the application with
scepticism.’
Nevertheless, necessity won, because Brereton J saw ‘no practical
alternative’ because other attempts had failed and
had no realistic
prospect of success, and because there was ‘strong professional support
for such a regime.’
M v Mental Health Review
which concerned
forced medication by depot injection, Lindsay J encouraged the applicant to
willingly accept the aid of the doctors
and nurses, who ‘can see in him a
goodness which all hope[d] to
There are two significant counter examples. The first is found in
The Mental Health Review Tribunal &
Barr J overturned a Tribunal decision where the appellant had been the
subject of an order for involuntary treatment involving the
administration of
antipsychotic medication to which she did not
Barr J acknowledged
that ‘[t]his decision may be seen as unsatisfactory by the dedicated
psychiatrists and other mental health
professionals who stand ready to assist
the appellant and treat her serious delusional
‘irrespective of the views held by the medical professionals as to the
appellant’s best
been insufficient evidence before the Tribunal to make the original orders. As
of writing, this decision has not been cited
in any subsequent judgments.
The second is
PBU v Mental Health
where in Bell J
summarised the objectives and principles of the
Mental Health Act
being ‘intended to alter the balance of power between medical authority
and persons having mental illness in the direction
of respecting their inherent
dignity and human
decision, Bell J further criticised the Tribunal for employing a best-interests
approach, finding that VCAT had been wrongfully
influenced by best-interest
considerations, which were not a part of the statutory criteria, instead of the
correct ‘least-restrictive’
More broadly, this
decision adds to the evidence of a pattern of paternalism reflected in tribunal
and judicial errors of law when
it comes to orders involving involuntary
medication and applying statutory criteria. If, as was the case in
Tribunal members with legal training are misapplying tests for legal
capacity, then the question arises as to whether medical professionals
There are further challenges to consistent application because chemical
restraint is practised across a number of industries. In
the NSW Civil and
Administrative Tribunal considered that there are ‘sound reasons why it
would be in the best interests of
people with whom restrictive practices are
being used in New South Wales, for there to be some consistency in the way the
definitions
are applied
throughout the quality and safeguards arena and within the
illustrates the complexity of the law around restraint practices. In this case,
the South Australian Administrative Appeals
Tribunal had to interpret a number
in order to determine
the legality of consenting
to restraining the three applicants. In this decision and in
the Tribunal
considered it to be appropriate that consistency was maintained with the
definitions of restrictive practices in the
NDIS Act and
Re KF; Re ZT; Re
the Tribunal noted at several points the inconsistency across
even observing that
the inconsistencies are something that ‘may merit the attention of
Parliament’.
Tribunal commented that the CRPD is a ‘a set of best practice principles
that should guide policy development, funding
decisions and the administration
and provision of disability services in
In both cases, the
Tribunals went beyond their dispute resolution function to comment on the scope
of the problem of regulating restraint
practices, particularly referencing the
CRPD as a guide. Yet, as was discussed in Part II, the Committee’s
interpretation on
the CRPD requires that restrictive practices are not to be
used, as it is a violation of several human rights.
Australian case and tribunal law that addresses the deeper issues raised by
chemical restraint and human rights is scarce. These judgments
and decisions
represent an implicit acceptance of chemical restraint, and other forced
interventions, as being in a person’s
best interests, despite references
to the need to uphold the values of the CRPD. On reading the case and tribunal
law, it is evident
that courts and tribunals place great value on protection of
vulnerable populations, even to the detriment of equal recognition of
person’s rights. Though not all of these cases concern elderly people, the
cases discussed above and below, taken together,
present a larger doctrinal
picture of implicit paternalism when it comes to people with disabilities.
Canadian case law indicates that the protectionist and paternalistic paradigm
is still widely adhered to, though steps are being taken
Several cases have
challenged the authorities that allow people to be chemically restrained against
their will. However, the
Canadian system result in attempts to balance protecting a person from the
effects of their impairment, while also protecting
the public from people who
can be a danger to themselves or
The guiding benchmark for Canadian courts is the
mirrors many international human rights obligations: s 7 of the
guarantees that ‘everyone has the right to life, liberty and security of
the person and the right not to be deprived thereof
except in accordance with
the principles of fundamental justice.’ Canadian courts have held that s 7
would be infringed by
state action that has the likely effect of seriously
impairing a person’s
Yet, when this was
challenged in the case of
a case which
concerned a claim for battery where a patient was chemically restrained and
challenge under s 7, the trial judge found that the
involuntary chemical restraint of Mr Conway was lawful both at common law and
Mental Health
On appeal, Chadwick
J acknowledged that every person has a right to liberty and security of
and that security of
person is linked to some aspects of personal
the use of the
chemical restraint against Mr. Conway ‘would be in accordance with the
principles of fundamental
both under the
common law and under the
challenge concerning chemical restraint was
where a patient
was medicated against his will for five days.
The trial judge concluded
that though Mr Mullin’s liberty had indeed been restricted, Mr Mullins
still had to prove that the
restriction was contrary to the principles of
fundamental justice.
appeal, Mr Mullins alleged that his rights against cruel and unusual punishment
(s 12 of the
) and his right to security of person (s 7 of the
) had been violated. Mr Mullins alleged that he was tackled by
security, taken to a ‘quiet room’ and injected with medication
rendered him
‘helpless’.
trial judge found that this did not amount to punishment because the intention
was to aid him, a conclusion with which Kirkpatrick
As with Mr Conway, Mr
Mullins was unable to prove that the restraint did not ‘accord with the
principles of fundamental
These principles of fundamental justice were discussed in
Karunaratne
concerning a 79-year old woman who, while suffering from a mental health
condition, refused to be medicated against her will.
McDermid DCJ held that,
‘assuming, for the purpose of this analysis, that [the plaintiff] will be
deprived of the right to
security of her person’ in determining whether
the forced medication violated the principles of fundamental justice, this
considering that fundamental justice incorporates both the procedural
and substantive issues.
Similarly, McDermid D.C.J stated that ‘it is generally accepted as a
fundamental principle of our society that the State has
an obligation to care
for disabled persons who are through no fault of their own, unable to care for
themselves.’
Consequently, because the plaintiff’s procedural rights were ‘fully
treatment would be given with the best interests of the plaintiff in
there would be no
‘infringement of the right to security of the person contrary to the
principles of fundamental
When deciding whether or not the involuntary medication constituted cruel and
unusual treatment or punishment, counsel for the appellant
relied on the case of
Rogers v Commissioner of the Department of Mental
to submit that
the administration of drugs would ‘inevitably flow’ from a finding
of incompetency
because there
was a State interest in permitting this to be
McDermid DCJ held that,
though in this particular incident the facts of the case did not constitute
cruel and unusual punishment
because the treatment was not ‘grossly
disproportionate ... in her circumstances or so excessive as to outrage
standards of
decency’, treatment without consent ‘may very well be
‘cruel and unusual’ especially if it is administered
not for the
benefit of the patient but for the ‘benefit of the government
restraint has been held to constitute treatment where it was employed for a
‘health related
meaning that
this door may still be open for future cases.
In all the above cases, the claimants alleged they did not consent to being
given medication, despite the facts indicating that there
were severe
behavioural issues at hand. Consent is a central theme in the debate about
chemical restraint: an action is (typically)
not an assault if consent has been
given. However, in the circumstances of persons with cognitive and intellectual
disabilities,
consent can be difficult to gain, and competency can be difficult
to establish.
This was a central issue in
which concerned
whether a mental health patient had the right to specify if they did or did not
wish to receive psychotropic medication
if they were to become incompetent. The
Ontario Court of Appeal found that ‘[f]ew medical procedures can be more
than the forcible injection of powerful mind-altering
and that to
deprive people of the right to make decisions when they are competent would be a
violation of their Charter rights to
security of the
Importantly, the
Court held that this was not a reasonable or justifiable restriction on a
person’s liberty: ‘a competent
patient’s right to be free from
non-consensual invasions of his or her person is not diminished by subsequent
incompetency
or subordinated to his or her “best interests” where
the prior competent wishes of the patient are
changes followed this
and, in the case of
Conway v Jacques,
the Court held that where no competent wishes were expressed, the substitute
decision-maker must take into account the person’s
values and beliefs, as
well as any wishes expressed while incompetent, before making a decision in the
patient’s best
Despite these positive changes, the Canadian case law also shows that there
is an overarching belief that involuntary medication and
other non-consensual
interventions are often in a person’s best interests, regardless of their
wishes. Though
elevated competent refusal of treatment to the
status of a constitutional
paternalistic language
persists in other judgments for those who do not meet the
‘competent’ standard. For example, the
Tribunal in
Re C (B.W.)
stated that:
The evidence established that BWC's treatment providers are trained
professionals who have used a number of strategies including seclusion
and chemical restraints to manage his behaviour. These resources
are not available to BWC if he is not in the custody of a psychiatric
... Outside of hospital BWC would not have the benefit of trained professionals
to redirect him. Nor would he have the strategies
such as seclusion
and chemical restraints available to manage his
behaviours.
There was similar commentary in the case of
A H v Fraser Health
which concerned
non-consensual interventions for a First Nations woman, though this was
described as ‘intrusive support and
assistance.’
believed that Ms H was likely to have an ‘ongoing
relationship’
respondents, regardless of her wishes. Additionally, the Court considered that
even though records indicate that the plaintiff
‘was pressured or cajoled
and she gave in’ to taking medication, the Court was not ‘persuaded
that A.H. was forcibly
administered treatment. It is at least as likely that she
consented, after being urged to do
Ms H was clearly
overwhelmed by the authorities around her, such that it is questionable whether
or not she truly consented.
Chemical restraint poses issues for effective regulation because it is often
used in emergency situations, which may amplify the pressure
put on vulnerable
people in that situation. The nature of the emergency turns the act of
chemically restraining a person from an
assault into a legally-defensible
however Canadian
courts have intervened to provide remedies where chemical restraint has been a
‘particularly shocking and
violation of
procedural requirements. This is even so where a patient may have lost their
right to refuse treatment under legislation
due to a lack of mental competency
or because they are ‘acting out’ in a dangerous
The structure of procedural safeguards is then important to understand. With
the importance of consent in mind, each jurisdiction
has its own way of
establishing decision-making authority for those who are deemed unable to
consent, and each jurisdiction contains
a provision exempting emergency
situations from the need to obtain consent before administering medication. For
example, Ontario
has created a legislative
of a ‘Ulysses
contract’, a means where a person with an illness can outline the nature
of the treatment they would like
to receive, should their illness worsen to the
point that they cannot act for
themselves.
Traditionally,
these have been binding agreements between a patient and a psychiatrist, but the
Ontario iteration involves invoking
‘powers of attorney for personal
which include the
power to use reasonable force to take a person to a place of care, or restrain
them during the care or
Presumably, this
could be extended to a decision to chemically restrain a person: the person
could express an opinion about what
medication they would prefer or what they
would prefer be done to them after the incident.
This is not a widespread practice yet, even though these contracts would be
better aligned with the requirements under the CRPD. The
decision-making regime remains predominant in Canada, though some jurisdictions
are moving towards modified versions.
The CRPD requires states to move towards a
supported model of
decision-making,
but this is
not without its difficulties: where communication with an affected person is not
possible even with appropriate supports,
‘previously expressed wishes,
abiding values, and experience in similar situations’ should be used to
determine decisions.
Doctrine should be regarded as a reflection of social issues, and though most
case law in this area concerns people with mental illnesses,
rather than
the themes that emerge from the cases above are still
applicable to disability more broadly. Firstly, the delineation of these two
categories is not entirely clear. For example, there is evidence that people
with intellectual disabilities are at a significantly
increased risk of
developing mental illness.
Secondly, from a sociological perspective, both cohorts have been subjected to
attempts to ‘normalise’ their
such that the
attitudes displayed in these cases are still reflective of broader attitudes
towards those that do not fit society’s
norms. These ‘normalising
trends’ deserve particular attention in the light of the introduction of
the social model of
disability to the law.
Primarily, the language used in the judgments and legislation above reflects
the larger cultural discourses happening with the uncomfortable
transition to
the social model. A paternalistic view is a clear commonality between both
Canada and Australia: for example, the Australian
and the Canadian case
Karunaratne
involve similar factual circumstances, of elderly women who do not wish to be
medicated. Both authorities arrived at the same
conclusion: that intervention
was inevitable and necessary, because of the fundamental duty society owes to
protect vulnerable people.
The cases and legislation reviewed also serve to reinforce notions that
non-consensual interventions are therapeutic, even with the
risks associated.
For example, the Depo-Provera injections in the Victorian Mental Health Review
Board case of 09-085
been the subject of a class action in
because of significant
and potentially irreversible bone mineral density damage, and yet, the
‘reward’ outweighed the
risk because, according to the Tribunal,
behavioural modification was necessary to prevent P’s sexual disinhibition
from becoming
a further threat. In Canada, there is a similar trend to refer to
the intention behind the treatment, such as in
rationalise the use of forced treatment.
That is not to say that no change in judicial sentiment towards people with
disabilities can be seen in either country. This is a
‘punishment to
protection’
which is clearly much better for the welfare of persons with disability. Yet,
overall, the judgments appear to quietly
reject the social model and the norms
presented by the CRPD: there is no large difference between the cases examined
dating before
and after the introduction of the CRPD in 2008, noting that the
ratification was preceded by years of negotiations. For example,
a Canadian 2009 case regarding forced medication was decided almost
identically to
Conway v Fleming
in that both instances of
forced treatment were held to comply with the ‘fundamental principles of
In Australia,
all of the case law and tribunal decisions above were decided after the
introduction of the CRPD, yet, as already explained
in Part A, there is a
consistent pattern of paternalism that goes against the aims of the CRPD.
It appears that paternalism and the ‘othering’ of persons with
disability is embedded so deeply within the legal system
that the CRPD and the
social model have not been able to take root, such that the aspirations of the
CRPD are not being met. This
is because the judicial interpretation of
restricting liberty shows a disinclination to leave people
‘suffering’, where
there appears to be a ready
Such an approach
would align with the ‘empowerment by protection’ paradigm introduced
, but it is likely that regulation will also have to address
persistent paternalism where this becomes
overpowering.
Nonetheless,
since regulation is dependent on its legal foundations, the fact that courts are
not willing to meet the standards set
by the CRPD poses a challenge for coherent
regulation based on the CRPD.
REGULATORY MODEL FOR IMPLEMENTING THE CRPD
Australia’s ratification of the CRPD creates obligations under the
Convention that cannot be ignored, and the CRPD therefore
must influence
regulation of matters affecting persons with disabilities. This part deals with
regulating the use of chemical restraint
in light of the theory presented in
section II and III, and the doctrine in section IV. Part A elucidates the
CRPD’s difficulties
in removing the cause of legal disability because it
serves to reinforce individualistic ideals. Part B proposes a new minimum
for chemical restraint, based on an empowerment by protection paradigm.
proposes a risk-based framework for chemical restraint before concluding
with selected policy suggestions for residential aged care.
The CRPD and Legal
In section III, it was explained that regulation can be successful where,
when aiming to structure interpersonal relations with a
certain goal, there is a
solid foundation of rights to build on. Though the CRPD is well-suited to
influence states in making structural
changes based on positive
it does not form a
sufficient basis for removing impediments to full social participation for
people with disabilities because it
still upholds the valorised atomistic
individual as the pinnacle of what humans are to achieve. Further, rights should
not be conceptualised
in a manner that is divorced from the realities on the
ground, because this risks regulatory failure where regulatory standards are
impossible for staff to meet. As a result, the discussion around chemical
restraint has reached a point where there is tension between
a number of
competing priorities: most notably, the protection of persons who are identified
as ‘vulnerable’ as well
as the persons who work and live with them,
and their inherent rights equal to others.
However, this does not mean that all attempts at improvements in the lives of
persons with disabilities must be abandoned: if anything,
idealism can be maintained as an aspiration. To this end, in section II, the
idea of empowerment by protection was
introduced, which for the purposes of
regulation will involve a balancing of rights and values. The CRPD is
particularly well-suited
for an empowerment paradigm because it
‘relocates’ power from the medical field and other institutions to
persons with
disabilities as it reinforces that persons with disabilities are
inherently equal to others. Recall that, as was discussed in section
Foucauldian lens, power is dynamically linked to
yet a whole
‘set of knowledge [has been]
disqualified’
because it belongs to the ‘wrong’ group. The CRPD forces states to
question taken-for-granted power structures
that can be a barrier to
In this light, the
next section examines how chemical restraint might be conceptualised as a
‘minimally sufficient action’
compatible with empowerment by
protection, rather than a tool of convenience and, at worst, oppression.
Restraint as a ‘Minimally Sufficient Action’ Instead of a
‘Last Resort’
It is a fundamental fact that people have different levels of capabilities,
and this warrants different treatment in recognition of
these differences: this
is equitable, rather than equal, treatment. However, this can be misappropriated
by paternalism and negative
perceptions about people with disabilities,
resulting in abuse. This is the case with chemical restraint where the
‘last resort’
requirement present in legislation appears to have
been used inappropriately to the detriment of people with disabilities: it is
possible that the ‘last resort’ is not a high enough standard to
restrict the use of the forced medication to truly appropriate
circumstances.
Re-framing when it may be appropriate to chemically restrain a person would
introduce a higher bar for health and
care workers to meet before forcibly
medicating a person.
Creating a new normative standard for when chemical restraint is appropriate
requires utilising a mix of theoretical approaches. To
reiterate, empowerment
theory works to reduce the effects of social or personal blocks to exercising
power in one’s own
The Canadian
approach claims to uphold the ideals of fundamental justice, such that at times,
it is appropriate to chemically restrain
a person against their will where it
serves an appropriate purpose. These two concepts can form the normative basis
for regulating
chemical restraint, at a standard higher than as a ‘last
resort’: where chemical restraint is the minimally sufficient
capable of reducing a person’s personal or social blocks to exercising
where its use does not violate a fundamental principle of
then the practice
may be used.
Examples may be useful to illustrate this idea. Where chemical restraint
allows a person to calm down enough to have a conversation
with their treating
practitioner, this is arguably the ideal outcome of medicating a person: it is a
‘rights violation’
empowerment in that it may ignore
their explicit requests not to be medicated, but it enables a person to better
exercise their personal
capabilities by stabilising their emotional state. On
the other hand, where an adult in aged care is medicated so as to be
and tidy and ... not crying
this does not
serve the person in improving their capability to exercise their power to make
autonomous choices: instead, this is
representative of a falsely-benign social
norm that requires people with disabilities to outwardly perform the
expectations of society
little respect for benign difference. On a similar issue, where wandering by a
person with dementia could instead be solved
with environmental factors that
address unmet needs, this is the minimally sufficient action that recognises
that behaviour should
be chemically restrained without first
attempting to recognise in what exclusionary
the person is
Risk-Based Chemical Restraint Regulatory Framework
Recall that the central question of this article is whether chemical
restraint has a place in modern disability policy and, specifically,
Even if the CRPD is unable to fully remove impediments to full participation for
persons with disabilities, this does
not mean that the question of efficient
regulation can be disregarded based on an inability to reach the ideals under
the CRPD. Any
affirmative answer to the question must be conditional on having
an effective framework that protects people from abuse: given that
legislation
already requires that chemical restraint is used as a last resort, there is
clearly a compliance issue such that the
current framework is insufficient. The
new benchmark outlined above for appropriate restraint use is useless without
compliance,
as well as an understanding of what barriers to compliance exist,
namely: perceived safety and legal issues; resource constraints
organisational culture; lack of education about consequences of, and
alternatives, to restraint; persistent paternalistic beliefs
towards older
people; inadequate review; and communication
These criteria, taken as a whole, present a risk-based framework that can be
used to control the risk that chemical restraint will
Each of those factors
could together form ‘a portfolio of harm-mitigation projects, each one
aimed at a carefully identified
and delineated
concentration’.
regulatory focal points would still allow for flexibility in strategy that is
responsive to the individual circumstances of
the regulated
institutions
but could also
provide the basis for analysing individual risk scores for different residential
facilities.
This suggestion has a caveat: it should be noted that different residential
facilities will have different risk profiles, and this
should be given
significant weight in developing a facility’s risk score. Simply labelling
a particular facility as ‘high
risk’ and targeting that facility for
action can lead to the misapplication of scarce resources, because certain
will be more amenable to different types of intervention than
Therefore, a risk
score based on the above list does not provide much information about the costs
of securing compliance
enforcing the ultimate policy goal of reducing the risk of abuse. This will be
heavily influenced by the individual residential
That is not to place all the blame on the individual facility. Regulation
exists in a broader societal context: it is well-established
that residential
facilities are viewed in a negative
but elderly people are
also viewed as burdensome.
This is likely because of a greater social discomfort with more than just
disability, but with ageing and mortality: ‘the last
stage of life is ...
where the darkest human fears reside, the dying are hard to associate with, and
their care is separated both
organisationally and
professionally.’
it starkly, for a liberal society, the obsession with autonomy places dependency
on the same trajectory as
For these reasons it is difficult to displace the negative connotations
associated with residential facilities, wherein they are viewed
stop’ rather than a full, valuable stage of a person’s life. These
perceptions are linked with the organisation’s
culture as well as the
attitudes of those working in these spaces: with society lowering the value of
this life-stage, and the people
in it, this allows for paternalism to override
dignity, because there is a broader perception that there is no dignity in
dependency.
An empowerment by protection paradigm could challenge this notion:
if all people are dependent on one another such that autonomy
can be exercised
through social relationships,
then dignity in dependence is inherent.
Considering that a central purpose of the CRPD is to change social structures
to reflect such inherent dignity for persons with disabilities,
chemical restraint practices have been abused by those who were supposed to
protect vulnerable people, policy in this area
must recognise that while persons
with disabilities may have different needs, it should not be taken for granted
that the benefits
of chemical restraint automatically outweigh the significant
risks. Yet, where people’s needs are not met, this significantly
the risk that chemical restraint becomes inevitable: regulation should therefore
be focused on reducing the risk that restraint
is ever needed.
Suggestions to Reduce Restraint Abuse
This final section offers suggestions to reduce the risk of chemical
restraint abuse, based on the empowerment by protection paradigm.
To reiterate,
this suggests that changes should be made to remove both personal and societal
blocks to full social participation:
the following suggestions have been chosen
as approaches that can address the key issues identified by the ACRC as barriers
to eliminating
restraint use.
Nonetheless, any changes will be only a stopgap solution to a system that is
unable to adequately address the root of legal disability.
Nonetheless,
improvements can be made to residential facilities with the aim of reducing the
likelihood that chemical restraint will
be needed while also providing a strict
safeguard framework for the practice.
First, one simple improvement would be to standardise chemical restraint
definitions and practices across sectors. Along with the
ACRC’s Final
Report, other key reports
note that restrictive practices are used across a wide range of
and argue that
there should be consistency in the way the sectors covering vulnerable people
are regulated.
The Australian
Law Reform Commission has twice recommended a national policy framework designed
to combat elder abuse,
standardise the use of restrictive practices across the
stakeholders have identified that reducing restrictive practices is challenged
by ‘the lack of uniform legislative
controls and reporting requirements
and the absence of equivalent key players across all
Therefore, the key benefits of standardising the sectors dealing with vulnerable
people are to prevent chemical restraint from being
a matter of discretion,
while also reducing the complexity of the legal
Second, inconsistencies in definitions and practices contribute to the
problem of defining the scope of abuse. There is a reluctance
medication prescribed by practitioners as chemical
Yet evidence given
at the ACRC alleged that that antipsychotics are given to residents without
psychotic symptoms
average, the rates of medication in residential facilities are significantly
higher than in the general
population.
This prescription
blind spot is reflected in the
Aged Care Act
, which specifically excludes
medication prescribed by a doctor as chemical
Inappropriate
pharmacy practices should be included within the ambit of the official
definitions of chemical restraint, such that
safeguards then apply.
Third, when it comes to the designs of residential aged care, it has been
noted that the designs of these facilities are often not
conducive to managing
behaviours of concern. For example, there have been concerns about the lack of
‘circulation space for
reducing the likelihood of aggressive incidents,
[and] accessible outside areas for regular physical exercise [as well as] ...
insufficient
natural light for maintaining normal sleep/wake
implemented a ‘multisensory environment as a nonpharmacological
intervention for people with behavioural and psychological
symptoms of
significant improvements in communication between participants and their
caregivers as well as significantly reduced behavioural
This supports the
idea that residential facilities must be seen as more than a place to die, but
instead, as a place wherein a fully
valued life stage can take place.
Though person-centred institutional designs do improve behaviour in
residential facilities, the research outlined in section III indicates
nurses feel that reducing restraint is impossible without increased staffing
measures because of threats to
Therefore, to address
this, mandated minimum nurse to resident ratios could be legislated across the
Commonwealth.
When nurses
have more time for each resident, this enables them to form better therapeutic
relationships with those in their care,
which as was explained in section III,
will have flow on effects for fostering autonomy for persons in residential
However, when
restraint may be inevitable, the Ulysses contract used in Canada would be a
beneficial protection for people in residential
or in-home care, in order to
promote respect for a person’s wishes and preferences.
Above all, it is important to include persons with cognitive and intellectual
disabilities, their family members and care workers
in the rule-making
This involves asking
what the persons who are being chemically restrained require from the
residential settings they reside in, and
how the law can be used to provide
access to justice for a vulnerable section of society that is often ‘out
of sight, out of
mind’. By putting these experiences at the forefront of
reform discussions, this also begins to visibly respect the lived experience
person with disabilities and their care workers, rather than attempting to solve
the problem from an arm’s length, academic
Many of these changes will require significant political will to occur.
Though it is generally accepted that society has a duty to
its most vulnerable,
this has not been followed by the requisite planning,
or oversight to make
this obligation a reality. The revelations of the ACRC showed the extent to
which Australia has failed its vulnerable
population: chemical restraint is too
often the outcome of a negligently underfunded and overworked system. By
introducing new standards
and empowerment-oriented policy, it is possible to
begin to rectify this situation, even if change is not going to happen quickly.
This is not an excuse to aim low, but instead, an opportunity to evaluate the
ways in which policy can further the overarching goals
of the CRPD.
VI CONCLUSION
The central question of this article was whether chemical restraint has a
legitimate place in modern disability policy, specifically
in aged care
facilities. Chemical restraint is the continuation of a long history of
controlling people who fall outside of the norm:
ECT, DST and chemical restraint
via psychotropic medications have all been used on persons with disability
without their consent,
often to horrific ends. From a Foucauldian perspective,
these practices are a mode of controlling those who fall outside of the norm.
For this reason, the power structures that enable these practices must be
examined and questioned, rather than simply taken on face
value as a necessity,
particularly when the consequences are potentially so severe.
The use of chemical restraint poses a difficult regulatory question because
it involves competing imperatives, presenting a ‘Kantian
as discussed in section II. On one hand, the CRPD, as the main source of rights
to answer this question, would appear
to require states to ban the use of all
restraint practices as forced interventions, while also requiring states to take
steps to ensure that persons with disabilities are able to enjoy the
full spectrum of human rights available to
Chemical restraint is
also often practised without consent, potentially constituting a violation of
that person’s rights as
well as their
On the other hand,
attention must also be paid to protection values, not only of the person
restrained, but of the other people around
This ethical dilemma means that regulation must balance a number of competing
priorities. These were identified as challenges for
regulation in section III.
In particular, studies show that nonpharmacological interventions can fail to
reduce aggressive or violent
behaviours of
and when other modes
of restrictive practices are taken away, nurses are more likely to turn to
chemical restraint anyway.
any case, this author has found no studies that have presented a viable
alternative model.
Though the CRPD has been in force since 2008, the judiciary appears to concur
with staff who practice chemical restraint. The doctrine
outlined in section IV
showed that there has been a quiet rejection of the new norms under the CRPD.
Regulation is therefore difficult
because there appears to be reluctance to
leave people ‘rotting with their rights
regulation must strike a balance between protection and the aspirational goals
of the CRPD.
Such a framework should be based on an ‘empowerment by
protection’ paradigm, which does not deny that certain people require
different treatment but emphasises this treatment should never be a form of
oppression. Several policy suggestions were outlined
in section IV, with the aim
of preventing the need to use chemical restraint in the first place. Particular
emphasis should be given
to improving the capacity of nursing staff to provide
genuine care to people in residential facilities, such that these places become
more than a place to die. However, where chemical restraint must be used, it
should be done so in a way that the risk does not outweigh
the benefits: it may
be that such a scenario is quite rare in practice.
Fundamentally, the way chemical restraint is practised against vulnerable
people is always going to be reflective of societal values:
for many, the ACRC
revelations were the first major public acknowledgment of the neglect occurring
in residential facilities, chemical
restraint being just one problem of the
dozens identified. This is not a new problem, but the solutions to chemical
restraint abuse
must be innovative if Australia is going to successfully reduce
the use of the practice. Regulation of this area should be underpinned
aspirations: the CRPD calls for states to recognise the inherent dignity in
persons with disabilities, and it is time that
Australia begins to properly do
*Mallory Comyn is an Hons graduate
Transcript of Proceedings,
Royal Commission into Aged Care
Quality and Safety
(Sydney Hearing, 15 May 2019) T1708.6-10 <
https://agedcare.royalcommission.gov.au/media/10021
‘ACRC Transcript’
Office of the State Coroner
(Western Australia),
Annual Report
(Report, 30 June 2012) 70-2;
Coroner’s Court of Western Australia,
Inquest into the death of
Antoinette Williams
(Inquest, 11 April 2014).
Royal Commission into Aged Care
Quality and Safety,
Restrictive practices in residential aged care
(Background Paper 4, 3 May 2019) 11 (‘
Restrictive
Royal Commission into Aged Care
Quality and Safety,
Final Report Volume 4A
(Final Report, 2021) 99.
Ibid 215, 218.
See generally A R Atti et al.,
‘A systematic review of metabolic side effects related to the use of
antipsychotic drugs in
dementia’ (2014) 26(1)
International
Psychogeriatrics
19; Anna Song Beeber et al., ‘Potential Side Effects
and Adverse Events of Antipsychotic Use for Residents with Dementia in
Living: Implications for Prescribers, Staff and Families’ (2021)
Journal of Applied Gerontology
1-8; Silvio Caccia, ‘Safety and
Phamacokinetics of Atypical Antipsychotics in Children and Adolescents’
Paediatric Drugs
217; Shan Xing and Todd Lee, ‘Increased
Risk of Diabetes Among 6-24-Year-Olds Using Second Generation
Antipsychotics’
(2017) 27(9)
Journal of Child and Adolescent
Psychopharmacology
782; Liesbeth Aerts et al., ‘Why Deprescribing
Antipsychotics in Older People with Dementia in Long-term Care is not Always
Successful: Insights from the HALT Study’ (2019) 34(11)
International
Journal of Geriatric Psychiatry
See generally Yu-Jung Wei et
al., ‘Fall and Fracture Risk in Nursing Home Residents with
Moderate-to-Severe Behavioral Symptoms
of Alzheimer’s Disease and Related
Dementias Initiating Antidepressants or Antipsychotics’ (2017) 72(5)
Journals of Gerontology: Medical Sciences
695, 697-700.
See generally Vikrant Mittal et
al., ‘Risk of Cerebrovascular Adverse Events and Death in Elderly Patients
with Dementia When
Treated with Antipsychotic Medications: A Literature Review
of Evidence’ (2011) 26(1)
American Journal of Alzheimer’s Disease
and Other Impairments
See generally Philip S Wang
et al., ‘Risk of Death in Elderly Users of Conventions vs. Atypical
Antipsychotic Medications’
(2005) 353(22)
The New England Journal of
See, eg, Trine Lise Bakken
and Heidi Sageng, ‘Mental Health Nursing of Adults with Intellectual
Disabilities and Mental Illness:
A Review of Empirical Studies 1994-2013’
(2016) 30(2)
Archives of Psychiatric Nursing
286, 286-7.
See eg, ICAC South
Oakden: A Shameful Chapter in South Australian History
Report, 28 February 2018) (‘The Oakden Report’); Australian Law
Reform Commission,
Equality, Capacity and Disability in Commonwealth Laws
(Report, 2014) (‘
Equality, Capacity and Disability’
Kate Carnell and Ron Paterson,
Review of National Aged Care Quality
Regulatory Processes
(Report, October 2017); Australian Law Reform
Commission,
Elder Abuse – A National Legal Response
(Final Report,
14 June 2017) (‘
Elder Abuse
See, eg, Committee on the
Rights of Persons with Disabilities,
Report on the Committee on the Rights of
Persons with Disabilities,
UN GAOR, 72
sess, Supp No 55, UN Doc
A/72/55 (25 March 2015 – 2 September 2017)
annex I, [10]-[11];
Committee on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities (n 12) [42]; Tina
Minkowitz, ‘The United Nations Convention
on the Rights of Persons with
Disabilities and the Right to be Free from Nonconsensual Psychiatric
Interventions’ (2007) 34(2)
Syracruse Journal of International Law and
405; Laura Davidson, ‘A Key, Not a Straitjacket: The Case for
Interim Mental Health Legislation Pending Complete Prohibition
of Psychiatric
Coercion in Accordance with the Convention on the Rights of Persons with
Disabilities’ (2020) 22(1)
Health and Human Rights Journal
Centre for the Human Rights of Users and Survivors of Psychiatry,
Health Laws Contravene the CRPD – An Application of Article 14 with
Implications for the Obligations of States Parties
(Report, 16 September
Tahani Hawsawi et al.,
‘Nurses’ and Consumers’ Shared Experiences of Seclusion and
Restraint: A Qualitative Literature
Review’ (2020) 29
International
Journal of Mental Health Nursing
Yvette Maker and Bernadette
McSherry, ‘Regulating restraint use in mental health and aged care
settings: Lessons from the Oakden
(2019) 44(1)
Alternative Law Journal
Convention on the Rights of Persons
with Disabilities,
opened for signature 13 December
2006, 2515 UNTS 3
(entered into force 3 May 2008) (‘
Mary Donnelly,
‘Changing Values and Growing Expectations: The Evolution of Capacity
(2017) 70(1)
Current Legal Problems
Terry Hutchinson, ‘The
Doctrinal Method: Incorporating Interdisciplinary Methods in Reforming the
(2015) 8(3)
Erasmus Law Review
Mathias Siems,
Comparative Law
(Cambridge University Press, 2
Steven Hoffman, Lathika
Sritharan and Ali Tejpar, ‘Is the UN Convention on the Rights of Persons
with Disabilities Impacting
Mental Health Laws and Policies in High-Income
Countries? A Case Study of Implementation in Canada’ (2016) 16(28)
International Health and Human Rights
Canada Act 1982
c 11, sch B pt I s 1 (‘
Canadian Charter of Rights and
Hutchinson (n 17) 138.
Henri-Jacques Stiker,
History of Disability
(University of Michigan Press, 1997) 117-22, cited in
Daniel G Atkins and Robert L Hayman Jr, ‘Disability and the Law: An Essay
on Inclusion, from Theory to Practice’
(2017) 23(2)
Widener Law
Michael Robertson, Kirsty
Morris and Gary Walter, ‘Overview of Psychiatric Ethics V: Utilitarianism
and the Ethics of Duty’
(2007) 15(5)
Australasian Psychiatry
Atkins and Hayman Jr (n 23)
Stiker (n 23) 18, cited in
Atkins and Hayman Jr (n 23) 168.
Atkins and Hayman Jr (n 24)
Peter Bartlett, ‘The
United Nations Convention on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities and Mental
Health Law’
(2012) 75(5)
Modern Law Review
Atkins and Hayman Jr (n 23)
Tom Shakespeare, ‘The
Social Model of Disability’ in Lennard J. Davis (ed),
The Disability
Studies Reader
(Routledge, 5
ed, 2017) 195, 197.
Jay Dolmage, ‘Disabled
Upon Arrival: The Rhetorical Construction of Disability and Race at Ellis
Island’ in Lennard J
Davis (ed),
The Disability Studies Reader
(Routledge, 5
ed, 2017) 43, 65.
Shakespeare (n 32) 199.
Bartlett (n 30) 759.
Nick Watson,
‘Theorising the Lives of Disabled Children: How Can Disability Theory
Children and Society
Bill Hughes, ‘What Can
a Foucauldian Analysis Contribute to Disability Theory?’ in Shelley Lynn
Tremain (ed),
Foucault and the Government of Disability
(University of
Michigan Press, 2015) 83.
Michel Foucault, ‘The
Subject and Power’ in Hubert Dreyfus and Paul Rabinow (eds)
Foucault: Beyond Structuralism and Hermeneutics
(University of Chicago
Press, 1983) 208 (‘The Subject and Power’).
Michel Foucault,
Archaeology of Knowledge
(Routledge, 1972) 49 (‘The Archaeology of
Knowledge’).
Scott Yates, ‘Truth,
Power, and Ethics in Care Services for People with Learning Disabilities’
in Shelley Lynn Tremain
Foucault and the Government of Disability
(University of Michigan Press, 2015) 65, 67.
Michel Foucault, ‘Two
Lectures’ in Colin Gordon (ed)
Power/Knowledge: Selected Interviews and
Other Writings, 1972-1977
(Pantheon, 1980) 81; Barry Allan,
‘Foucault’s Nominalism’ in Shelley Lynn Tremain (ed),
Foucault and the Government of Disability
(University of Michigan Press,
2015) 101 (‘
Two Lectures
Hughes (n 39) 81.
Krzysztof Pezdek and Lotar
Rasiński, ‘Between Exclusion and Emancipation: Foucault’s
Ethics and Disability’
Nursing Philosophy
(n 24) 121-2,
cited in Atkins and Hayman Jr (n 24) 169.
Shakespeare (n 32) 199.
Yates (n 42) 68.
Shakespeare (n 32) 199.
Michel Foucault,
History of Sexuality: Volume one: An Introduction,
tr Robert Hurley (Random
House, 1978) 100-1.
Michael Palmer and David
Harley, ‘Models and Measurement in Disability: An International
Review’ (2012) 27
Health and Policy Planning
Foucault, ‘Two
Lectures’ (n 43) 81, cited in Allan (n 43) 101.
M Carmela Epright,
‘Coercing Future Freedom: Consent and Capacities for Autonomous Choice'
(2010) 38(4)
Journal of Law, Medicine and Ethics
See, generally Fabrizio
Turoldo, ‘Relational Autonomy and Multiculturalism’ (2010) 19(4)
Cambridge Quarterly of Healthcare Ethics
Patrick Clarke, ‘Hip
Hip Hooray, ECT turns 80!’ (2019) 27(1)
Australasian Psychiatry
‘International Human Rights Law and the Institutional Treatment of Persons
with Mental Disabilities: The Case of
(2002) 21(3)
Law School Journal of International and Comparative Law
John Read et al.,
‘Should We Stop Using Electroconvulsive Therapy?’
British Medical Journal
Merrilyn Walton, ‘Deep
sleep therapy and Chelmsford Private Hospital: Have We Learnt Anything?’
(2013) 21(3)
Australiasian Psychiatry
Robert Kaplan, ‘Deep
Sleep Therapy in Australia’ (2013) 21(5)
Australasian Psychiatry
Walton (n 59) 206.
Medical Board of
Australia v Woollard
[2017] WASCA 64
Walton (n 59) 211.
David Richmond,
into Health Services for the Psychiatrically Ill and Developmentally
(Final Report, 1983); Criminal Justice Commission,
Report of an
Inquiry Conducted by the Honourable D G Stewart into Allegations of Official
Misconduct at the Basil Stafford Centre
(Final Report, 11 April 1995);
https://disability.royalcommission.gov.au/system/files/exhibit/EXP.0003.0002.0001.pdf
Meghan Gallahger, ‘No
Means No, or Does It? – A Comparative Study of the Right to Refuse
Treatment in a Psychiatric Institution’
(2016) 44(2)
International
Journal of Legal Information
William Gronfein,
‘Psychotropic Drugs and the Origins of Institutionalisation’
Social Problems
Foucault, ‘The Subject
and Power’ (n 40) 220.
Kurt Zemlicka, ‘The
Rhetoric of Enhancing the Human: Examining the Tropes of ‘The Human’
and ‘Dignity’
in Contemporary Bioethical Debates over Enhancement
Technologies’ (2013) 46(3)
Philosophy & Rhetoric
Leon Kass, ‘Beyond
Therapy: Bioetechnology and the Pursuit of Happiness’ (Discussion Paper,
President’s Council
on Bioethics, 2003) <
https://bioethicsarchive.georgetown.edu/pcbe/background/kasspaper.html
Zemlicka (n 70) 266.
Ibid; John Harris,
Enhancing Evolution: The Ethical Case for Making Better People
University Press, 2007) II.
Kass (n 71). ‘We must
move from the hubristic attitude of the powerful designer to look the proposed
improvements as they impinge
upon the nature of the one being
Zemlicka (n 70) 276.
Nick Bostrom, ‘Dignity
and Enhancement’ in President’s Council on Bioethics (ed),
Dignity and Bioethics: Essays Commissioned by the President’s Council on
(President’s Council on Bioethics, 2008) ch 8 <
https://bioethicsarchive.georgetown.edu/pcbe/reports/human_dignity/
Zemlicka (n 70) 269.
See Patrick Kermit,
‘Deaf or deaf? Questioning Alleged Antinomies in the Bioethical Discourses
on Cochlear Implantation and
Suggesting an Alternative Approach to
d/Deafness’ (2009) 11(2)
Scandinavian Journal of Disability Research
159 (‘Deaf or deaf?’).
Harry James Moore,
‘Antinomism in Twentieth-Century Russian Philosophy: The Case of Pavel
(2021) 73(1)
Studies in East European Thought
Kermit, ‘Deaf or
deaf?’ (n 78) 167.
Michel Foucault, ‘The
Ethics of the Concern of the Self as a Practice of Freedom’ in Paul
Rabinow (ed), tr Robert Hurley,
Ethics: Subjectivity and Truth
Press, 1997) 281, 282.
The Archaeology
of Knowledge
Kermit, ‘Deaf or
deaf?’ (n 78) 167-8
See above n 13.
Karen Nakamura,
Japan: Signing and the Politics of Identity
(Cornell University Press, 2006)
144; Patrick Kermit, ‘Enhancement Technology and Outcomes: What
Professionals and Researchers
Can Learn from Those Skeptical About Cochlear
Implants’ (2012) 20
Health Care Analysis
367, 370. To briefly give
an analogy, Cochlear implants are at the centre of an ethical debate for Deaf
people: when these devices
were approved for implantation in children, Cochlear
implants are able to treat a condition that was once untreatable, but they also
cause damage to a minority culture ‘which rejects the notion that
treatment is desirable’: If there were no difference
between being deaf
and Deaf, then there would be no debate over the ethics of Cochlear implants.
The same can be said for chemical
restraint because there is an ethical debate
‘deviant’: at
CRPD (n 15) art 1.
Committee on the Rights of
Persons with Disabilities (n 12) [42].
CRPD (n 15) art 1.
Fiona Kumari Campbell,
‘Legislating Disability: Negative Ontologies and the Government of Legal
Identities’ in Shelley
Lynn Tremain (ed),
Foucault and the Government
of Disability
(University of Michigan Press, 2015) 108, 110.
See, for example,
[2013] HCA 19
(2013) 250 CLR 375.
See above n 7.
See above n 10.
Rosie Harding, ‘Legal
Constructions of Dementia: Discourses of Autonomy at the Margins of
(2012) 34(4)
Journal of Social Welfare and Family Law
CRPD (n 15) art 3(a).
Ibid arts 26–29.
Malcolm Payne,
Social Work Theory
(Palgrave Macmillan, 3
ed, 2005) 295.
Simon Foley,
‘Normalisation and Its Discontents: Continuing Conceptual Confusion over
Theory/Praxis Issues Regarding the Empowerment
of People with Intellectual
Disability’ (2016) 41(2)
Journal of Intellectual and Developmental
Committee on the Rights of
Persons with Disabilities,
General Comment No 6: On Equality and
Non-discrimination,
UN Doc CRPD/C/GC/6 (26 April 2018) 2, [9].
Foley (n 97) 182.
See, eg, Joyce B Wale,
Gary S Belkin and Robert Moon, ‘Reducing the Use of Seclusion and
Restraint in Psychiatric Emergency
and Adult Inpatient Services—Improving
Patient-Centred Care’ (2011) 15(2)
The Permanente Journal
Studies have shown that there is always a risk of significantly aggressive or
violent persons, even when nonpharmacological
interventions have been attempted:
Harding (n 93) 428.
See generally Madia
Lozupone et al., ‘Delusions in Dementias’ in Colin R Martin and
Victor R Preedy (eds),
Genetics, Neurology, Behaviour, and Diet in Dementia
(Academic Press, 2020) ch 41, 647.
E Mak et al.,
‘Clinical Associations of Anosognosia in Mild Cognitive Impairment and
Alzheimer’s Disease’ (2015)
International Journal of
Geriatric Psychiatry
1207, 1207.
See generally ibid.
Harding (n 93) 430.
Kumari Campbell (n 89)
Jonas-Sebastien Beaudry,
‘Welcoming Monsters: Disability as a Liminal Legal Concept’ (2017)
Wendy Brown,
Injury: Power and Freedom in Late Modernity
(Princeton University Press,
Paul Appelbaum and Thomas
Gutheil, ‘“Rotting with Their Rights On”: Constitutional
Theory and Clinical Reality
in Drug Refusal by Psychiatric Patients’
(1979) 7(3)
Journal of the American Academy of Psychiatry and Law
See above n 87.
See above n 95.
Rory Sheehan et al.,
‘Psychotropic Prescribing in People with Intellectual Disability and
Challenging Behaviour’
British Medical Journal
Hanoch Dagan and Roy
Kreitner, 'The Other Half of Regulatory Theory'
(2020) 52(2) Connecticut Law
The Subject
(n 40) 208.
Dagan and Kreitner (n
Ani B Satz, 'Overcoming
Fragmentation in Disability and Health Law'
(2010) 60(2)
Robert Baldwin, Martin
Cave and Martin Lodge, ‘Why Regulate?’ in Robert Baldwin, Martin
Cave and Martin Lodge (eds),
Understanding Regulation
(Oxford Scholarship
Online, 2015) 15, 22.
Australian Health
Ministers’ Advisory Council,
National Principles to Support the Goal of
Eliminating Mechanical and Physical Restraint in Mental Health Services
December 2016) <
https://www.mentalhealthcarersnsw.org/wp-content/uploads/2017/05/National-Principles-to-Support-the-Goal-of-Eliminating-Restraint.pdf
See, for example: Len
Bowers et al., ‘Reducing Conflict and Containment Rates on Acute
Psychiatric Wards: The Safewards Cluster
Randomised Control Trial’ (2015)
International Journal of Nursing Studies
1412; Sandra A Barton,
Rebecca Johnson and Lydia V Price, ‘Achieving Restraint-Free on an
Inpatient Behavioral Health Unit’
(2009) 47(1)
Journal of Psychosocial
Hawsawi et al., (n 14)
The Subject
(n 40) 208.
Susan Koch, Rhonda Nay
and Jacinda Wilson, ‘Restraint removal: Tension Between Protective Custody
and Human Rights’ (2006)
International Journal of Older People
Eimear Muir-Cochrane, Deb
O’Kane and Candice Oster, ‘Fear and Blame in Mental Health
Nurses’ Accounts of Restrictive
Practices: Implications for the
Elimination of Seclusion and Restraint’ (2018) 27
International Journal
of Mental Health Nursing
1511, 1513.
J Murray and C Cott,
‘Nursing Staff Perceptions of the Use and Reduction in the Use of Physical
Restraints’ (1998) 22(1)
Perspectives
2, cited in Koch, Nay and
Wilson (n 124) 155.
Wale, Belkin and Moon (n
Koch, Nay and Wilson (n
Muir-Cochrane,
O’Kane and Oster (n 125) 1514.
B Christopher Frueh et
al., ‘Special Section on Seclusion and Restraint: Patients’ Reports
of Traumatic or Harmful Experiences
Within the Psychiatric Setting’ (2005)
Psychiatric Services
1123, 1130.
William M Greenberg,
Lanna Moore-Duncan and Rachel Herron, ‘Patients’ Attitudes Toward
Having Been Forcibly Medicated’
(1996) 24(4)
Bulletin of the American
Academy of Psychiatry and the Law
Eline Veltkamp et al.,
‘Patients’ Preferences for Seclusion or Forced Medication in Acute
Psychiatric Emergency in the
Netherlands’ (2008) 59(2)
Psychiatric
Camilla Haw et al.,
‘Coercive treatments in forensic psychiatry: a study of patients’
experiences and preferences’
(2011) 22(4)
Journal of Forensic
Psychiatry & Psychology
T Hoekstra, HHGM
Lendemeijer and MGMJ Jansen, ‘Seclusion: The Inside Story’ (2004) 11
Journal of Psychiatric and Mental Health Nursing
276, 281-2.
Shaghayegh Vahdat et al.,
‘Patient Involvement in Health Care Decision Making: A Review’
(2014) 16(1)
Iranian Red Crescent Medical Journal
Haw et al., (n 136)
Hoekstra, Lendemeijer and
Jansen (n 139) 281; Veltkamp et al., (n 135) 210.
See generally Celene YL
Yap et al., ‘Don’t Label Me: A Qualitative Study of Patients’
Perceptions and Experiences
of Sedation During Behavioural Emergencies in the
Emergency Department’ (2017) 24(8)
Academic Emergency Medicine
Hoekstra, Lendemeijer and Jansen (n 139).
Hoekstra, Lendemeijer and
Jansen (n 139) 281. See generally Fiona Whitecross, Amy Seeary and Stuart Lee,
‘Measuring the Impacts
of Seclusion on Psychiatry Inpatients and the
Effectiveness of a Pilot Single-Session Post-Seclusion Counselling
Intervention’
International Journal of Mental Health Nursing
Benyamin Schwarz et al.,
‘The Last Habitat: Living and Dying in Residential Care Facilities’
(2018) 32(3-4)
Journal of Housing for the Elderly
Joseph E Ibrahim et al.,
‘Meeting the Needs of Older People Living in Australian Residential Aged
Care: A New Conceptual Model’
Australasian Journal on Aging
See, eg, Uniting Care,
Submission No AWF.650.00093.0001 to Royal Commission on Aged Care Quality and
Safety (December 2019).
Commonwealth,
Parliamentary Debates,
Committee on Community Affairs, 28 September 2016
(Graeme Prior) 25.
Senate Community Affairs
References Committee,
Future of Australia’s Aged Care Sector Workforce
(20 June 2017) [3.62]-[3.66].
Commonwealth,
Parliamentary Debates,
Committee on Community Affairs, 23 February 2017,
46 (Melanie Birks).
Senate Community Affairs
References Committee (n 150) [3.17]-[3.31].
Jewish Care Victoria,
Submission No 109 to the Senate Community Affairs References Committee,
Parliament of Australia,
Future of Australia’s Aged Care Sector
(1 March 2016) 4.
Senate Community Affairs
References Committee (n 150) [3.43]-[3.61].
Ibid [3.34]-[3.36],
See, for example, Pat
Mayers et al., ‘Mental Health Service Users’ Perceptions and
Experiences of Sedation, Seclusion
and Restraint’ (2010) 56(1)
International Journal of Social Psychiatry
60, 70; Wale, Belkin and Moon
(n 101) 60-61.
Jewish Care Victoria (n
Hedman et al.,
‘Caring nursing homes to promote autonomy and participation’ (2019)
Nursing Ethics
280, 287-9.
Muir-Cochrane,
O’Kane and Oster (n 125) 1517.
Rhonda Nay and Susan
Koch, ‘Overcoming Restraint Use: Examining Barriers in Australian Aged
Care Facilities’ (2006) 32(1)
Journal of Gerontological Nursing
Sharna Lewis and Biza
Stenfert-Kroese, ‘An Investigation of Nursing Staff Attitudes and
Emotional Reactions Towards Patients
with Intellectual Disability in a General
Hospital Setting’ (2010) 23
Journal of Applied Research in Intellectual
Disabilities
Muir-Cochrane,
O’Kane and Oster (n 125) 1516.
See generally Nay and
Koch (n 161) 37.
Benedict Sheehy and
Donald Feaver, ‘Designing Effective Regulation: A Normative Theory’
[2015] UNSWLawJl 14
(2015) 38(1)
UNSW Law Journal
Robert Baldwin, Martin
Cave and Martin Lodge, ‘What is Good Regulation?’ in Robert Baldwin,
Martin Cave and Martin Lodge
Understanding Regulation
Scholarship Online, 2015) 25, 35.
See above n 19.
Dagan and Kreitner (n
John Braithwaite,
‘Limits on Violence; Limits on Responsive Regulatory Theory’
Law and Policy
Julia Black and Robert
Baldwin, ‘Really Responsive Risk-Based Regulation’
(2010) 32(2)
Law & Policy
Robert Baldwin, Martin
Cave and Martin Lodge, ‘Regulating Risks’ in Robert Baldwin, Martin
Cave and Martin Lodge (eds),
Understanding Regulation
(Oxford Scholarship
Online, 2015) 83, 95.
Braithwaite (n 170)
Benedict Sheehy and
Donald Feaver, ‘Designing Effective Regulation: A Positive Theory’
[2015] UNSWLawJl 34
(2015) 38(3)
UNSW Law Journal
Nicholas A Ashford and
Charles C Caldart,
Technology, Law and the Working Environment
Press, rev ed, 1996) 184.
Dagan and Kreitner (n
Ibid [134].
Charter of Human
Rights and Responsibilities Act 2006
argued that the State was required to show that, even where a treatment was a
medical necessity, a treatment’s characterisation
‘therapeutic’ did not automatically prevent the conduct from being
cruel, inhuman or degrading: at [121], [143].
Ibid [143]. Part of the
argument was that humiliation was an element of cruel, inhuman or degrading
treatment. The Board disregarded
P’s evidence that he felt humiliated as a
result of the treatment, as the Board was unable to accept that this
‘subjective
sense was any greater than it would expect for any involuntary
patient ... and especially when the treatment involves the [unwanted]
prescription of medications’: at [132].
Ibid [139], [143]. The
Board noted that considerable care would have to be taken by the treating teams
to prevent the clinical balance
shifting to the side effects outweighing the
therapeutic benefits, even though ‘[t]his responsibility is onerous, and
potentially become increasingly onerous’: at [139], [142].
Ibid [181].
Ibid [187].
Ibid [168].
Ibid [139].
[2009] NSWSC 1141
Convention on the
Rights of the Child,
opened for signature 20 November
(entered into force 2 September 1990).
Ibid, referring to
Director General, Department of Community Services v Thomas
[2009] NSWSC
, [37] (Bereton J). In this judgment, Bereton J explained that there are
several reasons why children’s rights under the CRC
are ‘relevant,
but not conclusive’ including that ratification ‘creates a
legitimate expectation that decisions
will be made having regard to the
principles espoused in
and the existence of a treaty
obligation alone (that is, without legislation implementing it locally) allows a
court to take such
a treaty into account in the development of the common
Ibid [18]-[66].
[2019] SACAT 51.
Ibid [132].
Ibid [136].
[2009] NSWSC 217
[2015] NSWSC 1876.
[2020] NTSC 13
[2018] VSC 564
(n 212) [101],
Christopher James Ryan,
‘Is Legislative Reform Translating into Recovery-Oriented Practice and
Better Protection of Rights?’
(2019) 53(5)
Australian & New Zealand
Journal of Psychiatry
[2019] NSWCATGD 8
JXC v Mental Health
[2018] NTSC 62
[2011] QCAT 109
(n 182) [126]. Difficulties in accurately applying the
law are compounded by practical difficulty in separating symptom from behaviour,
and ambivalence about questioning medical decisions about prescriptions. In
JXC v Mental Health Tribunal,
it was unclear whether JXC’s
behaviour was linked to mental illness, or just erratic behaviour. The Tribunal
set aside the
Community Management Order, ‘however tempting or convenient,
to continue involuntary treatment’: at [47]. In a different
approach, the
Queensland Tribunal in
acknowledged that medication (Xanax,
prescribed PRN) was for both controlling behaviour and for treatment: at
[21]-[22]. The Board
noted ‘the fact that, with
psychiatric illnesses, it can be very difficult to be certain about the
relationship between observed
signs and symptoms and any underlying illness
pathology’: at [126].
[2019] SACAT 37
‘Re KF; Re ZT; Re WD’
Guardianship and
Administration Act 1993
Consent to Medical Treatment and Palliative
Care Act 1995
Consent to Medical Treatment and Palliative Care
Regulations 2014
Advance Care Directives Act 2013
Advance Care Directives Regulations 2014
Mental Health Act
In the case of Ms ZT and
Mr WD, an order was necessary to authorise the use of restrictive practices,
particularly because the practices
were not being supervised by a health
practitioner. All three were adults living in fully supported disability
facilities in South
Australia, and all were diagnosed with ‘significant
intellectual disability’ meaning that they could not ‘make
In order for a person’s representative
to consent to medical treatment on
a person’s behalf, the Tribunal had to determine whether the restrictive
practices to manage
behaviour of the three adults could be authorised by 1) the
informal carers; 2) with the consent of a ‘person responsible’
Consent Act;
or 3) with the consent of a guardian appointed by the
Re KF; Re ZT; Re
(n 219) [70]-[71]; Ibid [45].
At [36], the Member
observed ‘there is a lack of consistency in SA between the various
legislative definitions of ‘mental
incapacity’ or impaired decision
capacity, which may merit the attention of
Parliament.’ At [40], the Tribunal noted ‘that the regulation of
restrictive
practices in South Australia up to now has been reasonably informal
in some sectors and has perhaps led to an inconsistency in approach
of, and authorisation for, those practices.’ The Tribunal went on to
explain that the authorisation of restrictive
practices across mental health,
aged care and disability are overseen by different regulatory bodies and ruled
by different legislative
models (at [41]), and that there is ‘s an
inconsistency between definitions in South Australian legislation and in policy
in use in South Australia, and a further inconsistency between the
various definitions of restrictive practices in use in South Australia
definition of restrictive practices under the NDIS Act and Rules’ (at
Re KF; Re ZT; Re WD
(n 219) [36].
See The Right Honourable
Beverly McLachlan, P.C., ‘Medicine and the Law: the Challenges of Mental
Illness’ (Speech, University
of Alberta and University of Calgary,
February 17 and 18, 2005). For example, in 2005, the Chief Justice of the
Canadian Supreme
Court Beverley McLachlin, delivered a speech in which she laid
out the challenge of balancing the rights of persons with mental illness,
wherein she said: ‘Failure to treat may well result in permanent
impairment of their right to be free from physical detention
and their right to
have a mind free from debilitating delusions, terrifying hallucinations and
irrational thoughts. Although respecting
a mentally ill person's decision to
refuse treatment formally accords them equally treatment with non-mentally ill
patients, abandoning
such people to the torments of their illness, mental and
physical deterioration, substance abuse and perhaps suicide surely does
respect their inherent dignity as human beings’.
Winko v Forensic
Psychiatric Institute
[1999] 2 SCR 625
Chaoulli v Quebec
Attorney General
[2005] 1 SCR 791
[1996] 62 ACWS (3d) 585
Ibid [280]-[281]. This
was framed as both ‘
a right and a duty
to restrain Conway’
(at [280]) in those circumstances, and Mr Conway’s argument that the
chemical restraint violated ss
1, 12 and 15(1) of the Charter
unsuccessful (at [284]).
Canada Act 1982
(UK) c 11, sch B pt I s 7 (‘
Canadian Charter of Rights and
Rodriguez v British
Columbia (Attorney General
[1993] 3 SCR 519
[2009] 304 DLR (4th) 64
In the judgment, his
Honour noted that ‘[u]ltimately, the trial judge concluded that, although
Mr. Mullins' liberty was clearly
curtailed, it was incumbent on
Mr. Mullins to establish that the deprivation was contrary to the
principles of fundamental justice’:
at [68] citing
[1988] 9 ACWS (3d) 218
458 NE (2d)
Counsel relied on the following statement: ‘We conclude that only if
a patient poses an imminent threat of harm to himself
or others, and only if
there is no less intrusive alternative to anti-psychotic drugs, may the
Commonwealth invoke its police powers
without prior court approval to treat the
patient by forcible injection of anti-psychotic drugs over the patient's
objection. No
other State interest is sufficiently compelling to warrant the
extremely intrusive measures necessary for forcible medication with
anti-psychotic drugs. Any other result also would negate the Legislature's
decision to regulate strictly the use of mind-altering
restraints’: at 321.
[2008] 171 CRR (2d) 344
[1991] 82 DLR
Simon Verdun-Jones and
Michelle Lawrence, ‘The Charter Right to Refuse Psychiatric Treatment: A
Comparative Analysis of the
Laws of Ontario and British Columbia Concerning the
Right of Mental-Health Patients to Refuse Psychiatric Treatment’
University of British Columbia Law Review
After the decision in
Ontario enacted the
Health Care Consent Act
expressly required that the wishes regarding treatment, admission to a care
facility or personal assistance services of people
(above 16 years of age) made
while competent had to be adhered to. It also created the Consent and Capacity
Board, which reviews
decisions regarding capacity, and cannot make decisions
based on what it perceives to be the person’s best interests: at
[2005] 250 DLR
Health Care Consent
(1996) s 21(2); Ibid
Katherine Brown and Erin
Murphy, ‘Falling Through the Cracks: The Quebec Mental Health
McGill Law Journal
CarswellOnt 20117
(2019) BCSC 227
Ibid [170].
95 CCC (3d) 334
Substitute Decisions
SO 1992, c 30, s 46 (‘
Substitute Decisions
Tom Walker,
‘Ulysses Contracts in Medicine’
Law and Philosophy
Substitute Decisions
(n 287) s 46.
Ibid s 50(2)(2).
CRPD (n 15) art 12.
Nicholas Caivano,
‘Conceptualizing Capacity: Interpreting Canada’s Qualified
Ratification of Article 12 of the UN/Disability
Rights Convention’ (2014)
Western Journal of Legal Studies
See generally Jason
Buckles, Ruth Luckasson, and Elizabeth Keefe, ‘A Systematic Review of the
Prevalence of Psychiatric Disorders
in Adults with Intellectual Disability,
2003-2010’ (2013) 6(3)
Journal of Mental Health Research in
Intellectual Disabilities
See the discussion in
section II.
‘Action Collective
Canadienne Concernant Depo-Provera’,
Depo-Provera Canada
https://www.depoprovera.ca/
Note that Depo-Provera is also used as a form of contraception.
[1988] 64 OR (2d)
See Claire Spivakovsky,
‘From Punishment to Protection: Containing and Controlling the Lives of
People with Disabilities in
Human Rights’
(2014) 16(5)
Punishment &
(n 261) [10].
Andrew Molas,
‘Defending the CRPD: Dignity, Flourishing, and the Universal Right to
Mental Health’
(2016) 20(8)
International Journal of Human Rights
Yates (n 42) 67.
Foucault, ‘Two
Lectures’ (n 43) 81, cited in Allan (n 43) 101.
Hughes (n 39) 83.
Malcolm Payne,
Social Work Theory
(Palgrave MacMillan Press, 3
ed, 2005) 295.
See also Martha Nussbaum, ‘Human Rights and Human Capabilities’
Harvard Human Rights Journal
A similar approach is the
‘capabilities approach’ theorised by Martha Nussbaum, which
Capability theory urges action
with the goal of making people ‘able to
function in a variety of areas of central importance’: at 21.
241). In determining whether forced medication violated the principles of
fundamental justice, this involved considering that fundamental
incorporates both procedural and substantive issues, including a generally
accepted obligation to protect people who are
unable to protect themselves: at
[30]. [32].
ACRC Transcript (n
Sandra Fredman,
‘Providing Equality: Substantive Equality and the Positive Duty to
(2005) 21(2)
South African Journal on Human Rights
Beaudry (n 108) 316.
Royal Commission into
Aged Care Quality and Safety,
Restrictive Practices
Robert Baldwin, Martin
Cave and Martin Lodge, ‘Risk Based Regulation’ in Robert Baldwin,
Martin Cave and Martin Lodge
Understanding Regulation
Scholarship Online, 2015) 281, 281.
Malcolm K Sparrow,
Character of Harms: Operational Challenges in Control
(Cambridge University
Press, 2008) 154.
Black and Baldwin (n 171)
Ibid 190-1.
Schwarz et al., (n 146)
Care in Ageing Societies: A New International Approach
(Policy Press, 2012)
Harding (n 93) 430.
Royal Commission into
Aged Care Quality and Safety,
Restrictive Practices
See above n 12. The Oakden
Report was an investigation launched after concerns were raised about treatment
of elderly people at the
Oakden Older Persons Mental Health Service. The 2017
Review of National Aged Care Quality Regulatory Processes, building on the work
of the Oakden Report, examined why Commonwealth processes failed to detect the
abuses at Oakden. Also in 2017, the Australian Law
Reform Commission released
the Elder Abuse – A National Legal Response report, which examined
safeguards designed to protect
the elderly. The ALRC also wrote the
Capacity and Disability
Report, which discussed the use of restrictive
practices across Australia.
Australian Law Reform
Commission,
Equality, Capacity and Disability
(n 12) ch 8, 257
Australian Law Reform
Commission,
Elder Abuse
(n 12) 147.
See generally Australian
Law Reform Commission,
Elder Abuse
(n 12) ch 8.
Offices of the Public
Advocate (SA and Vic), Submission 95 to Australian Law Reform Commission,
Equality, Capacity and Disability in Commonwealth Laws
(June 2014) 35
For example, Victoria,
Queensland and Tasmania have controlled restrictive practices through disability
legislation (see:
Disability Act 2006
Disability Services
(Restrictive Practices) and Other Legislation Amendment Act 2014
Disability Services Act 2011
(Tas)) but in New South Wales, restricted
practices may be authorised under the
Guardianship Act 1987
guidelines available for Behavioural Support Planning (see eg, NSW Government,
Behaviour Support in Out-of-Home Care,
Policy Guidelines, 10 October
2020). Mental Health and Aged Care have their own guidelines for restrictive
practices. Chemical restraint
is no longer specifically mentioned in the
Care Act 1997
Royal Commission into
Aged Care Quality and Safety,
Restrictive Practices
Royal Commission into
Aged Care Quality and Safety,
Final Report: Vol 2
(Final Report, 26
February 2021) 106.
See generally R E
Brimelow et al., ‘Prescribing of Psychotropic Drugs and Indicators for Use
in Residential Aged Care and Residents
with Dementia’ (2019) 31(6)
International Psychogeriatrics
837, 837-8.
The Quality of Care
Principles 2014 (Cth) set out the standards required for aged care facilities.
Section 15E(2) defines chemical
restraint as a practice or intervention that is,
or that involves, the use of medication or a chemical substance for the primary
purpose of influencing a care recipient’s behaviour, but does not include
the use of medication prescribed for the treatment
of, or to enable treatment
of, the care recipient for a diagnosed mental disorder or a physical illness or
condition, or as end of
Gerard J Byrne,
‘Prescribing Psychotropic Medications in Residential Aged Care
Facilities’
(2020) 212(7)
Medical Journal of Australia
Cheryl K Riley-Doucet and
Karen S Dunn, ‘Using Multisensory Technology to Create a Therapeutic
Environment for People with
Dementia in an Adult Day Centre’ (2013) 6(4)
Research in Gerontological Nursing
Koch, Nay and Wilson (n
Australian Nursing &
Midwifery Federation, ‘A Plan for ‘Care, Dignity and Respect’
for Older Australians’
(Media Release, 1 March 2021) <
https://www.anmf.org.au/media-releases/entry/media_210301
Hedman et al. (n 158)
Dagan and Kreitner (n
Carsten Colombier,
‘Drivers of Health-Care Expenditure: What Role Does Baumol’s Cost
Disease Play?’
(2017) 98(5)
Social Science Quarterly
Baumol’s cost disease, an economic model design explains why aged care
funding is particularly difficult: residential
services heavily rely on
labour-intensive services which limits opportunities for increased efficiency
from technological advancement.
CRPD (n 15) art 1.
See above n 12.
Wale, Belkin and Moon (n
Muir-Cochrane,
O’Kane and Oster (n 125) 1517.
Hawsawi et al. (n 14)
Appelbaum and Gutheil (n
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (760 KB)
PDF format (627 KB)
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter