URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/journals/PrecedentAULA/2024/17.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 15:29:39
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Dohrmann, Mark --- "Strengthening Liability in Personal Injury Claims: An Engineering and Ergonomics Perspective" [2024] PrecedentAULA 17; (2024) 181 Precedent 22
Strengthening liability in personal injury claims
An engineering and ergonomics perspective
By Mark Dohrmann AM
This article presents recommendations for maximising an expert’s
contribution to the claims process, drawn from 40 years as
an engineer and
certified ergonomist. Some of this should help in the initial assessment and
development of a claim.
Experts often receive focused instructions, with the issues we are asked to
consider made narrow and plain. In some cases, however,
the remit is quite
broad. Although this may increase the risk of an expert straying to the fringes,
an open brief can prompt opportunities
to make a claim more robust, and is
sometimes preferable. Regardless, the key issues at stake should always be made
plain by the
instructor.
CONSIDER THE CHAIN
An engineer or ergonomist can often use their technical experience to
identify additional parties who may deserve to be added to the
encourage cross-claims by a defendant. For example, in construction matters
there is usually a string of perhaps eight
separate entities who have had some
say in the conception, design, approval, checking, construction and sign-off of
a structure or
part of it. If the issue concerns a structural or building
matter, a typical chain might include the developer; architect;
draftsperson/designer;
building surveyor; builder; subcontractors; occupier; and
building permit issuer. Each has specific responsibilities and an accountable
role in a range of issues that an expert can advise you about. In my experience,
this can improve the plaintiff’s chances for
a settlement.
SCRUTINISE ‘SAFETY’
The idea of ‘safety’ is at the core of most claims and
allegations of negligence, although the word is fraught with mythology.
people, and evidently most defendants, consider safety to be primarily a
behavioural matter – ‘be careful’;
‘keep a reasonable
look out’; ‘don’t do anything risky’. This often leads
to promotion of training
or instructions as a key defence. Safety, however, is
not necessarily about how a person behaves. It is about situations into which
people move and are injured. Each situation demands scrutiny, physically and
otherwise, because numerous factors can come into play.
A better and more
powerful way to consider safety (or the lack of it) in any situation is to
consider an accident as a non-culpable
failure by a person at one or more of
three stages: that is, failing to
to a signal.
These are all human factors. Scrutiny becomes fruitful by unravelling those
factors, drawing on ergonomics – another name for
human factors – is
a recognised scientific body of knowledge applied to human behaviour, sizes,
abilities, limitations, thinking
and social relations.
First, people have to be able to
that there is an issue before
them – therefore, the ergonomics of vision, contrast, hearing, movement,
distraction, age or
vigilance may all have some part in explaining what or why
the accident occurred. For example, explanation and qualified opinion
vision in the circumstances of an accidental trip or fall can be more telling
than simply a questionable coefficient of
Second, if the situation is detected, the person must then
what they have seen, heard or noticed. This raises questions about:
• familiarity (have they seen it before?)
• stereotypes (did it conform?)
• training (see the next section)
• perhaps distraction.
Third, if the person has both detected and understood that something
dangerous is about to occur, they must still be in a position
to it. This brings in questions about their strength, manipulative skills,
reaction time, posture, reach, spacing and dimensions.
Each of these numerous factors opens the door to ergonomics (and some
engineering), each with comprehensive supporting
literature.
Presented coherently as
explanations for an accident cause, they can add considerable strength to your
claim if they are introduced
and discussed adequately by your expert.
Note that a certified ergonomist’s primary qualification may influence
their advice – it might be health therapy, psychology,
safety training or
engineering – so take note of this.
DEALING WITH THE DEFENCE OF ‘TRAINING’
Defendants will often submit that they provided training but on enquiry
(especially in manual handling matters, for instance) it is
often found that the
training was confined to the well-worn mantras of ‘bend your knees’
and ‘keep a straight back’,
which can be shown to be irrelevant to
the postures and movements required by the actual tasks that caused the injury.
It also ignores
the priorities assigned in
legislation
for addressing manual
handling risks – training comes in low on the list, well after ‘find
and fix’ the problem.
So the content and validation of any
‘training’ claimed always deserves scrutiny, and discovery should be
sought of any
training material.
USE A SYSTEMIC APPROACH
Checklists can be an invaluable aid to getting full value out of an initial
interview. I strongly recommend their use, since there
are so many variables and
factors that may have some bearing on understanding what happened, causation and
issues of liability. I
use a 60-point checklist to prepare for an interview, to
try and ensure that all bases are
Experts can be prone to inflated views of their own knowledge. Views should
be submitted to peers for candid appraisal to lift the
quality of the result (in
our organisation, we peer-assess the rigour of justification of the
author’s concluded opinions and
the clarity of expression). If necessary,
check if this assessment has occurred. The report of course remains exclusively
the expert’s
personal work and
Differences in factual accounts can only cause trouble. If medical reports,
factuals and other materials are supplied to the expert,
the facts they gather
at interview or at a view will hopefully remain consistent with key data in all
the other witness documents.
If not, discrepancies should be discussed by
telephone by the expert in the first instance, to resolve what is necessary
where possible.
Experts should understand the significance of consistency of
While a traumatic injury may have a clear description and analysis, injuries
that occur over time demand more care and attention.
I take clients through the
history of the relevant period and, for each event of interest, address five
headings – date; what
they were doing; what symptoms occurred; who they
told (if anyone); and what the response was.
This systematic approach allows the expert to provide more detailed advice on
what could and should have been done (from a process
or technical viewpoint) to
resolve a person’s progressive problem through a developing history of
MAGIC QUESTIONS
I have found two questions that often take you quickly to the core issues in
a claim. I use them towards the end of an interview.
The first one (put to the
client) is ‘In your opinion what was the worst thing about your
situation?’ The client will
invariably have an opinion, and they are
usually right. This also keeps the expert on the right track.
The second question is ‘If you were in charge, and had the money to pay
for it, what would you have done to prevent this ever
happening to you?’
Clients will usually save a lot of time by taking you straight to what could and
should have been done.
This is also very helpful for the expert and acts as a
reality check on their own initial assessment.
The interview is not a time to skirt around issues. It is a time for
frankness and toughness to get to the root of matters as best
Sometimes clients interviewed in your office can be offered a prepared
questionnaire which invites them to work through the circumstances
later, in their own time. This is a less threatening and usually more productive
way of being sure that their instructions
have been obtained thoroughly and
accurately, along with information about all relevant matters. I recommend that
when the client
is interviewed in the lawyer’s office, and comes in
nervously to meet an ‘expert’ whose intentions are often not
entirely clear to them, they are given an opportunity to do their own follow-up
ENSURE YOUR EXPERT IS WELL BRIEFED
Giving expert evidence at court is not always easy, and thorough pre-briefing
of your expert is essential. So too is practise, where
possible, as the
unexpected can occur. My instructor once distributed to three different
defendants two slightly different versions
of our report. The second report had
not been authorised – and it had a one-word key difference. It all became
apparent (and
disastrously so) in court when the versions held by the examining
barrister and the expert were discovered to be different. The Bench
view. In the same trial, when his Honour learned that the expert had produced a
further (unserved) report on the previous
day (containing no fresh opinion, and
on which the expert was not examined) it was suggested that the expert’s
failure to volunteer
the existence of that report was part of a conspiracy. A
later hearing found no dishonesty, but a failure in duty to the court.
Experts are drilled to answer only the questions put to us, simply and
honestly, with an overarching obligation to the court. That
does not free the
expert to enlarge on every thought or action they have taken. The expert is not
running the case, and should be
briefed to answer questions in chief, and to be
succinct in cross-examination.
It is vital that the expert finds and understands the key issues which, if
resolved, will assist the argument in liability. Make sure
your expert
doesn’t get buried in causation alone. Getting the cause nailed down might
be helpful, but ultimately you are looking
for help on respective liabilities.
Your careful instructions will assist, but so too will be opportunities for the
expert to explore
and advise in the broader areas discussed above. It never
hurts to have a chat about this at the beginning.
Mark Dohrmann AM
is a professional engineer and certified ergonomist.
He has consulted in workplace and public safety since 1981. His interests
A Model Ford Roadster. EMAIL mark@ergonomics.com.au.
KHE Kroemer and E Grandjean,
Fitting the Task to the Man
(5th ed, Taylor and Frances Group, 1997) is
the classic. See also N Diffrient et al,
1/2/3, 4/5/6
The MIT Press, Cambridge, 1974–81.
Occupational Health
and Safety Regulations
– mirrored in
other state legislation.
There are ergonomics checklists
available on the assessment of manual handling, falls on stairs, slips and falls
generally, product
failures and more at Dohrmann Consulting
<www.ergonomics.com.au>.
A further comprehensive reference that provides tools necessary for the
preparation, analysis and presentation of forensic evidence
in matters including
slips and falls, motor vehicle accidents, product failures, warnings, cognitive
factors and emerging applications
is YI Noy and W Karwowski (eds)
Handbook of
Human Factors in Litigation
, CRC Press, Boca Raton, Florida, 2005.
This and related points on
expert evidence reliability are discussed usefully in I Freckelton,
, 7th ed, Lawbook Co of Australasia, 2023.
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (29.6 KB)
PDF format (585 KB)
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter