URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/journals/AUJlLegHist/2004/8.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 14:33:51
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Loughton, Gavin --- "Calvin's Case And The Origins Of The Rule Governing 'Conquest' In English Law" [2004] AUJlLegHist 8; (2004) 8(2) Australian Journal of Legal History 143
Gavin Loughton*
V The Medieval Attitude To Conquest
VI Why The Conquest Rule Did Not Exist In English Law In The Middle Ages
VII How English Law Did Spread In The Absence Of The Conquest Rule: The Realities Of Power
VIII The Fashioning Of A Rule About Conquest In The Seventeenth Century
A The Position In The Late Middle Ages
B New Interest In Conquest By The Late Sixteenth Century
IX The Background To Calvin’s Case: The Debate About The Union Between England And Scotland
X The Continuation Of The Political Argument About Union In Calvin’s Case
XI The Example Of Angevin Ireland In Calvin’s Case
Xii Coke’s Formulation Of The Rule About Conquest In Calvin’s Case
Xiii Evaluation Of The Interpretation Of Irish History In Calvin’s Case
Xiv Continuing Obscurities About Coke’s Formulation Of The Conquests Rule In Calvin’s Case
A The Question Of The Importance Of Civilian And Canon Law In The Formulation Of The Conquests Rule
B The Exception Regarding Infidels
Xv The Acceptance Of The Analysis Of Conquest In Calvin’s Case
CASE AND THE ORIGINS OF THE RULE GOVERNING ‘CONQUEST’ IN ENGLISH
I INTRODUCTION
the monarch of England acquires a new territory by conquest he or she may change
the laws of that place; but, until then, its
old laws remain in force. I shall
call this common law rule ‘the conquest rule’. It is almost always
expressed as but
one part of larger, composite common law rule. This larger rule
is best known from Chapter 4 of Book 1 of the first edition of
Blackstone’s
Commentaries
Plantations, or colonies in distant countries, are either such where the
lands are claimed by right of occupancy only, by finding
them desart and
uncultivated, and peopling them from the mother country; or where, when already
cultivated, they have been gained
by conquest, or ceded to us by treaties. And
both of these rights are founded upon the law of nature, or at least upon that
of nations.
But there is a difference between these two species of colonies,
with respect to the laws by which they are bound. For it is held
]), that if an uninhabited country be
discovered and planted by English subjects, all the English laws are immediately
there in force.
For as the law is the birthright of every subject, so wherever
they go they carry their laws with them (P. Wms
]). But in conquered or ceded countries,
that have already laws of their own, the king may indeed alter and change those
till he does actually change them, the antient laws of the country
remain, unless such as are against the law of God, as in the case
of an infidel
(7 Rep. 17b
Calvin’s case
. Show Parl
This larger rule (which I shall call ‘the colonies rule’) as
stated by Blackstone thus has three main elements:
it divides territories newly acquired by
the king into two broad categories. The first category is comprised of
territories acquired
by settlement of empty, or at least uncultivated, lands.
The second category is comprised of territories acquired by conquest and
territories ceded under treaties;
as to settled lands, English settlers
take English law with them to their new home, as their
‘birthright’;
as to conquered and ceded lands, their
old laws remain, unless and until the king changes them (with an exception in
the case of laws
that are against the law of God).
It follows that the colonies rule is of importance in the legal history of
the British Empire, and in the legal histories of the places
that were once, or
are still, part of that empire.
In the colonies rule’s dichotomy between settled lands on the one hand,
and conquered and ceded lands on the other, ‘settled
lands’ have,
over time, assumed far and away the more important
It is hard to find cases of an English
colony that the judges have agreed should be regarded as having been
‘conquered’.
Nevertheless, the
conquest rule – that is, that part of the colonies rule that deals with
conquered lands – was the earliest
to emerge. When discussing settlement,
Blackstone cannot find a case worth citing earlier than 1693. When discussing
he can go back to
Calvin’s case
Calvin’s case
itself, as well as several other
seventeenth century cases, went back further and cited the Angevin conquest of
Ireland and the subjugation
of Wales in the middle ages as instances of the
conquest rule.
A thorough history of the colonies rule – to which this essay is a
contribution
– begins, therefore, with
the conquest rule. How far back can this rule be traced in English law?
II THE MEANING OF ‘CONQUEST’ AT COMMON LAW
There appears to be no major reported common law case that has ever tried to
define the term ‘conquest’. However, the
ordinary meaning of the
word entails the acquisition of territory by force of arms.
One of the most salient features of ‘conquest’ at common law is
the irrelevance of motivation or justification. An acquisition
of land by force
of arms counts as a legally valid ‘conquest’ regardless of the
justice or injustice of the act. As Conrad
has Marlow put it in the
, ‘[t]hey were conquerors, and for that you want only brute
Marlow adds that the practice
– ‘not a pretty thing when you look into it too much’ –
can be redeemed by
an unselfish ‘idea at the back of it’. But that
there is a good or bad motive behind a conquest does not effect its
characterisation
as a ‘conquest’ or the validity of the
conqueror’s title to land so acquired. To common lawyers, acquisition of
territory by force is an ‘act of state’ that municipal courts must
simply accept.
The rule into whose origins
we are enquiring can therefore be shortly paraphrased: when the king of England
acquires a new land by
force of arms then, regardless of the justice or
injustice of the acquisition, the land belongs to the king and he may alter its
laws, though until he does so the old laws of the place remain in force.
THE SPREAD OF ENGLISH LAW FROM THE NORMAN CONQUEST (1066) TO THE CONQUEST OF
WALES (1284)
Calvin’s case
suggest, the origin of the rule lie in the middle
It is true that during the period between the Norman conquest of England and
the end of Edward I’s final subjugation of Wales,
the area under the sway
of English laws increased dramatically. There would not be another expansion of
English authority on a comparable
scale until the seventeenth century.
So far as the conquest rule is concerned, the most important event of this
period is the Angevin conquest of Ireland. Medieval Ireland
politically united land. It was a patchwork of sub-kingdoms whose rulers’
allegiances to their local kings varied
from place to place and from time to
time. No Irish ruler was ever powerful enough to reduce the whole island to a
lasting obedience
of the kind that the kings of England frequently enjoyed.
When, in what follows, we speak of ‘Ireland’, it is to a
geographical,
not political, entity that we refer.
Henry II went to this land with a large army in
Historians now question whether
Henry’s expedition of 1171-1172 justifies the description
‘conquest’.
His large army met
little opposition, and the various native rulers quickly
Pope Alexander III gave his
blessings to the whole enterprise once it was successfully concluded and Henry
had ensured reform of
Irish ecclesiastical
Many of Henry’s men stayed in
Ireland to enjoy lordships of their own. Settlers followed. It seems strange to
modern lawyers
to speak of the Angevin ‘settlement’ of Ireland. The
colonies rule has trained us to think of ‘conquests’
‘settlements’ as two mutually exclusive categories. In this dualism
Ireland has always been a conquest: in his report
Calvin’s case
Coke stated that Ireland ‘originally came to the Kings of England by
and all the cases have
followed him.
Yet as a historical fact,
Henry II’s ‘conquest’ was followed by settlement.
In 1210 Henry’s son, by then King John, went to Ireland. He also went
with a large army, and with the principal purpose of establishing
his authority
among the not wholly obedient Anglo-Norman baronage there. The expedition was
successful. Those Anglo-Norman barons
who did not flee submitted to John, as did
many Irish chieftains. By the end of the expedition, only a few Irish rulers in
of the north lay wholly outside John’s
It appears that John issued a
charter requiring English laws to be observed by the Anglo-Irish barons. He may
have followed this
up by sending to Ireland a register of original
Later references in the Patent and
Close Rolls of Henry III confirm that John ordained that English laws were to be
in force in Ireland.
English penetration
into Ireland increased steadily up until about the reign of Edward I. This was
both in terms of the amount of
area brought under English control, and the
introduction of English judicial administrative machinery, eg, a Chancery,
justices, a ‘central’ court in Dublin, the sheriff’s
tourn, etc.
(After the reign of Edward I,
for factors beyond the scope of this essay, English influence in Ireland began a
long decline that
was not reversed until the sixteenth century.)
Ireland was not the only place into which English law penetrated in the
middle ages. Norman adventurers had ventured into Wales between
the conquest of
England and the 1130s. The situation in south and east Wales was markedly
different from that in the north. In the
south (‘the March’) Norman
barons carved out lordships for themselves, sometimes out of what had previously
The legal systems that
emerged in them were curious amalgams of Welsh law, English law, and feudal
principle. Those three same ingredients,
differently dispersed in the various
lordships, represented a series of working compromises between the conquering
barons and conquered
compromises were not governed by any overarching legal principle. Some land was
held by English land tenure, some by Welsh
rules. Welsh courts existed alongside
English ones. The barons devised their own forms of the English original writs,
but some Welsh
procedures were retained. This plurality survived for centuries.
It was acknowledged in Magna Carta: chapter 56 provides that disputes
tenements in the March are to be settled by the law of the March.
The north of Wales (‘the Principality’), managed at first to
maintain a greater degree of independence from England. But
this diminished over
time, and the Principality finally succumbed completely after a short war in
1276-7 and then an unsuccessful
In the Statute of Wales of 1284
Edward ‘annexed and united’ Wales to the Crown of the realm of
England. He declared that
he had sifted through the laws of the Welsh, abolished
some, allowed some, corrected some, and added
Welsh law, in the March and the
Principality, survived in various forms until Henry
He resolved ‘utterly to extirpe
all and singuler the senister usages and customes’ in Wales that differed
in England. Thereafter English law
DID THE CONQUEST RULE EXIST IN MEDIEVAL ENGLAND?
There is a puzzling feature about the expansion of English law between 1066
and 1284. Notwithstanding what the references in the later
cases might suggest,
there does not appear a rule of law to regulate it. There is no reference to a
medieval version of the conquest
nor in the early Year Books. There are fragments of discussion about conquest,
but not a clear common law rule.
It is true that Norman rules of inheritance distinguished between land
obtained by inheritance on the one hand, and ‘acquired’
land on the
other, the latter category perhaps including lands obtained through
The rule is mentioned in
Henrici Primi
and also in
But the distinction did
not survive into the common law
appears to have survived in some borough
). Roman law had a number of rules
concerning the rights to things captured in
These rules were known in England. The
historian Henry of Huntingdon (writing between 1125 and 1145), for example,
resorted to Roman
law in accounting for Caesar’s conquest of the Gauls,
the Roman subjugation of Britain, and Henry I’s defeat of the French
The author of
Henry of Huntingdon, knew of the Roman rules about things captured in war. When
it came to discussing the topic ‘Of Acquiring
Dominion’ (a topic
which takes up a sizeable part of the treatise) there are a handful of
references to these rules.
references are brief and scattered, not amounting to a clear rule, and certainly
not the conquest rule. The author of
does not seem inclined to
formulate such a rule. He tells us that Ireland and Wales are in the power and
dominion of the King, but
he does not tell us how this came
Indeed, in several places Bracton
stresses the illegitimacy (in private law) of property acquired by force in time
Of course, we should not look for a legalism that did not exist in such
matters. ‘Twelfth-century England had no constitution’,
‘no coherent theory of sovereignty’ says
Moreover, as Plucknett observed, one
must bear in mind:
the fundamental character of the common law, an understanding of which is
vital if English legal history in the middle ages is to
be read aright; the
common law is the product of administrative procedures ... . The common law,
therefore, crystallizes around procedures
... . The common law system of writs,
returns, and pleadings is thus modelled on the routines of business organization
as it existed
in the twelfth century ...
As aggressive as the English king was during the middle ages, it is a little
unreal to suppose that the business of conquest had become
so routine that a
standard administrative procedure had grown up around it and then become
crystallised in a common law rule.
Nevertheless, it would misstate the evidence to say that the medieval lawyers
of England never talked as if there were legal rules
territory by force. Sutherland finds Roman law rules about conquest in certain
passages in the
Dialogus de
There are, in the Irish
documents from the reign of Edward I, some instances of liberties in Ireland
being traced back to (and possibly
derived from) the English
‘conquest’ of Ireland.
most important of all, during Edward I’s quo warranto campaign from 1278
to 1294, some lawyers appear to have explored
the proposition that certain
franchises that appeared to be acquired by prescription (ie by uninterrupted use
over a long period)
are actually derived from William’s invasion in
Reconstructing the details of the
argument as it was proposed in the courts involves some speculation. The
manuscript evidence of
the argument, in the Year Books and elsewhere, is brief
and enigmatic.
However, it appears that the
argument was to the effect that rights acquired by prescription are ultimately
derived from the conquest
itself – not from a grant from William the
Conqueror in return for assistance.
So, while we can hardly say that England’s medieval lawyers knew of the
conquest rule as stated by Blackstone, we cannot say
that they had no use for
rules about the acquisition of territory by force either.
THE MEDIEVAL ATTITUDE TO CONQUEST
The answer is that England’s medieval lawyers had a doctrine to deal
with conquest, but it was not
doctrine of conquest.
Unlike as is the case with the conquest rule, medieval legal thought did not
accept that military aggression, alone and of itself,
could result in the
legally valid acquisition of new territory. ‘[L]aw is always what does
right; for will and force and violence
are not right’, said the author of
Leges Anglorum
, writing early in the reign of
Bracton said that a king is a king
when he rules well ‘but a tyrant when he oppresses by violent domination
the people entrusted
to his care’.
According to John of Salisbury, princes are forbidden to gather to themselves
treasures of silver and gold, or procure affluence
Geoffrey of Monmouth had King
Arthur proclaim that ‘[n]othing that is acquired by force and violence can
ever be held legally
by anyone’.
the continent, some lawyers impugned the legality of the Roman Empire on the
grounds that it had been obtained by force. Their
opponents could not deny that
force was no legal basis for the Empire, and had to try to dodge the attack in
other ways.
Canon law even demanded that
the right of infidels to their lands and self-government be respected, in point
of doctrine at least.
Pope Innocent IV writing c.1250 had examined the question
of whether the lands of the infidels were legally open to conquerors and
that, as a general rule, they were not.
(There was a rival and more bellicose doctrine about infidels advanced by the
canon lawyer Hostiensis, but Innocent IV’s statement
of the position
appears to have been more widely
However, that the middle ages would have looked with suspicion, even
hostility, on Blackstone’s enunciation of the conquest
rule does not mean
that conquest could never be legally permissible then. Sometimes, it could.
Canon law was a more appropriate forum than the common law for the
formulation of rules of high constitutional importance about the
acquisition of
territory by force. And canon law allowed that there could be a ‘just
war’. Indeed that this was the only
kind of war that canon law would
recognise as having legal standing. M H Keen, in his discussion of the law of
war in the late middle
ages, notes something equally true of the period of
interest to us: ‘the first principle of the legists was that only a just
war could have legal
consequences’.
A just war is not the same as ‘conquest’ in the sense of the word
that is used in the conquest rule. The just war is primarily
defensive or
retributive, not aggressive. The influential canon lawyer Gratian (writing
synthesized the ecclesiastical
authorities into this formula: the just war must be authorised by a legitimate
public authority, and
be waged in response to some kind of injury: for instance,
to recover lost goods, to punish wrongs, or in
self-defence.
These criteria found their
way, by a circuitous route, into Bracton’s treatise. The civilian jurist
Azo, following Justinian,
wrote that war could be attributed to the law of
But then Azo added something not
found in the corresponding passage in the
, namely Gratian’s
limiting criteria for the just war: the wars that are founded on the law of
nations (says Azo) are those
declared by the prince and/or to repel an
Bracton reproduced, with only minor
alterations, Azo’s rendition of the
complete with the canon
law interpolation.
Thus the canon
law’s suspicion of aggressive wars is present in an English law
None of this necessarily meant that the acquisition of an empire through
force was, in the eyes of canon law, impossible. A ruler
might acquire an empire
after waging a series of just wars. But such a chain of events would be very
regrettable. As Saint Augustine
had said of the Roman empire:
... to rejoice in the extent of empire is not a characteristic of good men.
The increase of empire was assisted by the wickedness
of those against whom just
wars were waged. The empire would have been small indeed, if neighbouring
peoples had been peaceable,
had always acted with justice, and had never
provoked attack by any wrong-doing. In that case, human affairs would have been
happier state ... To make war and to extend the realm by crushing other
peoples, is good fortune in the eyes of the wicked; to the
good it is stern
necessity ... . It is a wicked prayer to ask to have someone to hate or to fear,
so that he may be someone to conquer.
The general position was, then, conquest out of a lust for power was
impermissible and, indeed, sinful. Force of arms could only be
used to vindicate
some pre-existing right or title.
This is a far more restrictive rule than our conquest rule. Medieval rulers
who wanted to expand the area under their dominium did
their best to give the
appearance of working within this narrower legal framework. Hence royal
apologists in England preferred to
recast what we would call conquests as if
they were something else: gifts, inheritances, or vindications of subsisting
a just war.
The chronicler William of Poitiers (c1020 − c1087?) took this approach
when he sought to present a legal case for the Norman
conquest of
Edward the Confessor, he said, had
granted his entire kingdom of England to Duke William. William was not fighting
a war of expansion.
The Duke merely fought to ‘claim his
inheritance’ which had been ‘wrongfully seized’ by the usurper
William was ‘determined to
avenge this injury with arms [armis injuriam ulcisi] and claim his
inheritance’.
The chronicler’s
choice of words here is extremely suggestive. It mirrors St Augustine, who had
written that ‘those wars
are normally called just which avenge injuries
[quae ulcisuntur injurias]’, for example, ‘to restore what has been
Traces of the same
formulation of the just war appear in the writings of St Isidore of Seville
(c.560-636)
and can ultimately be traced
a writer whom William of Poitiers
confessed to admire.
In other words,
William of Poitiers was trying to pass off a conquest as if it were a
‘just war’ of the kind permitted
in the authoritative sources of
canon law. We find this argument carrying the day in an English court as late as
the Eyre of Northamptonshire
of 1329-1330.
Indeed, this is may be the sense in which we should generally understand the use
of ‘conquest’ in the quo warranto arguments
of Edward’s time:
not as an acquisition of new lands by the sword alone, but rather as the
reclamation of territory that, in
law (or so the rationalization went), belonged
to him the conqueror all along.
Other medieval writers resorted to dodges in their discussions of
‘conquest’. Gerald of Wales (who had studied canon law
and, indeed,
claimed to have lectured in it
) called his
Expugnatio Hibernica
Conquest of Ireland
). Even so, he
suggested that the Angevin subjugation of Ireland under Henry II and John was
not so much the aggressive expansion
of English authority as the exercise of a
pre-existing hereditary right. Drawing on fables in Geoffrey of Monmouth’s
Historia regum Britannie
, Gerald said that Ireland belonged to the king
of England because the first ‘Irish’ settlers had been sent there by
king in the beginning (before that, according to Geoffrey, the island was
‘completely uninhabited desert’); or alternatively,
that the native
Irish were descended from lands under Angevin rule; or alternatively, that the
kings of Ireland had once paid tribute
to the mythic King
(As to this last reason, Gerald
avoided mentioning the fact that in Geoffrey’s account Arthur’s
claim came from his prior
violent conquest of
) Similarly, a chronicler whose
work survives in the Great Chartulary of Glastonbury (compiled c.1338-1340 from
earlier documents),
so as to be able to claim that the kingship of the land of
the Scots had fallen to Edward I by descent, went so far as to falsely
that David I of Scotland (1124-1153) died without an
Likewise in a letter of 1301 to the
Pope Edward I based his claim to the lordship of Scotland principally on
inheritance.
Portraying what seemed like military domination as the claiming of an
inheritance was not the only option. Another legitimate way
of acquiring
authority over new lands in the middle ages was to have the natives voluntarily
submit – by oaths of fealty or,
better, homage. A royal apologist could
try to recast a conquest in that light. Gerald’s fourth justification of
claim to Ireland was to deny that force was involved in the
acquisition. The native Irish rulers ‘freely bound themselves in
submission to Henry II king of England by the firm bonds of their pledged word
And when all other
legitimations failed, there was papal authority. This was Gerald’s fifth
and final justification for Henry’s
acquisition of Ireland. The Pope
claimed to have authority over Ireland, and indeed all islands, by virtue of the
(forged) Donation
of Constantine.
Gerald could assert that Henry’s expedition was legitimate because he was
the Pope’s agent.
Gerald produced a
papal bull that Adrian IV had issued in 1154 authorising Henry to enter Ireland
in order to extend the authority
of the church and correct the ‘evil
customs’ of the Irish (a document that Henry himself had declined to act
it was first issued).
These are the
lengths that even historians would go to, to avoid asserting that kings could
legitimately extend their kingdoms by
force alone.
Alternatively, a war of domination might be presented as the enforcement of a
feudal bond. In 1276-7, when Edward I went against Llywleyn
ap Guffudd, the
prince of Wales, it was for the ostensible reason that Llywleyn had failed to
fulfil his feudal obligations to the
king, and so was a rebel and disturber of
the king’s peace. Edward’s justification was not in terms of
conquest (which
was his deeper motive), but in terms of enforcement of feudal
VI WHY THE CONQUEST RULE DID NOT EXIST IN ENGLISH LAW
IN THE MIDDLE AGES
We are now in a position to give some interim answers. The conquest rule as
expounded by Blackstone did not exist in English law in
the middle ages. There
are several reasons for this.
In the first place, such a rule could hardly be contemplated by the common
law, which at that time generally did not aspire to the
formulation and
enforcement of great rules of constitutional law.
In the second place, the body of law more suited to the formulation of such
rules – the canon law – was generally suspicious
frankly hostile to, the notion that a ruler could lawfully acquire new territory
by force alone. This limited the scope
for the development of any rule about
legal rights springing from conquest alone.
In the third place, such place as could be found for force as a tool of
territorial expansion was limited to ‘just war’
theory. Under such
theory, ordinarily force could be used to vindicate an existing right to
territory, not to create a new right.
This all but foreclosed the possibility of
a medieval version of the conquest rule. Under the conquest rule as we know it
the acquisition
of new territory by force, being an act of state, is ‘a
catastrophic change, constituting a new
departure’.
In a legal system where
so much is admitted, then the matter of what laws are to apply after the
‘new departure’ is an
obvious problem. But medieval conquerors,
labouring under the constraints of just war theory, generally strained to avoid
any admission
of a ‘new departure’. They wanted to be seen as
rightful heirs and upholders of the existing legal order, not bringers
‘catastrophic change’ with plenary power to alter the laws; they
wanted to give the appearance of continuity, and
not ‘introduce
discontinuity and usurpation into what should be a seamless web of
legitimacy’.
Thus William the Conqueror did not try to present himself as having wrought a
catastrophic change in England’s legal order.
On the official line, the
military victory in 1066 simply showed, as in the case of trial by combat, that
his claim to the Crown
was a just one all along. As William of Poitiers put it,
the Conqueror, ‘this wise and Christian man was firmly convinced that
omnipotence of God, which wills no evil, would not allow a just cause to fail
Thus, as Maitland points out,
William dealt with those he defeated not as if they were part of a conquered
population, but as if
they were rebels against the rightful king:
... the capital instance of harsh treatment consists in an application of
theory that they have not been conquered by foreign enemies,
but, having
rebelled against one who was de jure king of the English, are to be lawfully
punished for their unlawful deeds. Those
who fought by Harold’s side
forfeited their lands, and so of course did those who resisted William after he
was crowned. These
forfeitures, so far from clearing the way for pure Norman
law, had the effect of bringing the barons under English land
Similarly William, as rightful king of England, was keen to be seen as the
upholder of the ancient laws and customs (however much
he may have actually
changed them). We have several instances of William the Conqueror expressly
confirming the pre-existing law.
the shire and hundred courts to be attended as in the
In the famous Penenden trial of 1072
(or thereabouts), William ordered Aethelric, Bishop of Chichester, ‘a very
old man, very
learned in the laws of the land’ to be brought by chariot
‘in order to discuss and expound these same old legal
We even have a writ of the
conqueror ordering litigation concerning the ownership of land to be stopped if
the (Norman) litigants
‘refuse to proceed as they would have proceeded in
the time of King Edward’.
For all these reasons, it was impossible for the conquest rule as we know it,
with its connotations of catastrophic change and with
the awarding of plenary
power to the conqueror however unjust the conquest, to exist in the middle
VII HOW ENGLISH LAW DID SPREAD IN THE ABSENCE OF THE
CONQUEST RULE: THE REALITIES OF POWER
Yet as we have seen, in the period between the Norman conquest and the final
conquest of Wales, the king of England did extend his
authority, and the
authority of English law, to other parts of Britain, by force and by threat of
force. If we are hard pressed to
find a law book expounding a theory of how it
happened, we nonetheless cannot deny the phenomenon.
How are we to explain the medieval penetration of English law to other parts
of Britain in the absence of legal rule to justify it?
‘In truth’,
says Davies ‘it requires an exceptional degree of historical innocence to
see feudal rituals, obligations
and terminology – especially between
rulers – other than in terms of structuring the realities of
These ‘realities of
power’ – so influential to later lawyers that they took them to be a
precedent – are
what we must examine to explain the process by which
English law was established in places like Ireland and Wales in the middle
Power in the shape of the Royal Will was one of the principal factors shaping
the legal landscape of Ireland. The power and will of
the English king was an
operative factor in bringing English law to Ireland even before John went there
in 1210 and extracted from
his Irish barons oaths to observe English
The events of 1210 themselves we have
already noted. Subsequently, in the reign of Henry III, the king’s
strictures to the
Irish barons take the form of reminders of what the barons had
promised the king in 1210. In 1228, Henry III commanded his justiciar
the whole of the ruling class of the Irish counties to come before him, to read
John’s 1210 charter to them, and to
enjoin them ‘on pain of
forfeiture to firmly keep those
In 1233 Henry III again
reminded the Anglo-Irish that it was ‘manifestly contrary’ to the
English laws and customs established
by John for the ecclesiastical court to be
hearing pleas touching advowsons, lay fees and
And yet again in 1246 Henry III
ordered that, for the common benefit of Ireland and the unity of the
King’s dominions,
... all the laws and customs which are observed in England should be observed
in Ireland, and the said land should be subject to the
said laws, and should be
ruled by the same, as the Lord, King John, when he was last in Ireland, ordained
and ordered to be done.
Of course, all of this equally shows us that the power of the king’s
will had limits: if the king had been omnipotent there
would have been no need
to obtain from the barons promises to obey English law, nor to repeatedly remind
the barons of what had happened
in 1210. Nonetheless, bounded as it was by all
the factors that affect the waxing and waning of political power, the
will could affect the law. When medieval English judges of the time
of Henry III and Edward I discuss Ireland they appear to do little
more than the
minimum necessary to give effect to the royal will. That Ireland broadly shares
English law is put as a laconic assertion
of fact which the courts accept and
into which they do not enquire. Judges in Ireland must not ‘proceed
contrary to law and
custom of Ireland, which enjoys English law’, and
there is little further analysis.
during the thirteenth century, a matter of obedience to the King’s will
and respect for his authority.
Similarly, Davies has shown that an important feature in shaping the legal
position of the lordships in the March of Wales and in
the Principality was the
king’s will.
In some instances the
Welsh found certain English legal practices useful, and so were not hostile to
them. In others however, the
King played a stronger hand. The culmination of the
latter tendency occurred in 1284 when, after completing the conquest of Wales,
Edward I promulgated the statute of Wales in which he stated that having
considered the laws and customs of Wales, he had abolished
certain of them,
allowed some, and corrected some.
Thus the extension of English law to other parts of Britain in medieval times
between the Norman conquest and about the end of the
thirteenth century occurred
by exercises of power and convenience that were not the subject of very clear
legal rules. At the most,
if there was a rule it was to the effect that the
extension of English law was a matter within the discretion of the king. But if
this be a rule, it is a rule that was only imperfectly followed and it is rule
we must infer; for lawyers did not expressly articulate
it. Furthermore,
speaking of the king’s will in this way may be to misrepresent it.
Jolliffe has shown that one of the essential
features of Angevin kingship was
its extra-legal power, its ‘ungoverned
unrationalized’.
Describing the
king’s will as if it were an instrument of constitutional authority is to
court anachronism.
THE FASHIONING OF A RULE ABOUT CONQUEST IN THE SEVENTEENTH CENTURY
The Position in the Late Middle Ages
There is little evidence that English lawyers developed a significantly new
doctrine of conquest between the 1300s and the late 1500s.
Keen suggests that
well into the fourteenth century warriors sought to present aggressive wars in
the guise of ‘just wars’.
Christopher Allmand draws attention to the coronation oath of Henry VI in 1429
(ie. during the wars between England and France over
Acquitaine, Normandy and
other parts of France which English kings considered theirs as a matter of
feudal right) in which Henry
was exhorted, consistent with canon law discussed
above, to avenge injuries (‘ulciscaris iniusta’) and be the powerful
defender of his country.
Allmand also
refers to Sir John Fortescue’s characterisation, in the mid fifteenth
century, of war as ‘a legal trial
by battle [in which] he [ie. the King]
seeks the right he cannot obtain by peaceful
And when Henry VII came to
the throne, the supporters of the defeated Richard III were not treated as
‘conquered’, but
as rebels who were guilty of treason against the
rightful king. Richard himself was pointedly referred to as the ‘late duke
of Gloucester’ who had named himself King Richard III by
usurpation.
Thus the defeated supporters of
Richard were governed by the same theory that had been applied to Harold’s
supporters after
the battle of Hastings. By this theory Henry VII was not a
‘conqueror’ in the sense a common lawyer today would use the
rather the verdict of God, that Henry was the rightful king all along, was
revealed in Henry’s victory at the battle
In the early seventeenth
century, George Buck and Francis Bacon, in their respective histories of Richard
III and Henry VII, describe
Henry basing his claim to the throne on several
legal arguments, one of them being conquest or ‘de jure belli’. But
the extent that Henry did rely on such a basis, it seems unlikely that he
would have advanced it in anything other than the ‘just
New Interest in Conquest by the Late Sixteenth
The next great period of English expansion began with the colonization of
America in the early seventeenth century. This was the period
that saw the
creation of the conquest rule by common lawyers. They reached back to the
medieval conquests of Ireland and Wales for
their source material and
transformed them to fashion a new legal doctrine of conquest.
Medieval English law’s suspicion about the rectitude of using force to
extend English rule never completely disappeared. However,
by the late sixteenth
and early seventeenth centuries there are signs of a new interest in the concept
of conquest. This was perhaps
prompted or hastened by the need of the European
powers to find some basis in the Law of Nations for acquiring territories in the
The Spanish seem to have led
the way in a modest, if shortlived, rehabilitation of the concept of conquest
– albeit in a way
consistent with just war theory. Specifically, the
Spanish conquest of America was but a way to perfect legal rights whose ultimate
source lay elsewhere, for instance in Papal grants based on the Pope’s
duty to convert unbelievers.
The charter
that the Spanish monarchs granted to Columbus before he set sail, and their
patent of privileges to him, variously spoke
of the discovery, acquisition and
conquest of new lands.
It may not be
coincidence that Henry VII’s letters patent to John Cabot of 1496, like
the Spanish monarchs’ patent to
Columbus, authorised the recipient to
, occupy and possesse [
Subjugare, Occupare &
]’ such lands as he
discovered.
Later royal authorisations
to Humfrey Gylberte (1578) and Sir Walter Raleigh (1584) also mentioned
‘conquest’.
There are other indications that English lawyers were become more accepting
of the legitimacy of conquest as a basis of legal right.
In a case late in
Elizabeth I’s reign it was said that, by an Act of Parliament, Henry IV
and his heirs possessed the Isle
of Man ‘per
There was no suggestion
in the report that conquest was wrong or illegitimate. And in argument in
Calvin’s case
before the Exchequer Chamber in 1608 Francis Bacon
appeared to be a positive advocate for conquest. He praised English law as
law of a warlike and magnanimous nation fit for
THE BACKGROUND TO
: THE DEBATE ABOUT THE UNION
BETWEEN ENGLAND AND SCOTLAND
Calvin’s case
is important for another reason. It shows that in
the early seventeenth century English politicians, lawyers and writers had
other than the Americas to prompt them to think about the concept of
‘conquest’ in a systematic way. A potent spur was
the intense
political debate about James I’s project for a closer union between
England and Scotland. This issue first arose
when James I (James VI of Scotland)
assumed the throne of England in 1603. Arguments about the Union project, in and
out of Parliament,
occupied much of the nation’s political energy in the
years up to 1608.
During these arguments ‘conquest’ was used in technical sense. It
became a word that denoted one specific method (amongst
several) by which a king
expands his kingdom. Participants in the political debates had looked to history
for precedents about political
union. They examined other unions that had
occurred in Europe: Castile with Aragon, France with Normandy, England with
Ireland, and
many others. These precedents were analysed, distinctions were
drawn up between different types of unions, and classifications were
For example, on 26 April 1604 Sir Edwyn Sandys made a long speech in Parliament
setting out his objections to the union
project. In the course of his speech he
surveyed the different kinds of ways unions could occur and listed three ways:
by marriage
(ie. of one ruler to another), by election, and by
Francis Bacon, later to appear
as counsel in
Calvin’s case
, almost certainly heard this speech,
Journals of the House of Commons
records him as being the next
speaker. Bacon was immersed in the theoretical problems of union. The very next
day he reported to
the Commons from the Committee it had established to set down
the reasons and objections for union. The Committee had considered
precedents,
at home and abroad, including those involving
Outside of Parliament tracts
and treatises were also written about the union project, including by Bacon
Some of them also undertook the
task of classifying political unions throughout
One such treatise is Sir Henry
Savile’s ‘Historical Collections’ of
Savile analysed many examples of
political unions from European history. He fitted all historical instances of
the unions of sovereign
states into three kinds: (a) by conquest, (b) by
inheritance and (c) by marriage. As examples of the category of conquest, Savile
nominated the Angevin conquest of Ireland and also ‘so many states in
Italy and so many kingdoms abroad to the Romans in ancient
One of Francis
Bacon’s works distinguished union by conquest from union by
In the hands of politicians
and historians, ‘conquest’ had become a recognised, analytic
category. Thus Sergeant Moore
reports that when the most senior judges of
England appeared before a Parliamentary Committee in 1607 to give their opinions
effect of the union of the kingdoms of England and Scotland, the judges
also referred to the distinction between acquisition of a
kingdom by marriage
and acquisition by conquest.
THE CONTINUATION OF THE POLITICAL ARGUMENT ABOUT UNION IN
Calvin’s case
was the political argument about union carried on
by other means.
The case was contrived
as a vehicle for resolving the question of whether people born in Scotland after
the accession of James I
to the throne of England were aliens in
The legal issue was
sufficiently important for arrangements to have been made to bring parallel
cases in Chancery and in King’s
Argument was then removed to the
Exchequer Chamber, to be heard in 1608 before fourteen judges: judges from the
three common law
courts and the Lord Chancellor Lord Ellesmere.
The political background to
Calvin’s case
throws light on the
sources for the terms and concepts used in it. When it came to argue
Calvin’s case
, the lawyers (several of whom had been important
participants in the political debate) continued using many of the same terms and
concepts that had been used in the prior political argument. The change of
forum, though, had an important effect: the terms of historical
analysis were
turned into legal concepts. Francis Bacon, now appearing as counsel for the
plaintiff, described the ways the king
could acquire new lands. His list
resembled Sandys’ and Savile’s taxonomies: ‘countries devolute
by descent and
acquired by
Lawyers for the defence
also produced taxonomies that resembled
Coke’s report of
the case likewise contrasts the acquisition of a kingdom by descent to the
acquisition of a kingdom by conquest.
we had read nothing but law reports, we should think that with
‘conquest’ emerges almost out of nowhere as a fully formed,
precise legal concept. This is because the work of first
conceptualising it had
been done outside of the law courts.
THE EXAMPLE OF ANGEVIN IRELAND IN
CALVIN’S CASE
The lawyers in
did not just adopt the
concept of ‘conquest’ from the political speeches and historical
treatises. The lawyers also made
use of the historical evidence there cited to
formulate a specific legal rule about the consequences of conquest. Some of this
had to be discarded. Savile’s treatise, for example, referred to
such events as the conquest of Naples by the King of Aragon
and the conquest of
Portugal by the King of Castile.
could have little relevance for English law. Sir Henry Spelman’s writings
were more useful. In his treatise ‘Of
the Union’, also from 1604, he
cited the Norman conquest, the English conquest of Wales, and the English
conquest of Ireland
as evidence of the proposition that conquerors may
‘impose laws at their pleasure’ on the
The lawyers in
Calvin’s case
focused on the example of Ireland.
Bacon, counsel for the plaintiff, made particular use of Irish history in his
argument. Bacon’s
brief was to show that Scots born after James I’s
accession to the throne were not aliens in England. The logic of Bacon’s
argument proceeded as follows. An alien is a person who owes no bond of
allegiance to the king. Whether such a bond exists is a matter
of natural law,
not positive law.
Scots and English had
different national laws, but by operation of a transcendent natural law all
Scots and English had a bond of
allegiance with the same king. It followed that
Scots and English were subjects alike, and a Scot could not be an alien in
Bacon alleged the same could be said of Angevin Ireland before 1210.
Until then (he said), the Irish kept their own native laws,
but the Irish and
English were nonetheless all subjects who owed a bond of allegiance to the king
of England. It is in this context
– to support the argument that English
and Irish in Angevin times were all subjects of the same king though they had
national laws – that Bacon purported to deduce from the
historical evidence the proposition of law that the laws of conquered
remain until the king decides to change them:
... the laws of England are not superinduced upon any country by conquest;
but that the old laws remain until the king by his proclamation
patent declare other laws; and then if he will he may declare laws which be
utterly repugnant, and differing from the
laws of England. And hereof many
ancient precedents and records may be shewed, that the reason why Ireland is
subject to the laws
of England is not
upon conquest, but grew
by charter of King John ... .
It followed that being a subject of the king transcends positive law, it is a
matter of natural law.
Serjeant Hutton for the defence appears to have used Ireland as evidence for
the contrary argument.
His objective was
to show that being a subject of the king was a function of national law. Scots
and English did not share the same
laws; hence Scots were subjects of the King
of Scotland under Scottish law, and English were subject of the King of England
English law. Scots were therefore aliens in England, and vice-versa. It is
true, Hutton acknowledged, that the Irish were subjects
of the English king
after the Angevin conquest, but that was precisely because it was a case of
conquest. Upon conquest, and contrary
to what Bacon urged, there was an
automatic union of laws. As a result, the Irish became subjects of the king of
England. Hence the
union of England and Ireland had no bearing on the union of
England and Scotland. The Union of England and Scotland was achieved
by descent and with each kingdom’s native laws preserved.
The judges therefore had to choose between two versions of Irish history: (a)
Bacon’s, in which Ireland kept its native laws
until 1210; and (b)
Hutton’s, in which Ireland received English laws immediately upon
conquest. The judges opted for Bacon’s
view. There is a passage in Lord
Ellesmere’s (reconstructed) speech in the Exchequer Chamber which is very
similar to Bacon’s
argument about
Coke’s report likewise
relies on the argument that Ireland was first fully conquered by Henry II, but
English law was not introduced
until the reign of John. Coke fortifies the point
with a reference to the rolls.
been an exercise of the ‘realities of power’ by King John in the
thirteenth century had become, in the hands
of lawyers of the seventeenth
century, a legal precedent. Bacon, Coke and Ellesmere had taken historical
events of Angevin times
and transmuted them into legal authority without giving
any suggestion of the metamorphosis.
COKE’S FORMULATION OF THE RULE ABOUT CONQUEST IN
From the point of view of the history of the conquest rule, the culmination
Calvin’s case
is a passage in Coke’s report that discusses
‘conquest’ in some detail. Coke analysed the argument about conquest
and held the law to be this:
... there is a diversity between a conquest of a kingdom of a Christian King,
and the conquest of a kingdom of an infidel; for if
a King come to a Christian
kingdom by conquest, seeing that he hath
vitae et necis potestatem
may at his pleasure alter and change the laws of that kingdom: but until he doth
make an alteration of those laws the ancient
laws of the kingdom remain. But if
a Christian king should conquer a kingdom of an infidel, and bring them under
his subjection,
there ipso facto the laws of the infidel are abrogated for that
they be not only against Christianity, but of against the law of
nature, contained in the decalogue; and in that case, until certain laws be
established amongst them, the King by himself,
and such Judges as he shall
appoint, shall judge them and their causes according to natural equity, in such
sort as Kings in ancient
time did with their kingdoms, before any certain
municipal laws were given ... .
Here is the first statement of the conquest rule in English law reports.
Most of Coke’s long report of
Calvin’s case
is copiously
annotated with references to the Year Books. The obiter passage about conquest
is different. It is unsupported by citations
to authority, save for a reference
(shortly following the passage quoted above) to the example of Angevin Ireland.
This gives us
a clue to the source of the remarks. Coke did not take them out of
the Year Books. It seems that he adopted them from Bacon’s
speech to the
Exchequer Chamber. Bacon divided his speech to the Exchequer Chamber into three
parts. The first part consisted of
introductory observations. In these
observations Bacon purported to discuss the case from the point of view of pure
reason alone:
... your lordships will give me leave in a case of this quality, first to
visit and open the foundations and fountains of reason,
and not begin with the
positions and eruditions of municipal law...
It was under the cover of addressing the issue from the point of view of
reason that Bacon introduced many of the arguments that had
most likely been
exercising his mind during the political debates about union.
A comparison reveals important similarities between Coke’s influential
analysis of conquest and passages from the introductory
part of Bacon’s
speech. Coke’s report states that when the king comes to a new kingdom by
conquest, seeing he has ‘vitiae
et necis potestatem’, he may at his
pleasure alter and change the laws of that
Bacon had argued:
... the conqueror hath power of life and death over his captives; and
therefore where he giveth them themselves, he may reserve upon
such a gift what
service and subjection he will.
Coke also said in his report that until the king did make an alteration of
the laws of a conquered kingdom, its ancient laws remained.
Bacon had said in
his speech (citing the case of Ireland):
... the laws of England are not superinduced upon any country by conquest;
but that the old laws remain until the king by his proclamation
patent declare other laws ... .
We should however be careful in attributing too much originality to Bacon.
Bacon was simply drawing his arguments from the contemporary
political discourse
with which all the participants would have been familiar. Nevertheless, if Bacon
was not the ultimate source
of Coke’s remarks about conquest, the
similarities between Bacon’s speech and Coke’s report suggest that
most likely to have been the proximate source.
EVALUATION OF THE INTERPRETATION OF IRISH HISTORY IN
Was the influential interpretation of Irish history offered by Bacon in
Calvin’s case
and accepted by the judges correct?
The short answer is that it was not. English law had appeared in Ireland well
before a general expression of the King’s will
of the kind made by John in
1210. There is no firm evidence of any general decree by Henry II in 1171 that
English law would govern
Anglo-Irish.
Nevertheless, he and the
Anglo-Irish settlers seem to have simply proceeded on the basis that this would
be the case. Ireland was
divided up and distributed using English legal
concepts. In 1171 Henry granted Leinster to Richard de Clare, Earl of Pembroke
(‘Strongbow’)
Before departing Ireland in
1172 Henry granted Meath to Hugh de
It was to be held by
knight’s service, for the service of 50
One of the earliest surviving
grants by John as Lord of Ireland comes from 1185 and is a grant to Ranulf de
Glanville and Theobald
Walter in knight’s
There are many other examples
of pre-1210 grants of English-style
In this way English real
property concepts such as lands in fee, subinfeudation, and tenures such as
knight’s service came
to Ireland in 1171 and in the years immediately
following. Other aspects of English law necessarily came to Ireland with
of English-style seigniories. Hugh de Lacy, as Lord of Meath, had
‘all liberties and free customs which the King has or may
Grants by way of
sub-infeudation include the English rights of ‘judgment of fire, water and
Some grants, by
and by lords under
, expressly confer judicial and
financial rights using the old Anglo-Saxon terms, ‘soc, sac, theam,
infangthef’.
There was a County
Court for Dublin no later than Easter 1199 (albeit one that was significantly
different to an English county court
In England, the legal innovations of the Angevins were very popular and were
used by even minor landholders.
were probably not inclined to let go of the new legal procedures simply because
they had crossed the Irish sea. The Oblata
and Fine Rolls of John from before
the end of the century record Anglo-Irish lords purchasing common law writs to
have their titles
vindicated: for example, mort
, and novel
From 1204 litigants no longer
needed to go to the Chancery in England to obtain the principal writs. John
authorised his Justiciar
in Ireland to issue the writs of right, novel
disseisin, mort d’ancestor, and
Brand has pointed to evidence
that trial by jury, trial by battle, the ordeals, and outlawry were in operation
in Ireland before
the turn of the century, and that the common law concepts of
‘reasonable dower’ and seignorial wardship of minors were
Ireland before 1210.
So when John
authorised his Justiciar in Ireland to issue the main English real property
writs, and when in 1210 the barons promised
to obey English law, these were not
introductions of English law; they attested how deeply imbedded English law had
already become
in the affairs of the Anglo-Irish ruling class.
The error of the seventeenth century lawyers who looked to Angevin Ireland in
1210 for a precedent was to take a decree whose objective
was probably an
attempt at ensuring the observance of English law that was already present in
Ireland to be a decree that introduced
English law to Ireland for the first
time. For example, in 1207 John forbade any of his freemen from answering for
their free tenements
in any court, save by royal writ. Plucknett took this to be
an extension to Ireland of the ancient rule that no man need answer for
tenement save by royal writ.
However, it
does not read that way:
You well know that as well are bound to maintain and guard your rights, so
are you bound to preserve and defend your rights in all
things ... . We strictly
forbid you, by the fealty whereby you are bound to us, to answer for any, or in
the court of any, of your
free tenements save by precept and writ of us or of
our justiciar.
It reads more like an admonition and warning to free tenants not to forsake
the protection already bestowed on them by English law.
This admonition was only
the beginning. In the same year (1207) John rebuked the Anglo-Irish lords for
proposing to create a new
assize without his
permission.
It seems probable that the
charter of 1210 was similar: trying to regularise and ensure conformity to
existing law. When Bacon, Ellesmere
and Coke came to consider the case of
Ireland they failed to see that English law arrived in Ireland well before 1210
(or obscured
it for the purposes of their argument). They presented the records
as evidence of John formally introducing English law to Ireland
for the first
CONTINUING OBSCURITIES ABOUT COKE’S FORMULATION OF THE CONQUESTS RULE IN
CALVIN’S CASE
We have found the immediate source of the conquests rule: a tendentious use
of history by the participants in the union debates of
the early seventeenth
century. Nonetheless, several points about the genesis of the conquests rule
remain obscure. We may hope further
research will throw light upon those points;
for the present we must be satisfied in merely noting them.
The Question of the Importance of Civilian and
Canon Law in the Formulation of the Conquests Rule
One recurring problem in English legal history concerns the matter of how
much influence Roman law had on English law in and around
the sixteenth and
seventeenth centuries. This question resurfaces in the context of the origins of
the conquest rule. If the immediate
source of the conquest rule is early
seventeenth century political debates and treatises, can we nonetheless detect
the influence
of Roman law in those debates and treatises? There can be no doubt
that one aspect of the colonies rule – that empty lands
can be acquired by
settlement – is ultimately derived from the Roman rules regarding the
taking of a
res nullius
Does the conquest rule
have a like pedigree?
Points of similarity between Roman law and law derived from Roman sources on
the one hand, and the common law’s conquest rule
on the other, can be
found. For instance, at the basis of the conquest rule is the proposition that a
kingdom might be lawfully acquired
by conquest. This has a parallel in the Roman
law rule that things captured in war become the property of him who first takes
of them. This rule is found in several places in Justinian’s
, and is also stated by
Civilian and canon lawyers of
the middle ages both followed the rule.
More specific is one passage in the
that says that the occupation
of hostile lands is effected by the State and not merely soldiers; such lands
therefore come into public
(rather than private)
This rule found acceptance in
modified form among medieval civilian and canon lawyers: lands and tenements
captured in a just war
became the property of the prince for whom the captors
fought, and the people who lived on conquered lands became that prince’s
The rule that conquests belong to the conqueror was in turn adopted into
writings on the developing law of nations of the sixteenth
century. Perino
A Treatise on Military Matters and Warfare
of 1563 states
that things captured in war belong to the captors, citing Justinian and
Later, relying on the
and Bartolus, a qualification is added: captured immovables belong
to the sovereign (the Emperor).
Balthazar Ayala similarly stated the position in his treatise on the law of war
More important for our purposes is the work of Alberico Gentili. Gentili was
a notable civilian lawyer. He had fled to Oxford from
religious persecution in
Italy. He began teaching in Oxford in 1581, became Regius Professor of Civil Law
in 1587, and subsequently
practised in London as a member of Gray’s
De Jure Libri
, first published in 1598 says, again relying on classical sources, that
‘it is beyond doubt that lands and other possessions
may be acquired under
the title of war ...’.
Gentili’s work contains a detailed consideration of the rights of the
victors in war. He was inclined to give wide powers to
the conqueror:
... another question may, it would seem, be formulated; namely, whether one
who conquers another and gets all his property into his
power can presently
claim the rights of the conquered over others, over whom the conquered party
claimed rights before his defeat
or could justly claim them. The Romans thought
that when they had conquered Alba they ought to have the same rights in Latium
the people of Alba had previously had. It is true that from the submission
of the head the subjection of the members and of property
follows, because when
the head serves, it is necessary for the members to serve also. And a state
which has passed from one sovereign
to another is regarded as having passed over
with all its attributes... .
In 1602 there was published in London
The Pandects of the Law of
by William Fulbeck, an admirer of Gentili. The work contains
comments to similar effect on the rights of
conquerors.
conclude’, says Fulbeck at one point, ‘with shewing the universall
and absolute right, advantage, libertie,
power, and prerogative of the
Conqueror’. Fulbeck then proceeds, like Gentili, to say that all places
and things formerly belonging
to the subdued people belong to the conqueror, who
may take away their ornaments and riches, and sack their cities (unless
surrendered
upon condition). Only a handful of years later, in
, Bacon was to make his submissions in
Calvin’s case
the wide rights of conquerors.
In short, with Gentili and Fulbeck we are in the day and the milieu of the
most influential participants in
Calvin’s case
. Indeed, one of
Gentili’s patrons was apparently Lord
The same year that Gentili
was admitted as a member of Gray’s Inn (1600) was the year Francis Bacon
gave his reading on the
Statute of Uses there. Moreover, by then Fulbeck had
been a member of Gray’s Inn for over a decade; and had, indeed,
collaborated
with Bacon in writing a masque produced before Queen Elizabeth in
Thus we can say that two aspects of the conquest rule – (1) that
conquered territory belongs to the sovereign; and (2) that
the conquering
sovereign has wide powers over those whom he has conquered – have
parallels in Roman and Roman derived law.
And we have identified the means by
which knowledge of Roman law on these points might have passed to common
Nevertheless, it is not yet clear to what degree the similarity between Roman
(or Romanesque law) and the conquest rule is coincidental
and to what degree it
is causal. It must be admitted that congruence of the detail of the conquest
rule as specifically formulated
by Bacon and Coke on the one hand, and any
passage of the
or Fulbeck or Gentili and
their immediate predecessors on the other, is far from perfect. For instance,
the passages from Gentili
and Fulbeck to which we have just referred do not
explicitly discuss the question of what
is to apply to conquered
people; and the problem of what law is to apply is at the heart of the common
law conquest rule. The closest
Gentili comes to such discussion is actually to
reject the notion (accepted in Coke’s report of
) that the conqueror has plenary (as opposed to wide) powers over the
conquered peoples.
Indeed, whereas
Bacon’s successful submissions in
Calvin’s case
are based on
the premise that ‘the conqueror hath power of life and death over his
Gentili lays down a
rule against the slaughter of the
vanquished.
More generally, it is hard to gauge the depth of familiarity with the Roman
law tradition of the English lawyers who were the most
important participants in
the formation of the conquest rule, in particular Bacon and
Maitland could not find anything
to suggest that Francis Bacon ‘had more than a bowing acquaintance with
Roman law’.
On the other hand, it
must be reasonable to suppose that Bacon’s immersion in the debates
concerning the union of Scotland
and England led to him having some knowledge of
the Roman law (or at least Roman law-derived) learning about conquest. As for
his library certainly contained many volumes about the civil and canon
But how familiar was Coke with
them? The number of civilian volumes in Coke’s library is sometimes cited
as evidence of Coke’s
familiarity with Roman law. But owning a book is not
the same as mastering its contents. For only one of the civilian volumes
A Catalogue of the Library of Sir Edward Coke
edited by W O
Hassall does Hassall see fit to comment, ‘Many marginalia by
T E Scrutton’s
examination of Coke’s
led him to conclude that
Coke’s knowledge of Roman law was sparing and
unreliable.
A working knowledge of Roman
law can probably more readily be attributed to Lord
However, his own estimation
of his Roman learning was very modest: ‘I professe it not; I have learned
little of it ... .’
Thus we ought
be cautious about inferring a direct or simple causal connection between Roman
law and the conquest rule.
For the present we may state this hypothesis. The civilian learning
concerning conquest may have had some influence in the formation
of the common
law’s conquest rule, but if so that influence was diffuse. It was the
political arguments about the union of
Scotland and England that gave point to
it. At most, the lawyers in
Calvin’s case
may have cannibalised the
Roman doctrine – ‘a principle’ to borrow the words of
Holdsworth from another context,
‘which had long been in the
– without much
deference to its niceties. Like advocates of all ages, the common lawyers
involved in
Calvin’s case
took what they needed and shaped it to
their own ends. Most importantly, they formulated a rule that allowed to be left
notion that only a just war can result in a legally valid acquisition
of territory by force. This may not have been wholly accidental.
Francis Bacon
was apparently conscious of the distinction between force being used to create a
right to territory (i.e. what was
to become the conquest rule) and force being
used to enforce a right to territory (the just war tradition). In
Calvin’s case
Bacon submitted that:
... when any king obtaineth by war a country whereunto he hath right by
birth, that he is ever in upon his ancient right,
not upon purchase by
On the former basis Bacon explains a writ of protection said to date from 13
H VI that purported, on its face, to allow Commissioners
en route to Gascony to
‘conquer’ all who resist them: ‘conquer’ here (said
Bacon) meant merely re-claim what
already belonged to Henry by
inheritance.
But there would be no need
for further instances (in common law, at any rate) after
. Thenceforth acquisition of territory by force of arms counted as a
conquest, whatever its justification (or lack thereof); and thus
enquiries into
justification could pass out of English law and into the spheres of politics and
morality. It is the laying aside
of the requirement that there be a pre-existing
right to the territory that separates the conquest rule from medieval just war
and the civilian tradition.
Writing in the mid-seventeenth century, Sir Matthew Hale corrected those of
his contemporaries who thought that William obtained the
kingdom of England by
the Clayme of King William was not by right of Conquest, but of Succession to
King Edward and upon that acco[un]t indeed he Conquered
Harold that was an
Hale is here alluding to the medieval position and the civilian tradition:
that, in those times, a valid conquest depended on the
existence of a right to
enforce. The lawyers of Hale’s day were apparently losing sight of the old
position. To common lawyers
of the mid seventeenth century conquest was
something that, without more, could generate rights. A doctrine of conquest
to the common law now existed.
The Exception regarding Infidels
The problem of the extent of the influence of the civilian tradition becomes
even more vexed when we turn to consider the one significant
difference between
Bacon’s submissions in
Calvin’s case
and Coke’s statement of it in his report. Coke’s report superimposes
upon Bacon’s argument
a distinction between Christians and infidels:
according to Coke the laws of conquered Christian countries remain in place
the conqueror sees fit to alter them; the laws of infidel kingdoms are
automatically void as being contrary to Christianity and to
the law of nature.
The King or such judges as he shall appoint shall judge infidel cases according
to natural equity as kings did
in ancient times before any certain municipal
laws were given. There is a faint echo here of an observation made by Bacon in
course of his argument:
... you shall find the observation true, and almost general in all states,
that their lawgivers were long after their first kings,
who governed for a time
by natural equity without law.
But Bacon’s submissions nowhere make a distinction between conquests of
Christian peoples and conquests of infidels.
Coke’s source for this distinction is as yet
Neither Hawarde’s report
nor the anonymous manuscript notes of the speeches in the Exchequer Chamber show
any of the other
judges relying upon the distinction, nor even mentioning
infidels. And yet both sources do have Coke speaking of infidels, thus showing
that Coke’s remarks on this matter are not a later interpolation when Coke
came to write up his report of the case.
As to Coke’s possible sources for the distinction between Christians and
infidels, there is a passing remark by Brooke J in
a year book from the reign of
Henry VIII to the effect that a pagan is not able to prosecute an action if
someone beats him.
Coke cited this in
his report of
Calvin’s case
amongst several other
authorities (including a passage from Corinthians), dealing with the law’s
supposed hostility to infidels.
be enough to account for the distinction Coke then proceeds to draw between the
conquest of infidel kingdoms and the conquest
of Christian kingdoms. Even so,
this does appear to be thin authority for so elaborate a
distinction.
It is possible to suggest other sources that may have influenced Coke. Pagden
has pointed out that the notion that infidels are incapable
‘dominium’ (in the sense of rulership) is consistent with the
Protestant belief enunciated by Luther and Calvin, and
before them Wycliffe,
that power derives from God’s
Following this argument through,
infidels were not the recipients of God’s grace and so had no legitimate
worldly power. It
may be that consistency with Protestant doctrine was one of
the factors that recommended a distinction between infidels and Christians
There is also a strand in the history of canon law that was also hostile to
infidels. The canon lawyer Hostiensis, writing in the
thirteenth century, had
said that infidels were incapable of possessing dominium:
It seems to me that with the coming of Christ every public office and every
government and all sovereignty and jurisdiction, both
by law and from just
cause, was taken from infidels and given over to the faithful through Him who
has the highest power and cannot
err ... . And we assert that by law infidels
ought to be subject to the faithful and not the
We have already noted that most medieval canonists preferred Innocent
IV’s contrary view.
Nonetheless,
Hostiensis’s alternative position had canon law adherents throughout the
middle ages.
His writings on canon law
writing enjoyed great popularity until the early modern
Hostiensis’s doctrine on
infidels survived to be adopted by the first writers who sought to justify the
Spanish conquests in
great Baldus, a civilian and a canonist, apparently stated in one place that it
was lawful to plunder the enemies of the
faith and that infidels cannot have
true jurisdiction.
But Hostiensis’s doctrine cannot be said to represent the prevailing
opinion among the canonists and civilians of Coke’s
Hostiensis’s doctrine did not in the end win the field in Spain, where the
debate about the propriety of conquest of the
Americas was
Closer to Coke’s day,
Balthazar Ayala, writing one of the earliest modern treatises on the law of war
War may not be declared against infidels merely because they are infidels,
not even on the authority of the emperor or Pope, for their
infidel character
does not divest them of those rights of ownership which they have under the law
universal [
jus gentium
], and which are given not to the faithful alone
but to every reasonable creature.
He was able to rely on the authority of Justinian’s
Gentili similarly took the side
of those Spaniards who said that religion was not a just reason for war against
the Indians. As for
Baldus’s comment that infidels have no true
What did Coke know of these debates in any event? Some commentators have
derived Coke’s position on infidels from that of contemporary
the law of nations. However, the case they put is not wholly
compelling.
It is true that Coke’s
library was stocked with over fifty volumes on civil law and canon
and he professed a modest knowledge
of canon law.
Nonetheless, again, the
resemblance between the doctrine we have traced back to Hostiensis and
Coke’s distinction between Christians
and infidels is very imperfect. At
present, the problem remains largely imponderable. The most that can be said is
that the case
for deriving Coke’s distinction between Christians and
infidels from the canon law or the law of nations traditions (as opposed
instance, drawing on other sources, or just making it up himself) is weaker than
the case for deriving the rest of the conquest
rule from civilian materials.
THE ACCEPTANCE OF THE ANALYSIS OF CONQUEST IN
CALVIN’S CASE
Coke’s analysis of conquest in
Calvin’s case
constitutes
the earliest version of the conquest rule in an English law report. We have seen
that it arose almost accidentally: in
a case that had nothing to do with
colonial law (such a body of law barely existed), as a somewhat opportunistic
side argument to
support the proposition that allegiance to the king is a matter
of natural law. Even so, these remarks about conquest proved to be
influential. They could easily be extracted from the thicket of argument about
allegiance in Coke’s report and made
to stand alone as a discrete rule
It was repeated numerous times
in the cases. In 1622 Robert Callis cited it with approval in his reading at
Gray’s Inn on the
We find it being invoked in
legal submissions in Virginia in 1683.
Similarly, following
Calvin’s case
, the example of the Angevin
conquest of Ireland was relied upon by judges a number of times in seventeenth
century cases. In
Craw v Ramsey
in 1670, a majority of the justices of
Common Pleas said that Ireland remained governed by its own laws until King John
English ones.
report goes so far as to quote at length the relevant extracts from the patent
and close rolls pertaining to Ireland
from the reign of John and Henry
And again in
Dawes v Painter
in 1674, when the Common Pleas held (according to Freeman’s report) that
English law does not automatically extend into the
dominions, Ireland provided
the example: ‘Ireland was not governed by our laws, till it was so
specially ordered by King John’.
In the same year the rule about conquest was said by Common Pleas to apply to
Blankard v Galdy
1693 the King’s Bench is reported to have said:
The laws by which the people were governed before the conquest of the island
[Jamaica], do bind them till new laws are given ... .
The reason is, because
though a conqueror may make new laws, yet there is a necessity that the former
should be in force till new
are obtained, and even then some of their old
customs may remain. By the statute of 27 Hen 8, c.27 Wales was united to
England, yet
some of their customs still remain; it is so likewise in Ireland,
which nation, though conquered, still retained their old customs
Ultimately Coke’s analysis of conquest found its way into
Blackstone’s statement of the colonies
Only the curious exception as to infidels failed to survive into modern law.
It was neither reasonable nor feasible for an imperial
power to show no
tolerance of the laws of non-Christians. The correctness of Coke’s remarks
in subsequent
The Privy Council appears to have
attempted a modification of the exception as to infidels in 1722, but it did not
Instead, Lord Mansfield made
any attempted modification redundant by rejecting the whole idea of an exception
as to infidels ‘absurd’.
Thereafter, aside from an interesting discussion by counsel in
, the exception almost completely
disappeared from English law.
remainder of Coke’s remarks about conquest, however, survived and thus
became the first element of the colonies rule to
be established.
Senior Executive Lawyer with the Native
Title Unit of the Australian Government Solicitor. This is a heavily revised
version of part
of the author’s MPhil thesis at the University of Oxford.
My special thanks to Paul Brand, Mike McNair, Joshua Getzler, Nicholas
and an anonymous reviewer for their helpful comments. I am particularly grateful
to the Hector Pilling Memorial Scholarship,
Brasenose College Oxford, whose
assistance made the research for this essay possible. According to his obituary
Brazen Nose
of November 1942 Hector Pilling was ‘generous
with his money, generous with his affections and generous in his
aspirations’.
I have every reason to believe it.
These two cases are
(1693) 2 Salkeld 411
[1795] EngR 570
[91 ER 356]
Smith v Brown
Salkeld 666
[1795] EngR 114
[91 ER 566].
The former case is also reported at 4 Modern 222
Holt KB 341
[90 ER 1089]
and Comberbach 228
[1724] EngR 332
[90 ER 445]
although the latter
two reports ought be treated with particular caution: see John W Wallace,
(4th ed, 1882), 396, 398-9.
The details of this case, reported very
briefly by Peere Williams under the title of ‘Case 15 –
[1722] EngR 1
(1722) 2 P Wms 75
[24 ER 646]
have been obscure for a long
time. Recent work, however, has thrown some light on the case: B H MacPherson,
‘The Mystery of
Anonymous (1722)’
Australian Law
William Blackstone,
Commentaries of the
Laws of England
(facsimile edition of first edition published 1765-69, 1979)
104-5 [Bk 1, ch 4].
Although the significance of the conquest
rule was revived by the
Foreign Jurisdiction Act 1890
(Imp) (see esp s
1), and in particular by the wide (and arguably incorrect) operation given to
that Act by the courts: see
King v Earl of Crewe; Ex parte Sekgome
[1910] UKLawRpKQB 78
Kent McNeil,
Common Law Aboriginal
(1989) gives several examples, including Southern Rhodesia (124 n 69)
and part of what is now Ghana (129 n 97). Other examples he
gives at 117 n 38,
such as Grenada and British Guiana might be classified as conquests or cessions.
Calvin’s case
(1608) 7 Co Rep
, 398, 404];
Craw v Ramsey
(1670) Vaughan 274,
[1823] EngR 155
[124 ER 1072
Blankard v Galdy
(1693) 4 Mod 222, 225
, 361-2]; for a later case see
Campbell v Hall
[1774] EngR 5
(1774) 1 Cowp 204
[1774] EngR 5
[98 ER 1045
For an initial attempt at sketching the
origins of the colonies rule as a whole see the author’s ‘The
extension of English
law following conquest and settlement: the origins of the
colonies rule’ (unpublished MPhil thesis, University of Oxford, 2002).
Joseph Conrad,
The Heart of
(first published 1902, 1988 ed) 31 [ch 1].
The doctrine of the ‘act of
state’ awaits its historian. A start has been made in Sir William Harrison
Act of State in English Law
(1906) ch 1. Australian courts in
particular have had occasion to repeat many times over the past few decades the
proposition that
the acquisition of sovereignty over new territory is an act of
state unimpeachable in the municipal courts, eg
Coe v Commonwealth
[1979] HCA 68
, 128, 132;
Mabo v Queensland [No.2]
[1992] HCA 23
(1992) 175 CLR 1
Coe v Commonwealth
[1993] HCA 42
(1993) 118 ALR 193
the Yorta Yorta Aboriginal Community v Victoria
[2002] HCA 58
(2002) 194 ALR 538
[37]. For English authorities see eg
Secretary of State in Council of India v
Kamachee Boye Sahaba
(1859) 7 Moo Ind 476, 529, 531 [19 ER 388, 407, 408];
Salaman v Secretary of State for India
[1906] UKLawRpKQB 23
[1906] 1 KB 613
, 625-7, 635,
Post Office v Estuary Radio Ltd
[1968] 2 QB 740
Giraldus Cambrensis [Gerald of Wales],
Expugnatio Hibernica. The Conquest of Ireland
(A Brian Scott and Francis
X Martin trans, 1978) 91 [Bk 1, ch 30]; Art Cosgrove (ed),
A New History of
(1987) vol 2, 87-8.
Cosgrove, above n 10, 44, and see also
129; Rees Davies,
Domination and Conquest
(1990) 25-6.
Giraldus Cambrensis, above n 10, 93-7
[Bk 1, ch. 31, 33].
See the three letters from Pope
Alexander III in 1172 celebrating Henry’s success. They are reproduced in
translation in Edmund
Curtis and Robert McDowell (eds),
Irish Historical
Documents 1172-1922
(1943) 19-22, but note Martin’s correction of the
translation of Letter 1 in Cosgrove, above n 10, 92 (n 4).
Calvin’s case
(1608) 7 Co
Most recently Kirby J of the High Court
of Australia in
Commonwealth v Yarmirr
(2001) 208 CLR 1
129 (n 561).
Cosgrove, above n 10, 142-3, and see
also the map at 133.
Paul Brand, ‘Ireland and the
Literature of the Early Common Law’ (1981) 16
The Irish Jurist
Series) 95-7; 100-6.
One of my principal sources in this
essay for governmental documents concerning medieval Ireland is Henry Sweetman
Calendar of Documents Relating to Ireland Preserved in Her
Majesty’s Public Record Office London
(1875-86). This is a 5 volume
work covering the period 1171-1307. In this essay I shall by drawing from:
volume 1, published in 1875,
covering the period 1171-1251 (which volume I shall
hereafter cite as
Cal Docs Ire, 1171-1251
); volume 2, published in 1877,
covering the period 1252 to 1284 (which volume I shall hereafter cite as
Docs Ire, 1252-1284
); and volume 3, published in 1879, covering the period
1285 to 1292 (which volume I shall hereafter cite as
Cal Docs Ire,
). References will be to document numbers as calendered by
Sweetman. As to King John ordaining that English laws are to be in force
Ireland, the two most detailed accounts that are recorded on the rolls are
calendared at
Cal docs Ire
#1458 (10 Dec 1226), #1602
(8 May 1228). Other references on the rolls are at #1390 (29 June 1226), #1430
(8 July 1226), #2069 (28
October 1233), #2850 (9 September 1246);
Ire, 1252-1284
, #529 (27 January 1256).
Cosgrove, above n 10, 173-5; Jocelyn
Otway-Ruthven, ‘Anglo-Irish Shire Government in the Thirteenth
Century’ (1946-1947)
Irish Historical Studies
1. For a detailed
account of the birth of the Irish judiciary, see Paul Brand, ‘The Birth
and Early Development of a Colonial
Judiciary: the Judges of the Lordship of
Ireland, 1210-1377’ in W N Osborough (ed),
Explorations in Law and
(1995) 1. English law did not penetrate equally into all parts of
Ireland. Even within regions nominally ruled by the Anglo-Irish,
there could be
areas that were beyond their effective control: see Cosgrove, above n 10, 174.
Observance of native laws must have
survived in those areas: Jocelyn
Otway-Ruthven, ‘The Native Irish and English Law in Medieval
Ireland’ (1950) 7
Irish Historical Studies
1, 4; Geoffrey Hand,
‘The Status of the Native Irish in the Lordship of Ireland
1272-1331’ (1966) 1
The Irish Jurist
(new series) 93, 93-4; Rees
Domination and Conquest. The Experience of Ireland, Scotland and
Wales 1100-1300
Jocelyn Otway-Ruthven, ‘The
Constitutional Position of the Great Lordships of South Wales’ (1958) 8
Transactions of the Royal Historical Society
, 5th series 1, esp 1-7.
Rees Davies, ‘The Law of the
March’ (1970-1971) 5
Welsh History Review
Sir Maurice Powicke,
King Henry III
and the Lord Edward
(1947) vol 2, ch 15 esp 647-63; Rees Davies ‘Law
and National Identity in Thirteenth-Century Wales’ in Rees Davies
Welsh Society and Nationhood
(1984) 52-69.
Statute of Wales
12 Ed I, c.1
(1284) reproduced in
Statutes of the Realm
, vol 1, 55ff.
Rees Davies, ‘The Twilight of
Welsh Law, 1284-1536’
, esp 149-59.
27 Henry VIII, c.26 (1536) reproduced
Statutes of the Realm
, vol 3, 563ff.
Sir James Holt, ‘Politics and
Property in Early Medieval England’ (1972) 57
Past and Present
, the contrast is between ‘hereditas’ and
‘quaestus’ – in Hall’s translation, between
and acquired land’. Maitland, perhaps unhappily, chose to
translate the words as ‘heritage’ and ‘conquest’:
Frederick Pollock and Frederic Maitland,
The History of English Law Before
the Time of Edward I
, (2nd ed, 1898) vol 2, 308 n 4. However, in doing so he
was consciously drawing on Scottish law (see n 4: ‘In borrowing from
beyond the Tweed the words ‘heritage and conquest’...’). The
word ‘conquest’ as used in Scottish law,
at least when Maitland was
writing, did
denote land acquired by force of arms.
Leges Henrici Primi
(L J Downer
trans, 1972) 225 [70, 21].
The Treatise On the Laws
and Customs of the Realm of England Commonly Called Glanvill
trans, 1965) 70-1 [vii, i; f.21v-22].
Holt, above n 26, 12; Pollock and
n 26 above, 308 n 4.
I am indebted to Paul Brand for this
piece of information.
, 1.5.4, 11.7.36,
41.1.5.7, 41.2.1.1, 41.2.18.4, 49.15.20.1;
2.1.17; Cicero,
(Miriam Griffin and E Margaret Atkins trans, 1991) 9 [Bk 1, ch
21]; Donald W Sutherland, ‘Conquest and Law’ (1972) 15
33, 38-44. The ancient Greeks also seem to have had an analogous
rule, though its correctness was disputed: Aristotle’s
Henry of Huntingdon,
(Diana Greenway trans, 1996) 31 [Bk I ch 12], 273 [Prologue to Book
V], 699 [Bk X, ch 1]. See also: Greenway’s introduction
at xxxviii-xxxix;
Sutherland, above n 31, 45.
Henry de Bracton
, On the Laws and
Customs of England
(Samuel E Thorne trans, 1968-1977) vol 2, 43 [f.9], 52
[f.12], 66 [f.17], 137 [f.44b]. There are echoes of the same rules in
corresponding
passages in
(H G Richardson and G O Sayles trans,
1972) (Selden Society vol 89), 2 [Bk III, ch.2], 6 [Bk III, ch.3], 13 [Bk III,
ch.7]. I can
find no references or allusions at all to the Roman rules in the
corresponding passages of
(Francis Nicholls trans, 1865), ch 2
and 3 of Bk II.
Bracton, above n 33, vol 4, 191
Ibid vol 3, 213 [f.240b]; vol 4, 171
Sir James Holt,
Magna Carta
(2nd ed, 1992) 23, 87.
T F T Plucknett, ‘The Relations
Between Roman Law and English Common Law Down to the Sixteenth Century: a
General Survey’
(1939-1940) 3
University of Toronto Law Journal
Richard Fitz Nigel,
Dialogus de
(Charles Johnson, FEL Carte, Diana Greenway trans, 1983) 52-4,
59-60, 63. That said, there is no express reference to Roman law in
passages Sutherland cites.
Cal Docs Ire, 1254-1284
#1482 (1278); J Mills (ed),
Calendar of the Justiciary Rolls or Proceedings
in the Court of the Justiciar of Ireland, 1295-1303
(1905), 316-317 (1300).
I am indebted to Paul Brand for drawing to my attention these two references (in
which ‘conquest’
is used in the sense of acquisition by force), and
also to a third unpublished one: PRO C 260/18, no 10, an Irish quo warranto case
of 1298 in which the prior of St Patrick, Downpatrick apparently sought
(unsuccessfully) to trace various franchises back to the
time of John de Courcy,
who conquered Ulster in the late 1170s.
Donald W Sutherland,
Quo Warranto
Proceedings in the Reign of Edward I 1278-1294
(1963) 82-5, 101-5, 183-5;
Paul Brand, ‘“Quo Warranto” Law in the Reign of Edward I: A
Hitherto Undiscovered Opinion
of Chief Justice Hengham’, in Paul Brand,
The Making of the Common Law
(1992) 393, 427-8, 433.
In this essay I have relied principally
on those editions of the Year Books prepared under the direction of the Master
of the Rolls
in the nineteenth century (indicated herein by the notation
‘(RS)’ – for ‘Rolls Series’) and the editions
published by the Selden Society (in which case I have indicated the volume
number in question). For the argument about conquest in
quo warranto proceedings
see for example:
R v Richard de Baskervile
(1292) YB 20 and 21 Ed I (RS)
R v Bishop of Hereford
Coram Rege Roll no.136 (Easter 1293), m.58
in G O Sayles (ed),
Select Cases in the Court of King’s Bench Under
(1938) vol 2 (Selden Society, vol 57) 142;
R v Burgesses of
(1302) YB 30 and 31 Ed I (RS) 222. For later references to the
argument see:
Coventry v Grauntpie
(1308-9) YB 2 and 3 Ed
II (Selden Society, vol 19) 71, 73;
R v Prior of Merton
(1321) YB 14 Ed
II (Selden Society vol 86) 177, 178;
R v The Dean and Chapter of St Pauls
(1321) YB 14 Ed II (Selden Society vol 86) 209, 210.
The argument of Hugh of Lowther in
v Bishop of Hereford
, above n 41, seems to me particularly suggestive of
this interpretation. See also Sutherland, above n 40, 82;
Brand, above n
40, 427-8. Another significant reference to ‘conquest’ in the Year
Books is given at n 66. There is also
an interesting discussion of the Norman
conquest in
Simon of Ruston v Richard of Skeyton & ors
(1284): Paul
Brand (ed),
The Earliest English Law Reports
(1996) vol 1 (Selden Society
vol 111) 169, 171 (1284.11).
I use the translated passage in Bruce
God’s Peace and King’s Peace. The Laws of Edward
the Confessor
(1999) 118.
Bracton, above n 33, vol 2, 305
John of Salisbury,
Policraticus
(Cary Nederman trans, 1990) 38 [Bk IV, ch.5].
Geoffrey of Monmouth
, The History of
the Kings of Britain
(Lewis Thorpe trans, 1969) 209 [Bk IX, ch 16]. See also
the letter from Archbishop Theobald to Nigel, Bishop of Ely quoted in Mary
Cheyney, ‘The Litigation Between John Marshall and Archbishop Thomas
Beckett in 1164: a Pointer to the Origins of Novel Disseisin’
Guy and H G Beale (eds),
Law and Social Change in British History
9, 20 (‘But as things done by force and fear are to be considered null ...
we command ... that everything which has
been restored from you by violence or
against your will shall be recalled’).
Walter Ullman,
Medieval Papalism
(1948) 132-3.
Commentaria Doctissima in Quinque Libros Decetalium
, translated in Brian
The Crisis of Church and State 1050-1300
(1980) 155.
James Muldoon,
Popes, Lawyers and
(1979) ch 1, esp 27, and also 45, 112-9, 124-8; Kenneth Pennington,
‘Bartolome de Las Casas and the Tradition of Medieval Law’
Popes, Canonists and Texts 1150-1550
(1990) XIII.6-8.
Maurice H Keen,
The Laws of War in
the Late Middle Ages
(1965) 64, 65. See also the discussion of Baldus, 9
(unjust wars are not properly wars at all, but rather
Commentaria in usus Feudorum
II.28), and Keen’s
observations, 93.
q.2, c.1-2. The Latin is quoted in Frederick H Russell,
The Just War in the
Middle Ages
(1975) 62 (n 24), 63 (n 28). There is a translation of c.1 in
John Eppstein,
The Catholic Tradition of the Law of Nations
There is a helpful analysis of Causa 23 in James Brundage, ‘Holy war and
the Medieval Lawyers’ in Thomas Murphy
The Holy War
For differing interpretations of the
relevant passage see: Brundage, above n 51, 109, esp n 61; Russell, above n 51,
63, n 29. After
Gratian there were a diversity of medieval opinions on the
criteria for a just war. These were clarifications, elaborations, developments
or variations of Gratian’s formula. On this see: Russell, ibid, ch 4-5;
Keen, above n 50, ch 5.
1.1.5 (‘Ex hoc iure
gentium introducta sunt bella’); Frederic Maitland (ed),
Passages from the Works of Bracton and Azo
(1895) (Selden Society, vol 8)
40. Reliance on this passage of the
can be found in the works of
the canon lawyers. Isidore and Gratian used it: Keen, above n 50, 10.
Maitland, above n 53, 40. Presumably
Azo felt justified in making this interpolation by
Ibid 37 [f.4].
See also the ambivalent attitude to war
of the civilian lecturer in England in the late twelfth century: Francis De
Zulueta and Peter
Stein (eds and trans),
The Teaching of Roman Law in England
Around 1200
(1990) 10 (1.2).
St Augustine,
Concerning the City of
God Against the Pagans
(Henry Bettenson trans, 1984) 154 [Bk IV, ch 15].
In addition to the just war, canon law
also knew of the ‘Holy War’: a positively meritorious war waged in
the interests
of the Church, for example against infidels and heretics. The
criteria for the Holy War were vague. However, the Holy War’s
confined by the fact that it required papal sanction. It could not be invoked by
any secular ruler seeking to extend his
domains. For discussion of Holy War see:
James Brundage,
Medieval Canon Law and the Crusader
(1969) 21-9;
Brundage, above n 51, 103-9; Russell, above n 51, 72-83, 112-26; Herbert
Popes, Monks and Crusaders
(1984) essay XIII, esp 15-21.
George Garnett describes the Norman
accounts of the conquest as ‘legal briefs’: ‘Conquered
England’ in Nigel
The Oxford Illustrated History of Medieval
William of Poitiers,
Gesta Guillelmi
(RHC Davis and Marjorie Chibnall trans, 1998) 101 [ii.1] and 81 [i.48]
respectively.
Ibid 101 [ii.1]. The argument for Duke
William is again set out at length at 119-23 [ii.12]. The weakness of Duke
claim is shown in: George Garnett, ‘Coronation and
Propaganda: Some Implications of the Norman Claim to the Throne of England
1066’ (1986) 35
Transactions of the Royal Historical Society, 5th
91, 97 (and see also 107-12 for the genesis of the argument);
Garnett, above n 59, 62-5.
Quaestiones in Heptateuchum
10a. I have taken the English translation from Eppstein, above n 51, 74.
Etymologiarum sive Originum
, XX, xviii, 1, 2-4; translation in Eppstein, above n 51,
‘Those wars are unjust which are
undertaken without provocation. For only a war waged for revenge or defence can
actually be
just’ [‘Illa iniusta bella sunt, quae sunt sine causa
suscepta. nam extra ulciscendi aut propulsandorum hostium causam
bellum geri
iustum nullum potest’]: Cicero,
The Republic
(Clinton Keyes trans,
1928) 213 [III.xxiii.35]; ‘No war is just unless it is declared and waged
to recover lost goods’
[‘Nullum bellum esse iustum nisi quod aut
rebus repetitis geratur aut denunciatum ante sit et interdict’]: Cicero,
n 31, 14-5 [Bk 1, ch 35].
William of Poitiers, above n 60, 123
R v Abbot of Peterborough
(1329-1330) YB 3-4 Ed III 87, 92-3 (Selden Society vol 97).
Giraldus Cambrensis, above n 10,
Ibid 149 [Bk 2, ch 6]; Geoffrey of
Monmouth, above n 46, 81 [Bk III, ch 12], 198 [Bk IX, ch 10], 204 [Bk IX, ch
Walter Ullman, ‘On the influence
of Geoffrey of Monmouth in English History’ in Clemens Bauer, Laetittia
Boehm, and Max
Muller (eds),
Speculum Historiale
(1965) 257, 271. The
relevant passage from Geoffrey of Monmouth’s history is Geoffrey of
Monmouth, above n 46, 198 [Bk IX,
Rees Davies,
The First English
(2000) 33; Aelred Watkin (ed),
The Great Chartulary of
Glastonbury
(1947) vol 1, section entitled ‘Introductory
Documents’ (iii).
See Davies, above n 70, 41-2. The
letter itself can be found in ELG Stones,
Anglo-Scottish Relations
(1965) 96-109.
Giraldus Cambrensis, above n 10, 149
[Bk 2, ch 6]; see also 93 [Bk I, ch 31], 95 [Bk I, ch 33], 231 [Bk 2, ch 33] and
311 (n 150).
It is reproduced in translation in
Sidney Ehler and John Morral (eds),
Church and State Through the
(1954) 16-22, esp 20. For commentary see Walter Ullman,
‘Donation of Constantine’ in W J McDonald (ed in chief)
Catholic Encyclopedia
(1967) vol 4.
Giraldus Cambrensis, above n 10, 149
[Bk 2, ch 6].
Ibid 145-7 [Bk 1, ch 5]. The arguments
and extensive bibliography about this controversial document are summarised in
The Church and the Two Nations in Medieval Ireland
(1970) 36 n
Sir Maurice Powicke,
King Henry III
and the Lord Edward
(1947) vol 2, 647-8.
Salaman v Secretary of State for
[1906] UKLawRpKQB 23
[1906] 1 KB 613
Davies, above n 70, 41.
William of Poitiers, above n 60, 109
Pollock and Maitland, above n 26,
Ten Articles of William I, chapter 7
confirms the laws of King Edward, ‘with the additions which I have decreed
for the benefit
of the English nation’: Agnes Robertson,
The Laws of
the Kings of England from Edmund to Henry I
(1925) 241. Likewise the
Conqueror issued a charter to the city of London, willing that the Laws of King
Edward continue in force
there: ibid 231.
Ten Articles of William I, chapter 8a,
section 1: ibid 241.
RC van Caenegem,
English Law Suits
from William I to Richard I
(1990) vol 1 (Selden Society, vol 106) 9.
Ibid 49 (case 18, c.1082-1087).
Davies, above n 70, 33.
See John’s indignant admonition
of the Irish barons in 1207 for purporting to arrogate to themselves the power
to create a
new assize:
Cal docs Ire, 1171-1251
, #329 (for details on
this citation, and the next few following, see above n 18).
Cal docs Ire
#1602 (1228).
Cal docs Ire
#2069 (1233).
H F Berry (ed),
Statutes and
Ordinances and Acts of the Parliament of Ireland King John to Henry V
Cal docs Ire
#1163 (209; see also 203) (1275); #1450 (1278);
Cal docs Ire
, #58. For statements in King’s writs to judges that
English and Irish law are the same, see:
Cal docs Ire
#317 (1253-1254); #318 (1253-1254); #458 (1255). On the other hand, from the
late thirteenth century there appears to have been
increasing official
acceptance that English law had legitimately adapted itself to local
circumstances. The result was an official
acknowledgement of the existence of a
specifically Irish law and custom: Brand, above n 19, 21, 47.
For the march: Rees Davies,
‘Kings, Lords and Liberties in the March of Wales’ (1979) 29
Transactions of the Royal Historical Society
, 5th series 41, 53-60. For
the principality: Rees Davies, ‘Law and National Identity in
Thirteenth-century Wales’ in
Rees Davies
Society and Nationhood
12 Ed I, c.1 (1284) reproduced in
Statutes of the Realm
, vol 1, 55ff. On the King’s disposition to
pass judgement, and revise, native laws in Ireland, Scotland and Wales, see Rees
Davies, ‘Lordship or Colony’ in James Lydon (ed),
The English in
Medieval Ireland
(1984) 142, 156.
JEA Jolliffe,
Angevin Kingship
(2nd ed, 1963) 34.
Ibid 87. Cf Ralph V Turner,
and His Courts
(1967) 269.
Keen, above n 50, 84-5.
Christopher Allmand,
The Hundred
Ibid 38. In any event, in the late
medieval common law there was no conquest rule. Note the absence of anything
like a rule about
conquest to solve the problem of what law prevails in Wales in
Countess of Gloucester & Hertford v Bluet
(1319) 12 Ed II (Selden
Society vol 70) 4, a case well suited to the application of such rule (had it
S B Chrimes,
English Constitutional
Ideas in the Fifteenth Century
Sir George Buck,
The History of
Richard the Third
(Arthur Kincaid ed 1982) Book II, 87-9 [ff 88-89v];
Francis Bacon,
The History of the Reign of King Henry the Seventh
Weinberger ed, 1996) 29-32. The discussions of the theory of
‘conquest’ in these two texts must be treated with
caution. They
were written during the age of (and perhaps with an eye on) the great struggle
between King and Parliament, in which
the theory of ‘conquest’ had a
significant part to play (on this, see J G A Pocock’s controversial
Constitution
and the Feudal Law
(revised ed, 1987) esp chapter 2,
and also Glenn Burgess,
The Politics of the Ancient
Constitution
82-5). The histories of Buck and Bacon may therefore tell us more about the
discourse about ‘conquest’ in the
seventeenth century than in the
fifteenth (see esp Weinberger’s note in Bacon, ibid 32, n 21). A more
reliable treatment of
the contemporaneous legal significance of Henry
VII’s victory is that of S B Chrimes,
(1972) 50-1,
The question of what justification
in the Law of Nations the European powers relied on when laying claim to the
Americas has been
the subject of considerable academic argument. The various
competing theories that have been propounded from time to time are usefully
summarised in John T Juricek,
English Claims in North America to 1660: A
Study in Legal and Constitutional History
(PhD Thesis, University of
Chicago, 1970) 2-36. For present purposes suffice to say that Juricek must be
right in saying, at 36,
that ‘the rationale behind English claims to North
America was not constant from 1497 to 1660’.
Julius Goebel Jr,
The Struggle
for the Falkland Islands
(1927) 74-94. More generally on this topic see
Muldoon, above n 49, ch 6 and 7. In 1454 Pope Nicholas V issued the bull
Romanus Pontifex
to award to the Portuguese the right ‘to invade,
whatsoever’
(ibid 134). In 1493, following the return of Columbus, Pope
Alexander V issued three bulls in which (inter alia) he awarded to Castile
right to acquire lands in the Americas which were not yet in the possession of
any Christian prince (ibid 136-138). The three
bulls themselves can be found in
F G Davenport (ed),
European Treaties Bearing on the History of the United
States and Its Dependencies to 1648
(1917) 56-83.
Goebel Jr, above n 102, 88-9, 94;
Francis Thorpe,
The Federal and State Constitutions, Colonial Charters, and
Other Organic Laws of the States, Territories, and Colonies Now or Heretofore
Forming the United States of America
(1909) vol 1, 39-40.
Thorpe, above n 103, 45-6 (emphasis
added). There is similarly robust language in Henry VII’s patent of 1501
to various merchants
(‘occupandi possidendi et subjugandi’): Richard
A Memoir of Sebastian Cabot
(2nd ed, 1832) 226, 313.
Thorpe, above n 103, 51, 55.
Earl of Derby’s case
(1598) 2 Anderson 115
[123 ER 575].
(1608) 2 State Trials (Cobbett and
Howell) 575, 595.
Bruce Galloway and Brian Levack
The Jacobean Union
(1985) ix-vvvii. For a comprehensive account,
see Bruce Galloway,
The Union of England and Scotland 1603-1608
Journals of the House of
(1547-1628) vol 1, 186; Mary Anne E Green (ed),
Calendar of State
Papers, Domestic Series, of the Reign of James I 1603-1610
(1857) #63 (26
April 1604).
Journals of the House of
(1547-1628) vol 1, 188; Green, above n 109, #79 (27 April 1604).
James Spedding,
The Letters and
the Life of Francis Bacon
(1868) vol 3 90-9 (‘A Brief Discourse
Touching the Happy Union of the Kingdoms of England and Scotland’), 218-35
Articles or Considerations Touching the Union of the Kingdoms of
England and Scotland’).
Galloway, above n 108, 30-2,
It is reproduced in Galloway and
Levack, above n 108, 185ff.
Spedding, above n 111, 93, 96.
2 State Trials (Cobbett and Howell)
Calvin’s case
[77 ER 377].
There is a report at 2 State Trials (Cobbett and Howell)
575 which reproduces Coke’s report, and also contains Bacon’s
as counsel for the plaintiff and Lord Ellesmere’s reasons for decision
which he had to reconstruct at the King’s
command after the event so that
they might be published. A modern edition of that latter publication, with
notes, can be found in
Louis Knafla,
Law and Politics in Jacobean England.
The Tracts of Lord Chancellor Ellesmere
(1977). There is also a contemporary
report of the case by John Hawarde of the Inner Temple: John Hawarde,
Reports del Cases in Camera Stella 1593 to 1609
(W Paley Baildon ed, 1894)
349-66. Hawarde’s editor describes this report as ‘in many parts
little more than a collection
of disconnected quotations and references’.
The chief value of the report is its contemporaneity and its notes on the
judgement of Walmsley J. Also, brief anonymous notes of speeches made
by the counsel and the judges are preserved at PRO SP 14/34/12-26,
but they do
not add much to our knowledge. For a general overview of
, see Galloway, above n 108, 148-57, from which I have gained much
assistance.
The preparations for bringing the
case can be traced through the state papers of the Earl of Salisbury now
transcribed by the Historical
Manuscripts Commission: see Montague Giuseppi and
D McN Locke (eds),
Calendar of the Documents of the Most Honourable Marquess
of Salisbury ...
Galloway, above n 108, 148.
2 State Trials (Cobbett and Howell)
Galloway, above n 108, 151.
(1608) 7 Co Rep 1a
‘Historicall
Collections’ in Galloway and Levack, above n 108, 195.
‘Of the Union’ in
Galloway and Levack, above n 108, 181.
Price notes that Bacon may have
taken from Bodin the argument that allegiance to the sovereign is a matter of
natural law, not positive
law: P J Price, ‘Natural Law and Birthright
Citizenship in
Journal of Law and the Humanities
(1608) 2 State Trials (Cobbett and
Howell) 575, 591-2.
I here rely on the reconstruction of
the defence’s argument in Galloway, above n 108, 151-2. The surviving
notes we have of
Hutton’s speech for the defence do not in fact mention
Ireland: PRO SP 34/14/12. However these notes are very short. Galloway’s
reconstruction makes sense in light of the surviving documentary evidence of the
case and is therefore (I believe) probably reliable.
(1608) 2 State Trials (Cobbett and
Howell) 659, 680-1; Knafla, above n 117, 232 (‘First, for Ireland, it was
gotten by Conquest,
and the Conqueror may impose what Lawes hee will upon them
... consider how it was in the
before king John gaves Lawes to
Ireland’). According to Knafla, the major source for Lord
Ellesmere’s historical precedents
in his speech (including Ireland) was a
treatise, ‘Unions of states be of different natures’, upon which
Ellesmere made
notes: 231, n 2.
(1608) 7 Co Rep 1a
, 17a, 22b-23a
, 398, 404].
For the same tendency in a
sophisticated legal treatise, see Sir Matthew Hale’s manuscript work on
the prerogative. Proceeding
on the basis the Norman conquest of England, the
conquest of Wales, and the Angevin conquest of Ireland obeyed laws which a
can divine, Hale set out a detailed legal theory of conquest: Sir Matthew
The Prerogatives of the King
(DEC Yale ed, 1976) (Selden Society
vol 92) 4, 8-35.
(1608) 7 Co Rep 1a
(1608) 2 State Trials (Cobbett and
Howell) 575, 577.
(1608) 7 Co Rep 1a
Bacon here cites scripture: Judges
8:22 and Genesis 10: 8-9. 2 State Trials (Cobbett and Howell) 575, 579-80.
Interestingly, he does
not cite any civilian sources, a matter to which we shall
return. See also the discussion about conquest in Bacon’s later
of the Reign of King Henry the Seventh
, above n 100, 31 (first published in
(1608) 2 State Trials (Cobbett and
Howell) 575, 591.
The Chronicler Roger of Wendover
records Henry II calling a council at Lismore, ‘where the laws of England
were received by
all, and confirmed by oath’: Roger of Wendover,
Flowers of History
(J A Giles trans, 1849) vol 2, 21. However, Roger was
probably writing here of the council of clerics which met in Cashel in 1171-2
and agreed merely to introduce ecclesiastical reforms along English lines: Henry
Ireland Under the Normans 1169-1216
(1911) vol 1, 275 n 1; Jocelyn
Otway-Ruthven, ‘The Native Irish and English Law in Medieval
Ireland’ (1950) 7
Irish Historical Studies
1, 4 5; Brand, above n
17, 95-100, esp n 17.
Goddard Henry Orpen (ed and trans)
The Song of Dermot and the Earl
(1892) lines 2621-2: ‘Leynistre lui
ad grante / Li riche reis en herite’ (‘The rich king granted to him
in fee’). This is confirmed by Gerald of Wales: Giraldus
Cambrensis, above n 10, 89 [Bk 1, ch 28].
Roger de Hoveden,
The Annals of
Roger de Hoveden
(Henry T Riley trans, 1853) vol 1, 354; see also Giraldus
Cambrensis, above n 10, 105 [ch 38].
The deed is reproduced in the
Gormanston Register, which was compiled in 1397-1398: John Mills and Michael
McEnery (eds),
Calendar of the Gormanston Register From the Original in the
Possession of the Right Honourable the Viscount of Gormanston
(hereafter ‘
Gormanston Register
’). The calendared summary of
the grant is at 6 [f.5], the full Latin text 177. Roger of Howden, above n 138,
354 says the service
required was 100 knights, not 50; but the Register is the
better evidence.
It is reproduced in translation in
Curtis and McDowell, above n 13, 24.
Edmund Curtis (ed),
Calendar of
Ormond Deeds 1172-1350AD
(1932) #1, #2, #3, #7, #8, #10, #13, #17, #29, #38;
Cal docs Ire
, #50, #86, #87, #92, #93-99, #103, #104,
#121, #122, #124, #126, #136, #137, #139, #260, #263, #382;
, 6 [f.5], 129 [f.163d], 142 [f.188d], 143-4 [f.189d], 145 [f.190d],
163 [ff.210-210d]; J T Gilbert (ed),
Facsimiles of the National Manuscripts
(1878) plate LXVII.
Gormanston Register
the full Latin text is at 177. John’s confirmatory grant to Hugh’s
son in 1208 expressly reserves certain jurisdiction
to the King, for example in
pleas of the Crown, and pleas in default of seignorial jurisdiction:
Ireland, 1171-1251,
#382; Sir Thomas Duffus Hardy (ed),
Rotuli Chartum in
Turri Londinensi
(1837) vol 1,
Gormanston Register
[f.188d] (c.1190), 143-4 [f.189d] (c.1195), 163 [f.210d] (c.1209). The earliest
such grant seems to be a grant in 1185 to William
FitzMaurice: Brand, above n
17, 99 n 15.
Curtis and McDowell, above n 13, 24
(1185); Hardy, above n 142, 79;
Gormanston Register
, 145 [f.190d], 163
[f.210]; Curtis, above n 141, #7.
Gormanston Register
[f.189d], 163 [f.210d]; Gilbert, above n 141, plate LXVII; Curtis, above n 141,
Florence Harmer,
Anglo-Saxon
(1952) 73-6.
Cal docs Ire
, #116 (1199). There is another reference in December 1201,
Cal docs Ire
, #164. See also Brand, above n 19,
Holt, above n 36, 123-6.
Cal docs Ire
, #89 (1199), #111 (1199).
Cal docs Ire
, #108 (1199), #109 (1199); possibly also #164 (1201).
Berry above n 89, 3. The writ of
naifty was the writ by which a lord claimed ownership over a villien.
Brand, above n 17, 98-9.
T F T Plucknett,
Legislation of
Berry above n 89, 3.
See n 86 above.
Goebel Jr, above n 102, 102-7.
(‘Again, property taken from the enemy is forthwith the property of the
taker under the law of nations’); 41.2.1.1
(‘... things captured in
war ... become the property of him who first takes possession of them’);
see also 41.2.18.4.
(‘Again the things that we take from the enemy at once become ours by the
law of nations’).
De Officiis
Walter Miller, 1956) 23 [I.vii.21] (‘... property becomes private either
through long occupancy ... or through conquest
(as in the case of those who took
it in war) or by due process of law ...’).
Keen, above n 50, 70, and see also
139-47. There noted, for example, is Bartolus’s statement (followed by
subsequent civilians)
that in a ‘public war’ (i.e. a war declared by
the ‘Roman people, or by the emperor on whom their entire authority
been conferred’; opposed to, for example, a private war between barons)
‘captives can be enslaved, and goods taken
in its course become the
property of the captors’:
Commentaria In Digestum Novum
Similarly, notes Keen (70, n.3), in canon law Gratian reserved the spoils taken
in a war to the conquering king: Gratian’s
, C.23, q.5,
49.15.20.1 (‘...
any field which may be captured from the enemy[’s ownership] is
confiscated’). See also Goebel
Jr, above n 102, 69.
Keen, above n 50, 139, citing (inter
alia) Baldus,
Commentaria in I Decretales
, Tit 34). For other discussion
of the ownership of conquered lands in medieval times see also:
Prince, ‘The Indenture System under Edward III’ in J G Edwards
Historical Essays in Honour of James Tait
(1933) 283, 295;
Giovanni de Legnano,
Tractatus De Bello, De Represaliis et De Duello
Thomas Erskine Holland trans, 1917, first composed c 1360) 270 [Ch lxi].
Pierino Belli,
A Treatise on
Miltiary Matters and Warfare
(first published 1563, Herbert C Nutting trans,
1936) 85 [Part II, XII.1].
Ibid, 97-8 [Part II, XVIII.8].
Balthazar Ayala,
Three Books on
the Law of War and on the Duties Connected with War and on Military
(first published 1582, John Pawley Bate trans, 1912) [trans of
De Jure et Officiis Bellicis et Discliplina Militari
] 35-6 [V.1-3].
For biographical details, there is a
useful note on Gentili in the
Dictionary of National Biography
treatment can be found in Gesina H J Van Der Molen,
Alberico Gentili and the
Development of International Law
(2nd ed, 1968), ch 2.
Alberico Gentili,
The Three Books
on the Law of War
(trans John C Rolfe, 1933 being a translation of the 1612
ed) 304; and see also 305 [Bk III, Ch 4, 495-6; 498].
Ibid 308-9 [Bk III, Ch 5, 502].
William Fulbeck,
The Pandects of
the Law of Nations
(1602) 50-2. Cf Fulbecke’s
A Parallele or
Conference of the Civill Law, the Canon Law, and the Common Law of this Realme
(1601) ‘To the courteous reader’, where he comments
that the law of the realm was changed by conquest (viz the Norman
conquest), but
that reason and consent were responsible for the changes, not sovereignty and
Knafla, above n 117, 41, n 2.
See Fulbeck’s entry in the
Dictionary of National Biography
Gentili, above n 167, 366 [Bk III,
Ch 4, 499]. Gentili refers to a passage in Caesar’s
I.36.1, in which the German king Ariovistus tells Caesar that ‘it was the
recognised custom of war for victors to rule the
vanquished in any way they
pleased’: Julius Caesar,
The Conquest of Gaul
(SA Handford trans,
1982) 46. Gentili comments that ‘Ariovistus replied too
See note 134 above and the
accompanying text.
Gentili, above n 167, 322 [Bk III,
Ch 8, 523]: ‘It is surely a rule that severity ought not to be shown, a
rule to avoid the
slaughter of many men’; and see that chapter generally,
as well as chapters 2, 7, and 8 of Book III. Cf Walter Ullman, ‘Bartolus
and English Jurisprudence’ who notes that the influential civilian
‘Baldus maintained that prisoners of war became res
mobiles and could
therefore be done to death’:
Bartolo da Sassoferrato
(1962) vol 1,
It would be wrong to ascribe to
common lawyers complete indifference to the civil law. Abbott, citing a number
of primary sources,
notes that ‘it had been regular practice at least from
the time Dyer began compiling his reports to consult with the doctors
and civil law on points of difficulty’: L W Abbott,
Law Reporting in
England 1485-1585
(1973) 191. See also Hans Pawlisch,
Sir John Davies and
the Conquest of Ireland
(1985) ch 9.
Frederic Maitland,
English Law
and the Renaissance
William Hassall,
A Catalogue of
the Library of Sir Edward Coke
(1950) 38-41.
Ibid 40, #469:
Institutiones
Juris Civilis cum glossis Fr. Accursii
(1559). I have not had the
opportunity to examine this volume. The close study of it, and particularly any
glosses concerning things
captured in war, may yet throw light on Coke’s
comments about conquest in
Calvin’s case
T E Scrutton, ‘Roman Law
Influence in Chancery, Church Courts, Admiralty and Law Merchant’ in
Select Essays in Anglo-American Legal History
(1907) vol I, 208-12. Cf
Peter Stein,
Regulae Iuris. From Juristic Rules to Legal Maxims
Knafla, above n 117, 39-40, 49.
(1608) 2 State Trials (Cobbett and
Howell) 575, 673; Knafla, above n 117, 221.
Sir William Holdsworth,
of English Law
(1937) vol 4, 240.
(1608) 2 State Trials (Cobbett and
Howell) 575, 602 (emphasis added).
Ibid, citing Anthony Fitzherbert,
La Graunde Abridgement
, title ‘Protection’, plea 56 (although
in the edition I consulted, the 1577 edition published by Richard Tottel, the
plea in question is in fact plea 59 and the year is 17 H VI rather than 13 H
Sir Frederick Pollock and Sir
William Holdsworth (eds), ‘Sir Matthew Hale on Hobbes: an unpublished
Law Quarterly Review
(1608) 2 State Trials (Cobbett and
Howell) 575, 581.
Coke is also reported have expressed
a hostility to infidels in
Michelborne v Michelborne
(1609) 2 Brownl and
[1609] EngR 22
[123 ER 952].
The anonymous notes of Coke’s
speech have him saying (alone of the judges) that of the various kinds of
enemies known to law,
one kind is ‘perpetual as a Turke because he is
Enemy to soule and body’: PRO SP 14/34/22. Hawarde records Coke as saying
‘A Conqueror may change the law where he had it by conquest and the
inhabitants are ‘infydlles’, but otherwise
where they are
Christians’: above n 117, 359. Hawarde’s version is significantly
different to the way Coke puts it in
his report of the case. However W Paley
Baildon, the modern editor of Hawarde’s reports, finds them
‘inaccurate and careless’
in several places: ibid viii.
William Filow’s
(1520) YB 12 H VIII, f.4.
(1608) 7 Co Rep 1a
Brian Slattery,
The Land Rights
of Indigenous Canadian Peoples
(1979) 13-6 examines in some detail all of
the authorities cited by Coke and finds them wanting. Moreover, it seems that
the Crusades
do not provide a precedent for Coke’s distinction. Upon
conquest of the Holy Lands, the practice of the crusaders seems to
have been to
leave the (‘infidel’) laws of the conquered Moslem population in
place: Joshua Prawler,
The Crusaders’ Kingdom
(1972) 140.
Anthony Pagden,
Lords of All the
(1995) 47-8; Quentin Skinner,
The Foundations of Modern Political
(1978) vol 2, 139-40, 166-71. For the relevance of Wycliff in this
context, see also Kenneth Pennington, above n 49, XIII.10.
Lectura quinque decretalium,
translated in James Muldoon (ed),
The Expansion of Europe: the First
(1977) 193. Hostiensis position on infidels was foreshadowed by Alanus
Anglicus at the beginning of the century: ‘Commentary
c.6’, translation in Tierney, above n 48, 123.
See n 49 above.
For a specific instance of canon
lawyers in the fifteenth century relying on Hostiensis’s doctrine on
infidels, see Stanlislaw
Belch (ed),
Paulus Vladimiri and His Doctrines
Concerning International Law and Politics
(1965) vol 2, 1113, 11184.
Vladimiri observed in several places that Hostiensis’ doctrine had become
widespread in Europe:
See also: Muldoon, above n 49, 17-8;
Pennington, above n 49, XIII.6.
Kenneth Pennington, ‘Henricus
de Segusio (Hostiensis)’ in his
Popes, Canonists and Texts,
(1993) XVI.7.
Pennington, above n 49, XIII.5.
Gentili, above n 167, 39 [Bk I, Ch
9, 62], citing Baldus,
IV.cxl, and V.ccccxxxix. Gentili also
notes, however, that Baldus is inconsistent on this point, for in another place
he adopts Innocent
IV’s position that war is not lawful against the
infidels who live at peace with us and do no harm: 39 [Bk I, Ch 9, 61], citing
Pagden, above n 192, 47-8. For a
concise summary of the leading Spanish writers, Sir Mark Lindley,
Acquisition and Government of Backward Territory in International La
12-3. For the influence of medieval canon law on Bartolome de Las Casas, the
Native Americans’ chief advocate in the
arguments in Spain, see
Pennington, above n 49, XIII. Note also that the position of Bartolus was
apparently that a lawful ground
of war was necessary even against the Saracens:
Cecil Woolf,
Bartolus of Sassoferrato
(1913) 202 n 3; see also 199.
Ayala, above n 165, 20.
Gentili, above n 167, 39 [Bk I, Ch
Robert Williams is incorrect in
asserting a congruity between Gentili’s writings and Coke’s remarks
Calvin’s case
The American Indian in Western Legal
(1990) 200. Gentili accepts the justice of war against cannibals,
people who have sexual intercourse with animals, idolators who
innocents, and people with no kind of religion at all; but he denies the justice
of war against infidels, even where they
refuse to hear the preaching of the
gospels: Gentili, above n 167, 122-3 [Bk I, Ch 25, 198-200]; and see also 39 [Bk
I, Ch 9, 61-62].
Similar comments apply to Richard Tuck,
The Rights of War
and Peace. Political Thought and International Order From Grotius to Kant
(1999), 122-3.
Hassall, above n 177, 38-41. It
would be a useful for a specialist to examine the volumes listed in the
catalogue with a view to
attempting to throw some light on the question of
Coke’s familiarity with canon law’s arguments about infidels.
See the preface to part 10 of
Coke’s reports (xxx of the 1826 edition).
And perhaps not only lawyers. The
antiquarian and friend of Edward Coke, Sir George Buck, in his history of
Richard III (composed
before 1622) has the barons opposing Henry VII’s
proposal to give himself the title ‘de jure belli’ on the purported
ground that ‘the names both of conqueror and of co[nquest were] very harsh
and hateful words to all the English, and reputed
as barbarous and heathenish
tyra[nnical titles.] And by good reason, for the work and end of them is to all
the people of the land
sla[ves, to] possess all their goods and fortunes at
their pleasures, and in brief to do anything’: above n 100, 87 [f.88].
Robert Callis,
The Reading ...
Upon the State of 23 H.8 Cap 5 of Sewers
(1647) 23 (First lecture, section
entitled ‘Of Islands’).
William Fitzhugh,
Fitzhugh and His Chesapeake World 1676-1701: the Fitzhugh Letters and Other
(Richard Davis ed, 1963) 158.
Craw v Ramsey
Ventris 1, 4
[1726] EngR 343
, 275]. The report actually reads ‘being a
Christian King they remained governed by their own laws’. I take the word
here to be an error or abbreviation. The correct word must be
‘Kingdom’, or the sentence makes no sense.
Craw v Ramsey
(1670) Vaughan
[1823] EngR 155
[124 ER 1072
Dawes v Painter
Freeman 175 [89 ER 126].
Witrong v Blany
Keble 401, 402
[1685] EngR 962
[84 ER 789].
Blankard v Galdy
(1693) 4 Mod
It follows from what I have said
that I cannot fully agree with those writers such as Williams, above n 203,
194-9 who suggest that
the conquest rule was simply lifted from contemporary
texts on international law. That said, it is true that international law texts
may have played some part, for there are a few references in the cases to what
the law of nations purportedly says about conquest:
Craw v Ramsey
Vaughan 274, 291
[1823] EngR 155
[124 ER 1072
, 1080]; and see also
The Case of Tanistry
(1608) Davies 28
[80 ER 516]. (The
latter report is in law French. I have relied
upon the translation in Davies,
A Report of Cases and Matters in Law Resolved
and Adjudged in the King’s Courts in Ireland
(1762). The relevant
passage is at page 84).
There is a survey of the arguments
in Slattery, above n 191, 16-9. By way of summary, against Coke’s
exception as to infidels:
East-India Company v Sandys
(1684) 10 State
Trials (Cobbett and Howell) 371, 392 (‘absurd, monkish, fantastical and
fanatical’) 442-5 (‘as
irreligious as can be’); Skinner 165,
[1728] EngR 162
Wells v Williams
(1697) 1 Salkeld 46 [91 ER 46]
(‘Turks and Infidels are not perpetui inimici ... they are Creatures of
God and of the same
kind as we are, and it would be a Sin in us to hurt their
Persons’, citing a criticism by a contemporary of Coke’s);
Omichund v Barker
(1744) Willes 538
[125 ER 1310
(‘contrary nor only to the scripture but to common sense and common
humanity’). In support of the exception:
Witrong v Blany
Keeble 401, 402
[1685] EngR 962
[84 ER 789]
East-India Company and Sandys
State Trials (Cobbett and Howell) 371, 373-5,
409; Skinner 165
[1728] EngR 162
Merchant Adventurers v Rebow
(1687) Comberbach 53, 55
[1724] EngR 400
Dutton v Howell
(1694) Shower 24, 31
[1693] EngR 7
(1722) 2 Peere Williams 75
[1722] EngR 1
The Privy Council is reported as deciding that the laws of infidel
countries actually remain in place after conquest, excepting only
such of their
laws as are ‘contrary to our religion, or enact anything that is
, or are silent’. In those cases, the law of the conquering
country prevails. Support for this modification can be found in
Blankard v Galdy
(1693) 2 Salkeld 411, 412
[1795] EngR 570
not in any other report of the case.
Campbell v Hall
[1774] EngR 5
(1774) 1 Cowp
[1774] EngR 5
[98 ER 1045
(1804-1812) 30
State Trials (Cobbett and Howell) 225, 904-6, 932-5, 944-6.
It is discussed in the Malaysian
R v Willans
(1858) 3 Kyshe 16
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
PDF format (1.34 MB)
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter