URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/journals/UMelbLRS/2018/7.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 15:41:23
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Varuhas, JNE --- "Varieties of Damages for Breach of Privacy" [2018] UMelbLRS 7
Varieties of Damages for Breach of Privacy
Jason NE Varuhas*
Introduction 2
Compensatory
Preliminaries:
Factual and Normative Losses 3
Rights and Remedies 6
Vindicatory
Torts: Fundamental Features 6
Evolving Privacy Action: Fundamental Features 8
Compensatory
Damages for Breach of Privacy 18
for Interference with Privacy 19
for Consequential Loss 23
Compensatory
Damages Available as of Right 25
Vindicatory
Approach to Other Relief 26
Irrelevance
of Strasbourg Practice under Article
Non-Compensatory
of Profits 32
Fee or User Damages 36
Vindicatory
Damages in Lieu of an Injunction 43
Conclusion 48
I. Introduction
This chapter interrogates which types of damages are and
ought to be available for the action of misuse of private information in
law, and which types of damages are not and ought not to be available. The
chapter first considers compensatory damages,
arguing that a vindicatory model
does and ought to characterise the approach to compensatory damages. According
to this approach,
damages are available as of right for the wrongful invasion of
chapter then
examines non- compensatory damages. The courts are yet to authoritatively
determine the availability of such damages
for breach of privacy, and the
principles governing their award. The chapter argues that exemplary damages
ought to be available
but that disgorgement and ‘vindicatory
damages’ ought to be rejected. Reasonable fee or user damages should not
be recognised.
Lastly, the chapter considers damages in lieu of an injunction,
arguing that these damages are equivalent to a fee for the loss of
a liberty to
enforce primary rights. Such damages ought very rarely to be awarded in the
place of an injunction in a case of ongoing,
unjustified invasion of
All in all, the remedial approach to breaches of privacy ought to, and
increasingly does follow that which has characterised vindicatory
torts such as
trespass to land, false imprisonment and battery. These actions have long
performed a constitutional role in protecting
those interests fundamental to
English civil society.
II. Compensatory Damages
This section will first sketch the outlines of a
'vindicatory' model of compensatory damages that has long pertained within, and
is a defining feature of the English law of torts. The section then
advances a normative claim that this model of compensatory damages
ought to be
adopted within the action for misuse of private information, and an allied
expository claim that the law of privacy,
as it has evolved, has embraced the
vindicatory model. The law is thus on the right course.
A preliminary point requires to be made. I consider that only limited insight
can be gained from debating whether the action for
misuse of private information
is or is not 'a tort'. This is because there are many torts, they perform
different functions and they
may have radically different characteristics from
one another, including – importantly for present purposes – quite
approaches to causation and damages. Of greater value is to
the normative concerns that underpin creation of the primary privacy rights, and
a remedial model which gives effect to and carries
forward these concerns at the
remedial stage. This will ensure that, as a practical matter, remedies help the
law to achieve its
normative ends, rather than stymieing fulfilment of those
goals. As a matter of principle, connecting rights and remedies ensures
field of privacy is coherent. As Lord Reed observed in
loss resulting from a breach of duty has to be measured according to legal
rules, and different rules apply to the breach
of different obligations’,
these rules in turn reflecting the distinctive ‘nature’ and
‘rationale’
of the obligations breached.
A. Preliminaries: Factual and Normative Losses2
Let us begin our examination of compensatory damages by
distinguishing two different types of compensatory damages.
The first type of compensatory damages is damages for material or factual loss.
Such damages compensate for the negative physical,
emotional, psychological or
economic effects actually suffered by the claimant in consequence of a wrong,
such as costs of repairing
a machine, pain and suffering or distress. These
extent will vary from one claimant to the next, according to the actual
consequences they experience as a result of the wrong. Recovery
of this type of
loss is at least subject to ordinary ‘but for’ analysis and to
remoteness rules, albeit those rules may
vary from one type of wrong to the
other. This type of material or factual loss is recoverable across the law of
torts, although
specific heads of damage vary across different actions.
The second type of compensatory damages is radically different in nature, and
the availability of these damages is, within the law
of torts, in general
limited to those torts, like
* I am grateful to participants at the
International Workshop on Remedies for
Breach of Privacy
, Melbourne Law School, 12–13 December 2016 for
comments on an earlier draft of this chapter and for two days of stimulating
discussion on the law of remedies for breach of privacy. An earlier draft of
this chapter was also presented at a ‘Judges and
the Academy’
seminar held at the Supreme Court of Victoria on 17 February 2017. I am grateful
to participants for their very
panellist, Hon Marcia Neave, and to Hon Chris Maxwell, President of the Victoria
AIB Group Plc v Mark Redler & Co Solicitors
[2014] 3 WLR
1367, [92]. See also, to similar effect, Lord Reed’s judgment in
Morris-Garner v One Step (Support) Ltd
[2018] UKSC 20
, [31] et seq.
Please note that
Morris- Garner
was handed down by the Supreme Court as
this chapter was being finalised. I have done my best to incorporate reference
to the case
where appropriate.
See further JNE Varuhas,
Damages and Human Rights
Hart Publishing, 2016) chs 2–3; JNE Varuhas, ‘The Concept of
“Vindication” in the Law of Torts: Rights,
Interests and
trespass to land, battery, false imprisonment and defamation, which are
actionable per se and constituted to afford strong protection
from outside
interference to basic interests. Within these torts a claimant may recover
damages for the injury to those of his or
her interests directly protected by
the tort. So traditionally one recovers in false imprisonment for the damage to
one’s interest
in liberty inherent in the wrongful imprisonment under the
head of loss of liberty. In battery one may recover for the damage to
one’s interest in physical integrity inherent in unwanted physical
any injury, distress or
medical expenses. One may recover in defamation for the damage to one’s
interest in one’s reputation,
regardless of whether the libel causes any
distress or loss of income. In trespass to land the landowner recovers damages
wrongful interference with his or her interest in exclusive possession
of land, notwithstanding whether the wrong left the landowner
no worse off.
Unlike damages for factual losses, which correspond with real-world effects,
these damages compensate for a damage that is constructed
by and only exists on
the plane of the law. In this way they are akin to expectation damages in the
law of contract; there is no
such thing as an expectation loss outside of the
law, but without construction of this head promises would be rendered hollow. I
refer to these types of damages as ‘normative damages’. In
constructing these heads of damage the law is seeking an end
or a goal –
that is to give effect to the policies which underpin creation of the primary
rights. As we shall see, torts such
as false imprisonment and trespass are
characterised by a primary function of affording strong protection to basic
interests from
outside interference, and vindicating these interests, in the
sense of affirming and reinforcing their importance within a hierarchy
legally protected interests and that they ought to be respected. The law, by
responding to every wrongful infringement with a
substantial award of damages
for the interference with the interest in itself, and regardless of the
happenstance of whether factual
losses are suffered, affords strong protection
to the interest, which is the very object of the law’s protection, and
a signal that these are interests of the utmost importance, which ought to
be maintained inviolate.
For normative damages factual causation is irrelevant. Normative damage is
inherent in the wrongful interference. This is often captured
in the idea of a
presumption of damage within torts actionable per se. In the leading authority
, the Court observed that the law ‘implies’
general damage ‘in every breach of contract and every infringement of
absolute right’; ‘In all such cases the law presumes that
damage will flow in the ordinary
course of things from the mere invasion of the plaintiff’s
In contrast within torts actionable only upon proof
of loss, ‘it is the damage done that is the wrong; and the expression
damage,” when used of this damage denotes the actual and
temporal loss which has, in fact, occurred’.
Similarly in
, Stephenson LJ observed, ‘[w]hereas damage is presumed in
trespass and libel, it is not presumed in negligence and has to be
Thus, if someone camps on my land for two weeks without my consent, I may
recover substantial damages in trespass regardless of the
fact that I would not
have leased the land but for the trespasser’s use, and regardless of the
fact that I myself, for whatever
reason, could not and would not have made use
of the land. So I am left no worse off in any material sense but I still
Similarly in conversion, I can recover against you for
converting my airplanes, even though it was inevitable that if you had not
converted them someone else would have.
So your conversion leaves me
materially no worse off as I would not have had the planes anyway. Nonetheless,
I can recover substantial
damages. In defamation the claimant ‘gets
damages because he was injured in his reputation, that is simply because he was
In respect of battery it has been said at
the highest level that the ‘most trifling and transient physical
assault’ will
give the claimant an action ‘sounding in damages (and
if appropriate aggravated or exemplary damages)’.
There is no
appeal here to but for counterfactual analysis; one gets damages simply because
one’s basic interests were wrongfully
interfered with. Similarly, if one
is falsely imprisoned it ought not to matter that one could have been lawfully
imprisoned in exactly
the same way in any case, albeit this orthodoxy has come
under threat in recent times.
How do we explain this approach to factual causation? Why does it not matter
that, for example, the claimant would have suffered
an interference in any case?
To answer this we need to go back to the nature of torts such as defamation or
battery as being torts
concerned with protecting interests
from outside
interference
. The law’s starting assumption in these actions is
Ratcliffe v Evans
[1892] UKLawRpKQB 131
[1892] 2 QB 524
, 528 (emphasis in
Forster v Outred & Co
[1982] 1 WLR 86
Damages and Human Rights
(n 2) 55–59;
Varuhas, ‘Concept of Vindication’ (n 2) 284–89.
Kuwait Airways Corp v Iraqi Airways Co
[2002] UKHL 19
[2002] 2 AC 883.
Uren v John Fairfax & Sons Pty Ltd
[1966] HCA 40
(1966) 117 CLR 118
Watkins v Secretary of State for the Home Department
Christie v Leachinsky
[1947] UKHL 2
[1947] AC 573
(especially the
speech of Lord du Parcq) and
R (Lumba) v Secretary of State for the Home
[2011] UKSC 12
[2012] 1 AC 245.
See Varuhas,
Damages and Human Rights
that the position each person ought to be in is one in which his or her basic
interests are inviolate and maintained in pristine
form. Wherever there is an
interference with those interests that cannot be justified, the law takes the
view that the claimant has
been subject to an interference to which he or she
ought not to have been subjected. Normative damages redress the imbalance
the position the claimant is entitled to be in – one in which the
claimant’s interests are in pristine form – and
the claimant’s
position given the wrongful interference, where his or her interests are subject
to an encumbrance to which
they ought not to have been subject. This approach is
most explicit in conversion, where the courts assess damages by reference to
‘the owner’s position had he retained his goods’ – that
is, the position the owner ought to have been in
– as opposed to the
position the owner actually would have been in but for the defendant’s
wrongful actions.
Thus, ‘there may be no actual loss’
but ‘the law takes the view as a matter of policy that the claimants ...
entitled to substantial compensation for the mere invasion of their
in such circumstances, ‘damages do not
necessarily depend upon precisely what would have occurred but for the
As Lord Hoffmann said in
Kuwait Airways
, ‘causal requirements
follow from the nature of the tort’.
How we frame the damages
inquiry depends on the normative concerns of the law, and in vindicatory,
protective torts the counterfactual
is constructed in such a way as to give
maximal protection to basic interests.
Remoteness is irrelevant for normative damage. A head of damage that responds to
the wrongful interference in itself can never be
too remote from the wrongful
interference.
B. Connecting Rights and Remedies
Vindicatory
Torts: Fundamental Features
Within the law of torts, normative damages have been confined to a set of torts
which I refer to as vindicatory torts and which protect
those rights that
Blackstone described as absolute rights, and which – within the common law
system – have been regarded
as constitutional in nature. The paradigm
vindicatory torts are trespassory torts, such as trespass to land, false
(n 7) [80]–[83].
Devenish Nutrition Ltd v Sanofi-Aventis SA
[2009] Ch 390
Experience Hendrix LLC v PPX Enterprises Inc
[2003] EWCA Civ 323
[2003] EMLR
(n 7) [127]–[129].
imprisonment and battery. However, other torts in this category include
defamation, conversion and nuisance by interference.
The reason normative damages have traditionally been confined to these torts
lies in their primary functions. These torts are concerned
to protect the most
fundamental of human and proprietary interests from outside interference,
creating zones of protection, and to
vindicate the importance of these interests
in the sense of affirming and reinforcing their importance and that they ought
maintained inviolate. Normative damages give direct effect to these
protective and vindicatory policies at the remedies stage. In
this light it is
unsurprising that newer contexts in which such damages have been recognised or
contemplated include anti-discrimination
torts and human rights damages actions,
these fields similarly being underpinned by a policy of strong protection and
vindication
of basic interests.
We see the primary protective and vindicatory concerns of these actions in their
core features. They are all actionable per se; loss
the gist of
the action. That an individual may prove a wrong and access remedies for a mere
interference with interests, even if it
leaves him or her no worse off, attests
to and reinforces the fundamental importance of the interests as well as their
inherent value
independent of harm, while affording those interests strong
protection. Thus in false imprisonment it has been said that ‘[w]hen
liberty of the subject is at stake questions as to the damage sustained become
of little importance’.
Of defamation, Lord Hoffmann explained
that reputation is a part of a person’s ‘personality, the
“immortal part”
of himself and it is right that he should be
entitled to vindicate his reputation and receive compensation for a slur upon it
proof of financial loss’.
Lord Goff in
recalled the fundamental principle that every person’s body is
inviolate, and that one is protected not only against injury
but also against
any physical molestation.
Within these torts liability is not fault-based but strict or relatively
The focus is
firmly on the claimant’s interests and whether they were interfered with.
Such strict approach to liability signals the importance
of the protected
interests, and that it is inexcusable to trespass upon these interests whether
one is acting benevolently, reasonably
or innocently. Liability is
eg, in Australia under anti-discrimination law (
Wotton v State
of Queensland (No 5)
[2016] FCA 1457
, [1619]– [1629]) and in New
Zealand for breach of the New Zealand Bill of Rights Act 1990 (
Attorney-General
[2000] NZCA 84
[2000] 3 NZLR 136).
John Lewis v Tims
[1952] AC 676
Jameel v The Wall Street Journal Europe Sprl
[2006] UKHL 44
[2007] 1 AC
, [91]. But note the Defamation Act 2013, s 1 and certain procedural
restrictions:
Tamiz v Google Inc
[2013] EWCA Civ 68
, [48]–[52].
[1991] UKHL 1
[1990] 2 AC 1
See further Varuhas,
Damages and Human Rights
strictest in trespass to land, where voluntarily walking onto another’s
land is sufficient to generate liability, whether the
defendant knew it was
someone else’s land or not. In defamation the defendant may be liable even
if he or she had no reason
to know the material published was defamatory, his or
her belief as to the truth of the statement was reasonably held or the
was the product of an innocent mistake. Liability is less strict in
battery and false imprisonment, but still relatively strict.
Intention to cause
harm is not required, nor necessarily an intention to, for example, touch in the
knowledge that the claimant did
not consent. However, in battery an intention to
touch is required, or at least reckless touching. In false imprisonment it may
that only an intention to do the act that causes the imprisonment is
required, albeit other authorities suggest an intention to imprison
recklessness is necessary. Either way, it does not matter that the claimant did
not know that he or she was imprisoned and would
have had no occasion to leave
the place of confinement, while blameless, good faith or benevolent acts or acts
based on a genuine
misunderstanding may generate liability.
If the claimant proves an interference with his or her protected interests, the
onus is on the defendant to justify his or her act.
Whereas it is relatively
easy for the claimant to make out a prima facie case, the defendant may face an
uphill task; this reflects
the importance placed on the protected interests
– the cards are stacked in the claimant’s favour, as the law’s
preference is for basic interests to be maintained inviolate. Defences protect
only the most important of countervailing interests
and will be construed
narrowly. Something of great importance is required to justify interference with
fundamental interests.
Thus the basic features of these torts reflect and give effect to the underlying
normative concerns of these actions – to afford
strong protection to
fundamental interests and to affirm and reinforce their importance and the fact
that they ought to be maintained
inviolate and respected.
Evolving Privacy Action: Fundamental Features
The action for misuse of private information – or perhaps more
appropriately, the action for breach of privacy
– as it has
evolved over time, shares the basic features of these vindicatory
R v Governor of Brockhill Prison, ex parte Evans (No 2)
[2000] UKHL 48
[2001] 2 AC 19.
See the discussion below in this section regarding the expanding
scope of the action to encompass protection of privacy interests
beyond those in
information.
torts. That protection of privacy belongs to the genus of vindicatory,
rights-based actions has likewise been recognised explicitly
in comparative
jurisprudence.
Actionable Per Se
. Such claims are actionable per se. It is not a
prerequisite for bringing a claim for misuse of private information that one is
to demonstrate actionable or special damage, as is the case for loss-based
actions such as negligence or misfeasance in public office.
For example, in
the claimant, a child, did not even know the relevant photos were
taken. The child suffered no physical injury to person or property,
financial losses, in consequence of the breach of privacy.
there was no evidence of distress before the court. Yet a claim was successfully
brought and damages awarded. Similarly, two
of the child claimants in the case
successfully bought privacy claims and recovered damages,
despite apparently suffering no distress or other actual loss.
it was held that simply accessing or retaining private
information could be wrongful in itself.
In similar vein, in
, it was confirmed that phone hacking constituted an actionable
breach of privacy, regardless of whether the claimant was aware of
hacking and whether the information garnered was ever published (see, eg,
Yentob’s case).
Again, claims were actionable regardless of
the fact there was no physical injury to person or property or special losses:
interference with privacy is the gist of the action, not the suffering
of loss. This is also made clear by the fact that causation
is not a formal
element of the privacy cause of action, as it is for torts for which loss is the
gist of the action, such as negligence.
That causation is a core feature of such
actions follows from the fact that proof of loss is also a core element; if loss
element then one must also show that it was the defendant who caused
It has been suggested that the impact of the defendant’s actions on the
claimant is a factor relevant to whether an expectation
However, it has not been suggested that a serious impact on
the claimant is a
prerequisite
to an expectation of privacy. And more
generally the proposition that whether an expectation exists in the first place
ex post facto
analysis of the impacts of the
defendant’s actions on the claimant seems a
C v Holland
[2012] NZHC 2155
[2012] 3 NZLR 672
[2004] NZCA 34
[2005] 1 NZLR 1
, [2], [42].
AAA v Associated Newspapers Ltd
[2012] EWHC 2103
[2013] EMLR 2
Associated Newspapers Ltd
[2013] EWHC 2694
[2014] EMLR 7 (QB)
[2016] 1 WLR 1541 (CA).
(QB) (n 23) [189]–[197];
23) [64]–[65].
Imerman v Tchenguiz
[2010] EWCA Civ 908
[2011] 2 WLR 592
Gulati v MGN Ltd
[2015] EWHC 1482
[2016] FSR 12 (Ch)
[2016] 2 WLR 1217
Murray v Express Newspapers
[2009] Ch 481
(CA) (n 23) [36]–[38].
dubious proposition: how can determination whether a right existed or not depend
on events subsequent to the conduct giving rise
to the (putative) wrong? Such
proposition also seems out of step with the dicta in
not a necessary precondition for a privacy claim that disclosure of the relevant
information would be ‘highly offensive’;
indeed the information in
itself was held to be obviously private absent any inquiry into
whether disclosure would be highly offensive or had had any actual
In any case, the ‘highly offensive’ test
– which barely features in the post-
jurisprudence –
does not implicate an inquiry into whether the claimant in fact was offended or
suffered mental distress. Rather
the court asks, as one indicium of whether the
claimant had a reasonable expectation of privacy in the relevant material,
a reasonable person in the claimant’s position would likely be
highly offended by disclosure of the relevant information.
as Lord Nicholls said in
, if relevant, questions over actual
degree of harm or impact more properly go to questions of proportionality, and
thus defences,
than to the existence of an expectation of privacy in the first
It is right that the privacy action is and ought to be actionable per se:
one ought to be able to
bring a claim in respect of a wrongful interference regardless of whether the
interference leaves one worse
off. This is one reason why breach of confidence
would not be an appropriate vehicle for the protection of privacy. Albeit the
is contested, and has arguably been so watered down that it is
It is important to record that the high threshold of ‘highly
offensive’ derives from the United States, where the tests
governing the
expression. The context is very different
in the UK, where – following
jurisprudence of the European Court of Human Rights (ECtHR) – free
expression and privacy
ceteris paribus
, accorded equal normative
Campbell v MGN Ltd
[2004] UKHL 22
[2004] 2 AC 457
, [12], [55]). To adopt a
‘highly offensive’ test would afford privacy insufficient protection
and strike the law’s
balance systematically in favour of free expression.
See further JNE Varuhas and NA Moreham, ‘Remedies for Breach of
ch 1 of this book, in relation to the importance of local
context in analysing the law of privacy.
Similarly one might ask how certain conduct would make a
reasonable person in the claimant’s position feel in determining whether
reasonable expectation of privacy should be recognised: eg
(n 27) [35]. This differs from inquiring into actual
subsequent effects on a given claimant, as such an inquiry can only be answered
retrospectively whereas an objective inquiry can be answered prospectively.
Further, the objective inquiry controls for overly-sensitive
reactions of
particular claimants. Of course, it may be that the actual impact on a given
claimant carries
evidential weight
in determining how a reasonable person
would be impacted by the disclosure.
(n 28) [22].
meaningless,
it is the case, as a matter of principle, that the
suffering of detriment is a precondition for such a claim.
Strictness of Liability
. Albeit the principles are still being worked
out, liability for misuse of private information seems to be towards the
stricter end
of the spectrum, in common with other vindicatory actions. However,
this is not immediately obvious. The reason is because every
such claim begins
with an inquiry into whether a reasonable expectation of privacy exists, and
this inquiry can implicate a range
of considerations, including the type of
information obtained by the defendant, the place in which the defendant’s
conduct occurred, characteristics of the claimant, such as whether he
or she is a child, and actions taken by the claimant, such
as steps taken to
keep out prying eyes. This indicates that there may be significant hurdles over
which a claimant may have to leap
before establishing a prima facie breach of
his or her legal right. This stands in contrast to, for example, a claim in
to land, where as soon as the claimant can show that the defendant
entered the claimant’s land through a not involuntary act,
the defendant
is prima facie liable.
However, this difference does not necessarily demonstrate that liability in
misuse of private information is not strict, or at least
relatively strict. The
reason is that the inquiry into whether there is a reasonable expectation of
is an inquiry into whether the claimant had
a right that that information be maintained as private. In other words, the
expectation inquiry is an inquiry into whether the claimant had a
in the first place
, and the scope and extent of that right.
Once the court concludes that there was a reasonable expectation of privacy then
the defendant
may be liable for acting inconsistently with that expectation,
even if there was no malice or disclosure was the result of a simple
defendant did not grasp that the information was sensitive; the defendant acted
out of a genuine concern for the claimant’s
best interests and/or in good
the claimant had no idea his or her privacy interests were
being interfered with;
the defendant simply repeated known
or the defendant strove to ensure that the claimant’s
image but not doing it well
See the suggestion in
Attorney-General v Guardian Newspapers
[1990] 1 AC 109, 270 (and see 281–
82) that a loss of friends may suffice to fulfil this requirement.
Coco v AN Clark (Engineers) Ltd
[1968] FSR 415
(n 28) [166] (‘the motives of the
respondents in publishing the information, which they claim to have done to give
a sympathetic
treatment to the subject do not constitute a defence, if the
publication ... revealed confidential material’).
As may be the case with phone hacking (
covert photos of a young child (
PJS v News Group Newspapers Ltd
[2016] UKSC 26
[2016] AC 1081
JIH v NGN Ltd
[2011] EMLR 9, [59].
enough). In this way a ‘misuse’ of private information does not
necessarily connote a blameworthy act (in the same way
that the concept of
‘wilful default’ in equity does not necessarily connote blame,
despite first appearances).
The case law is not entirely clear on the mens rea element required - the law is
still in a developmental phase - though the law
of privacy in this regard does
not appear to be any less strict than the approach taken in other vindicatory
It is clear that there is no need for the claimant to prove that the defendant
intended to inflict loss or harm upon the claimant
through the disclosure of
information or other invasion of privacy, in common with other vindicatory
actions. It also seems relatively
clear that a defendant may be liable even if
they did not intend a disclosure. In the case of
, the Court held
disclosure of private information by mere error or carelessness to be
In that case the Home Office, by mistake and
unintentionally, uploaded private information concerning applicants for asylum
to remain to the UK Border Agency website. Claims for misuse of
private information were proven and substantial damages awarded.
Mance’s statements of principle in
reinforce this approach:
‘any ... disclosure’ of sexual information ‘will on the face
of it constitute the tort
of invasion of privacy’.
strict approach is consonant with a protective conception of the privacy action:
what matters is the fact of invasion of basic
interests, not whether the
defendant can really be said to be to blame. Where basic rights are at stake the
onus ought to be on the
defendant to organise his or her conduct and take steps
so as to avoid trespassing upon those rights, especially where he or she
controls sensitive information relating to the claimant.
Some cases suggest that the defendant’s knowledge is relevant,
specifically whether the defendant knew the information accessed
or disclosed
was private or not. For example, in
a key step in the
Court’s reasoning in finding that the defendant had breached the
claimant’s privacy by accessing the
claimant’s electronic documents,
was that the defendant knew that the claimant reasonably expected his documents
to be private.
However, even if knowledge is an element, it would
seem from the emergent jurisprudence that the law will not typically insist on
actual knowledge.
To insist on subjective knowledge would seriously
weaken the protection of privacy (as well as raise potentially serious
difficulties
of proof for
TLT v Secretary of State for the Home Department
(n 35) [32]
(n 25) [68].
(n 28) [134].
the claimant). Thus, many important categories of private information, such as
medical, financial and sexual information, are in
general considered to be
‘obviously’ private – as was clearly established in
– so that any claim in respect of such information would
not depend on what the defendant actually knew. Thus, if knowledge
is indeed an
element of the action then in this class of case the defendant shall be fixed
with knowledge, and if the defendant discloses
he or she shall be liable, even
if the disclosure was the result of simple error.
liability in these cases is very strict, as is apt where interests in highly
sensitive information are at stake, and consonant
with the approach in other
vindicatory actions: the focus is on maintaining the claimant’s basic
interests inviolate, not on
the defendant’s blameworthiness.
Further, it would seem that even outside categories of case in which the
information is ‘obviously’ private, the courts
may find liability
where the defendant did not subjectively believe or recognise that the
information was private, on the basis that
the court nonetheless considers there
was, following an all-things-considered analysis, a reasonable expectation of
information disclosed by the defendant. It may be that knowledge
is an element in such cases, but that the courts readily fix the
defendant with
constructive knowledge – that is, where a reasonable expectation of
will be assumed to have recognised
the private quality of the information (albeit it is then difficult to
distinguish such cases
from the ‘obvious’ category of cases, the
only difference being that in the ‘obvious’ cases no detailed
multi-factor
inquiry into the existence of a reasonable expectation of privacy
is conducted). It is worth noting, however, that such approach
necessarily render the defendant’s actual knowledge irrelevant. What the
defendant knew, and especially whether he
or she knew that the claimant would
not consent to the capture of the relevant information, may be one factor (among
many) that goes
to whether there was a reasonable expectation of privacy in the
information in the first place. Thus, if the defendant subjectively
claimant would not consent to the taking of given photos, this may make it more
likely that a court will conclude that the
claimant had a reasonable expectation
of privacy in the photos.
Importantly, such approach is
conceptually distinct from requiring, as a
prerequisite
to liability,
that the claimant prove that the defendant subjectively recognised the private
quality of the information.
(n 27) [57];
(CA) (n 23) [35],
Thus, even if knowledge is an independent element – which is not entirely
clear from the jurisprudence – it will often
be assumed, and certainly
where sensitive information is at stake. In combination with a strict approach
to disclosure of information,
overall the liability criteria for breach of
constituted to protect basic interests.
. Once the claimant has established a reasonable expectation of
justify his or her act. In this way the basic structure of the privacy action
matches that for the vindicatory torts; any interference
calls for justification
given the importance of the claimant’s interests, and if the defendant has
no good reason for his or
her actions then he or she shall be liable. Only the
most important concerns will be sufficient to justify an invasion of privacy,
such as prevention and investigation of crime or national security. Commercial
interests of newspapers, for example, do not carry
much currency.
Consonant with the approach in human rights law, which has inspired the
Further, public
interest justifications will be subject to the strict conditions of the
proportionality test;
for example, even if the defendant can show
that the interference with the claimant’s privacy was genuinely motivated
by a legitimate
public interest in protecting national security, the defendant
will need to show in addition that the interference was the least
necessary to
safeguard that public interest and that there was more general proportionality
between means and ends. Again in common
with human rights law, where purported
justifications advanced by the defendant are premised on factual claims,
evidence will be
required to substantiate those claims, and the
defendant’s failure to establish relevant facts will lead to the defence
Another justification often raised, especially in cases of
press intrusion, is preservation of the basic rights of another, specifically
freedom of expression. Of course even assertion of another fundamental right,
freedom of expression, is insufficient in itself. In
general there will need to
be a real public interest in giving publicity to the private information before
a disclosure can be justified.
And for information of a particularly personal
nature, such as medical information, financial information, information about
activity or information about a child,
it would seem that
only an exceptionally strong real and legitimate public interest in release of
the information
McKennitt v Ash
[2008] QB 73, [66]. Albeit they may be
relevant: eg
(n 28) [77], [143].
(n 28) [138]–[141].
Goodwin v News Groups Newspapers
[2011] EWHC 1437
[2011] EMLR 27
[134], [135], [137], [139].
(n 35) [36];
could justify accessing or disclosure of such information.
example, in
it was observed that ‘there is not, without more,
any public interest in a legal sense in the disclosure or publication of purely
private sexual encounters, even though they involve adultery or more than one
person at the same time’.
And even if it is legitimate to
disclose such sensitive information, because there is a real public interest, it
will only be justifiable
to publish the least information necessary so as to
satisfy the public interests at stake; for example, even where publication of
the fact of a sexual affair is in principle justified, publication of the
salacious details of the affair or the identity of the
other party to the affair
may well not be.
From breach of confidence to a vindicatory action
. Other features of the
jurisprudence reinforce the protectionist concern that underpins the recognition
of privacy rights. In particular
whereas breach of confidence was the original
vehicle for developing the action for misuse of private information, as the
jurisprudence
has evolved the courts have gradually uncoupled the action from
breach of confidence, and in doing so recalibrated features of the
more closely resemble those of vindicatory torts. This process is of some
importance, as it goes to proper classification
of the action, but also because
core features of the equitable action for breach of confidence, which have now
been shed, would otherwise
operate to impede full protection of privacy.
As the courts have emphasised, the privacy claim affords wider protection than
the classic action for breach of confidence, in that
information that is in the
public domain may still remain private whereas confidence in it may be
Importantly, as the courts have again emphasised, the privacy
action is not, unlike breach of confidence, concerned only with maintaining
secrets, while confidence has more generally developed principally in a
commercial context – that of trade secrets –
which in turn has
fundamentally shaped its character. The concern within the privacy action is a
wider one, which encompasses protection
of individual dignity and autonomy from
interference, something against which breach of confidence is not set up to
protect given
its narrower focus on information and its
disclosure;
In this regard early statements, made at a time when the law of
of publishers
will very often be expected to prevail, were too broad and have been superseded
by subsequent developments:
(n 28) [137].
(n 35) [32].
(n 28) [60].
OBG Ltd v Allan
[2007] UKHL 21
[2008] 1 AC 1
, [255] (noting also that, eg,
a trade secret may be confidential but not private);
(n 35) [25], [57].
CTB v NGN Ltd
[2011] EWHC 1326
[2011] EWHC 1334
‘the concepts of confidence and privacy are not the same and protect
different interests’.
This recognition as the jurisprudence
has matured also reinforces that the privacy claim increasingly resembles the
vindicatory torts,
in that the concern is to protect basic interests from
outside interference:
What a concept of privacy does ... is accord recognition to the fact that the
law has to protect not only those people whose trust
has been abused but those
who simply find themselves subjected to an unwanted intrusion into their
personal lives.
Furthermore, obligations of confidence have often depended on a pre-existing
relationship, whereas privacy, as a recognised human
right, is of such
importance that its protection ought not to depend on whether such a
relationship can be demonstrated; to inquire
into the existence of a
relationship would ‘distort[]’ outcomes,
damage done by giving publicity to intimate facts may be no less because
information has been sourced in the absence of
a pre- existing
relationship.
On the other hand, to continue to stretch breach of
confidence so as afford sufficient protection to privacy will be to introduce
incoherence into that action and warp its application in traditional fields,
including trade secrets and employment.
As long as the privacy action remained hitched to breach of confidence it could
not evolve to protect types of privacy other than
informational privacy. But in
order to comply fully with the European Convention on Human Rights (ECHR), it
seems inevitable that
the action will have to evolve to embrace all types of
informational
Indeed, the courts have routinely observed
that the action has absorbed Article 8;
and it follows naturally
from this that courts have explicitly begun to hold that intrusion upon privacy,
absent any misuse of information,
is actionable under the domestic privacy
, Tugendhat J explicitly recognised
Vidal-Hall v Google Inc
[2015] EWCA Civ 311
[2015] 3 WLR 409
(n 49) [255] (‘two distinct causes of action, protecting two different
interests: privacy, and secret (“confidential”)
information’).
(n 22) [48], [246].
Douglas v Hello! Ltd
[2000] EWCA Civ 353
[2001] QB 967
(n 42) [8], [15];
(n 22) [109].
ibid [46], [49].
(n 28) [15] (‘An individual’s privacy
can be invaded in ways not involving publication of information. Strip searches
are an example. The extent to which the common law as developed thus far in this
country protects of forms of invasion of privacy
is not a matter arising in this
Wainwright v Home Office
[2003] UKHL 53
[2004] 2 AC 406.
(n 25) [65];
[2002] EWCA Civ 337
[2003] QB 195
(n 42) [11];
(n 28) [17].
that ‘[t]he right to respect for private life embraces more than one
concept’, ruling in that case that while the relevant
disclosure would not
constitute a misuse of private information, it would constitute wrongful
intrusion upon private life more generally.
was held that merely accessing or retaining information may be wrongful.
This was reinforced by the decision in
, which held that
accessing phone messages was in itself wrongful, notwithstanding whether the
information obtained was disclosed.
However, in
Court nonetheless maintained that the privacy action remained of the confidence
But as the breadth of protection invariably
expands to ensure compliance with Article 8, the conceptual integrity of this
categorisation
will be stretched to breaking point, or the categorisation will
simply be rendered meaningless.
As such, it is unsurprising that
since the decision in
in 2011, the overwhelming trend has been
for courts to classify the action as a tort.
Lastly, whereas in breach of confidence the focus is upon the obligations of
confidence owed by the defendant and considerations
of conscience, within a
vindicatory action the focus is upon the interests of the claimant and their
protection from outside interference.
As Lord Hoffmann said in
the focus is not on duties of good faith applicable to confidential information
but on protection of human autonomy and dignity;
thus the starting point is
whether the claimant had a right to privacy in relevant information rather than
an inquiry into whether
the defendant ought to be held to have owed duties of
confidence or the character of the defendant’s conduct.
follows from this, for example, that while actual knowledge has been an
important aspect of the law of confidence (especially in
cases outside those
involving a pre-existing relationship) – as it marks the engagement of the
defendant’s conscience
and justifies imposition of equitable duties
– the defendant’s actual state of mind is likely to be of less
within the developing law of privacy, which seeks to mark out a zone
of protection within which basic interests ought to be
inviolate, regardless of
(n 44) [85] et seq. And see also
(n 25) [67].
As Gault P and Blanchard J observed in the New Zealand Court of
Appeal decision in
, as long as protection of privacy is tied to
breach of confidence, ‘the United Kingdom courts will increasingly have
reconciling decisions with Human Rights Act obligations’
(n 22) [40]).
Burrell v Clifford
[2016] EWHC 294
, [149]. And see
(n 28) [14];
(n 22) [2], [42], [246].
considerations of conscience. The logic of this proposition is evidenced by a
ready willingness to impute knowledge in the developing
law of privacy, and the
less prominent role of knowledge within privacy cases more
Thus the trajectory of legal development suggests the action is one concerned to
protect and vindicate basic interests. This is reinforced
by judicial statements
to this effect. The courts have emphasised that ‘[p]rivacy is a
fundamental right’
and that it ‘lies at the heart of
liberty in a modern state. A proper degree of privacy is essential for the
well-being and
development of an individual’.
autonomy and integrity’.
and the emergence of the action for misuse of private information was a direct
response to the
requirement in human rights law that respect for privacy
requires that privacy interests be protected from interference by private
Vindication or the reinforcement of the importance of the
interest in the face of interference has similarly been emphasised by courts,
especially – as we shall see – in determinations as to
C. Compensatory Damages for Breach of Privacy
There are thus strong similarities between the privacy
action and longer-established vindicatory torts. In this regard the emergence
the privacy action might be accurately explained as an updating of the
vindicatory torts, the new cause of action emerging so
as to protect an interest
that society today recognises as being of fundamental importance. Given that
vindicatory torts and the
action for misuse of private information protect
similarly basic interests and perform similar functions, as evidenced by their
similar legal structures, there is a powerful argument that the approach to
damages ought to analogous. Such a vindicatory approach
to damages would give
effect to the action’s underlying policies at the remedial stage.
See discussion at nn 38 et seq above. Of course there are
increasingly indications that in at least some classes of case, an objective
approach may be taken within breach of confidence itself. See the discussion in
B McDonald, ‘Privacy Claims: Transformation,
Fault, and the Public
Interest Defence’ in A Dyson et al (eds),
Defences in Tort
Hart Publishing, 2015) 297–303.
(CA) (n 26) [46].
(n 28) [12].
Mosley v NGN Ltd
[2008] EWHC 1777
[2008] EMLR 20
Von Hannover v Germany
[2005] ECHR 555
(2006) 43 EHRR 7.
(n 68) [216]–[217].
for Interference with Privacy
It is therefore unsurprising that the damages jurisprudence has over time come
to embrace an approach to compensatory damages identical
to the vindicatory
approach within torts actionable per se. We can trace the seeds of this approach
: ‘An infringement
of privacy is an affront to the personality, which is damaged both by the
violation and by the demonstration
that the personal space is not
inviolate’.
In other words, the claimant suffers damage by
the fact of interference with an interest that ought to be maintained inviolate.
the 2008 decision of
, Eady J invoked an idea of vindication
similar to that elaborated herein.
He indicated that damages could
be awarded for the interference in itself, arguing that to award only nominal
damages for an interference
with so basic a right would be inadequate. Put
another way, damages ought to be awarded for the interference with the right in
in part so as to reflect and reinforce the importance of the right. The
idea that quantum is a symbolic marker of the importance
of the protected
interest is arguably evidenced in the more general and deliberate uplift in
damages awarded for breach of privacy,
which can be traced through the case law
and which has brought sums more into line with other vindicatory actions such as
defamation.
In the 2011 decision of
, Tugendhat J awarded
£30,000 for a breach of privacy, this sum not apparently including any
portion for consequential loss;
he said that the sum would have been
£40,000 if distress had been taken into account (distress had been
compensated by a separate
award for defamation).
£15,000 was awarded to a very young child who had been covertly
photographed. The child had no appreciation of the breach, and
thus could not be
said to have suffered any consequential losses such as distress. The award could
only therefore be for the privacy
interference in itself, and this is reinforced
by the Judge’s express statements that the award should reflect that the
rights were breached ‘and serve as notice, both as to the
present and the future as to how seriously the court regards infringement
child’s rights’.
Put another way, the award for the
wrong in itself vindicates the right, in the sense of reinforcing and affirming
that privacy rights
ought to be respected and maintained inviolate. In
, awards were made to three children, whose pictures had been
published by a newspaper in breach of their privacy.
(n 28) [75], quoting
R v Broadcasting Standards
Commission, ex parte BBC
[2000] EWCA 59
[2001] QB 885
(n 68) [216]–[217].
Cooper v Turrell
[2011] EWHC 3269
, [107] (QB).
(n 23) [127]. See similarly
(QB) (n 23) [189]–[197]. Appeal dismissed:
(CA) (n 23).
of the children received substantial awards of £2,500 each, despite not
having suffered any distress – in contrast to
the third child, whose award
was explicitly uplifted as he had experienced feelings of embarrassment –
suggesting the awards
were for the breach of privacy
further reinforced by the ‘objective’ nature of the factors that
guided the Court in setting awards, which go
more to assessing the seriousness
of the wrong rather than gauging actual losses suffered. These included the
degree of intrusion,
what the photos showed, the extent of publication and how
long the article was online.
The explicit embrace of the vindicatory model came in Justice Mann’s
magisterial judgment in
, upheld by the Court of Appeal (permission
to appeal to the Supreme Court refused). Justice Mann held that damages may be
to ‘reflect infringements of the right itself’, regardless
of the suffering of consequential loss: ‘The absence
of distress does not
mean that there was any less an invasion of privacy ... If there was an invasion
of a right then prima facie
there ought to be a remedy.’
J employs similar reasoning to that of Eady J in
, saying that a
failure to afford damages simply because distress was not suffered would render
the rights ‘illusory’,
at least to a significant degree.
He makes a point of the utmost importance when he says:
The tort is not a right to be prevented from upset in a particular way. It is a
right to have one’s privacy respected. Misappropriating
private information without causing ‘upset’ is still a wrong. I fail
to see why it should not, of itself, attract
damages. Otherwise the right
becomes empty.
The law of privacy is first and foremost constituted to protect the interest in
interest that ought to be
the first head of loss recognised by the law. It would make little sense for the
law to afford compensation
for consequential losses parasitic on the wrong, but
not damage to the interest that is the very object of the law’s
protection.
If the law’s principal concern was to prevent consequential
loss then consequential loss would be a prerequisite to bringing
the claim, as
it is in negligence. The right would not be a right in respect of privacy but a
right not to be caused harm through
interference with privacy. That is not the
law: the action is actionable per se.
(Ch) (n 26) [115].
ibid [113].
Justice Mann explicitly stated that such damages are compensatory in nature,
confirming the normative loss thesis. These normative
damages are, as in
vindicatory torts, to be assessed objectively, with quantum varying with the
seriousness or extent of the interference
with privacy and not with the
subjective effects suffered by the claimant, which is the province of
consequential loss. This helps
to explain why it was defensible
as a matter
of principle
for Mann J to adopt a tariff of £10,000 per year for
serious violations by phone hacking (the approach makes sense
as a matter of
as it will facilitate settlements).
Ceteris paribus
victim of phone hacking suffers a basic level of interference with his or her
The extent of the
interference can of course be aggravated, so that the seriousness of the
interference may be worse in one case
relative to others; for example, where the
information accessed is highly sensitive medical information, damages will rise
significantly
above the tariff, in contrast to a case where the phone messages
contained fairly anodyne information.
One might respond that this
is unfair on the defendant, who may have no idea in advance what type of
information he or she will find.
But this is the wrong perspective: damages
compensate for the degree of interference with
the claimant’s
infringement when a defendant accesses information that is
highly sensitive.
Furthermore, it hardly lies in the mouth of someone who engages in phone hacking
to complain.
Thus, quantum is assessed objectively. In cases of false imprisonment, damages
for the interference with liberty in itself vary according
to, inter alia, the
duration of the imprisonment and the extent of the confinement. In trespass to
land, user damages, for the interference
with the interest in exclusive
possession of land, are assessed according to, inter alia, the duration of the
use and amount of land
used. These considerations are indicia of the extent or
seriousness of the violation. Damages for normative damage to privacy interests
will vary according to similar considerations; as the Court put it in the
, damages for normative damage respond
to the ‘degree of intrusion’.
I suggest that such
damages should vary according to considerations similar to those that go to the
existence of an expectation of
Where the violation entails the taking of information, the nature of that
information will be material:
ceteris paribus
damages should be higher
where the violation entails unauthorised taking of intimate pictures versus
unauthorised accessing of the
claimant’s order history on the
ibid [229].
(n 63) [162].
Damages and Human Rights
Star Wars online store. Extent of publication will be relevant: if the defendant
publishes the information in a national newspaper,
the interference shall be far
more serious than if they publish it to no one. Location may be pertinent:
installing a camera in the
claimant’s family home, and recording them, is
likely to entail a far more serious interference with privacy, than recording
someone on a public street. Duration shall also bear on quantum:
, damages should be higher where the defendant bugs my house for four
months relative to where they bug my house for two weeks. The
more times a
violation is repeated – for example if there have been multiple instances
of wrongful accessing of private information
– the greater the award
Mann J took an approach on all fours with this. In setting quantum he
considered, for example, the nature of the information accessed,
whether it was
disclosed, and the length, degree and frequency of the interferences by hacking.
In other cases the extent of the
disclosure has also been considered as one
factor indicating a more or less serious breach, as well as how long the
information was
made available.
, Spearman QC,
sitting as a Deputy Judge of the High Court, explicitly stated that those
factors relevant to determining the existence
of an expectation of privacy could
be relevant to damages.
In setting quantum of damages for both normative damage and consequential non-
pecuniary loss courts have, ‘while making all
due allowances for the
different facts of each particular case’, also sought guidance from past
awards made for breach of privacy
so as to ‘strive for a measure of
consistency’.
For example in assessing normative damage in a
given case the court will compare the seriousness of violations in past cases
the case before them so that the awards across the different cases broadly
cohere with one another. In looking to past cases it is
however important to
bear in mind Mann J’s observation in
that awards for breach
of privacy have increased over time, as earlier awards were acknowledged to be
too low, so that awards made
early in the development of the privacy action may
not be a safe guide as to quantum today.
Courts have also, in
assessing damages for breach of privacy, considered scales applied in the
context of other fields of tortious
liability, including defamation, personal
injury and anti-discrimination law, where detailed guidance and
(n 63) [138] (‘the extent of the misuse
should be a relevant factor when assessing compensation for the wrong itself
because disclosure to the world at large involves a greater loss of
control than a disclosure to, for example, a small number of
journalists’);
(QB) (n 23) [196].
(n 63) [139].
See ibid [162].
(Ch) (n 26) [184](i). Note also that while the
Simmons v Castle
[2012] EWCA Civ 1039
[2013] 1 WLR 1239
10% uplift was not applied in
, it seems from the reasoning therein that the uplift may apply to
awards for non-pecuniary loss in future privacy cases: see
26) [160]-[166].
guidelines as to quantum have been developed.
Justice Mann advised caution in reading across scales from other fields, as
there is a risk of passing over the distinctive nature
of the privacy
For example awards for non-pecuniary loss in
anti-discrimination torts do not include a component for normative damage for
the interference
in itself, awards being limited to factual losses such as
However, Mann J did not consider scales in other
liability contexts to be irrelevant: while the approach to quantum in other
cannot be transposed directly into privacy cases, awards made in other
contexts such as personal injury can provide ‘a sort
of sanity check on
amounts which are proposed’.
A similar approach has been
adopted in other areas such as defamation; courts will consider (or instruct
juries to take notice of)
the levels of awards in personal injury cases in
quantifying general damages, so as to facilitate coherence and consistency
the law, though there is no exact relationship or precise correlation
between awards made in each field.
for Consequential Loss
In contrast to the objective approach to normative damages, consequential
factual losses depend on the subjective effects of the
wrong on the individual
claimant: ‘A thinner-skinned individual may be caused more upset, and
therefore receive more compensation,
than a thicker- skinned
individual’.
These losses have to be proven, and factual
causation established. In contrast to the position in respect of normative
damage, which
is inherent in and inseparable from a violation, rules of
remoteness will likely apply to limit recovery of consequential losses
breach of privacy. The question is what the approach to remoteness ought to be.
Within actions for which loss is the gist, such
as negligence, recovery is in
general limited to those losses that are reasonably foreseeable. However, it is
strongly arguable that
such a limit does not apply for those torts actionable
per se that protect basic interests. Rather, the preponderance of authority
indicates that the defendant shall be liable for all factual losses that are a
direct and natural consequence of his or her wrongful
actions; this test clearly
applies where the wrong is
(n 68) [212]-[231];
[102]-[107];
WXY v Gewanter
[2013] EWHC 589
, [25] et seq;
(n 36) [11].
(Ch) (n 26) [185]-[202].
Ibid [189]-[190].
Ibid [202]. This approach was echoed by the Court of Appeal:
(CA) (n 26) [60] et seq.
John v MGN Ltd
[1997] QB 586, 612-616;
Cairns v Modi
[2012] EWCA Civ 1382
[2013] 1 WLR 1015
(CA) (n 26) [61]-
(Ch) (n 26) [229](viii);
[140], [159].
intentional and arguably holds as a more general proposition in the context of
certain vindicatory actions.
The courts have so far not given
detailed consideration to the remoteness rules that apply to the emergent
given the evolving nature of the privacy action courts
are likely to follow the approach taken within other vindicatory actions,
as the torts actionable per se. Such approach has been applied by analogy to
newer actions also constituted to protect basic
interests, such as statutory
anti-discrimination torts.
This approach to remoteness furthers the
protective aims of vindicatory actions by holding a defendant liable for all
losses flowing
directly from the wrong, whether those consequences were
reasonably foreseeable or not. That courts have regularly awarded damages
various types of factual loss for breach of privacy without any inquiry into or
mention of reasonable foreseeability in itself
strongly suggests the absence of
such a limit. The vast majority of awards for consequential loss have been for
distress, but awards
have also for example been made for recognised psychiatric
One would expect damages for consequential pecuniary
losses to be recoverable on an analogy with other vindicatory actions; in
to non-pecuniary losses, which are ‘at large’, economic
losses would need to be specifically pleaded. Aggravated damages
are available
for breach of privacy, in common with other vindicatory actions, and have been
regularly awarded where the defendant’s
conduct is such as to injure the
claimant’s proper feelings of dignity and pride, including the
defendant’s conduct of
proceedings.
It is worth noting that in
, Spearman DHCJ indicated his concern
that the application of the egg-shell skull rule in regard to non-pecuniary loss
in claimant A, who is unusually sensitive, receiving a higher award
for an objectively less serious infringement of privacy than
claimant B, who is
not unusually sensitive but suffers a more serious infringement.
That there could be such disparity would seem unlikely (as Spearman DHCJ
appears to acknowledge) given that awards for mere distress
– which would
comprise the majority of A’s award – are typically modest, whereas
one would expect claimant B to
Damages and Human Rights
(n 2) 72; J Edelman,
McGregor on Damages
, 20th edn (London, Sweet
& Maxwell, 2018) [8 -012]-[8-013], [8-050], [8-062]. See
Harnett v Bond
[1925] AC 669
[99]-[104];
Quinn v Leathem
[1901] AC 495, 537;
Jones v Ruth
[2012] 1 WLR 1495
, especially [32];
Essa v Laing
[2004] EWCA Civ 2
[2004] ICR 746
, especially [38]-[39], [48] et seq.
(Ch) (n 26). Albeit
a separate award of aggravated damages was not made in
interestingly Spearman DHCJ considered the fact that the breach had occurred in
the context of a relationship of trust was a factor
that would aggravate
distress: (n 63) [160].
(n 63) [142].
receive a significant award for a serious invasion of his privacy, whether or
not he suffers distress, as the awards in cases of
serious violation, such as
, indicate. Indeed, the outcome in
illustrates this point. A relatively modest award of £5,000 was made for an
objectively less serious invasion of privacy
but which caused significant
distress to the claimant, who was particularly sensitive; as was noted in the
decision, this was well
£10,000 starting-point set by Mann J for serious cases of phone hacking,
and far below any of the awards made in
, which involved
objectively very serious and sustained invasions of privacy. In any case, even
if the type of disparity identified
by Spearman DHCJ did arise, this simply
follows from a compensatory approach: one receives damages in proportion to
one’s losses,
otherwise one will be undercompensated. But perhaps what we
ought to take from Spearman DHCJ’s judgment is a reinforcement
point made in section II.C.i above, that it is the fundamental interest in
to protect, rather than
insulation from mere upset, and it is right that awards for the interference
itself ought to be afforded
primacy at the remedies stage, through awards on a
higher scale than will be applied to consequential mental distress.
Compensatory
Damages Available as of Right
Importantly, in all of the major damages decisions discussed, damages followed
as of course from the wrongful interference. There
was no suggestion that awards
were, for example, discretionary. There was no suggestion that, as some hangover
of the action’s
origins in breach of confidence, equitable bars to relief
applied. Rather, damages appear to be available as of right. This is the
approach, especially for normative damages. Normative damage is a reflex of the
wrong. If an individual suffers a trespass
to land, that person ipso facto
suffers damage to his or her interest in exclusive possession of land. If an
individual is the subject
of defamation, that person ipso facto is injured in
his or her reputation. Similarly, if an individual suffers a wrongful invasion
of privacy that person ipso facto suffers damage to his or her privacy interests
and ought to be compensated for that loss. This
has been the general approach to
damages for breach of basic interests in English law. It is difficult to see a
basis for deviating
from such approach specifically in the case of privacy.
Indeed to do so would be to suggest that privacy is an interest of lesser
importance, contrary to judicial statements reiterating its fundamental
importance; rather than vindicating the normative importance
interests, this would be to treat privacy rights as second-class rights.
Furthermore, it would cut down protection of
the right, again contrary to the
policy of strong protection that pervades this field.
Even in equity, where it is an available remedy, equitable compensation is
generally awarded as of course where a claimant proves
loss suffered pursuant to
an equitable wrong (such as breach of a fiduciary duty of skill and care),
albeit equitable bars are potentially
applicable in theory at least.
Vindicatory
Approach to Other Relief
It is worth observing that the law’s vindicatory policy in this area is
also evident in the approach to other remedies. For
example, in
Supreme Court maintained an injunction restraining disclosure of private
information even though the information was widely available.
It is specifically
where privacy has been egregiously violated that the courts ought to send a
strong message that privacy is a right
of fundamental importance and which ought
to be respected. As Lord Neuberger said, ‘The courts exist to protect
legal rights,
even when their protection is difficult or unpopular in some
Consideration of the view of the minority Justice,
Lord Toulson, sheds further light on the vindicatory dimensions of the
decision. Lord Toulson, in dissent, would have discharged the
injunction on the basis that ‘Once [the information] has become
available to anyone who wants to know it, it has lost the essence of
confidentiality. The court must live in the world as
it is and not as it would
like it to be.’
If Lord Toulson’s judgment is based on
an acceptance of facts as they are, one might say the majority judgments are
a commitment to a normative view of how things ought to be. Whereas
Lord Toulson’s approach was to face up to the fact that
scale, the majority’s approach
is consonant with a view that maintains
that these are the very circumstances in which, despite the practical limits of
the court’s
powers, the court can at least send the signal that these are
rights of the utmost importance, which ought to be maintained inviolate
which individuals ought to be able to enlist the aid of the courts.
D. Irrelevance of Strasbourg Practice under Article 41
case in the Court of Appeal, Lord
Pannick QC, for the defendant, argued that the approach to damages for misuse of
private information
ought to follow that of the ECtHR in
(n 35) [71].
making awards of just satisfaction under Article 41 of the Convention. This
submission, if accepted, would have several key implications.
Awards would be set at scales far lower than domestic tort scales. Awards
could be denied in the discretion of the court even where
loss had been
a finding of violation being just satisfaction.
Normative damages would be unavailable, as the ECtHR only awards
compensation for consequential losses such as distress. Further,
as discussed
below, the ECtHR does not award aggravated and exemplary damages.
The Court of Appeal rejected this argument and upheld Mann J’s approach in
full. With respect, the Court was right to do so.
Elsewhere I have argued in
detail why the ECtHR’s approach to just satisfaction is inappropriate for
transposition into domestic
Only a brief summary of those
arguments is possible here. First, the Article 41 jurisdiction is that of a
supranational court that
performs a secondary, subsidiary and supervisory role
in monitoring member states’ compliance with an international treaty.
jurisprudence of such a court is not a model and is not intended as a model for
the remedial practices of domestic courts, which
responsibility for remedying rights violations. Rather, remedial practices
in domestic law are governed by Article 13, the right to
an effective remedy. In
contrast, Article 41 is not an article directed to or binding on member states;
it is directed inwards to
the ECtHR’s own subsidiary remedial
recognised this point, and rejected an
approach that focused solely on consequential loss as one that would fail to
provide an effective
remedy in all cases: ‘a regime in which damages were
confined to damages for distress would render the rights (to a degree)
“illusory” (to use the word used by the ECtHR) and would, to a
degree, fail to provide an effective remedy [as required
Furthermore the ECtHR has itself, in laying down the
requirements of Article 13, articulated
See further JNE Varuhas, ‘Damages under the Human Rights
Act’ in Edelman (n 92) pt V.
Notably, discretionary factors applied under the HRA to deny
damages have not affected claimants’ entitlement to damages for
of misuse of private information. For example, under the HRA, disproportion
between the costs of litigation and the amount
that could be awarded in damages
has been a basis for denying awards. However, in
, a privacy claim
at common law rather than under the HRA, such factor was held to be irrelevant
to the claimant’s ‘entitlement
to compensation’ ((n 63)
Albeit a de minimus rule has been recognised within the action
for misuse of private information, it would seem the threshold is exceptionally
low and easily passed (
(n 36) [15]), whereas the ECtHR, and domestic
courts under the HRA, have been willing to deny money awards in their discretion
relatively substantial losses on the basis that the loss is not considered
‘sufficiently serious’.
Damages and Human Rights
(n 2) ch 5.
(Ch) (n 26) [113].
an approach for domestic courts to follow that envisions something akin to
damages for normative loss:
[T]he Court is of the opinion that the domestic courts, as the custodians of
individual rights and freedoms, should have felt it
their duty to mark their
disapproval of the State’s wrongful conduct to the extent of awarding an
adequate and sufficient quantum
of damages to the applicant, taking into account
the fundamental importance of the right of which they had found a breach in the
present case, even if they considered that breach to have been an inadvertent
rather than an intended consequence of the State’s
conduct. As a corollary
this would have conveyed the message that the State may not set individual
rights and freedoms at nought
or circumvent them with impunity.
Second, the ECtHR has itself said that domestic courts are free to and ought to
follow their own remedial traditions.
Thus there is no imperative
from Strasbourg that domestic courts follow the Article 41 jurisprudence.
Third, the Strasbourg jurisprudence is riddled with problems: the jurisprudence
under Article 41 is characterised by parsimonious
and opaque reasoning, and a
lack of coherence, consistency, principle and predictability. Under the HRA,
where this jurisprudence
has been followed domestically, lower court judgments
are replete with statements that the court has been unable to divine any tariff
or meaningful principles or guidance from the ECtHR jurisprudence. As a result,
the domestic case law on damages under the HRA has
come to be characterised by
many of the problems associated with the supranational
jurisprudence.
In addition to these points, the direction in section 8(4) of the HRA for
domestic courts to have regard to the principles applied
under Article 41 (to
the extent any can be discerned) only applies to damages under the HRA; there is
no such requirement to have
regard to Article 41 jurisprudence applicable to the
action for misuse of private information, which is an action sourced at common
As Arden LJ said in
English law has only recently recognised a civil wrong for intrusions of
reference to the values
to be found in articles 8 and 10 of the Convention. However, an action for
breach of confidence did not completely
coincide with a right of action for
pursuing private information in violation of article 8 ... The court, when
Shilbergs v Russia
App no 20075/03 (ECtHR First Section,
17 December 2009) [78].
Scordino v Italy (No 1)
[2006] ECHR 276
(2007) 45 EHRR 7
[188]–[189].
See Varuhas,
Damages and Human Rights
(n 2) ch 5; Varuhas
In any case, even under the HRA recent lower-court decisions
have, notwithstanding s 8(4), indicated a move towards domestic tort
principles:
Alseran v Ministry of Defence
[2017] EWHC 3289
, [871] et seq (QB).
making an award for misuse of private information is not proceeding under either
section 8 of the Human Rights Act 1998 or article
Convention.
The new action may have been inspired by the European Convention jurisprudence
under Article 8 but the action is one for breach of
duties sourced at common
law. As such, the remedial approach must be one that coheres with the approach
to damages for similar types
of actions in English law, and quantum must be
matched to domestic conditions: ‘national courts are intrinsically better
to assess the adequacy of an award in their jurisdiction than an
international body ... the conditions of the tort are governed by
English law
and not the Convention’.
In subsequent privacy cases courts
have cross-checked awards for losses such as mental distress and recognised
psychiatric illness
against domestic tort comparators in the personal injury
context, and stated: ‘damages are to be assessed under English domestic
law and not the approach adopted by the Strasbourg
III. Non-Compensatory Damages
A. Exemplary Damages
On a vindicatory model of
remedies, exemplary damages ought to be available for misuse of private
information. In
, Eady J ruled them out.
, both Lord Mance and Lord Toulson suggested that Eady J’s
decision may not be the last word on the matter.
Lord Toulson
observed that such damages might play a useful role in ‘deter[ring]
flagrant breaches of privacy and provid[ing]
adequate protection for the person
concerned’.
For some actions, such as the loss-based torts of negligence and misfeasance in
public office, exemplary damages have traditionally
not been available in
principle. As a practical matter, such damages have never been awarded for
negligence in England, and the House
of Lords observed that exemplary damages
will very rarely be available for misfeasance in public
(CA) (n 26) [88]–[89].
(n 36) [19] and see [11]. See also text to nn 86-90
(n 68) [172]–[197].
(n 35) [42], [92].
In contrast, for vindicatory actions, exemplary damages
have long been available and regularly awarded in cases of egregious wrongdoing.
Their availability for such actions reflects the vindicatory and protective
functions of these actions. The ‘micro’ goal
of exemplary damages is
punishment, such damages responding to and sanctioning outrageous wrongdoing.
However, on a ‘macro’
level such damages give effect to the
law’s vindicatory and protective purposes. First, that significant awards
may be made
against defendants who egregiously interfere with very basic
interests serves to enhance protection of those interests against such
Second, that the civil law takes the exceptional step of punishing such
interferences, and in so doing marking the law’s
disapproval’
of such conduct, signals the importance of the
protected interests and reinforces that they must be afforded the utmost
respect. Third,
that such damages have traditionally been available, and indeed
played a significant role for vindicatory actions, but have traditionally
been available for other actions reinforces the importance the law attaches to
those interests protected by vindicatory actions.
In principle such awards ought to be available for the privacy action, as that
action is informed by the same vindicatory and protective
policies that underpin
other vindicatory actions for which exemplary damages have long been a
recognised remedy. Such awards would
afford enhanced protection and a strong
reinforcement of the importance of the protected interests and that they ought
to be maintained
inviolate in the face of an egregious violation, sending a
signal that the law will not tolerate such disregard for the most basic
interests. As we shall see below in section III.B.i, such damages can play a
particularly important role in cases where the defendant
deliberately breaches
the claimant’s privacy so as to make a profit. One of Eady J’s
reasons for ruling out exemplary
was that it was
questionable whether the privacy action is a tort. This issue has now been
resolved in the case law in favour of the
view that the action is a
while, as discussed in section II above, the key to making
decisions as to remedies is to consider whether particular remedies are
consonant with the policies underlying creation of the primary rights. Another
core reason given by Eady J for ruling out exemplary
damages was that this would
be inconsistent with the Article 41 jurisprudence of the ECtHR, which does not
recognise exemplary damages.
With respect,
(n 9) [26], [32], [81].
Rowlands v Chief Constable of Merseyside
[2007] 1 WLR
1065, [42].
this argument is not persuasive. First, the action for misuse of private
information is a creation of domestic law. It has been informed
by Strasbourg
jurisprudence but it has been woven into domestic legal traditions. It would be
inconsistent for compensatory damages
to be approached on the basis of domestic
legal thinking, as they have been, but for exemplary damages to be ruled out on
of Strasbourg jurisprudence. Similarly, that the Strasbourg
jurisprudence does not recognise aggravated damages has not prevented
damages becoming a core aspect of the damages jurisprudence for breach of
41 jurisprudence is not
a remedial model intended for adoption by domestic courts. As Starmer has
argued, the Strasbourg Court’s
reluctance to award exemplary damages
‘is in keeping with its role as an international supervisory body’
– ‘domestic
courts have a different role’.
are further reasons linked to this that explain why the Strasbourg Court has not
embraced such damages but which are irrelevant
to the domestic context; for
example, the Court is cautious not to threaten its own legitimacy by making huge
awards against member
states and risking a significant political backlash.
Third, as already noted, it is Article 13 that governs member states’
remedial responsibilities – not Article 41. Under Article 13, the
Strasbourg Court has made clear that domestic courts are
free to develop
remedial jurisprudence according to domestic traditions, and exemplary damages
have long been an important aspect
of the English law of damages. The one
important limit that Strasbourg jurisprudence does impose on exemplary damages
is that quantum
should not be so large as to constitute a disproportionate
interference with freedom of expression.
But this recognition that
exemplary damages should not be disproportionate in itself involves an
acceptance by the Strasbourg court
that it is permissible for domestic courts to
award exemplary damages. This tells against Eady J’s view that adoption of
damages at all would be disproportionate and at odds with the
Convention framework.
B. Gain-Based Relief
Let us first consider a truly gain-based remedy, an
account of profits, and then go on to consider reasonable fee damages, which
restitution
theorists claim are restitutionary, but which are properly analysed
as compensatory for normative damage.
European Human Rights Law
(London, LAG, 1999)
[2.46]–[2.47].
Tolstoy Miloslavsky v UK
[1995] ECHR 25
(1995) 20 EHRR 442
Morris v UK
[2005] ECHR 103
(2005) 41 EHRR 22.
(n 68) [197].
, Lord Mance left open the question of whether an account of
profits is available for the action for misuse of private information.
In my view such an award should not be available, or if it is to be made
available, it ought to be available only exceptionally.
awards have been made in equity specifically in the context of pre-existing
legal relationships. For example, such awards are
available for breach of
fiduciary duties. It makes sense that awards are available in the context of a
fiduciary relationship. The
fiduciary is required to act for the
principal’s interests, so the law holds that if the fiduciary deviates
from this course,
abusing his or her position to make a personal profit, the
fiduciary ought to be required to put the beneficiary or the fund in a
as if the fiduciary had acted as he or she ought to have acted. If the fiduciary
had acted as he or she ought to have, the
monies ought to have been earned for
the beneficiary’s benefit. Of course such awards may be made for breach of
too, and breach of confidence is perhaps more analogous to the action
for misuse of private information than a claim that a fiduciary
breached the
no-conflict rule. However, breach of confidence, at least traditionally, is also
commonly based in a pre-existing relationship
of confidence, and often one
arising in the context of a fiduciary relationship.
For example
where an employee or agent misuses the relevant information, such as trade
secrets, for his or her own, rather than the
principal’s,
Again, logically one can understand why profits made by
such misuse should be disgorged to the principal.
Some seek to sever the link between account of profits and equity, and argue
that an account of profits – now, reframed in
common law terms,
‘disgorgement damages’ – ought to be available for a more
diverse range of wrongs, often arguing
that there is no reason why the remedy
should not be more widely available or could not play a useful role in other
However, a weakness of such arguments is that they often
ignore or place too little weight on the distinctiveness of different types
obligations and different doctrinal contexts. That compensation is the general
remedy for vindicatory torts follows from the nature
of the obligations, which
are quite different from those in fiduciary relationships or relationships
(n 35) [41].
See also K Barnett, ‘Gain-Based Relief for Breach of
See also Turner’s discussion of the nature of facilitative
institutions: PG Turner, ‘Privacy Remedies Viewed Through an
Lens’, ch 11 in this book.
(n 25) [54].
See, eg, A Burrows, ‘We Do This at Common Law But That at
Attorney-General v Blake
[2000] UKHL 45
, 283–84. See also J Edelman,
Gain-Based Damages
Hart Publishing, 2011).
confidence. The obligation in vindicatory torts is a negative one of
non-interference with basic interests, and this applies regardless
pre-existing relationship, being an obligation imposed by law. It is consonant
with a concern for non-interference that awards
compensate for the extent of a
wrongful interference, and it is consonant with a concern to protect and
vindicate the claimant’s
interests that damages respond directly to the
invasion of those interests. An account of profits could potentially go beyond
resulting in an award well beyond one required to compensate for the
interference. In this way it invites the windfall objection:
an award beyond
that required to restore the claimant’s rights is a windfall gain for the
The common premise for arguments for an account is that compensatory damages may
not be available or adequate on certain facts, for
example where no loss is
suffered in a case of a serious wrong. These were the circumstances in the case
, where the House of Lords recognised that an account could be
ordered exceptionally for breach of contract.
But the problem for
this argument is that on a vindicatory approach to remedies, it is wholly
unlikely that there would ever be a
case where compensatory damages (in
combination with other remedies) would be inadequate or unavailable, given that
such damages
are granted as of course for normative damage, regardless of
whether the claimant incurred any consequential, material losses. Even
contract the profit-based remedy recognised in
is effectively a
dead letter, and even on amenable facts the courts have shied away from making
such an award.
These arguments suggest that an account of profits, if it were to be available
for vindicatory torts, should be an exceptional remedy,
limited to cases where
other remedies would be unavailable or inadequate. In other words, it would have
a gap-filling role (albeit
it is wholly unlikely, or indeed impossible, that a
gap could arise). Thus in contract the remedy is available exceptionally and
where other remedies are inadequate.
In tort such an award has not
– outside the intellectual property context – been recognised,
although the courts have
suggested that if it were to be available, it would be
so only exceptionally, in cases not involving use of property.
Experience Hendrix
(n 125) 285–86.
Forsyth-Grant v Allen
[2008] EWCA Civ 505
, [31], [33];
(n 12) [88];
Lawrence v Fen Tigers Ltd
[2014] UKSC 13
[2014] AC 822
, [131], [248].
However, as has been observed many times, there is a lack of clarity over when a
case will be exceptional, which in turn reflects
a lack of clarity over the
rationale for an account of profits outside of its traditional context of
equity. The most common rationale
given is that of deterrence. But this
rationale is deeply problematic. First, if deterrence is to be the rationale we
to know whether such awards in fact deter, yet there is little
evidence on this, and in any case courts are not well placed to judge
awards are necessary to alter incentives. Second, because the argument is an
instrumentalist one, we would need to know
that the benefits of making such
remedies available would outweigh any costs. Third, this rationale is completely
removed from any
doctrinal context, and there is little sensitivity to the
discrete normative concerns of distinct fields of law such as contract
vindicatory torts. Protagonists of the wider availability of disgorgement
typically offer deterrence as a general justification
across torts and
If a rationale is to be identified for the exceptional availability of such
relief for misuse of private information, it must lie
in the field’s
normative concerns and not rest on questionable speculations as to behavioural
effects. Elsewhere I have suggested
that one possible rationale, in the context
of vindicatory actions, is that such awards could afford
and serve to
vindicate the importance of protected interests and
that they ought to be respected, in exceptional circumstances where such added
protection and vindication is warranted, and the factual circumstances make
stripping profits a rational way of achieving these objectives.
this rationale, one exceptional circumstance where such remedy might potentially
be made available for vindicatory actions is where
fundamental interests are
particularly vulnerable to wrongful interference because there are acute
financial incentives to commit
the wrong, the claimant is a member of a class
particularly vulnerable to exploitation and the defendant acted on those
thus earning a profit.
However, albeit this rationale might be a principled and defensible one, the
practical reality is that such awards are unlikely to
be necessary because we
already have an established remedy to offer enhanced vindication and protection
in such situations: that
is, exemplary damages in the second category of
Furthermore, exemplary damages have many advantages
over the remedy of an account of profits as a tool for affording heightened
and vindication in the case of a profit-driven wrongdoer.
Damages and Human Rights
(n 2) 120–21.
Rookes v Barnard
[1964] UKHL 1
[1964] AC 1129
Lord Devlin in
explained that exemplary damages may be available
in the following circumstances:
Where a defendant with a cynical disregard for a plaintiff’s rights has
calculated that money to be made out of his wrongdoing
will probably exceed the
damages at risk, it is necessary for the law to show that it cannot be broken
with impunity.
Exemplary damages in this category have several advantages over the remedy of an
account of profits. First, these damages can be
awarded in response to a cynical
profit-motivated wrong even though the defendant does not end up making a profit
or makes a very
small profit. This is because quantum is not necessarily hitched
to the amount of profit in fact made. Second, an account will only
offer added
protection where the gain sought and made is financial. However, the conception
of gain for the purposes of the second
category of
is wider than
financial profits: ‘This category is not confined to moneymaking in the
strict sense.’
Third, the claimant who suffers a cynical,
profit-driven wrong can recover both compensatory and exemplary damages, whereas
would need to elect between compensatory and disgorgement damages.
Fourth, gain can be very difficult to calculate, and causation
can be hard to
prove, especially if profits derived from the wrong are intermingled with other
profits. Fifth, in calculating profits
a court would make an allowance for the
defendant’s skill and expenses, whereas no such discount need be made from
In addition to exemplary damages other forms of relief may also be utilised to
address gains. An injunction may issue to prevent
a defendant from using private
information to continue to make a profit from distribution of that information.
The court could order
the defendant to deliver up the information, thus
preventing its use.
, Tugendhat J also
contemplated the making of an order akin to that made in
preventing the defendant from receiving money in relation to the relevant
information.
Thus, all in all, disgorgement damages do not add anything to orthodox remedies
available for vindicatory actions, and they ought
not to be available. If they
are to be made available,
ibid 1226–27.
See the discussion of the line of confidence cases in
, which demonstrate that delivery-up has been an important remedy
in this area: (n 25) [54] et seq.
Spelman v Express Newspapers
[2012] EWHC 355
they ought to be an exceptional remedy, and the criteria for their award should
be formulated by reference to the normative concerns
underpinning creation of
Fee or User Damages
Where a defendant uses the claimant’s land without the claimant’s
consent the defendant shall be liable in trespass for
user damages, calculated
according to the market rate for the use of the land. For nearly their entire
history these damages were
conceptualised by the courts as compensatory.
However, more recently restitution theorists have preyed on the characterisation
such damages as loss-based. They have argued that these damages cannot be
compensatory because they are available whether or not
the claimant would have,
or even could have, leased out his or her land to another person but for the
trespass. On this premise they
argue that a gain- based analysis – such
damages reverse a transfer of value from the claimant to the defendant –
be preferred. It is correct that ‘but for’ analysis does not
apply to such damages. But it does not follow from this
that they must be
characterised as gain-based.
Rather, the absence of ‘but
for’ analysis shows that such damages are not factual damages but
normative damages for the
wrongful interference with exclusive possession and
use of land in and of itself. The courts have explained them as such. In the
leading authority of
Morris-Garner
Lord Reed, giving the lead judgment in
the Supreme Court, said that user damages provide compensation for the loss of
the right to
control use of one’s property that goes with proprietary
rights of exclusive possession, this ability to control use of one’s
being conceptualised as a valuable asset in itself; such losses are conceptually
distinct from financial losses of a ‘conventional
kind’ such as the
cost of repair.
Lord Sumption, in the same case, said the
availability of user damages follows from the nature of the right infringed: the
the ‘exclusive dominion’ conferred by property rights as
having an independent pecuniary value – one might say,
a normative value
constructed by the law – which is assessed according to the user measure
where those rights, and thus one’s
interest in exclusive possession, are
Morris- Garner
built on earlier authority to
similar effect. The Privy Council had previously observed that damages are
‘readily awarded at
common law for the invasion of rights to tangible
moveable or immoveable property’, and acknowledged the availability
of ‘compensatory
See further Varuhas, ‘Concept of Vindication’ (n 2)
Morris-Garner
(n 1) [25]-[30], [66], [79], [95](1).
Ibid [110].
damages which exceed the actual financial loss caused to the claimant by an
actionable breach of duty’.
In trespass loss has a wider
meaning than simply being left materially worse off:
It is an established principle concerning the assessment of damages that a
person who has wrongfully used another’s property
without causing the
latter any pecuniary loss may still be liable to that other for more than
nominal damages. In general, he is
liable to pay, as damages, a reasonable sum
for the wrongful use he has made of the other’s property. The law has
reached this
conclusion by giving to the concept of loss or damage in such a
case a wider meaning than merely financial loss calculated by comparing
property owner’s financial position after the wrongdoing with what it
would have been had the wrongdoing never occurred.
Furthermore, in such a case
it is no answer for the wrongdoer to show that the property owner would probably
not have used the property
himself had the wrongdoer not done so. In
[1900] AC 11
117, Earl of Halsbury LC made the famous
observation that a defendant who had deprived the plaintiff of one of the chairs
in his room
for 12 months could not diminish the damages by showing that the
plaintiff did not usually sit upon that chair or that there were
plenty of other
chairs in the room.
This modern authority follows on from the line of wayleave cases decided in the
latter part of the nineteenth century, and which
explicitly conceptualise user
damages as compensatory – and explicitly reject gain-based
Morris-Garner
Lord Reed, in his leading
judgment, authoritatively reasserted this orthodoxy: ‘The courts did not
... adopt a benefits- based
approach, but conceived of awards as compensating
In the important High Court of Australia case of
it was held, as a
more general proposition applicable beyond user cases, that substantial damages
follow a wrongful interference with
land whether or not that interference causes
material loss:
True it is that the entry itself caused no damage to the appellant’s land.
But the purpose of the action for trespass to land
is not merely to compensate
the plaintiff for the damage to the land. That action also serves the purpose of
vindicating the plaintiff’s
right to the exclusive use and occupation of
his or her land ... The appellant is entitled to have his right to property
by a substantial award of damages.
Pell Frischmann Engineering Ltd v Bow Valley Iran Ltd
[2011] 1 WLR 2370
, [46], [48].
Stoke-on-Trent City Council v W & J Wass Ltd
, 1416. The passage was quoted with approval in
Morris-Garner
1) [29], [110].
Damages and Human Rights
(n 2) 55–59.
Morris-Garner
(n 1) [79].
Plenty v Dillon
(1991) 171 CLR 635
Such approach reflects the ‘policy of the law’, which is ‘to
protect the possession of property and the privacy
and security of the
As Arden LJ says in
may be no actual loss’ but ‘the law takes the view as a matter of
policy that the claimants if they prove
their claims are entitled to substantial
compensation for the mere invasion of their rights’.
analysis in
Morris-Garner
shows, this policy aim is effectuated by the
law conceptualising exclusive possession and use of land as a thing of value in
with the corollary that its infringement involves the suffering of a
compensable detriment.
If loss-based explanations are open we need not have recourse to heterodox
gain-based analysis.
Furthermore, the normative damages thesis
provides an explanation that coheres with the nature of the cause of action. The
of trespass is to protect and vindicate the protected interests. It
therefore makes sense that the focus of damages would be upon
the extent of the
interference with those protected interests, rather than on the
defendant’s gain.
There are further problems with gain-based
accounts, albeit they cannot be explored here given space
constraints.
Should reasonable fee damages be available for the action for misuse of private
information? For example, a reasonable fee could
conceivably be applied to
assess the normative loss suffered by a claimant where a defendant newspaper
makes use of the claimant’s
personal information without the
claimant’s permission, for instance by publishing the claimant’s
private photographs.
The fee might be assessed on the basis of the market fee
that could have been charged by the claimant for use of those photos. In
the courts should be reluctant to apply such a measure. Reasonable fee measures
are usually applied to assess normative loss
where the interests interfered with
are proprietary in nature, as we routinely value property interests in market
terms. However,
where damage is to interests such as those in liberty and
physical integrity, not typically measured in market terms, a reasonable
not applied. This must partly be because it is unnatural to describe imprisoning
(n 12) [36].
A point also made by Lord Reed in
Morris-Garner
Contrast unjust enrichment claims, such as a claim for money had
and received, where restitution is the logical remedy given that
‘not-wrong’ (to borrow from Birks) is that the defendant was
unjustly enriched at the claimant’s expense: enrichment
is the very gist
of the action, so that restitution (reversal of a gain) is the apt remedial
See Varuhas, ‘Concept of Vindication’ (n 2)
as involving a
of that person’s liberty.
fundamentally it would be inappropriate to assess damage inherent in being
deprived of one’s liberty or pictured at
a personal moment according to
market value, given that this involves treating basic dignitary interests as
interests in tradeable
commodities. In this regard it must be recalled that the
interest in the photos protected by the privacy action is the claimant’s
interests or their commercial interests in confidentiality.
C. Vindicatory Damages
‘Vindicatory damages’ are a novel head of
damages awarded for violations of constitutional or human rights in some
The principles governing such awards ‘are not greatly
developed’.
However, some broad principles are discernible.
Such damages are generally awarded only where compensatory damages are
insufficient to vindicate the right, and an additional award is
necessary to mark the sense of public outrage at the violation, the
of the right and gravity of the violation, and to deter future
violations.
In terms of assessment it has been suggested that
awards are ‘conventional’, ‘[a]llowance must be made for the
of the right and the gravity of the breach’, account taken of
the possible deterrence effects of the award
and quantum no more
than necessary to recognise the wrong but not derisory.
Going by their name, one might expect such damages to be available for
vindicatory actions such as the action for misuse of private
information.
Jones v Tsige
the Ontario Court of Appeal recognised a type of
‘symbolic’ award, designed to ‘mark the wrong’ and
rights or symbolize recognition of their infringement’,
within cases of breach of privacy by intrusion upon seclusion.
Nevertheless, the exact conceptual nature of such
Though this has not prevented Kantian torts theorists from
attempting to explain false imprisonment on the basis of ‘use’:
Private Wrongs
(Cambridge, MA, Harvard UP, 2016) ch 2. The idea
is perplexing.
See Lord Hoffmann’s discussion in
[118]–[124] differentiating the privacy claim from interference with
commercial interests. See also
Douglas v Hello! Ltd (No 3)
[2005] EWCA Civ 595
[2006] QB 125
(n 10) [177].
Attorney-General of Trinidad and Tobago v Ramanoop
[2005] UKPC 15
Subiah v Attorney-General of Trinidad and Tobago
(n 10) [178]–[180].
Ibid [180].
Jones v Tsige
2012 ONCA 32
, [75], [87]–[90].
Contrast the approach in
Jane Doe 464533
2016 ONSC 541
, in the context of
the misuse of private information tort, where damages were approached on an
orthodox compensatory basis, on an
analogy with sexual assault cases.
awards is not clear,
and such awards must be understood in the
light of the distinctive ‘functionalist’ approach to damages for
non-pecuniary
damage and loss that prevails in Canada (and which does not
characterise English law).
However, notwithstanding the approach
in Ontario, in the English case of
the UK Supreme Court held, in
the context of a false imprisonment claim, that vindicatory damages are not
generally available in tort.
With one caveat, the Court was, with respect, right
to do so. Two interrelated reasons given by the majority for rejecting such
are particularly convincing: the purpose of vindication is met by
established remedies,
and vindicatory damages perform similar
functions to exemplary damages.
We have seen that damages are generally available across vindicatory torts for
damage to the protected interest, which are proportionate
to the seriousness of
the interference and take account of the normative importance of the interest.
This means no additional award
is necessary to address the seriousness/extent of
the interference. It is also of the utmost importance to observe here that
vindicatory
damages are super-compensatory in nature whereas normative damages
are compensatory in nature, compensating for the interference
with protected
interests. Mann J articulated this distinction in
awarded to reflect the infringement [of the right in itself] are not vindicatory
in the sense of
. They are truly compensatory.’
The Court of Appeal agreed.
The only remaining functions that a ‘vindicatory’ award could
perform would be to express public outrage at the
interference, or deterrence. Indeed, in those constitutional cases where an
award has been made, it has been in response to
the outrageous
Oddly, the factors identified in
((n 155) [87]) as
being relevant to assessment of such awards include factors that would be
relevant to damages for the wrong in itself
(eg the nature and incidence of the
wrong), damages for consequential loss (eg effect on the plaintiff’s
health and financial
position, and any distress suffered), and aggravated and
punitive damages (eg conduct of the defendant). As such the award recognised
is not easily classified and does not appear coherent, seemingly
being a fusion of conceptually different types of award. It is also
unclear why
such awards should be capped at C$20,000 for intrusion upon seclusion, as
indicated in
, when much higher awards are available for other torts
and indeed for the public disclosure tort.
Though there are questions over the extent to which Canadian law
continues to adhere to the functionalist approach: J Berryman,
‘Non-Pecuniary
Damages for Personal Injury: A Reflection on the Canadian
Experience’ in E Quill and RJ Friel (eds),
Damages and Compensation
Culture Comparative Perspectives
(Oxford, Hart Publishing, 2016).
(n 10) [101], [236], [237].
ibid [100], [233], [255].
(Ch) (n 26) [132].
(CA) (n 26) [48]. Similarly the Court of Appeal in
Shaw v Kovacs
[2017] EWCA Civ 1028
seems to have, with respect, correctly
distinguished vindicatory damages from compensatory damages for the infringement
(albeit such damages were refused in that case, in the very different
context of negligence).
of the violation.
The making of such awards for the
protected interests,
and therefore give effect to the law’s vindicatory
function. However, given that exemplary damages would be available on a
vindicatory remedial model, respond to and express outrage at the manner of the
violation by punishing the defendant, reinforce the
normative importance of
protected interests and may theoretically deter future interferences,
vindicatory damages are otiose.
The degree of overlap is
recognised in the Caribbean cases on vindicatory damages. Vindicatory and
exemplary awards cannot be recovered
concurrently for the same wrong; where a
vindicatory award is made, ‘the purpose of exemplary damages has largely
been achieved’
given the element of deterrence ‘[t]hat a substantial
award carries’.
The overlap was evident in
where those aspects of the case that convinced the minority that a vindicatory
award was warranted were the same features that came
close to convincing other
Justices to make an exemplary award.
Thus it is unnecessary to recognise this novel head of damages. However, one
important caveat ought to be entered. If the Supreme
Court, for example,
and holds that normative damages are not available and
only consequential loss is recoverable for breach of privacy, there would be
strong argument for recognising vindicatory damages to fill the gap left by the
absence of normative damages, especially in a case
where no consequential loss
was suffered and thus no damages otherwise payable. The possibility that
might be overruled is not fanciful, given that in
itself the Supreme Court, with respect, mislaid the orthodoxy that
substantial damages ought to follow breach of a fundamental right
in the context
of the paradigm vindicatory tort of false imprisonment.
overall it would be nonsensical to deviate from the orthodox approach to damages
for vindicatory actions by rejecting the
availability of normative damages, only
to have to then again deviate from
Merson v Cartwright
[2005] UKPC 38
152); see also
Graham v Police Service Commission
[2011] UKPC 46
One might argue that vindicatory damages would be more freely
available than exemplary damages, which are limited by the
categories. However, vindicatory damages have been developed within
constitutional claims against public actors. This category of
case roughly maps
onto the first category in
itself involved claims
against officials.
Takitota v Attorney-General of The Bahamas
[2009] UKPC 11
Webster v Attorney-General of Trinidad
[2011] UKPC 22
(n 10) [233];
(n 152) [19].
(n 10) [176], [194] with
[165]–[168].
For a critique of that judgment and an explanation for why this
misturning in the law of damages occurred, see Varuhas,
Damages and Human
(n 2) 61–67.
orthodoxy to correct for the original departure by recognising the novel head of
vindicatory damages.
Furthermore, vindicatory damages are far from a perfect substitute for normative
damages. First, such damages are exceptional and
discretionary. Second, in most
cases where they have been awarded, especially in the Caribbean cases,
vindicatory damages have served
as a surrogate form of exemplary damages; they
do not perform the same function as normative damages, which are available as of
and specifically respond to the damage to the claimant's interests.
Third, very modest awards of vindicatory damages have been contemplated outside
of cases of egregious wrongdoing (the exemplary damages
example where compensatory damages were not available but it was thought
important to mark the wrong with an award.
Used in this way, are vindicatory
damages a substitute for normative damages? No. First, in these cases
vindicatory damages remain
an exceptional and discretionary remedy. Second,
quantum in such cases is exceptionally modest. For example in
minority Justices would have awarded sums of between £500 and £1,000
in vindicatory damages to mark a two-year period
of false imprisonment. If
orthodox principles had been followed, a compensatory award for two years of
false imprisonment would have
been in the tens of thousands of pounds: £500
is a poor substitute. Despite their name, such awards do not vindicate basic
they achieve the inverse. Such a measly award trivialises an
important interest long afforded strong protection at common law through
imposition of damages liability. Lords Brown and Rodger, who would have
maintained that substantial damages ought to follow
wrongful imprisonment, said
that to do otherwise would ‘devalue the whole concept of false
imprisonment’.
There is, with respect, inconsonance between
Lord Hope’s statements in
that the breach was
‘deplorable’, ‘the right is a valuable one’, vindicatory
awards should register the ‘gravity
of the breach of the fundamental
right’, any award should not be ‘nominal’ or
‘derisory’, and his conclusion
that an award of vindicatory damages
on the facts should be ‘modest’ and ‘substantially
lower’ than £1,000.
Also problematic is the suggestion
that such paltry awards could encourage ‘all concerned to avoid anything
like it happening
If anything is likely to affect a
defendant’s behaviour it is unlikely to be such a small sum,
especially in a case like
, where there were powerful
(n 10) [343].
ibid [176], [178], [180].
ibid [217].
incentives to commit the wrong (those falsely imprisoned were foreign national
prisoners) and the evidence tended to suggest that
the defendant officials had
maintained their course of conduct despite a full appreciation of liability
IV. Damages in Lieu of an Injunction
Another form of damages that may possibly be awarded in
a claim for breach of privacy is damages in lieu of an injunction. Here I
going to consider specifically a situation where (i) there is an ongoing breach
of privacy or pattern of breaches; and (ii) a
court has jurisdiction to grant an
injunction and there are no discretionary bars to granting the injunction. In
such a case, albeit
the court could and would ordinarily grant an injunction,
the court may nonetheless grant damages in substitution of the injunction
the Lord Cairns’ Act jurisdiction. In this section I argue such damages
should very rarely be awarded in a case of breach
of privacy: the claimant
should have an injunction as of course to restrain an ongoing wrong. To
understand why this is, it is important
to first consider the nature of damages
in lieu. Their nature has not always been clear, and clarity has been further
attempts by restitution theorists to explain such damages as
gain-based. At this point it will suffice to record Millett LJ’s
restitutionary explanations are ‘puzzling’, and that courts
consistently have analysed such damages as compensatory,
including the Supreme
Court in its recent decision in
Morris- Garner
It is to be
hoped that in this area at least we may avoid the instability and commercial
uncertainty that has been generated in other
fields, such as user damages, by
restitutionary theories.
Cases concerning damages in lieu have often involved situations where an
injunction is sought by the claimant to enforce a restrictive
covenant, or to
restrain a continuing nuisance or trespass. The defendant argues that damages
should be awarded in lieu of the injunction
so that the defendant can continue
with his or her wrongful activity, albeit for a price. What do damages address
in such situations?
practical effect
of granting damages in lieu of an injunction is that
the claimant will not be able to enjoy his or her rights, as the courts will
refuse to coerce the defendant to discontinue the infringement.
Thus it has sometimes been said that damages represent
ibid [154]–[164].
Jaggard v Sawyer
[1995] 1 WLR 269, 291;
Morris-Garner
compensation for an appropriation of the claimant’s rights. In a case of
nuisance this would be the claimant’s right
against the defendant that the
defendant shall not interfere with the enjoyment value of the claimant’s
property, or in trespass
the right of the claimant against the defendant that
the defendant shall not interfere with the claimant’s interest in
possession of land. However, while it is true that the award of
damages and concomitant refusal to grant an injunction broadly have
effects for the claimant as if his or her primary rights had been appropriated,
damages do not as
a matter of principle
involve the defendant in
appropriating the claimant’s primary rights.
For example, in
trespass the claimant remains the owner of the land, continues to have a right
in exclusive possession and can sue
others who trespass – there is, for
example, no transfer of title to the defendant, nor is the defendant granted
of proprietary interest such as an easement, which the defendant can
then sue upon against others. This is why I consider that it
is also inaccurate
to refer to damages in lieu as ‘release fee’ damages – the
defendant is never released from
his or her primary duties to the claimant.
All of this is not to say that the practical consequences of refusing an
injunction and granting damages in lieu should not be taken
seriously –
below I argue that these practical effects ought to weigh heavily in our
consideration of how freely the courts
ought to award damages in substitution of
an injunction. Nonetheless, as a matter of principle it is not correct to say
damages involve an appropriation of the claimant’s primary
rights. Thus in
Anchor Brewhouse
Scott J said, ‘Whether or not an
injunction was granted, the defendant’s use of the right of way would,
after the judgment
as well as before, represent trespass unless and until he
were granted a right of way.’
Millett LJ echoed this
analysis in
[T]he court could not by an award of damages put the defendant in the position
of a person entitled to an easement; whether or not
an injunction were granted,
the defendant’s conduct would still constitute a trespass ... This
reasoning strikes at the very
heart of the statutory jurisdiction; it is in
marked contrast to the attitude of the many judges who from the very first have
that, while the Act does not enable the court to license future
wrongs, this may be the practical result of withholding injunctive
Thereafter the defendant may have no right to act in the manner complained of,
but he cannot be prevented from doing so.
(n 1) [69] (‘The claimant
does not literally lose the right in question’).
Anchor Brewhouse Developments Ltd v Berkley House (Docklands
Developments) Ltd
(1987) 38 BLR 97
(n 171) 285–86.
In this light, the more accurate explanation of what the claimant is being
forced to give up – what the claimant has lost –
to enforce his or her primary rights against the defendant. As a result of
the court’s refusal to grant the injunction and its
decision to grant
damages instead, the defendant shall, into the future, be
suit – any claim would be struck out
claimant shall be
from bringing a claim against the defendant in
respect of the subject matter of the damages award. Such damages are often drawn
with and analysed alongside other types of damages relating to
proprietary interests and which have proven challenging to explain,
such as user
damages for trespass. However, damages in lieu are different in nature, in that
they do not compensate for a one-off
intrusion upon a protected interest (and
are awarded in a unique statutory jurisdiction, which is equitable in
Rather they compensate for the loss of the liberty to
enforce a primary right into the future.
The different nature of such damages in turn explains why they are calculated
differently from user damages. In trespass, user damages
are assessed according
to parameters that measure the seriousness or extent of the defendant’s
interference with the claimant’s
interests, such as duration of use and
amount of land used. However, there are no such parameters when assessing
damages for the
loss of the liberty to enforce a primary right. Furthermore,
while there is a rental market for land, by reference to which interests
possession and use can be valued, there is no such market for trading in
liberties to enforce primary rights. As such, the courts
resort to a different
measure: a hypothetical bargain between the claimant and the defendant for the
‘purchase’ of the
claimant’s liberty to enforce.
Put another way, damages are akin to the ‘price of [the claimant]
waiving their rights’
Thus such damages have
commonly been referred to as ‘negotiating damages’.
Having said this, within any hypothetical negotiation, what the claimant
may reasonably have demanded for waiver of the right to sue
will naturally be
informed by the value of what the claimant is
Ibid 280–81.
Morris-Garner
(n 1) [46]-[47], [55]-[56], [62], [71];
cf K Barker, ‘“Damages Without Loss”: Can Hohfeld
Albeit, as noted in
Morris-Garner
(n 1) [63], [95](5),
while negotiating damages are the common measure applied in property tort cases,
they may not be the invariable
measure for damages under the Lord Cairns’
Act jurisdiction; it is ultimately for the court to judge the most appropriate
of quantification in the circumstances.
(n 171) 289. And see ibid [69].
Lunn Poly Ltd v Liverpool & Lancashire Properties Ltd
[2006] EWCA Civ 430
[2006] 2 EGLR 29
, [22]. And see now
Morris-Garner
, the Supreme Court endorsing this terminology.
giving up through not being able to protect his or her primary rights.
This explains why Brightman J in
Wrotham Park
took into account, in
setting damages in lieu, the profits the defendant would make from use of the
land in breach of the restrictive
Contrary to the claims
of restitution theorists, it is obvious that Brightman J’s consideration
of the profits the defendant
could make through use did not suggest damages were
a form of disgorgement damages. As Bingham LJ said in
, Brightman
paid attention to the profits earned by the defendants, as it seems to me, not
to strip the defendants of their unjust gains, but
because of the obvious
relationship between the profits earned by the defendants and the sum which the
defendants would reasonably
have been willing to pay to secure release from the
Millett LJ echoed this view:
It is plain from his judgment ... that Brightman J’s approach was
compensatory, not restitutionary ... He did not award the
plaintiff the profit
which the defendant had made by the breach, but the amount which he judged the
plaintiff might have obtained
as the price of giving its
Kennedy LJ agreed with Bingham LJ. In the more recent case of
, Arnold J, distilling from the authorities the principles applicable
to assessment of ‘negotiating damages’, could not
have been clearer
when he said ‘The overriding principle is that the damages are
compensatory’.
That these damages are compensatory has now
been authoritatively confirmed by the Supreme Court, consonant with the
statements of
principle in
: such damages compensate for
‘what is lost by the withholding of’ an
injunction.
Thus damages in lieu of an injunction compensate for the loss of the liberty to
sue, not the loss of primary rights as such. Nonetheless,
as noted above, it is
significant that the
practical effect
of a grant of damages in lieu is
that the claimant is unable to enjoy his or her primary rights and must endure
an ongoing wrong.
The courts have taken these effects seriously, and
Morris-Garner
(n 1) [95](4).
Wrotham Park Estate Co Ltd v Parkside Homes Ltd
(n 171) 281–82.
Force India Formula One Team Ltd v 1 Malaysia Racing Team SDN
[2012] EWHC 616
, [386](i) (appeal dismissed
[2013] EWCA Civ 780).
(n 1) eg [44], [58]-[61],
[95](3)-(4), [114].
generally injunctions have been granted as of course for ongoing nuisances and
trespasses. The courts have been reluctant to allow
a defendant to effectively
buy his or her way out of complying with legal duties: ‘the Court has
always protested against the
notion that it ought to allow a wrong to continue
simply because the wrongdoer is able and willing to pay for the injury he may
Lord Kingsdown in
Imperial Gas Light
that for an ongoing wrong an injunction should issue ‘as of course’,
unless there ‘is something special in
it was observed that ‘very exceptional
circumstances’
would be required before damages were given
in lieu, and the working rule enunciated by AL Smith LJ in that case indicates
will only be where it is oppressive to the defendant to grant the
injunction.
There is another reason why courts should be reluctant
to grant damages in lieu. The court’s refusal to grant an injunction
facto – albeit not de jure – effects a redistribution of proprietary
rights. Damages in lieu may not grant a defendant
a right of way over the
claimant’s land as a matter of law, but as a matter of fact the practical
effects are not dissimilar.
Courts are not well placed institutionally, and they
lack constitutional legitimacy to effect such redistributions. Allocation of
rights ought first and foremost to be for the political branches of government.
Furthermore, there
a de jure redistribution of sorts in that the
claimant loses a legal liberty to sue.
If the courts have been reluctant to allow ongoing nuisances or trespasses to
continue, which involve interferences with proprietary
interests (recall
nuisance is a tort
against land
), they should be even more reluctant to
allow an ongoing interference with dignitary interests such as liberty, physical
to continue for a fee. The idea of being disabled
from enforcing one’s basic personal or privacy rights is unpalatable in a
liberal democracy. This was recognised by Lord Mance in
Albeit the Supreme Court in that case suggested (in my view wrongly, with
respect), at least in cases of private nuisance, that
the criteria for granting
damages in lieu need not be as strict as AL Smith LJ’s working rule
Lord Mance observed that ‘the right to enjoy
one’s home without disturbance is one which I believe many, indeed
people value for reasons largely if not entirely
Shelfer v City of London Electric Lighting Co
[1894] UKLawRpCh 212
[1895] 1 Ch
Imperial Gas Light and Coke Company v Broadbent
[1859] EngR 915
(n 187) 316.
ibid 322–23; and see
The Court did, however, maintain that ‘the prima facie
position is that an injunction should be granted’ (
129) [101], [121]).
independent of money’.
This suggests where the subject
matter of the claimed injunction is something other than land or goods, which
can be valued in market
terms, the courts should be even slower to grant damages
in lieu than they typically would be, as damages are an even less satisfactory
remedy for an ongoing interference with dignitary interests. This point was
echoed specifically in the context of privacy in
, again by Lord
One may analogise here with the great writ of habeas
corpus, itself a type of specific relief constituted to address ongoing
interferences
with a basic interest. The writ issues
as of right
is proven that a person is being deprived of liberty without lawful
justification.
V. Conclusion
Given the protective and vindicatory policies that
underpin creation of privacy rights, damages for both normative and factual
ought to be available, and clearly are available following
Compensatory damages should not follow the ECtHR’s approach to money
awards under Article 41 of the Convention.
Exemplary damages ought to be available. But care must be taken to ensure that
quantum is not so high as to constitute a disproportionate
interference with
freedom of expression. An account of profits is an unnecessary remedy in the
light of the availability of normative
damages, coupled with exemplary damages
in the second category of
; exemplary damages in the second
category also have many advantages over the remedy of an account of profits.
However, if an account
of profits were to be made available, the remedy ought to
be exceptional, and the criteria for its award should follow the normative
concerns that underpin creation of the primary rights in privacy. Reasonable fee
or user damages are one way of measuring normative
damage in property torts.
They are not restitutionary. They ought not to be available for breach of
to treat dignitary interests as if they were
interests in tradeable commodities. The novel head of vindicatory damages ought
to be available. Such damages add nothing to established remedies.
Damages in lieu of an injunction compensate for the loss of the legal liberty to
enforce a primary right. They are not restitutionary.
Where a privacy
claimant proves an ongoing
ibid [168], and see also [127], [247].
(n 35) [41].
wrong, an injunction should be granted as of course to restrain that wrong. A
court should be extremely reluctant to refuse a final
injunction and grant
damages in substitution.
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (2.63 MB)
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter