URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/journals/WALawTRw/2025/8.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 15:58:24
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Clarke, Harrison; Peari, Sagi --- "Why Do We Need Legal Academics? The Ppsa Test" [2025] WALawTRw 8; (2025) 3 The Western Australian Law Teachers' Review 100
WHY DO WE NEED LEGAL ACADEMICS?
THE PPSA TEST
HARRISON CLARKE & SAGI PEARI
Legal academics serve an important and crucial function in the role of
teaching and engaging in research within the legal field. Despite
this it has
been argued that this role is redundant and simply unnecessary – legal
academics are a dinosaur that refuse to
become extinct. This article presents
and criticises this assertion of academics as useless, with reference to the
Personal Property Securities Act 2009
(Cth) (‘PPSA’) as a litmus
test to determine if there is some truth to the unimportance of legal academics.
This article
references the fundamental role of key academics in leading the
process of reform regarding personal property securities in Australia.
provides a comparison between PPSA publications of academics against legal
practitioners demonstrating the narrow scope of practitioners
in comparison.
Finally, discussing the centrality of academics in the teaching of the PPSA in
higher education institutions. The
article rejects the ‘useless
theory’ of academics and reasserts the importance of legal academics as
both irreplaceable
agents of change and educators.
I INTRODUCTION
This article examines a provocative thesis about
the possible redundancy of legal academics. First, it introduces the thesis
challenges the role of legal academics as those best equipped with the
required skills and knowledge to teach and research law. Secondly,
the article
focuses on the
Personal Property Securities Act 2009
(‘PPSA’) as an excellent candidate to serve as a litmus test to the
‘uselessness’ thesis. After introducing
the PPSA and explaining its
critical role in Australia, the article argues that the assessment of the
PPSA’s practice after
the introduction of the Act in 2009 opposes the
‘uselessness’ thesis – legal academics are not yet
replaceable.
II THE APPARENT APPEAL OF THE
‘USELESSNESS’ THESIS
It has been provocatively argued that nothing negative would occur in an
imaginary world which has no legal
‘uselessness’ thesis has historical, practical and conceptual
dimensions. Thus, the undeniable
fact is that once upon a
time, there were legal practitioners who led the academic discipline of
At the time the first
university was founded in Bologna in the 11th century, legal practitioners
dominated the legal academia by
teaching and researching
The role of practitioners
remains central today as they continue leading clinical/practical aspects of
legal education and are significantly
involved in teaching the content across
universities.
Emancipating the
field from the hands of academics and giving it to lawyers would mean returning
the field to its historical origins.
practically
, legal practitioners appear to be the best equipped
with the skills and knowledge to tackle the complex content intricacies and the
multifaced twisting of legal doctrine. If one indeed takes seriously the
argument that the doctrinal inquiry sits at the very heart
of law as a
discipline,
lawyers have a clear
advantage over academics to lead this discipline. They are the ones who spend
their days in courts, arbitration
tribunals and dispute resolution negotiations.
By facing the current legal reality, practitioners experience the law in
acquiring first-hand understanding of it. They are positioned on the
front lines – using and applying the law. Put simply,
lawyers are the
best contingent to teach and research law in a way that would not detach the
field from social reality. Their first-hand
experience empowers them to
communicate reliable, accurate and comprehensive legal knowledge and skills to
their students.
Academics often point to the advantage of scholarly inquiry when it comes to
researching and teaching theory.
conceptually
, the counterargument says that academics are superior to
practitioners in tracing the underlying rationale of the legal doctrine,
explaining the normative underpinnings of apparently unrelated legal concepts,
principles and rules. The significance of theoretical
inquiry should not be
underestimated. Theory informs
By revealing the
underlying nature of legal rules, the theory shapes future legal settings. It
provides an invaluable basis for qualification
and adaptation of the traditional
legal doctrine in light of such acute contemporary challenges as globalisation,
technological progress,
cross-border commerce and
sustainability.
This indeed
explains why – in contrast to a popular call to increase the
‘practical’ aspects of teaching
– some academics have
made a diametrically opposite suggestion, characterising legal education as
requiring ‘further
theorising’.
words, we need legal academics because of theory.
However, even the ‘theory’ counterargument can easily be rebutted
by the ‘uselessness’ thesis. The supporters
of this thesis do not
challenge the irreplaceability of the theory. They do argue, however, that a
close look at the theoretical
teaching and scholarly writings of law frequently
involve references to various ‘law & x’ fields, challenging the
conceptual distinctiveness of law as an independent
discipline.
By analysing legal
doctrine through the conceptual lens of such fields as history, sociology,
anthropology, economics and political
science, legal theory inherently collapses
into foreign disciplines. This suggests that the theoretical inquiry of law
could be taken
from the hands of legal academics, delegating the task to
academics of other fields. Tackling the interdisciplinary angles of legal
doctrine could be shifted to ‘other schools or faculties of the
university’,
perform the task of researching and teaching ‘law & x’ areas
better compared to
In other words, even
the conceptual counterargument apparently leaves the ‘uselessness’
thesis intact.
III PPSA: THE NATURE, SIGNIFICANCE AND CENTRALITY OF
LEGAL PRACTITIONERS
Coming into force in 2012, the PPSA represents one of the cornerstones of
commercial practice in Australia. The familiar example of
‘mortgage’ would perhaps be the easiest way to explain nature of the
PPSA in a single sentence. A ‘mortgage’
under the PPSA applies to
all types of tangible and intangible property which is not immovable property
(eg, land, houses, and apartments
are examples of immovable property). Indeed,
there is a limited number of times that an individual can ‘mortgage’
immovable property as a security for loan repayment. Financial
institutions are often reluctant to take ‘second in line’
due to the associated risks. So, the PPSA allows us to extend the
‘mortgage’ rationale to all other types of
present and future
proprietary assets, called ‘personal property’. These include such
items as goods (eg, equipment,
livestock and business inventory), bank accounts,
intellectual property (such as patents and trademarks), licenses, financial
(such as stock, bonds and other types of securities) and even future
A simple loan agreement involving a debtor and a creditor epitomises the
operational force of the PPSA. A creditor, usually a financial
institution,
requires a debtor to provide some type of asset such as inventory, office
equipment or future income to serve as a ‘security’
obligation towards the creditor – the loan repayment. That security is the
‘peace of mind’ of the creditor
which serves as an important
precondition to the loan being approved. The advances of technology with respect
to a wide variety of
proprietary assets that a business could potentially use as
a security facilitates commercial activity. By supporting a business’s
ability to raise capital, the PPSA constitutes an important aspect of the modern
Furthermore, the PPSA extends far beyond the paradigmatic example of loans
and debts. The most central provision of the PPSA –
says that the PPSA applies to any transaction and commercial dealing which in
‘substance’ follows the underlying
‘mortgage’ structure
for personal property. The idea is to assess the very nature of each commercial
dealing and consider
whether it in ‘substance’ or effectively
represents a situation when a debtor provides a creditor with a piece (or
of personal property to secure their obligation towards a
While the commercial
actors can title a given transaction in different ways,
denies formal
labeling by requiring a careful ‘substantive’ assessment of the
underlying agreement between the parties
and their interaction.
The broad scope of the ‘substance’ test set out in
explains why the PPSA applies to a wide range of commercial and consumer
transactions which go beyond the classical example of a
loan agreement. These
• A purchase of goods when the agreement between parties says that the
buyer will keep ownership of the goods until the full
repayment of the purchase
price – these are ‘reservation of title’ agreements;
• Many leases of personal property, especially leases that last for
more than 2 years;
• Consignments – such as the typical contractual arrangement
between a retail store and a distributor/importer according
to which the former
operates as an agent of the latter;
• Hire purchase arrangements – such as a typical agreements under
which a person has the option to purchase a vehicle
at the end of a lease
period; and
• Even ordinary consumer transactions made outside of retail stores
(such as transactions made through the ‘Gumtree’
online platform)
that involve a value of more than $5,000.
The wide range of relevant transactions explains the central role of the
PPSA’s online federal registration platform –
the Personal Property
Securities Register
of personal property in ‘substance’ serves as a security of an
obligation, the transaction must be properly
registered on the PPSR website. The
buyers and renters must check the status of the personal property items they are
considering
purchasing or hiring. Failure to follow the PPSA’s provisions
may lead to significant losses of property and
Not surprisingly, the
PPSA has received much attention in commercial practice. The statistics
indicates that millions of Australian
businesses used the PPSA in the first
quarter of 2024,
demonstrating
its paradigmatic centrality for the Australian legal and economic
landscapes.
At first glance, a review of the practice of the PPSA supports the
‘uselessness’ thesis. The Act contains 400 pages of
more than 300
provisions, representing a highly sophisticated and technical piece of
legislation. The provisions cover such issues
as registration requirements on
the PPSR database for various types of personal
a complex enforcement
and provisions
concerning the interaction between the PPSA and insolvency/bankruptcy
situations.
This high level of
technicality and detail has provided fertile ground for doctrinal publications
authored by legal practitioners,
elaborating on the operation of the legal
doctrine and commenting on the case law
developments.
Lawyers write
textbooks on the PPSA, publish articles and teach it in law schools.
Furthermore, practitioners also seem to be instrumental to the PPSA reform.
In 2015, after a 5-year statutory review of the PPSA,
Bruce Whittaker released
the ‘Whittaker Report’ offering more than 100 suggested amendments
to the existing legislative
Whittaker is one of Australia’s leading experts in finance law,
working as a partner in the banking and finance departments
at the law firm
The dramatic
significance of the PPSA in daily commercial practice and its technicalities
explains the inherent interest of practicing
lawyers in the exploration of the
PPSA’s doctrine.
Yet, the ensuing section challenges the application of the
‘uselessness’ thesis to the PPSA context. It considers the
three main points: (1) the dramatic role that legal academics played in the
successful reformistic efforts leading to the
introduction of the PPSA in
Australia in 2009; (2) an examination of the PPSA’s theory, demonstrating
that it does not necessarily
trigger an interdisciplinary inquiry, and (3)
consideration of the post-2009 PPSA experience, suggesting that legal academics
a dominant role in the PPSA’s teaching, writing and reformistic
efforts to improve the law.
IV CHALLENGING THE USELESSNESS THESIS
A Academics Stood Behind the 2009 PPSA Reform
Intriguingly, the Australian version of the PPSA was modelled on the related
legislative acts in the following Canadian provinces:
Saskatchewan, Alberta and
British Columbia.
Often referred
to as one of the principal figures in leading PPSA legislative projects in
Canada, Professor Ron Cuming of the University
of Saskatchewan had played the
key role in drafting the legislative acts in those Canadian
While the process of law reform in Australia leading to the introduction of
the PPSA in 2009 was a gradual
it was Professor
Cuming’s model of the PPSA which ultimately prevailed and was adopted in
Australia. Led by Professor David
Allan of Bond University, the reformistic
efforts led to the creation of a PPSA draft bill, known as the
Bond Bill 2002
Professor Allan was
further instrumental in promoting the PPSA reform, his efforts are attributed to
have inspired the release of
an options paper in 2006 by the Standing Committee
of Attorney’s-General to review the law on personal property securities
This was followed by
the eventual formation of the
Personal Property Securities Bill 2008
(Cth), and the PPSA in 2009.
Inspired by Professor Cuming’s vision and Professor Allan’s
instrumental efforts, the Australian PPSA in many ways epitomises
a product of
academic creation.
The dramatic role played by academics in the origination and facilitation of
the PPSA in Australia aligns with the broader notion
academics as agents of social change in society. Indeed, legal academics do not
just produce scholarly outputs
and teach students, but also lead societal change
by standing at the very forefront of the reformistic efforts across
The academics perceive their role as the best equipped to flesh
out the conceptual underpinnings of the legal doctrine, facilitate
an internal
coherency in law and address the above-mentioned acute challenges of
globalisation, technological innovation, sustainability,
and cross-border
commerce. Indeed, the lessons of the recent decades demonstrate the profound
impact of legal scholars on the development
of such areas as criminal
administrative
and the law of unjust
enrichment.
Academics lead
reforms in both common law and civil law
perspective, the academically led reforms of the PPSA is not an exception, but
rather follows the broader vision about
the critical public role of legal
academia in improving the law to meet the ever-evolving needs of society.
B The PPSA Theory is Still a Legal Theory
Lawyers and academics both have an interest in the law; however, their
approaches differ immensely. On the one hand, lawyers are concerned
practice and using the law as it stands, whereas legal academics are more
concerned with understanding the law, why it is the
way it is and how can it be
modified or improved considering the underlying normative underpinnings. It is
their position as academics
which gives them valuable insight and deep
understanding as to the theory behind the law. Academics look at society as a
whole, twisting
and analysing the multifaced dimensions of the legal
which strongly
supports the point about their irreplaceable nature in researching and teaching
As we have seen, the supporters of the ‘uselessness’ thesis have
referred to the centrality of the interdisciplinary perspectives
as something
that undermines the internal intelligibility of the law as an autonomous
discipline. Legal theory does not need to be
‘legal’. However, a
close look at the PPSA’s conceptual writings reveal the centrality of
legal perspective. Without
trying to discard the significance of an
interdisciplinary outlook, the dominant theoretical framework of the PPSA (and
related personal
property security legislative provisions across jurisdictions)
Thus, fundamentally, the structure and operational mechanics of the PPSA are
based on an agreement between a creditor and a debtor.
It is, for example, a
loan agreement which sets out the parties’ rights and duties according to
which the parties contractually
agree that in the case of a debtor’s
failure to repay the loan, a certain piece of the debtor’s personal
property can
be repossessed through a legal procedure initiated by the creditor.
Similarly, the contractual analysis dominates other types of
the above-mentioned
PPSA arrangements: hire-purchase, consignments and reservation of title
agreements.
The contractual structure of the theory of the PPSA informs the nature of the
legal analysis in light of the specific context of the
PPSA doctrine. This
context raises difficult questions about the limits (if any) of the
creditor-debtor autonomy to determine the
scope of their contractual
obligations. The PPSA’s contractual theoretical framework remains mindful
to the policy-based considerations
underpinning consumer transactions,
inequality of powers within the bilateral nexus of the parties, a fair risk
allocation and –
more generally – legal considerations concerning
legal certainty and internal coherency of the legal doctrine.
The proprietary dimensions of the PPSA theory are important as well. One of
the central aspects of this theory is the possible impact
that a given
creditor-debtor contract may have on third parties, such as other creditors of
the debtor or insolvency/bankruptcy proceedings.
The analysis closely follows
the observations of classical property law scholars about the inherent
difficulty that a separation
between ownership and possession may create for
third parties.
The fact that a
person has possession of a given piece of property may communicate an unclear
message to the external world indicating
that a person also has ownership of
that piece of property. However, possession does not always mean ownership. This
indeed explains
the PPSA’s operational dynamics insisting on the
registration of the creditor-debtor contract and the personal property item
serving as a security. The very act of registration underscores a central
insight of property law theory about the significance of
the external
manifestation of rights towards the external world. Stated in these terms, the
conceptual analysis of the PPSA does
not inherently embrace an interdisciplinary
outlook but remains faithful to the normative underpinnings of classical
contract and
property law doctrine – with proper modifications. This
suggests that
academics are also indispensable as a matter of the
PPSA’s theory.
C The Post-2009 PPSA Experience
The ‘uselessness’ thesis could be further challenged through an
examination of the reality of the PPSA in Australia after
the introduction of
the Act in 2009. As we will see below, a close assessment of the post-2009 PPSA
experience demonstrates the critical
academics in the
PPSA’s scholarly writings, reform considerations and teaching.
1 PPSA Publications
Indeed, as we have seen, legal practitioners publish widely on the PPSA and
related topics. That said, the leading PPSA textbook in
Australia was authored
by two legal academics.
comparison between this textbook and an alternative PPSA textbook authored by
practicing lawyers,
significant difference between two approaches to scholarly publishing. Thus, the
textbook authored by the practitioners
provides a comprehensive guide and
commentary to the PPSA’s specific provisions. It constitutes a handy
practitioner’s
manual and guide, often adopting a problem-solving approach
to a wide range of issues expected to be confronted by a practicing lawyer
daily legal practice.
In contrast, the academically led textbook frequently examines the
PPSA’s provisions in light of the underlying goals, principles
considerations and provides an illuminative comparative outlook of the related
legislative personal security acts in other
This comparative
approach is not surprising in light of the abovementioned modelling of the
Australian PPSA on the PPSAs of several
Canadian provinces. The academics are
far more concerned with the conceptual analysis of the underlying values of the
PPSA and the
internal coherency of the Act. The academic rigour of the textbook
often sheds light on the deficiencies of the existing law, twisting
sophisticating the legal doctrine through a consideration of a wide range of
hypothetical scenarios.
A similar trajectory could be witnessed through an examination of the
contemporary heated debate about the nature and scope of the
abovementioned
‘substance’ test set out in section 12 of the PPSA. Due to the fact
that section 12 serves as a ‘gateway’
for the application of the
PPSA, the debate bears tremendous practical
significance.
A review of the
publications on this point suggests that the debate largely follows the contours
of classical contract and property
law ideas. This ‘section 12’
debate tackles such themes as the limits of the parties’ contractual
autonomy, legal
certainty, manifestation of proprietary rights, internal
coherency of legislative acts, their relation to other pieces of legislation
consumer protection
considerations.
The publications
on this point demonstrate a plausible cooperation and partnership between
academics and practitioners as several
of the pieces with respect to the nature
and scope of section 12 have been jointly co-authored by academics and
practitioners.
The last point is important. Teaching and researching law necessitate the
writings of legal academics. While a partnership between
academics and lawyers
could benefit both worlds, a sole reliance on practitioners is clearly
undesirable – what is indeed evidenced
in the examination of the post-2009
PPSA record of publications.
2 The Current PPSA Reform Consideration
The centrality of legal academics is also evidenced through an examination of
the current PPSA Law Reform Consultation process initiated
by the Australian
Government.
The above-mentioned
Whittaker Report has not been implemented, what led to the current call for
submissions to make concrete proposals
on the way to improve the current 2009
PPSA legislative framework.
academics and lawyers alike made submissions expressing their opinions and
perspectives with respect to that call for submissions.
A review of the submissions once again illustrates a significant gap between
the two approaches. Submissions made by practicing lawyers
tend to focus on
technical details, aiming to clarify the language of the existing
Based on the post-2009 case
law, these submissions generally follow a client-based
perspective,
aiming to provide
clear-cut solutions to the pressing issues and problems that have emerged in
practice since the 2009
legislation.
In contrast, the submissions made by academics provide a broader outlook of
the suggested amendments in light of the underlying rationales
of the Act,
considerations of legal coherency and public
Frequently, academics
have expressed concerns related to the shortcomings of the existing PPSA
legislation in light of the comparative
lessons and scholarly debates in other
The significant
difference between the two types of law reform submissions underscores once
again the critical role of legal academics
as agents of social change. While
practitioners without a doubt bring an important practical perspective to law
reform considerations,
the post-2009 lessons show that legal academia continues
to lead the reformistic efforts.
3 PPSA in Law Schools
Finally, there is a question of a fact about the identity of the individuals
who have been teaching PPSA in Australian Law Schools.
‘uselessness’ thesis is correct, one would expect witnessing a
prevailing role of legal practitioners in teaching
this highly complex,
technical and yet practically important subject. However, an examination of the
PPSA lessons in the leading
the Group of Eight (Go8) Australian universities
below indicates otherwise.
PPSA is taught by an
at the following institutions:
• University of Sydney,
• University of Melbourne,
• University of Queensland,
• University of Western Australia,
• University of Adelaide,
PPSA is taught by a
Practicing Lawyer
at the following
institutions:
• Monash University,
• Australian National University,
• UNSW Sydney,
The findings reveal the centrality of academics in teaching the PPSA. Indeed,
lawyers are ordinarily more concerned with their practice
and clients, which may
explain some shortsightedness towards the considerations of policy and theory in
teaching the PPSA. In contrast,
legal academics are versed in theory,
comparative outlook and the broad vision about the critical role of law in our
societal fabric.
Alongside the practical aspects of the legal doctrine, as
future leaders of the legal community law students must gain a deep appreciation
of the law, understand why it is shaped the way it is and distil its problematic
aspects within the broader public context. This
suggests that legal academics
could not be easily discarded from the teaching of the PPSA in Australia.
V CONCLUSION
The PPSA is a fascinating subject. Intellectually intricating, impossibly and
practically complex, it bears tremendous significance
for the daily lives of
Australians. It has also served as an excellent litmus test for the provocative
‘uselessness’
thesis. Despite the initial appeal of this thesis, the
findings of this article say otherwise. As it has been argued, these were
academics who initiated and carried through the 2009 reform, embracing their
role in society as agents of change. Furthermore,
as we have seen, the
conceptual nature of the PPSA seems to be grounded in legal underpinnings which
rebut a central claim of the
‘uselessness’ thesis supporters.
Finally, it has been argued that the post-2009 reform PPSA experience further
the centrality of legal academics in this area law – they
dominate the PPSA teachings, lead reformistic efforts and enrich
the community
with PPSA writings. As far as the examination of the PPSA goes, legal academics
are irreplaceable and should stay around.
The ‘uselessness’ thesis
should seek its support elsewhere.
* Harrison Clarke is a BPhil (Hons) candidate at The University of Western
Australia. Sagi Peari is an Associate Professor in Private
and Commercial Law
and Deputy Head of School (Students) at the UWA Law School, The University of
Western Australia. The authors are
thankful for the participants of the Western
Australian Teachers of Law Conference in August 2024 for their helpful comments
suggestions.
Mathias M Siems, ‘A World Without Law Professors’ in
Mark Van Hoecke (ed),
Methodologies of Legal Research: Which Kind of Method
for What Kind of Discipline
(Hart Publishing, 2013) 71.
See, eg, Richard Posner,
Divergent Paths: The Academy and the Judiciary
(Harvard University Press,
2016) 3–4; Andrew Burrows, ‘Judges and Academics, and the Endless
Road to Unattainable Perfection’
The Lionel Cohen Lecture
Siems (n 1) 81. See also
Geoffrey Samuel, ‘What is the Role of a Legal Academic? A Response to Lord
Burrows (2022) 3(2)
Amicus Curiae
See, eg, Ernest Weinrib,
Idea of Private Law
(Harvard University Press 1995) 8.
See, eg, Sagi Peari,
Foundation of Choice of Law: Choice & Equality
(Oxford University Press)
Harry T Edwards,
Growing Disjunction Between Legal Education and the Legal Profession
Michigan Law Review
Ernest J Weinrib, ‘Can
Law Survive Legal Education’
(2007) 60(2)
Vanderbilt Law Review
, 405. See also, Oliver Wendell Holmes, ‘The Path of the Law’
Harvard Law Review
in David Kennedy and William W Fisher
The Canon of American Legal Thought
University Press, 2018) 19; Mary Keyes and Graeme Orr, ‘Giving Theory
“a Life”: First Year Student Conceptions
of Legal Theory’
[1996] LegEdRev 2
(1996) 7(1)
Legal Education Review
See eg Brian H Bix,
‘Law as an Autonomous Discipline’ in Mark Tushnet and Peter Cane
The Oxford Handbook of Legal Studies
(Oxford University Press,
Siems (n 1) 77.
Personal Property
Securities Act 2009
For further discussion of these issues, see Richard Winter and Sagi Peari,
‘PPSA and You: A Short Guide to the
Personal Property Securities Act 2009
for the Perplexed’ (2022) 49(2)
https://www.ppsr.gov.au/>.
Gold Valley Iron
v Ops Screening and Crushing Equipment
[2002] WASCA 134
Power Rental v
Forge Group Power
[2017] NSWCA 8.
<https://www.afsa.gov.au/about-us/statistics/ppsr-quarterly-statistics>.
PPSA (n 14) ch 5.
See, eg, Linda Widdup,
‘Function, Form, Fixed, Floating and Forge: Filtering Out Pre-PPSA
Concepts in a Post-PPSA World
(2019) 47(6)
Australian Business Law
; Matthew Broderick, ‘PPSA and Construction Law’
(2013) 29(4)
Building and Construction Law Journal
Bruce Whittaker,
Personal Property Securities Act 2009
(Final Report, February 2015).
See also Law Council of Australia,
Review of the Personal Property Securities
(Report, December 2023).
University of Melbourne Law
Bruce Whittaker
(Web Page) <
https://law.unimelb.edu.au/about/staff/bruce-whittaker
Anthony Duggan, ‘The
Australian PPSA from a Canadian Perspective: Some Comparative Reflections’
[2014] MonashULawRw 6
(2014) 40(1)
Monash University Law Review
Roderick J Wood and Ron C C
Handbook on the Saskatchewan Personal Property Security Act
of Commission of Saskatchewan, August 1987); University of Saskatchewan,
(Web Page) <
https://law.usask.ca/people/emeriti/ron-cc-cuming.php
See, eg, Law Council of
Report on Fair Consumer Credit Laws
David E Allan,
‘Uniform Personal Property Security Legislation for Australia -
Introduction to the Workshop on Personal Property
Security Law Reform’
(2002) 14(1)
Bond Law Review
25. For background of Bond Bill, see
Bond Law Review’s
special issue on ‘Proceedings of a Workshop
on Personal Property Security’ (2002) 14(1).
Craig Wappett et al,
Review of the Law on Personal Property Securities: An International
Comparison of Personal Property Securities Legislation
(July 2006).
See, eg, Anthony J Duggan
and Jacob S Ziegal,
Secured Transactions in Personal Property: Cases, Text
and Materials
(Emond Publishing, 5
William Twining et al,
‘The Role of Academics in the Legal System’ in Mark Tushnet and
Peter Cane (eds),
The Oxford Handbook of Legal Studies
(Oxford University
Press, 2005) 927.
Warren Swain, ‘Unjust
Enrichment and the Role of Legal History in England and Australia’
[2013] UNSWLawJl 41
University of New South Wales Law Journal
See, eg, Sagi Peari,
‘Academics and Legal Change: Birks, Savigny, and the Law of Unjust
Enrichment’ in Warren Swain and
Sagi Peari (eds),
Rethinking Unjust
Enrichment: History, Sociology, Doctrine and Theory
(Oxford University
Press, 2023).
Thus, for example, Twining
et al (n 32) 936 commented on the role of legal academics in civil countries as
exerting ‘enormous
influence on the law-making process, be it statutory or
Bryan Horrigan,
‘Australian Legal Principles in Practice: Taking Reasoning and Research
[1993] QUTLawJl 10
Queensland University of Technology Law
The ensuing three paragraphs
are based on the following sources: Grant Gilmore,
Security Interests in
Personal Property
(Little Brown, 1965); Clayton Bangsund, ‘PPSL
Values’ (2015) 57(2)
Canadian Business Law Journal
184; Ron Cuming
The Ontario Personal Property Security Act: Commentary and Analysis
ed, LexisNexis Canada, 2020); Alan Schwartz,
‘Security Interests and Bankruptcy Priorities: A Review of Current
(1981) 10(1)
Journal of Legal Studies
Friedrich Carl von Savigny,
Von Savigny’s Treatise on Possession
(1848) (E Perry trans,
Anthony Duggan and David
Australian Personal Property Securities Law
(LexisNexis
Butterworths, 2
Nicholas Mirzai and
Christopher Anthanassios,
PPS in Practice A Practitioner’s Guide to the
Personal Property Securities Act 2009
(Thomson Reuters, 2018).
Ibid xi–xii.
See generally Duggan and
Brown (n 39).
See, eg, ibid 1–3
[1.2]–[1.6].
See, eg, Craig Wappett and
Anthony Duggan, ‘Rights in Collateral Under the PPSA: Rebutting the
Minimalist Approach
(2019) 30(3)
Journal of Banking & Finance Law
; Diccon Loxton, Sheelagh McCracken and Andrew
Boxall, ‘PPSA Models: a Minimalist Approach’
(2018) 32(1)
Commercial Law Quarterly
See, eg, Wappett and Duggan
See, eg, Loxton, McCracken
and Boxall (n 44).
Attorney-General’s
Department,
Public Consultation on the Government’s Response to the
Statutory Review of the Personal Property Securities Act 2009
<https://consultations.ag.gov.au/legal-system/government-response-to-pps-review/consultation/published_select_respondent>.
See, eg, Nicholas Mirzai,
Submission to the Attorney-General’s Department,
Public Consultation on
the Government’s Response to the Statutory Review of the Personal Property
Securities Act 2009
(16 November 2023) [16].
Ibid [2], [9].
See, eg, John Bennett,
Submission to the Attorney-General’s Department,
Public Consultation on
the Government’s Response to the Statutory Review of the Personal Property
Securities Act 2009
(2023) [8].
See, eg, Sheelagh McCracken,
Submission to the Attorney-General’s Department,
Public Consultation on
the Government’s Response to the Statutory Review of the Personal Property
Securities Act 2009
(8 December 2023) 7–9.
See, eg, Anthony Duggan,
Submission to the Attorney-General’s Department,
Public Consultation on
the Government’s Response to the Statutory Review of the Personal Property
Securities Act 2009
(2023) [10].
The University of Sydney,
LAWS6956: Personal Property Securities
(Web Page, 17 Feb 2024) <
https://www.sydney.edu.au/units/LAWS6956/2024-S1CRB-BM-CC
The University of Melbourne,
Personal Property Securities Law (LAWS90101)
(Web Page) <
https://handbook.unimelb.edu.au/2017/subjects/laws90101
The University of
Queensland,
Foundations of Property Law (LAWS2706)
<https://course-profiles.uq.edu.au/course-profiles/LAWS2706-20234-7520#course-overview>.
The University of Western
Commercial Law [LAWS2207]
<https://handbooks.uwa.edu.au/unitdetails?code=LAWS2207>.
The University of Adelaide,
LAW7153 – Personal Property Security Law
<https://www.adelaide.edu.au/course-outlines/106018/1/winter/2019/>.
Monash University,
LAW5399 - Personal Property Securities
(Web Page, 2020)
<https://handbook.monash.edu/2020/units/LAW5399>.
Australian National
University,
Commercial Law
(Web Page, 2024)
https://programsandcourses.anu.edu.au/2024/course/LAWS8140
UNSW Sydney,
Commercial Law – 2024
(Web Page, 11 September 2024) <
https://www.unsw.edu.au/course-outlines/course-outline#year=2024&term=Term%203&deliveryMode=In%20Person&deliveryFormat=Standard&teachingPeriod=T3&deliveryLocation=Kensington&courseCode=LAWS3018&activityGroupId=1
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (116 KB)
PDF format (534 KB)
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter