URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/journals/MelbULawRw/2024/9.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 15:18:03
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Meagher, Dan; Emerton, Patrick; Groves, Matthew --- "The Principle of Legality and Secondary Legislation: The Role of Proportionality" [2024] MelbULawRw 9; (2024) 47(2) Melbourne University Law Review 429
THE PRINCIPLE OF LEGALITY AND SECONDARY LEGISLATION: THE ROLE OF PROPORTIONALITY
II The Principle of Legality and Necessary Implication
A The Principle of Legality’s Application to Secondary Legislation
B The Test for a Necessary Implication That Rights May Be Infringed
C The ‘Variable Intensity’ of Legality
III Proportionality and the Ordinary Test for Validity of Secondary Legislation
IV Fundamental Rights and Secondary Legislation
A Structured Proportionality in the Principle of Legality: Preliminary Considerations
B The Validity of Secondary Legislation and Proportionality
C An Australian Example
D The Intensity of Legality and the Strictness of Proportionality
1 Fundamentality
2 Parliamentary Scrutiny and Control
V Conclusion
THE PRINCIPLE OF LEGALITY AND SECONDARY LEGISLATION:
THE ROLE OF PROPORTIONALITY
Dan Meagher,
† and Matthew
The principle of legality operates to protect fundamental rights by requiring
express words or necessary implication if legislation
is to remove or restrict
fundamental rights. The principle applies to secondary legislation but does so
principally through the interpretation
of the legislative power to make that
secondary legislation, rather than interpretation of the secondary legislation
itself. This
article examines this mode of application of the principle of
legality, with particular reference to courts’ use of proportionality
analysis to establish what degree of rights infringement broad and purposive
secondary lawmaking powers permit by way of necessary
implication. It sets out
an approach that is both normatively
attractive and able to explain
recent doctrinal
developments.
This article addresses a particular problem in
statutory interpretation and the related judicial task of determining the
of secondary legislation: how is such validity to be determined when a
statutory conferral of secondary lawmaking power, that is
expressed in broad and
purposive terms, has been
exercised so as to make secondary legislation that infringes fundamental
This is a topic of practical importance that also raises a matter of
theoretical importance in the law of statutory interpretation.
uncommon for secondary legislation to infringe rights to some
leading to its validity
being challenged on the ground that it goes beyond what the empowering
legislation has authorised. There is not yet a clear judicial
account of how
such challenges should be adjudicated. The reason for this, we argue, is because
of the interplay of two interpretive
considerations whose interaction has not
yet been fully understood: (i) the principle of legality, and in particular its
implication’ component; and (ii) the modern approach to
statutory interpretation, which makes context and purpose fundamental.
article explains how these two considerations interact in the particular context
of secondary lawmaking with which we are concerned,
and on that basis sets out a
systematic methodology for adjudicating these sorts of challenges to the
validity of secondary legislation.
Our account takes seriously the modern
approach to statutory interpretation, the rationale (and core concerns) of
legality, and the
centrality of secondary legislation to the
machinery of modern government.
Our account is extrapolated from judicial discussions of the issue: we
consider key Australian cases, as well as cases from the United
(‘UK’), that have considered the principle of legality, particularly
in its application to secondary lawmaking
powers. We also address Jason
Varuhas’s recent claim to have identified an ‘augmented’
principle of legality being
applied by English
ostensibly ‘introduces a proportionality dimension into the [principle],
with the effect that it is more difficult to
demonstrate legal authorisation for
rights-interferences’.
We argue that Varuhas has misconstrued the role of proportionality in this
context: as we argue, the role of proportionality reasoning
is to establish, in
the context of adjudication, the degree of rights
infringement by secondary legislation that is permitted when the secondary
lawmaking power is expressed in broad and purposive terms.
The article proceeds as follows. Part II details the relevant (and still
evolving) principles of legality and necessary implication.
Of particular
importance is the doctrinal and normative pressure exerted on both principles by
judicial willingness to take seriously the core tenet of the modern approach
to statutory interpretation in fundamental rights cases,
namely, that a statute
should be interpreted consistently with its purpose. Part III sets out the
established Australian law for
determining the validity of secondary legislation
when the principle of legality is not relevant, including the role of
proportionality
reasoning in this respect. With this legal context established,
Part IV sets out our account, including the distinct role played
proportionality reasoning in applying the principle of legality, and how this
relates both to the role identified in Part III,
and to constitutional
proportionality reasoning. Part V concludes.
II The Principle of Legality and Necessary
Implication
It is well-established at common law that
legislation may only infringe fundamental rights by express words or necessary
implication.
interpretive presumption, now known as the principle of legality, ‘is of
long standing and has been restated over many
years. It can be taken to be a
presumption of which those who draft legislation, regulations and by-laws are
The Principle of
Legality’s Application to Secondary Legislation
The principle of legality applies whether the legislation in question is
primary or secondary. This is an often overlooked aspect
R v Secretary of
State for the Home Department; Ex parte
’), which has not yet been fully
explored: while that case propounded a strict interpretive presumption that
is regularly applied by the courts to primary legislation,
the factual scenario
was the validity of secondary legislation which affects
fundamental
Hoffmann stated in his seminal speech, ‘[w]hat this case
decides is that the principle of legality applies to subordinate legislation
as much as to Acts of Parliament’.
However, the mode of application of the principle of legality is different in
the case of secondary legislation as it is mediated
through the primary
legislation that confers the secondary lawmaking power. Such a statutory power
does not authorise the infringement
of fundamental rights by way of secondary
legislation ‘unless the statute conferring the power makes it clear that
the intention of
Parliament’.
That is, it must be apparent from the empowering statute that such an exercise
of the secondary lawmaking power was
authorised.
the empowering statute does not authorise it, then the secondary legislation is
either invalid (as ultra vires the empowering
statute) or, if possible, will be
read down to protect the fundamental right
At the level of general principle, this relationship between secondary
legislation and fundamental rights is clear enough. Yet the
difficult issue of
method which often arises in this context is how judges are to ascertain whether
(or not) a secondary lawmaking
power expressed in broad and purposive terms
authorises the infringement of fundamental rights. In this context the doctrine
of necessary
implication plays an important, often decisive, role because, if a
secondary lawmaking power is conferred in broad and purposive
terms, then by
definition any capacity to authorise the infringement of fundamental rights must
arise by necessary implication.
manner in which such an implication is established (or rejected) in the relevant
case law remains largely obscure.
Furthermore, if such a necessary implication is established, there still
arises for judicial determination whether the fundamental
rights-infringing
secondary legislation falls within the scope of infringement that is authorised.
As we consider in Part IV, this
is an interpretive issue of some complexity,
particularly if the secondary lawmaking power is expressed in broad and
purposive terms
and hence the question of scope is itself a matter of necessary
implication.
The Test for a
Necessary Implication That Rights May Be Infringed
The contemporary renaissance of the principle of legality was underpinned by
a doctrinal account which left little interpretive scope
for the infringement of
fundamental rights by necessary implication. In
Coco v The Queen
’), the High Court stated that ‘courts should not
impute to the legislature an intention to interfere with fundamental
Such an intention must be clearly manifested by unmistakable and unambiguous
The Court did recognise ‘the possibility that the presumption against
statutory interference with fundamental rights may be
displaced by
implication’.
But the relevant test
to be applied ‘is a very stringent
[I]n some circumstances the presumption may be displaced by an implication if it
is necessary to prevent the statutory provisions
from becoming inoperative or
meaningless. However, it would be very rare for general words in a statute to be
rendered inoperative
or meaningless if no implication of interference with
fundamental rights were made, as general words will almost always be able to
given some operation, even if that operation is limited in
The interpretive
principle established in
said judges must construe
legislation compatibly with fundamental rights unless the statute makes clear
‘that the legislature has not only directed its
attention to the question
abrogation or curtailment of such basic rights, freedoms or immunities but
has also determined upon abrogation or curtailment of
As Deane and
Dawson JJ reiterated:
Obviously, the most satisfactory means of manifesting a legislative intent to
that effect is by express and specific words. There
can, however, be
circumstances where such a legislative intent is made unambiguously clear
notwithstanding the absence of express
words. One example of such circumstances
is where the
relevant legislative provisions would otherwise be rendered
either inoperative
nonsensical.
In England as
well, the courts have set out a strict test in the fundamental rights context,
establishing a very high threshold before
an implication to infringe fundamental
rights is considered ‘necessary’ in the relevant
v Lord Chancellor; Ex parte Witham
suggested that, in the case of secondary lawmaking powers, it may be
to establish such a necessary
implication.
But in cases decided soon
, the House of Lords seemed to recognise that a strict test
of necessary implication — that was difficult
though possible
satisfy — ought to be applied when fundamental rights are infringed by
secondary legislation.
Recent cases, however, suggest that a refinement of this common law doctrine
is underway in fundamental rights cases. In Australia,
two related developments
are of significance. The first concerns interpretive principle in general. The
High Court has (re)asserted
its commitment to the modern approach to statutory
interpretation.
That commitment was made in
the 2017 decision of
SZTAL v Minister for Immigration and Border Protection
’) where the Court explained the essence of the
approach in the following terms:
The starting point for the ascertainment of the meaning of a statutory provision
is the text of the statute whilst, at the same time,
regard is had to its
context and purpose. Context should be regarded at this first stage and not at
some later stage and it should
be regarded in its widest sense. This is not to
deny the importance of the natural and ordinary meaning of a word ... to the
of construction. Considerations of context and purpose simply recognise
that, understood in its statutory, historical or other context,
meaning of a word may be suggested, and so too, if its ordinary meaning is not
consistent with the statutory purpose,
that meaning must be
The second relates
to the application of this approach in order to fix the legal meaning of a
statute which, on its ordinary meaning,
implicates a fundamental right. The
modern approach, when taken seriously in fundamental rights cases, has exerted
pressure on the
strict conception of legality detailed in
stringent test of necessary implication.
a result, a more constrained and limited conception of legality has gained
traction in the High Court. The judgment of Gageler
and Keane JJ in
South Wales Crime Commission
’) has proven pivotal
in this regard.
It offered the following
of legality:
The principle of construction is fulfilled in accordance with its rationale
where the objects or terms or context of legislation
make plain that the
legislature has directed its attention to the question of the abrogation or
curtailment of the right, freedom
or immunity in question and has made a
legislative determination that the right, freedom or immunity is to be abrogated
or curtailed.
Its doctrinal
significance is to state that the
requirement for some manifestation or indication that the legislature has not
only directed its attention to the question of the
abrogation or curtailment
of such basic rights, freedoms or immunities but has also determined upon
abrogation or curtailment of
may be evidenced by
‘the objects or terms or context of
legislation’.
That was important in
the context of
, where the statutory modification to the fundamental
right engaged was established by necessary
implication.
On the minority view, that
implication was not available as ‘[i]t will not suffice that a
statute’s language and purpose
might permit of such a construction, given
what was said in
majority view, however, the intention to infringe fundamental rights may arise
by necessary implication if it becomes apparent
(upon considering a statutory
text in its wider context) that to do so is required to secure the
statute’s clear purpose(s).
implication is, then, established through the ordinary application of the modern
approach to statutory interpretation. It
need not be ‘necessary’,
for instance, ‘to prevent the statutory provisions from becoming
inoperative or
meaningless’.
A recent trio of cases —
Probuild Constructions (Aust) Pty Ltd v
Systems Pty Ltd
v Paterson Constructions Pty Ltd
’) (2019) and
Roy v O’Neill
’) (2020) — suggest
that the less stringent test of ‘necessary implication’ outlined in
has now gained traction in the High
as a consequence, tempered the strictness with which legality is applied to
determine the legal meaning of a statute that
implicates a fundamental right,
at least in certain contexts
. Recent decisions in the UK courts have also
qualified the strict test of necessary implication, driven similarly by the
that the modern approach to statutory interpretation exerts on those
interpretive presumptions (like legality) which have relied
on a strict test of
rebuttal for their strength, including a very strict test to establish that an
implication is ‘necessary’ in the relevant
The ‘Variable Intensity’ of
There is a core characteristic of legality which
remains doctrinally important even as the strictness of the test for necessary
implication
has abated. This characteristic is illustrated clearly and
frequently in the cases, and is especially
apparent in the context of secondary legislation said to infringe fundamental
rights by necessary implication. We call it the
variable intensity
an approach which seeks to calibrate the intensity with which legality is
applied to the importance of the fundamental right infringed and the extent
to which a statute does so. The core idea is that legality
flexibly and with greater force the more important the interest at issue and the
more directly the legislation to
be construed touches upon that
The interpretive upshot is
that ‘the greater the intrusion into a person’s rights the more
clarity of expression that
In the English case of
R v Secretary of State for the Home Department; Ex
parte Leech
’), Steyn LJ (for the Court) explained
how this approach operates in the secondary legislation context: ‘in
relation to
rule-making powers alleged to arise by necessary implication, it can
fairly be said that the more fundamental the right interfered
with, and the more
drastic the interference, the more difficult becomes the
implication’.
Similarly, in the recent case of
Kassam v Hazzard
’), the New South Wales Court of Appeal accepted that
legality could and should be applied with a variable level of intensity,
course of upholding unanimously the validity of several ministerial orders made
Public Health Act 2010
(NSW) to combat the Delta strain of the
COVID-19 virus.
Justice of Appeal Leeming observed crisply that ‘there are rights and
there are rights
Bell made clear the consequences of that suggestion when his Honour explained
that the ‘the principle of legality’s
insistence on clarity in a
statute which authorises the curtailing of rights will be correlative to and
vary with the strength or
fundamental nature of the right(s)
and thus required close
attention to whether rights were properly described as fundamental, as well as
the process for deciding
found that several of the ‘fundamental rights’ that the appellants
claimed were breached by the orders were
not in fact recognised at common law to
fundamental.
To vary the intensity with which legality is applied follows logically from
the application of the modern approach to determine the
legal meaning of a
statute which engages a fundamental right. It recognises the highly contextual
nature of fundamental rights cases,
including both that ‘some rights, freedoms and principles are more
“fundamental” than others, and [that] the extent
to which statutes
“infringe” them will vary
Furthermore it explains, as a doctrinal and normative matter, the following
account of legality recently
offered by Edelman J:
A more nuanced approach than one which is all-or-nothing might calibrate the
strength of the presumption to the unlikelihood of an
intention to impair the
particular right based on factors including the importance of the right within
the legal system and the extent
to which it is embedded in the fabric of the
legal system within which Parliament
legislates.
for example,
Plaintiff S157/2002 v Commonwealth
’) where the ordinary or asserted meaning of a statute sought to
seriously limit or remove the right to access the
A particularly strict application
of legality was the judicial response to safeguard, to the extent interpretively
possible, this
fundamental right.
take such an interpretive approach as they consider this right to be of
constitutional importance and inherent in the rule
In other words, the strict test of
rebuttal by necessary implication is still applied when this fundamental right
is implicated.
By way of contrast, the variable intensity of legality cuts the other way if
the right engaged lacks the same claim to fundamentality
in the relevant factual
and legal context. This may arise if the right engaged by a statute (eg payment
quantum meruit
lacks the same
historical, functional or institutional importance within the Australian system
of constitutional government as, for
example, the fundamental rights to fair
trial, liberty, natural justice or free
It may also arise if the right
asserted by a litigant (eg freedom
of speech, movement or religion) is a fundamental one, but it conflicts with
other important (sometimes pressing) rights and interests (eg privacy,
public health and order) which the relevant statute seeks to protect, hence
creating a need for balancing in determining the extent of permissible
rights infringement.
It is, arguably, normatively attractive to apply a less strict test to
establish the rebuttal of legality by necessary implication
That being so, the less strict
test of ‘necessary implication’ which has gained traction on the
High Court may offer
an appropriate, context-sensitive analytical framework to
determine the legal meaning of these kinds of statutes.
However, to vary the intensity of legality in this way in a manner that is
compatible with legality’s contemporary rationale
requires that
Parliament be given some guidance by the courts
as to how that intensity
will be calibrated.
This requires an
account of which rights are more fundamental than others (and why), and of how
courts determine the extent to which
a statute infringes a fundamental
These are, moreover, doctrinal
issues which are particularly apparent and pressing when a secondary lawmaking
power said to authorise
the infringement of fundamental rights by implication is
conferred in broad and purposive terms. We will consider these issues in
, where an account is offered as to how (and why) courts ought to determine
the validity of this species of secondary legislation.
Before doing so, however,
we briefly set out the well-established test for the validity of
secondary legislation in
circumstances where the principle of legality is not enlivened, and thereby
introduce the important topic of
proportionality
III Proportionality and
the Ordinary Test for Validity of Secondary Legislation
In ordinary cases of secondary legislation, in which there is no infringement
of fundamental rights and hence the principle of legality
is not enlivened, a
proportionality test is used to determine validity. As Andrew Edgar has noted,
‘[p]roportionality review
of delegated legislation has been accepted in
Australia since the
The ‘foundation of the modern
in this regard is the judgment of Dixon J in
Williams v Melbourne Corporation
’), where the relevant test was stated in the
following terms:
Notwithstanding that
there seemed a sufficient connection
between the subject of the power and that of the by-law, the true character of
the by-law may
then appear to be such that it could not reasonably have been
adopted as a means of attaining the ends of the power. In such a case
will be invalid, not because it is inexpedient or misguided, but because it is
not a real exercise of
test was endorsed by the High Court in
South Australia v
’) and more recently in
Attorney-General (SA) v
Adelaide City Corporation
Adelaide City
Corporation
the joint judgment of Wilson,
Dawson, Toohey and Gaudron JJ stated the test as
whether the regulation is capable of being considered to be reasonably
proportionate to the pursuit of the enabling purpose. ...
The same test, in
relation to a power limited to regulation, was expressed by Dixon J in
, as being, in substance, whether the regulation goes beyond any
restraint which could be reasonably adopted for the prescribed
The Dixonian test,
as French CJ noted in
Adelaide City Corporation
, was offered ‘in
the context of a purposive by-law making
That too was the relevant
Adelaide City
Corporation
In both cases, as a
consequence, the Court applied the test to determine whether secondary
legislation was lawfully made pursuant
to a purposive power conferred in broad
general terms.
As Hayne J observed in
Adelaide City Corporation
— endorsing an important point made by
Brennan J in
— ‘the problem is one of
characterisation’.
Brennan, in
, articulated the approach in the
following terms:
In deciding whether an impugned regulation is valid, the court has three steps
to take: it construes the terms in which the Parliament
has conferred the power
to make the regulation, it ascertains the scope and legal effect of the impugned
regulation and it determines
whether the regulation having that scope and legal
effect is within the ambit of the power. This approach is similar to the
approach adopted by a court in deciding whether a law enacted by the
Parliament of the Commonwealth is within the legislative powers
conferred by
Constitution
Adelaide City Corporation
, the common characterisation
issue was whether there existed a sufficient connection between the
impugned secondary legislation and the subject matter of the purposive
(lawmaking) power; and the Dixonian test of reasonable proportionality
to make that determination.
It is likewise
the case when characterising primary legislation which relies upon a purposive
head of Commonwealth legislative power
for its validity (such as the defence
power): the Court uses a test of
reasonable proportionality to determine whether a sufficient connection
exists between the statute and the subject matter of the
It is important to note that proportionality is not a singular standard of
scrutiny but a spectrum.
It provides a
framework and criterion to undertake justification analysis. The intensity of a
proportionality standard (and whether
it should be used at all) will vary
depending on the specific (constitutional, legal and factual) context in which
it may arise for
application.
the characterisation context for secondary legislation, the test of reasonable
proportionality sets a ‘high threshold’
invalidity.
, for example,
Wilson, Dawson, Toohey and Gaudron JJ stated: ‘It is not enough that the
court itself thinks the regulation inexpedient
or misguided. It must be so
lacking in reasonable proportionality as not to be a real exercise of the
Adelaide City
Corporation
, French CJ accepted that ‘[h]istorically, it can be
regarded as a development of the high threshold “unreasonableness”
test derived from the nineteenth century English
authorities’.
Contrast, by way of example, the implied constitutional freedom of political
communication. In this context a majority of the High
Court now uses structured
proportionality to determine whether a law which effectively burdens the implied
freedom is nevertheless
constitutionally justified as a reasonably appropriate
and adapted measure to achieve another legitimate
Relevantly, this test assesses
whether the law is justified as suitable, necessary and adequate in its balance
in the following senses:
— as having a rational connection to the purpose of the
— in the sense that there is no obvious and compelling
alternative, reasonably practicable means of achieving the same purpose
has a less restrictive effect on the freedom;
adequate in its balance
— a criterion requiring a value judgment,
consistently with the limits of the judicial function, describing the balance
the importance of the purpose served by the restrictive measure and the
extent of the restriction it imposes on the
Janina Boughey has observed, ‘[s]tructured proportionality involves a
significantly higher degree of judicial scrutiny of
executive law-making powers
than means/ends [ie characterisation] proportionality, in particular due to its
“necessity”
Adelaide City Corporation
, the impugned by-law was challenged
‘on both proportionality
ie to characterise whether
it was within the broad and purposive lawmaking power and
its compatibility with the implied freedom.
The latter (proportionality) inquiry, as noted, necessarily involves more
intensive judicial scrutiny.
argue that a stricter form of proportionality analysis is similarly required
when the claimed authority to infringe fundamental
rights by way of secondary
legislation is provided by a broad and purposive lawmaking power by necessary
implication, and we explain
how this application of proportionality reasoning is
found in French CJ’s judgment in
Adelaide City Corporation
an application of proportionality that is distinct both from the ordinary test
of validity of secondary legislation, and
from constitutional review, that to
date has not been clearly identified or correctly understood.
IV Fundamental Rights and
Secondary Legislation
Proportionality in the Principle of Legality: Preliminary
Considerations
As noted in the introduction, Jason Varuhas has recently suggested that
English courts have developed an ‘augmented’ conception
cases offered in support of this suggestion are
(Daly) v Secretary of State for the Home Department
R (UNISON) v Lord Chancellor
On this account, the ‘augmented variant introduces a proportionality
dimension ... with the effect that it is more difficult
to demonstrate legal
authorisation for
rights-interferences’.
As Lord Reed JSC put it in
, ‘[e]ven where a statutory power
authorises an intrusion upon the right of access to the courts, it is
interpreted as authorising
only such a degree of intrusion as is reasonably
necessary to fulfil the objective of the provision in
That proposition was
offered in the context of an order which significantly increased court fees and
seriously compromised court
access (for some) as a
consequence,
but as a doctrinal matter
— and for purposes of the ‘augmented’ principle — the
proposition seems to apply
to fundamental rights in general.
The clearest support for the ‘augmented’ principle in our view
comes from the judgment of Lord Bingham in
. There, in the context of
a search policy which implicated the rights of prisoners to access court, legal
advice and legal professional
Lord Bingham stated the following: ‘Such rights may be curtailed only by
clear and express words,
and then only
to the extent reasonably necessary
to meet the ends which justify the
curtailment.’
The italicised words
(our emphasis) suggest that,
fundamental rights infringement is
authorised by clear and express words, a proportionality analysis must still be
undertaken. It
requirement which must be satisfied to secure
the validity of the relevant secondary legislation — hence the augmented
conception of the principle.
In a recent decision of the Federal Court of Australia —
Cattle Co Pty Ltd v Minister for Agriculture
— Rares J applied a similarly ‘augmented’ principle. His
Honour rightly noted that the principle of legality applies
to secondary as well
as primary legislation.
As noted above, the
proposition which follows is that the secondary legislation may only infringe
fundamental rights if the relevant
lawmaking power provides that authority
expressly or by necessary implication.
Brett Cattle
, the secondary legislation burdened the common law right
‘to carry on business in one’s own way within the
The lawmaking power expressly
authorised the making of regulations that would seriously infringe if not
abrogate the fundamental
right implicated,
and a regulation was made which did precisely
Nevertheless, Rares J
applied structured proportionality reasoning to determine the validity of the
secondary legislation.
We reject the ‘augmented’ principle. Thus, we argue that it was
an error for Rares J to use structured proportionality
to determine the validity
impugned regulation in
Brett Cattle
. As the authority to infringe
fundamental rights was expressly provided by the statute at issue, the demand
imposed by the principle
of legality was
The only role for proportionality
reasoning was to determine whether the regulation satisfied the ‘high
threshold’ Dixonian
test of validity.
As discussed in the previous section, this is not
proportionality
reasoning, and has nothing to do with fundamental
rights or the principle of legality.
The account we offer in this Part suggests an alternative explanation of, and
justification for, the application of proportionality
analysis in the English
cases on which Varuhas relies, and in like statutory
These cases have a common (maybe
defining) characteristic: the validity of
secondary legislation
challenged on the basis that a broad and purposive lawmaking power did not
authorise the infringement of fundamental rights by
way of necessary
implication,
at least to the extent that the secondary legislation
purported to do
. Thus, and contrary to the approach of Rares J and the words
of Lord Bingham,
in cases where the express
words of the statute authorise rights-infringing secondary legislation,
proportionality has no role to
play beyond the characterisation analysis
discussed in
; and the incorporation of proportionality into the cases
with which we are concerned is
a super-added requirement
applied to make the infringement of fundamental rights more difficult
a court has concluded that the relevant statute authorises that
interference by clear and express words.
Rather, proportionality is the
methodological tool used to determine whether the infringement of the
fundamental right implicated
by the secondary legislation, and the extent of
that infringement, falls within the scope of infringement authorised by the
broad and purposive lawmaking power as a matter of necessary
implication
This use of
proportionality is therefore quite different from the role it has long played in
determining the validity of secondary
legislation, by way of characterisation
analysis as discussed above.
as an illustration. The fundamental right infringed was
‘unimpeded access to the
which, as Steyn LJ stated,
‘[e]ven in our unwritten constitution ... must rank as a constitutional
The infringement
occurred because the rule permitted prison authorities to open and read
prisoner correspondence including that which passed between a prisoner and
their legal adviser.
That being so, Steyn
LJ said ‘that at the heart of this case lies the question whether a
necessary implication wide enough
to validate [that] rule ... can be
established’.
It was accepted that
the lawmaking power
by necessary implication authorises some screening of correspondence passing
between a prisoner and solicitor. The authorised intrusion
must, however, be the
minimum necessary to ensure that the correspondence is in truth bona fide legal
correspondence.
held as a consequence that the rule was ‘ultra vires so far as it
purport[ed] to apply to correspondence between prisoners and their
legal advisers’.
Once the Court determined that the broad and purposive lawmaking power
authorised by necessary implication
interference with fundamental
the proportionality analysis was
applied to establish whether (or not)
interference occasioned could be justified, that is, to
answer ‘the question whether a necessary implication wide enough to
validate [the] rule [could] be
established’.
Importantly, the
Court used proportionality-style analysis, within the doctrinal vehicle of
necessary implication, to give a broad
and purposive lawmaking power a
construction (and therefore scope) which authorised a rule that struck an
appropriate balance between
the legitimate governance needs of the prison and
the fundamental right of prisoners to access
That is, the implication
authorised the infringement of fundamental rights
to the extent necessary
to facilitate the purpose(s) for which the lawmaking power was conferred.
It was in this regard, as noted above, that Steyn LJ observed that, ‘in
relation to rule-making powers alleged to arise by necessary
implication, it can
fairly be said that the more fundamental the right interfered with, and the more
drastic the interference, the
more difficult becomes the
implication’.
We explain how such
calibration of the intensity of legality fits into the proportionality framework
below; and in that discussion we also suggest that there may well
be a judicial disposition to apply legality more strictly in the
secondary legislation which is sourced in this kind of empowering
First, however, we explain more fully how and why courts undertake this form
of proportionality analysis to establish the scope of
a necessary implication to
infringe fundamental rights when such authority is conferred by a broad and
purposive lawmaking power.
After explaining our approach, we provide an
Australian example in
Part IV(C).
The Validity of
Secondary Legislation and Proportionality
The focus of our analysis, as noted, is secondary legislation that infringes
fundamental rights, where the putative authority to do
so — consistently
with the principle of legality — is conferred by a broad and purposive
lawmaking power by way of necessary
implication. On our account, the judicial
task undertaken in this context involves the following distinct (though related)
1 Interpretation Question: A court must determine the relevant scope of the
secondary lawmaking power, ie does it authorise the secondary
lawmaker to
infringe fundamental rights in some fashion or to some degree? The application
of the modern approach to statutory interpretation
may establish a necessary
implication to this effect even when the lawmaking power is conferred in broad
and purposive terms
, considering its subject matter and the relevant
governance context in which it was conferred, such a power is necessary in order
to facilitate its purpose(s). If upon its proper construction the power does
authorise by implication the infringement of fundamental
rights to ensure
fulfilment of the relevant statutory purpose(s), then legality is not only
enlivened but prima facie met.
Importantly, however, the scope of such implied authority is not at large: it
only authorises rights infringement
to the extent necessary
specific governance context to fulfil the purpose(s) for which the power was
conferred. The difficult issue which thus arises
is determining
. If the answer to the
interpretation
been provided only at a high level of abstraction, ie that there is an implied
authorisation to infringe fundamental rights to
the extent necessary to give
effect to the purpose(s) for which the lawmaking power was conferred, then this
cannot be settled at
this first stage of the inquiry, by the construction of the
terms of the lawmaking power alone. Determining the extent of authorised
infringement will require, necessarily in our view, an analytical tool to
perform a species of justification analysis.
2 Operation Question: Once a court has determined that the lawmaking power
impliedly authorises secondary legislation that infringes
fundamental rights, it
must then ascertain the operation of the impugned secondary legislation; and
specifically the extent to which
it infringes fundamental rights in order to
further the purpose(s) of the power.
3 Characterisation Questions: It then falls to determine whether the impugned
secondary legislation having that operation falls within
the ambit of the
lawmaking power conferred. We suggest that in the present context such an
inquiry ought to have two parts, based
on the proposition that ‘the
problem is one of
characterisation’.
3a Suitability Question: First, the court must apply the ‘high
Dixonian test to
determine whether the secondary legislation is ‘so lacking in reasonable
proportionality as not to be a real
exercise of the
J said a by-law will be invalid if ‘it could not reasonably have been
adopted as a means of attaining the ends of the
We note here the doctrinal
similarity of that inquiry with the first — suitability — limb of
structured proportionality:
whether the impugned secondary legislation has
‘a rational connection to the purpose of the
provision’.
3b Necessity Question: If the secondary legislation satisfies the Dixonian
the second and more intensive part
of the characterisation inquiry is then undertaken. This requires
determining whether the extent of the infringement occasioned by the
operation of the impugned secondary legislation is necessary
(and so justified)
in that specific governance context in order to facilitate the statutory
purpose(s) for which the power was conferred.
Only by considering in this way
the operation of the impugned secondary legislation can the court ascertain the
proper scope and
content of the necessary implication (established, but only in
the abstract, in response to Question 1), and thus answer the question
whether the extent of the secondary legislation’s fundamental rights
infringement falls within the authority of the lawmaking
We do not propose that proportionality is the only tool
that might be used to undertake this task, but some form of necessity-oriented
justification analysis seems to be required in this context. There are two
features of proportionality analysis that make it a particularly
appropriate
tool: (i) proportionality is a
well-developed technique; and (ii) there is a correlation between the
second — necessity — stage of a structured proportionality
analysis and the legality analysis that is required to characterise
secondary legislation as falling within or outside of the scope of a necessary
implication that fundamental rights may be
On our account, then, the important doctrinal point is that the analysis
undertaken in the second, necessity, part of the characterisation inquiry
involves more intensive judicial scrutiny of the impugned secondary
legislation than occurs under the Dixonian test of proportionality.
appropriate to determine whether secondary legislation which infringes
fundamental rights is valid pursuant to a broad and
purposive lawmaking power
that is said to
authorise the extent of that infringement by necessary implication. As noted,
what is necessary, and hence legally justified in this
regard, turns on the
specific governance context, the relevant statutory purpose(s) and,
significantly, the
importance of the fundamental right infringed. We explore in detail the issue
of fundamentality and the role it plays in our framework
An Australian
In Australian case law, the judgment of French CJ in
Adelaide City
Corporation
is broadly illustrative of our analysis of the use of
proportionality reasoning in applying the principle of legality to determine
validity of secondary legislation that infringes fundamental rights.
The impugned by-law in this case concerned the management of
required a council-issued permit before a person could ‘preach, canvass,
or ‘give out
or distribute to any bystander or passer-by any handbill, book, notice, or other
on any road.
The case was complex as the by-law was challenged on three distinct but
overlapping grounds: (i) as being beyond the power conferred
by the primary
legislation, when properly construed having regard to the principle of legality;
(ii) unreasonableness; and (iii)
the implied freedom of political
communication.
First, French CJ determined the scope of the broad and purposive lawmaking
power. The power conferred by the relevant statute provided
council may make by-laws ... generally for the good rule and government of the
area, and for the convenience, comfort
and safety of its
inhabitants’.
Chief Justice French
said that ‘[t]he common law freedom of expression ... through the
principle of legality ... may affect
the scope of discretionary powers which
involve the imposition of restrictions upon freedom of speech and
expression’,
and thus that
‘the construction of [the lawmaking power] is informed by the principle of
legality in its application to freedom
As Heydon J noted in
dissent, the relevant lawmaking power did not expressly authorise
the infringement of fundamental
The relevant test pursuant to
principle of legality, therefore, was one of necessary implication.
Chief Justice French noted that the impugned by-law ‘did not purport to
proscribe or regulate the content of any communication’
and then said,
the subject matter of [the impugned] By-law No 4 and the discretion which it
created to grant permissions to engage in the conduct
which it otherwise
proscribed, had to fall within the scope of matters of municipal concern or
‘accepted notions of local government’.
Control of the expression of
religious and political opinions per se is not within that subject matter.
According to the circumstances,
control sub modo may be within it. By-law No 4,
so understood, involved the least interference with freedom of expression that
language could bear. By parity of reasoning, the power conferred by s
667(1)(9)(XVI), construed in
accordance with the principle of legality in
its application to the common law freedom of expression, was sufficient to
support the
Chief Justice
French must therefore have determined that the very nature of the broad and
purposive lawmaking power in this local
government context
authorised, by necessary implication, at least
interference with
the fundamental right to free speech of persons (like the respondents) on
Adelaide roads. Relevantly, the lawmaking
power authorised the least
interference with freedom of speech
to ensure the convenience,
comfort and safety of inhabitants to use roads in the local government area.
This is the (abstract)
answer to Question 1.
As we have set out above, French CJ commenced the legality reasoning as part
of the first (interpretation) question. But in order
to determine the extent of
the free speech infringement, which the lawmaking power authorised by necessary
implication when construed
in accordance with the principle of
legality, French CJ went on to identify what was
local government context to fulfil the purpose(s) for which the power was
conferred: his Honour held that the operation of
the impugned by-law was within
the lawmaking power if used to control only the mode and circumstances of the
relevant speech, but
not its content.
The validity of the by-law as applied required content neutrality: that involved
‘the least interference with freedom of expression
that its language could
bear’, which ensured the by-law’s operation fell ‘within the
scope of matters of municipal
concern or “accepted notions of local
government”’.
This is a form
of justification analysis that involves more
intensive judicial scrutiny of the impugned by-law than the ‘high
Dixonian test.
It highlights also why the proper scope of a broad and purposive lawmaking
power in this fundamental rights context cannot be determined
by construction of
its terms alone, and is appropriately undertaken at the final (necessity) stage
of the characterisation inquiry
— in French CJ’s case ‘by
parity of reasoning’.
Ascertaining
the power’s scope, and specifically to what
it authorises
the infringement of fundamental rights, requires consideration of the secondary
legislations’ operation including
the extent to which it infringes
fundamental rights (Question 2); this enables answering the ultimate
characterisation question,
namely whether the impugned secondary legislation
having that operation falls within the scope of the lawmaking power which
authorises,
by implication, infringement of fundamental rights to the extent
necessary to fulfil its purpose(s) in the relevant governance context
3b). That said, the precise sequence in which the analysis is done — so
long as it is done — should make no
difference to the ultimate conclusion
regarding the validity of the
impugned secondary legislation.
Having resolved the legality issue, French CJ then turned to the issue of
unreasonableness. This was the inquiry undertaken to answer the first
characterisation question; whether the impugned by-law met the
proportionality
test of not going ‘beyond any restraint which could be reasonably adopted
for the prescribed purpose’.
the two relevant paras of the impugned by-law ‘have a rational connection
to the statutory purpose’ of the lawmaking
They were not, on their face, capricious or oppressive. Nor did they represent a
gratuitous interference with the rights of those
affected by them. They provided
a mechanism for protecting members of the public from gratuitous interference
with their freedom
to choose whether and, if so, when and where they would be
the subject of proselytising communications. They were directed to modes
places of communication, rather than
consequence, French CJ concluded that the by-law was ‘not invalid on
account of unreasonableness’.
That his Honour did so was unsurprising: a by-law which survives the more
intensive justification analysis, which in our view is
required by legality
(outlined above) will, necessarily, meet the ‘high threshold’
Dixonian test of proportionality.
Finally, French CJ assessed the compatibility of the impugned by-law
with the implied freedom. That too was an inquiry which required the
application of a ‘proportionality
criterion’.
It was done so to
determine whether the by-law — which ‘effectively burden[ed]
communications about political
‘nevertheless reasonably appropriate and adapted to serve a legitimate end
in a manner which is compatible with
the maintenance of the constitutionally
prescribed system of representative and responsible
government’.
His Honour held
that for the same reasons that the
by-law met ‘the high threshold proportionality test’, it
‘also satisf[ied] the
proportionality test applicable to laws which burden the implied freedom of
political communication’.
Comparing French CJ’s judgment to our analytical framework, we make two
further observations. First, French CJ was cautious
evaluation of whether ‘alternative mode[s] of
regulation’
might be available as
part of the ‘high threshold’ reasonableness
But if a broad and purposive
lawmaking power authorises the infringement of fundamental rights by
implication, that authority extends
only to what is
its purpose(s) in the relevant governance context. It is therefore difficult to
see how that assessment can be made without
at least some consideration of
whether other regulatory alternatives exist which secure the law’s purpose
in a less rights-infringing
manner. To be sure, as French CJ observed, such an
inquiry may test the limits of judicial reasoning and expertise
‘particularly
where they may involve costs and the allocation of resources
upon which there may be competing
But note how a High Court
majority now frames the similar inquiry when undertaking structured
proportionality analysis in the context
of the implied freedom:
— in the sense that there is no obvious and
compelling alternative, reasonably practicable means of achieving the same
which has a less restrictive effect on the
As French CJ himself
Tajjour v New South Wales
(decided nearly two years after
Adelaide City Corporation
) and noted as part of the plurality judgment in
McCloy v New South Wales
The cautionary qualification that alternative means be ‘obvious and
compelling’ ensures that consideration of the alternatives
remains a tool
of analysis in
applying the required proportionality criterion. Courts must
not exceed their constitutional competence by substituting their own
legislative
judgments for those of
parliaments.
suggest that this level of judicial scrutiny — whilst more intensive than
the Dixonian test of proportionality — is
an appropriate and
context-sensitive analytical tool to determine whether impugned secondary
legislation is authorised by a broad
and purposive lawmaking power that
impliedly authorises
infringing fundamental rights.
Second, our framework is offered to determine the validity of secondary
legislation which infringes fundamental common law (not constitutional)
in the context when the relevant lawmaking power is broad and purposive, and
contains no express words authorising such infringement.
Adelaide City
Corporation
did involve the additional, constitutional ground of challenge.
As noted above, a High Court majority now undertakes a structured
proportionality analysis to determine this constitutional issue. So in cases
where the validity of secondary legislation is challenged
on the overlapping
grounds of legality
the implied freedom, the analytical framework we
offer could be
supplemented with this additional stage of (proportionality) analysis.
We note that the High Court’s use of structured proportionality in the
context of the implied freedom remains controversial
So too in England, where the
application of a stricter proportionality analysis in the
review of secondary legislation which infringes fundamental rights has been
criticised for operating ‘effectively as a surrogate
form of invasive
substantive review, while freeing the courts of the ordinary constraints that
apply to substantive review’.
acknowledge the strength of these criticisms in both
On the other hand, the broad
parallel we are suggesting between the review of legislation on constitutional
grounds, and the task
of determining the validity of secondary legislation in
circumstances where it infringes fundamental rights and is said to be authorised
to do so on the basis of a necessary
implication, is more than an abstract one. It makes clear that this sort of
proportionality analysis in the review of secondary legislation is not new,
at least in Australia.
Ultimately, however, our account in this Part is offered primarily by way of
doctrinal explanation: if upon application of the modern
approach to
interpretation a court determines that a lawmaking power conferred in broad and
purposive terms authorises the infringement
of fundamental rights by necessary
implication, it then requires an analytical tool to assess whether the secondary
legislation falls
within the scope of that
authority; and if that
scope extends to what is necessary —
but no more
fulfil the statutory
purpose(s) in the relevant (governance) context, then using a stricter
form of proportionality analysis in this context makes good doctrinal and
practical sense.
The Intensity of
Legality and the Strictness of Proportionality
This brings us (back) to the factors which, arguably, most inform how courts
will calibrate the intensity of legality. That in turn
conditions the strictness
of the justification analysis which is undertaken to determine the validity of
secondary legislation in
those cases where a broad and purposive lawmaking power
authorises, by implication, fundamental rights infringement to the
extent necessary to fulfil the relevant statutory purpose(s). The necessity
stage of characterisation (Question 3b) underpins Steyn
LJ’s proposition
that ‘the more fundamental the right interfered with,
and the more drastic the interference, the more difficult becomes the
implication’.
The more fundamental
the right, and the greater the degree of interference, the more difficult it
will be to show that the secondary
legislation nevertheless falls within the
implied authority to adopt measures that, while infringing fundamental rights,
are nevertheless
able to be considered
to fulfil the purpose(s)
for which the power was conferred.
This explains, for example, why in cases like
a stricter form of proportionality analysis was applied. In both cases, to
recall, the relevant lawmaking powers authorised, by necessary
implication,
interference with the fundamental right to access the
But in neither could the
elevated justification threshold be met as the right infringed was of
‘constitutional’
significance.
Relevantly, the extent of
the infringement went beyond what was necessary (and so impliedly authorised) to
fulfil the relevant statutory
purpose(s); and it would, moreover, be an especially rare case according
to Steyn LJ ‘in which it could be held that a statute authorised by
necessary implication the abolition [or] limitation of so fundamental a right
subordinate legislation’.
Fundamentality
As noted above, this approach requires an account of which rights are more
fundamental than others and why.
‘problem in this area is the difficulty (perhaps impossibility) of
devising any coherent or consistent methodology or
criteria for ranking
Even so, the courts must
provide Parliament with some guidance on the issue of fundamentality if legality
is to be applied in a manner
which is compatible with its contemporary
rationale. To do so is necessary in order for Parliament to ‘squarely
its legislative decisions on fundamental rights and
‘accept the political
There may be sources within a domestic legal order which provide useful
guidance on the issue of fundamentality. In particular, if
a right, freedom or
principle has a constitutional pedigree or status, then it is, arguably, more
‘fundamental’ than
others that do not. If so, this may calibrate to
a stricter form of legality — with the concomitant elevated threshold of
implication and a stricter proportionality analysis — on the
assumption that Parliament intends to legislate in conformity
constitution. In Australia, for example, there are fundamental rights which have
a big-C constitutional dimension. Examples
include liberty, court access, due
process and freedom of (political) speech and
association.
Important constitutional
values underpin these rights which might provide them with an elevated status
amongst the suite of fundamental
rights. It might explain, for example, why the
High Court has often applied legality strictly — as a technique of
— to secure the constitutional validity of a
Constitutional function and expertise may also play an important role here.
In particular, it might be justified to apply a stricter
form of legality to
those rights, freedoms and principles which fall within the heartland of
expertise and experience, and are essential to the proper exercise of
judicial power and to maintain the rule of law. There is, indeed,
an established
body of common law jurisprudence where a particularly strict application of
legality has protected these ‘judicial
rights’, such as natural
criminal due process such as the right to silence and the privilege against
self-incrimination,
and the right of
access to the courts.
A justification
based on proper respect for the separation of powers may be offered for such
an approach.
This is not to deny or ignore the element of (contested) judicial choice
involved in such domestic constitutional designations; or that doing so
‘precipitates further
But it is incumbent on
the courts to address the issue of fundamentality if the intensity of legality
is to be calibrated in a manner
which is normatively coherent and transparently
To do so by identifying those
rights, freedoms and principles within a domestic legal order with an
especial durability and weight (in the constitution, legislation, and
enduring common law) is, arguably, a process to which the common
piecemeal and historical method is
well-suited.
Moreover, if courts are
willing to vary the level of interpretive protection granted to rights according
to the degree to which rights
are fundamental, then rather than a variable level
of judicial scrutiny, this might be said to indicate a variable level of rights,
which may in turn
provide a foundation for incremental expansion of those rights regarded as
fundamental.
This is also well-suited
to common law judicial techniques.
Parliamentary Scrutiny
and Control
There may be a normative justification for courts to apply a stricter form of
secondary legislation infringes fundamental rights and
especially when that authority is provided by necessary implication. The risk
which Lord Hoffmann identified in his iconic statement
of ‘the full
implications’ of general words ‘pass[ing] unnoticed in the
particularly acute when a lawmaking power conferred in broad and purposive terms
is said to authorise fundamental rights
infringement by necessary implication,
because it arises in a two-fold manner: in the enactment of the power to make
secondary legislation;
and, in the subsequent making of that secondary
legislation.
This proposition is buttressed by the constitutional fact that
‘Parliament is the organ of government in which legislative power
vested and Parliament should not be held to have delegated to another repository
more power than is clearly denoted by the words
This is especially so as
the volume of secondary legislation promulgated continues to grow exponentially
along with its capacity
to infringe fundamental
It is a problematic development
which has been exacerbated by the rapid (secondary) legislative response to the
On the other hand, applying a strict test for necessary implication may
compromise those contexts where the exigencies and complexities
government require that secondary lawmaking power be conferred in broad and
purposive terms. With this in mind, the suggestion
of Leeming JA, that a
‘more nuanced’ approach should also take account of ‘the legal
and practical operation of
the [rights-infringing public health] orders
including their exceptions and
timeframe’,
can be developed in a
further direction: we suggest that the various possible requirements of
parliamentary involvement, including
whether there is a requirement for
parliamentary approval or a power of
disallowance, can perform a useful element of that analysis.
However, in such cases, the reasoning of Lord
would pose a difficult question
for the courts: if Parliament has not directly and clearly confronted the
possibility of legislative
restriction on a fundamental right (in the form of
express words allowing a regulation to that effect), does the possibility of
parliamentary
disallowance provide a sufficient equivalent? On its face, that
reasoning has a focus on the clear grant of power by Parliament,
rather than the
tacit permission that occurs when Parliament does not disallow secondary
legislation. Moreover, it might seem that
the constitutional and democratic
justification for both legality and secondary legislation works only if
Parliament effectively
monitors the manner in which that legislative power is
exercised through its processes of scrutiny and disallowance. In this context
fundamental rights are implicated, Parliament can only ‘squarely
confront’ and
accept clear political responsibility for what it directly considers and
It is not the role of the courts, however, to ensure that Parliament carries
out its political functions adequately. That is a matter
for Parliament itself,
ultimately for electoral determination. What the courts
is to have regard to the legal framework within which secondary legislation
including whether or not it is exempted from parliamentary disallowance and
other forms of scrutiny.
framework can, in turn, inform the understanding of what Parliament may be taken
to have permitted or intended by way
of necessary implication: in particular,
the greater the extent to which it has retained control over secondary
legislation (for
instance, by way of tabling requirements, disallowance
processes, regular renewals by responsible ministers, etc) the greater
infringement
of rights it may be taken to have permitted in the exercise of
broad and purposive lawmaking powers. Conversely, when such control
is weaker or
absent, the courts may consider a stricter form of
legality an appropriate response.
This further demonstrates why the application of a structured form of
proportionality analysis in these contexts makes good doctrinal
and practical
sense. It is an analytical framework which provides a (varying) scrutiny
capacity which is appropriately sensitive
to the importance (and extent) of the
fundamental right infringed, the purpose(s) of the lawmaking power conferred,
the relevant
context in which the secondary legislation falls to be applied, and
the degree of control Parliament retains over the exercise of
V Conclusion
We have set out an analytical framework that
seeks to explain and justify the role of proportionality in determining the
of secondary legislation, specifically when a broad and purposive
lawmaking power is said to authorise the infringement of fundamental
necessary implication. Our account is consistent with the direction of recent
High Court decisions in which a less stringent
approach has been taken to
necessary implication;
integrating the modern approach to statutory interpretation with the principle
of legality our account explains the important
role played by necessary
implication in this context. Our account also explains those cases which have
been mistakenly criticised
as applying an ‘augmented variant’ of
we have shown that what the
courts are actually doing in these cases is using a form of structured
proportionality analysis to determine
whether a challenged piece of secondary
legislation falls within the permissible extent of rights infringement that is
authorised,
by way of necessary implication, by a secondary lawmaking power
conferred in broad and general terms.
We have also explained how the use of proportionality analysis in this way
can take account of the inherent tensions that often arise
in secondary
legislation. On the one hand, the very nature of secondary legislation may seem
to tend against its use to remove or
restrict fundamental rights. On the other
hand, parliaments continue to enable the use of secondary legislation for this
and increasingly so. We have therefore argued for a calibrated approach
to the intensity of legality, and have shown how our account
appropriately tailored judicial scrutiny of secondary legislation that removes
or infringes fundamental rights. That possibility
was signalled in
, when Leeming JA suggested that greater nuance was required in the
interpretation of health orders that imposed significant restrictions
We have argued that this greater
nuance need not be limited to the text of the power to make secondary
legislation, but could also
extend to the legal framework surrounding the making
of secondary legislation, and in particular the provision for parliamentary
scrutiny and control. Judicial consideration of such matters would expand the
range of factors courts consider when determining the
validity of secondary
legislation, and if that allows courts to more fully consider the nature of
secondary legislation that affects
fundamental rights, it can only lead to
better calibrated decisions. This, surely, is right.
* Deakin Law School, Deakin University.
† Centre for Law as Protection, Deakin Law School, Deakin
University.
‡ Deakin Law School, Deakin University.
As the cases discussed in this article
illustrate.
See generally Jason NE Varuhas,
‘The Principle of Legality’ (2020) 79(3)
Cambridge Law
578. Varuhas first suggested the concept in Jason NE Varuhas,
‘Administrative Law and Rights in the UK House of Lords and Supreme
Court’ in Paul Daly (ed),
Apex Courts and the Common Law
(University of Toronto Press, 2019) 225, 252–3; JNE Varuhas,
‘Conceptualising the Principle(s) of Legality’
(2018) 29(3)
Public Law Review
, 199–200. See also Jason NE Varuhas,
‘The Principles of Legality in Aotearoa New Zealand’
(2024) 34(4)
Public Law Review
Varuhas, ‘The Principle of
Legality’ (n
) 592. Craig has
argued that such concerns overstate what are essentially normal requirements of
statutory interpretation which are
determine the scope of the relevant power: Paul Craig, ‘Judicial
Review, Methodology and
Reform’ [2022] (January)
Coco v The Queen
[1994] HCA 15
(1994) 179 CLR
, 437 (Mason CJ, Brennan, Gaudron and McHugh JJ), 446 (Deane and Dawson JJ)
R v Secretary of State for the Home Department;
Ex parte Simms
[1999] UKHL 33
[2000] 2 AC 115
, 131 (Lord Hoffmann)
R (Anufrijeva) v Secretary of State for the
[2003] UKHL 36
[2004] 1 AC 604
, 621 [27] (Lord Steyn);
Lee v New South
Wales Crime Commission
[2013] HCA 39
(2013) 251 CLR 196
, 202–3 [3], 217–18
[28]–[29] (French CJ), 249 [126]
(Crennan J), 264 [171]–[172] (Kiefel J), 309–11 [311]–[314]
(Gageler and Keane JJ) (‘
’). See also
[2004] HCA 37
(2004) 219 CLR 562
, 577 [19] (Gleeson CJ).
A-G (SA) v Adelaide City Corporation
(2013) 249 CLR 1
, 31 [42] (French CJ) (‘
Adelaide City
Corporation
) 120–1 (Lord Steyn).
R v Secretary of State for the Home
Department; Ex parte Pierson
[1997] UKHL 37
[1998] AC 539
, 575 (Lord Browne-Wilkinson)
) 130 (Lord Steyn, Lord Browne-Wilkinson
agreeing at 119), 132 (Lord Hoffmann), 144 (Lord Hobhouse), 144 (Lord Millett).
R v Lord Chancellor; Ex parte Witham
[1997] EWHC Admin 237
[1998] QB 575
(Laws J, Rose LJ agreeing at 586–7) (‘
’) where an
order prescribing court fees was held unlawful;
R (Daly) v Secretary of State
for the Home Department
[2001] UKHL 26
[2001] 2 AC 532
, 539–40 [10], 540–1
[12], 545 [21] (Lord Bingham, Lord Steyn agreeing at 546 [24], Lord Cooke
agreeing at 548 [29], Lord
Hutton agreeing at 549 [34], Lord Scott agreeing at
549 [36]) (‘
’) where a policy excluding prisoners from
their cells during searches, including those that might reveal legally
correspondence, was held unlawful;
R (UNISON) v Lord
[2020] AC 869
, 899–900 [78]–[79], 902 [86]–[87]
(Lord Reed JSC, Lord Neuberger PSC, Lords Mance, Kerr, Wilson and Hughes JJSC
agreeing, Baroness Hale DPSC agreeing at 910 [121])
’) where an order prescribing tribunal fees was held
This occurred in
) which involved a standing order that
required special permission before journalists could interview a prisoner: at
120–1 (Lord
Steyn). The House of Lords held that the policy applied to the
standing order, which precluded all interviews, was unlawful but the
orders were interpreted as not authorising an indiscriminate ban on such
interviews: at 130–1 (Lord Steyn, Lord Browne-Wilkinson
agreeing at 119),
Hoffmann), 144 (Lord Hobhouse), 144 (Lord Millett). The standing orders were
given a limited (and thus lawful) scope. See also
) which concerned policies governing the
regulations, which were
in turn guided by a policy manual that included
instructions enabling prisoners to be removed from their cells during a search:
536–7 [1]–[2] (Lord Bingham). This instruction enabled legally
privileged material to be located and read in the absence
of a prisoner. The
House of Lords held this possibility contravened the common law right of
prisoners to unimpeded access to the
courts: at 539–40 [10] (Lord Bingham,
Lord Steyn agreeing at 546 [24], Lord Cooke agreeing at
548 [29], Lord Hutton agreeing at 549 [34], Lord Scott agreeing at 549 [36]).
Their Lordships held that the relevant parts of the
policy manual were invalid,
but made no such order against the regulations allowing the search of
prisoners’ cells: at 545
[21] (Lord Bingham, Lord Steyn agreeing at 546
[24], Lord Cooke agreeing at 548 [29], Lord Hutton agreeing at 549 [34],
Lord Scott agreeing at 549 [36]).
Lord Hoffmann acknowledged that the
presumption his Lordship propounded prevailed ‘[i]n the absence of express
or necessary implication
) 131 (emphasis added).
) 437 (Mason CJ, Brennan, Gaudron and
McHugh JJ). The principle stated in
) has been repeatedly endorsed by the High
Court: see, eg,
Plaintiff S157/2002 v Commonwealth
[2003] HCA 2
(2003) 211 CLR 476
492 [30] (Gleeson CJ) (‘
Plaintiff S157
Electrolux Home
Products Pty Ltd v Australian Workers’ Union
[2004] HCA 40
(2004) 221 CLR 309
329 [20]–[21] (Gleeson CJ),
357 [118] (McHugh J), with Gleeson CJ’s endorsement itself being
endorsed in
Australian Crime Commission v Stoddart
[2011] HCA 47
(2011) 244 CLR 554
622 [182] (Crennan, Kiefel and Bell JJ);
Saeed v Minister for
Immigration and Citizenship
[2010] HCA 23
(2010) 241 CLR 252
, 271 [58] (French CJ, Gummow,
Hayne, Crennan and Kiefel JJ) (‘
CJ, Brennan, Gaudron and McHugh JJ).
UK courts have long cautioned that a
strict approach must be taken to the rights which merit protection under the
principle: see,
v Lord Chancellor; Ex parte Lightfoot
[1999] EWCA Civ 3025
, 609 (Laws J). Such arguments are developed at greater length in Philip
Sales, ‘Rights and
Fundamental Rights in English Law’
(2016) 75(1)
Cambridge Law
) 573–5 (Lord Browne-Wilkinson);
) 131 (Lord Hoffmann);
R (Morgan Grenfell & Co Ltd) v Special Commissioner of Income Tax
[2003] 1 AC 563
613–14 [36]–[39] (Lord Hoffmann, Lord Nicholls agreeing at 605
[1], Lord Hope agreeing at 614 [41], Lord Scott agreeing
at 617 [49]), 616
[45]–[46] (Lord Hobhouse, Lord Hope agreeing at 614 [41]).
The nature and history of this
interpretive approach is explained in Dan Meagher, ‘The
“Modern Approach” to Statutory Interpretation and the Principle
of Legality: An Issue of
Coherence?’
(2018) 46(3)
Federal Law Review
[2017] HCA 34
(2017) 262 CLR 362
, 368 [14] (Kiefel
CJ, Nettle and Gordon JJ) (‘
’). Justice Gageler made
similar remarks: at 375–7 [38]–[43].
See generally Dan Meagher, ‘On
the Wane? The Principle of Legality in the High Court of Australia’
Public Law Review
). It has been argued that ‘[t]he
appointments of Gageler and Keane JJ marked a critical juncture for the
principle of legality
under the French Court’: Bruce Chen, ‘The
French Court and the Principle of Legality’
[2018] UNSWLawJl 16
(2018) 41(2)
University of
New South Wales Law Journal
) 310 [314].
) 437 (Mason CJ, Brennan, Gaudron and
McHugh JJ).
) 310 [314] (Gageler and Keane JJ).
Ibid 202–4 [3]–[4] (French
Ibid 265 [173] (Kiefel J).
Ibid 218 [28]–[30] (French CJ),
249–50 [126] (Crennan J), 310 [314] (Gageler and Keane JJ). See also Chief
Bathurst, ‘Address to NSW Legislative Drafters on the Principle
of Legality’ (Speech, Sydney, 30 October 2018) 22–4
<https://supremecou​rt.nsw.gov.au/documents/Publications/Speeches/2018-Speeches/Bathurst_20181030.pdf>,
archived at <https://perma.cc/5EVZ-PUTY>.
) 436 (Mason CJ, Brennan, Gaudron and
McHugh JJ). Justices Deane and Dawson jointly made similar remarks: at 446.
Probuild Constructions (Aust)
Pty Ltd v Shade Systems Pty Ltd
(2018) 264 CLR 1
14–15 [34] (Kiefel CJ, Bell, Keane, Nettle and Gordon JJ), 40 [98],
41–3 [101]–[104]
(Edelman J) (‘
Mann v Paterson Constructions
[2019] HCA 32
(2019) 267 CLR 560
622–3 [158]–[159] (Nettle, Gordon and Edelman JJ, Gageler J
agreeing at 591 [58]) (‘
Roy v O’Neill
[2020] HCA 45
(2020) 272 CLR 291
, 327 [92] (Keane and Edelman JJ) (‘
Dan Meagher, ‘Fundamental Rights and Necessary Implication’
Federal Law Review
, 103–4, 114–19. The effect of
) in this respect
is also noted in Lisa Burton Crawford, ‘An Institutional Justification for
the Principle of Legality’
[2022] MelbULawRw 4
(2022) 45(2)
Melbourne University Law
R (Black) v Secretary of
State for Justice
[2017] UKSC 81
[2018] AC 215
, 231–2 [36]–[37] (Baroness Hale
PSC, Lord Mance DPSC, Lords Kerr, Hughes and Lloyd-Jones JJSC agreeing)
R (Dolan) v Secretary of State for Health and Social Care
[2020] EWCA Civ 1605
[2021] 1 WLR
2340–1 [66]–[71] (Lord Burnett CJ, King and Singh LJJ)
’). Both cases concerned necessary implications:
) dealt with
fundamental rights: at 2329 [1]; while the question in
) 222 [1] (Baroness Hale PSC, Lord Mance
DPSC, Lords Kerr, Hughes and
Lloyd-Jones JJSC agreeing) was very similar to that in
Bropho v Western
[1990] HCA 24
(1990) 171 CLR 1
, 14–16 (Mason CJ, Deane, Dawson, Toohey,
Gaudron and McHugh JJ). The modern approach to statutory interpretation is not
to Australia: see, eg,
A-G (Turks and
Caicos Islands) v Misick
[2020] UKPC 30
, [38] (Lords Hamblen and
Stephens, Lady Black,
Lords Lloyd-Jones and Briggs agreeing) (‘
This possibility has many counterparts
in public law. For example, it has long been accepted that the intensity of
judicial review
of administrative action is variable: Mark Aronson, Matthew
Groves and Greg Weeks,
Judicial Review of Administrative Action and
Government Liability
(Lawbook, 7
ed, 2022) 144–5 [3.40].
Justice Kenny endorsed that possibility when her Honour explained that
‘[w]hat may be termed
the width and depth of the judicial review that the
Court can undertake depends on the nature and subject matter of the challenged
exercise of executive power’:
Davis v Minister for Immigration,
Citizenship, Migrant Services and Multicultural Affairs
[2021] FCAFC 213
(2001) 288 FCR 23
Sir Philip Sales, ‘A Comparison
of the Principle of Legality and Section 3 of the
Human Rights Act 1998
(2009) 125 (October)
Law Quarterly Review
) 324 [83] (Keane and Edelman JJ). See
R (Privacy International) v Investigatory Powers Tribunal
[2019] UKSC 22
where Lord Sumption (Lord Reed DSPC agreeing) drew upon the principle of
) and explained that
‘[t]he degree of elaboration called for in a statutory provision designed
to achieve a given effect must
depend on how anomalous that effect would
) 577 [199], citing
) 131 (Lord Sumption).
[1993] EWCA Civ 12
[1994] QB 198
[2021] NSWCA 299
(2021) 106 NSWLR 520
[77]–[78] (Bell P, Meagher JA agreeing at 550 [138],
Leeming JA agreeing at 550–1 [139]), 557–8 [175] (Leeming JA,
Meagher JA agreeing at
550 [138]) (‘
Ibid 555 [166] (Meagher JA agreeing at
550 [138]) (emphasis added).
Ibid 542 [90] (Meagher JA agreeing at
550 [138], Leeming JA agreeing at 550–1 [139]).
Ibid 542 [91] (Meagher JA agreeing at
550 [138], Leeming JA agreeing at 550–1 [139]).
These were the right to earn a living,
the right to privacy and the right not to be discriminated against: ibid
544–5 [104]–[105],
[107], 546 [111]–[112] (Bell P, Meagher JA
agreeing at
550 [138], Leeming JA agreeing at 550–1 [139]), 555–6 [166]
(Leeming JA, Meagher JA agreeing at 550 [138]).
Lord Hodge has acknowledged
extra-curially that such an approach is routinely deployed in cases involving
fundamental rights: Patrick
S Hodge, ‘The Scope of Judicial Law-Making in
Constitutional Law and Public Law’
(2021) 26(2)
Judicial Review
, 162 [55]–[56].
Meagher, ‘Fundamental Rights and
Necessary Implication’ (n
‘In this context the concept and degree of a right’s fundamentality
is judicially assessed and determined’:
at 119 n 152. As then Spigelman CJ
observed extra-curially: ‘What is to be regarded as a “fundamental
right, freedom
or immunity” is informed by the history of the common
law’: James Spigelman,
Statutory Interpretation and Human Rights
(University of Queensland Press, 2008) 26. In
), for example, Lord Reed JSC
characterised the right to access the courts in the UK as
‘constitutional’ which, presumably,
is the highest level of
fundamentality: at 896 [66]
(Lord Reed JSC, Lord Neuberger PSC, Lords Mance, Kerr, Wilson and Hughes JJSC
agreeing, Baroness Hale DPSC agreeing at 910 [121]).
See also at 901–2
[84]. See generally Francis Cardell-Oliver, ‘Parliament, the Judiciary and
Fundamental Rights: The
Strength of the
Principle of Legality’
[2017] MelbULawRw 20
(2017) 41(1)
Melbourne University Law
Commissioner of
[2018] HCA 62
(2018) 265 CLR 434
, 467 [101]. Crawford (n
) argues that explaining this variability
of intensity demands new attention to the rationale for the principle of
legality: at 512–14.
The principal focus of this article is on analysing
this aspect of the doctrine and setting out its operation, not its underlying
justification.
Plaintiff S157
) 482 [3]–[4] (Gleeson CJ). It is
important to note that the expansive conception of Lord Reed JSC, which referred
to the ‘constitutional
right of access to justice’,
included access to the courts and tribunals:
) 896 [65]–[66] (Lord Reed JSC,
Lord Neuberger PSC, Lords Mance, Kerr, Wilson and Hughes JJSC agreeing,
Baroness Hale DPSC agreeing at 910 [121]).
Plaintiff S157
) 492–4 [30]–[38] (Gleeson
CJ), 505 [72] (Gaudron, McHugh, Gummow, Kirby and Hayne JJ), 520 [118] (Callinan
This right was explained as an
essential quality to the operation of the
Constitution
concepts upon which it was based:
Plaintiff S157
24_9.html#_Ref159858590">12) 491 [31] (Gleeson CJ),
513–14 [103]–[104] (Gaudron, McHugh, Gummow, Kirby and Hayne JJ).
) 896–902 [65]–[85]
(Lord Reed JSC, Lord Neuberger PSC, Lords Mance, Kerr, Wilson and Hughes JJSC
agreeing, Baroness Hale
DPSC agreeing at 910 [121]). In
) the dissenting decisions of
Lord Sumption and Lord Wilson JSC accepted that this requirement of the rule of
law was not absolute:
at 559–60 [172], 566–7 [182] (Lord Sumption,
Lord Reed DPSC agreeing), 589 [237]–[239], 592 [252]–[253] (Lord
Wilson JSC).
This was a central feature of the
legislation considered in
) 622–3 [158]–[160]
(Nettle, Gordon and Edelman JJ, Gageler J agreeing at 591 [58]), discussing
Domestic Building Contracts Act 1995
Justices Gageler and Keane have
jointly suggested that the principle ‘is not confined to ... rights,
freedoms or immunities
that are hard-edged, of long standing or recognised and
enforceable or otherwise protected at common law’ but also
‘extends to the protection of fundamental principles and systemic
[313]. The distinction here is not simply between the certainty of a settled
historical list of rights and the uncertainty of
further possible principles and
values. It is also about whether and how an interpretive approach to the notion
of a right being
‘fundamental’ can and should evolve: see below
discussion in
Part IV(D)(1).
A striking example is
R (Begum) v
Special Immigration Appeals Commission
[2021] UKSC 7
[2021] AC 765.
The central issue in
that case was whether the appellant could properly participate in an
appeal against a decision to strip her of UK citizenship: at 780 [13] (Lord
Lord Hodge DPSC, Lords Lloyd-Jones and Sales JJSC and Lady Black agreeing).
The Supreme Court of the UK rejected arguments that the
appeal should inevitably
be allowed because the appellant could not adequately participate in a hearing
while she could not enter
the UK to instruct her lawyers and attend any court:
at 801 [90]. While a hearing in such circumstances would be difficult, arguably
even unfair to the appellant, the Court held that the appellant’s right to
adequately participate in her appeal had to be balanced
with the imperatives of
national security which prompted the decision under appeal: at 801–3
In making this normative observation,
we do not commit to any particular legal rationale for it. For one argument, see
Crawford (n
An argument developed in detail in
Meagher, ‘Fundamental Rights and Necessary Implication’ (n
The solution of Gageler and Keane JJ
is to tether the principle to its ultimate rationale:
) 310 [313]. The limitation of
that approach is that it can simply invite new questions on the scope and force
of the principle, depending
on how one characterises the rationale.
Andrew Edgar, ‘Judicial Review
of Delegated Legislation: Why Favour Substantive Review over Procedural
Review?’ in John
Bell et al (eds),
Public Law Adjudication in Common
Law Systems: Process and Substance
(Hart Publishing, 2016) 189, 189. See
also Peter Bayne, ‘Reasonableness, Proportionality and Delegated
Legislation’
(1993) 67(6)
Australian Law Journal
A useful theoretical account is offered in Andrew Edgar and Kevin M Stack,
‘The Authority and Interpretation
of Regulations’
(2019) 82(6)
Modern Law Review
Those authors argue that the UK, United States
and Australian courts take an approach of ‘regulatory authority’
fosters a purposive interpretation that is guided by the purpose and text
of regulations and constrained by wider legal norms: at
South Australia v Tanner
[1989] HCA 3
166 CLR 161
, 175 (Brennan J) (‘
[1933] HCA 56
(1933) 49 CLR 142
) 165 (Wilson, Dawson, Toohey and Gaudron
JJ), 175 (Brennan J);
Adelaide City Corporation
) 37–8 [56], 40 [59] (French CJ), 57
[117] (Hayne J, Bell J agreeing at 90 [224]), 83 [199] (Crennan and Kiefel
) 165, discussing
) 156 (Dixon J).
Adelaide City Corporation
) 37–8 [56].
) 163–5 (Wilson, Dawson, Toohey and
Gaudron JJ); ibid 18–19 [10]–[11].
) 164–8 (Wilson, Dawson, Toohey and
Gaudron JJ);
Adelaide City Corporation
) 40 [60], 41–3
[64]–[66] (French CJ), 57–9 [117]–[123] (Hayne J).
Adelaide City Corporation
) 59 [122], discussing
) 178 (Brennan J). Here, Hayne J
relevantly noted that ‘Brennan J dissented from the orders made in
] but his Honour’s statement of applicable principles does
not differ in any material respect from those applied by the
) 173 (citations omitted).
) 155–6 (Dixon J); ibid 164–8
(Wilson, Dawson, Toohey and Gaudron JJ);
Adelaide City Corporation
) 42–3 [64]–[66] (French CJ),
57–9 [117]–[123] (Hayne J, Bell J agreeing at 90 [224]).
Thomas v Mowbray
[2007] HCA 33
(2007) 233 CLR 307
, 359–60 [135] (Gummow and Crennan JJ, Gleeson CJ
agreeing at 324 [6]).
Adelaide City Corporation
) 37 [55] (French CJ).
See Shipra Chordia,
Proportionality
in Australian Constitutional Law
(Federation Press, 2020) 200–2;
Adrienne Stone, ‘Proportionality and Its Alternatives’
(2020) 48(1)
Federal Law Review
Adelaide City Corporation
) 40 [59] (French CJ).
Adelaide City Corporation
See, most recently,
Transparency International Ltd v New South Wales
(2022) 403 ALR 1, 9 [29]
(Kiefel CJ and Keane J, Steward J agreeing at 64 [269], Gleeson J agreeing at 65
[271]), 59 [250] (Edelman
J, Steward J agreeing at 64 [269]).
McCloy v New South Wales
[2015] HCA 34
257 CLR 178
, 195 [2] (French CJ, Kiefel, Bell and Keane JJ) (emphasis in
original) (‘
Janina Boughey, ‘Brett Cattle:
New Limits on Delegated Law-Making Powers?’
(2020) 31(4)
Ibid, citing
Adelaide City
Corporation
) 15–16 [2]
(French CJ).
Adelaide City Corporation
) 37 [55], 42–5
[64]–[68] (French CJ), 57–9 [117]–[123], 61–4
[130]–[141] (Hayne J).
See ibid 44 [68] (French CJ).
See above n 2 and accompanying
Varuhas, ‘The Principle of
Legality’ (n
). Another case that could have been
included was
Pham v Secretary of State for the Home Department
[2015] UKSC 19
, where Lord Reed JSC formulated an approach in the terms that we have
adopted: at 1629–30 [118]–[119].
Varuhas, ‘The Principle of
Legality’ (n
) 900 [80] (Lord Reed JSC, Lord Neuberger
PSC, Lords Mance, Kerr, Wilson and Hughes JJSC agreeing, Baroness Hale DPSC
agreeing at
910 [121]).
Ibid 903–5 [90]–[98] (Lord
Reed JSC, Lord Neuberger PSC, Lords Mance, Kerr, Wilson and Hughes JJSC
agreeing, Baroness
Hale DPSC agreeing at 910 [121]).
) 537–8 [5] (Lord Bingham, Lord
Steyn agreeing at 546 [24], Lord Cooke agreeing at 548 [29], Lord Hutton
agreeing at 549 [34],
Lord Scott agreeing at 549 [36]).
Ibid 538 [5] (Lord Bingham, Lord Steyn
agreeing at 546 [24], Lord Cooke agreeing at 548 [29], Lord Hutton agreeing at
549 [34], Lord
Scott agreeing at 549 [36]) (emphasis added).
[2020] FCA 732
(2020) 274 FCR 337
Ibid 410 [293].
See above nn
and accompanying text.
Brett Cattle
) 409 [292] (Rares J).
‘The regulations may prohibit
the export of prescribed goods from Australia’:
Export Control Act
, quoted in ibid 344 [8].
The regulation prohibited the export
of livestock to the Republic of Indonesia for a period of six months from the
date of the order:
Export Control (Export of Live-Stock to the Republic of
Indonesia) Order 2011
(Cth) ss 2, 4(1), cited in
Brett Cattle
) 389 [204] (Rares J).
Brett Cattle
) 411 [300]. See also at 407–14
[285]–[310], 418–25 [327]–[363].
See Boughey (n
See Andrew Edgar, ‘Structured
Proportionality, Unreasonableness and Managing the Line
between Executive and Judicial Functions’
(2021) 32(3)
See above n
and accompanying text.
) 537–8 [5] (Lord Bingham, Lord
Steyn agreeing at 546 [24], Lord Cooke agreeing at 548 [29], Lord Hutton
agreeing at 549 [34],
Lord Scott agreeing at 549 [36]);
Brett Cattle
) 411 [300] (Rares J).
) has rightly cautioned that such
distinctions are vital in order to analyse cases by reference to the doctrine
employed within them,
as opposed to a simple analysis based upon the result of
cases: at 32–5.
) 214 (Steyn LJ for the Court).
We discuss in more detail the basis
for making this determination in Part IV(B) below.
) 212 (Steyn LJ for the Court).
Ibid 208–17.
Interestingly, Bayne (n
) noted in 1993 that ‘[w]hat is
clear is that where the delegated legislation entrenches on judicially
recognised rights and
freedoms, the recent cases suggest that the courts may be
more willing to find invalidity’: at 452.
Adelaide City Corporation
) 59 [122] (Hayne J), citing
) 178 (Brennan
Adelaide City Corporation
) 37 [56] (French CJ).
) 168 (Wilson, Dawson, Toohey and Gaudron
) 195 [2] (French CJ, Kiefel, Bell and
See above n
and accompanying text.
Adelaide City Corporation
) 15–16 [1]–[5] (French
CJ), discussing Chief Executive Officer of Adelaide City Council, ‘By-Law
Made under the
Local Government Act 1999
No 4 — Roads’ in South Australia,
The South Australian
Government Gazette
27 May 2004, 1384–5 (‘By-Law No 4’). By-Law No 4 (n
) was made under
s 246(1)(a)
Local Government Act 1999
By-Law No 4 (n
) para 2.3.
Ibid para 2.8.
Interestingly, in
[1984] HCA 50
(1984) 154 CLR 349
, the High Court held valid a similar City of
Adelaide by-law which prohibited the distribution of any material in a public
mall without
council permission: at 351, 360 (Gibbs CJ), 363 (Wilson J),
383–4 (Dawson J). But the Court did so
considering the
principle of legality-style argument that the by-law interfered with the
appellant’s common law rights to liberty
and freedom of speech: ‘In
the end, the question for the courts is simply whether the Council could
reasonably have formed
the opinion that the activity is likely to affect the use
or enjoyment of the Mall’: at 355 (Gibbs CJ, Wilson J agreeing at
See also Dan Meagher and Matthew Groves, ‘The Common Law Principle of
Legality and Secondary Legislation’
(2016) 39(2)
University of New
South Wales Law Journal
Adelaide City Corporation
) 15–16 [2], 30 [41], 34 [47],
43–4 [67] (French CJ).
Local Government Act 1934
s 667(1)(9)(XVI)
, quoted in
ibid 18–19 [10]. Note that the
Local Government Act 1934
(SA) was repealed by the
Local Government
(Accountability and
Governance) Amendment Act 2015
(SA) sch 1 pt 2.
Adelaide City Corporation
Ibid 31 [43].
Ibid 70 [158]–[159]. See also
Meagher and Groves (n
Adelaide City Corporation
Justice French — when a
member of the Federal Court — applied a similar interpretive
approach to a broad and purposive lawmaking power to determine the validity
of secondary legislation which had engaged the applicant’s
right to freedom of speech in the earlier case of
Evans v New South Wales
[2008] FCAFC 130
(2008) 168 FCR 576
, 591–9 [60]–[88] (French, Branson and Stone
JJ). See also Meagher and Groves (n
Adelaide City Corporation
Ibid 39 [58], quoting
) 165 (Wilson, Dawson, Toohey and
Gaudron JJ).
Adelaide City Corporation
) 37 [53] (French CJ). See above nn
–16 and accompanying text.
Adelaide City Corporation
) 37 [54] (French CJ).
Chief Justice French makes the
converse point that ‘[a] law which fails the high threshold test will
necessarily fail the lower
threshold test’: ibid 41–2 [62].
Ibid 41 [62].
Ibid 44 [67].
Ibid 43–4 [67].
Ibid 44 [68].
Ibid 42 [65].
Ibid 43 [65]. See also at
58–9 [120]–[121] (Hayne J); Boughey (n
Adelaide City Corporation
) 195 [2] (French CJ, Kiefel, Bell and
Keane JJ) (emphasis in original).
Tajjour v New South Wales
[2014] HCA 35
(2014) 254 CLR 508
, 550 [36] (‘
’), cited in ibid 211
See Stone (n
) 128–31. See generally Gabrielle
Appleby and Anne Carter, ‘Parliaments,
Proportionality and Facts’
[2021] SydLawRw 11
(2021) 43(3)
Sydney Law Review
Varuhas, ‘The Principle of
Legality’ (n
See Stone (n
) in the context of the implied freedom:
) 209 (Steyn LJ for the Court).
) 902 [86]–[88] (Lord Reed JSC, Lord
Neuberger PSC, Lords Mance, Kerr, Wilson and Hughes JJSC agreeing, Baroness Hale
DPSC agreeing
at 910 [121]).
) 210, 216–17 (Steyn LJ for the
) 896 [66],
903–5 [90]–[98] (Lord Reed JSC, Lord Neuberger PSC, Lords Mance,
Kerr, Wilson and Hughes JJSC agreeing, Baroness
Hale DPSC agreeing at 910
[121]). See also
Raymond v Honey
[1983] 1 AC 1
, where a similarly
elevated justification threshold was not met with respect to a rule restricting
prisoners’ right of access to the courts: at 10–13 (Lord
Wilberforce, Lord Elwyn-Jones agreeing at 14, Lord Russell agreeing
at 14, Lord
Lowry agreeing at 14, Lord Bridge agreeing at 14).
This issue weighed heavily in
) where the Court
rejected invitations to find that rights to work and to privacy were fundamental
common law rights protected by
the principle of legality: see above n
and accompanying text.
Cardell-Oliver (n
) 57. This issue is closely related to
the more basal question of precisely how courts identify such rights: see
generally David Crump,
‘How Do the Courts
Unenumerated Fundamental Rights? Cataloguing the Methods of Judicial
(1996) 19(3)
Harvard Journal of Law and Public Policy
Brendan Lim, ‘The Rationales for the Principle of Legality’ in Dan
Meagher and Matthew Groves (eds),
The Principle of Legality in Australia and
New Zealand
(Federation Press, 2017) 2, 9–12.
) 131 (Lord Hoffmann). We note, but in
this article do not address, Crawford’s strong criticism of this
rationale: Crawford
515–16, 519–26.
A list of the rights recognised as
within the scope of the principle of legality is contained in Dennis C Pearce,
Statutory Interpretation in Australia
(LexisNexis Butterworths,
ed, 2019) 255–60 [5.60].
See generally David Hume,
‘The Rule of Law in Reading Down: Good Law for the “Bad
[2014] MelbULawRw 3
(2014) 37(3)
Melbourne University Law Review
Duxbury, ‘Reading Down’
(2017) 20(2)
Hogan v Hinch
(2011) 243 CLR 506
, 535–44 [27]–[51] (French CJ), 547–56
[66]–[99] (Gummow, Hayne, Heydon, Crennan, Kiefel and Bell JJ)
Monis v The Queen
[2013] HCA 4
(2013) 249 CLR 92
, 208–12 [327]–[339] (Crennan, Kiefel and Bell
600–5 [221]–[241] (Keane J);
North Australian Aboriginal
Justice Agency Ltd v Northern Territory
[2015] HCA 41
(2015) 256 CLR 569
, 581 [11],
587–93 [23]–[38] (French CJ, Kiefel and Bell JJ),
645–52 [212]–[237] (Nettle and Gordon JJ)
’). But important doubts have been articulated as to
the propriety of this approach: see
Vella v Commissioner of Police (NSW)
(2019) 269 CLR 219, 293–4 [194] (Gordon J);
) 604–5 [75]–[80] (Gageler
) 629–44. For further
doubts on this approach, see generally Scott Stephenson, ‘Against
Interpretation as an Alternative to Invalidation’
(2020) 48(1)
Federal Law Review
) 258–9 [11]–[15], 271
[56]–[59] (French CJ, Gummow, Hayne, Crennan and Kiefel JJ), 283–4
(Heydon J).
) 534–9 [27]–[39] (French
CJ), 550–1 [75]–[78] (Gummow, Hayne,
Heydon, Crennan, Kiefel and Bell JJ).
X7 v Australian Crime
[2013] HCA 29
(2013) 248 CLR 92
, 131–2 [86]–[87],
136–7 [102]–[105], 140–1 [119], 142–3
[124]–[125], 148–9 [142], 150 [147]–[148] (Hayne and
Bell JJ, Kiefel J agreeing at 154 [162]).
) 210, 212–14, 216–17 (Steyn
LJ for the Court);
Plaintiff S157
492–4 [30]–[38] (Gleeson CJ), 505–7 [72]–[78], 508
[83] (Gaudron, McHugh, Gummow, Kirby and Hayne JJ), 520
[118], 534–5
[160]–[163] (Callinan J);
Bodruddaza v Minister for Immigration and
Multicultural Affairs
[2007] HCA 14
(2007) 228 CLR 651
, 668–72 [45]–[60]
(Gleeson CJ, Gummow, Kirby, Hayne, Heydon and Crennan JJ, Callinan J agreeing at
Varuhas, ‘The Principle of
Legality’ (n
The level of possible coherence may
never be absolute, due to the common law method’s
‘opposing directions, to the past and to the future’: Sir Philip
Sales, ‘The Common Law: Context and Method’
(2019) 135 (January)
Law Quarterly Review
47, 55. Sales identifies the inherent tension in our
expectations of the common law, which is expected to provide both certainty and
flexibility: at 61–2. Any greater emphasis on one expectation invariably
comes at the
expense of the other.
Sales has argued that the same is
true when the courts are required to decide that a right is not fundamental:
Sales, ‘Rights
and Fundamental Rights in English Law’ (n
) 98–100. For a discussion of the
common law’s piecemeal and historical method: see generally Sir Owen
Dixon, ‘Concerning
Judicial Method’ in Judge Woinarski (ed),
Jesting Pilate: And Other Papers and Addresses
(William S Hein,
ed, 1997) 152; Justice Michael McHugh, ‘The Law-Making
Function of the Judicial Process’ (Pt 1)
(1988) 62(1)
Australian Law
; Justice Michael McHugh, ‘The Law-Making Function of the
Judicial Process’ (Pt 2)
(1988) 62(2)
Australian Law Journal
Leeming JA appeared to anticipate
that possibility in his Honour’s analysis of the ‘nascent’
right to privacy:
556 [166] (Meagher JA agreeing at 550 [138]).
) 174 (Brennan J).
See, eg, Senate Standing Committee
for the Scrutiny of Delegated Legislation, Parliament of Australia,
Exemption of Delegated Legislation from Parliamentary
(Final Report, 16 March 2021) 5 [1.10], 8 [1.28]
Exemption from Parliamentary Scrutiny
Inquiry (Final Report)
Senate Standing Committee for the
Scrutiny of Delegated Legislation, Parliament of Australia,
Inquiry into
Exemption of Delegated Legislation from Parliamentary Oversight
(Interim Report, 2 December 2020) 8–9 [1.21]–[1.24]. The use of
secondary legislation as part of
governmental responses to COVID-19 was weighed heavily by the Senate Standing
Committee for the Scrutiny of Delegated Legislation:
at 5–6 [1.14].
) 556 [167] (Meagher JA agreeing at 550
A recent Senate inquiry found that
almost one fifth of federal delegated legislation is exempt from parliamentary
Exemption from Parliamentary Scrutiny Inquiry (Final Report)
) 8–9 [1.29]. The Senate
Standing Committee on Regulations and Ordinances cautioned that this practice
served to ‘effectively
remove Parliament’s control of delegated
legislation, leaving it to the executive to determine (albeit within the
of the enabling legislation and the
Constitution
) the content of
the law’: Senate Standing Committee on Regulations and Ordinances,
Parliament of Australia,
Parliamentary Scrutiny of Delegated Legislation
(Report, 3 June 2019) 122–3 [8.35]. See also Law Council of Australia,
Submission No 21 to Senate Standing Committee for the
Scrutiny of Delegated
Legislation, Parliament of Australia,
into the Exemption of
Delegated Legislation from Parliamentary Oversight
(2 July 2020).
). See above n
and accompanying text.
That is the approach taken by
Varuhas, ‘The Principle of Legality’ (n
) 556 [167] (Meagher JA agreeing at 550
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (312 KB)
PDF format (321 KB)
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter