URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/journals/UMonashLRS/2010/5.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 15:42:07
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Groves, M --- "Reforming judicial review at the state level" [2010] UMonashLRS 5
REFORMING JUDICIAL REVIEW AT THE STATE LEVEL
Matthew Groves*
Introduction
Change is one of the few constant features of Australian administrative law.
The tribunal system has been fashioned and refashioned
in most jurisdictions.
Freedom of information legislation has also been subject to regular review and
reform. By contrast, the framework
of judicial review appears to be static. The
key features of the
Administrative Decisions (Judicial Review) Act 1977
(Cth) (‘the
’) have remained largely unchanged since
their introduction, even though many parts of that Act have been reviewed and
over the years. Similarly, the three jurisdictions that have adopted
legislation modelled on the
(Queensland, Tasmania and the ACT)
have done little if anything to alter the key features of that
different statutory mechanism of judicial review created by the
Administrative Law Act 1978
(Vic) has also remained largely untouched
since its enactment more than 30 years ago. The four jurisdictions that have not
a statutory mechanism for judicial review (New South Wales, Western and
South Australia and the Northern Territory) appear equally
unlikely to adopt any
significant change to their schemes of judicial review or to adopt a judicial
review statute.
The apparently static nature of the various frameworks for judicial review
raises several questions. Why are other elements of the
administrative law
scheme so much more likely to experience radical reform? Why has the federal
model proved attractive to some States and Territories but not
others? Does the existence of differing schemes for judicial review
federal system have any effect on the substantive law of judicial review in
Australia? Is uniformity on such issues desirable
within a federal system?
This paper considers the current standing of judicial review at the State
level. It examines the arguments for and against the adoption
model by those jurisdictions that have not already done so. An important
question that flows from this issue is whether the various
statutory models for
judicial review have focussed on procedural reform at the expense of any
substantive reform. Another question,
which has received virtually no
consideration, is whether the States should even have a have a statutory vehicle
for judicial review.
The final section of this paper draws from the Canadian
experience, where the combination of a federal system and a heritage of the
English common law that has given rise to a more autonomous common law may
appear similar to that of Australia. It is useful to rehearse
some of the issues
affecting the position of judicial review at the State level and how the federal
nature of Australia’s constitutional
system has or may affect the
development of judicial review at the State level.
The Commonwealth
Constitution
– guiding principle or cage?
Although there is considerable debate about the precise basis of judicial
review at common law there seems little disagreement that,
for much of its early
history, judicial review was a fairly ‘bottom up’ affair in the
sense that it did not begin with
a single or coherent principle (a
Matthew Groves is Associate Professor, Faculty of Law, Monash
University. This paper was presented at the 2009 AIAL National Administrative
Law Forum, Canberra, 7 August 2009.
top down principle). It instead
occurred on a case by case basis without clear reference to a single or guiding
seems little disagreement that the same is true of the early phases of judicial
review in Australia. It was transmitted
as part of Australia’s English
legal heritage and occurred for many decades without any obvious recourse to a
top down principle
by which it might be guided or organised. This distinction
between top down and bottom up legal reasoning is a simple one and can
used when subject to many
qualifications.
main one is that even the most ardent ‘bottom upper’ must have some
semblance of a theoretical basis, even if this
only takes the form of an
adherence to
important point for present purposes is that judicial review evolved far ahead
of any coherent justification for it. In this
sense it was a classic bottom up
The same may
be said for the increasing influence of the
Constitution
over judicial review in
Australia. While the
Constitution
was adopted long after judicial review had
become entrenched in Australia, it also took a considerable time before the full
effect of the
Constitution
became apparent upon judicial review in
In more recent times the
Constitution
has become a focal point of judicial
review and is now clearly the dominant force in Australian administrative law.
The growing influence
Constitution
is one consequence of the increased
use of the original jurisdiction of the High Court that is entrenched in
but it is equally a consequence of the privative clauses that have sought to
restrict the role of the High Court and other courts
of federal jurisdiction. It
is no small irony that successive legislative attempts to exclude judicial
review have led to the emphatic
assertion by the High Court of the entrenched
nature of its supervisory position. An equally ironic point is that these
attempts to exclude or limit judicial review have provided the platform
for a series of cases which have served to reinforce the
central role of
judicial review within our constitutional structure and, in turn, the role of
Constitution
itself. This increased recourse to the
Constitution
provided many occasions for the High Court and its observers to assert the
central or fundamental role of the High Court and
entrenched nature of the
Much less attention has been given to the longstanding structural limitations
that accompany this entrenched jurisdiction. The most
obvious structural
limitation in the
Constitution
of the separation of powers doctrine, which is
expressed partly in the text of the
Constitution
but has been given added force
by the High Court’s expansive approach to this doctrine. Sir Anthony Mason
drew attention to
some of the early indications of the possible constitutional
influence when he explained that the
Constitution
provided ‘a delineation
of government powers rather than a charter of citizen’s
institutional emphasis on governmental structures provided a natural terrain for
the ‘strict and complete legalism’
that has long been associated
with Owen Dixon.
Mason suggested that this legalism laid the foundation for an important
limitation on the constitutionally entrenched jurisdiction
that the High Court
has emphasised so stridently in recent times. Mason has argued that the various
principles developed by the High
Court, including its constitutionally protected
Constitution
, are based upon and
restricted by ‘the limited Australian conception of content of judicial
power’ upon which the separation
of powers doctrine is
The influence of the separation of powers doctrine is reinforced by
Constitution
, which establishes the High Court of Australia as the
ultimate Australian court of appeal in matters of both federal and state law.
Leslie Zines has identified this provision as the ‘unifying element in our
judicial system.’
That conclusion is reinforced by
the repeated statements from the High Court that there should be a single or
uniform body of Australian
common law, despite the various differences between
the High Court appears to have reached a position by which it will countenance a
level of difference between the Commonwealth
and the States by reason of our
federal structure but, at the same time, it will remain mindful that those
differences should not
develop in a way that might overturn the inherent
connection between all Australian jurisdictions that is established by the
Constitution
. There is, in essence, a federal constitutional leash upon the
That leash was tightened dramatically in
Kirk v Industrial Relations
Commission of NSW
that case the High Court drew together several constitutional threads to hold
that State Supreme Courts occupied a constitutionally
recognised position which
precluded State legislatures from enacting legislation that removed or narrowed
core elements of the supervisory
reasoning of the High Court had several distinct but related parts. The first
was the appellate
Constitution
. The Court held that this jurisdiction presumed the continued
existence of the State Supreme Courts and also their continued ability
exercise functions which were, at the time of federation, accepted as essential
features of State Supreme Courts. One such feature
was the supervisory
the determination of the limits
on the exercise of State executive and judicial
power by persons other than the Supreme
High Court also suggested that its own constitutional position at the peak of
Australia’s judicial system, recognised by
Constitution
relevant to the constitutional position of State
that this express constitutional recognition of the High Court cannot be
undermined by State legislation that would deprive
State Supreme Courts of
original jurisdiction that would, in turn, deprive the High Court of its
appellate jurisdiction. The High
Court also made clear that Australia’s
judicial system was integrated at the constitutional level and also at common
now constitutionally entrenched supervisory jurisdiction of the State
Supreme Courts was exercisable ‘in the end’ by
the principles
determined by the High
The High Court accepted that the States could enact legislation to limit or
exclude the ability of State courts to review errors of
law but only for errors
not infected by jurisdictional
possibility reinforces the close alignment that
drew to judicial
review at the State and federal level. The validity of legislation that narrows
or excludes judicial review at the
federal level has long been determined by
reference to the distinction between jurisdictional and non-jurisdictional
errors of law.
Federal legislation can exclude judicial review of the latter but
not the former. That is now the case at the State level. This alignment
federal and State law is not absolute. In other cases the High Court has made it
clear that the separation of powers doctrine
does not apply to the States with
the same force as it does at the federal level, though it clearly has some
application to the States.
In recent times attention has gone to the
incompatibility doctrine which prevents the States from enacting legislation
which invests
their courts with functions that might be incompatible with the
exercise of federal judicial power. Although this doctrine has only
successfully invoked in a small number of
provided the main focus in recent times for judicial consideration of the
potential application of the federal separation
of powers doctrine as a limiting
factor on State
The recent focus on the incompatibility doctrine has distracted attention
from the considerable variations in State and federal administrative
the more limited application of the separation of powers doctrine at the State
level has permitted to arise. The strongest
examples have arisen in State
tribunals, which are not subject to the same restrictions as those established
by federal law.
Some State tribunals are empowered to make orders that may be enforced directly,
in the same manner as is possible for
federal level, it is clear that tribunals cannot be invested with such
of such powers to State tribunals reflects a trend in recent Australian
administrative law which has received relatively
little attention, which is the
extent to which the limited application of the separation of powers doctrine to
the States has been
exploited by the States by legislation that invests State
tribunals with functions that might be regarded, at least in the strict
as judicial in
extent of the latitude that may be granted to State tribunals remains unsettled,
though it is clear that for the near future
some features of State tribunals
will occupy the outer edges of their constitutional
Although the federal limits on State administrative tribunals may be
relatively unexplored, the same is not true for State courts
supervisory judicial review jurisdiction. The limited conception of judicial
power that Mason traced to the influence of
Owen Dixon has many modern adherents
who have made clear that this conception of judicial power necessarily limits
judicial review.
Perhaps the most cited one was Sir Gerard Brennan. In
Attorney-General (NSW) v Quin
Brennan J offered a conception of the judicial power, which in turn directly
informed the nature and role of judicial review, which
clearly echoed that of
Owen Dixon. Brennan J explained:
If it be right to say that the court’s jurisdiction in judicial review
goes no further than declaring and enforcing the law
prescribing the limits and
governing the exercise of power, the next question immediately arises: what is
the law? And that question,
of course, must be answered by the court itself. In
giving its answer, the court needs to remember that the judicature is but one
the three co-ordinate branches of government and that the authority of the
judicature is not derived from a superior capacity
to balance the interests of
the community against the interests of an individual. The repository of
administrative power must often
balance the interests of the public at large and
the interests of minority groups or individuals. The courts are not equipped to
evaluate the policy considerations which properly bear on such decisions, nor is
the adversary system ideally suited to the doing
of administrative justice:
interests which are not represented must often be
considered.
The current Solicitor-General of Australia – Stephen Gageler SC –
has described the reasoning of Brennan J as ‘top
down reasoning at the
reason, Gageler explained, is that:
From the constitutional conception of the nature of judicial power, there is
derived a single principle which then informs both the
scope and content of
judicial review. That single principle is the duty of the court to declare and
enforce the
The late Justice Selway thought that the issue was not so clear cut. He
accepted that the
Constitution
provided ‘the ultimate justification for
judicial review and sets its
parameters’.
But, he also suggested that the
Constitution
‘does not explain the
detail’ of the operation of judicial review. Selway reasoned:
True it is that the constitutional context means that parliamentary intent as
expressed in a statute has primacy over the common
law; true it is that the
constitutional context means that the courts cannot engage in merits review and
are required to differentiate
between ‘jurisdictional errors’ and
‘non-jurisdictional errors’. But within these parameters there is
considerable room for
The extent to which there might be ‘room for debate’ about the
nature and scope of judicial review, because it implies
that the constitutional
constraints upon judicial review which flow from the separation of power, may be
more subtle than many believe.
There are several cases which indicate that the
latitude identified by Selway is largely illusory.
Corporation of the City of Enfield v Development Assessment
('Enfield')
In that case the High Court rejected the so-called
American courts accord considerable deference to the decisions of administrative
agencies in the determination of jurisdictional
facts. A majority of the High
Court held that this doctrine of deference was fundamentally incompatible with
the limitations that
Australia’s constitutional arrangements impose upon
the executive and its agencies. Two points may be drawn from this conclusion
present purposes. First, the majority relied heavily upon the approach of
Brennan J in the
case as explained above and the demarcation that
this approach imposes between the roles of the executive and the
case concerned the constitutional limits upon the executive and
its agencies, the High Court stressed that the similar considerations
corresponding limitations upon the courts. More particularly, the court affirmed
that constitutional imperatives precluded
the courts from entering issues that
formed part of the merits of a decision. A separate but clearly related point
may be made about
the reach of these constitutional principles.
was an appeal from a State court in a case about a State institution, yet the
reasoning of the High Court is clearly infused with
the scent of federal
constitutional doctrine. It may be argued, therefore, that
reinforces two important underlying points of the reasoning adopted by Brennan
case, which is that the High Court does not appear willing to
sanction significant doctrinal differences between State and federal
administrative law.
Another decision which indicates that there is less latitude within the
constitutional boundaries of judicial review than Selway suggested
That case is
partly known for the hesitant approach that several members of the High Court
adopted towards the legitimate expectation;
however, for present purposes the
more relevant issue was the obvious disapproval the Court expressed for the more
dynamic successor
to the legitimate expectation that has developed in England in
the form of substantive
unfairness.
short, the doctrine of substantive unfairness draws upon many of the elements of
the legitimate expectation in its traditional
guise, but extends those notions
to the protection of a substantive rather than procedural
expectation.
interest or expectation that attracts the protection of the doctrine of
substantive unfairness may be disappointed, but when English
courts determine
whether and how this might lawfully be done by a public official, they will
‘have the task of weighing the
requirements of fairness against any
overriding interests relied upon’ by the
decision-maker.
Later English decisions have stressed that this doctrine does not enable the
court to ‘order the authority to honour its promise
where to do so would
assume the powers of the executive.’ Judicial observance of this principle
would counter criticisms that
substantive unfairness veers towards merits review
but it would not overcome the criticisms that the concept of abuse of power upon
which substantive unfairness is based is so vague it does not bear close
scrutiny. More particularly, the empty nature of the concept
means it provides a
vessel for judicial perceptions of ‘right and wrong’ rather than
Gleeson CJ approached the issue of substantive
unfairness as one that raised ‘large questions as to the relations between
executive and judicial branches of government’. He concluded that the
Constitution
did not ‘exist for the
purpose of enabling the judicial branch of government to impose upon the
executive branch its ideas
administration’.
McHugh and Gummow JJ, with whom Callinan J agreed on this
acknowledged that the normative values considered by English courts in
substantive unfairness and the wider rubric of abuse of power
bore some parallel
to those used in Australian law, particularly the ‘values concerned in
general terms with abuse of power
by the executive and legislative branches of
government in Australian constitutional law.’ But they noted ‘it
going much further to give those values an immediate normative
operation in applying the
Constitution
This reasoning suggests that their Honours conception of the separation of
powers doctrine precludes judges from undertaking the
balancing exercise that
English courts have devised to adjudge claims of substantive unfairness. Mason
and Gummow JJ also made clear
that Australia’s constitutional structure
demanded careful attention to
Constitution
Considerations of the nature and scope of judicial review, whether by this Court
Constitution
or otherwise, inevitably involve attention to the
text and structure of the document in which
appears. An aspect of the rule
of law under the
Constitution
is that the role or function of Ch III courts does
not extend to the performance of the legislative function of translating policy
into statutory form or the executive function of
administration.
Several propositions may be extracted by the above discussion. One is that
the limits that have been accepted as part of the Australian
conception of the
separation of powers doctrine are not simply structural in character. They limit
not only the reach of the courts
but the nature of the function that the courts
may exercise within their constitutionally accepted role. In other words, the
of powers doctrine limits both the institutions that may exercise
supervisory review and the character of that jurisdiction. This
clearly extends to the nature and content of grounds of judicial review, such as
substantive unfairness, which appear foreclosed
in Australian law. If the High
Court views matters of State judicial review through a federally tinted lens it
is extremely unlikely
that significant innovations in the grounds or content of
judicial review could be fostered at the State level. At least not if those
innovations depart in any significant way from federal constitutional
principles.
Similar considerations would appear to preclude innovation in the judicial law
of the States through an entirely different source,
namely Bills or Charters of
Rights. The
Charter of Human Rights and Responsibilities Act 2006
Charter of Rights
’) draws heavily from the
Human Rights Act 1998
The English
Act has led to many dramatic changes in the judicial review law of that country,
such as the adoption of a separate ground
of proportionality and a more intense
standard of review in cases affecting fundamental
has argued that the overall effect of the English Act has been to provide a
‘justification’ for a more rights-based
approach to administrative
law including judicial
other English commentators who advocate this approach essentially seem to
believe that the
Human Rights Act 1998
(Eng) provides a basis upon which
the courts may call the parliament, the executive and administrative agencies to
a stricter standard
of judicial review. In simple terms, the
Human Rights
constrains the reach of government. At the same time, however, the
advocates of this approach do not appear to believe that the human
legislation imposes any equivalent or significant constraints upon the
changes to English judicial review need to be understood against this
background. English judicial review law has expanded in
recent years without any
equivalent to the structural constraints imposed in Australia by the
Commonwealth
Constitution
. The main consequence of this difference is that the
adoption of human rights legislation in the States of Australia will not itself
enable the transmission of many of the changes to judicial review that the
English equivalent has fostered. Any such changes in Australia
would almost
certainly run aground on constitutional reefs.
model and its limitations
is the statutory vehicle for judicial review at the
federal level. The Act introduced several important reforms to judicial review,
such as a uniform test for standing, a general right to reasons for decisions to
which the Act applied and a set of streamlined remedies.
Although these reforms
were arguably procedural in character there is little doubt that replacing many
of the technical features
of the common law process of judicial review with
simplified statutory ones made judicial review much more accessible and
constituted a significant substantive
did not effect significant changes to the grounds of review and
instead appeared to codify the existing common law
interpretation of the
was confirmed in several key cases of the
1980s such as
case the High Court divided on the question of whether the duty to observe the
requirements of procedural fairness arose
from the common law or the statute
that conferred the statutory power in issue. Despite this division on key
aspects of natural justice,
all members of the High Court appeared to adopt a
similar view of the role of the
. No member of the court
suggested that questions on the scope of natural justice might be answered or
even illuminated by the
, even though the case at hand was
commenced under that
reached a similar view the following year in his influential judgment in
Minister for Aboriginal Affairs v
Peko-Wallsend
when he concluded that the grounds of unreasonableness and relevant/irrelevant
considerations were ‘substantially declaratory
of the common
suggestions that the
has codified the common law grounds of
review in an almost literal manner have never been seriously questioned or
It is arguable that the architects of the Act had anticipated this problem by
the inclusion of two novel and open ended grounds that
enable review of a
decision that is ‘otherwise contrary to law’ or is ‘an
exercise of power in a way that constitutes
an abuse of the
These grounds do not codify common law grounds of review but they are expressed
in sufficiently open terms that they could embrace
new grounds that might arise
at common law after the
commenced. Aronson, Dyer and Groves
suggest that the inclusion of these grounds ‘acknowledges the common
law’s capacity
to develop new
though those authors shy away from considering whether and how the Australian
common law might do so. In my view, these grounds are
so rarely used or even
mentioned that they may fairly be described as ‘dead
The Law Reform Commission of Western Australia reached a different conclusion
in its report on judicial review of 2002. When the Commission
recommended the
adoption of an
model it doubted that the codification of grounds
had limited the substantive law of judicial review. It also concluded that, even
if codification might exert an inhibiting effect, that possibility could be
overcome by the inclusion of a clause that enabled review
of a decision on the
ground that it was ‘otherwise contrary to
Although this proposed ground clearly mirrors one of the existing open ended
grounds included in the
it is useful to note that the Commission
did not explain how the ground might work. In addition, the Commission provided
no examples
of principle or case law where this ground had been invoked.
Kirby J addressed the wider and possibly negative effect of the
Re Minister for Immigration and Multicultural Affairs; Ex parte
While he acknowledged that the impact of the
‘overwhelmingly beneficial’ his praise of the Act was not
unqualified.
J noted that the introduction of the
marked a point at which
Australian law had moved away from that of England. His Honour reasoned that
many of the innovations which
had arisen in English judicial review had bypassed
Australia since the introduction of the
. ‘The somewhat
arrested development of Australian common law doctrine that followed’ the
, Kirby J concluded, ‘reflects the large impact of the
federal legislation on the direction and content of Australian administrative
generally.’
These remarks imply an acceptance that the
had provided many
useful procedural changes which in themselves greatly reformed judicial review
but, at the same time, the codification
of the existing common law grounds of
review introduced a new limitation. It could also be suggested that this aspect
was amplified by its procedural reforms which, for the
first decade or so of its operation, proved an attractive option for applicants.
It is useful to note that the Law Reform Commission of Western Australia had
earlier rejected one of the central conclusions of Kirby
J and Aronson, namely
that the codification of grounds in the
had likely stifled the
development of the substantive principles of judicial review. When the WA
Commission considered the adoption
model it concluded,
without a detailed discussion of the point, that the law had not been shackled
by codification.
The Commission provided the example of review on the ground of denial of natural
justice, noting that the
did not define the rules of natural
justice. It reasoned:
accordingly, the ambit and content of those rules are left to be filled by the
general law as enunciated by the courts from time
to time. There is thus ample
scope for judicial development of the substantive law relating to natural
justice within the statutory
A review of Victorian law, which recommended the adoption of the
model appeared considerably less certain about this aspect of that
model. While the review supported the codification of the grounds
largely in the format used by the
, it also recommended the
inclusion of an additional ground that would enable relief to be granted upon
any ground of review not specifically
included in the statutory list but which
might be available at common
‘common law ground’ appeared to offer a more explicit recognition
that new grounds of review might evolve outside
a statutory mechanism for review
and that any such ground should be able to be adopted without difficulty.
Mark Aronson offered a broader criticism of the
argued that the various grounds codified in that Act and the manner of their
codification reflected an absence of any wider
philosophy in the Act itself. He
noted that both the
and its many statutory grounds of review:
...say nothing about the rule of law, the separation of power, fundamental
rights and freedoms, principles of good government or
(if it be different) good
administration, transparency of government, fairness, participation,
accountability, consistency or administrative
standards, rationality,
impartiality, political neutrality or legitimate expectations. Nor does ADJR
mention the Thatcher era’s
over-arching goals of efficiency, effectiveness
and economy...ADJR’s grounds are totally silent on the relatively recent
of universal human rights to autonomy, dignity, respect, status, and
security. Nowhere does ADJR commit to liberal democratic principles,
republicanism.
Aronson also offered several specific solutions to the perceived limitations
, such as extending both the scope of the Act and its
obligation to provide reasons for the decisions to which the Act
not, however, favour introducing some form of guiding principle or principles
that might fill the apparent philosophical gap
that he identified in the passage
quoted above. Aronson doubted whether such principles were desirable or perhaps
even possible.
More particularly, he thought it might be difficult if not
impossible to devise any grand or unifying principles that were coherent,
workable and of significant
Even if such principles were drafted, any attempt to devise a general or
guiding principle to the
, or any other statutory vehicle for
judicial review, would surely face an uncertain fate in the courts. The recent
history of Australian
migration law indicates that legislation designed to limit
or control judicial review will rarely achieve its desired effect and
achieve the opposite of its intended
question is not whether there would be a judicial response to any legislative
attempt to introduce a guiding or grand principle
to statutory judicial review,
but instead how quickly such legislation might be interred with successive
privative clauses.
Aronson also doubted whether the courts might fare any better than the
parliamentary drafters. He asked:
To what extent might it be the judiciary’s role (or even duty) to explore,
describe, articulate or promote a normative framework
for judicial review of
administrative action? This is not to question the judiciary’s role in
articulating general doctrinal
principle, but the question being asked here
concerns a much deeper level of public law theory....is it the judge’s
to explore and expound his or her philosophical underpinnings, and
when they do it, are their conclusions
Aronson reasoned that any conclusions the courts might reach on the grand
ideals of judicial review ‘would necessarily be piecemeal,
fairly vague,
and subject to legislative reversal, unless of course, it were sought to embed
these theories into the
Constitution
The outcome seems to be the same as Dixonian legalism, even if the path is
different. Dixon’s conception of the limited judicial
function led him to
conclude that Australian judges do not have the power to venture down the path
of these broad normative questions.
Aronson hopes they know better.
Kirby J was not so cautious in
Re Minister for Immigration and
Multicultural Affairs; Ex parte Applicant
he reasoned that a judicial remedy for ‘serious administrative
injustice’ might provide some sort of ‘default’
chance’ relief in judicial review when no other recognised ground of
review might apply. His Honour considered
that the courts:
subject to the
Constitution
or the applicable legislation...reserve to
themselves the jurisdiction and power to intervene in extreme circumstances.
They do this
to uphold the rule of law itself, the maintenance of minimum
standards of decision-making and the correction of clear injustices
has occurred does not truly answer the description of the legal process that the
Parliament has laid
issues were rolled up within this remarkable ambit claim. One is that the
invocation of such a jurisdiction in cases of serious
injustice harks to a line
of recent English cases that have issued relief in cases of ‘conspicuous
unfairness’.
Relief has been granted on the basis of such unfairness in many English cases in
recent years, though the principle that supposedly
underpins such cases has been
questioned. The similarity between Kirby J’s wish to grant relief for
serious administrative
injustice and the English approach is that both would
appear to be available to correct serious failings in the standards of
decision-making.
The English principle of conspicuous unfairness has been
criticised on the grounds that it appears to enable a court to issue relief
simply because it believes ‘something has gone wrong, even if the court
cannot quite put its finger on
J’s notion of ‘serious administrative injustice’ appears as
subjective, impressionistic and arguably lacking
in any clear legal principle as
the English equivalent.
The remedy suggested by Kirby J also appears to have a more obvious weakness
in its internal logic. His Honour implied that the grant
of relief in cases of
serious administrative injustice lay within an orthodox understanding of the
scope of judicial power because
the impugned conduct did not meet what had been
prescribed by parliament. The difficulty with this suggestion is that its
on ‘standards’ of administrative decision-making appears to
venture beyond the traditionally accepted notions of judicial
power that Kirby J
appeared so anxious to assure that his reasoning remained within.
The Three different State models of judicial review
A striking feature of the judicial review schemes in Australia is their lack
of coherence. The
has been reproduced in the
Administrative
Decisions (Judicial Review) Act 1989
Judicial Review Act
Judicial Review Act
(Tas). Victoria
long ago enacted the
Administrative Law Act 1978
(Vic) which might be
described as a ‘no frills’ form of statutory judicial review which
is explained in more detail below.
The introduction of
legislation has been proposed, though apparently not accepted, in Victoria (in
1999) and Western Australia (in
reform appears to be currently under consideration in New South Wales, South
Australia or the Northern Territory. Judicial
review in each of those
court. That same common law
default avenue of review in those jurisdictions that have introduced some form
of statutory judicial
Adoption of the ADJR Act – Are there benefits in
uniformity?
The most recent consideration of the apparent arguments in favour of
uniformity in judicial review legislation was provided by the
Commission of Western Australia, in its (apparently shelved) report that
recommended the adoption of the
model. The Commission noted that
the ‘obvious advantage’ of such a change was ‘uniformity of
the substantive law
governing judicial review of administrative decisions,
irrespective of whether or not those decisions are made under state or
Commonwealth
The obvious reply to this assertion is that uniformity already exists in the
grounds of review, which suggests that this benefit
of uniformity is more
imagined than real. The other benefit of uniformity that the Commission
identified was that it would enable
Western Australia (and of course any other
model) to essentially adopt the
body of law that had developed in the interpretation of that
Commission explained that benefit of the
model in the following
Litigation under that Act is now the predominant source of the general body of
law relating to judicial review in Australia. The
enactment of...legislation
which follows, as far as possible, the terminology used in the Commonwealth Act
will enabled that body
of law to be applied directly to litigation under the
reasoning invites several comments. First, the notion that proceedings under the
are the primary vehicle for judicial review at the federal level
takes no account of the role of
Constitution
or the provisions of
Judiciary Act 1903
(Cth) which
invest the lower federal courts
with an equivalent jurisdiction. In light of the increasing role of those
avenues of review, it is
somewhat misleading to suggest that the
exerts some sort of dominant influence at the federal level. If it did, that
time has passed. Secondly, the primary argument made
in favour of the adoption
appears to be one of convenience. That argument is one of
pragmatism rather than principle because it does not provide any critical
analysis of the law that would be adopted. Thirdly, adoption of the
would not only bring the relevant State into alignment with the
Commonwealth. It would also align the adopting jurisdiction with
those that had
already adopted the
model. Finally, the perceived advantages of
uniformity imply or assume that the relevant statutes will remain the same as
possible and, more controversially, will be amended in a like manner. The
history of Commonwealth-State relations suggests that goal
is often an
aspirational one. This last point presents a particular obstacle to further
reform to judicial review because, if the
model as enacted at
the federal level is seen as the benchmark, it is difficult for those
undertake further reform without the
effective consent (and perhaps the lead) of the
Commonwealth.
A separate and far more controversial point that arises from the almost
unquestioning acceptance by the Law Reform Commission of the
supposed benefits
of uniformity in judicial review legislation is whether such legislation should
be adopted. No such scheme has
been adopted in New South Wales, South Australia
or the Northern Territory. While the Territory appears to have a relatively
number of judicial review applications, the same cannot be said of New
South Wales or South Australia. The experience of these States
could be argued
to provide support for the proposition that the absence of a statutory template
for judicial review does not itself
hinder the willingness or ability of people
affected by administrative decisions to seek judicial review of those decisions.
argument is enhanced in New South Wales by the reversal of the common law
in one important area, namely the right to obtain reasons
for administrative
decisions that was confirmed in
The No-frills statutory model – Victoria’s Administrative
Law Act 1978
Victoria adopted an entirely different vehicle for statutory judicial review
only a year after the
was enacted. The
Administrative Law Act
(Vic) adopted many of the procedural advantages of the
in the form of a simplified approach to
introduction of a right to reasons for decisions to which the Act
simplified single remedy in the form of an order to review that essentially
reproduces the remedies available at common law,
though without the need to
apply for a particular
The Act did
not adopt the
formula that confers jurisdiction over
‘decisions’ that are ‘of an administrative character’
which are made
‘under an enactment’ but instead enabled decisions of
‘tribunals’. A tribunal is defined as any person or
body (which is
not a court or tribunal presided over by a Supreme Court Judge) who is required
to observe one or more rules of natural
There are many obvious flaws in this scheme. One is that the definition of
‘tribunal’, which determines the scope of decisions
to which the Act
applies, excludes any body headed by a Supreme Court judge. That definition
excludes the Victorian Civil and Administrative
Tribunal and many other bodies,
such as the parole board, which are headed by members of the Supreme Court. The
definition of tribunal
by reference to a requirement to observe the rules of
natural justice has also proved uncertain in cases where the nature or extent
any obligation to act fairly by an initial decision-maker is
issue is that the statutory right to gain reasons is qualified by a provision
that enables decision-makers to decline to
provide reasons if they conclude this
is ‘against public policy’ or that reasons would be against the
interests of the
person primarily affected by the decision. This provides an
uncertain exemption from the right to obtain reasons. Another flaw is
of the Act, which establishes a time limit for making an application, has been
held to deprive the Supreme Court of jurisdiction
to review under this Act once
the prescribed time limit has
inflexible time limit is plainly undesirable, particularly in a statute that was
intended to introduce procedural reform.
A final flaw is that much of the
apparent procedural flexibility introduced by the Act is of little importance
since the various
writs available through the common law avenue of judicial
review were replaced by a single order that can be sought by an originating
Perhaps the most notable flaw of the Victorian scheme is the one that has
received no real attention. The Victorian Act did not codify
any grounds of
judicial review and could, therefore, have side stepped the problems that
Aronson suggested had flowed from the codification
of existing common law
grounds in the
. The Victorian scheme has not stimulated an
energetic or innovative approach to judicial
the codification of existing grounds by those jurisdictions which have adopted
model appears to have tacitly limited the scope of review to
those grounds, the absence of codification does not appear to have provided
impetus in Victoria for a more adventurous approach. The Victorian experience
suggests that an entirely pared down version of
focussed solely on procedural simplicity and reform and did not codify existing
grounds of review, might make no difference.
A review of the Victorian legislation in 1999 found little benefit in this
scheme. It recommended the adoption of the
model, in terms that
left no doubt that the 1978 Act was regarded as a failure. While this review
provided a detailed examination
of judicial review and made a strong case for
reform, it had the misfortune to be published around the time there was a change
State government. That change of government involved many high profile policy
shifts and led to many law reform projects in administrative
law and public
governance, including changes to FOI legislation and greater independence for
independent public bodies such as the
Office of Public Prosecutions and the
Auditor-General. But the possible reform of judicial review was not one, even
though the exclusion
and limitation of rights of review to the Supreme Court had
attracted considerable attention in the period leading up to the change
government. The proposed changes to judicial review were quietly shelved and
have not been revisited.
Some lessons from the Canadian experience of procedural uniformity in
administrative law
The Australian and Canadian systems of law and government share many common
features, such as a heritage of the English common law
and many Westminster
traditions such as responsible government, a federal system and a written
constitution; however, their systems
of administrative law have unfolded in
quite different ways. These differences are partly explicable by the absence of
any entrenched
doctrine of the separation of powers in Canada, which enables
Canadian courts and tribunals to undertake a variety of functions that
almost scandalise Australian
Canada has not adopted a statutory vehicle for judicial review such as the
, though Aronson’s criticisms of that Act noted above
suggest that the absence of a clear equivalent at the federal level in
may not be a matter of regret. But it could be argued that a broad parallel
could be drawn between the
Federal Courts Act
(Can). Strictly speaking this Canadian Act does not represent a true
parallel to the
because it deals more generally with the powers
of federal courts, but some of the provisions governing judicial review are not
the key features of the
. Section 18(1) of the Canadian
Act enables the federal Attorney-General or ‘anyone directly
affected’ by ‘the matter
in respect of which relief is
sought’. This simple formula does not adopt the various requirements of
for a ‘decision’ or ‘conduct’ that
is ‘of an administrative character’ and is made ‘under
enactment. In the absence of those limiting requirements it is hardly surprising
that Canadian law is not replete with decisions
Earlier this year when the Supreme Court considered the nature and scope of
Federal Courts Act
it concluded that any interpretation of the
must be sufficiently elastic to apply to the decisions of hundreds of different
‘types’ of administrators, from Cabinet
members to entry-level
fonctionnaries
, who operate in different decision-making environments
under different statutes with distinct grants of decision-making powers. Some
these statutory grants have privative clauses; others do not. Some provide for a
statutory right of appeal to the courts; others
In later parts of the same case a majority of the Supreme Court of Canada
indicated that the legislature could alter or even oust
the common law of
judicial review but noted that most Canadian attempts to do so took the form of
legislation affecting the grounds
of review that could be sought rather than the
standard of review applicable to any case (the latter point being a particularly
one in Canadian
This approach to the
Federal Courts Act
suggests that Canada has
struck an interesting balance at the federal level by the introduction of a
stripped down statutory codification
of judicial review that expresses the basic
elements of judicial review but does so in a way that does not constrain the
common law.
In particular, the brief statutory coverage of the grounds of review
and the lack of any generic provision covering the applicable
standard of review
leaves considerable room for judicial manoeuvre. It could be argued that this
approach strikes a ‘middle
ground’ by introducing a bare statutory
framework for judicial review, which confirms the statutory jurisdiction of
courts and articulates the basic elements of that framework but leaves
much of the detail, including the detail of the grounds, to
the courts. The
result is a statutory framework interpreted against a common law background.
An interesting aspect of this scheme is that the courts have not advanced the
common law as stridently as in England. An example is
Mount Sinai
the Supreme Court of Canada rejected the (then) new doctrine of substantive
unfairness only a year after it had been decisively
recognised in England. The
Supreme Court side stepped the English cases that had accepted the possibility
of either substantive unfairness
or the closely related possibility of estoppel
in public law on the grounds that those trends represented ‘a level of
intervention in government policy that our courts, to date, have not
considered appropriate in the absence of a successful challenge
Canadian Charter of
Mount Sinai
case concerned provincial law, the rejection of
substantive unfairness is generally understood in Canada to be one of wider
application. The reasoning in the
Mount Sinai
case suggests that
the Canadian courts may approach the apparent latitude that exists for the
development of judicial review principles
with some moderation.
The Canadian experience at the provincial level
At the provincial level Canada has undertaken a quite different experiment in
the codification of its administrative law. Several
provinces have adopted some
form of model statutory procedures for administrative bodies, some of which
could be broadly equated
with the American
Administrative Procedure Act 1946
(5 USC). The most widely studied is Ontario’s
Statutory Powers
Procedure Act
form of administrative code has also been adopted in Alberta, Quebec and British
codes have come under sustained criticism on the ground that they are inflexible
and therefore counterintuitive because they
seek to release administrative
decision-makers from many of the constraints that arise from the curial model of
adjudication but
do so by introducing a different form of
inflexibility.
movement to codify administrative law in Canada appears to have lost much of its
energy. The Canadian provinces appear to have
an odd array of statutes that each
codify different parts of each province’s administrative law system and do
so in differing
ways. One notable feature of these statutes is that, although
they are ostensibly directed to the powers of administrative officials
tribunals they often address the principles that courts must use in applications
for judicial review of tribunal decisions, including
the applicable standard of
sense, legislative control that sets standards for administrative tribunals and
officials also regularly extends to how those
standards may be enforced by the
Another striking feature of these various provincial arrangements is that
they are designed to provide codes for either administrative
officials or many
different tribunals, but they have not encouraged any move to the creation of
tribunals of general jurisdiction
such as Australia’s AAT or its various
State counterparts. One commentator has suggested that many of these Acts have
not introduced
any significant innovation but have instead simply codified the
existing common law which may be causing the ossification of administrative
at the provincial
criticism clearly echoes some of the concerns expressed by Aronson about the
overall effect of the ADJR Act.
Concluding observations
Several tentative conclusions can be drawn from the above analysis. One is
that the influence of the Commonwealth
Constitution
is in many ways a
restrictive one. While the
Constitution
may preserve the role of the courts,
particularly the High Court, and also a minimum standard of judicial review, the
doctrine that
has been devised to support and protect these principles also
serves to limit the role of the courts in the exercise of their supervisory
review might extend to the perceived merits of decisions
as opposed to legal
issues. The result is that innovation in judicial review is subject to some
significant doctrinal limits. Those
limits almost certainly apply equally to the
States even though they are not subject to the separation of powers doctrine to
same extent as it applies at the federal level. The difficulty for the
States is that the structural limits created at the federal
level appear to
restrain the capacity of all Australian courts to venture beyond the established
grounds of review, particularly
if any such venture might tread towards
constitutionally dubious territory as appears to be the case with the English
principle of
substantive unfairness.
appears in some ways to have imposed another obstacle to
the possible reform of judicial review at the State level. Many of the
reforms effected by the
, notably the ability to
obtain reasons for decisions to which the Act applies and the simplification of
traditionally difficult technical
issues such as standing and remedies, were
clearly important and useful steps forward. At the same time, however, the
codification
of the grounds of review appears to have inadvertently discouraged
any significant development in the substantive law of judicial
review. The
overall effect of the
could be argued to have funnelled much of
the energy of judicial review down a single path, or at least until the revival
constitutionally entrenched right of review under
Constitution
presents a particular disadvantage to the
States if it is viewed as the preferred or dominant model for judicial review in
because that characterisation of the Act necessarily precludes the
adoption of different and perhaps more advantageous models. It
also provides the
Commonwealth with an apparent monopoly upon the future of judicial review, which
is a possibility that deserves
careful scrutiny particularly in light of the
enthusiasm of successive federal governments in their efforts to limit or
exclude the
scope of review in particular areas.
statutory judicial review:
Administrative Decisions (Judicial Review) Act
Judicial Review Act
Judicial Review
classic historical analysis notes that judicial review arose as one consequence
of the increasing separation of functions between
the executive and the courts
in England. This occurred during the seventeenth century when the courts began
to assert their power
to decide the legality of (selected) actions of the
executive: Louis Jaffe and Edith Henderson, ‘Judicial Review and the Rule
of Law: Historical Origins’
Law Quarterly Review
Jaffe and Henderson do not, however, ascribe this as some form of top down
doctrine of the separation of powers as it might be understood
taxonomy of top down and bottom up reasoning is mainly deployed in
constitutional law. See, eg, Keith Mason, ‘What is Wrong
With Top-Down
Reasoning?’
Australian Law Journal
The taxonomy, in
the context of judicial review, is discussed in Stephen Gageler, ‘The
Underpinnings of Judicial Review of
Administrative Action: Common Law or
Constitution
Federal Law Review
seems the implicit point in Kirby J’s pointed suggestion that even the
most crude bottom uppers must ‘have some
concept of the principle by which
the analogy is to be discovered’ by which they will be guided:
Shire Council v Day
[1998] HCA 3
(1998) 192 CLR 330
this point it is useful to note the date of Oliver’s influential article
which stimulated energetic English debate on the
basis of judicial review: Dawn
Oliver, ‘Is the Ultra Vires Rule the Basis of Judicial Review?’
The appearance of such a piece around four
centuries after judicial review had become part of the English legal landscape,
uncertainty about the basis of judicial review that it revealed,
provides compelling evidence of the bottom up nature of English
most notable recent example being
Plaintiff S157/2002 v Commonwealth
[2003] HCA 2
(2003) 211 CLR 476
and the voluminous literature which followed that case.
Anthony Mason, ‘Procedural Fairness: Its Development and Continuing Role
of Legitimate Expectations’
Australian Journal of
Administrative Law
expression is taken from ‘Two Constitutions Compared’ in Owen Dixon,
Jesting Pilate
(1965) 247. Dixon’s legalism and its legacy are
discussed in Jeffrey Goldsworthy, ‘The Australian Devotion to
in Jeffrey Goldsworthy (ed),
Interpreting Constitutions
Anthony Mason, ‘Procedural Fairness: Its Development and Continuing Role
of the Legitimate Expectation’
Australian Journal of
Administrative Law
, 109. Sir Anthony expressed similar views more
recently in Sir Anthony Mason, ‘Mike Taggart and Australian
Exceptionalism’
in Linda Pearson, Carol Harlow and Mike Taggart (eds),
Administrative Law in a Changing State
Cowen and Zines’s Federal Jurisdiction in Australia
Lange v Australian Broadcasting Commission
[1997] HCA 25
(1997) 189 CLR 520
Kruger v Commonwealth
[1997] HCA 27
(1997) 190 CLR 1
, 175. There is, however,
considerable authority which also confirms that Australia’s federal system
enables a fair level of
variation between the States and the Commonwealth in
some areas. See, eg,
North Australian Aboriginal Legal Aid Service Inc v
[2004] HCA 31
(2004) 218 CLR 146
(Gleeson CJ);
Fardon v Attorney-General
[2004] HCA 46
(2004) 223 CLR 575
(McHugh J);
K-Generation Pty Ltd v
Liquor Licensing Court
[2009] HCA 4
(2009) 237 CLR 501
(French CJ), [229] (Kirby
239 CLR 531.
239 CLR 531 at [98].
239 CLR 531 at [98].
239 CLR 531 at [99].
239 CLR 531 at [100].
Kable v DPP (NSW)
[1996] HCA 24
(1996) 189 CLR 51
case and its consequences are explained in Peter Johnston and Rohan Hardcastle,
‘State Courts: The Limits of
[1998] SydLawRw 10
and Fiona Wheeler, ‘The
Doctrine and State
Legislative Power over State Courts’ (2005) 20(2)
Australasian
Parliamentary Review
15. The doctrine was also successfully invoked in
International Finance Trust Co Ltd v NSW Crime Commission
(2009) 240 CLR
Totani v South Australia
[2009] SASC 301
(2009) 105 SASR 244.
Fardon v Attorney-General (Qld)
[2004] HCA 46
(2004) 223 CLR 575
Australian Securities and Investments Commission
[2006] HCA 44
(2006) 228 CLR 45
Jokers Motorcycle Club v Commissioner of Police (WA)
(2008) 208 CLR 532
K-Generation Pty Ltd v Liquor Licensing Court
[2009] HCA 4
(2009) 237 CLR 501.
Attempts to invoke the incompatibility doctrine failed in all of these
Kirk v Industrial Relations Commission of NSW
(2010) 239 CLR 531 at [69]
the High Court noted that the distinction between courts and tribunals
‘may not always be drawn easily,
for there is not, in the States’
constitutional arrangements, that same separation of powers that is required at
level by Ch III of the
Constitution
.’ This cryptic passage might
be interpreted as an acceptance of the blend of judicial and administrative
functions that has
arisen in some State tribunals.
Victorian Civil and Administrative Tribunal Act
State Administrative Tribunal Act
is a consequence of
Brandy v Human Rights & Equal Opportunity Commission
[1995] HCA 10
(1995) 183 CLR 245
where the High Court held that the power to enforce
determinations was an aspect of judicial power that could only be exercised by
bodies that met the requirements of a court established under ChIII. The High
Court held that any determination of a tribunal could
only be made enforceable
upon ‘an independent exercise of judicial power’:
[1995] HCA 10
(1996) 183 CLR
, 261 (Mason CJ, Brennan and Toohey JJ), 270-1 (Deane, Dawson, Gaudron and
McHugh JJ).
of the wider themes in this point are explored in Geoffrey Kennett, ‘Fault
Lines in the Autochthonous Expedient: The Problem
of State Tribunals’
Public Law Review
suggests that the issue might require the High Court to revisit the implications
Constitution
: Geoffrey Kennett, ‘Fault Lines in the
Autochthonous Expedient: The Problem of State Tribunals’
Public Law Review
Gageler, ‘The Underpinnings of Judicial Review: Common Law or
Constitution
Federal Law Review
Gageler, ‘The Underpinnings of Judicial Review: Common Law or
Constitution
Federal Law Review
Selway, ‘The Principle Behind Common Law Judicial Review of Administrative
Action – The Search Continues’
Federal Law Review
Selway, ‘The Principle Behind Common Law Judicial Review of Administrative
Action – The Search Continues’
Federal Law Review
[2000] HCA 5
199 CLR 135.
Established
Chevron USA Inc v Natural Resources Council Inc
[1984] USSC 140
(1984). The
doctrine is explained in Richard Pierce,
Administrative Law
(4th ed, 2004) 139-191.
Corporation
of the City of Enfield v Development Assessment Commission
(2000) 199 CLR
[43]-[44] 135, 152-4 (Gleeson CJ, Gummow, Kirby and Hayne JJ), citing
Attorney-General (NSW) v Quin
(1990) 170 CLR 1
, 35-6 (Brennan J). A
separate but related point is that the deference accorded to administrative
agencies by the United States Supreme
Court has long been criticised on the
ground that it involves a retreat from the sole jurisdiction over legal issues
by the courts
that was so forcefully asserted in
Marbury v Madison
[1803] USSC 16
1 Cranch 137
; 5 US 87 (and relied upon by Brennan J in
apparent retreat marked by
has its supporters. See Cass Sunstein,
: The Executive’s Power to Say What the Law
Yale Law Journal
for Immigration and Multicultural Affairs; Ex parte Lam ('Lam')
discussion by the High Court of substantive unfairness was somewhat curious
given that Lam only relied on a strictly procedural
variant of the legitimate
expectation.
key case was
R v North and East Devon Health Authority; Ex parte Coughlan
[2000] QB 213. That case is examined from an Australian perspective in Cameron
Stewart, ‘Substantive Unfairness: A New Species
of Abuse of Power?’
Federal Law Review
; Matthew Groves, ‘Substantive
Legitimate Expectations in Australian Administrative Law’
[2008] MelbULawRw 15
Melbourne University Law Review
v North and East Devon Health Authority; Ex parte Coughlan
[2000] QB 213,
Elliott, 'Legitimate Expectation, Consistency and Abuse of Power: The
Judicial Review
, 285; Matthew
Groves, ‘The Surrogacy Principle and Motherhood Statements in
Administrative Law’ in Linda Pearson, Carol
Harlow and Michael Taggart
Administrative Law in a Changing State
J agreed that the legitimate expectation could ‘on no view...give rise to
substantive rights rather than procedural
(2003) 214 CLR 1
opposed to the increasing influence of European law, which McHugh and Gummow JJ
suggested had greatly affected the reasoning in
(2003) 214 CLR
, [73]-[74].
, [76]. See also [102].
the history and scope of the
Charter of Rights
Priyanga Hettiarachi, ‘Some Things Borrowed, Some Things New: An Overview
of Judicial Review of Legislation under the
Charter of Human Rights and
Responsibilities
Oxford University Commonwealth Law
has also almost certainly played a role in the adoption of the doctrine of
substantive unfairness in England because substantive
unfairness is perhaps the
best instance of the increased rights-based focus of judicial review that Craig
has identified.
Administrative Law
(6th ed, 2008) 1-025. The suggestion that the
Human Rights Act
(Eng) provides a ‘justification’ for
rights-based review is somewhat ironic because it might be taken to imply that
(and the judges who have so ardently pursued this rights based approach in
England) were searching for a convenient basis upon which
to affix an approach
that may have been waiting in the wings for some time.
pointedly rejects arguments to the contrary on the basis that ‘in a
constitutional democracy it is both right and proper
for the courts to impose
limits on the way in which power is exercised in order to prevent abuse of that
power’: Paul Craig,
Administrative Law
(6th ed, 2008) 1-034. It
does not seem to occur to Craig that similar considerations of democratic
pluralist values could support
some limits upon the role of the courts as well
as the executive and its officials. A similar view appears to be favoured by
who argues that the
Human Rights Act
(Eng) has fundamentally
altered the relationship between the courts and the parliament, to essentially
increase the reach of the
courts. Jowell also does not appear to conceive that
this new judicial power might or should be accompanied by limits: Jeffrey
‘Parliamentary Sovereignty Under the New Constitutional
Hypothesis’
history of the
and other contemporaneous reforms to
administrative law are detailed in Robin Creyke and John McMillan (eds),
Kerr Vision of Australian Administrative Law at the Twenty Five Year Mark
obvious exception is the ‘no evidence’ ground in ss 5(1)(h)(3) and
6(1)(h)(3) of the
. This statutory ground clearly alters the
common law equivalent.
[1985] HCA 81
159 CLR 550.
ground of denial of natural justice is available in ss5(1)(a), 6(1)(a) of the
162 CLR 24.
grounds are ss5(1)(j), 6(1)(j) [otherwise contrary to law] and ss5(1)(e)(2)(j),
6(1)(e)(2)(j) [an improper exercise of power
amounting to an abuse of power] in
Aronson, Bruce Dyer and Matthew Groves,
Judicial Review of Administrative
(4th ed, 2009) 3.165. Wade reached a similar view many years earlier:
Constitutional Fundamentals
(revised ed, 1989) 90.
used this description in ‘Substantive Legitimate Expectations in
Australian Administrative Law’
[2008] MelbULawRw 15
Melbourne University Law
Australian Law Reform Commission,
Report on Judicial Review of Administrative
(Project No 95, 2002) 23-4.
[2003] HCA 30
198 ALR 59.
[2003] HCA 30
98 ALR, [157].
Australian Law Reform Commission,
Report on Judicial Review of Administrative
(Project No 95, 2002) 23.
Australian Law Reform Commission,
Report on Judicial Review of Administrative
(Project No 95, 2002) 23.
was recommended in P Bayne,
Judicial Review in Victoria
Attorney-General’s Advisory Council, Expert Report No 5, 1999),
recommendation 12.
Aronson, ‘Is the ADJR Act Hampering the Development of Australian
Administrative Law?’
Australian Journal of Administrative
Aronson, ‘Is the ADJR Act Hampering the Development of Australian
Administrative Law?’
Australian Journal of Administrative
, 96. Aronson suggested that the scope of the Act extend beyond
‘decisions of an
administrative
character’.
Aronson, ‘Is the ADJR Act Hampering the Development of Australian
Administrative Law?’
Australian Journal of Administrative
obvious example is the series of attempts to codify the requirements of the
hearing rule before the Refugee Review Tribunal and
exclude the implication of
other requirements of natural justice.
Aronson, ‘Is the ADJR Act Hampering the Development of Australian
Administrative Law?’
Australian Journal of Administrative
, 96 (emphasis in original) .
Aronson, ‘Is the ADJR Act Hampering the Development of Australian
Administrative Law?’
Australian Journal of Administrative
[2003] HCA 30
198 ALR 59.
[2003] HCA 30
foundation case was
R v Inland Revenue Commissioners; Ex parte Preston
[1984] UKHL 5
[1985] AC 835
where the House of Lords granted relief to an applicant who
claimed unfairness in relation to a tax decision. The Lords relied on
mixture of natural justice principles and abuse of power, though they did not
elaborate on the latter concept. The reliance
upon abuse of
power appeared to provide the basis a year later for the grant of relief on the
basis of ‘conspicuous unfairness’
R v Inland Revenue
Commissioners; Ex parte Unilever plc
[1996] STC 681, 695. The notion of
conspicuous unfairness was revised with gusto by the Court of Appeal in
Secretary of State for the Home Department v R (Rashid)
[2005] EWCA Civ
Elliott, ‘Legitimate Expectation, Consistency and Abuse of Power: The
Judicial Review
was recommended in P Bayne,
Judicial Review in Victoria
Attorney-General’s Advisory Council, Expert Report No 5, 1999) and Law
Reform Commission of Western Australia,
Report on Judicial Review
Administrative Decisions
(Project No 95, 2002).
nature of those jurisdictions is explained in Mark Aronson, Bruce Dyer and
Matthew Groves,
Judicial Review of Administrative Action
(4th ed, 2009)
Australian Law Reform Commission,
Report on Judicial Review of Administrative
(Project No 95, 2002) 26.
benefits were also recognised by the author of the 1999 review of the Victorian
scheme in Peter Bayne, ‘Reform of Judicial
Review – A New
Model?’ (1996) 79
Canberra Bulletin of Public Administration
Australian Law Reform Commission,
Report on Judicial Review of Administrative
(Project No 95, 2002) 26.
the example given in Mark Aronson, Bruce Dyer and Matthew Groves,
Review of Administrative Action
(4th ed, 2009) 2.285 where a reform
recommended to the
by the Administrative Review Council was
rejected by the Commonwealth but adopted by Queensland.
Note SC CL 3 enables applicants for judicial review to obtain reasons for
decision. The main drawback of this right is that
it is triggered only upon
commencement of proceedings for judicial review, which is not required in the
various statutory rights
to obtain reasons.
3 of the Act enables ‘any person affected’ to seek judicial review
of a decision to which the Act applies. This
approach abolishes the old common
distinctions in standing that existed between the various prerogatives writs.
8. This provision is much simpler than the
equivalent in
uncertainty can be traced to
FAI Insurances Ltd v Winneke
[1982] HCA 26
(1982) 151 CLR
in which Brennan J suggested that the Victorian Act did not extend to a
hearing in which an official advised the ultimate decision-maker.
The issue was
important in
because the ‘adviser’ in the case was a
minister and the nominal decision-maker was the Governor in Council. The other
members of the High Court did not address this point and it has remained
unresolved. Another similarly technical issue surrounding
the Victorian Act that
remains unresolved is whether the definition of ‘tribunal’ includes
a decision-maker who may not
be obliged to meet the requirements of fairness but
is subject to a right of review that may attract that obligation. There is
that the original decision-maker is not a ‘tribunal’ for
the purposes of the
Administrative Law Act
Football Club Ltd v Commissioner of Payroll Tax
[1983] VicRp 47
[1983] 1 VR 505.
v Bayside City Council
[1996] 1 VR 357
Quality Packaging Service Pty Ltd
v City of Brunswick
[1996] VR 829
Kuek v Victorian Legal Aid
[1999] VSCA 44
Supreme Court Act
replaced the old common law judgments
and prerogative writs with a single order or judgment. The latest version of the
originating
motion, by which the new order or judgment may be sought, is
contained in
Supreme Court (General Civil Procedure) Rules
approach was arguably established by early cases which adopted a cautious
interpretation of the Act. See Leslie Glick, ‘Get
Behind Me Satan: Or Some
Recent Decisions on the Administrative Law Act 1978’
[1980] MelbULawRw 6
Melbourne University Law Review
example, courts may issue advisory opinions about proposed Bills. This
possibility was accepted by the Privy Council and then
the Supreme Court of
Attorney-General (Ontario) v Attorney-General (Canada)
[1912] UKLawRpAC 31
In re Succession Reference
[1998] 2 SCR 217 (SCC).
Canadian administrative law are examined from an Australian view in more detail
in Matthew Groves, ‘The Differing
and Disappearing Standards of Judicial
Review in Canada’
Australian Journal of Administrative
(Minister for Immigration and Citizenship) v Khosa
[2009] 1 SCR 339
Binnie J (McLachlin CJ, Le Bel, Abella, Charron JJ agreeing).
(Minister for Immigration and Citizenship) v Khosa
[2009] 1 SCR 339
Binnie J (McLachlin CJ, Le Bel, Abella, Charron JJ agreeing).
Sinai Hospital Center v Quebec (Minister of Health and Social Services)
[2001] 2 SCR 281
('Mount Sinai')
at [27] (Binnie J).
useful analysis of these criticisms is given from an Australian view in Margaret
Allars, ‘A General Tribunal Procedure State
for New South Wales?’
Public Law Review
Administrative Procedures Act RSA 2000
Administrative Justice Act SQ 1996
; and British Columbia’s
Administrative Tribunals Act SBC 2004
exception would appear to be the scheme adopted in Quebec which consists of
several statutes governing administrative agencies
and a procedure that is
strongly influenced by French administrative law. This scheme is usefully
explained in Denis Lemieux, ‘Codification
of Administrative Law in
Quebec’ in Grant Huscroft and Mike Taggart (eds),
Inside and Outside
Canadian Administrative Law
eg, the description of the British Columbia Act given in Diane Flood, Elizabeth
Loughran and Richard Rogers, ‘British
Columbia’s New
Administrative Tribunals Act
Canadian Journal of
Administrative Law and Practice
Rankin, ‘The
Administrative Tribunals Act
: Evaluating Reforms of
the Standard of Review and Tribunals’ Jurisdiction Over Constitutional
Canadian Journal of Administrative Law and Practice
It is useful to note that quite different concerns have been expressed
USA, which many
commentators argue have been subject to partisan reforms which reflect
particular political views about the level
of regulation to which administrative
agencies should be subject. An informative account is contained in Jim Rossi,
Institutions and Administrative Procedure: What Exactly Do We
Know from the Empirical Study of State Level APAs and What More Can
Administrative Law Review
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (289 KB)
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter