URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/journals/LegEdDig/2013/45.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 15:13:49
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Broadbent, G; Sellman, P --- "Great expectations? Law schools, websites and 'the student experience'" [2013] LegEdDig 45; (2013) 21(3) Legal Education Digest 47
Great expectations? Law schools, websites and ‘the student experience’
Great expectations? Law schools, websites and
‘the student experience’
G Broadbent and P Sellman
The Law Teacher
, Vol 47, No 1, 2013, pp 44-63
As part of a wider study of the ways in which university law schools
represent themselves and legal education through their web pages,
this article
focuses on the ways in which law schools project images of ‘the student
experience’ that those studying
law might gain from studying at that
particular institution, with particular reference to undergraduate students, and
the context
within which this operates. The provision of information by
universities has become a much discussed issue in recent times. The National
Union of Students (NUS) has, over a period of time, argued for better provision
of information from universities for existing and
prospective students. More
recently, the Browne Review took up the theme, arguing for greater availability
of material to inform
not just students but other stakeholders. The recent White
Paper largely adopted the Browne recommendations and led to the joint
Education Funding Council for England (HEFCE), Universities UK and Guild HE
policy document which sets out, in line with the
White Paper, the requirements
for the ‘Key Information Sets’ (KIS) that all HE institutions are
providing from September
Institutional web pages have a significant role to play in providing the
‘official’ version of information about
any particular law school,
its views and activities and, more widely, about the university in which it is
located. However, they
exist as only one source amongst a whole host of others,
whether official or unofficial, formal or informal. The mere availability
information is, however, only part of the picture: the understanding and use of
that information are also important.
In the present context, given the diversity of the student body in many
(though by no means all) universities, it becomes artificial
‘the student experience’ as if there is only one. Promotion of
‘the student experience’ at any
particular law school as part of the
projection of the image of the law school may, however, play a part in the
process of encouraging
undergraduate applicants, particularly if accompanied by
glowing student testimonials, as well as informing them.
The benefits of higher education have been promoted in official discourse
largely, though not exclusively, in economic terms: higher
levels of education
lead to higher levels of individual economic benefit via higher earnings over
the life course, and this, in turn,
benefits the country in economic terms by
providing a workforce sufficiently skilled to ensure that the UK remains
competitive in
the global marketplace. If this is correct, then it is not
surprising that subjects such as law, which appear to lead to substantial
financial rewards, become more attractive to prospective students and it is not
surprising to find this reflected in law school web
This is important because the economic inducement to individuals that they
will earn more as graduates only works if the supply of
graduate jobs is not
exceeded by the demand for them. It has been the case for some time that the
number of graduates that the traditional
branches of the legal profession can
absorb has been exceeded significantly by the number of law graduates, though
some of the impact
of this has been offset by the ability of law graduates to
secure employment in fields other than traditional legal practice.
Despite the formal abolition of the binary divide, there are still
distinctions between institutions in practice and these are reflected
pages of both universities and law schools. Whilst the pre-1992 university law
schools have retained their research focus
and their national and international
character, the post-1992 institutions are more likely to emphasise teaching and,
Andrew Marks
argues, have remained essentially local in character. For
non-traditional students, who are less likely to be mobile because of domestic
or economic commitments, this restricts their choice and perpetuates
inequalities as institutions become ‘widening participation
institutions’. Indeed, the whole question of choice, assumed by Browne and
the recent White Paper, is rather misleading, as,
for many students aspiring to
study law, there will be little or no real choice. As well as academic criteria,
cultural factors also
have an effect on university choice. Studies on widening
participation suggest that some applicants, especially but not exclusively
mature and/or minority ethnic students, have concerns about whether they will
‘fit in’ at a particular institution or
on a particular course and
the institution’s publications and projected images play a part in this
decision-making process.
Although many law schools offer open days or similar events, the importance
of material contained on web pages is heightened as it
may provide the only
appear to recognise this and try
to anticipate it by having ‘frequently
asked questions’ or similar as a feature of their websites, together with
whether static or moving, of the campus in tacit recognition that
prospective students may not otherwise see it prior to starting
the course.
For many students, studying law will involve engagement with a subject they
have not previously encountered. This means that there
is no direct experience
to draw on, thus increasing reliance, at least before starting a law degree, on
what others say about it.
There is no longer a single model of student
experience at university, let alone of the range of experiences of law students,
university material often projects the ‘traditional’ student
life of the person aged late teens or early 20s, usually
to the accompaniment of
pulsating rock music, enjoying both curricular and extracurricular activities,
and talks in terms of ‘the
student experience’ as though there was
only one. Many students work part time, or live at home or have domestic
commitments,
thus limiting their engagement with the university and often
precluding them from taking part in extracurricular activities, yet
hardly ever reflected in material on law school websites. Perhaps web pages
should also seek to correct misapprehensions
based on media images, which do not
portray the realities and variety of the lives of modern law students in this
country and may
contribute to setting up false expectations as to how, for
example, law will be studied. The relationship between expectation and
experience is of particular significance, as it has been suggested that unmet
expectations are a key factor in dissatisfaction amongst
law students and in the
non-completion of degree courses generally.
Dealing with any form of collective activity, such as classes, means that,
inevitably, the organisation cannot cater for every wish
of every individual.
However, for present purposes, in this consumer era, universities may need to
make clear what they can and cannot
do with regard to matters such as scheduling
of classes in order to avoid dissatisfaction later. It is of interest to note
studies that have been carried out of student wishes in terms of
information there is a contrast between the very specific information
seem to want and the more generalised forms of information that university
websites and the like are able to provide, though
this may now be partly
addressed by KIS.
Traditional methods of communication, such as prospectuses and websites,
might not reach the audience that needs it most, namely those
who are not
familiar with the university sector or able to access advice on university
entrance and practices. Merely making information
available is not enough: the
information has to be comprehensible, in meaning and context, to its audience of
potential students
and other interested parties. This has implications for
equality: material that is not explicit about matters such as academic practices
privileges those with knowledge of such practices and discriminates against
those without, thus perpetuating inequalities. Equally,
however, students need
to take steps, in so far as they can, to make themselves aware of such matters
prior to starting the course,
as failure to do this may result in
non-completion. It is ultimately a two-way process.
This study has been carried out initially by accessing law school websites
and analysing their content from our standpoint as law
lecturers. Clearly, as
experienced law lecturers, our perspective will differ from that of the
prospective student, but our objective
was to explore the content of the
websites. We have studied the web pages of 45 of the 90 law schools in England
and Wales. The choice
of law schools included pre-1992 and post-1992
institutions and was selected randomly from within those categories, resulting
a wide geographical spread. As expected, the websites varied greatly with
regard to the information they contained. At a most basic
level, some websites
were more user friendly than others. Ease of navigation is a key issue, as much
of the more general information,
such as that relating to student support and
fees, was often on the university’s general website rather than the law
web pages. The websites are also clearly designed for the dual purposes
of providing information about the university and the law
school and as a
marketing tool.
As our immediate focus was on undergraduate degrees, we concentrated on the
LLB, leaving combined and postgraduate programmes for
future study. Most of the
law school websites accessed for this study referred somewhere to the degree
structure, and included reference
to the foundation modules required for
completion of the academic stage of legal education. This was often by a cross-
to an online prospectus or similar document. Some provided links to
module descriptions or handbooks. It is unlikely that the presence
foundation subjects will have much impact on student choice in itself as they
will be universally present in course outlines.
Although some web pages split
the modules into the different levels or years, some did not. An applicant
looking for information
may not find information as to what was studied at each
level/year. Does this matter? Will studying land law at level 4/year 1 at
law school and level 5/year 2 at another help an applicant to decide between
different universities? Optional, or elective,
modules were also frequently
included but not always separated into the different levels. This could be
because many law schools
might not want to tie themselves into offering
particular modules at different levels, or to be seen as guaranteeing that those
modules would be offered. The range and type of optional modules
available may well be a factor in attracting a potential law student
particular institution, as, unlike the ever present foundation subjects,
this is a feature that differentiates law
schools from each other. Some
students may well not be aware of the meanings of some of the terms used until
they are registered
on a programme or have commenced their legal studies. A
further factor that may attract students to a particular law school is a
distinctive approach to legal education, something that was emphasised by
several in our study.
Information about assessment varied considerably. The Oakleigh Staffordshire
study that informed both the Browne Review and the 2011
White Paper suggested
that students wanted detailed information about assessment. This could be
provided by web pages linking to
module descriptions or handbooks, which is the
approach that some law schools took. Most, however, made general statements to
effect that assessments will include coursework and/or examinations.
There is, perhaps, a practical reason for not providing such
information on web pages, for if there are amendments to the assessment regime,
then the web pages will also have to be
amended. The increasing demand for more
information may mean that in the future law school web pages will be encouraged
links to specific module information.
The Oakleigh Staffordshire study also found that students wanted to know the
number of contact hours per week for the course. Whilst
this may be criticised
as seeing higher education as an extension of school and failing to understand
the greater focus on independent
learning at university, it was nevertheless
taken up by both Browne and the government and now appears as part of the
requirements
for the KIS that universities now have to compile. It is, at one
level, understandable that students may want this information, to
enable them to
fit studies around part-time jobs or domestic commitments. To help them in this,
however, they would also need timetable
information for the coming year which
was almost universally unavailable on the sites we visited. In terms of student
workload, some
websites did refer to the anticipated student workload of, for
example, ‘at least 40 hours per week’.
Staff details were much more readily accessible on some websites than on
others. The amount of information about individual staff
members varied greatly;
some had virtually nothing whilst at the other end of the spectrum were life
histories. The material was
often contained in a standard format which, in many
instances, meant the presence of a number of blanks for particular individuals.
Under the requirements for KIS, the teaching qualifications of staff will need
to be made available. Of all the sections of the law
school web pages, the staff
pages were the most likely to be out of date, with references, for example, to
forthcoming publications
in years long gone.
Many law schools, from all parts of the sector, sought to make a connection
between their research work and their teaching. However,
applicants may not
register the subtleties of the distinction between research-led teaching and
research-informed teaching. There
is an additional issue in that, as Lewis Elton
points out, research active staff will often buy out of teaching or be relieved
teaching duties in order to create more research time, which rather
undermines the benefits to teaching brought about by research.
A further effect
is that staff featured on the web pages will not necessarily be the people who
will teach on undergraduate courses.
Many websites included testimonials from current and former students, though
these were often contained in the university pages rather
than having dedicated
law school testimonials and not always easy to find: a sixth-former in Hannah
Fearn’s article ‘Deciphering
the Code’ is quoted as saying:
‘I struggled to find student comments, and if I did they were always good
and never bad
ones.’ There was considerable variety in format, from a
short written paragraph to videos. The videos did not always give a
of information but were usually short (e.g. 56 seconds) and clearly used to show
that students were happy, staff were
particular university led to great opportunities.
Employment tends to be represented on law school web pages in two ways.
First, by indicating the potential careers for law graduates
and secondly, by
highlighting the careers of some alumni. A further dimension has now been added,
as employment destinations and
the salaries attaching to them have become part
Predictably, given the qualifying status of the law degree, the material on
the websites focused on careers in the traditional branches
of the legal
profession. An article in
The New York Times
highlighted the experiences
of law graduates in seeking employment. The main complaint centred on the fact
that law schools had held
out law degrees to be a gateway to good employment,
but for many graduates this was not the case.
Most law schools appear to assume that applicants looking at law school pages
on a website are sure that they want to study law and
that they know what this
entails. There was little to indicate that students will have to spend hours
reading. Photographs reflected
none of the despair, stress and looks of panic
around assessment times!
Whilst there are large amounts of material available to prospective
applicants, the material is often fragmented and not always easy
to find, and
this is exacerbated where links do not work. Even when accessed it can be
difficult to read and understand. It can be
confusing and time consuming going
between a university’s website and a law school’s web pages and,
often, university
material is general rather than specific to the law school.
This, in part, lies behind the impetus for KIS, which are designed to
information in an accessible and uniform fashion to enable prospective students
to compare institutions more readily. What
potential students want to know and
what law schools want to say about themselves do not necessarily coincide: as
one sixth former
put it in an article in
Times Higher Education
‘Most university websites don’t show you information you want to
know, they just show you the information that they want
you to know.
That’s quite stupid really.’ But is it stupid? This would suggest
that the content of web pages should be
driven solely by the wishes of the user.
It is surely not as simple as that. Law schools need to be able to use material
out about themselves to project their identity and to reflect the
things that are important to them as well as satisfying the demands
Ideally, both could be accommodated.
One of the most notable features of our investigation of law school web pages
is the variety in style and content, with each law school
doing something
distinctive. Perhaps applicants may find this very distinctiveness unhelpful and
would prefer each law school website
to be in the same format and carry the same
information. It will be sad if external intervention leads to standardisation
bland uniformity, as the current picture is one of vibrancy and
variety that reflects the diversity of law schools.
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (681 KB)
PDF format (3.28 MB)
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter