URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/journals/UTSLRS/2018/14.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 15:51:27
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Goldblatt, Beth; Rai, Shirin --- "Recognizing the Full Costs of Care? Compensation for Families in South Africa's Silicosis Class Action" [2018] UTSLRS 14; (2018) Social and Legal Studies, vol. 27, no. 6
Recognising the full costs of care? Compensation for families in South
Africa’s silicosis class action
Beth Goldblatt
A later version of this article appears in Social & Legal Studies,
This article concerns recognition and compensation of the intimate, gendered
work of caring by family members for workers who became
ill with lung diseases
as a result of poor labour conditions in the mines in South Africa. It focuses
on a recent decision by a
court in South Africa, (
Nkala and Others v Harmony
Gold Mining Company Limited and Others
, 2016) that took the unusual step of
acknowledging this care work and attempting to compensate it indirectly. The
article combines
insights from political economy and law within a feminist frame
to develop an argument about compensation for social reproductive
address the harm experienced by the carers of mineworkers. Using the theory of
depletion through social reproduction, it
suggests ways of understanding the
costs of care in order to fully compensate the harms suffered by the carers.
This is done with
reference to a photographic essay by Thom Pierce called
‘The Price of Gold’ taken in the mineworkers’ homes after
their discharge from work due to illness. The article argues that ideas of
depletion should inform any consideration of compensation
of people engaged in
caring in a range of reparatory contexts.
Introduction
This article concerns recognition and compensation of the intimate, gendered
and unremunerated work of caring, in this case for relatives
of mine workers who
became ill as a result of silicosis and Tuberculosis (TB) in South African gold
mines. In its decision in
Nkala and Others v Harmony Gold Mining Company
, 2016, a court took the unusual step of
acknowledging this care work and attempting to compensate it partially, albeit
via the legal
‘backdoor’. The article combines insights from
political economy and law within a feminist frame to develop an argument
compensation for social reproductive work to address the harm experienced by the
carers of mineworkers. Using the theory of
depletion through social reproduction
(Rai, Hoskyns and Thomas, 2014), the article examines how we understand the
costs of care in
order to fully compensate the harms suffered by the carers. We
do this by examining a series of photographs and accompanying descriptions
Thom Pierce called
The Price of Gold
taken in the mineworkers’
In so doing, we tease out
some of the complexities of the calculation of loss for economic and legal
measurement that should inform
any consideration of compensation of people
engaged in caring for those who are injured or ill in a range of reparatory
We link this discussion to feminist critiques of the law of damages
that expose the way in which traditional legal categories ignore
and exclude
women’s unpaid work. By using a feminist approach that unpacks and
acknowledges care in its many dimensions, we
challenge the structural
devaluation of intimate labour.
In May 2016 the South African High Court (Gauteng Local Division) granted an
order in the case of
Nkala and Others v Harmony Gold Mining Company Limited
, 2016certifying a consolidated class action against 32 mining
companies by mineworkers and their dependents who contracted silicosis
The litigation that led to this decision began in 2012 with efforts dating back
to 2009 by some of the lawyers involved in
the case (Chisholm &
Lépiz, 2017; Ledwaba and Sadiki, 2016). The case concerns the
contraction, since 1965, of silicosis,
by miners breathing in silica dust
generated during mining. The disease can take many years to manifest, is
incurable, debilitating
and often fatal. The mineworkers argued that exposure to
silica dust also increases the risk of TB, a lung disease caused by bacterial
infection. Once miners became too ill to work they returned to their families
who became tasked with their care. The
decision, a landmark
judgment in the development of class action law in South Africa, authorises the
commencement of the largest
class action litigation ever to occur in the
country, with almost half a million possible claimants (Chisholm &
The article
focuses on the aspect of the decision that concerns the access of dependents of
the miners to parts of the compensatory
damages potentially arising from this
claim. It then discusses the issue of unpaid care work by the families of the
miners using
the theory of depletion through social reproduction. It goes on to
apply this theoretical frame in analysing some of the photographs
taken by Thom
Pierce to consider the complex and varied dimensions of harm suffered by the
family members of the miners. Following
this it looks at legal responses to
compensation for unpaid care and how social reproduction and its depletion
should be built into
the law’s approach to remedying this harm whether
through damages, reparations or other means.
The case against the mines and their complicity in the illness and death of
possibly hundreds of thousands of mine workers should
be understood within the
history of the symbiotic relationship between mining capital and the colonial,
post-colonial and apartheid
states in South Africa over the past 130 years since
gold was first discovered in the
Witwatersrand.
The state colluded
with the mining industry to ensure its supply of cheap, Black labour and the
mines funded the development of the
Apartheid state (Wilson, 2014: 7). The
migrant labour system was central to this collusion in providing a pool of cheap
labour. Workers
were legally prevented from living in areas close to the mines
and were housed in poor conditions in mine compounds for part of the
returned to families for brief visits in the rural ‘labour reserves’
or ‘Bantustans’, racially
designated areas with limited land,
services or infrastructure, to which communities were removed coercively and
lived in poverty.
By removing Black people’s access to their land and
livelihood, they were effectively forced to become migrant labourers (Wilson,
2014: 9). Many mine workers also came from neighbouring countries, particularly
Lesotho, Mozambique and Malawi (Wilson, 2014: 10).
At its peak in the mid-1980s,
half a million Black workers were employed in the mines (ibid). This has been
declining steadily since
then to around 120 000 workers in 2016 with the slowing
of production (Ledwaba & Sadiki, 2016 quoting the Chamber of Mines: 145).
When workers returned to their homes they encountered limited access to health
care and social security (Wilson, 2014: 28-32). Family
members, usually women,
were left to provide the bulk of the care for these workers, on an unpaid basis.
This caring work, which
is deeply gendered, further entrenched women’s
poverty and inequality which was already severe in areas which supplied labour
to the mines (Peacock, 2014: 6-9).
The litigation is significant in shining the spotlight on the historical
legacy of a system of state and private sector complicity
leading to structural
violence against mineworkers and their families. The development of class action
law in the judgment is not,
however, the focus of our discussion. Of interest
here is a less prominent feature of the court’s decision dealing with the
legal question of whether certain ‘personal’ claims for compensation
are transmissible to the heirs of mineworkers who
die before the claim
officially commences. The next section will discuss this dimension of the
judgment which has resulted in progressive development of the law
in South Africa and a noteworthy finding on the issue of unpaid
Transmissibility of damages
The South African law of delict (in other common law countries known as
‘tort’) allows for claims for damages for monetary
loss caused by
wrongful injuries to a person (such as loss of income and medical expenses)
known as special damages. It also allows
claims for wrongful injuries to a
person’s body leading to pain and suffering, loss of amenities of life and
disfigurement
that is not readily calculable (non-economic loss) but which can
be given a monetary value by the courts as a form of compensation,
general damages. The law has refused to allow general damages, as a claim
arising only from the personal experience of suffering,
from being transmitted
to a person’s estate. The dependents are, however, still able to claim
loss of support and the estate
can claim damage to property, while both can
claim medical and funeral expenses (
, at para 187). The exception
to this, based on Roman Law, is that once
litis contestatio
pleadings) has been reached the executor of the estate is allowed to effectively
assume the role of the deceased and can
pursue all pleaded claims, including
those for general damages (at para 188). The reason behind this is that a claim
made by a person
before death is effectively ‘frozen’ once
contestatio
is reached and the executor is simply ‘stepping into the
shoes’ of the deceased rather than bringing a claim in her/his
right’ (at para 188). Mojapelo DJP and Vally J, the majority of a full
bench of the provincial high court in the
case, noted that reaching
litis contestatio
in Roman times was quite straightforward but under
current South African court procedure is a much more complicated and uncertain
issue (at para 189).
Pleadings may
appear to be closed but an amendment to pleadings at a late stage can change
this status, including if made by a defendant
attempting to prolong close of
pleadings or litigation as a whole.
The failure of the common law of damages to ‘keep pace’ with the
changes to the law of procedure (at para 191) led the
mineworkers to claim that
the common law required development to avoid causing injustice or infringing
South Africa’s Bill
of Rights. They asked the Court to develop the common
law to allow all claims in the class action, including those for general
to be counted from the date of the launch of the certification
application (at para 192). The Court accepted this challenge mindful
obligation to ensure that the common law is responsive to changing social
conditions and remains relevant and appropriate.
This judicial role is accepted
across common law systems. The additional dimension, in the South African
context, is the existence
of a constitutional mandate to the courts to develop
the common law consistent with the ‘spirit, purport and objects of the
Bill of Rights’ (
Constitution
of the Republic of South Africa,
, s8(3) and s
(2)). The mineworkers argued that by disallowing the
transmission of the general damages claims to their estates, the law violated
number of their rights including to equality, dignity, life, access to the
courts, and freedom and security of the person which
includes a right to bodily
integrity (at para 199). They claimed that their right to compensation, for
damages suffered as a result
of the mining companies’ actions, should be
able to benefit their dependents even if they do not survive the litigation
to benefit from it themselves. This implicated their right to equality
since those who survive their illnesses for the duration of
the action and their
dependents would be in a better position than those who do not, the latter group
suffering discrimination as
a result (at para 204).
The Court found that there had been legislative developments in the United
Kingdom, Australia and the United States to address the
issue of damages for
personal injury reaching the estates of people wrongfully injured who later died
as a result (at paras 205-9).
The Court also noted that since the first
applications that preceded the class action a significant number of mineworker
had died and others might succumb before the matter was finalised. It
thus found that failure to develop the law would result in
injustice’ that would benefit the mining companies as a result of the
‘very harm they caused the deceased
class member’ (at para 213). The
Court noted that the harm resulting from the loss of the general damages would
impact on the
widows and children of the deceased mineworkers, ‘the
indigent, weak and vulnerable in our society’ while benefiting
‘powerful corporates’ (at para 213). Significantly, the Court added
the following point (at para 213):
It has to be borne in mind that while the mineworker experienced pain and
suffering from the loss of amenities of life prior to his
death, his widow and
children too, bore some hardship by virtue of the care they were required to
give to him as a result of his
loss of amenities of life.
The gender bias inherent in the common law rule under consideration by the
Court was raised by the
amici curiae
in this case. In prior proceedings
amici curiae
were admitted to the certification case. These
non-governmental organisations are the Treatment Action Campaign, representing
of the public healthcare system in South Africa, and Sonke Gender Justice,
working on issues of gender equality. Both organisations
raised arguments in
support of certification of the class action by the mineworkers. An affidavit by
Dean Peacock, the executive
director of Sonke Gender Justice, was admitted as
additional evidence in the case. Peacock’s evidence concerned the
implications of occupational lung disease’ focusing on the
‘disproportionate care burden carried by women’ (Peacock,
The major argument that
emerged from his evidence is that ill mineworkers are primarily dependent on
which is largely provided by women and girls due
to the lack of access to state provided compensation, social security and
care. Referring to the literature on the impact of care in the context
of HIV/AIDS in South Africa he detailed some of the effects
on the carers’
minds, bodies and finances. The Court accepted the evidence of the
that ill mineworkers in rural areas depended on ‘home-based
care’ provided by wives and daughters (at para 214). It noted
following impact of the provision of this care (at para 214):
The care-work is demanding and includes efforts such as carrying, lifting and
bathing the mineworkers, monitoring their medication,
and staying up at night to
attend to their needs. These women, and in some cases girls, are often anxious
of their loved ones, the mineworkers, and as a
result “have reported experiencing tearfulness, nightmares, insomnia,
anxiety, fear, despair and despondency, ... trauma ... headaches, body
aches and physical exhaustion.” In short, they too bear
a heavy burden as
a result of the mineworkers contracting silicosis and TB. Often, the care work
requires full-time attention, effectively
compelling many women and girls to
forego income-generating, educational, and other
opportunities.
The Court noted that general damages would benefit these carers by reducing
their care-work and would ‘indirectly compensate
them for the care-work
they have already provided’ (at para 214). Based on these arguments the
Court found that the common
law had to be developed to allow for general damages
claims to be transmitted to the estate of a deceased plaintiff who dies prior
litis contestatio
, and ordered that the date of the launch of the
application for certification, August 2012, be regarded as the date on which
by members of the class would be transmissible (at para 230(8)).
Aside from the import of the decision in overturning a long-standing legal
rule, the judgment is highly significant in recognising
the issue of unpaid care
work in the law of delict. This significance is two-fold. First, the judgment
gives attention to the many
dimensions of caring and the varied impacts of this
work on the carer. In so doing it acknowledges these tasks as work and their
impacts as harms, both of which are unusual in law which tends to overlook
unpaid caring work. Second, the judgment attempts to compensate
the carers for
the harms they have suffered. It is notable that the judges refer to
‘indirect compensation’ for this
work. Is this compensation by
stealth, through the legal back door that is normally closed to carers? The law
does not usually allow
carers to bring damages claims for their unpaid caring
work which is treated as gratuitous. This article argues that while the judges
attempted to develop the law some way towards addressing the
unfair position of carers, within the constraints of what they felt
possible, this does not take the law far enough. It suggests that unpaid caring
work and the depletion that arises from it should
be fully compensated directly
to the dependent carer.
The article now looks at the first issue raised by the judgment – the
nature of unpaid care, its impact on the carer and how
to understand and measure
it for the purpose of compensating it in law.
Unpaid care and depleted carers – Measuring uncounted work
This section aims not only to highlight the harmful effects of the mining
practices on the lives of the miners and those connected
to them, but also to
disaggregate what human life means in the law. Although the court recognised the
contribution that women make
to caring for the miners, and to the deleterious
effects of this work, like much of the law, globally, it did not recognise the
of domestic labour as labour with value. This is largely because domestic
work is placed outside the ‘production boundary’
and is not seen to
be contributing to the national GDP and therefore to the national economy.
Much has been written about the importance of this anomaly – of
excluding most of the work within the home as unproductive labour
its harmful effects (Waring, 1988; Picchio,
1992; Fraser, 2017
; Hoskyns and Rai,
2007). This literature challenges not only the domination of the market –
what counts is what can be commodified
and exchanged – but also of
gendered relations that reflect the (public) world of men but not the (private)
world of women’s
labour. While Marx and Polanyi see the effects of
commodification of the first count (the market) as the source of instability and
eventual crisis of the economy, feminists have argued that there is a
simultaneous crisis of reproduction that has its roots in the
denial of the
place of social reproduction in the economy and its commodification through the
market (Fraser, 2017; Elson, 2000).
Fraser has argued that social protection, in
Polanyian terms, is being undermined within state policy structures and this in
is affecting the boundaries of social reproduction as well as the
development of human capabilities (2011). Feminist economists have
also argued
that the restructuring of states and markets is leading to a situation where the
subsidy provided by social reproduction
is being increasingly relied upon to
fill the gaps in the state provision of welfare (Folbre, 2001; Elson,
Pearson 1998).
Rai et al (2014) argue that in order to identify the extent to
which this is harmful we need to measure the costs of social reproduction,
they term depletion through social reproduction (hereafter referred to as
‘depletion’).
In this article, we think about social reproduction as both “the
fleshy, messy, and indeterminate stuff of everyday life”
and “also a
set of structured practices that unfold in dialectical relation with production,
with which it is mutually constitutive
and in tension” (Katz, 2001: 710).
These practices include: 1) biological reproduction (including reproducing
labour). This
carries with it the provision of the sexual, emotional and
affective services that are required to maintain family and intimate
relationships;
2) unpaid production in the home of both goods and services. This
includes different forms of care, social provisioning through unpaid
subsistence farming, family business as well as voluntary work directed at
meeting needs in and of the community; and, 3)
the reproduction of culture and
ideology which stabilises (and sometimes challenges) dominant social relations
(Hoskyns and Rai,
2007:). Rai et al define depletion through social reproduction
as ‘the level at which the resource outflows exceed resource
carrying out social reproductive work over a threshold of sustainability, making
it harmful for those engaged in this
unvalued work’ (2014:3-4). The harm
through depletion is experienced not only by individuals involved in this work
health, both physical and mental, and to their sense of self as well
as to their entitlements), but also to the fabric of the household
and those who
inhabit it (in terms of the decrease in collective household resources:
including lack of leisure time spent together,
failure to manage the
consequences of an increase in the number of household members engaged in wage
labour and reduced support structures),
and to the communities within which
households and individuals live their lives (which would include the shrinking
of spaces for
community organisation as a result of a lack of time commitments
from those mobilized into paid work, a depletion of neighbourliness
possibilities of collective provisioning). Depletion through social reproductive
work then continues to leach out from the
labouring bodies, households and
communities, unrecognised, unmapped and unvalued and results in harm to those
engaged in this work.
If unrecognized, depletion erodes individual lives as well
as social institutions (family, community groups and resources), which
a crisis in society. Harm occurs when there is a ‘measurable deterioration
in the health and well-being of individuals
and the sustainability of households
and communities’ (Rai et al 2014:6), and when the inflows required to
sustain social reproduction
fall below a sustainable threshold. In this context,
despite social reproductive work being carried out within consensual social
relations, the doing of this work may still remain harmful. Analysing depletion
involves identifying indicators and forms of measurement
as well as developing
an appropriate terminology. Issues to do with harm and subsidy are relevant here
as well as questions about
the point at which depletion needs to be recognized,
accounted for and how in the end it can be reversed. We also need to understand
the scale of depletion and the rate at which it takes place. This would allow us
to understand and think through issues of compensation
for depletion for the
miners and their families.
The concept of depletion is valuable in understanding the everyday political
economy. It is not just useful for examining how depletion
follows the reduction
of state provided services due to economic crises but also aids in understanding
the political economy of work
and care in the global South (Hassim, 2008; Hassim
and Razavi, 2007; Razavi, 2006). It is particularly helpful in understanding
in the context of the South African mining industry and the State’s
role in legislating for enforced, racialised, rural reproduction
of labour in
conditions of poverty. Elson has focused on the depletion of human capabilities
in the context of economic crisis (1995;
1998; 2000), while Rai et al build
their theory on an analysis of everyday political economy, which extends to
include not only the
public and the private sectors of the economy but also the
domestic sectors of the economy; which focuses not on state/market relations
alone but also on how the domestic sphere shapes and is shaped by these
Hassim and Razavi have also argued that most social policy innovations in the
global north look to reshaping the male bread winner
model of employment –
to address the issue of increasing mobilisation of women into the labour market,
conditions of work,
taxation and provision of care services by the state.
However, they argue that informal work still forms a critical part of the labour
landscape in countries of the global south, such as South Africa, and that this
requires a different approach to provision of care,
social policy and the work
of women (2006). Without this, they argue, ‘job security and work-related
benefits [remain] privileges
available to a relatively thin stratum of workers,
predominantly men’ (Razavi, 2006:4). As we will see below, this is exactly
what we are faced with in the case of miners who have been retrenched –
they remain the focus of compensation battles while
their carers are overlooked.
The focus on the everyday labouring body in the domestic sphere that the
depletion framework provides
is important, we believe, because this everyday
depletion leaves few resources for the poorest and the most vulnerable with
to negotiate and weather crises of social reproduction, particularly in
times of economic and social distress.
We now discuss the issues of social reproduction, depletion and compensation
through Thom Pierce’s beautiful photo essay,
The Price of Gold
which illustrates the impact of illness on the lives of the miners, widows,
other carers and their households. The powerful pictures
display the sadness,
physical vulnerability and poverty of the miners and their
Seeing is Believing? The ‘Price of Gold’ and Visual Cultures
of Depletion
Alpers et al have argued that an image ‘is at least potentially a site
of resistance and recalcitrance, of the irreducibly particular,
subversively strange and pleasurable’ (1996:28). In other words, images
have the potential to ‘do’,
in the Austinian sense, just by being
seen. A critical photographer is not simply a recorder of what is being done
but, as David
Goldblatt put it, is a ‘witness’. He explained that,
‘if I had to report on my activities to a Heavenly Labour
Ministry, I
would, under the heading of Job Description, say that I am a self-appointed
observer and critic of the society into which
I was born, with a tendency to
doing honour or giving recognition to what is often overlooked or unseen’
(2005:94). Pierce
is clearly a critical photographer – his photographs do
not make icons of the miners as, for example, the work of Margaret
Bourke-White
Through the photo essay Pierce
has been able to walk the fine line between exposing the ‘collapse’
of the worlds of the
retrenched and sick miners and their families, and
displaying their courage and dignity in the face of such adverse circumstances.
Pierce’s photographs are striking in what they say and what they omit,
what they make visible and what remains invisible. He
supplements some of these
gaps with captions containing information he has selected about each of the
miners. As Squires has pointed
The photographs are read through a spectrum of texts, including
photographer’ interviews and writings, news reportage, political
social history...the history of photography... [T]he images can be opened out
into a broader field of understanding by texts
that can help us comprehend the
complexity of what the photographers confronted. (2006:10)
We have chosen to unearth one of the less visible themes that serve as a
background to the photographs – the role of women as
carers and as bearers
of the burdens of social reproductive work. Without claiming expertise as
visual researchers, our analysis
of these photographs builds on a critical
approach to visual culture, which in Gillian Rose’s words means that we
take ‘images
seriously’, ...think ‘about the social conditions
and effects of visual objects’...and consider our ‘own
looking at images’ (2012:16-17). This means that ‘Looking carefully
at images, then, entails, among other things,
thinking about how they offer very
particular visions of social categories such as class, gender, race, sexuality,
able-bodiedness,
and so on’ (Rose, 2012:12). Critical visual studies have,
with Berger, worried about images in which ‘
The social construction of illness – of silicosis acquired by black,
male bodies by working in white owned mines – frames
the social context of
these photographs. Pierce aims to alert the audience to the pain and loss that
these photographs reveal and
to support the legal claims of the miners and their
families. Pierce gives attention both to the male workers and, in some cases,
their relatives: both groups are clearly affected by the men’s illness and
loss of employment. The photographs speak to
the issue of gendered roles and to
gendered recognition of individual selves – in most photographs the
description is of male
lives, even when female bodies are present in the same
frame. There are women in kitchens, situated in their homes with the
accoutrements
of everyday life, their dwellings showing wear and tear but also
careful maintenance (Photos 1 and 3). In some images, women are
present as an
absence where women are working to support the family, sometimes far away from
the home. Xolisile Butu’s wife
works ‘in Komani and earns the money
for the household – she only comes home once a month’ (Photo 6). In
case, retrenched miner Mthuthuzeli Mtshange is seen working as a
gardener hundreds of kilometres from home to earn enough to support
children who are presumably being cared for by his wife or other relatives
(Photo 4). Women are not portrayed as secondary
to the men but as subjects who
suffer the effects of poverty – most often they sit rather than stand, as
if weighed down by
the burden of care, shaped by their relationships with ill
men. We are able to deduce that these women are responsible for providing
in the face of poverty, sickness and death (Photo 2 and 3). In this context, the
depletion of the individual is easily imagined
- the long days, combining caring
for the husband, children, grandchildren and the home following his illness and
retrenchment.
Depletion can be physical – as measured by the Body Mass Index (BMI),
tiredness, exhaustion, sleeplessness (or less sleep than
replenishment), health, clothing, heating, and access to clean water, etc (Rai
et al, 2014). It can also be mental –
the undermining of the self;
feelings of guilt and apprehension; and insufficient time for oneself, the
enjoyment of family and friendships,
and to participate in community life. All
these factors can, if they fall below the threshold of normal wear and tear,
deteriorate
the well-being outcomes, and reduce the capability of the individual
to carry out social reproduction in the long run. In certain
circumstances they
can even lead to increased morbidity (Rai et al, 2014:5). The tiredness and
anxiety on the face of the widow of
a miner, Zwelakhe Dala, who passed away in
2015 is clearly evident (Pierce: Photo 5). She told Pierce, ‘It is too
If my husband was not working on the mines, he would still be
alive’. ‘Mrs Dala’, writes Pierce, ‘raised
children on her own, for the most part. She is now left with no income except
for a small pension’ (Photo 5).
Ledwaba and Sediki write of the miner’s aspirations, ‘When they
left home, usually as 18-year-olds...they harboured dreams
of earning good money
on the mines to help them fulfil their dreams of building grand homes for their
families...Instead...they come
back broke and broken’ (2016, xi-ii; see
Photo 4). It is not only the miners that are broke and broken - their homes are
Mncedisi Dlisani (Photo 7), shown in this picture with his family in his
ruined house, worked on the mines for 15 years. After being
diagnosed with TB he
had to leave work and spend 9 months in hospital. It is not only poverty that we
witness in this portrait of
deprivation, but also the crumbling of the very
fabric of homestead. Pierce notes that due to bad weather and poor building
the walls of their main house collapsed and he has no money to repair
it and that he now lives with his family in a rondavel (mud
hut). Whilst issues
of compensation mean that the money for repair of the house is a critical
concern, it is also important to reflect
upon issues of labour – if
Dlisani is ill, if his wife is looking after him and doing other social
reproductive labour in bringing
up their family, then who is looking after the
repairs of the house? How can the space of the home not suffer? And how can she
care for him in these physical conditions? As we have seen above,
depletion of households is reflected in a decrease in collective
resources, which then adversely affects ’the rate of repair of household
infrastructure, including enough disposable
income to carry out essential
repairs to the fabric of the house, improving the environment of the house to
support the members of
the household...’ (Rai et al., 2014:5). Depletion
of the household could also be influenced by intangible factors such as the
adverse effects of poverty and ruination on the standing of the household in the
Looking at compensation claims in the mining class action using the lens of
photography enables us to think about depletion and about
which harms are
recognized and which ones are not, and the reasons for this. It also leads us to
ask who is compensated for which
of the harms done to them? And who is not? And
what effects does the denial of compensation for this depletion have on the
of individuals, households and communities? Understanding depletion as it
manifests itself in the photographs points to the need
for a deep and textured
reconsideration of ideas of loss and injury as they are normally understood and
quantified for the purpose
of compensatory damages in law.
The article now turns to the second issue arising from the
- the legal recognition of caring labour as a loss deserving of damages.
Photo 1: Zama Gangi
Photo 2: Patrick Sitwayi
Photo 3: Matsekelo Masupha
Photo 4 : Muththuzeli Mtshange
Photo 5: Nosipho Dala
Photo 6: Xolisile Butu
Photo 7: Mncedisi Dlisani
Caring, depletion and harm: issues for compensation
This section sets out the current state of the law in South Africa relating
to compensation for unpaid care. It then considers feminist
critiques of tort
law to expose the problems with existing legal formulations. It goes on to
consider feminist legal responses to
international law that propose new
approaches to harm in law. Drawing on these it argues for the broadening of
legal definitions
of harm that should include recognition and compensation of
social reproduction and the depletion that may arise from this.
The South African law of delict (tort) has its roots in Roman-Dutch law which
recognised that ‘members of the family of the
deceased had a right to
enforce a claim for the loss of ... support resulting from the death of the
deceased (or injury to him) caused
by the unlawful acts of the defendant’
Amod v Multilateral Motor Vehicle Accidents Fund
, 1999: para 8). As
noted above, dependent’s actions are for patrimonial losses only (special
damages) and do not include claims
for general damages based on the reasoning
that the injury is suffered by the breadwinner rather than the dependent. The
to put dependents in the same financial position in which they would
have been had the breadwinner lived – to compensate their
pocket losses’ (van der Walt and Midgely, 2016: 309, para 197, fn 1).
Within this broad principle, the courts
have had to determine certain issues
including who counts as a dependent and what constitutes a dependent’s
patrimonial loss.
The basis of the dependent’s action is the existence of a legal duty of
support (Amod, para 12). The dependent’s action
has been extended over
many years to a range of situations not contemplated by the old authorities by
elaborating on the categories
of people regarded as dependents entitled to
support in law. Wives and dependent children have always been entitled to claim
of support where a male breadwinner was killed or injured and hence
prevented from supporting them.
A century ago the court in
Union Government v Warneke
(1911: 665)
extended this rule to apply to a husband claiming loss of support following the
unlawful killing of his wife. Although
the man did not depend on her income he
counted on her looking after his seven children. Her death meant that he would
financial loss in paying for their care. The law effectively
acknowledged the need to compensate a man for the ‘replacement
costs’ of a wife, who had provided unpaid caring functions rather than
financial support, as a valid form of the dependent’s
But this acknowledgement of unpaid care work by the law has not translated
into compensating women who provide such care work to their
injured partners.
Since a damages claim rests with the injured man, only he can be compensated for
his loss. Were he to pay for care
services these would be covered by his damages
claim; but his ability to rely on unpaid care services from family members means
does not suffer monetary loss and these services are thus non-compensable.
The family members, through their ‘voluntary’
assumption of caring
responsibility, carry the physical, financial and emotional costs of this work,
even where they give up paid
work to perform this function (Feldman, 1994: 300).
They are merely entitled to be maintained by him as they were before his
but this maintenance obligation remains with him and for him to pursue
as part of his own claim for lost
Should a breadwinner
die, the dependents are then able to claim in their own right for the loss of
support they would have received
had the man survived and provided for
It is this unsatisfactory
state of the law that led the
court to consider ways of allowing
the dependents to access the general damages that were meant for the
mineworkers. This indirect
approach was needed because these women have no
actual claim to compensation from the mining houses for their caring labour.
court did not address the question of who counts as a family member and a
dependent. Many of the mineworkers were cared for by urban
‘girlfriends’ or second wives while working on the mines and left
these families to return to their rural families. It
is possible that both
families provided care during the mineworker’s illness, before and after
his dismissal from work; and
both families were likely to have been dependent on
his income).
Feminist legal scholars have, for decades now, raised a number of critical
concerns with the law of delict/tort (Conaghan, 2003; Richardson
and Rackley,
2012; Chamallas and Wriggins, 2010; Graycar, 1997; 2002), including in South
Africa (Feldman, 1994; O’Sullivan,
1992; Albertyn, Fedler and Goldblatt,
1997; Goldblatt and Mills, 2000). A broader feminist critique of law is that it
is not only
reflective of the social context in which it is located but also
creates and maintains power inequalities (Smart, 1989). Judges are
informed by
their own race, class and gender positions, assumptions and biases based on
their particular life experiences. Thus law,
including tort law, while formally
gender-neutral, tends to view the subject of law as male, usually white and
able-bodied. Where
women do make an appearance they are often squeezed into
legal or social categories such as ‘the good wife’, the ‘bad
mother’ and similar unhelpful stereotypes (Graycar and Morgan, 2002). A
common assumption in tort law is that wives and other
family members (usually
women) will assume responsibility for the care of injured men. It is also
assumed that women take on these
responsibilities through the exercise of
empowered, rather than constrained, choice. Feminist scholars have pointed to
the consistent
devaluation of women’s work, in their capacity both as
victims of harm and as dependents (Graycar and Morgan, 2002; Feldman,
They have noted that women’s unpaid work in the home is frequently
discounted in damages awards, unless their male partners
suffer financially as a
result of this lost labour (Graycar, 2012). The approach taken in South African
law to disregard unpaid caring
work has been evident in other common law
The feminist critiques of tort law also assist in understanding why the
complexities of caring work and the depletion that may result
from it are often
absent in the law. Joanne Conaghan points to the difficulty tort law faces in
dealing with the relational nature
of harm, emotions and intimacy (2003: 192).
Thus, physical harm that results in economic loss is the easiest area for tort
address. It becomes less helpful in being able to appreciate the impact
of harm on family members particularly where they experience
grief’ (Conaghan, 2003: 192; Priaulx, 2012). As has been noted, it also
struggles to deal with the knock-on effects
of such harms on the family members
of the injured person, including those that result from the caring
responsibilities they are
forced to assume. The focus on market-based relations
in tort law leads to a ‘vigorous ... eschew(ing)’ of intimacy in
favour of a male notion of autonomy (Conaghan, 2003: 192). Tort law aims to
define the boundaries of personal freedom and ‘limited
responsibility for
others’ that contrasts with ideas of relational interdependence (Conaghan,
2003: 199-200).
Paradoxically,
tort law is focused on duties of care that people owe to each other yet it
avoids acknowledging some of the key relationships
that underpin this care in
determining the legal scope of such duties (Steele, 2012). A further feminist
concern with tort law is
that it focuses on individual rather than collective
responsibility for harm. As Conaghan notes, ‘the focus of tort on
responsibility in the context of injury and harm sits somewhat at
odds with more progressive articulations of social or collective
responsibility
for misfortune’ (Conaghan, 2012: viii). This has particular resonance in
the case of the miners who must pursue
damages claims, albeit as a class,
against the mining houses but not against the state that was complicit in the
harmful treatment
of black mine workers in South Africa.
Feminist legal work in international law and in the context of post-conflict
transition has also challenged traditional legal conceptions
of harm and
compensation. These are critiqued as ungendered and individualized; and where
gendered frames have been adopted, this
has largely been in the context of
sexual violence rather than socio-economic violence (Sankey, 2015; Ni Aolain,
2010). This focus
on the socio-economic impact of conflict has some parallels
with the depletion argument in this article. While their arguments relate
context of conflict, our arguments refer to a comparable crisis - the context of
ill mine workers returning home that generates
the depletion of their carers,
households and communities.
In the context of armed conflict, Diana Sankey has alerted us to
‘subsistence harms’ - deprivations of subsistence needs
discrete form of violence (Sankey, 2014). Like depletion, these socio-economic
deprivations can be seen as structural harms
and as a gendered form of violence
that is underpinned by gendered roles and inequalities that harm women more than
men. Other legal
scholars have argued that these socio-economic harms are
cumulative and ‘social location plays a role in determining the incidence
and distribution of particular harms’ (Conaghan, 2002: 322). The violent
disruption of life can lead not only to erosion of
well-being, but also to the
narrowing of the coping strategies available to women. Resilience therefore is
not a given. The non-recognition
of harm can lead to disruption of households
and communities as the individuals affected, both physically and mentally, lose
to cope (Ni Aolain, 2010). Further, Ni Aolain argues that
‘individual violations create communities of harm which include not
the victim herself but also those people who are closely tied to her
emotionally, or who are in a relationship of co-dependency
(2010:219). This resonates with depletion which sees harm taking many forms
– material and non-material, subsistence,
discursive, emotional and
citizenship harms. The lack of recognition of these harms erodes the
capabilities of women to cope emotionally
(PTSD, depression). It challenges
their place in society and their right to frame claims against the state as
entitlements rather
than as the needs of subjects requiring rescue (Rai et al,
The amicus arguments in the
case challenge current legal
frameworks to address the contributions and costs of social reproductive work by
the families of the
mine workers. They aim to advance the law more generally
towards recognition of the intimate, gendered work of care and its effects
has historically been rendered invisible and devalued in the cases. This article
has suggested that the concept of depletion
would give greater conceptual depth
to the notion of harm occasioned by caring for the ill mine workers.
In their development of the concept, Rai et al outline three ways of
reversing depletion: mitigation, replenishment and transformation
(2014:13-15).
While theorised separately, this is of course a heuristic device to focus on
different aspects of reversing depletion.
So, for example, replenishment through
increased welfare provision through monetary credit (rather than direct
provisioning of health
etc) may result in buying in (mitigation) more care
rather than shifting the gendered patterns of care responsibility. However,
considering
them separately does allow us to explore the distinct elements of
different strategies for reversing depletion. Within the depletion
the strategy of
allows individuals engaged in social
reproductive work to lean on monetary buy-in of labour or on relational labour
(family members,
friends, neighbours). This can, however, lead to passing on the
costs of depletion to these others – a depletion-chain in effect.
transformation
, they argue that depletion would be reversed where
society fully values unpaid domestic labour and gender relations are equalised.
However, it is
replenishment
that seems to speak best to the
miners’ case as this occurs where ‘states or private bodies
contribute to inflows’
(2014: 14). It includes interventions by both state
and voluntary associations and other non-state actors to change policy or the
law. In the miners’ case, compensation would contribute to inflows to
offset depletion. The argument here is that the state
has a role to play in
developing policies that address the harm attendant upon depletion. Non-state
actors like Sonke also play a
role in campaigning for legal change whether
through legislation or the courts. The opening up of the compensatory regime to
not just the miners affected by silicosis and TB to be compensated for
their loss of income, livelihood and aspirations but also
those affected by
these illnesses as carers could serve as a bridge between the replenishment
strategy (compensation) and transformation
strategy (acknowledging depletion as
harm and providing the basis of valuing social reproduction).
By reading Thom Pierce’s photographs through feminist legal and
political economy perspectives, we have argued that compensation
for miners in
the silicosis case in South Africa can be better framed by employing the
depletion through social reproduction theory.
This would allow the law to be
more responsive to the gender relations of care of the miners. It would ensure
that compensatory responses
would take fuller account of the individual
miners’ social context by seeing them as situated within relationships,
and communities. In this way, compensation would need to be broadened
to include not only the cost of marketised care (medicine,
food, etc) but also
the cost of depletion through social reproductive work by the families,
households and communities.
This approach requires a two-fold response. First, reform of tort law is
needed to recognise and compensate unpaid care work and the
depletion that
results from this. Care work, in the context of extreme poverty and lack of
services in rural South Africa, and the
harm this caused family members, was
arguably foreseeable and sufficiently related to the miners’ illnesses not
to be considered
remote. Carers would need to be allowed to make claims in their
own right rather than as indirect recipients of damages just as dependents
able to do in a claim for lost support. However, quantifying the costs of this
care is not necessarily straightforward. If comparable
care services in the
market are used as the measure, then payments may be small because the market
tends to undervalue care work
which is feminised and poorly remunerated (Brooks,
2005). In addition, if women are compensated for the lost opportunities to work
but these opportunities are very limited and low paid for unskilled, Black women
in rural areas in South Africa, then again, payments
are likely to be very
small. Compensating caring work even on a more generous measure that takes
account of this context would not
address the broader costs of depletion to the
carer. In relation to the costs of depletion, lost opportunities to participate
communities and for rest and leisure for example, would also pose challenges
for quantification. Any reform of the law in this area
would need to generate
creative and appropriate measures of the costs of care and depletion of the
carer. The second response to
addressing depletion, particularly in cases where
there has been widespread and systemic harm, is through reparatory schemes.
involving private actors and/or the state, could use similar innovative
mechanisms for quantifying depletion as developed in tort
law reform. In
addition, they could provide more community-oriented responses such as
infrastructure projects that create employment
opportunities, educational
scholarships and so on, designed to remedy the broader harms caused to
communities by practices such as
hazardous gold mining. The arguments advanced
in this paper for the recognition of care and depletion could inform any
scheme that may arise from the class action litigation in the
silicosis case. This would be of value to the miners and their families
would also stand as a valuable precedent for similar compensatory schemes in
other countries and contexts.
The growing concerns with the issue of unpaid care are being expressed at the
international level. The recent UN Commission on the
Status of Women stressed
‘the need to recognize, reduce and redistribute the disproportionate share
of unpaid care and domestic
work by promoting the equal sharing of
responsibilities between women and men and by prioritizing, inter alia, social
policies and infrastructure development’ (CSW61 Agreed
Conclusions (E/CN.6/2017/L.5) at para 30). The recognition of unpaid
also been articulated in human rights terms. A report of the United
Nations’ Special Rapporteur on extreme poverty
and human rights argued
that heavy and unequal care responsibilities are a major barrier to gender
equality and to women’s
equal enjoyment of human rights, and, in many
cases, condemn women to poverty (2013). Therefore, the failure of States to
provide, fund, support and regulate care contradicts their human
rights commitments by creating and exacerbating inequalities and
threatening
women’s enjoyment of their rights. Ideas of depletion of social
reproduction should also inform the development
of international law in
responding to gendered harms. South Africa’s strong constitutional
framework which requires the common
law to be developed in line with
constitutional values and rights could lead to greater recognition of care in
law. This too might
serve as an example to other jurisdictions and also inform
the development of international law.
Several countries have supported Household Satellite Accounts that sit
alongside the GDP calculations and demonstrate the value of
unpaid domestic
work, the latest being the UK in 2016. Feminist economists have also developed
statistical models, methodologies
such as time-use surveys to calculate the
value of this work. The missing link is the political will to standardise
inclusion of
this work into country GDPs, forcing them to acknowledge the value
of women’s labour to the economy – and therefore,
to compensate both
individual miners who are suffering from the collapse of their everyday
economies with retrenchment because of
illness as well as the carers who
look(ed) after the ill miners. This momentum to recognise social reproductive
work, is of course
stymied by the instabilities of capitalism’s crises,
leading many to ask whether capitalism needs the ‘reserve army’
unpaid labour; whether it is impossible for it to recognise and compensate for
social reproductive work (Rai et al 2014). While
acknowledging the small spaces
for feminist intervention in developing the law, the
although insufficiently far-reaching, provides an opportunity to rethink care
in law, to extend law effectively into the
intimate spaces of the home, and to
compensate the invisible work that supports the world.
Akintola, O (2006) ‘Gendered home-based care in South Africa: more
trouble for the troubled’ 5(3)
African Journal of AIDS Research
Albertyn, C, J Fedler and B Goldblatt (1997) ‘Gender’ in
Law of South Africa
, First Reissue, Volume 10,
(Butterworths,
Durban), 139 at 188-9.
Alpers, S, et al (1996) ‘Visual Culture Questionnaire’ 77
Berger, J (1972)
Ways of Seeing
, (London: BBC and Harmondsworth:
Brooks, K (2005) ‘Valuing Women's Work in the Home: A Defining
Canadian Journal of Women and the Law
Buthelezi, Michael (2011) ‘The Action of Dependants Revisited in the
Brooks v The Minister of Safety and Security
African Law Journal
Chamallas M and J Wriggins (2010)
The Measure of Injury: Race, Gender, and
(New York University Press, New York).
Chisholm J & D Q Lépiz (2017) ‘When the Dust Settles’
(Chronicle & Code4SA) in
The Daily Maverick
, 1 March 2017
<https://features.dailymaverick.co.za/whenthedustsettles/>, timeline box
on the key events leading to the class
Commission of the Status of Women, ‘CSW61 Agreed Conclusions’
(E/CN.6/2017/L.5).
Conaghan, J, ‘Foreword’ in J Richardson and E Rackley (eds),
Feminist Perspectives on Tort Law
(Routledge, Abingdon)
Conaghan, J (2003) ‘Tort Law and Feminist Critique’
Legal Problems
Constitution
of the Republic of South Africa
, 1996, s 8(3) and
Burchell, JM et al (2017)
Corbett and Buchanan, The Quantum of Damages in
Bodily and Fatal Injury Cases
, Jutastat e-publications (online), Volume 1:
General Principles, originally by MM Corbett, 4th edition by Jeremy Gauntlett,
Chapter II.1, at 22 fn 40.
Elson, D (2000) ‘The Progress of Women: Empowerment and
Economics’, in
The Progress of the World’s Women
(UNIFEM, New
Feldman, B (1994) ‘The Impact of Gender Stereotyping on Compensation
Awards Affecting Women’
Responsa Meridiana
Folbre, N (2001)
The invisible heart: economics and family values
Press, New York).
Fraser, N (2011) ‘The Wages of Care: Reproductive Labor as Fictitious
Commodity’ Lecture, University of Cambridge, 19
B Goldblatt (2000) Case Note: ‘
Amod v Multilateral Motor Vehicle
Accidents Fund (Commission for Gender Equality Intervening
[1999] ZASCA 76
’ South African Journal of Human Rights 138).
Goldblatt, B and S Mills (2000) ‘Reviewing the Road Accident Fund
– A Gender Sensitive Perspective’ 386
Goldblatt, D (2005)
South African Intersections
(Prestel, New
Graycar, R ‘Hoovering as a Hobby and Other Stories: Gendered
Assessments of Personal Injury Damages’
University of British
Columbia Law Review
Graycar, R (2002) ‘Sex, Golf and Stereotypes: Measuring, Valuing and
Imagining the Body in Court’
Torts Law Journal
Graycar, R (2012) ‘Damaging Stereotypes: the Return of “Hoovering
as a Hobby”’ in J Richardson and E Rackley
(eds) (2012)
Perspectives on Tort Law
(Routledge, Abingdon) 205-226.
Hassim, S (2008) ‘Global Constraints on Gender Equality in Care
Politics and Society
Hoskyns, C and Rai, S M (2007) ‘Recasting the International Political
Economy: Counting Women’s Unpaid Work’,
New Political Economy
12 (3): 297–317.
Ledwaba, L and L Sadiki (2016)
Broke & Broken – The Shameful
Legacy of Gold Mining in South Africa
(Blackbird Books,
Johannesburg).
Pete Lewis (2017) ‘Silicosis: unpacking the gold
mines’ strategy’
, 27 March 2017
http://www.groundup.org.za/article/silicosis-unpacking-gold-mines-strategy/
O’Sullivan (1992) ‘A Feminist Analysis of
“Reasonableness” in the Law of Delict’
Olsen, F (1985) ‘The Family and the Market: A Study of Ideology and
Legal Reform’
Harvard Law Review
Pearson, R, (1998) ‘Nimble Fingers Revisited’ in C Jackson and R
Pearson (eds)
Feminist visions of development: gender, analysis and
(Routledge, London).
Picchio, A (1992)
Social Reproduction: The Political Economy of the Labour
(Cambridge University Press, Cambridge).
Pierce, Thom (2016)
The Price of Gold
, photographic essay,
http://thompierce.com/tpog/
Priaulx, Nicky (2012) ‘Endgame: On Negligence and Reparation for
Harm’ in J Richardson and E Rackley (eds)
Feminist Perspectives on Tort
(Routledge, Abingdon), 36-54.
Rai, S M, C Hoskyns & D Thomas (2014) ‘Depletion: the cost of
social reproduction’,
International Feminist Journal of Politics
Rai S M and C Hoskyns, (2007) ‘Recasting the Global Political Economy:
Counting Women’s Unpaid Work’12:3
New Political Economy
Richardson J and E Rackley (eds) (2012)
Feminist Perspectives on Tort
(Routledge, Abingdon).
Rose, G (2012)
Visual Methodologies
(Sage, London).
Smart, Carol (1989)
Feminism and the Power of Law
(Routledge,
Special Rapporteur on extreme poverty and human rights ‘Report of the
Special Rapporteur on extreme poverty and human rights’
(2013) GA 68th
Session, A/68/293.
Steele, J (2012) ‘Duty of Care and Ethic of Care: Irreconcilable
Difference?’ in J Richardson and E Rackley (eds), (2012)
Perspectives on Tort Law
(Routledge, Abingdon), 14-35.
Squires, C, (2005)
The Body at Risk
(International Centre of
Photography, London).
van der Walt, JC and JR Midgley, (2016)
Principles of Delict
Edition (Juta, Cape Town).
Waring, M (1988)
If Women Counted: A New Feminist Economics
& Row, San Francisco).
Cases cited
Amod v Multilateral Motor Vehicle Accidents Fund (Commission for Gender
Equality Intervening)
[1999] ZASCA 76
Du Plessis v Road Accident Fund
2004 (1) SA 359 (SCA)
Griffiths v Kerkemayer
[1977] HCA 45
[1977] 139 CLR 161
Naisbitt v Road Accident Fund
(85653/2014)
[2015] ZAGPPHC 969
August 2015)
Nkala and Others v Harmony Gold Mining Company Limited and Others
Paixão v Road Accident Fund
[2012] ZASCA 130
2012 (6) SA 377 (SCA)
Union Government v Warneke
1911 AD 657
Zimnat Insurance Co Ltd v Chawanda
1991 (2) SA 825
Beth Goldblatt, Associate
Professor, Faculty of Law, University of Technology Sydney; Visiting Associate
Professor, School of Law,
University of the Witwatersrand; Visiting Fellow,
Faculty of Law, University of New South Wales. Shirin M Rai, Professor,
of Politics and International Studies, University of Warwick. This
article arises from our participation in a project initiated by
Shireen Hassim of the University of the Witwatersrand on ‘Governing
Intimacies’. We wish to thank the participants
of the workshop who met in
Stellenbosch in June 2016 for their helpful suggestions on the early ideas that
led to this paper; and
to the participants of the Colloquium who met in
Johannesburg in June 2017 for their helpful comments on the paper. We are
to the photographer Thom Pierce for allowing us to reproduce his
photographs and to Sonke Gender Justice and Section27 for sharing
papers from the
case. Thanks also to Carol Wolkowitz for assistance
with the visual sociology materials. We appreciate the thoughtful responses to
an earlier version of the article provided by Davina Cooper and Kate Bedford as
well as the helpful suggestions from the anonymous
reviewers of Social &
Legal Studies.
Over a period of
20 days in September and October 2015, Thom Pierce travelled around South
Africa's Eastern Cape, into Lesotho and
up to Johannesburg to find and
photograph the 56 miners and widows named in the court documents. This project
was supported by the
Treatment Action Campaign and
, organisations
working on the right to health in South Africa. The Price of Gold series can be
viewed in full at http://thompierce.com/tpog/.
We are grateful to Thom Pierce
for allowing us to reproduce some of these photographs which are labelled here
with the name of the
applicant in the case (the miner or surviving dependent).
In September 2016, the Supreme
Court of Appeal granted the mining houses leave to appeal against the decision.
The appeal has been
set down for March 2018. As the lawyers for the mineworkers
point out, the appeal and any delay it causes to the resolution of this
hugely problematic since significant numbers of plaintiffs are dying each year
(Chisholm and Lépiz 2017, citing attorney
Richard Spoor). Parallel to the
appeal process there are discussions occurring between some of the parties
regarding a possible settlement.
For a detailed discussion of the settlement
efforts and appeal process see Pete Lewis ‘Silicosis: unpacking the gold
strategy’ GroundUp, 27 March 2017
http://www.groundup.org.za/article/silicosis-unpacking-gold-mines-strategy/
This history was discussed in a supporting affidavit by Professor Francis
Wilson, signed 10 December 2014, in the application for
admission as
of Treatment Action Campaign and Sonke Gender Justice,
matter between Bongani Nkala and Fifty-Five Others and Harmony Gold Mining
Company Limited and Thirty-One Others
, High Court of South Africa, Gauteng
Local Division, Case no: 48226/12. Wilson is a recognized expert on the history
of the mining
industry, labour migration and poverty in South
Windell J’s
minority judgment found that the development of the common law should apply only
in cases concerning a class
Affidavit of Dean
Peacock, signed 11 December 2014, in the application for admission as
of Treatment Action Campaign and Sonke Gender Justice,
matter between Bongani Nkala and Fifty-Five Others and Harmony Gold Mining
Company Limited and Thirty-One Others
, High Court of South Africa, Gauteng
Local Division, Case no:
Note that the
judgment is quoting Peacock’s affidavit, above note v, who is quoting
Akintola, 2006.
The exhibition
for this body of work was shown at the Iziko Slave Lodge in Cape Town, in
collaboration with the Treatment Action
Campaign from 1 December 2015 to 31
March 2016. The exhibition was staged in the dark with only the light from a
miner’s helmet
to illuminate the
https://bourkewhite.wordpress.com/
Unlike Pierce, Bourke-White was not able to learn the names of the subjects of
the photograph of miners.
Although a range of other partnerships have been recognized as generating
dependency relationships only in more recent years, particularly
since the new
Constitution
in 1994. These include: Muslim marriages:
critical response to the decision: B Goldblatt (2000) Case Note: ‘
v Multilateral Motor Vehicle Accidents Fund (Commission for Gender Equality
Intervening
1319 (SCA)’
South African Journal of
Human Rights
138); same-sex partnerships:
Du Plessis v Road Accident
2004 (1) SA 359 (SCA); heterosexual permanent life partnerships:
Paixão v Road Accident Fund
[2012] ZASCA 130
2012 (6) SA 377 (SC
Naisbitt v Road Accident Fund
(85653/2014)
[2015] ZAGPPHC 969
(24 August 2015). Customary marriages have also been included:
Insurance Co Ltd v Chawanda
1991 (2) SA 825
Corbett and Buchanan
(2017) Volume I, Chapter II ‘Damages for Bodily Injury, Who may sue, Wife
and Children’, footnote
In such cases, women are
unlikely to be able to claim the ‘replacement costs’ of men’s
non-economic contributions
such as caring for children since the law is likely
to assume, often correctly so, that this work was done by
The Australian High
Court addressed this issue in
Griffiths v Kerkemayer
[1977] HCA 45
[1977] 139 CLR 161
but subsequent court decisions and legislation have significantly undermined the
decision (Graycar, 2012). For a discussion of the
more progressive developments
in Canadian law regarding compensation of unpaid work in the home see Brooks
Conaghan (2003,
203-4) draws on Jennifer Nedelsky’s work on a feminist conception of
relational autonomy.
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (30.4 MB)
PDF format (894 KB)
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter