URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/journals/IntJlSSWC/2009/5.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 15:04:47
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Millard, Daleen --- "Protecting Dependants against the Effects of Occupational Hazards: Extended Damage in South African and Belgian Law" [2009] IntJlSSWC 5; (2009) 1(1) International Journal of Social Security and Workers Compensation 47
PROTECTING DEPENDANTS AGAINST THE EFFECTS OF OCCUPATIONAL HAZARDS:
EXTENDED DAMAGE IN SOUTH AFRICAN AND BELGIAN LAW
Daleen Millard∗
A. INTRODUCTION
B. SOUTH AFRICA
I. Common Law Position
II. Occupational Injuries and Diseases
III. Link between Common Law and the Compensation for Occupational Injuries and Diseases Act
I. Recognition of Extended Damage
II. Schadeleer Sensu Stricto
III. Preventieleer and Schadeloosstellingsleer
IV. CONCLUSION: SCHADE AAN DE MENS IN BELGIAN LAW
D. OCCUPATIONAL INJURIES IN BELGIAN LAW
I. Introduction
II. Illness and Invalidity Insurance
III. Occupational Injuries
E. CONCLUSION AND RECOMMENDATIONS
BIBLIOGRAPHY
Legislation
Court Cases
PROTECTING DEPENDANTS AGAINST THE EFFECTS OF OCCUPATIONAL
EXTENDED DAMAGE IN SOUTH AFRICAN AND BELGIAN
The South African workmen’s compensation system is most probably the
longest-running system that deals with disability in South
Africa. In terms of
current legislation, a no-fault system aims to provide coverage for occupational
injuries and diseases, and to
provide employees with substantial protection
against loss of income.
South African legislation is broadly up to par with international standards.
However, one aspect that has been neglected is the position
of those who suffer
a loss of support as a direct result of such a worker’s disability, where
that worker has survived but
with a significantly reduced earning capacity.
Currently, an employee’s dependants are only entitled to compensation
that employee has died.
Damage suffered by dependants of the employee during the lifetime of such an
employee is not recognised, let alone compensated. Typically,
a spouse may have
to stop working to take care of an injured or ill workman, or a whole family may
forfeit opportunities, because
of the reduced income of such an employee. Those
are but two forms of indirect or extended damage.
The Belgian system makes provision for damage suffered by close relatives and
dependants of injured employees. This is best described
in legal terms as
extended damage. The purpose of this article is to investigate the nature of
extended damage and to suggest ways
in which the existing system can be reformed
to allow for compensation for extended damage.
This article compares the Belgian and South African systems and shows how
compensation for extended damage can be incorporated in
the existing
compensation scheme. The conclusion is that extended damage has long been
neglected in South African law and that it
is particularly evident in the area
of occupational injuries and diseases. The South African system will benefit
from the inclusion
of extended damage and it is one way in which the system can
be strengthened.
A. INTRODUCTION
Viane et al state:
There would be no problems concerning this question if human damage were an
individual feature and only found among people who have
been directly affected.
But this is not the case. Man never suffers damage alone. Damage is always a
social phenomenon. When someone
is injured, it also involves all those who have
close, positive ties with him. The legal bonds do not apply here. The actual
of the more or less social ties with the directly damaged person determines
the extent of human damage (i.e. loss of earnings or
health damage) affecting
the other members of his group. If a death occurs, for example, there is only
‘extended damage’.
The directly injured person no longer suffers
damage, but those close to him
Although Viane
et al use the term ‘extended damage’ to refer to the damage that
others suffer as a result of injury to
a specific individual, it is submitted
that the word ‘reflect’ in English has a different meaning. It is
more correct
to speak of extended damage because the damage extends to others,
notably the dependants or close family members who are perhaps
not dependent on
the victim. In South Africa, both common law delictual claims and claims for
benefits following an occupational
injury focus on the direct victim and do not
provide for compensation, in the strict sense of the word, to the relatives of
an incapacitated
individual.
question is then whether South African law is perhaps too narrow in its approach
to human damage and whether there is good cause
for extending remedies to
victims other than the direct victim. Also, one needs to have a proper
understanding of common law delictual
compensation before one can appreciate the
fact that this forms the basis of all compensation systems in South Africa,
the workmen’s compensation system. So, even though statutory
compensation systems can change the common law principles in order
specific objective, where common law is conservative and has certain
restrictions, subsequent legislation often has the
same underlying traits.
This article analyses the meaning of extended damage in the South African and
Belgian legal systems and investigates the extent to
which these two legal
systems have already given recognition to extended damage, either in common law
or by way of statutes. Finally,
the article argues that the time is right for a
new take on the concept of human damage in South Africa and, possibly, for the
introduction
of statutory measures to provide those close to the victim of a
damage-causing event, such as an occupational injury or disease,
appropriate remedy.
B. SOUTH AFRICA
I. Common Law Position
For the purposes of this discussion, extended damage refers to patrimonial
loss suffered by those who have a sufficiently close relationship
victim of a damage-causing event. This phrase has not been coined by South
African jurists, probably because there is uncertainty
in the law as to whether
those who stand in a sufficiently close relationship to the incapacitated
individual should in fact be granted
an action based on the
actio legis
. Note well that one can only consider the impact of extended damage
where the primary victim’s injuries are of such a serious
nature as to
impact severely on those close to him. For instance, where a healthy,
economically active father suddenly sustains a
debilitating brain injury, it
stands to reason that the resultant job loss and lowering of the household
income will have a rippling
effect on his family. However, where the same man
only suffers a minor whiplash injury, the payment of damage to him alone in
with the general principles of delictual liability poses no
Neethling et al point out that the dependants of a person who was injured in
a wrongful and culpable way should be able to claim loss
of maintenance with the
Aquilian action in the same way they would have claimed where the breadwinner
Three cases support this
Abbott v Bergman
court allowed an amount of damage to be paid to a husband married in community
of property for ‘loss of his wife’s
services in running the boarding
De Villiers JA
referred to
Union Government v
and argued that
although there is a rule in Roman-Dutch law which states that a money value
could not be placed upon the body or limb
of a free man, Roman law allowed a
father to claim for medical expenses and loss of services of a son who was
The judge continued:
As in the case of the death of a wife, our law is, however, silent whether a
husband can recover from a person who has through culpa
injured his wife, though
not fatally. But no reason can be suggested why a husband should not be allowed
to recover the actual pecuniary
loss sustained by him under these circumstances.
If he is allowed to recover the loss sustained by him through the death of his
he must also be allowed to recover when the injuries are not fatal.
For, in principle, no distinction can be drawn between the two
Plotkin v Western Assurance Co
the court awarded
damage to a husband where the couple was married out of community of property,
where there was a duty on his wife
to contribute to the common
In the same vein, the
court stated, in
Erdmann v Santam Insurance Co
Prima facie
one would imagine that either of the two spouses could
institute action to recover that loss [of maintenance]. The family unit has
suffered because it is deprived of the services of one of its members. That
deprivation has been quantified. Whether the husband
or the wife recovers the
loss, is not really material, as it can be assumed that the award would be used
for the family unit. Whilst
there is something to be said for the husband as
nominal head of the household suing, there would appear to be more merit in
such a claim to be brought by the spouse who suffered the physical
, the court still thought it better to
allow the injured spouse to bring the claim in her private
In contrast with the
cases which recognised the right of a spouse to claim damage in his or her own
name, the court in
refused to allow a
wife and children to claim for loss of support where the husband was injured.
Greenberg J argued that any claim
by the dependants of such an injured husband
and father should be rejected on the basis that ‘they have suffered no
The judge stated
Abbott v Bergman
probably incorrect but that the court made the award because there was damage to
the joint estate.
Neethling et al disagree with the argument in
De Vaal v Messing
the dependant has not suffered
and state that a
dependant who suffers damage because of an injury to his or her breadwinner
should have an action. In support hereof,
they argue that where a breadwinner is
80 per cent to blame for his or her own damage and the wrongdoer 20 per cent,
the breadwinner
can only claim 20 per cent of his or her future loss of
The dependant has a
significant loss of income. They continue to argue that the
Apportionment of
Damages Act
provides, in
section 2(1B), for cases where someone suffers damage because of the injury or
death of another person, which means
that a dependant has an action and the
breadwinner and wrongdoers are considered joint wrongdoers.
When considering the above cases, it is clear that the courts hinge on two
thoughts and that although there are convincing arguments
for the recognition of
extended damage, South African private law remains conservative and slow to
extend the operation of the Aquilian
It is submitted that there are two compelling arguments in support of the
recognition of extended damage. First, where a breadwinner
is permanently and
seriously incapacitated and not able to conduct his or her own affairs, it is
conceivably simpler for a dependant
like a spouse to institute an action in his
or her own name. He or she then does not have to wait for his or her
incapacitated spouse’s
curator to apportion his or her award for future
loss of income in order to provide for his or her monthly maintenance. Second,
loss is definitely the dependant’s and not that of their estate. If
the dependant’s income per month will be lower post-morbid,
he or she will
be able to prove a loss.
From the above it is clear that although the law has not been settled on this
point, there is definitely a basis in common law for
the recognition of the
concept of extended damage. If that be the case, legislation that regulates the
payment of benefits to dependants,
such as the
Compensation for Occupational
Injuries and Diseases Act
, can draw from this basis and allow for the
payment of those close enough to the victim who sustain a loss because of the
permanent incapacitation of their breadwinner.
II. Occupational Injuries and Diseases
The workmen’s compensation system is most probably the longest-running
system in South Africa which deals with
disability.
introduction of this system, the obligations of employers towards their
employees were based on common law. In attempting
to overcome the glaring
shortcomings of the delictual
a no-fault system was
In terms of current legislation, where a person who falls within the
definition of ‘employee’ in terms of the
Compensation for
Occupational Injuries and Diseases Act
becomes disabled because of an
accident that occurs in the scope of his or her employment, or such an employee
contracts a disease
in the scope of his or her employment, the
Compensation
for Occupational Injuries and Diseases Act
provides for the payment of
benefits to these individuals. The basic idea of this system is that, where a
person carries on economic
activities by using machinery and the labour of other
persons, and in the process creates an organisation that may harm workers,
employer should be responsible for providing compensation without any questions
being asked about fault, since the employer
gains the economic benefits. Another
aspect of this approach is the fact that the employer is solely responsible for
financing the
this no-fault system is therefore to give broad coverage for occupational
injuries and diseases, and to provide employees
with substantial protection
against loss of income.
South African legislation is broadly up to par with international standards.
However, an aspect that has been neglected is the position
of the dependants of
such a worker who experience a significant loss of support. Currently, an
employee’s dependants are only
entitled to compensation where that
employee died because of his or her injuries or a disease contracted in the
scope of his or her
employment. Furthermore, in cases of severe disability,
relatives of the injured worker may have to take care of this injured relative
and this may have a negative effect on their own economic activities.
Interestingly, section 28 of the
Compensation for Occupational Injuries and
Diseases Act
provides for payment of a constant attendance allowance if an
employee requires constant help. This section reads as follows:
If the injury in respect of which compensation is payable causes disablement of
such a nature that the employee is unable to perform
the essential actions of
life without the constant help of another person, the Director-General may in
addition to any other benefits
in terms of this Act grant an allowance towards
the cost of such help.
Of course, while this section
recognises the fact that workers with permanent, serious disabilities need
constant care, this allowance
cannot be categorised as compensation, as it is
rather a type of salary that is payable to a caretaker. Furthermore, this
can be paid to anyone who takes care of the disabled worker and is not
limited to a spouse or other dependants. Also, even if the
allowance is paid to
a blood relative, it is possible that this allowance can be much less than any
salary that such a relative could
have earned, were they able to work in the
open labour market. Therefore, although this provision attempts to provide
relief to someone
other than the primary victim, the fact remains that a
dependant’s loss of support due to his or her breadwinner’s
or his or her curtailed economic activities, which result in loss of
income, are but two forms of indirect or extended damage that
themselves because of employment injuries and diseases.
Apart from the provisions of section 28, an overview of the current South
African system shows that where a person who falls within
the definition of
‘employee’ in the
Compensation for Occupational Injuries and
Diseases Act
becomes disabled because of an accident which occurs in the
scope of his or her employment, or such an employee contracts a disease
scope of his or her employment, the Act provides for the payment of benefits to
these individuals.
Furthermore, where an employee is injured in an accident that arises out of,
and in the course of, his or her employment, or an employee
contracts a disease
in a similar way, section 35 of the
Compensation for Occupational Injuries
and Diseases Act
provides that:
[N]o action shall lie by an employee or any dependant of an employee for the
recovery of damage in respect of any occupational injury
or disease resulting in
the disablement or death of such an employee against such employee’s
employer, and no liability for
compensation on the part of such employer shall
arise save under the provisions of this Act in respect of such disablement or
indicated above, claims against the Compensation Commissioner in terms of the
Compensation for Occupational Injuries and Diseases Act
are not based on
The aim of this
particular system is furthermore to give broad coverage for occupational
injuries and diseases, and to provide substantial
protection against loss of
income. Sufficient medical care and rehabilitation must also be provided where
an employee was injured
or the employee had contracted a disease. Most
importantly, the prevention of injuries and diseases by creating a safe
environment
should be the duty of all employers.
One must bear in mind that only employees who fall within the definition of
Compensation for Occupational Injuries and Diseases Act
are protected
in terms of the Act. In this context, the Act defines an employee as a person
who has entered into, or works under,
a contract of service or of apprenticeship
or learnership with an employer, whether the contract is express or implied,
writing, and whether the remuneration is calculated by time or by
work done, or is in cash or in
Furthermore, unless the
context indicates otherwise, ‘accident’ means an accident arising
out of, and in the course and
scope of, an employee’s employment and
resulting in the personal injury, illness or the death of an
Under this system, benefits are calculated with reference to a person’s
The Compensation
Commissioner also pays all medical costs upon the occurrence of an accident or
where the employee contracts a disease.
Protection against loss of income in
terms of the
Compensation for Occupational Injuries and Diseases Act
of particular significance for this discussion. Legislation provides for
compensation in those instances where an employee suffers
either a temporary or
permanent total disability. As far as compensation for permanent disability is
concerned, there is a distinction
between disability that is less than 30 per
cent and disability of more than 30 per
In the first instance, a
lump sum based on 15 times the employee’s monthly earnings, up to a
specified maximum, is paid out
Where the disability
is 31 per cent or more, a monthly pension is paid to the employee. The monthly
pension is calculated in the
same way as the lump
In calculating benefits for
loss of earning capacity, the Compensation Commissioner makes use of a so-called
‘meat chart’.
This guideline contains a list of injuries and the
corresponding percentage of disability that is attached to specific injuries.
This so-called ‘meat chart approach’ of compensation, where the loss
of a limb, for example, is adjudged to constitute
a certain percentage of
compensable injury or disease, has been the subject of severe
In summary, although the protection for total disablement afforded in terms
Compensation for Occupational Injuries and Diseases Act
very important role, it is not above
The most important
criticism against the current system is that it only provides for the payment of
benefits to employees directly
or for the dependants of those employees who have
died because of an employment-related injury or disease. However, where an
is severely or totally incapacitated, that injury also has a
devastating effect on the household of such an employee. It is submitted
there are deserving cases where the payment of benefits to the dependants of an
incapacitated individual, while that individual
is still alive, would be more
equitable and would alleviate the lot of those dependants whose standard of
living has been reduced
significantly. These benefits should go beyond the scope
of the existing section 28 and should in fact provide for maintenance as
III. Link between Common Law and the Compensation for
Occupational Injuries and Diseases Act
The discussion of the common law position in section B(I) above in this paper
may have raised a number of concerns as to the way in
which compensation should
be calculated where the incapacitated victim is still alive but the dependants
claim compensation in their
own name. For instance, one concern would be as to
the apportionment of the household income. Another concern has to do with the
operation of the ‘once-and-for–all’ rule. What is the point of
paying compensation to a spouse of a permanently
incapacitated individual if
there is a chance that they may divorce and the healthy spouse may marry someone
with a significantly
higher income? There are in fact solutions to those
dilemmas and these form part of a more detailed discussion that cannot be
here. The point is that it is necessary to recognise the concept of
extended damage and that it will offer a remedy to those who
are sufficiently
close to the incapacitated person.
Because injuries and diseases in the workplace are regulated by statute,
reform in this area is markedly easier than it is at common
law. For actions
based on the latter, the courts need to recognise the concept of extended damage
and the fact that parties other
than the victim should have actions based on the
actio legis Aquiliae
. On the other hand, reform in the area of
occupational injuries and diseases will entail amendments to the existing
statute. Because
compensation is paid in instalments, a spouse who divorces an
injured workman will cease to receive benefits. Furthermore, it is
possible to
list categories of dependants who will be entitled to benefits. Although it is
preferable to work with a liberal concept
of ‘family’ in the South
African context, it is probably preferable to limit the payment of additional
compensation to
spouses and to other de facto dependants such as children. Also,
the total claim should be more than it would have been, had benefits
paid to the victim. Rather, the victim’s benefits for future loss of
income should be apportioned between himself
or herself and other claimants. By
doing that, the household as a unit will be placed in the position it would have
been in had the
accident not occurred. Although it is conceivable that
amendments such as these will have a potentially enormous impact on the system,
one must bear in mind that this is a tool that has the potential of alleviating
the lot of many who suffer because of a breadwinner’s
disability.
The suggestions above can easily be implemented but it is submitted that due
consideration should be given to the nature of extended
damage and other policy
issues before the
Compensation for Occupational Injuries and Diseases Act
can be amended.
The next section looks at extended damage in Belgian law. Before discussing
the details of human damage in Belgian law, the reader
is asked to focus on the
underlying philosophy regarding human damage and to appreciate the fact that
compensation is in fact a policy
I. Recognition of Extended Damage
Belgian lawyers have conducted extensive research in the area of human damage
or ‘schade aan de mens’. Viane et al state:
De algemene schadeleer bestat uit drie delen: de eigenlijke schadeleer, de
preventieleer en de schadeloosstellingsleer
parts of the doctrine are of equal importance. Damage or
given. It is necessary to know what is meant by damage in order to do something
Viane et al suggest
that damage is more or less a serious disruption of the normal occurrence of
events, a complex reality that should
be investigated as such. As opposed to
that, prevention and indemnification are two forms of policy which aim to
prevent or cancelling
disruption.
Viane et al convincingly argue that the traditional doctrine of damage, in
the strictest sense of the word, investigates the phenomenon
of damage as fully
as possible, but without looking at the measures that may be used to prevent, or
even bring to an end, damage.
this initial stage of the investigation, policy has nothing to do with damage.
Rather, a mere factual investigation is made into
the occurrence of
Prevention (
de preventieleer
), as a second constitutive element of the
doctrine of damage, on the other hand does not merely observe, but aims
primarily at thwarting,
imminent danger and inevitable harm, and secondarily
attempts to impede the further development of damage that has already
Indemnity (
schadeloosstelling
as the third element is aimed at
bringing an end to damage already incurred. This third element consists of two
components, namely
repair/reinstatement (
) and compensation
The purpose
of repair is to bring an end to damage when it is total and to limit the extent
of the damage when it is incomplete.
Compensation, on the other hand, serves to
leave the damage as it is and to offer something in its place; for instance,
wage substitution
in the case of loss of earning
Clearly, money is the universal yardstick with which jurists attempt to
rebalance the scales of justice. It is no different in
Even in the social
security system, certain benefits can only be paid in money. The most
revolutionary approach to damage in Belgian
law, however, is the way in which
they see damage as a social phenomenon, namely that damage does not only affect
a specific individual,
but also those members of society who are close to the
injured individual.
The following exposition sheds some light on the way in which human damage is
approached in Belgium. In order to extract more meaning
from this highly
developed doctrine, a further investigation is necessary, something which cannot
be pursued here. What follows in
the next paragraph is a simplified explanation
of the most important elements of the theory.
II. Schadeleer Sensu Stricto
Viane et al explain that damage is a loss of future value, which has already
been incurred and which causes a negative deviation of
an expected, better
existence, with such a deviation causing
uncertainty.
They identify five
essential elements, namely an explicit picture of exactly what constitutes a
human being, a mathematical concept,
a philosophical concept, three dimensions
and three types of
uncertainties.
On the first element — what constitutes a human being — they
comment that it is evident that a human being can potentially
suffer damage in
one of two ways, namely through damage to his or her physical and psychological
health and through damage to his
environment.
The second element, namely the mathematical concept, recognises that damage
stands in a close relationship with loss and profit. Therefore,
damage exists
where there is a difference between a better and a worse course for the same
The writers illustrate
this concept with reference to loss of income. They explain that loss of income
remains the difference between
what the individual would have earned but for the
damage, and what he or she earns after having been
This aspect of the Belgian law is indeed informative. Instead of just making
a before-and-after comparison, the whole procedure that
is followed, although
mathematical, is based on sound research and aimed at fairness. One can very
well assume that the projections,
or hypothetical earnings, of those affected by
damage-causing events are based upon statistics and not upon the gut feeling of
administrator of the system or even a judge. Such a database is not available
in South Africa. A litigant who wants to convince the
court of the value of his
or her hypothetical earnings must privately employ the services of a
statistician. Once again, a lot of
time and money are wasted, whereas a central
difficulties.
Apart from the mathematical element, there is also a third element of damage,
namely the philosophical dimension. In fact, most efforts
to define damage boil
down to a philosophical
explanation.
For instance,
jurists debate more about the objects of damage than about damage itself. These
objects are then duly divided into
categories, based on the common
characteristics of these
From a philosophical
perspective, damage has two meanings, namely an existential meaning
ontologische, zijnstheorie
) and a value meaning (
axiologische,
waardetheorie
). The existential meaning merely denotes the negative
evolution of the real being, like loss of eyesight, whereas the value meaning
refers to the loss that flows from the disturbance of that
The difference between the two types of damage translates into different
the course or path
is brought back to what it was. The loss of value that was experienced in the
past remains lost; it cannot be
changed and should be
compensated.
The fourth element is the three-dimensionality of
Viane et al argue that
damage cannot exist if the dimensions of value, time and space, which are in
fact essential for every science,
The value dimension
exists in the interest (
) that a human being has in his or her
Just as damage must have a value element, it must also essentially have a
time element.
It is exactly this
element that informs the distinction between past and future loss at any given
point in time. In Belgian as well
as in South African law, this time element is
important as it has an influence on the way in which damage is
calculated.
The last dimension of damage refers to space. A human being does not suffer
damage in isolation. Instead, because there are relationships
between people,
damage really radiates outward and affects others as
It is this aspect of
damage that Belgian lawyers have come to call ‘extended damage’ and
to which this paper refers as
extended damage.
Therefore, value, time and space are relative occurrences and failure to take
cognisance of the changing character of each dimension
may result in an
incomplete assessment of
The fifth and final element of damage is made up of the three types of
uncertainties, namely the uncertainty of value (
axiologische
onzekerheid
), uncertainty of time (
temporele onzekerheden
spatial uncertainty (
onzekerheden
Uncertainty
of value lies in the fact that a number of aspects of a person’s existence
may be damaged at once. There is no
universal category that can measure the
extent of the damage and money is used to repair the damage. Because money
varies in value,
one must constantly seek just results. Viane
convincingly argue that if human damage can be related to a single value, that
value will be to be healthy
gezond-zijn
Uncertainty of time is constantly a problem as damage mostly concerns future
loss. Viane
et al remark that nobody can tell what the future would have
been had the damage not occurred in the past.
Finally, spatial uncertainty means that it is impossible to tell how damage
will influence those near the
These uncertainties
culminate in global uncertainty. The more serious the damage to the victim, the
greater the uncertainty and,
yet, the law requires a victim to quantify his or
her damage.
et al use a mathematical diagram to illustrate the different
elements of damage.
This diagram
shows, among other things, that it makes no sense at all to try and deduct
values mathematically when it comes to human
damage. Loss of value must have
more than a mathematical element in the context of human
At this point, one may very well ask whether there is any point in this
discussion. It seems to delve into a maze and become more
complex. However, the
point is that human damage in the many ways it may be suffered by an individual,
always extends to others.
Therefore, individual damage is always part of global
damage, in the same way that individual profit is part of global
The damage that is
ricocheted to others causes a chain reaction of damage that feeds itself and may
last several years. Eventually,
one can speak of a disaster. As Viane et al
explains, the more workers are simultaneously permanently incapacitated, the
more partners,
children, parents, friends and social security institutions will
simultaneously experience extended
The cogency of this statement is obvious. If one acknowledges that human
damage spills over into the lives of others, it is possible
to take it out of
the realm of private law, where the law primarily regulates the relationship
between private individuals. The next
step is then to design a contingency plan
to protect the network of social
This concept of extended damage is very important in South African society.
There are many causes of unemployment. Disability due
to a damage-causing event
is just one of them. However, if the law is there to provide compensation for
human damage, it is time
to recognise the fact that extended damage catapults
the concept of the damaged individual from the private sphere into the public
sphere. Therefore, one can safely say that loss of earning capacity because of
an employment injury is a social risk that needs to
be addressed in a new and
innovative way.
III. Preventieleer and
Schadeloosstellingsleer
As was indicated above,
damage is a legal fact that has nothing to do with policy. Prevention and repair
or compensation, on the other hand, are policy issues
that draw from various
institutions and disciplines in an attempt to create safety and surety about the
IV. CONCLUSION:
SCHADE AAN DE MENS
The above exposition relies on sound, comprehensive research that is
interdisciplinary and breaks the boundaries of the traditional
approach to
Viane, Van Steenberge and Lahaye use the following table to illustrate their
HUMAN DAMAGE
INDEMNIFICATION
Removing [threats]
-medical prevention
-situational prevention
Loss of earnings
-Unemployment
-Incapacity for work
-dependants
Loss of health
In other words the hinderer between the damaged person and his or
her environment
Indemnification of
loss of earnings
- REPARATION
employment policy
- COMPENSATION
(secondary):
replacement income
Indemnification of loss of
- REPARATION
-medical treatment
-situational treatment
- COMPENSATION
(secondary)
LEGAL POLICY
LEGAL POLICY
The table above outlines the crux of the argument about human damage. Human
damage is multifaceted, it has many causes and its prevention
indemnification is a policy issue. Clearly, it is up to policy-makers to choose
the best way to prevent and indemnify human damage.
D. OCCUPATIONAL INJURIES IN BELGIAN LAW
I. Introduction
Different pieces of legislation regulate the payment of compensation to an
employee for loss of income because of incapacity. The
system is structured in
such a way as to provide separately for employees, the self-employed and
government officials. This article
only focuses on the system for employees.
Furthermore, although this article focuses on employment injuries, a short
discussion on
illness and invalidity insurance is included in order to
illustrate how the theories discussed in section C above manifest themselves
legislation.
II. Illness and Invalidity Insurance
Van Steenberge explains that the Belgian social security system provides
extensive support to workers who can no longer work because
of serious illness
As far as the benefit
amounts are concerned, Pieters explains that during the first period of one
year, the benefit normally consists
of 60 per cent of the wage, which gives rise
to contribution liability.
the second year of incapacity for work (period of invalidity), people who are at
the head of a household obtain 65 per
Otherwise, this percentage
is 45 or 40 per cent of the previously earned
This principle seems to
have equality implications, but is, in essence, a recognition of the fact that
those who are the breadwinners
in a family have responsibilities towards their
dependants.
By paying an
increased benefit to a breadwinner, the system recognises the fact that the
breadwinner’s responsibilities extend
beyond himself or herself and that
his or her dependants stand to suffer a loss.
Although the injuries covered under this strand of the social security system
are not work-related, it is important to remember that
the Belgian social
security system is made up of an effective network and that the management of
all risks are subject to the main
aims that underpin the system. Furthermore,
there is also a link between labour legislation pertaining to incapacity and
sick leave.
In South African law, the different legislation pertaining to sick
leave, personal injury and social security simply do not relate
or interact, let
alone acknowledge such a concept as extended damage.
III. Occupational Injuries
Where an employee’s incapacity to work is due to an industrial injury
or an occupational disease, such an employee is entitled
to receive a percentage
of his or her wages from the previous year which is equal to the degree to which
he or she is incapacitated.
Where the degree of incapacity is less than 10 per cent, the benefit is
calculated on the basis of a lower percentage. Where the
beneficiary needs the
constant assistance of another person, the benefit is
This is a further
example of basic recognition of extended damage in Belgian law. An incapacitated
individual who depends on a spouse
or a caretaker for assistance receives an
increased benefit to help shoulder that burden. Although it may not necessarily
direct payment to a caretaker who happens to be a spouse, the point is
that the increased compensation may alleviate the lot of a
spouse who has
reduced his or her own economic activities in order to take care of the
incapacitated spouse.
Consequently, every employee who is, in principle, entitled to social
security benefits is entitled to occupational injury
In order to qualify as
an occupational injury (
arbeidsongeval
), an employee must have been the
victim of a sudden incident
(plotselinge gebeurtenis)
which caused death
or incapacity to work.
words, the victim must prove three elements. The victim must prove that he or
she sustained an injury, that it was caused
by a sudden incident and that it has
had a negative influence on the victim’s capacity to perform his or her
duties. The requirement
that there must be a sudden incident is necessary to
distinguish accidents from occupational
Once the employee proves the three required elements, there are two
presumptions that operate in his or her favour: that the injury
was caused by
the accident and that the employee was injured in the scope of his or her
employment.
It is then the
prerogative of the employer’s insurer to rebut those
presumptions.
So far, the Belgian and South African systems have a lot in
The occupational
injuries systems in both countries are no-fault
Even where an employee
has been grossly negligent, the insurance fund will pay. It is only where an
employee intentionally has caused
the injury to themselves that he or she
forfeits the right to
compensation.
On the test for
incapacity, Van Steenberge writes:
De arbeidsongevallenwet voorziet, naast het opvangen van de medisch kosten...
ook een vergoeding voor het verlies of de vermindering
van het arbeidsinkomen.
De vermindering van het vermogen om met arbeid een loon te verdienen noemt men
arbeidsongeschiktheid. Het
begrip arbeidsvermogen wijst op een verhouding tussen
twee elementen; de fijsieke toestand van de betrokkene en de arbeid die hij
kan verrichten. Vandaar dat bij de evaluatie, naast de medische gegevens, ook
socio-economische factoren een rol moeten
interesting factor in the Belgian system is the consideration of socioeconomic
elements. In South Africa, this is quite
This holistic
approach to incapacity is far more realistic since it ensures, by making use of
one procedure, that the victim is assessed
properly. He or she need not fall
back on some other system merely because the initial test was inadequate or
unnecessarily narrow.
As in South Africa, the Belgian system makes a distinction between temporary
incapacity and permanent incapacity. When it becomes
evident that a
victim’s situation is not going to improve, the incapacity to work
(arbeidsongeschiktheid)
becomes permanent.
Medical experts determine permanent incapacity and attach a percentage to
One then uses the
person’s basic wage to calculate the compensation.
The percentage
of the wage that is paid by way of compensation depends on whether the
employee’s incapacity falls within one
of the following categories:
temporary total incapacity; temporary partial incapacity; permanent total
incapacity; or permanent partial
incapacity.
In the case of temporary total incapacity, the victim is entitled to 90 per
cent of the average wage and compensation is paid per
Where a victim suffers from
temporary partial incapacity only, a special procedure applies. Van Steenberge
Deze komt hierop neer dat, op advies van de arbeidsgeneesheer van de
onderneming, een concreet voorstel wordt uitgewerkt voor (meestal
gedeeltelijke)
wedertewerkstelling van het slachtoffer. Aanvaardt het slachtoffer die
tewerkstelling, dan ontvangt hij een uitkering
gelijk aan de verschil tussen
zijn vroegere loon en het loon dat hij op dat moment verdient. Weigert hij, dan
ontvangt hij slechts
een vergoeding overeenkomstig zijn graad van
arbeids-ongeschiktheid. Wordt hem geen (gedeeltelijke) wedertewerkstelling
aangeboden,
dan wordt hij beschouwd als volledig tijdelijk
arbeidsongeschikt.
total incapacity entitles a victim to 100 per cent of his or her basic wage.
This amount may be increased where the victim
requires regular help from a
The most difficult
category is probably permanent partial incapacity. Here, compensation is
calculated as a ratio of 100 per cent
of the basic wage. For lower percentages
the compensation is reduced by half where it is less than 5 per cent and by a
quarter where
it is between 5 per cent and 10 per
Once again, providing increased compensation to a victim who relies on the
into account and is
commendable.
The basic structure of occupational disease and injury compensation is much
the same in Belgium as it is in South Africa. The big
difference between the two
systems lies in the different ways in which incapacity or
arbeidsongeschiktheid
is calculated. In South Africa, this test is quite
mechanical and critics refer to it as the ‘meat chart
This creates
the impression that compensation is paid for the loss of, for instance, a limb,
as opposed to providing reasonable income
replacement for disability. The
Belgian approach to occupational injuries is clearly more holistic than the
South African one. Proper
assessment ensures adequate compensation and that the
victim is not left destitute. Furthermore, reintegration and rehabilitation
a much stronger role in Belgium, whereas the focus in South Africa is more on
compensation and far less on rehabilitation and
reintegration. Overall, the
concept of extended damage is neither recognised in South Africa nor woven into
the existing legislation.
E. CONCLUSION AND RECOMMENDATIONS
Extended damage, human damage, damage by any other name … the fact
remains that injury to a human being has consequences which
extend beyond the
existence of that individual. It has a rippling effect and can be devastating to
spouses and dependants who live
in a sufficiently close relationship with the
injured individual.
South African common law does give recognition to extended damage by
appreciating the fact that the spouse of an injured individual
may have a claim
in his or her own name for damage. Even though this aspect has not been settled
by the courts and the popular view
is that an incapacitated individual has an
action in his or her own name, there is, in principle, no reason why a spouse or
dependant should not be granted an action in his or her own name. The
defendant would not pay a greater amount of compensation; rather,
the cake would
simply be sliced and distributed in a different manner. Furthermore, although
occupational injuries are regulated
by statute, entitlement to benefits and the
recognition of classes of dependants who may claim benefits have developed from
embedded common law principles. It is therefore, as a matter of policy,
extremely important to give basic recognition to the concept
of extended damage.
Furthermore, legislators should recognise that the way in which compensation is
paid is primarily a policy issue.
Taking a leaf from the book of the Belgians,
South African policy-makers would be well advised to build on the above
hypothesis about
human damage. Human damage is never limited to one individual
only. It is hoped that this all-important truth will, in future, be
by the judiciary and built into all legislation dealing with the payment of
compensation and benefits. This will widen
the overly narrow concept of human
damage and hugely improve compensation systems, including systems which aim to
provide compensation
for occupational injuries.
BIBLIOGRAPHY
1. Klinck, E, ‘People with Disabilities’ in
Social Security: A
Legal Analysis
eds Olivier, MP, Smit, N and Kalula, ER, LexisNexis
Butterworths, Durban, 2003.
2. Mutual Information System on Social Protection (MISSOC),
Protection in the Member States of the European Union: Situation on 1 July 2000
and Evolution
, European Commission, 2000
3. Neethling, J, Potgieter, JM and Visser, PJ,
Law of Delict
LexisNexis Butterworths, Durban, 2006.
4. Pieters, D,
Introduction into the Social Security Law of the Member
States of the European Community
, MAKLU Uitgevers, Antwerpen, Apeldoorn,
5. Smit, N, ‘Employment Injuries and Diseases and Disability in the
Workplace’ in
Social Security: A Legal Analysis
, eds Olivier, MP,
Smit, N and Kalula, ER, LexisNexis Butterworths, Durban, 2003.
6. Van Langendonck, J, ‘Belgium’ in
International
Encyclopaedia of Laws
ed W Van Eeckhoute, Kluwer Law
International, The Hague, London, Boston, 1998.
7. Van Steenberge, J,
Onze Sociale Zekerheid 4: Loon naar Werken
Die Keue, Brugge, 1989.
8. Van Steenberge, J and Van den Heuvel, A,
Inleiding tot het Recht Inzake
Arbeidsveiligheid
Die Keure, Brugge, 1988.
9. Viane, J, Van Steenberge J and Lahaye
D, ‘Prevention and
Related Policy Issues’ in
The European Face of Social Security: Essays
in Honour of Herman Deleeck
, eds Berghman, J and Cantillon, B, Avebury,
Aldershot, Brookfield USA, Hong Kong, Singapore, Sydney, 1993.
10. Viane, J, Lahaye, D and Van Steenberge, J, ‘Een laaste bijdrage tot
de synthese van de schadeleer? Aanloop tot het opstellen
glossarium’ in
Liber Amicorum Roger Dillemans Deel II. Sociale
Zekerheidsrecht
, ed D Pieters, Kluwer Rechtswetenschappen, België en E.
Stroy-Scientia, 1997.
Legislation
Apportionment of Damages Act 1956
(South Africa) No 34 of 1956.
Compensation for Occupational Injuries and Diseases Act
(South Africa) No 130 of 1993.
Workmen’s Compensation Act 1941
(South Africa) No 30 of
Court Cases
Abbott v Bergman
[1922] AD 53.
De Vaal v Messing
[1938] TPD 34.
Erdmann v Santam Insurance Co Ltd
[1985] 3 SA 402
Jooste v Score Supermarket Trading (Pty) Ltd
[1998] ZACC 18
[1998] 9 BCLR 1106
; [1999] 2 BCLR 139 (CC)
[1999] 2 SA 1 (CC)
; [1999] 20 ILJ 525 (CC).
Plotkin v Western Assurance Co Ltd
[1955] 2 SA 385
[1956] 3 SA 355 (E).
7. Union Government v Warneke
[1911] AD 657..
1. Myburgh, P, ‘Occupational Health and Safety’ (Lecture
delivered in LLM/M Phil in Labour Law, Rand Afrikaans University,
29 September
Daleen Millard, BIur LLB
LLM (UP) LLD (UJ); Advocate of the High Court of South Africa; Associate
Professor, University of Johannesburg.
J Viane, J van Steenberge and D
‘Prevention and Related Policy Issues’ in
European Face of Social Security: Essays in Honour of Herman Deleeck
Berghman and B Cantillon, Avebury, Aldershot, Brookfield USA, Hong Kong,
Singapore, Sydney, 1993 at 281.
See the discussion of section
Compensation for Occupational Injuries and Diseases Act, 1993
(South Africa) in section B(II) below.
J Neethling, JM Potgieter and
Law of Delict
, LexisNexis Butterworths, Durban, 2006 at 276.
Abbott v. Bergman
Union Government v.
[1911] AD 657.
Abbott v. Bergman
Ibid (emphasis added).
Plotkin v Western
Assurance Co Ltd
[1955] 2 SA 385
Id at 394–5.
Erdmann v Santam
Insurance Co Ltd
[1985] 3 SA 402
Id at 406, 406. See also J
Neethling, JM Potgieter and PJ Visser,
Law of Delict
, LexisNexis
Butterworths, Durban, 2006 at 262.
De Vaal v Messing
[1938] TPD 34.
Abbott v. Bergman
[1922] AD 53.
J Neethling, JM Potgieter
and PJ Visser,
Law of Delict
, LexisNexis Butterworths, Durban, 2006 at
Apportionment of Damages
(South Africa).
The first system under the
Workmen’s Compensation Act,
came into effect during the
Second World War. Although a new act, the
Compensation for Occupational
Injuries and Diseases Act,
was introduced subsequently, this new
Act retained the structure of the old Act.
One of the most problematic
shortcomings was the requirement that an employee had to prove fault on behalf
of his or her employer
in order to succeed with an action.
Taken from P Myburgh,
‘Occupational Health and Safety’ (Lecture delivered in LLM/M Phil in
Labour Law, Rand Afrikaans
University, 29 September 2004).
N Smit, ‘Employment
Injuries and Diseases and Disability in the Workplace’ in
Security: A Legal Analysis
, eds MP Olivier, N Smit and ER Kalula, LexisNexis
Butterworths, Durban, 2003 at
Sufficient medical care and
rehabilitation must also be provided where an employee has been injured or the
employee has contracted
a disease. Only employees that fall within the
definition of the Act are protected in terms of the
Compensation for
Occupational Injuries and Diseases Act
N Smit, ‘Employment
Injuries and Diseases and Disability in the Workplace’ in
Security: A Legal Analysis
, eds MP Olivier, N Smit and ER Kalula, LexisNexis
Butterworths, Durban, 2003 at
Compensation for
Occupational Injuries and Diseases Act, 1993
(South Africa) section 35. See
[1956] 3 SA 355 (E)
357-358, where the court pointed out
that social labour legislation is designed to ‘[p]rotect the interests of
employees and
to safeguard their rights, and its effect is to limit the
common-law rights of the employers and to enlarge the common-law rights
employees. The history of social legislation discloses that for a considerable
number of years there has been progressive encroachment
on the rights of
employers in the interests of workmen and all employees. So much has this been
the purpose of social legislation
that employees have been prevented from
contracting to their detriment. They have been prohibited from consenting to
accept conditions
of employment which the legislature has considered are too
onerous and burdensome from their point of view.’ See also
Score Supermarket Trading (Pty) Ltd
[1998] ZACC 18
[1998] 9 BCLR 1106 (E)
; [1999] 2 BCLR
[1999] 2 SA 1 (CC)
; [1999] 20 ILJ 525 (CC), where the Constitutional
Court found that section 35 of COIDA does not violate the right to equal
and benefit of the law in
Constitution
other right of the
Constitution
However, employees are
entitled to increased compensation if negligence on the part of the employer can
be established. See N Smit,
‘Employment Injuries and Diseases and
Disability in the Workplace’ in
Social Security: A Legal Analysis
eds MP Olivier, N Smit and ER Kalula, LexisNexis Butterworths, Durban, 2003
Compensation for
Occupational Injuries and Diseases Act, 1993
(South Africa) section 1. The
current definition of employee includes a casual employee employed for the
purpose of the employer’s
business, a director or member of a body
corporate who has entered into a contract of service or of apprenticeship or
learnership
with the body corporate, in so far as he or she acts within the
scope of his or her employment in terms of such contract, a person
provided by a
labour broker against payment to a client for the rendering of a service or the
performance of work, and for which
service or work such person is paid by the
labour broker, in the case of a deceased employee, his or her dependants and in
of an employee who is a person under disability, a curator acting on
behalf of that person. Although the protection afforded in terms
Compensation for Occupational Injuries and Diseases Act
disablement definitely plays a very important role, it does not mean that the
whole workforce enjoys protection in terms
Compensation for
Occupational Injuries and Diseases Act
. Members of the security forces,
independent contractors and domestic employees in private households fall
outside the ambit of the
Compensation for Occupational Injuries and Diseases
N Smit, ‘Employment
Injuries and Diseases and Disability in the Workplace’ in
Security: A Legal Analysis
, eds MP Olivier, N Smit and ER Kalula, LexisNexis
Butterworths, Durban, 2003 at
Id at 480–1.
disablement is less than 30 per cent, the lump sum is calculated
proportionally.
Id at 480: see footnote 178.
For instance, E Klinck, ‘People with Disabilities’ in
Security: A Legal Analysis
, eds MP Olivier, N Smit and ER Kalula, LexisNexis
Butterworths, Durban, 2003 at 326, states: ‘It is doubtful whether the
legislation is sufficient in assisting government to comply with its
constitutional duties
people living with disabilities
which arose from employment or road accidents. In particular, when deciding on
an appropriate response
— in a social security sense — to the needs
related to occupational injuries, deaths and disease, a policy decision has
be made as to the nature of the provision for such needs... [T]he so-called
‘meat chart approach’ (fixed levels of
compensation) has been
criticised as creating the impression that this is compensation for loss of a
limb rather than for the achievement
of adequate or reasonable income
replacement (social security as a (temporary) bypass until reintegration
General criticism can be
summarised in three points. Firstly, only those in formal employment who qualify
as employees enjoy coverage.
This exclusion may probably be justified because
the objective of the Act is to cover employment injuries, and only employees
employers contribute to the system enjoy coverage. However, this does not
mean that the self-employed and atypically employed should
forever remain
excluded from a system under the
Compensation for Occupational Injuries and
Diseases Act
. Secondly, little is done about the prevention of accidents and
rehabilitation and re-integration. Finally, even those employees
who do receive
lump sums or monthly pensions merely receive defined benefits and will most
likely not be in a position to maintain
the same standard of living that they
enjoyed prior to the employment accident.
J Viane, D Lahaye and J van
Steenberge, ‘Een laaste Bijdrage tot de Synthese van de Schadeleer?
Aanloop tot het Opstellen van
een Glossarium’ in
Liber Amicorum Roger
Dillemans Deel II. Sociale Zekerheidsrecht,
ed D Pieters, Kluwer
Rechtswetenschappen, België en E. Stroy-Scientia, 1997 at 470.
J Viane, D Lahaye and J van
Steenberge, ‘Een laaste bijdrage tot de synthese van de schadeleer?
Aanloop tot het opstellen van
een glossarium’ in
Liber Amicorum Roger
Dillemans Deel II. Sociale Zekerheidsrecht
ed D Pieters, Kluwer
Rechtswetenschappen, België en E. Stroy-Scientia, 1997 at 471 correctly
state: ‘Een goed preventiebeleid
vergt gewoonlijk de inzet van vele
middelen tegelijk: organisatorische, juridische, medische, informatieve,
technische, financiële,
pedagogische en andersoortige acties, die steeds op
een gecoördineerde wijze moeten aangewend worden. Een gebrek aan
samenwerking
loopt zeer vlug uit op tegenwerking en op de verkommering van de
preventie.’
On the role of currency in
the process of compensation, J Viane, D Lahaye and J van Steenberge, ‘Een
laaste bijdrage tot de
synthese van de schadeleer? Aanloop tot het opstellen van
een glossarium’ in
Liber Amicorum Roger Dillemans Deel II. Sociale
Zekerheidsrecht,
ed D Pieters, Kluwer Rechtswetenschappen, België en E.
Stroy-Scientia, 1997 at 471, make the following important remark: ‘Het
vergoedingsbeleid darentegen kan in beperkte mate de standaard
gebruiken om, met het oog op het uitkeren van een kompensatie, een
waardeverlies rechtstreeks te kwantificeren. Dit is enkel het geval
wanneer het
verlies van arbeidsinkomen
gaat. Voor de kwantificatie van de
menselijk nutswaarde is een geldelijk standaard immers bruikbaar. Elk
andersoortig waardeverlies
echter valt op zulke rechtstreekse wijze onmogelijk
te evalueren. In dergelijk geval moet opnieuw de omweg gemaakt over de
kostprijs van de vervangingsmiddelen
die kunnen aangeboden worden om de
aangerichte schade te kompenseren. In de praktijk ziet het rechtsbeleid evenwel
op tegen een beoordeling
van de nodige vervangingsmiddelen. Het kent liever in
den blinde geldelijke bedragen toe, om daarna kritiek uit te brengen over de
wijze waarop het geld gebruikt wordt.’
Ibid 472: the authors state:
te definiëren sluiten we aan op wat in de actuele
stand van de wetenschap zo goed als algemeen aanvaard wordt. De individuele
is niet een gesloten systeem, dat enkel beïnvloed wordt door wat er binnen
de grenzen van zijn huid voorvalt, maar een
open systeem
, dat in grote
mate bepaald wordt door zijn
milieu, wereld,
Umwelt, situatie
) waarin het leeft. Een omgeving waarop het trouwens op zijn
beurt grote invloed uitoefent.’
writers, assisted by a team of economists, statisticians and information
technologists, put this theory to the test. Their efforts
culminated in the
HARVART-project. The purpose of this project was to see to what extent the
mathematical calculation of loss of
income could be achieved uniformly in social
insurance. The result is explained as follows: ‘[V]ertrekkend van de
en gebruikmakend van die nieuwe loon- en arbeidstijdendatabank
waarover de R.S.Z. [
Rijksdienst voor Sociale Zekerheid
] sinds 1990
beschikt, bleek het inderdaad mogelijk te zijn het loonverlies op een
juristische wijze te berekenen, zodat een einde
kan komen aan de versplinterde,
ondoorzichtelijke en wanordelijke aanpak die tot op heden schering en inslag is.
Ingevolge het bestaan
van het K.S.Z. [
Kruispuntbank der Soziale
]-netwerk is een directe en vlugge opvraging van de nodige gegevens
bij de R.S.Z ook geen probleem meer. Komt het ooit zover dan kunnen
werkgevers ontlast worden van de enorme rompslomp die de mededeling van de
refertelonen bij ieder geval van verlies van arbeidsinkomen
meebrengt.’
Although this method broadly
echoes the sum-formula approach that is used in South Africa in the calculation
of future damage, the
availability of a database makes future predictions more
J Viane, D Lahaye and J van
Steenberge, ‘Een laaste bijdrage tot de synthese van de schadeleer?
Aanloop tot het opstellen van
een glossarium’ in
Liber Amicorum Roger
Dillemans Deel II. Sociale Zekerheidsrecht,
ed D Pieters, Kluwer
Rechtswetenschappen, België en E. Stroy-Scientia, 1997 at 474.
Id at 475. To summarise, the
authors argue: ‘Met het begrip schade kan men daarom zowel de negatiewe
(ontologische) verandering
bedoelen die de realiteit ondergaat als het
(axiologische) irreële waardeverlies dat daaruit voortvloeit.’
Ibid. The authors note in
this regard: ‘Daarom ook bestaat er uiteindelijk alleen maar
‘menselijke’ schade. Een
zaak kan maar schade oplopen, wanneer ze
voor een menselijk wezen enige waarde bezit. Een res nullius, waarin niemand
belang stelt,
kan alleen maar ‘
veranderen’,
nooit schade
lijden. Zakenschade op zichtzelf, geisoleerd van de menselijke
belangstelling,
bestaat niet.’
The authors
is de tweede dimensie van schade, even essentieel als
de waarde. Tijdeloze schade bestaat op deze wereld niet. Ingevolge de
onverbiddelijke
vooruitgang van de tijd wordt schade, zolang ze bestaat,
voortdurend groter. Schade is van bij haar begin steeds een
verlies van
Ondermeer daardoor is en blift opgelopen schade altijd
For instance, in South
African law the ‘once and for all’ rule dictates that a plaintiff
should claim his or her damage
‘once and for all’, which means that
both past and future damage should be included in the claim. See J Neethling, JM
Potgieter and PJ Visser,
Law of Delict
, LexisNexis Butterworths, Durban,
2006 at 208.
J Viane, D Lahaye and J van
Steenberge, ‘Een laaste bijdrage tot de synthese van de schadeleer?
Aanloop tot het opstellen van
een glossarium’ in
Liber Amicorum Roger
Dillemans Deel II. Sociale Zekerheidsrecht,
ed D Pieters, Kluwer
Rechtswetenschappen, België en E. Stroy-Scientia, 1997 at 476.
Id at 476–7.
Id at 477–8.
Id at 478. The authors
state: ‘Een van de belangrijkste onderdelen van het gezond-zijn is
nuttig-zijn.
Voor het axiologisch onderzoek is het van uitzonderlijk
belang omdat het zich leent tot kwantificatie. Bovendien is het nuttig-zijn,
samen met het gezond-zijn, steeds de hoofbekommernis geweest van de sociale
zekerheid.’ They also remark that loss of
menselijke nutswaarde
always been included in their analysis.
Id at 510. The authors
remark in this regard: ‘Wanneer, bijvoorbeeld, de zeer onzekere schade
door een onrechtmatige daad aangericht
werd, kan de dader redelijkerwijze niet
eisen dat het schlachtoffer met zekerheid de aard en de omvang van zijn schade
zou bewijzen.
Toch steld de rechtsspraak en rechtsleer dit beginsels voorop. Wij
zijn het daar in gene mate mee eens. Aangezien de dader zelf de
onzekerheid
schept, dient hij ook zelf voor het goedmaken van dit wesenlijke onderdeel van
de schade in te staan, zodat de bewijslast
moet omgekeerd worden.’
Id at 484. The writers note
in this regard: ‘Appels van peren aftrekken mag niet, leren onze kinderen
als ze voor de eerste
maal naar school gaan. Toch begaan de grote mensen
herhaaldelijk deze fout wanneer het om de becijfering van de menselijke schade
gaat. Een referteloon wordt vaak genoeg met een medische restwaarde verminderd,
om het verschil een ‘verloren loon’ te
Id at 485-486.
Id at 489 (emphasis in
See Section B(I).
J Viane, D Lahaye and J van
Steenberge, ‘Een laaste bijdrage tot de synthese van de schadeleer?
Aanloop tot het opstellen van
een glossarium’ in
Liber Amicorum Roger
Dillemans Deel II. Sociale Zekerheidsrecht,
ed D Pieters, Kluwer
Rechtswetenschappen, België en E. Stroy-Scientia, 1997 at 489.
J Viane, J van Steenberge
and D Lahaye,
‘Prevention and Related Policy Issues’ in
The European Face of Social Security: Essays in Honour of Herman Deleeck
eds J Berghman and B Cantillon, Avebury, Aldershot, Brookfield USA, Hong Kong,
Singapore, Sydney, 1993 at 283.
J Van Steenberge,
Sociale Zekerheid 4: Loon naar Werken
Die Keue, Brugge, 1989 at 19.
He states: ‘Werknemers die, ingevolge ziekte of ongeval niet meer in staat
zijn om te werken,
kunnen van het ziekenfonds een vervangingsinkomen ontvangen.
daarvoor moeten ze uiteraard onder deze wetgeving vallen en aan een
voorwaarden voldoen. De uitkering zal afhankelijk zijn van de duur van de
arbeidsongeschiktheid en van de familiale situatie
waarin de betrokkene zich
bevindt.’ For a concise (but rather cryptic) discussion of this system,
see also Mutual Information
System on Social Protection (MISSOC),
Protection in the Member States of the European Union: Situation on 1 July 2000
and Evolution
, European Commission, 2000; J Van Langendonck,
‘Belgium’ in
International Encyclopaedia of Laws
ed W Van Eeckhoute, Kluwer Law International, The Hague, London,
Boston, 1998 at 105, states: ‘The basic rule is found in Art.
100, par. 1
of the Act as coordinated on 14 July 1994, according to which a worker is
incapacitated to work, if he ‘has stopped
all occupational activity, and
if his injuries or disorders are recognised to reduce his earning capacity to
one third or less of
what a person of the same social condition and with the
same training can earn in the category of jobs to which the occupation of
worker before his incapacity belongs, or in all occupations he could be employed
in, considering his training’.’
Introduction
into the Social Security Law of the Member States of the European Community
MAKLU Uitgevers, Antwerpen, Apeldoorn, 1993 at 28
J Van Steenberge,
Sociale Zekerheid 4: Loon naar Werken
Die Keue, Brugge, 1989 at 32.
The writer also comments: ‘Het toepassingsgebied van die
arbeidsongevallenwet werd darenboven
nog uitgebreid tot bepaalde groepen van
werknemers die in feite onttrokken zijn aan de werkingssfeer van de sociale
sekerheid voor
werknemers, bijvoorbeeld wegens de geringe duur van hun
prestasies. Uitgesloten uit deze regeling zijn het overheidspersoneel en
militairen: voor deze categorieën van personen is een afzonderlijke
regeling van toepassing.’
J Van Steenberge,
Sociale Zekerheid 4: Loon naar Werken
Die Keue, Brugge, 1989 at 33
states: ‘In de arbeidsongevallenwet wordt het arbeidsongeval omschreven
als: ‘het ongeval
dat de werknemer tijdens en door het feit van de
uitvoering van de arbeidsovereenkomst overkomt en dat een letsel
veroorzaakt’.
Het was niet de bedoeling van de wetgever een volledige
begripsomschrijving te geven, maar wel de elementen aan te geven die door
slachtoffer moeten bewezen worden.’ J Van Langendonck,
‘Belgium’ in
International Encyclopaedia of Laws
ed W Van Eeckhoute, Kluwer Law International, The Hague, London,
Boston, 1998 at 118 illuminates this further: ‘The classical
definition of
the accident that is given by the Cour de Cassation on 26 May 1967: the accident
is a sudden occurrence causing an
injury. Previous to this decision the courts
required that the sudden occurrence should be of an abnormal nature, and caused
external force. The many disputes on these elements caused the judges to
drop them.’ As far as prevention is concerned, see
Van Steenberge J and
Van den Heuvel A,
Inleiding tot het Recht Inzake Arbeidsveiligheid
Die Keure, Brugge, 1988 at 68.
J Van Steenberge,
Sociale Zekerheid 4: Loon naar Werken
Die Keue, Brugge, 1989 at
explains:’De grens hiertussen is echter soms moeilijk te
trekken, en daarom hanteert men steeds het volgende criterium: het
niet het eindpunt zijn van een langzame ‘aftakeling’ van de
gezondheidstoestand, maar moet het gevolg zijn
van een tijd en ruimte
lokaliseerbare gebeurtenis, inspanning, handeling of emotie. Slechts in dit
laaste geval is er sprake van
een arbeidsongeval.’
J Van Langendonck,
‘Belgium’ in
International Encyclopaedia of Laws
ed W Van Eeckhoute, Kluwer Law International, The Hague, London,
Boston, 1998 at 118 states: ‘The Act helps the victim with
presumption, that an injury is caused by an accident, if the victim can prove
the existence of a sudden occurrence and of
an injury (Art. 9, Act of 10 April
1971). But this has not put an end to all litigation on the nature of the
accident. The courts
still have to decide every day on the nature of the
‘sudden occurrence’ which will be deemed to be an accident. It has
been decided that this occurrence must be different from the injury itself,
since the act requires a sudden occurrence
an injury. So a heart
attack cannot be deemed to be an accident all by itself, the victim — or
his survivors — will have
to show the existence of some other
‘sudden occurrence’, such as a special effort, or an exceptional
stress. The occurrence
can be considered as ‘sudden’ also when it
lasts for a specific period of time. It is sufficient that it can be situated
time and space. It doesn’t have to be different from the normal
performance of the work, but it has to be of a nature to
cause such injury as
was sustained by the victim.’
However, note that there are
huge differences between the two systems as far as commuting injuries are
concerned. In Belgium, accidents
that occur while an insured travelling on the
normal route to and from work are equated with occupational injuries. The risk
of accidents
on the way to and from work was added to the Act during the Second
World War for practical reasons. On determining the normal route,
Steenberge,
Onze Sociale Zekerheid 4: Loon naar Werken
Brugge, 1989 states: ‘Over de normale weg geeft de wet de volgende
bepaling: ‘onder de weg naar en van het werk
wordt verstaan het normale
traject dat de werknemer moet afleggen om zich van zijn verblijfplaats te
begeven naar de plaats waar
hij werkt en omgekeerd.’ De normale weg is
niet noodzakelijk de kortste of de vlugste en ook niet de weg die men iedere dag
volgt. Beide elementen spelen uiteraard een rol.’ The residence of the
employee is that place where the employee usually resides,
while the workplace
is that place where the employee executes his or her duties in terms of his or
her employment contract. Although
this system seems to be ideal, especially in
an industrialised country where commuters have to use roads in order to reach
places of work and to contribute to the economy, the labour courts hear
many cases on commuting injuries. Where someone used a detour,
for instance, one
may ask whether he or she was in fact forced to do so, or where there is a time
discrepancy, one may ask why an
employee for instance stopped to buy cigarettes
on the way to work. Thus, the merits of a claim like this may be difficult to
If it is difficult to define an industrial accident, it is even more
difficult to describe the way to and from work! Many court decisions
around the starting point and the end of the journey.
J Van Steenberge,
Sociale Zekerheid 4: Loon naar Werken
Die Keue, Brugge, 1989 at
J Van Langendonck, ‘Belgium’ in
International
Encyclopaedia of Laws
ed W Van Eeckhoute, Kluwer Law
International, The Hague, London, Boston, 1998 at 126–7 states the matter
as follows: ‘The
basic principle of the industrial accidents act is that
the own fault of the employer or of the worker plays no role whatsoever.
worker doesn’t have to prove that the employer was at fault in the causing
of the accident, and the employer (or his insurer)
cannot escape his
responsibility by showing that the worker was himself at fault. The
responsibility of the employer will be covered
by a compulsory insurance, to be
paid by the employer himself. It is felt that the insurance premiums will have
some preventive effect.
They will go up if the employer causes too many
accidents in his enterprise.’
J Van Steenberge,
Sociale Zekerheid 4: Loon naar Werken
Die Keue, Brugge, 1989 at
On the considerations that
need to be taken into account, Van Steenberge,
Onze Sociale Zekerheid 4: Loon
naar Werken
Die Keue, Brugge, 1989 at 37–8 notes: ‘De
vraag is hier in welke mate het slachtoffer ten gevolge van het ongeval minder
kansen heeft om arbeid te verrichten en daarmee een loon te verdienen. De
ongeschiktheid wordt dus niet meer beoordeeld ten opzichte
oorpronkelijke beroep van de werknemer, maar ten opzichte van alle beroepen die
hij zou kunnen uitoefen, gelet op zijn leeftijd,
beroepsopleiding,
herscholings-kansen, e.d.m.’
Id at 39. See also J Van
Langendonck, ‘Belgium’ in
International Encyclopaedia of
ed W Van Eeckhoute, Kluwer Law International, The
Hague, London, Boston, 1998 at 122.
J Van Steenberge,
Sociale Zekerheid 4: Loon naar Werken
Die Keue, Brugge, 1989 at 39.
See also J Van Langendonck, ‘Belgium’ in
International
Encyclopaedia of Laws
ed W Van Eeckhoute, Kluwer Law
International, The Hague, London, Boston, 1998 at 122: ‘Under industrial
accident rules, when
the incapacity is no longer complete, the victim continues
to be entitled to full benefits, but a procedure of reinstatement to work
be initiated.’
J Van Steenberge,
Sociale Zekerheid 4: Loon naar Werken
Die Keue, Brugge, 1989 at
Also Van J Van
Langendonck, ‘Belgium’ in
International Encyclopaedia of
ed W Van Eeckhoute, Kluwer Law International, The
Hague, London, Boston, 1998 at 123 states: ‘In this agreement or decision
the degree of permanent incapacity will be expressed by a percentage figure
between 0 and 100. The benefit will consist of multiplication
of this percentage
and the basic wage. This basic wage is the normal wage of the victim in the year
preceding the accident, with
a statutory minimum and maximum limit. Special
rules are applied when the victim has not worked regularly for a full year, or
he worked for more than one employer.’
E Klinck, ‘People with
Disabilities’ in
Social Security: A Legal Analysis
eds MP Olivier,
N Smit and ER Kalula, LexisNexis Butterworths, Durban, 2003 at 326.
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (275 KB)
PDF format (207 KB)
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter