URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/journals/SydUPLawBk/2011/9.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 15:40:39
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
O'Neill, Nick; Peisah, Carmelle --- "Chapter 7 - The Functions and Powers of Guardians" [2011] SydUPLawBk 9; in O'Neill, Nick; Peisah, Carmelle (eds), "Capacity and the Law" (Sydney University Press, 2011)
7. 1. Introduction
7. 2. The function or powers given to guardians and the duties that go with them
7. 2. 1. New South Wales
7. 2. 2. Victoria
7. 2. 3. Queensland
7. 2. 4. Western Australia
7. 2. 5. South Australia
7. 2. 6. Tasmania
7. 2. 7. Australian Capital Territory
7. 2. 8. Northern Territory
7. 3. Duties and responsibilities of guardians
7. 3. 1. Guardians must apply the legislative principles
7. 3. 2. Guardians must act honestly and with reasonable diligence
7. 3. 3. Guardians must act in the best interests of the person under their guardianship
7. 3. 4. A guardian’s obligations and the views of the person under guardianship
7. 3. 5. Guardians must act as required by terms of the order appointing them
7. 3. 6. The legal effect of actions taken and decisions made by guardians
7. 4. Restrictions on the functions or powers of a guardian
7. 4. 1. No power to discipline person under guardianship
7. 4. 2. No power to vote in an election for the person under their guardianship
7. 4. 3. No power to make a will or other testamentary instrument for the person under their guardianship
7. 4. 4. No power to consent to the adoption of a child on behalf of the person under their guardianship
7. 4. 5. No power to consent to a marriage on behalf of the person under their guardianship
7. 5. The functions/powers of guardians
7. 5. 1. Advocacy
7. 5. 2. Accommodation
7. 5. 3. Health Care
7. 5. 4. Medical and dental consent
7. 5. 5. Services
7. 5. 6. Access
7. 5. 7. Behaviour intervention and support
7. 5. 8. Restriction of the freedom of movement of and consent to other restrictive practices in relation to those a who has been
in trouble with the criminal law or others with an intellectual disability
7. 5. 9. Restrictive practices in legislation in Queensland and Victoria
7. 5. 10. A guardian to make decisions about religious observance
7. 5. 11. Miscellaneous functions or powers
7. 6. The ancillary powers of guardians
7. 7. Directions (and advice) to guardians
7. 7. 1. Case law on directions to guardians
Chapter 7 – The functions and powers of guardians
7. 1. Introduction
This chapter sets out the functions or powers given to guardians by
legislation in some of the States and the Australian Capital Territory.
discusses the functions or powers commonly given to guardians when they are
appointed by tribunals as well as less commonly
given functions or powers.
The chapter also discusses the duties of guardians and the matters that
guardians are barred by legislation from appointing guardians
to make decisions
and the Australian Capital Territory
apply equally to guardians in the other
States and the Northern Territory where they are not legislated for.
7. 2. The function or powers given to guardians and
the duties that go with them
The functions or powers that may be given to guardians are described by
different words in the different legislation of the different
Territories. In order to clarify the terms used in rest of the chapter, it is
useful to set out the way in which those
functions or powers are given by the
relevant legislation.
7. 2. 1. New South Wales
In New South Wales, guardians are given functions. A plenary guardian has all
the functions that a guardian has at law or in equity,
while a limited guardian
has one or more of those functions as set out in the
In New South Wales, a
plenary guardian has custody of the person under their guardianship to the
exclusion of all others while a
limited guardian has custody of the person under
their guardianship to extent set out in the
Both plenary and limited
orders may contain conditions.
7. 2. 2. Victoria
In Victoria, guardians are given powers and duties. A plenary guardian has
all the powers and duties a plenary guardian would have
if they were a parent
and the person under their guardianship were their
A limited guardian has such
of those powers and duties as are specified in the guardianship
Nevertheless, some of these
powers are set out in the
Guardianship and Administration Act
as follows:
1. to decide where the person under guardianship is to live, whether
permanently or temporarily,
2. to decide with whom that person is to live,
3. to decide whether that person should or should not be permitted to work
and, if so, the nature or type of work, for whom they are
to work and related
4. to consent to any health care that is in their best interests , subject to
limitations on this power elsewhere in the
5. to restrict visits to them to the extent necessary in their best interests
and to prohibit visits by any person if the guardian
reasonably believes that
such visits would have an adverse effect on the person under
guardianship.
7. 2. 3. Queensland
In Queensland guardians may exercise power for a personal matter, that is
make all decisions about the personal matter “and
otherwise exercise the
power”. They may, to the extent authorised by the order appointing them,
do anything in relation to
a personal matter that the person under guardianship
could do if they had capacity.
The statutory list of personal matters that Queensland appointed guardians
may make decisions about is not exhaustive. It contains
the first four powers in
the Victorian list, and the fifth power in the Victorian, the access power, has
been held to be a “personal
Queensland.
The Queensland list
also includes:
1. deciding whether the person under guardianship applies for a licence or
2. day-to-day issues, including, for example, diet and dress,
3. deciding whether to consent to a forensic examination of the of the person
under guardianship
4. making decisions about a legal matter not relating to their financial or
property matters.
The statutory “functions and powers” of guardians in Queensland
will be returned to later in this chapter as those provisions
responsibilities and duties of guardians that are relevant to guardians in the
other States and
Territories.
7. 2. 4. Western Australia
In Western Australia guardians are given functions. A plenary guardian has
all the functions in relation to the person under their
guardianship that are,
Family Court Act
(WA), vested in a person in whose favour
has been made:
1. a parenting order which allocates parental responsibility for a child,
2. a parenting order which provides that a person is to share parental
responsibility for a child,
as if the person under their guardianship were a child lacking in mature
understanding. However, a plenary guardian does not have
the right to chastise
or punish the person under their
guardianship.
A limited guardian
has one or more of the functions of a plenary guardian that are set out in the
guardianship order.
As in Victoria, some of these powers are set out in the
Guardianship and
Administration Act
(WA). The first four functions are the same as the
first four powers in Victoria, but Western Australian guardians have, as plenary
guardians, or may be given as limited guardians, the following functions:
1. to decide what education and training the person under their guardianship
is to receive,
2. to decide with whom that person is to associate,
3. as the next friend of that person, commence, conduct or settle any legal
proceedings on their behalf, except proceedings relating
to their estate,
4. as the guardian ad litem
of the represented person, defend or
settle any legal proceedings taken against the person under their guardianship,
except proceedings
relating to the estate of that
These functions, together with the Victorian powers, will be discussed later
in the chapter as they are functions that, with reservations
in some cases, may
be exercised in at least some of the other States and
Territories.
Guardianship and Administration Act
(WA) sets out a
list of things a guardian cannot
This issue will be discussed
later in the chapter.
In Western Australia if an occupier or a person in charge of premises refuses
to allow the guardian to enter those premises where
the person under their
guardianship is present, the guardian may apply to the State Administrative
Tribunal (WASAT) for a warrant
to enter those premises in order to perform any
function in relation to the person under their guardianship or to discover
the person under their guardianship is on those
7. 2. 5. South Australia
In South Australia, guardians are given powers. A guardian with full powers
has all the powers that a guardian has at law or in equity,
while a limited
guardian has one or more of those powers as set out in the guardianship
In addition, the
Guardianship Board may direct that the person under guardianship live with a
specified person or in a specified
place or it may empower the person’s
guardian to make decisions about the placement or detention of the person under
guardianship.
This matter
is taken up later in the
7. 2. 6. Tasmania
In Tasmanian legislation is virtually identical with the Victorian
. It provides that guardians have powers and duties. A
“full” guardian has all the powers and duties which a full guardian
would have in Tasmania if they were a parent and the person under guardianship
were their child.
guardian has such of those powers and duties as are specified in the
guardianship order.
these powers are set out in the
Guardianship and Administration Act
They are the
same powers as are set out in the
Guardianship and Administration Act
7. 2. 7. Australian Capital Territory
In the Australian Capital Territory, guardians are given powers, namely the
powers that the ACT Civil and Administrative Tribunal
(ACAT) is satisfied are
necessary or desirable for the guardian to have in order to make decisions for
the person under guardianship
in accordance with the decision-making
principles.
Again, as in
Victoria, Western Australia, Tasmania and the Northern Territory, some of the
powers of a guardian are set out in the
Guardianship and Management of
Property Act
(ACT) The first five of these are effectively the same
powers as those set out in the
Guardianship and Administration Act
The final power is to
bring or continue legal proceedings for or in the name of the person under
guardianship.
Guardianship and Management of Property Act 1991
out a list of powers that a guardian cannot be
This list will be set out
and discussed later in the
As already noted in Chapter 6, the Public Advocate has an obligation, if
appointed as the guardian, to endeavour to find a suitable
(private) person to
be appointed as the guardian of the person under the Public Advocate’s
guardianship. If such a suitable
person is found, the Public Advocate is
required to apply to ACAT for the appointment of that person as
7. 2. 8. Northern Territory
In the Northern Territory, following the Victorian model, guardians are given
powers and duties. A “full” guardian has
all the powers and duties
which a full guardian would have if they were a parent and the person under
guardianship were their infant
Under a conditional
order, a guardian has such of those powers and duties as are specified in the
Again, following the
Victorian model, some of the powers of a guardian are set out in the
Guardianship Act 1988 (NT)
They are the first four powers that are set out in the
Guardianship and
Administration Act 1986
7. 3. Duties and responsibilities of
When an adult person accepts an appointment a guardian they take on a set of
duties and responsibilities that are either found in
the legislation of the
State or Territory they are appointed in or are likely to be held to be applied
to them as a matter of common
law. These duties and responsibilities are set out
7. 3. 1. Guardians must apply the legislative
Guardians must apply the general principles set out in the legislation under
which they are appointed, including any relevant more
principles.
For example, in
Queensland, if given powers in relation to health matters, they must apply the
health care principle.
7. 3. 2. Guardians must act honestly and with
reasonable diligence
Guardians must exercise their functions or powers honestly and with
reasonable diligence to protect the interests of the person under
guardianship. This is stated in terms in the Queensland
, but applies
to guardians in all States and
Territories.
7. 3. 3. Guardians must act in the best interests
of the person under their guardianship
This central aspect of a guardian’s duty or responsibility is stated
best in the Western Australian
, following on from the Victorian
, but it applies to guardians wherever appointed. Guardians are
required, subject to any direction given to them by the body appointing
act according to their opinion of the best interests of the person under their
guardianship.
While their obligations as guardians may extend beyond this in particular
cases, guardians act in the best interests of the person
under their
guardianship if they act as far as possible:
1. as an advocate for the person under their guardianship,
2. in such a way as to encourage that person to live in the general community
and participate as much as possible in the life of the
3. in such a way as to encourage and assist that person to become capable of
caring for themselves and of making reasonable judgments
in respect of matters
relating to their person,
4. in such a way as to protect that person from abuse, exploitation or
5. in consultation with that person, taking into account, as far as possible,
their wishes, as expressed, in whatever manner, or as
gathered from their
previous actions,
6. in the manner that is least restrictive of the rights, while consistent
with the proper protection, of that person,
7. in such a way as to maintain any supportive relationships that that person
8. in such a way as to maintain that person’s familiar cultural,
linguistic and religious
environment.
The Victorian, Tasmanian and Northern Territory
set out the best
interests responsibilities of guardians in the same way. They refer to the first
five actions set out above and
state that a guardian must act (at all times in
Tasmania) in the best interests of the person under
guardianship.
The New South Wales
imposes a clear obligation on guardians to
give paramount consideration to the welfare and interests of those persons under
guardianship.
While the advocacy role of a guardian is not stated in terms as being part of
a guardian’s duties in the other States and the
Australian Capital
Territory as it is in Victoria, Western Australia, Tasmania and the Northern
Territory, it is understood as an
obligation implied into every function or
power given to a guardian that the guardian may advocate as appropriate for the
under guardianship in relation to that function or power.
The Guardianship Board of Western Australia and it successor, WASAT, both
recognise that the role of a guardian includes not only
the making of decisions
but also acting to assert and protect the rights and interests of those under
guardianship against third
parties and making representations on their behalf
and that this is consistent with the obligation of guardians to act in the best
interests of those under their
guardianship.
7. 3. 4. A guardian’s obligations and the
views of the person under guardianship
This question is discussed in relation to tribunals in Chapter 6. 11. 5.
In New South Wales guardians are under a duty to take the views of the person
under guardianship into consideration, but they are
not bound by
The guardian must give
paramount consideration to the best interests of the person under
guardianship.
In Victoria,
Western Australia, Tasmania and the Northern Territory this obligation is an
element of acting in the best interests
of the person under guardianship. The
person under guardianship must be consulted and their wishes gathered either
from current expression
or from previous
Those wishes are to be
taken into account, as far as possible. However, there are extra provisions in
Victoria, Tasmania and the
Northern Territory which will be returned to shortly.
The effect of the New South Wales and Western Australian provisions is that
guardians are substitute decision-makers for the people
under their
guardianship. Their role is not to make substituted judgments but to consider or
take into account the views of the person
under their guardianship and, having
done so, to make decisions in the best interests of those persons, but without
being bound by
their views.
In Victoria, Tasmania, the Northern Territory the obligations of guardians
when carrying out their powers and duties come from two
sources. The first being
a general principle applying when any function, power, authority, discretion,
or imposed by the relevant
exercised or performed so that:
1. the means which is the least restrictive of the person with a disability's
freedom of decision and action as is possible in the
circumstances is
2. the best interests of that person are promoted, and
3. the wishes of that person are, wherever possible, given effect to.
In 1989 Hart J sitting in the Victorian Administrative Appeals Tribunal held
that the requirement to promote the best interests of
the person with the
disability prevailed over the other two
requirements.
The second is a specific direction to guardians requiring them to act in the
best interests of the person under their
guardianship.
However, they are
told that they act in the best interests of the person under their guardianship
if they act, wherever possible
and among other things, in consultation with that
person taking into account, as far as possible, the wishes of that
Despite the different wording in the relevant legislation, and the internal
conflict between the provisions within them, the effect
of the Victorian,
Tasmanian, the Northern Territory provisions is the same as those in New South
Wales and Western Australia, namely
that guardians are substitute
decision-makers for those under their guardianship. Their role is not to make
substituted judgments
where to do so would be to act contrary to the best
interests of those under their guardianship, but to consult with and take into
account the views of the person under their guardianship and, having done so, to
make decisions in the best interests of those persons
without being bound by
their views.
The relevant legislation in Victoria, Tasmania, the Northern Territory
contains a specific section setting out how guardians are to
exercise their
authority. That section states that they must act in the bests interests of
those under their guardianship and advises
them that they do so, among other
things, by consulting with that person and, as far as possible, taking into
account their wishes.
applies specifically to guardians, it must prevail, in relation to them, as a
matter of statutory interpretation, over
the general provision which requires
that every function, power, authority, discretion, jurisdiction and duty
conferred or imposed
by the relevant
is to be exercised or performed
so that the wishes of the person under guardianship are, wherever possible,
given effect to. This
is particularly so because the same general provision also
requires guardians to exercise their powers or perform their duties so
best interests of the person under their guardianship are
Those two obligations are sometimes in conflict; however they are resolved in
the section which sets out how guardians are to exercise
the authority given
them by the order appointing them. In this regard it should be noted that each
year in Australia, a number of
people with decision-making disabilities have
guardianship or administration orders made in relation to them as the evidence
they need such orders in part at least because they lack insight into the
problems confronting them and demonstrate this by expressing
views which, if
given effect to, would be seriously detrimental to their own interests. For
example, people with dementia often deny
they have problems managing at home.
They may forget that they have had falls and/or deny they have medical problems
or need medication.
Often they ask to be “left alone”. To heed
these wishes would be to expose them to risk and neglect which would be
detrimental
to their own interests.
Furthermore, the long established common law policy behind the protective
protecting incapable
adults and promoting their best interests because of their inability to do those
things on their own behalf,
despite their ability to express opinions. For all
these reasons it is suggested that the relevant legislation in Victoria,
the Northern Territory is not intended to be read as importing the
requirement of substituted judgment to prevail over a guardian’s
obligation to act in the best interests of the person under their guardianship,
disregarding their views when necessary.
Guardians in Queensland are in a similar, but not identical, situation. They
must recognise and take into account the right of the
person under guardianship
to participate, to the greatest extent practicable, in decisions affecting their
life, including the development
of policies, programs and services for them.
Guardians must also take into account the importance of preserving, to the
extent practicable, the right of those under their guardianship to make
their own decisions. Consequently, they must give those under
their guardianship
any necessary support and access to information, to enable them to participate
in decisions affecting their lives
and, to the greatest extent practicable, seek
and take into account the views and wishes of those under their guardianship.
when performing a function or exercising a power a guardian must do so in
the way that is least restrictive of the rights of the
person under their
guardianship.
Furthermore,
Guardianship and Administration Act
provides that guardians must use the principle of substituted judgment, but in a
limited way only. If it is reasonably practicable
to work out what the views and
wishes of the person under guardianship would be from their previous actions, or
from their views
and wishes expressed orally, in writing or in another way,
including by conduct, then a guardian must take into account what they
would be those views and wishes. Nevertheless, guardians must perform their
functions or exercise their powers in a way
that is consistent with the proper
care and protection of those under their
guardianship.
This means that substituted judgment is not to trump the requirement that
guardians, when performing their functions or exercising
their powers under the
orders appointing them, must do so in a way that is consistent with the proper
care and protection of those
under their guardianship. If the position were
otherwise, it would be pointless appointing guardians in Queensland for adults
proven impaired capacity who were nevertheless articulate and stating that
they wished to continue with activities that were inconsistent
with their the
proper care and protection.
In the Australian Capital Territory the wishes of the person under
guardianship, as far as they can be worked out, must be given effect
making a particular decision in accordance with those wishes is likely to
significantly adversely affect the interests
of the person under guardianship.
Even if giving effect to that person’s wishes is likely to significantly
adversely affect
their person’s interests, the guardian must,
nevertheless, give effect to those wishes as far as possible without
significantly
adversely affecting the interests of the person under
guardianship. It is only when those wishes cannot be given effect to at all
the guardian can (and must) act, in a way unencumbered by those wishes, to
promote the interests of the person under their
guardianship.
Through these provisions, the
Guardianship and Management of Property
puts substituted judgment before best interests
placing guardians in the Australian Capital Territory in the difficult position
either standing by while people under their guardianship with impaired
decision-making capacity suffer unnecessary detriments to
their interests or
ignore the clear words and intention of the
and step in to prevent
this happening.
In South Australia when making decisions about the person under guardianship,
guardians must, as the paramount consideration, give
consideration to what, in
the guardian’s opinion the wishes of the person under guardianship would
be in the matter if they
were not mentally incapacitated. Guardians are required
to do this only to the extent that there is reasonably ascertainable evidence
which they can base such an
However, they must seek
and consider the present wishes of the person, unless it is not possible or
reasonably practicable to do
The South Australian requirement divides into two parts. Under the first part
it requires guardians to gather evidence, if they can,
of the views of the
person under their guardianship. Then, from that evidence, consider, as the
paramount requirement, what the wishes
of the person under their guardianship
would have been in relation to the matter to be decided if they had not been
mentally incapacitated.
What appears to be required is the ascertainment of the
pre-incapacity views of the person under guardianship. Where the pre-incapacity
views of the person under their guardianship are not discoverable, this requires
an element of guesswork on the part of the guardian
as to those views, but does
not appear to require the guardians to make substituted decisions to give effect
to any presumed views.
The second part requires the guardian to obtain the current wishes of the
person under their guardianship about the matter to be decided,
unless it is
neither possible nor reasonably practicable to do so, and to give consideration
to, but not be bound by those wishes.
7. 3. 5. Guardians must act as required by terms
of the order appointing them
Guardianship orders may contain functions or powers stated in standard terms
or in terms drafted to meet the particular needs of the
person under
guardianship. They may contain conditions or be subject to directions.
Consequently, when exercising their functions
or powers, guardians must exercise
them as required by the terms of the order appointing
7. 3. 6. The legal effect of actions taken and
decisions made by guardians
Any action taken, decision made, consent given, document executed or thing
done by a guardian in the performance of the functions
vested in them by the
order appointing them or implied from or ancillary to that order has effect as
if it had been taken, made,
given, executed or done by the person under
guardianship and that person was of full legal capacity. This point is
specifically made
in the relevant legislation in New South Wales, Tasmania,
Victoria, Western Australia and the Northern
However, it is stated
a little differently in the Australian Capital Territory where any act or
omission of a guardian under the
Guardianship and Management of Property
has effect as if it were an act or omission of the
person under guardianship and that person was of full legal
The approach in the
Guardianship and Administration Act 2000
different. When it is necessary or convenient to exercise a power, a guardian
may sign a document as guardian and the document
is as effective as it would
have been if it had been signed by the person under guardianship with capacity
to sign the document.
Also, the guardian may exercise any of the powers given in
the guardianship order in their own name. If a guardian does this, their
is as effective as if it had been done in the name of the person under
guardianship. This implies that a guardian, in taking
action under the
guardianship order appointing them, acts with the same effect as the agent of
the person under guardianship with
full authority to take the actions they have
Guardianship and Administration Act 1993
does not deal with
the question, but a guardian appointed by the South Australian Guardianship
Board stands in the shoes of the person
they are appointed to make decisions for
and their decisions are, in effect, decisions of the person under their
guardianship.
The legal and practical effects of the decisions and actions of guardians on
behalf of the person under their guardianship help explain
why guardians are
subject to a range of obligations and responsibilities placed on them.
7. 4. Restrictions on the functions or powers of a
While tribunals and courts in Australia have wide powers to make guardianship
orders, it does not follow that they have the power
to appoint guardians as
substitute decision-makers for every area of personal decision-making. Some
matters are so personal, such
as the decision to marry, or are such a personal
right that they may be exercised only by the person themselves and are lost if
person loses capacity to exercise it, for example the right to vote in an
election. This issue has been recognised in Western Australia
and the Australian
Capital Territory where there are statutory restrictions that preclude a
guardian from doing certain things. In
the Australian Capital Territory these
1. the power to discipline the person under their guardianship:
2. to vote in an election for the person under their guardianship,
3. to make a will or other testamentary instrument for the person under their
guardianship,
4. to consent to the adoption of a child on behalf of the person under their
guardianship,
5. to give a consent to a marriage on behalf of the person under their
guardianship,
6. to give a consent required for a prescribed medical procedure for the
person under their
guardianship.
In Western Australia guardians of adults are specifically denied the right to
chastise or punish the person under their guardianship.
The other things they
cannot do are expressed in similar terms to those in the Australian Capital
There have been decisions by the Supreme Court of New South Wales and VCAT
indicating a reluctance to extend the range of the powers
and functions of
guardians so that may make substitute decisions for those under their
guardianship in relation to matters arising
in the course of criminal
proceedings or related proceedings. Underlying this reluctance is the view that
such decisions are for
the accused or convicted person alone, regardless of
their capacity to understand the issues involved and make a reasonable judgments
in relation to them.
It is suggested that in the other States and the Territories, guardians
cannot do or make substitute decisions about these matters
As will be seen in Chapters 12 and 15, there are special legislative
provisions relating to sterilisation and selected other kinds
treatment that either prevent or circumscribe a guardian’s capacity to act
as a substitute decision-maker in relation
to those treatments.
7. 4. 1. No power to discipline person under
guardianship
Only in New South Wales can guardianship orders be made for those who are
still minors namely those who are at least 16 years but
not yet 18 years of
In the other States and
Territories the legislation applies to those who are 18 years and above. It is
not appropriate for a guardian
to discipline another adult. Guardianship is not
that kind of relationship. Also, a guardian who disciplined a person who was
their guardianship would be acting contrary to the principles set out in
the guardianship legislation throughout Australia and contrary
to the principles
stated in or the policy behind all the recent legislation in Australia relating
to people with disabilities. The
view of the courts has long been that the
To accept that a
guardian could be empowered to punish or to authorise others to punish the
person under their guardianship, would
be contrary to the history of the
7. 4. 2. No power to vote in an election for the
person under their guardianship
The right to vote is a right given expressly by legislation, according to the
terms of that legislation. Subject to arguments about
constitutionality in the
Commonwealth at least, the right can be removed or denied by that legislation.
Commonwealth Electoral Act
provides that a person
who, by reason of being of unsound mind, is incapable of understanding the
nature and significance of enrolment
and voting is not entitled to have their
name placed on or retained on any roll or to vote at any Senate election or
House of Representatives
The right is personal
and cannot be transferred to another person.
7. 4. 3. No power to make a will or other
testamentary instrument for the person under their guardianship
As noted in Chapter 4, a person must have will-making capacity before they
can make a will. They must meet the test in
Also as noted in
Chapter 4, in each State and Territory the Supreme Court may grant leave to any
person to apply to the Court for
it to make, alter or revoke a will, in the
specific terms approved by the
While statutory wills to
be made, they may be made only by the processes administered by Supreme Courts.
The power to make them is
not given to guardians. Except as varied by the
legislation allowing for statutory wills, the right to make a will is personal
cannot be transferred to another person.
7. 4. 4. No power to consent to the adoption of
a child on behalf of the person under their guardianship
Again, adoption is a matter covered by State and Territory legislation, and
principles relating to the best interests of the child
being considered for
adoption. Adopting a child imposes great responsibilities and obligations on the
adopting parent. Because of
these considerations, adoption is not something that
a substitute decision-maker can consent to on behalf of another person.
7. 4. 5. No power to consent to a marriage on
behalf of the person under their guardianship
If a person lacks the capacity to consent to marry, that is the end of the
matter, no court, tribunal or substitute decision-maker
can consent, on their
behalf, to a person lacks the capacity
7. 5. The functions/powers of guardians
7. 5. 1. Advocacy
As already noted, in Tasmania, Victoria, Western Australia and the Northern
Territory, advocating for the person under guardianship
is set out in the
relevant legislation as one of the ways of acting in the best interests of the
person under guardianship.
any event, guardians are expected advocate in the best interests of those under
their guardianship in relation to the matters
they are given the function or
power to make decisions about. Nevertheless, it is sometimes necessary to
appoint a guardian with
a specific advocacy
7. 5. 2. Accommodation
In Queensland, Tasmania, Victoria, Western Australia, the Australian Capital
Territory and the Northern Territory, plenary guardians
or limited guardians
given the authority by the relevant tribunal or court may decide where the
person under their guardianship is
In New South Wales
guardians have this function and in South Australia guardians have this power
because it is a function or power
that a guardian has at law or
The power to make this
decision is very frequently given to
The view taken in New South Wales at least is that the giving of this
function to a guardian authorises them to decide where the person
guardianship is to live and for either them or others acting under their
direction to take the person to that place of residence
and to keep them safely
there. This form of the accommodation function allows guardians, family-member
carers or paid service providers
to use normal practices to keep the premises
appropriately locked and to provide safe boundaries to the property. This
includes introducing
complex gate opening devices aimed at preventing children,
people with dementia or people with other forms of cognitive impairment
entering unsafe parts of the property or leaving the property unsupervised when
they lack the capacity to look after their
own safety. The exercise of this form
of the function also allows nursing and other staff in hospitals, aged care
facilities and
similar places where accommodation, day care and associated
support services when they are providing services to people with decision-making
disabilities to use normal nursing techniques of diversion and engagement of the
person to draw them away from situations in which
they may inappropriately or
unsafely leave the premises. Should such people leave the premises, their carers
can guide, direct or
for. They may use methods which may involve touching, but not the use force.
Common sense, acting in the best interests of the person to protect them from
harm and to preserve their dignity is required in these
circumstances.
If a person for whom a guardian is being or has been appointed cannot be kept
at a place of accommodation without the guardian and
those responsible for the
person’s care and safety having greater authority to control the person,
the guardian can be given
a stronger form of accommodation function or power in
the order appointing them and giving them their functions and powers. However,
this order must be explicit as to the extent of the function or power it gives.
Also, the function or power may be given only if
it promotes the best interests
of the person under guardianship.
The form of order used in New South Wales empowers the guardian to authorise
others to take the person under guardianship to a place
of accommodation, to
keep them there and to bring them back to that place of residence should they
leave it. This is authorised by
Guardianship Act
which provides that the guardian, a person authorised by the guardian or
particular persons or a class of persons specified in the
order may be empowered
to take such measures or action as are specified in the order so as to ensure
that the person under guardianship
complies with the decision of the
Any of them who takes
any measure or action specified in the order in the reasonable belief that they
are empowered by the order
to do so and the measure or action is in the best
interest of the person under guardianship and it is necessary or desirable in
circumstances to take that measure or action, the person doing so is
protected from legal
In a 2003 case, the then Queensland Guardianship and Administration Tribunal
took the same approach in a case involving an adult with
a moderate level of
intellectual disability who had exhibited aggressive and destructive behaviours
over a period of time despite
the trialling of many strategies to minimise those
behaviours.
The question for the
Tribunal was whether it could make a guardianship order empowering the guardian
to determine where the person
under guardianship may live, to keep them at that
place of residence and bring them back to that place of residence should they
it. And, in addition, to require them to undergo examination and treatment
by a doctor, including a psychiatrist, using the minimum
force necessary and
reasonable to carry out the treatment.
The Queensland Tribunal noted that it could appoint a guardian after finding
that the incapable person did not have the capacity to
make decisions for
themselves. The Tribunal also noted that guardians can make decisions, in the
best interests of those under guardianship
even if that was contrary to the
stated views of those under their guardianship.
The Tribunal also stated that the guardianship regime is not simply a
“substitute decision making regime” but a regime
which must operate
in the “best interests of the adult” and, as such, allows guardians
to make decisions which may restrain
or contain the person under guardianship if
that is in their best interests.
Consequently, the person under guardianship could be held, diagnosed and treated
against their stated views as a result of a decision
of their guardian in the
exercise of a function or power given to the guardian in a guardianship order.
Where the person under guardianship has behavioural problems, arising from
their whole of life or acquired decision-making disability,
this form of the
accommodation function may need to be supported by a behaviour intervention and
support plan. This matter is taken
up later in this
There are similar provisions in the Tasmanian and Victorian
legislation.
It is respectfully
suggested that those provisions can be used for the same purpose in those States
as it is in New South Wales.
In South Australia the Guardianship Board has been given a specific statutory
power to make orders of this
The guardian or another
person may apply and the application may be heard at the same time as the
application for the appointment
of a guardian. The Board may make an order
directing the person under guardianship to live with a specified person or in a
place or with such person or in such place as the guardian from time
to time thinks fit. The Board may authorise the detention of
the person in the
place where they are to reside.
It is the Board that authorises the detention. It may also, by order, direct
where the person under guardianship may reside and with
whom, but it may leave
either or both those decisions to the guardian
While the order is in force, the Board may also authorise the person’s
care providers to use such force as may be reasonably
necessary for the purpose
of ensuring the proper medical or dental treatment, day-to-day care and
well-being of the person.
The Board cannot make any of these orders unless it is satisfied that the
health or safety of the person under guardianship or the
safety of others would
be seriously at risk if the order was not made. However, the provision cannot be
used to allow or authorise
the detention of a person under guardianship in a
correctional institution or any other place in which persons charged with or
of offences may be detained or in any part of an approved treatment
centre under the
Mental Health Act
that is set aside for
the treatment of those with a mental illness.
The guardian or a member of the police force may enter any premises and take
the person under guardianship to the place in which they
are to be placed or
detained, but may use only such force as is reasonably necessary for the
purpose. Also, the person in charge
of the premises in which the person under
guardianship is being detained may take such action as is reasonably necessary
the person under guardianship from leaving the premises or for
bringing them back to the premises should they leave without lawful
authority or
excuse. There are legal protections for those acting in good faith under this
The District Court of South Australia has held that a guardian cannot use the
authority given them under this provision to direct
that the person under their
guardianship be taken to a particular place of accommodation and held there over
night in emergency situations.
The guardian may direct that the person be
detained in the place in which they will reside, but may not direct that they be
occasionally to a particular place of residence as it could not be said
that that they were residing
Whether a guardian could
direct that a person under their guardianship be detained temporarily in a
particular place under this provision
pending finding a permanent placement for
them is an open question. It is a fact situation that is significantly different
ruled upon by the District Court.
To help make these placement and detention provisions effective, the South
allows a member of the police force who has reasonable
cause to believe that a person who is being detained in any place under such
order is unlawfully at large, without warrant, to enter any place in which the
police officer believes on reasonable grounds that
the person under guardianship
may be and apprehend them, using only such force as is reasonably necessary for
the purpose, and return
them to the place in which they are being
There is a specific offence in South Australia of, without lawful authority
or excuse, removing from the place in which they are being
detained a person who
is being detained there pursuant to powers conferred under the
Guardianship
and Administration Act 1993
. Aiding or abetting the person under
guardianship to leave that place unlawfully is an offence
7. 5. 3. Health Care
Health care and medical and dental consent are different but related
functions. The health care function or power authorises the guardian
to take the
initiative in deciding on and seeking out appropriate health care for the person
under their guardianship. It gives the
guardian a proactive role. As the New
South Wales Guardianship Tribunal pointed out in a 2007 case:
The health care function allows a guardian to make decisions in relation to the
choice of appropriate health care for a person under
guardianship, the provision
of that health care and for general health care planning. A guardian, exercising
a health care function
could, for example, determine that the person under
guardianship should consult a specialist medical practitioner or a general
practitioner.
Differing treatment modalities can be chosen. A guardian might
decide between surgical or non surgical care, traditional/Western
medicine or
alternative/complementary approaches, therapeutic or curative treatment or
palliative care.
The Tribunal went on to note that:
Health care planning is an important part of a guardian’s role under the
health care function. A health care plan can map out
an approach to treatment
and may contain general directions about treatment options. Health care planning
affords a significant opportunity
for a guardian to advocate on behalf of a
person with a disability in relation to their health care needs. It can also be
of particular
importance for people in end of life situations, when a decision
is made about adopting a therapeutic approach or a palliative approach
care. Health care planning which addresses end of life issues is often referred
to as advance care
The Tribunal also distinguished advance care planning from the making of an
advance directive, something a guardian has no power to
make for a person under
their guardianship
The health care function contrasts with the more reactive medical and dental
consent function or power which authorises the guardian
to seek out needed
medical or dental treatment and to give consent to it and to give or refuse
consent to medical or dental treatment
proposed for the person under their
guardianship by others. In New South Wales the medical and dental consent
function is exercised
Guardianship Act
, but the health care function is
In a 2008 case decided by O’Connor DCJ, as President of the New South
Wales Administrative Decisions Tribunal, the Guardianship
Tribunal had given the
Public Guardian a health care function to determine what health care and major
and minor medical treatment
the person the guardianship order was about may
The function
specifically included the authority to make end of life care decisions including
advance care planning. Because of a
decision in an earlier case before the
Administrative Decisions Tribunal, O’Connor DCJ was asked to determine
whether the Public
Guardian had power to approve an advance care plan or
palliative care plan for a person who was the subject of a guardianship order
that permitted life-sustaining treatment to be
O’Connor DCJ noted that in the case of unconscious or incompetent
patients, the duties imposed on doctors to provide treatment,
life-sustaining treatment, rested on consideration of what was in the
patient’s best interests for the purpose of
preservation of life. However
he continued:
But the law recognises that clinical judgments are involved, and that there is
no need to continue treatments which are therapeutically
ineffective, or are
extraordinary, excessively burdensome, intrusive or futile. The law does not
assume that a patient’s best
interests are served by extending the
patient’s life by whatever means are available and for as long as
In his opinion, the
Guardianship Act
did not fetter a guardian in a way that is inconsistent with the ordinary law,
and because a plenary order bestowed on the guardian
‘all the functions of
a guardian of that person that a guardian has at law or in equity’, a
specified function in a limited
guardianship order, whether it is health care
function or another function, should be interpreted in accordance with what is
by law or in equity in relation to the particular kind of function
that is specified. However he particularly noted that:
The only difference between the rights enjoyed under the law as between an
autonomous individual with capacity, and a guardian responsible
for a person
without capacity, is that the guardian must always act according to best
interests considerations whereas the autonomous
individual, in the exercise of
free will, may make decisions which, objectively, appear to be against his or
While the Guardianship Tribunal’s authority comes from the
Guardianship Act
and not the common law as does much of
the Supreme Court’s authority, the functions that the Tribunal may give to
can be to the full extent of the law’s understanding of the
scope of a guardian’s power to make substitute decisions.
The Tribunal
cannot give, and functions must not be performed in a way that infringes the
boundaries set by common law and equity.
Also, in the case of a limited
guardianship order, guardians must not perform the functions given them in a way
that transgresses
the terms of the
Consequently, O’Connor DCJ was of the view that a guardian could make
health care decisions consistent with the principles that
have been developed by
the general law, and that the current law recognised that a guardian’s
health function could involve
the making of decisions about the withdrawal of
life-sustaining treatment.
In the 2007 case,
, the Guardianship Tribunal took a view not
dissimilar to the view taken in relation to the stronger, more specific,
accommodation
function discussed at 7. 5. 2 above. It considered that a general
health care function was not sufficient authority to allow a guardian
end of life health care decisions, including advance care planning and
The Tribunal is able to give a guardian an end of life health care function, if
the Tribunal is satisfied that a patient is in an
‘end of life’
situation. This can only be determined after a comprehensive assessment of the
patient’s circumstances,
including a thorough and impeccable investigation
of the person’s medical situation, including their clinical needs,
options and prognosis. Family members and others with a genuine
concern for the patient’s welfare, should be consulted and
the views and
wishes of the patient considered. In addition, evidence must also demonstrate
that the appointment of a guardian is
necessary and that the patient would
benefit from having a guardian to make decisions about end of life health
The Tribunal went on to note what was expected of a guardian in these
circumstances. It pointed out that a guardian:
1. Must take into account the views of the person,
2. Have regard to the other general principles of the
Guardianship
, including the importance of preserving family
relationships.
3. Canvass the views of family members and significant others before any end
of life health care plan is considered.
As the Public Guardian was aware that Ms BAH was opposed to medical
intervention in general, it must balance those views carefully
considerations relating to her welfare and best
The Tribunal also noted that:
A guardian with an end of life health care function can be a strong advocate for
a person with a disability. Important questions
can be asked. For example, in Ms
BAH’s case, a guardian might ask whether a person without a disability, in
a similar situation
to Ms BAH, would be offered the same health care plan as has
been proposed for her. A guardian with a health care function can
ensure that
health care decisions and health care plans are made to facilitate the best
available care and support for the person
under guardianship in light of that
person’s individual needs and their views and
7. 5. 4. Medical and dental consent
As Powell J of the Supreme Court of New South Wales pointed out in a 1986
case, by reference to textbook writers from the late 19
centuries, a long established role of a guardian is to see that
every care is taken to promote the bodily health and mental improvement
person under their guardianship and to see that they have good medical advice.
It is the duty of a guardian to make all necessary
arrangements for the care and
treatment of the person under their
guardianship.
Starting in the 1980s, all six States have created comprehensive statutory
schemes for dealing with substitute consent to medical
and dental treatment for
adults unable to give a valid consent to their own treatment. In 2009, the
Australian Capital Territory
adopted such a
The roles of the
tribunal or court appointed guardians are set out in these schemes. While
neither of the two territories have comprehensive
schemes, it is clear that the
relevant tribunal or court can appoint a guardian as a substitute decision-maker
for medical and dental
treatment in all the States and Territories of Australia.
This is a function or power that is regularly given to a guardian. The
details of how the function or power is to be carried out in
each State and the
Australian Capital Territory are set out in Chapter 12.
While the statutory schemes overcome the need, in many cases, for a guardian
to be appointed as a substitute decision-maker in relation
to medical and dental
treatment, by providing for statutorily authorised substitute decision-makers,
there are some situations in
which guardians need to be appointed for this
purpose. Common examples of this are where there is conflict among the
statutorily
authorised substitute decision-makers as to the treatment to be
provided to the person unable to give a valid consent to their own
treatment or
where there are differences of view about medical treatment between the
incapable person and their close friends or
Guardians are sometimes confronted with very difficult decisions as to
whether or not to give consent to medical or dental treatment,
particularly
life-sustaining treatment.
of life decision-making is dealt with in detail in Chapter 14.
In the Australian Capital Territory, if a person makes an enduring power of
attorney which gives the attorney powers in relation to
health care matters but
the person is subsequently placed under guardianship by ACAT, and ACAT revokes
the power of attorney in whole
or in part, the guardian must nevertheless
consider the terms of the power of attorney before they make decisions about
health care
matters on behalf of the person under their
guardianship.
In the Australian
Capital Territory health care matters include the withholding or withdrawal of
medical treatment. Consequently,
a guardian appointed in these circumstances is
expected to acquaint themselves with what the person under their guardianship
have had in mind when they made their power of attorney.
7. 5. 5. Services
Another function or power commonly given to guardians is that of authorising
them to empower others to provide services to the person
under their
guardianship. This function or power can be of great benefit to the person under
guardianship in assisting them to continue
to lead as normal a life as possible
in the community by remaining, as they often desire, in their own homes but
supported by others
providing domestic support services to them through
government subsidised programs, such as the Community Aged Care Package, or
services paid for privately.
Through the use of this function or power, elderly people with dementia, and
others with decision-making disabilities, can be maintained
in their own homes
for months and sometimes years beyond that which would be possible if those
services were not available to them
because of their refusal to accept them.
While this function is most often given to the guardians of elderly people with
it can be used for the benefit of people with decision–making
disabilities arising from other causes, for example, acquired
brain damage and
intellectual disability or, less successfully, arising from psychiatric
The function or power is most often useful where the person’s
decision-making disability makes them incapable of appreciating
that they are
unable to continue to live in their present accommodation without the assistance
of service-providers and where their
level of functioning is such that
service-providers will be able to give them sufficient support to stay in their
present accommodation
– usually their own home.
The function or power is effective where, although the person under
guardianship may be stating that they do not want the services
service-providers using normal methods of discussion, diversion or persuasion
are able to gain access to the premises and
provide their services.
What happens when the person under guardianship denies them access and they
cannot persuade that person to let them in? Can the guardian
authorise them to
enter the premises forcefully? This matter was considered by the then Queensland
Guardianship and Administration
Tribunal in the 2006 case,
CJ was a 53 year old woman who had been living in her own home. She had
diabetes which required constant monitoring and had been diagnosed
with paranoid
schizophrenia in 1985. CJ had been able to live independently in the community
with the assistance of mental health
case workers, service providers and the
support of her sister, who lived nearby and who had a key to her unit.
CJ’s meals were
provided by Meals on Wheels and a nursing service
monitored her diabetes. Those arrangements were working well until early 2005
CJ began consistently to refuse entry to her residence to the mental health
workers and the nursing service.
In January 2005 the Queensland Tribunal received an application from
CJ’s psychiatrist, Dr A, seeking the appointment of the
Adult Guardian as
guardian so that a guardian could make decisions about CJ’s health care.
Dr A advised that CJ lacked any
insight into her illnesses and this was causing
a great deal of concern as she was refusing necessary health care and other
for both her schizophrenia and her diabetes. In February 2005 the
Tribunal appointed the Adult Guardian as guardian for CJ for decisions
relation to health care and the provision of services. However, the matter came
on for further hearing in 2006 to consider a guardian’s
power and duty to
allow a health provider access to the house of the person under guardianship,
when the adult refuses to allow such
access and the Adult Guardian’s
decision not to authorise access when the person under guardianship refuses
access to her property
for health care.
At the time of this hearing, CJ was the subject to an Involuntary Treatment
Order under the provisions of
Mental Health Act
receiving compulsory treatment for her mental illness. Also, she was denying
that she had either a physical illness or a
mental illness.
The Tribunal decided that, because of the long-established common law
principle that every unauthorised entry upon private property
is trespass and a
person in possession or entitled to possession of premises has the right to
exclude others from those premises,
the power given to the Adult Guardian did
not include power of entry into a premise in the absence of specific statutory
do so. Furthermore, the Tribunal was satisfied that should CJ refuse
the guardian or health providers’ access to her premises,
then they may
not authorise a forced entry under
Guardianship and
Administration
The Queensland Tribunal also held that
did not carry with it an
implied power to enter a person’s premises if the person refused access to
the guardian or someone
acting under the guardian’s
instructions.
Guardianship and Administration Act
provides that a guardian is authorised to do anything in relation to a
personal matter that the person under guardianship could have
done if they had
capacity for the matter when the function or power was exercised. This provision
is similar to provisions found
in the New South Wales, Tasmanian, Victorian and
Western Australian
legislation.
While the then
Queensland Guardianship and Administration Tribunal’s decision in
may be correct on the facts of that particular case, it is respectfully
suggested that it does not apply to many other similar fact
situations. That
case can be seen as an attempt, appropriately resisted by the Tribunal, to use
the guardianship legislation to impose
compulsory treatment for a psychiatric
condition on a person, something which the mental health legislation of the
various States
and Territories is established to do.
As was submitted in the
, guardianship legislation is remedial in
nature so that its provisions should be given a broad interpretation to achieve
the general
principles and objects found in that legislation.
similar provisions in the New South Wales, Tasmanian, Victorian and Western
Australian are designed to place a guardian in
the same shoes as the person
under guardianship in relation to any decision or action that they could have
made if the adult had
capacity at the time. In other words to give the
decision-making power of the person under guardianship to the guardian.
Also, as was submitted, there are no legislative provisions to prevent the
tribunal or court dealing with the matter giving a guardian
an expressed power
to facilitate the person under guardianship receiving health care by providing
access to them, for example, by
providing a nominated person with a key and an
expressed right of entry provided the entry was for the purpose for ensuring
the person receives the services they needed to be able to live at
The services function or power is often used as a less restrictive
alternative to having to place a person under guardianship in an
facility or other place of supported accommodation where their lives are much
more controlled and regimented by others.
It also protects them from
self-neglect.
It is also crucial to appreciate that the services function or power can be
given only if the person has been found to be incapable
of decision-making in
relation to the matters covered by that function or power. Seen in the light of
all these factors, and appreciating
that entry onto the premises is for the
purpose of providing services to the person, not to arrest them, search their
premises or
forcibly treat them, then entry onto the premises under the
authority of the guardian, even with the use of a key, as long as force
used either to gain entry or to provide the services, is within the scope of the
function or power.
In Western Australia, there is a specific provision that can be used where
the person under guardianship is on certain premises if
the occupier or person
in charge of those premises refuses to allow a guardian to enter those premises
for the purpose of performing
any function in relation to the person under
guardianship.
assumed that the provision applies to the performance of any guardianship
function given to the guardian. It may well apply
to other functions necessarily
associated with the guardian’s responsibilities arising from their
appointment as a guardian,
for example, acting to protect the person under
guardianship from abuse, exploitation or
The section authorises the guardian to apply to WACAT for a warrant to enter
those premises. If the Tribunal is satisfied that it
is necessary for the
guardian to enter those premises, it may issue a warrant authorising the
guardian to enter the premises by force,
if necessary, during a particular
period or at any time, as the warrant may specify. When executing the warrant,
the guardian may
be assisted by such persons as the guardian thinks necessary,
including police officers. It is an offence to obstruct or hinder a
acting under the authority of such a warrant, without reasonable
This is not an appropriate mechanism for ensuring the safety of the person
under guardianship over anything other than a short period
This provision can also be used for confirming whether or not the person is
in those premises. This could be useful in cases of “grannynapping”
where a person is taken away from where they are living by someone other than
the guardian or someone acting under their direction
and are being kept at that
other place to which the guardian cannot obtain
7. 5. 6. Access
Although it may have been borrowed from family law, it is accepted that
making decisions as to who should have access to a person
under guardianship and
under what terms and conditions is a function or power that a guardian of an
adult may need to exercise under
a plenary guardianship order or may be given to
a guardian in a limited guardianship order. Following principles developed in
law, the function or power must be exercised in the best interests of the
person under guardianship and not as a right of others,
including the parents of
a person with a whole of life intellectual
disability.
In Queensland,
access has been held to be a "personal matter” for the purposes of the
Guardianship and Administration Act 2000
In a 1984 case, Powell J of the Supreme Court of New South Wales relied on
precedents going back to the 18
century dealing with court ordered
access to an incapable person to appoint the Protective Commissioner as the
committee of both
the estate and person of a young woman who had a severe
intellectual disability and to make access orders which gave the Protective
Commissioner a small role in approving the necessary
arrangements.
In a 2006 case, WACAT appointed a guardian to deal with access and contact
issues rather than leave dealing with these matters in
the hands of the
person’s service providers. WACAT reappointed the Public Advocate as
limited guardian for LA, a 29 year old
woman with physical and intellectual
disabilities. The Tribunal noted that LA was settled in her accommodation
placement and received
an excellent level of care but that there was no one
available and appropriate from her family to decide personal matters on her
behalf. The Tribunal considered that, in the particular circumstances of that
case, it was not in LA’s best interests that
decisions about personal
matters be made by the service providers or by her paid carer and that it was
appropriate that an independent
guardian with the formal authority to decide
matters in relation to her person be reappointed, namely the Public
In that case a request had been made by LA’s mother for LA to have
family members in a
remote community. The Tribunal noted that family contact and visits to her
community were critical to the maintenance
of LA’s family and cultural
relationships and continued:
The decisions which may be made in relation to contact are complex as they may
include balancing the needs of the represented person
for contact with her
family, her cultural needs, the maintenance of her relationships, her wishes and
the need to limit the restriction
on her rights with the need to ensure the
proper protection of her health and safety. Exercising this judgment goes beyond
and proper authority of a paid carer or service provider. Decisions to
allow or restrict contact the represented person has with
others should be made
by a guardian with formal authority having regard to the sometimes competing
considerations in [section 51
Guardianship and Administration Act
(WA)] which elaborates on the way in which a guardian acts in the best
interests of [the person under
guardianship].
The issue of facilitating access is also relevant to older people under
guardianship. Older people with a disability, particularly
those with dementia,
are sometimes sequestered at home by those caring for them. This may occur as a
result of family conflict, particularly
when one family member who is living
with the older person limits access to the older person, often to the older
person’s detriment.
In such cases it may be useful to give an access
function or power to a guardian in order to facilitate contact with friends or
members. Sometimes access functions are needed so that the guardian and
those providing accommodation services to the person under
guardianship can work
out a roster or other arrangements to allow a range of visitors, who would
otherwise clash with one another,
to visit the person under
guardianship.
function may also be necessary where an elderly person with dementia is
vulnerable to the influence of their spouse, other
family members or significant
others who, themselves, may have cognitive defects caused by dementia or other
health problems.
Sometimes access functions are needed to allow the guardian to stop another
person having access to the person under their guardianship
because that other
person has indicated that they intend to remove the person under guardianship
from their current accommodation
against their best interests and contrary to
the accommodation decision made by the
7. 5. 7. Behaviour intervention and support
Some people who have an intellectual disability or acquire a brain injury or
develop dementia have difficult behaviours. In dementia,
such behaviours are
considered an integral part of the disease as they occur in up to 90% of
patients, and are formally known as
Behavioural and Psychological Symptoms of
Dementia (BPSD).
behaviours can be a manifestation of the intellectual disability, brain injury
or dementia per se, or a manifestation of a
complicating (or
“comorbid”) medical or psychiatric condition which must be
identified and treated. There are a myriad
of causes of difficult behaviours
which can be summarised as follows:
1. Manifestation of a comorbid medical condition, often causing delirium
(e.g. pain, infection, constipation, electrolyte disturbance,
drug toxicity)
2. Manifestations of comorbid psychiatric conditions (e.g. depression,
3. Biological causes intrinsic to the intellectual disability, head injury or
dementia, due to genetic, or neurobiological (neurochemical
neuropathological) factors
4. Psychological causes (e.g., premorbid personality, response to stress)
5. Social causes (e.g., environmental factors such as changes in staff,
co-residents, place of living, boredom, under or overstimulation,
This difficult behaviour can be manifested in many ways, but it often takes
the form of aggression directed at self, others or property
prompting a need for
intervention. One of the challenges for those providing care or medical
services to people with difficult behaviours
is to discover the cause of the
behaviour and to reduce or eliminate that cause. At the same time, if the
behaviour puts them, the
person manifesting the behaviour or others at risk,
they have to take appropriate steps to protect the person, themselves and others
from injury and property from destruction. However, it is neither ethically
acceptable nor lawful to respond simply by physically
or chemically restraining
the person with the difficult behaviour. Their situation must be investigated to
discover whether the behaviours
can be stopped or reduced by treatment for a
superimposed medical condition – for example urinary tract infection in
people with dementia – by diagnosis and treatment of a psychiatric
condition, providing a more stimulating but physically safe
environment for the
person to live in or by giving the person extra support during a period of
As a result of the efforts of some psychologists, psychiatrists, service
providers, family members and support groups for people with
decision-making
disabilities, there is now considerable experience, as well as training,
available to assist service-providers and
family members to deal with these
matters as well as policies, practices and procedures developed by government
and non-government
agencies to deal with incapable people with difficult
behaviours in an ethical and legal way.
Importantly, available research now shows that many patients with difficult
behaviours due to intellectual disability, brain injury
and dementia improve
with appropriate treatment. Such treatment may include pharmacological and
non-pharmacological measures, the
latter being usually first-line in dealing
with milder behavioral difficulties. There is a limited, but rapidly growing,
research supporting the use of these non-pharmacological interventions
in dementia, particularly those tailored to the needs of the
If the difficult behaviour can be resolved by action that is not intrusive
such as appropriate medical treatment, a change in accommodation,
the provision
of extra support or reinforcement of positive appropriate behaviours,
guardianship will not be required.
However, sometimes restrictive practices and medication are needed to control
difficult behaviour. Problems without an environmental
trigger that are severely
distressing to the caregiver often (though not always) require medication in
conjunction with non-pharmacological
interventions.
psychotropic medications such as antipsychotics, antidepressants,
benzodiazepines and anticonvulsants have been used in
this context, with
variable empirical evidence to support their efficacy. When prescribing is
informed and judicious, utilising low
starting doses with slow and cautious dose
titration, and careful monitoring for the emergence of side effects,
pharmacological intervention
can be helpful in managing a range of BPSD in
dementia such as aggression and
The outcome of a pharmacological treatment should be monitored on a routine
basis for both its effect on the frequency and severity
of the symptoms and
their side effects. As a matter of principle, drug treatment for BPSD should be
time limited and, with the exception
of antidepressant treatment for depression,
should not exceed 12 weeks without a review of the treatment
Very often in the
case of dementia, the need for drug treatments for BPSD changes as the disease
progresses.
Restrictive practices are those which, in the absence of formal consent, may
be deemed unlawful because they limit or confine a person’s
access and freedom. They include physical restraint and physical contact where
the person objects and exclusionary time
out – a period of time in a room
away from others. Not all restrictions on a person’s movements are
restrictive practises
requiring the appointment of a
Appointing a guardian as a substitute decision-maker with functions or powers
relating to behaviour intervention and support, and
having a guardianship
tribunal as an expert body regularly reviewing the need for guardianship is
sometimes an appropriate response
to the issues raised by such situations.
The Guardianship Tribunal of New South Wales notes that restrictive practices
and medication may need to be used in an emergency to
prevent harm but that if
they are required on a continuing basis, they should be provided only in the
context of a behaviour management
and activities plan and a care plan that
reflects a person-centred approach to all activities of daily living needs, as
well as spiritual
and social activities.
It is the practice of the Tribunal to make guardianship orders authorising
guardians to consent to the use of restrictive practices
and medication to
manage challenging behaviours where there is a thorough, documented assessment
of the reasons for the person’s
behaviour and where systematic attempts to
use positive non-pharmacological interventions, such as a tailored behavioural
or activity
programme has been trialled and found to be inadequate. The
Tribunal’s orders are crafted to ensure that any behaviour intervention
and support plan is used only under strictly controlled circumstances and that
it promotes the wellbeing and interests of the person
with the decision-making
disability and will operate in accordance with the general principles of the
Guardianship Act
7. 5. 7. 1. Keeping safe (containment)
Although the law changed in Queensland in 2006 as a result of the
commencement of the
Disability Services Act 2006
, in a 2003 case
dealt with by the then Queensland Guardianship and Administration Tribunal, it
is suggested that the legislation
still reflects the common law. That case
involved a 23 year old woman who had an intellectual disability in the moderate
range following
a brain haemorrhage after an injury when she was three and a
half years of age.
been taken into care at the age of twelve and had a series of placements in
foster care during her teenage years.
At the age of 23 and in a large residential institution in Queensland, her
behaviour continued to be aggressive and destructive involving
regularly kicking
holes in walls, tipping out food, misuse of cleaning products and food, swearing
at staff, physically threatening
staff, pulling wires out of walls, throwing
cups at walls, kicking windows, pulling a stove down and pulling out the door.
Despite the trialling of many strategies to minimising her behaviours, none
had been successful. Her outbursts were unpredictable
and included an incident
in which a staff member was threatened with a knife. The young woman’s
behaviour also included significant
self harm as she used her knees and elbows
to damage walls and windows, resulting in bruising and cuts to these areas.
reported increasing levels of obsessive behaviour and episodes where
the young woman believed she was talking to and listening to
people who were not
actually present.
The Queensland Tribunal stated that guardians must inherently have the power
to prevent those under their guardianship harming themselves.
Further, that
guardians can provide the consent necessary to allow restriction or containment
just as those under guardianship themselves
could do so if they had
The Tribunal
empowered the guardian to authorise medical assessment and treatment of the
young woman as well as containment of her
to allow this to occur.
7. 5. 7. 2. Seclusion
Seclusion will sometimes be included in a behaviour intervention plan.
However, before discussing that matter, it is worth noting
Lord Scott’s
comment in the House of Lords that:
It cannot be doubted that Ashworth (a hospital where mentally disordered
patients are detained) owes a legal duty to each of the
inmates of the hospital
to take reasonable steps to protect him or her from physical injury by other
inmates. Ashworth cannot choose
its patients. They are sent to Ashworth by
others and Ashworth has to accept them, to detain them and to look after them.
them suffer from some degree of mental disturbance - otherwise they would
not be there. Some of them from time to time present a
physical danger to other
inmates. Where the danger appears particularly acute Ashworth's legal duty to
the other inmates may well
require Ashworth to place the dangerous inmate in
seclusion. It is accepted that the only legitimate purpose of placing an inmate
in seclusion is the protection of others. Seclusion cannot be used as a
punishment nor can it constitute medical treatment, at least
in the narrow sense
of that expression. And the placing of a patient in seclusion where the
apprehended danger that the patient in
question may inflict harm on other
inmates is sufficiently acute would, in my opinion, constitute a step that
Ashworth's legal duty
to the other inmates would require it to
Reacting urgently to a situation and secluding one person for the protection
of others may be allowable under a common law duty of
care to protect the others
from the imminent risk of harm. However, this duty of care can only be relied
upon in urgent and unforseen
circumstances. If incapable persons with difficult
behaviours are known to have outbursts of violence that may threaten others, it
is the responsibility of the carers of such people to address that issue by
taking appropriate action to discover the cause of the
behaviours if possible
and to develop ways, including behaviour intervention plans, to reduce those
behaviours in the interests of
those people and all those in contact with them.
In the House of Lords, Lord Hope described seclusion in its unadorned reality
as a means of controlling seriously disturbed behaviour.
He noted that there was
general agreement that the sole aim of seclusion was to control such behaviour
where it was likely to cause
harm to others and continued:
There is general agreement also as to the nature of the procedure. It consists
of the supervised confinement of the [person] in a
room which may be locked to
protect others from significant harm. But opinions differ sharply as to the
length of time for which
it may be proper to resort to it. This in turn affects
the degree to which seclusion in practice interferes with the[ person's]
autonomy, the extent to which it is possible for the state by means of
a uniform code to regulate this and the way in which the [person’s]
interests are to be
safeguarded.
When this case was in the Court of Appeal, Hale LJ suggested another possible
legal justification of the use of seclusion, namely
what she called the
“common law doctrine of
necessity”.
in reliance upon
, that where a person lacks
capacity, there is a power to provide them with whatever treatment or care is
necessary in their best
The fact that there exists a power to control or protect
cannot mean that any and every use of that power is lawful. There must be
limits. If there were not, it would still be lawful to confine patients in the
shackles and other mechanical restraints which were
commonly employed in the
madhouses and asylums of the past. …. The criterion must be one of
reasonable necessity judged against
the purpose for which the restraint is
employed. Hence, a detained patient may be kept in the hospital with no more
force than is
reasonably necessary in the circumstances to achieve this. Any
patient may be restrained from doing harm to others with no more force
reasonably necessary in the circumstances. An incapacitated patient may be given
such treatment as is reasonably necessary
in his own best
While seclusion may be a justifiable way of dealing with
an incapable person’s difficult behaviours in some situations, it is
that if the possibility of seclusion is to be included in any behaviour
intervention plan, it must be provided for as a last
resort and be subject to
reasonable time limits with strict limits on the force that can be used to get a
reluctant person into a
place of seclusion.
The of New South Wales Guardianship Tribunal has developed two position
statements on the issue of behaviour intervention and support,
respectively to the contexts of intellectual disability and dementia. Those
statements emphasise the following principles:
1. The need for a thorough assessment
2. Behaviour management and activities plans should accompany an application
3. Positive (non-restrictive) interventions are the preferred method of
providing support to people experiencing behavioural disturbances
4. A guardian needs to be authorised to consent to restrictive practices if
such practices are to be used in an attempt to manage
or change the behaviour of
the person.
5. Specific authority to exercise the use of physical restrictive practices
must be contained in a ‘restrictive practices’
function in the
guardianship order
6. A guardian does not need to be appointed to authorise restraint that is
used to provide a safe environment for the incapable person
under a duty of care
if there are no concerns held by any of the relevant persons involved
7. If the legality of the use of restraint or confinement is unclear, an
application should be made to the Tribunal to determine if
there is a need to
appoint a guardian authorised to consent to the restraint or confinement
8. If the Tribunal considers it is appropriate for the Tribunal, the
‘person responsible’ or guardian to consent to the
use of medication
to manage challenging behaviours, this should be done with a request to consent
to medical treatment.
9. It is appropriate for the Tribunal to regularly review the use of PRN and
other major medication and restrictive practices to ensure
alternative
approaches are trialled and adopted and that major medications are reviewed and
adjusted regularly
10. When an application is made in response to a crisis the Tribunal should
ensure the care provider also undertakes to provide an
assessment of the
person’s behaviour and to develop a comprehensive individualised behaviour
management and activities plan
based on positive interventions and only make a
short order when no proper plan is yet in place.
11. In determining how much direction to give a guardian in relation to
restrictive practices, the Tribunal should consider all relevant
circumstances
12. It may be appropriate in some circumstances for the Tribunal to include
specific conditions in relation to restrictive
7. 5. 7. 3. Chemical and physical constraint
In a 2002 case, the then Guardianship and Administration Board of Western
Australia dealt with the question of the use of chemical
and physical restraints
on a man living in an aged care facility who had alcohol-related dementia and
who intermittently became agitated
and aggressive for no observable
The Western
Australian Board noted that the medication proposed was intended for behaviour
management and treated the case as one
of chemical restraint that necessitated
the appointment of a guardian make decisions as to whether or not restraint was
and, if so, in what circumstances and what type of restraint was
required. The Board noted that this was a contentious and sensitive
that the use of restraints was open to abuse unless appropriate monitoring
systems were in place.
In a 2008 case the State Administrative Tribunal of Western Australia,
following the case noted in the last paragraph, held that the
antipsychotic medication to control the difficult behaviour of a man with
acquired brain damage who was not psychotic was
chemical restraint.
Consequently, a guardian was needed to be appointed for the man to consent to
the ongoing use of the medication
which was accepted as being necessary and in
his current best interests.
7. 5. 7. 4. Holding a person with an intellectual disability and
behavioural problems in a place in which there are restrictions on
liberty not
“false imprisonment”
In 2010, Johnstone DCJ of the New South Wales District Court held that a
person with an intellectual disability and behavioural problems
charged criminal
offences sent to the Kanangra Centre operated by the New South Wales Department
of Community Services originally
on remand for the alleged offences, but held
there for six and a half years against the wishes of the person’s guardian
not falsely imprisoned.
This was because the fact of intentional total restraint could not be proved on
the facts of the case.
The young woman involved had substantial and difficult to manage behavioural
problems which led to all her placements in community
based accommodation
breaking down, prior to her being charged with the criminal offences, even when
she had 24 hour support provided
by the Department. The Guardianship Tribunal
had, prior to the criminal charges being laid against her, appointed the Public
as the young woman’s guardian and the Protective Commissioner as
her financial manager. The Tribunal kept renewing the guardianship
order after
each review, and the financial management order remained in place. Although the
Public Guardian pointed out to the Department
constantly that the young
woman’s placement at the Kanangra Centre was inappropriate, the Department
temporised for many years,
part of the time because of the cost of providing the
young woman with appropriate supported accommodation, but eventually provided
such accommodation to her.
7. 5. 8. Restriction of the freedom of movement
of and consent to other restrictive practices in relation to those a who has
in trouble with the criminal law or others with an intellectual
The New South Wales Guardianship Tribunal occasionally empowers a guardian to
authorise others to restrict the freedom of movement
or impose other restrictive
practices in relation to a person with an intellectual disability who has been
in trouble with the criminal
law. In some cases, these restrictions will be an
appropriate part of a behaviour intervention and support program for the person
under guardianship as they will:
1. assist the person under guardianship to change their behaviour and move
towards a more positive and fulfilling lifestyle,
2. help the person to avoid re-offending and risking imprisonment,
3. facilitate access to bail, bond, parole and other non-custodial options,
4. assist the person to comply with conditions on non-custodial options.
The Tribunal has noted its need to be careful about giving this function to a
guardian because of the risk of guardianship orders
being used as community
protection orders rather than as orders that maintain their paramount focus on
the interests of the individual
under guardianship. The Tribunal also noted the
comparative lack of established standards of good practice in behaviour
intervention
and support in relation to offending behaviour, the very limited
skill base in NSW in this field. In addition, it noted the fact
that people with
offending behaviour usually had comparatively mild intellectual disabilities so
that the issue of incapability and
its nexus to the offending behaviour, as well
as whether a guardianship order could be made for them, was not clear cut.
The Tribunal's “Position Statement on Behaviour Intervention and
Support in applications relating to a person with an intellectual
disability” sets out how it will deal with applications for guardianship
orders to deal with these matters.
7. 5. 9. Restrictive practices in legislation in
Queensland and Victoria
Queensland and Victoria have legislated specific arrangements relating to
behaviour intervention and support for people with decision-making
disabilities
who have difficult and dangerous behaviours.
Disability Act
(Vic) deals with “restrictive
interventions” namely any intervention used to restrict the rights or
freedom of movement
of a person with a whole of life intellectual disability
including chemical restraint, mechanical restraint or
It does not apply
to people with dementia, brain damage acquired after 18 years of age or a
psychiatric condition.
The regime in the
Disability Act
does not involve
the appointment of guardians. However, a disability service provider may apply
to VCAT to review a decision of the
Secretary of the Department of Human
Services to refuse its application for approval of a proposal to use restrictive
interventions
on a person.
VCAT may also deal with an application made to it to review a decision to use
restraint or seclusion in a behaviour management
Also VCAT may deal with
an application by a person with a disability to review the inclusion of the use
of restraint or seclusion
in their behaviour management
The restrictive practices legislation in Queensland, the
Services Act
in combination with the
Guardianship and
Administration Act
, may apply to people with a wider range
of disabilities. While it applies only to people who receive services from a
service provider
funded under the
Disability Services
applies to any of those who are adults with a disability who has a condition
attributable to an intellectual or cognitive
impairment, or a combination of
these impairments.
required to approve any plan containing proposals for the containment or
seclusion or an associated restrictive practice
proposed for a relevant adult.
QCAT may appoint guardians specifically as consent-givers for other forms of
restrictive practice.
In 2009, the then Queensland Guardianship and Administration Tribunal held
that the administration of the drug Androcur to reduce
the sexual urges of a
person with a decision-making disability was a restrictive practice because it
was a form of chemical restraint
requiring the consent of a guardian appointed
under the restrictive practices provisions of the
Guardianship and
Administration Act
7. 5. 10. A guardian to make decisions about
religious observance
The issue of whether guardians can be appointed to make decisions about the
religious observance of a person under their guardianship
arose in a New South
Wales case in which a guardian sought to be reappointed to make such
The Guardianship
Tribunal noted two of the general principles of the
Guardianship Act 1987
that it has a duty to observe when making its decisions in relation to
persons with a disability. These were that the Tribunal must
ensure that the
freedom of decision and freedom of action of persons with a disability should be
restricted as little as possible
and that such persons should be encouraged, as
far as possible, to be self-reliant in matters relating to their personal,
and financial
The Tribunal then
took the view that the freedom of a person with a disability to choose how they
should practice their faith should
be paramount and that it was not appropriate
to impose a guardianship order which could possibly result in restrictions in
to the practice of her faith by the person the guardianship review was
Responding to an argument that the Tribunal had no power to make a
guardianship order in relation to matters of religious observance,
Panel of the New South Wales Administrative Appeals Tribunal stated:
[W]e are loathe to conclude that this is a category of decision making which
could never be the subject of such decisions. There
may be instances where it is
necessary for the benefit or welfare of the person that such decisions are made
on their behalf. It
follows that, in our view, the Guardianship Tribunal has
decisions, take action and give consent in relation to matters involving
religious observance as long as that was considered
necessary for the welfare or
benefit of the
The Appeal Panel then continued:
Whether such an order should be made in this case can only be determined once
the Guardianship Tribunal has re-heard the evidence
and made new findings of
The facts of this case show why careful consideration must be given to the
circumstances of the case and the evidence of the person
with a decision-making
disability before such a function or power is given to the guardian. The person
the hearing was about was
elderly and cognitively impaired as a result of
alcohol related brain damage. She was a long term adherent of the
Witness faith. She lived in an aged care facility which placed
no impediment in the way of her practice of her faith and which respected
practice of different faiths. She had told senior staff at the aged care
facility that she was a Jehovah’s Witness and
that while she not observe
Christmas and some of the other things on the Christian calendar, she did like
the sound of carols and
enjoyed carols singing wanted to attend every
Christmas-themed activity that took place.
The person seeking to be guardian with the religious observance function was
also a Jehovah’s Witness who had the view that
attending such activities
was contrary to the religious beliefs of the person the hearing was about. Also,
the person seeking to
be guardian had told staff of the aged care facility not
to allow the person the hearing was about to participate in any Christmas-themed
activities even if that meant that she was by herself in the cottage while every
other resident went to such an
7. 5. 11. Miscellaneous functions or
7. 5. 11. 1. Travel
VCAT has held that it can make a guardianship order that gives a guardian
power to make decisions concerning travel, including travel
abroad, for the
person under their
guardianship.
7. 5. 11. 2. To obtain legal advice about a pre-nuptial agreement
WASAT has given a guardian the power to obtain legal advice in respect of the
prenuptial agreement said to have been signed by the
person under guardianship,
and to take any steps necessary concerning that agreement which are appropriate
and in the best interests
7. 5. 11. 3. To maintain a claim for compensation in a Commonwealth
The New South Wales Guardianship Tribunal has made a guardianship order
appointing the father of the man the limited order was about
as his guardian
with an advocacy function. This function was intended to permit the father to
maintain the claim by his son against
the Military Rehabilitation and
Compensation Commission in the Administrative Appeals Tribunal.
When Madgwick J of the Federal Court dealt with the matter, he was clear that
the Guardianship Tribunal intended that the father’s
advocacy function
should extend to giving instructions and that that was a plain indication that
the father was authorised to obtain
legal representation for his son and
instruct the legal representatives on his
7. 5. 11. 4. To deal with immigration matters
The New South Wales Guardianship Tribunal has made a guardianship order
appointing the cousin of a man with dementia to deal with
immigration issues. The Tribunal also made an administration order in relation
to the man’s estate.
7. 5. 11. 5. To formally change the name of the person under
guardianship
The New South Wales Guardianship Tribunal has made a non-renewable
guardianship order appointing the mother of a severely autistic
man to deal with
the Registry of Births, Deaths and Marriages in order to change his
7. 5. 11. 6. To approve fingerprinting to help identify an unconscious
In 2008 the New South Wales Guardianship Tribunal made a non-reviewable
guardianship order appointing the Public Guardian as an unknown
guardian for a period of one week to make substitute decisions on his behalf so
that his fingerprints could be taken
for the purpose of establishing his
identity and informing his closest friends and family, as appropriate, of his
circumstances.
6. The ancillary powers of guardians
Guardians need to be able to carry out a number of powers in order to give
full effect to their duties and responsibilities as guardians.
Some of these are
set out in the legislation of the different States and Territories. Some of
these need to be inferred in the other
States and Territories order for
guardians to be able to function effectively and for their decisions to be given
effect to. These
matters are discussed below.
In Queensland, New South Wales, Victoria, Western Australia and the Northern
Territory a guardian may, on behalf of the person under
their guardianship, sign
and do all such things as are necessary to give effect to any function, power or
duty vested in the guardian.
The Queensland
even provides that if a guardian is given a power to
do a thing it is, by implication, given the power to execute a deed to do the
Guardians in South Australia, Tasmania and the Australian Capital Territory
would have to have these roles implied into their responsibilities
in order for
them to be able to carry out their responsibilities as guardians
effectively.
In Queensland, guardians have been given a statutory right to all the
information that those under their guardianship would have been
entitled to if
they had capacity and which is necessary to make an informed exercise of any
power given to the guardian. Those who
have custody or control of the
information must give it to the guardian when the guardian requests it, unless
they have a reasonable
excuse for not doing so. Failing to give the information
because it might tend to incriminate the person who has it is a reasonable
excuse, but the statutory right overrides any restriction, in an
the common law, about the disclosure or confidentiality of information and any
claim of confidentiality or privilege, including
a claim based on legal
professional privilege. Also, the guardian may apply to the QCAT and it may
order the person to give the information
While guardianship tribunals elsewhere in Australia do not have the power to
order the giving of necessary information to guardians,
in New South Wales,
Tasmania, Victoria, Western Australia, the Australian Capital Territory and the
Northern Territory the decisions
of guardians have effect as if they were the
decisions of the person under guardianship.
This opens the way for an
argument that, by necessary implication from the guardianship legislation in
those States and Territories,
and probably that of South Australia, guardians
have the right to the information the person under guardianship would have been
to provided it is relevant to matters they have to make decisions about
in the best interests of the person under guardianship.
7. 7. Directions (and advice) to
When the Supreme Courts of the Australian States and Territories had the
exclusive jurisdiction to make guardianship and administration
orders, they were
prepared to be very directive in the orders they made when they considered this
to be necessary. This is shown
in the 1984 decision of Powell J of the Supreme
Court of New South Wales in
In that case,
Powell J appointed the Protective Commissioner the committee of the person
(guardian) of a young woman with a severe
intellectual disability and then went
on to make further orders about access and gave a set of directions as to what
was to happen
if others, including the Protective Commissioner as committee,
could not agree on the access
arrangements.
The tribunals dealing with guardianship matters in Queensland, New South
Wales, South Australia, Tasmania, Victoria and Western Australia,
but not the
Australian Capital Territory or Western Australia, have been given the
different form in each
In Queensland QCAT and in Western Australia WASAT have jurisdiction to give
directions to guardians.
These directions can be given at the time the guardianship order is made or at a
subsequent time. There is no statutory limit placed
on the scope of the
directions that may be given.
In Queensland QCAT may also make recommendations and give advice to
Applications for
directions, recommendations or advice may be made by the person under
guardianship or any other interested person
meaning, in this context, a person
who has a sufficient and continuing interest in the person under
guardianship.
In New South Wales only guardians may apply for directions and only as to the
exercise of their functions in relation to those under
their guardianship. The
Tribunal must conduct a hearing into any application made by a guardian, and
when considering the application
must have regard to:
1. the views (if any) of the person under
guardianship and the guardian,
2. the importance of preserving the person’s existing family
relationships, and,
3. the importance of preserving the person’s particular cultural and
linguistic environments.
In South Australia also, only the guardian may apply, to the Guardianship
Board, for directions, but for a broader range of directions,
1. directions on the exercise of the guardians powers under the
Guardianship and Administration Act
or any other
or law or as to the scope of those powers or,
2. for approval to the taking of any action for which the approval of the
Board is required.
Any direction given by the Board is binding not only on the applicant
guardian but also on any other joint
A guardian may also
apply to the Board for
In Tasmania the Guardianship and Administration Board may, “of its own
motion, direct a guardian in respect of any
guardian may apply for advice or direction by the Board on any matter relating
to the scope of the guardianship order or
the exercise of any power by the
guardian under the guardianship order. After considering the application either
with or without
a hearing, the Board may:
or disapprove of any act proposed to be done by the guardian,
2. give such advice or direction as it
considers appropriate; and
3. vary the guardianship order or make any
other order that it could have made on the original
application.
It is an offence for a
guardian to contravene a
In Victoria, only a guardian can apply, to VCAT, and only for its advice upon
any matter relating to the scope of the guardianship
order or the exercise of
any power by the guardian under the guardianship order. However, in dealing with
the application, VCAT may:
1. approve or disapprove of any act proposed to be done by the guardian,
2. give such advice as it considers appropriate, and
3. make any order it considers
No legal action can be taken against a guardian because of an act or thing
done or omitted by the guardian under any order or on the
advice of VCAT under
this section, unless in representing the facts to VCAT the guardian has been
guilty of fraud, wilful concealment
misrepresentation.
7. 7. 1. Case law on directions to
The Australian guardianship tribunals do not often give directions to
guardians, particularly public officials who have a statutory
responsibility and
obligation to act as guardian if appointed.
The function of guardianship tribunals and the public or private guardians
appointed by them are separate and distinct. On most occasions,
the functions of
the Australian guardianship tribunals are primarily supervisory.
They make the appointments of guardians and administrators (financial
managers), review those appointments, and define the matters
guardian may make decisions. The role of the guardian essentially is to make
decisions in the best interests of the
person under their guardianship in
relation to those personal matters they have been authorised to make decisions
themselves do not make those decisions.
Nevertheless, guardians and others, where they have the right to, sometimes
apply for directions. In 2006, the then Queensland Guardianship
Administration Tribunal considered the extent of its powers when asked to give
directions to a guardian.
saw the question before it as being whether the Tribunal had the power to give a
direction to a guardian which had the effect
of the Tribunal making a decision
which the guardian was otherwise empowered to make and whether it could, by the
directions it gave,
effectively override a decision which the guardian had
already made.
The Tribunal said that its power to give a direction, recommendation or
advice has its origin in the analogous jurisdiction of the
courts to give advice
and directions to trustees under legislation relating to trustees. The ability
to seek such guidance from a
Supreme Court was seen as beneficial to
The Tribunal considered that in seeking a direction from it, the guardian
was, in effect, asking the Tribunal to stand in their shoes
and make a decision
which the guardian was empowered to make.
The Tribunal noted that, if a narrow interpretation of the directions
function was applied and the Tribunal could not give guardians
directions with
the effects referred to above, the consequence would be that guardians, who in
all other respects may be competent
and appropriate, would have to be removed.
The Tribunal particularly noted that, the removal of a public official who was
the guardian
would often be to remove the guardian of last resort –
something that was not an option in
The Tribunal concluded that it had the power, at the time it appointed the
guardian, or reviewed the guardianship order, as well as
on a specific
application, to impose restrictions on or give instructions to a guardian which
may extend to directing a substantive
course of action for the guardian.
It also concluded that its power to give directions extended to directing the
guardian as to how they should exercise their powers,
and to how a decision
which the guardian had been appointed to make should be
In a 2007 case the then Queensland Tribunal gave directions effectively
overriding the Adult Guardian’s decision, in the exercise
accommodation function or power, to move the person under guardianship from one
accommodation service to
Guardianship Act
ss 16(2)(b)
(2A). Relying on the authority of late
and early 20
century textbook writers, Powell J
referred to the broad powers and duties of the committee of the person (the
guardian) of a “person
of unsound mind” in
(unreported, Supreme Court of NSW, Powell J, 2 May 1986), BC8601063, 7-9.
Guardianship Act
ss 16(2)(a)
Guardianship and
Administration Act
Ibid. s 25(1).
Ibid. s 24(2).
Guardianship and
Administration Act
and Schedule 2, item 2 and
Schedule 4.
[2005] QSC 68
Guardianship and
Administration Act
(Qld) Schedule 2,
See, 7. 3. 1, . 2 and. 4,
7.5.2 and. 5 and .6 and 7. 5. 7. 1.
Guardianship and
Administration Act 1990
See 7.5 and following.
Guardianship and
Administration Act 1990
See 7. 4 and following.
Guardianship and
Administration Act 1990
Guardianship and
Administration Act
See 7. 5. 2.
Guardianship and
Administration Act
Guardianship and
Administration Act 1986
Guardianship and
Management of Property Act
Guardianship and
Administration Act
Guardianship and
Management of Property Act
See 7. 4 and following.
Public Advocate Act
McGregor and Pearce v The Hon John Gallop and the
Attorney-General of the ACT
[2002] ACTSC 45
Adult Guardianship
Ibid. s 18(1).
Ibid. s 18(2).
Guardianship and
Administration Act
Guardianship and
Administration Act
Guardianship
Guardianship and Administration Act
Guardianship and Administration
Guardianship and Administration Act
Guardianship and Management of Property Act
Adult Guardianship Act
Ibid. s 34(2). See also,
for example,
Guardianship Act
Guardianship and
Administration Act
Guardianship and
Administration Act 1990
Guardianship and
Administration Act
Guardianship and
Administration Act
Adult Guardianship Act
Guardianship Act
[2005] WASAT 193
[37] and [38] and
Review of Guardianship Order for LGW
(Unreported,
Guardianship and Administration Board, 7 May 1004).
Guardianship Act
Guardianship and
Administration Act
s 52(2)(e).
Guardianship and
Administration Act
Guardianship and
Administration Act
Adult Guardianship Act
Guardianship Board
(1989) 3 VAR 87
Guardianship and
Administration Act
Guardianship and
Administration Act 1995
Adult Guardianship Act
Guardianship and
Administration Act
s 28(2)(e);
Guardianship and
Administration Act
Adult Guardianship
s 20(2)(e).
Guardianship and
Administration Act
Guardianship and
Administration Act
Adult Guardianship
Pearce, DC and Geddes RS,
Statutory Interpretation in Australia
, LexisNexis Butterworths,
ed 2006, [4.32].
Guardianship and
Administration Act 2000
Schedule 1, item 7.
Guardianship and
Management of Property Act 1991
Guardianship and
Administration Act 1993
Guardianship and
Administration Act
Guardianship Act
Guardianship and Administration Act 1995
Guardianship and Administration Act 1986
Guardianship and Administration Act 1990
Guardianship Act
ss 17(4) and 18(3).
Guardianship and
Management of Property Act
Guardianship and
Administration Act
Guardianship and
Management of Property Act
Guardianship and
Administration Act
, (3), (4) and (5) .
Public Guardian v
Guardianship Board
(1997) 42 NSWLR 201and
PL (Guardianship)
Guardianship Act 1987
Ex parte Lyttleton
[1801] EngR 189
(1801) 31 ER 911
In re B (an alleged lunatic)
[1891] UKLawRpCh 137
[1891] 3 Ch 274
[1981] 2 NSWLR 334
[1984] 1 NSWLR 694
Commonwealth Electoral
See also, for example,
Parliamentary Electorates and
Elections Act 1912
(NSW) s 21.
(1870) LR 5 QB 549.
Sheffield City Council v
[2004] EWHC 2808 (Fam)
See 7. 3. 3. See also,
Guardianship and Administration Act
Guardianship and Administration Act
s 28(2)(a);
Guardianship and Administration Act
Adult Guardianship Act
s 20(2)(a).
See for example,
No. 97/0696
(unreported, Guardianship Board, 21 March 1997).
Guardianship and
Administration Act
Guardianship and
Administration Act
Guardianship and
Administration Act
s 24(2)(a);
Guardianship and
Administration Act
Guardianship and Management of
Property Act
Adult Guardianship Act
s 17(2)(a).
For NSW see,
Guardianship
s 21(1)(b).
For South Australia
Guardianship and Administration Act
For an example see,
[2006] WASAT 59.
Guardianship Act
[2003] QGAAT
Ibid. [37].
Guardianship and
Administration Act
Guardianship and
Administration
Guardianship and
Administration Act
DCAAT-97-64
[1997] SADC 3655.
For other cases about
Guardianship and Administration Act
Guardianship Board
[1999] SADC 12
, P v Guardianship Board
[2006] SADC 38.
Guardianship and
Administration Act
[2007] NSWGT 1
Ibid. [109].
Ibid. [107].
FI v Public Guardian
[2008] NSWADT 263.
The earlier case was
v Public Guardian (No 2)
[2006] NSWADT 121.
FI v Public Guardian
[2008] NSWADT 263
FI v Public Guardian
[2008] NSWADT 263
Ibid. [47].
[2007] NSWGT 1
[124]. For an application of the
approach see,
[2007] NSWGT 19
[2008] NSWGT
Ibid. [125].
Ibid. [126].
(unreported,
Supreme Court of NSW, Powell J, 2 May 1986, BC8601063, 8-9).
Guardianship and
Management of Property Act 1991(ACT)
For an example see,
[2006] WASAT 279.
For an example see,
the matter of Elizabeth M
30 A.D. 3d 780 (2006).
Guardianship and
Management of Property Act
Powers of Attorney
Act 2006(ACT)
[2006] QGAAT 11.
Ibid. [22]-[23] and
Ibid. [27].
Guardianship Act 1987
Guardianship and Administration Act 1995
Guardianship and Administration Act 1986
Guardianship and Administration Act 1990
For an example of the NSW
Guardianship Tribunal giving a guardian appropriate authority see,
[2007] NSWGT 9.
Guardianship and
Administration Act
Guardianship and
Administration Act 1990
s 52(2)(d).
s 49(1)(b).
Hodak v Newman
[1993] FamCA 83
(1993) 17 Fam LR 1
Rice v Miller
(1993) 16 Fam LR 970
[1998] FamCA 55
(1998) 23 Fam LR 53.
Guardianship and Administration Act
Schedule 2,
[2006] WASAT
[2] and [3].
Ibid. [37], [45] and
For an example see, the
Tasmanian Guardianship and Administration Board’s decision,
Guardianship – 9-6-05
(www.guardianship.tas.gov.au/decisions).
GLM (Guardianship)
[2007] VCAT 2487.
(unreported, Guardianship Tribunal, 3 November 2006) and
No. 2006/3088
(unreported, 2 June 2006)..
International
Psychogeriatric Association (IPA) Behavioral and Psychological Symptoms of
Dementia (BPSD) Educational Pack Module
1 2002 International Psychogeriatric
Association.
Ibid., Module 5.,
Opie J, Rosewarne R,
O’Connor DW, “The efficacy of psychosocial approaches to behaviour
disorders in dementia: a systematic
literature review”,
, 1999; 33(6):789-99
International
Psychogeriatric Association (IPA) op. Cit (footnote 117), Module 5.
Ibid., Module 6
See for example,
[2009] NSWGT 10.
Guardianship Act
Position Statement on Management of Challenging
Behaviours in People with Dementia
Position Statement on Behaviour
Intervention and Support in applications relating to a person with an
intellectual disability
on the NSW Guardianship Tribunal’s website,
www.gt.nsw.gov.au.
Ibid. [32].
Regina v Ashworth
Hospital Authority ex parte Munjaz
[2005] UKHL 58
[103]. Also reported as
Regina (Munjaz) v Mersey Care NHS Trust
[2005] UKHL 58
[2006] 2 AC 148.
Ibid. [50].
Munjaz v Mersey Care
National Health Service Trust
[2003] EWCA Civ 10
Ibid. [46].
[1991] UKHL 1
[1990] 2 AC 1.
Munjaz v Mersey Care
National Health Service Trust
[2003] EWCA Civ 10
NSW Guardianship
Tribunal Position Statement on Managing Challenging Behaviours in People with
Dementia, 2005 and Position Statement
Behaviour Intervention and Support in
applications relating to a person with an intellectual disability, March
Re application for a
guardianship order (BCB
(2002) 28 SR (WA) 338.
[2008] WASAT
Darcy v State of New
South Wales
[2010] NSWDC 210.
Ibid. [102].
Disability Act
Disability Services
Ibid. S 123D. For an
example of an appointment of a guardian for restrictive practices in Queensland
HH v HI and the
Protective Commissioner
[2009] NSWADTAP 41.
Guardianship Act
(b) and (f).
HH v HI and the
Protective Commissioner
[2009] NSWADTAP 41
Ibid. [38].
Ibid. [38].
Ibid. [19]-[23].
AA (Guardianship)
[2006] VCAT 1957.
For an example from NSW see,
Matter No 2004/5028
(unreported Guardianship Tribunal, 15 September 2004).
[2005] WASAT
Rehabilitation and compensation Commission v SRGGGG
[2005] FCA 342.
[2007] NSWGT
[2007] NSWGT
Guardianship and
Administration Act
Guardianship Act
Guardianship and Administration Act
Guardianship and Administration Act
Guardianship Act
Guardianship and
Administration Act
Guardianship Act
Guardianship and Administration Act
Guardianship and Administration Act
ss 24(4) and 25(3);
Guardianship and Administration Act
Guardianship and Management of Property Act
Adult Guardianship Act
ss 17(4) and
[1984] 1 NSWLR 694.
Ibid. 708-709.
Guardianship and
Administration Act
Guardianship Act
Guardianship and Administration Act
Guardianship and Administration Act
Guardianship and Administration Act
Guardianship and Administration Act 1990
Guardianship and
Administration Act
Guardianship and
Administration Act
Guardianship and
Administration Act
s 82(1)(d).
and Schedule
Guardianship Act
Guardianship and
Administration Act
Guardianship and
Administration Act
Guardianship and
Administration Act
s 30(1) and (3).
Ibid. s 31(4).
Ibid. [13].
Ibid. [23], [24] and
Ibid. [33].
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (750 KB)
PDF format (217 KB)
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter