URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/journals/UNSWLawJlStuS/2025/23.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 15:46:18
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Koit, Alyssa --- "Reconstructing Deconstruction: Reconciling Derridean Notions of Violence, Justice and Law" [2025] UNSWLawJlStuS 23; (2025) UNSWLJ Student Series No 25-23
RECONSTRUCTING DECONSTRUCTION: RECONCILING DERRIDEAN
NOTIONS OF VIOLENCE, JUSTICE AND LAW
ALYSSA KOIT
I INTRODUCTION
Fundamental to Western philosophical conceptions of ‘justice’
lies a tension between the moral agency of the individual
and the collective
understandings of ‘good’ as dictated to them by their
particularity.
A philosophical
dilemma arises, however, when attempting to reconcile such notions of
‘justice’ with the apparatuses
of law purportedly designed to
protect the individual and facilitate justice. Jacques Derrida’s
of Law: The ‘Mystical Foundation of Authority’
deconstruction as an open-ended questioning of the legitimacy of authority. For
Derrida, justice is not a fixed and transcendental
‘there-is’ in a
Platonic idealist sense,
ought-to-be as Kantian theory
Rather, he argues,
justice is an
(‘to-come’),
outside the realm of the expressible – Derrida thus appropriates
Wittgenstein’s notion of the ineffable, which
it is the mystical’.
article delineates Derrida’s argument with respect to both conventionalist
and idealist approaches, and explores his conception
of authority as legitimised
through a circular system of ‘performative
self-referencing. It explains how the
Force of Law
exploits the tension
between the ‘generality’ of law
specificity or
‘singularity’
justice to offer a new space of thought, a
which ultimately
facilitates justice by dissolving both the constraints of strict calculation and
chaos of strict arbitrariness.
This article illuminates feminist interpretations
of Derrida’s ‘justice’, and finally it explores these notions
as applied to Australia’s contemporary legal justice system, in particular
its applicability to the criminal law. In exploring
these aspects, this article
ultimately affirms Derrida’s
Force of Law
as a movement which
destabilises dominant socio-politico-legal narratives, presenting the tool of
deconstruction as a means through
which to illuminate marginalised voices and
secure justice.
II DECONSTRUCTING DERRIDA’S THEORY OF THE FORCE OF
A Contextual Forces Driving Derrida’s Theory
Jacques Derrida’s philosophical pursuits demonstrate a commitment to
empowering the minority, marginalised voices of society
– a direct product
of his experiences of alienation and othering as a Jewish-born 1930s Algiers
citizen living under French
The series of anti-Semitic
legislation introduced by the Vichy government in 1940 excluded Derrida from
formal education from the
age of 12, thus influencing his lifelong commitment to
traversing the ‘many unspoken assumptions, discontinuities, internal
inconsistencies, tensions, irresolvable paradoxes, slips, silences, absences,
and exclusions’
eventual formulation of his deconstructionist theory of justice.
B Force through Conventionalist and Idealist Lenses
Derrida emphasises the wholly constructed nature of the structures which
constitute one’s reality – from literature to
philosophical
thinking, and, most importantly, the socio-political and legal processes
purportedly designed to uphold order and ‘justice’.
Deconstruction
thus, as a starting point, seeks to ‘destabiliz[e], complicat[e], or bring
out the paradoxes’
these structures, of the authority of law. He states that one obeys the law
‘not because they are just but because they
authority’,
and uses this
foundation as a basis through which to contemplate the law’s source of
authority. In questioning the law’s
source of legitimacy, traditional
thought suggests such authority must arise from within other legally constituted
systems, structures
which themselves require justification – thus
introducing an infinite
regression.
The alternative Platonic philosophy conceptualises justice as an absolute,
eternal, universal truth transcending any historical or
cultural manifestation
This notion of justice
exists only in the transcendent, spaceless, timeless realm of the Idea,
imperceptible and inexplicable. The
idealist conception of justice is therefore
similarly inadequate in that this universal standard through which to measure
the ‘justice’
of any legal or political convention also remains
undefined and inexpressible.
A conventionalist approach, then, suggests that the force of law must arise
through an ultimate source of justification, some arbitrary
convention – a
somewhat perverse conclusion given that this suggests it sources authority from
force (which is thus unjust). The regress thus falls into a
continuum in futile search of a non-existent centre of
To escape the
infinite regression of justification through
convention, as well as
the perversity of an
justification of force, Derrida seeks
justification outside of this dichotomy.
C Performative Utterance and the Mystical
Distinguishing itself from the Saussurian notion of meaning as a strict
product of linguistic
convention,
JL Austin’s
performative utterance
suggests that meaning is derived from
both linguistic structure
the conscious intention of the
Performative utterance
thus suggests one should account for the meaning of utterances (their
‘illocutionary
) by first analysing
the external system which makes them
Austin here explores a system in which the very speaking of words establishes
something performatively, through no fact external to
it. Uttering the words
‘I promise...’ in itself wills the obligation into existence,
actualising the ‘spiritual
assumption of a spiritual
Responding to
this notion of performative utterance, it might then be posited that the law
wills itself into existence in its mere
utterance – wills the dichotomy of
legal/illegal into existence and hence exists outside the dichotomy yet not
entirely separate
from it. Although this notion brings Derrida closer to the
law’s source of authority, it faces similar limitations as the
inexpressible
idealist conceptions of justice. A complete theory of speech acts
must in principle identify every feature of context which might
affect what
particular speech act an utterance effectively performs: ‘meaning is
context-bound, but context is
boundless’.
applicability of Austin outside of the context of pure linguistic philosophy
remains somewhat limited and we thus reach the limits
of expressibility –
the ‘mystical’ limits of
The mystical therefore reconciles the seemingly irreconcilable idealist and
conventionalist approaches – creating a space beyond
the articulable,
coherent, expressible and therefore a liminal space in which the above
irreconcilable notions may exist. Here, Derrida
uses Wittgenstein’s notion
of the inexpressible
to subordinate a logic of infinite
reference to a rhetoric of speech acts (Austin’s
performative
In reaching the
mystical limits of language, Derrida then deconstructs the ‘mystical
foundation of authority’, positioning
law as a self-authorising and
self-justifying force, a ‘legitimate
self-perpetuates in a cyclical system of
self-referencing.
and the authority of law both exist, are both
inexpressible.
D The Irreconcilable Tension between Justice and the
Derrida begins Part One of
Force of Law
with a complaint over
obligation. His text is introduced in French before translating into English, as
[himself] to you in
He is compelled
to write in a foreign language, on a topic which he did not
an obligation
necessitated by several imperatives, ‘symbolic force[s] or
control: the need to be understood by his audience, the Cardozo Law
School’s conference rules at which he presents
his paper, as well as the
general hegemony of the United States of America and the English language
throughout the world following
By reverting back to French
before the end of the first page and throughout his
Derrida acts in
self-interest and commits an act of violence against the English-speaking
Alternatively, by
speaking English he restrains the pursuit of his claims to do justice to the
majority, and in doing so commits
violence to himself, succumbing to the
dominant frame of reference which silences and excludes the
foreshadows his following arguments of the
of law and its
‘mystical foundation of
authority’.
By first positioning language as a force imposing an absolute truth on the
individual, Derrida then establishes law as analogous to
this violent
– calculable,
homogenous, definite and codified into a system of universal
Just as the violence of
language insists upon ‘an always possible but always imperfect
compromise’
dominant frame of reference, English, and weaker frame of reference, one’s
(foreign) native language, so too does
the strict system of law demand such an
imperfect balance of its subjects. Justice, on the other hand, embodies an
incalculable,
heterogenous, unpresentable and irreducible
Unlike law, which is
wholly constructed (and therefore
deconstructible),
remains ‘unconstructible’ (therefore
constructible)
because of its unfathomability, ‘like a God who would not show his face
... cannot be caught by the gaze or comprehended
In drawing this clear distinction between
Derrida opens up a liminal space between the two – a complex space of
tension and violence which he later exploits to provide
a critical point from
which to judge a society’s laws and apparatuses of justice. Derrida
explores an aporia which is the ‘experience
of the impossible’
within this space, where ‘deconstruction is
He highlights
the paradoxical tension between law and justice, whereby each sustains yet
challenges the other. Although laws exist
as a vehicle through which justice is
achieved, laws alone are unjust because force without justice is
Conversely, justice
cannot exist without law. Without its embodiment through the law it merely
exists in abstraction – some
arbitrary notion of ‘justice’ is
insufficient and ultimately unenforceable without
Derrida posits a
dialectical relationship between justice and law, not in the Rawlsian sense of
seeking consensus
Hegelian ideals of complete
but in a perpetual,
fluid tension and
interdependence.
He therefore
characterises justice as the experience of three aporias
(‘non-roads’)
1. For a decision to be just, a judge must not only
a rule, but
must ‘reinstitute’
This reinstitution in each unique judgment is a kind of violence in itself,
as it refuses to conform perfectly to the instituted codes
A judicial officer who
mechanically applies policy or the law as a ‘calculating machine’
not only fetters discretion
(where given), but ultimately effectuates an unjust
outcome; each case must instead be treated as ‘other’ and each
formed on a case-by-case basis which no general code of rules can, nor
ought to, dictate.
thus paradoxically both conserved and destroyed, suspended, and each judgement
is regulated yet unregulated – a
violent re-institution, ‘imperfect
compromise’,
characterises justice. The tension between the generality of law and singularity
demanded by justice is therefore a necessary
violence in that the system reduces
chaotic arbitrariness whilst simultaneously allowing for novelty and flexibility
such that any
sense of overpowering indifference toward the individual is
eradicated.
2. The judge must experience the ‘ordeal of the undecidable’ in
order to evaluate all alternative possibilities before
making their fresh
A decision should not
derive from the complete suspension of the undecidable, but also simultaneously
cannot derive from a programmable
order (thus requiring some suspension of the
undecidable). The undecidable thus remains ‘caught ... as an essential
its ghostliness deconstructs from within any assurance of presence,
any certitude or any supposed criteriology that would assure
us of the justice
of a decision’
decision haunted by what ‘could have been’, highlighting the
impossibility of complete
3. One must avail themselves to infinite information in order to satisfy the
infinite demands of justice.
However, as a matter of practicality, the required immediacy of judgement
undermines a decision’s capacity to be just, as it
is necessarily limited
in a ‘finite moment of urgency and precipitation’.
These three aporias highlight the inherent violence within justice which
ostensibly renders it unpresentable and impossible. Rejecting
Platonic notions
of justice as a fixed ideal, Derrida instead positions justice as a superfluous
paradox of infinite
(im)possibilities.
Deconstruction functions to ‘reinterpret the very foundations of law such
as they had previously been calculated or delimited’
and hence question
the ‘mystical foundation of
authority’.
Derrida thus presents a compelling tool of ‘meta-questioning’
which is not merely a ‘monastic ivory tower’
resting on purely
speculative, philosophical
Deconstruction is
‘at home in law schools’, as its purpose is to ‘
things’, to ‘intervene ... not only in the profession but in what
one calls the
and more generally the
With this in mind,
the following parts III and IV of this article explore the ways in which
Derrida’s notion of the violence
of law is ultimately ‘just’
with reference to contemporary Australia’s legal justice system, as well
as delineates
how deconstruction provides a basis through which to destabilise
the false foundations of authority.
III RECONSTRUCTING DERRIDA’S THEORY: RECONCILING THE
FORCE OF LAW WITH FRASER AND MACKINNON’S FEMINIST INTERPRETATION
Part III provides a comparative between Derrida’s conception of
and feminist interpretations of justice as advanced by Catharine
A MacKinnon and Nancy Fraser.
Interacting with Derrida’s notion of law as a deconstructible
epistemological foundation which legitimises a somewhat arbitrary
dominant frame
of reference, MacKinnon applies the same characterisation to the social
construct of the gendered
Here, she asserts
that patriarchal tradition formulates the dominant frame of reference,
‘the state, in part through law, institutionalises
male power. If male
power is the systemic, it
The imposition of a supposed male supremacy, violently willed into existence
and perpetuated through the law, compels a subordination
of women (the other) to
men (the dominant frame of
reference).
The dominance
approach, then, not only suggests that the patriarchal tradition of law is
violently achieved, but that it is violently
institutionalised androcentric norms. It suggests that the overtly dominant
voice of the law is that of the patriarchy, and
the conscious perpetuation of
such inherently masculinist attitudes by key players in the legal system has
fostered an unconscious
acceptance and perpetuation of these perspectives by the
remainder of the system.
Such a claim is epitomised in the longstanding common law’s
‘reasonable man’ test. This standard dictated that the
judgement of
legal liability lies within a comparison between the defendant’s conduct
and that of a reasonable
– specifically the well-educated,
middle-upper class man ‘who takes the magazines home and in the evening
lawnmower in his shirt
The reasonable
man standard is thus characterised by attributes which are
‘stereotypically and exclusively
that is, the
‘reasonably prudent
the man on the
Clapham omnibus
or on the Bondi
This convenient piece of
legal fiction
was then, and
continues to be, perpetuated in acts of law-preserving
by a heavily
male-dominated judiciary.
The extremity of such a perpetuation is demonstrated in the purely
misogynistic judgements issued in the long history of Australian
sexual assault
case law: the instruction of South Australian Supreme Court Judge Derek Bollen
to a jury that a husband may reasonably
use ‘rougher than usual
tactics’ to convince his wife into sex if all earlier attempts are
Judge Norman
O’Bryan’s finding that a 16 year old girl’s state of
unconsciousness (a result of her assaulter punching
her in the head and slitting
her throat) rendered an aggravated rape lawful due to a lack of psychological
trauma she suffers whilst
unconscious,
despite evidence of
her post-traumatic stress disorder
a New South Wales
magistrate’s justification that women cause problems by ‘nagging and
bitching’ and, as men ‘can’t
bitch’ for ‘hormonal
reasons’ it logically follows that he
retaliate with
Pithouse’s notion that a victim, thrown out of a casino for being
intoxicated and raped whilst unconscious outside
said casino, ‘put herself
in that position’ and thus must not gain compensation as
‘there’s an old adage
... in equity [law], that you can’t
profit from your own malfeasance,’ and characterisation of the
victim’s subsequent
attempt to call the sexual assault crisis line as
; the finding that
the raping of a woman, knocked unconscious by her attacker, beaten, raped anally
and vaginally and held captive
for two and a half hours, was ‘not very
grave’ according to a majority in the Victorian Court of Criminal
and the rationalisation
by Victorian County Court Judge John Bland, in sentencing a man who pleaded
guilty to raping a 15 year old
girl crying ‘Stop it!’, that
‘in the common experience of those who have been in the law as long as I
“No” often subsequently means
not only the judiciary who perpetuate this deeply and inherently sexist dominant
frame, but also the external regulatory bodies
and political system which
persist in defending such figures and attitudes, for instance the Victorian Bar
Council which publicly
stated its support for the aforementioned Victorian
judgement, claiming that there was ‘no evidence at all’ that
media claims of endemic gender bias at the time, as only ‘very
few judges on very few occasions have made remarks which some
“insensitive”.’
Such acts of ‘law-preserving’ violence epitomise both MacKinnon and
Fraser’s notions of the perpetuation of androcentric
and misogynistic
attitudes in the law which continue to this day.
Fraser deconstructs Derrida’s argument even further, rejecting his
notion of the ‘force of law’ as deriving its
authority from a
strictly metaphysical source. She instead asserts the
its self-legitimisation,
locating law’s authority in the ‘contingent social relations and
institutionalisations of power’. Her argument
thus gives rise to a
political critique of such an authority, one which ‘seek[s] to identify
the various levels at which masked,
structural violence enters into our
institutionalized practices of legal
MacKinnon’s theory of dominance, Fraser here suggests that a society
‘stratified by gender, color, and class
... and widely held assumptions
ultimately violently subordinate the experience of the ‘other’. The
congeries of androcentric assumptions upon which
the law is founded are
therefore similarly violently perpetuated, as is exemplified in the history of
Australia’s criminal
IV JUSTICE-PRESERVING VIOLENCE IN AUSTRALIAN CRIMINAL
This section applies Derrida’s theory to Australia’s criminal law
to elucidate his notion that the violence of the law
is ‘just’ and
necessary. It explores the applicability of his ‘mystical foundations of
law’ and deconstructive
questioning with specific focus on the Australian
common law’s defences to murder.
Derrida’s first aporia suggests that
lies within the
‘reinstitution’ of
Judicial discretion in
criminal proceedings epitomises this necessary ‘violence’ as
ultimately accommodating for justice
in the individual case. The potential for
novelty in judicial discretion and jury verdict reflect the necessary violence
which tears
apart the generality of law, transforming it into a form which may
more readily be applied to the individual case in a ‘just’
This is epitomised in the historical development of the complete murder
defence of self-defence and partial murder defence of provocation,
particular, the series of somewhat perverse verdicts issued throughout the
1980s, in which Australian juries refused to convict
female victims of domestic
abuse for the murder of their abusers. At the heart of this murder defence lies
the recognition of one’s
right to defend their life in extenuating
circumstances. Yet, affirming MacKinnon and Fraser’s notion of dominant
androcentric
narratives subordinating the
the defence
developed historically for the benefit of the quintessential male conflict in
which two armed men could duel for honour.
Its patriarchal origins thus
‘catered for the position of a person against whom another person’s
hand was raised ...
[rather] than ... a person who, over a lengthy period has
become sensitised to danger from her batterer and who ought not to be required
until a knife is uplifted, gun pointed, or fist is clenched before her
apprehension of danger is deemed
reasonable’.
availability of self-defence as a full murder defence relies primarily on
considerations of imminence, proportionality, and a
legal duty to retreat, and
therefore essentially excluded victims of domestic abuse (‘battered
Legal principles
of self-defence thus rested upon androcentric assumptions which ‘permeate
the horizon of judgement’,
founded on a ‘model of male aggression that is seriously askew of many
women’s socialization and experience with
Whilst Fraser frames this ‘force of law’ as inevitably
‘com[ing] down with a thud on the side of
patriarchy’,
theory ultimately shows how justice exists within the liminal space of
irresolvable tension between the generality of the
law and specificity of
justice. In
R v MacDonald
, a wife was acquitted after fatally shooting
her physically, psychologically, financially and sexually abusive
‘elements’ of self-defence dictate there must be an
‘imminent’ threat to make the defence available,
and precedent sets
out that such imminence must be strictly with respect to temporality. The
acquittal of MacDonald therefore
perverse and unsubstantiated by
law. Facing this challenge of seemingly strict rules of imminence, the Supreme
Court Justices thus
tailored a judgement
this boundary of law. By
allowing considerations of an extended history of domestic violence and
acknowledging this as an ‘ever-present
threat’, the Supreme Court
Justices conjured a line of reasoning which violently redefined the limits of
‘imminence’,
demonstrating a
‘reinstitution’
the law which allowed for this specific instance of justice.
the majority of the Criminal Court of Appeal
similarly redefined the limits of ‘immediacy’ in the context of
provocation,
in order to quash the conviction of a battered wife.
In this case, the wife axed her
abusive husband to death shortly after her daughter revealed that the husband
had violently raped
not only her (the daughter), but each of R’s five
daughters. This triggering event, however, was inadmissible according to
legal evidential rules of hearsay provocation. The majority in the Criminal
Court of Appeal thus worked around the boundary of
evidentiary law, conjuring a
line of reasoning which allowed for this somewhat perverse verdict (or at least
perverse at law), to
instead give effect to notions of ‘justice’.
Five years later in
the acquittal of a
detective who shot his nieces’ rapist resulted in a similarly perverse
verdict that was seemingly unsubstantiated
by the standing common law at the
The decisions of
R v MacDonald
R v Quartly
therefore demonstrate what Derrida would characterise as a
‘violent’ destruction of the law that ultimately allowed evolving
societal notions of ‘justice’ to prevail. Whilst these individual
instances push the limit of Derrida’s violence,
demonstrating a tendency
toward an almost pure legal improvisation which threatens to completely
obliterate any notion of law (but
does not quite cross this boundary), they
demonstrate how such violence within the paradox of law and justice must remain
irreconcilable.
The necessity of this violence of irresolvable tension between law and
justice is further affirmed when considering an alternative
in which the law
attempts completely fuse with and embody justice. Recalling Derrida’s
notion of the law as wholly constructed
(and therefore
constructible),
one can only hope that the authority empowered to construct such law is driven
purely by considerations of what is
‘justice’ based on the relevant
objective community standard. However, as demonstrated in the Assault Causing
Death offence
(‘one-punch’
which arose in response to
negative media attention surrounding a series of one-punch deaths in Sydney
during the early 2000s, Parliament’s
reform efforts are all too often
founded on political motivations. The harshness of this one-punch law epitomises
issues of penal
populism, where the elements of merely the act
(‘hitting’) and consequence
completely eradicated
any need for relevant mens rea, thus eroding the fundamental relation between
criminal liability and moral
culpability.
Such an attempt
by the legislature to completely dictate what is ‘just’ in fact
ultimately destroys justice – the
space of novelty, singularity,
specificity which once characterised justice is reduced to a strictly mechanical
filter which treats
its subjects with complete indifference. This tension
between political power and moral normativity that characterises the law must
then be addressed through judicial discretion and the role of juries in
exploiting the aforementioned ‘violence’ of the
law to instead issue
‘just’ outcomes. By maintaining the violence of the law,
Derrida’s system allows the novelty
of justice to be preserved whilst
remaining faithful to the generality of the law – thus eliminating any
notion of pure arbitrariness
and pure indifference to individual circumstance.
V CONCLUSION
Derrida conceptualises justice as inexpressible, unpresentable, existing
beyond the realm of the expressible and thus the ‘mystical’.
explores the paradox of law and justice as mutually reinforcing yet in perpetual
tension, and exploits the resulting liminal space
between the two to present a
system in which justice resides: within the violence of the generality of law
and specificity of justice.
It is this perpetual violence which ultimately
facilitates justice to the individuals under the protection of a society’s
and which we must harness in order to destablise the dominant frames,
traverse the unspoken assumptions, inconsistencies and irresolvable
and institutionalised oppression of the ‘other’.
Johnathan Wolff,
Introduction to Political Philosophy
, (Oxford University Press,
Jacques Derrida, ‘Force
of Law: The “Mystical Foundation of Authority”’ in Drucilla
Cornell, Michel Rosenfeld
and David Gray Carlson (eds),
Deconstruction and
the Possibility of Justice
(Routledge, 1993) (‘
Douglas Litowitz,
‘Derrida on Law and Justice: Borrowing (Illicitly) from Plato and
(1995) 8(2)
Canadian Journal of Law and Jurisprudence
Force of Law
Ludwig Wittgenstein,
Tractatus Logico-Philosophicus
, ed C K Ogden, tr F P Ramsey (Edinburgh
Press, 1992), 90 [6.522] (emphasis in original).
John L Austin,
Things with Words
, ed J O Urmson (Oxford University Press, 1962) 6. Noting
that according to HLA Hart, ‘The Ascription of Responsibility and
Rights’ (1948) 49
Proceedings of the Aristotelian Society
Austin’s earliest documented use of the term is in J Wisdom et al,
‘Symposium: Other Minds’ (1946) 20(1)
Aristotelian Society
Force of Law
Leslie Hill,
Cambridge Introduction to Jacques Derrida
(Cambridge University Press, 2007)
Force of Law
Simon Glendinning,
‘Derrida and the Philosophy of Law and Justice’ (2016) 27(2)
tr GMA Grube, ed CDC Reeve (Hackett Publishing, rev ed, 1992).
Hans Kelsen,
‘Platonic Justice’ (1938) 48(3)
University of Chicago Press
Glendinning (n 15) 193.
Derek Allen,
‘Saussure’s Cours de Linguistique Générale’
University of Calgary
Austin (n 7) 15.
Johnathan Culler,
‘Convention and Meaning: Derrida and Austin’ (1981) 13(1)
Literary History
Wittgenstein (n 6).
Charles Altieri,
‘Wittgenstein on Consciousness and Language: A Challenge to Derridean
Literary Theory’
(1976) 91(6)
Force of Law
Litowitz (n 3) 330.
Force of Law
(emphasis in original).
John P McCormick,
‘Derrida on Law; Or, Poststructuralism Gets Serious’ (2001) 29(3)
Political Theory
Force of Law
Michel Rosenfeld,
‘Derrida, Law, Violence and the Paradox of Justice’
(1991) 13(4)
Cardozo Law Review
Force of Law
Petra Gehring, ‘Force
and the “Mystical Foundation of Law”: How Jacques Derrida Addresses
Legal Discourse’
(2005) 6(1)
German Law Journal
Force of Law
Ibid 15 (emphasis
Zeynep Direk, ‘Law,
Justice, and Politics: Derrida on Deconstruction and Democracy to Come’
(2014) 14(2)
New Centennial Review
Force of Law
John Rawls,
A Theory of
(Oxford University Press, rev ed, 1999) 3–19, 52–6.
Georg Wilhelm Friedrich
Elements of the Philosophy of Right
, ed AQ Wood, tr H B Nisbet
(Cambridge University Press, 1991); Marina Valverde, ‘Derrida’s
Justice and Foucault’s
Freedom: Ethics, History and Social
Law and Social Inquiry
Valverde (n 49) 659
Force of Law
Leanoard Lawlor,
‘Jacques Derrida’ in Edward N Zalta and Uri Nodelman (eds),
Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy
(Metaphysics Research Lab, Stanford
University, Summer 2023 Edition)
<https://plato.stanford.edu/archives/sum2023/entries/derrida/>.
Litowitz (n 3) 26.
Force of Law
Kathryn RL Rand,
‘Making a Real Difference: The Dominance Approach in the Opinions of
Justice Beryl J. Levine’
(1996) 72(4)
North Dakota Law Review
Catharine A MacKinnon,
‘Feminism, Marxism, Method, and the State: Toward Feminist
Jurisprudence’ (1993) 8(4)
Signs: Journal of Women in Culture and
Catharine A MacKinnon,
Feminism Unmodified: Discourses on Life and Law
(Harvard University
Press, 1987) 40–2.
Force of Law
Hall v Brookland Auto
Racing Club
[1933] 1 KB 205
Wendy Parker, ‘The
Reasonable Person: A Gendered Concept?’
(2011) 23(2)
University of Wellington Law Review
Blyth v The Birmingham
Waterworks Co
(1856) 11 LR Ex 78.
Hall v Brookland Auto
Racing Club
[1933] 1 KB 205
J G Fleming,
(Law Book Co, 8
ed, 1992) 107.
Raphael Demos, ‘Legal
Fictions’ (1923) 34(1)
International Journal of Ethics
Force of Law
Noting that the Australian
judiciary remains at an estimated 67% male to 33% female ratio as at 2022 (NSW
Judicial Commission),
and the Justices of the High Court of Australia was
predominantly male from its inception up until the swearing-in of Justice Jayne
Jagot in October 2022.
Transcript of Proceedings,
(Supreme Court of South Australia, Bollen J, 26 August 1992)
Transcript of Proceedings,
R v Stanbrook
(Supreme Court of Victoria, O’Bryan J, 10 November
1992) 27–8.
Ibid, Victim Impact
Statement, 6.
Tamara Ponne, ‘Sit
Down Girlie: Legal Issues from a Feminist Perspective’
[2000] AltLawJl 16
(2000) 25(1)
Alternative Law Journal
Judicial Commission of
Victoria, ‘Outcome of Investigation into Complaint about Magistrate
Richard Pithouse’
(Media Release, 8 April 2020).
John Silvester, ‘Rape
Victim Attacks Judges’,
(Melbourne, 18 September 1994).
Peter Moses,
‘Non-Consent in Rape’
[1993] AltLawJl 115
(1993) 18(6)
Alternative Law Journal
Chris Jessup and Susan
Crennan QC, Victorian Bar Council, Letter to the Editor, ‘Judges Condemned
Without Evidence’,
(13 September 1993).
Nancy Fraser, ‘The
Force of Law: Metaphysical or Political?’ in NJ Holland (ed)
Interpretations of Jacques Derrida
(Penn State University Press, 1997),
Force of Law
R v Lavallee
, 883 (Wilson J).
Elizabeth A Seehy, Julie
Stubbs and Julia Tolmie, ‘Defending Battered Women on Trial: The Battered
Woman Syndrome and Its
Limitations’
(1992) 16(6)
Criminal Law Review
Fraser (n 84) 162.
R v MacDonald
(Supreme Court of Victoria, Nettle J, 3 March 2006).
Force of Law
(1981) 28 SASR
R v Quartly
11 NSWLR 332.
Crimes Act 1900
R v Lavallee
, 883 (Wilson J).
John Quilter,
‘One-Punch Laws, Mandatory Minimums and “Alcohol-Fuelled” as
an Aggravating Factor: Implications
for NSW Criminal Law’ (2014) 3(1)
International Journal for Crime, Justice and Social Democracy
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (82.6 KB)
PDF format (331 KB)
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter