URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/journals/AUIndigLawRpr/2006/84.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 14:27:22
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Hiley, Graham; Levy, Ken --- "Native Title Claims Resolution Review - Digest" [2006] AUIndigLawRpr 84; (2006) 10(4) Australian Indigenous Law Reporter 93
Native Title Claims Resolution Review
Executive Summary
NNTT mediation
Communication between the Federal Court and NNTT
Overlapping claims and inter-Indigenous and intra-Indigenous disputes
Uncertainty
Connection evidence and tenure research
Reducing the backlog of native title claims
Third party respondents
Other recommendations
Options for institutional reform
Native Title Claims Resolution Review
Graham Hiley RFD QC and Dr Ken Levy RFD
31 March 2006
Executive Summary
1. This Report has been prepared for the Attorney-General in response to the
Terms of Reference for the ‘Review of the claims
resolution process in the
native title system’. The Report focuses on the process by which native
title applications are resolved
and examines the role and practices of the
National Native Title Tribunal (NNTT) and the Federal Court of Australia. The
of the Report is to identify ways to improve the efficiency and
effectiveness of the claims resolution process.
2. Chapter 1 outlines the package of six inter-related reforms to the native
title system announced by the Attorney-General on 7 September
2005. The package
of reforms proposes changes to all key aspects of the native title system. This
Review is one element of that package
of reforms and aims to consider the role
and practices of the Federal Court and NNTT.
3. Chapter 2 sets out the Terms of Reference for this Review. It provides an
overview of our interpretation of the Terms of Reference
and summarises our
discussion with the Attorney-General about the scope of the Terms of Reference.
Chapter 2 also explains our interaction
with the Steering Committee during the
course of the Review.
4. Chapter 3 outlines the consultation strategy for the Review. We consulted
with a wide range of relevant organisations and individuals
through personal
meetings and telephone conferences. Written submissions were invited and
received from a broad range of interested
persons and groups. Chapter 3 also
identifies other reference material that we drew upon in formulating our
analysis and reaching
our conclusions.
5. Chapter 4 contains our analysis of important aspects of the existing
native title system and identifies potential areas for improvement.
contains recommendations aimed at improving the efficiency and effectiveness of
parts of the claims resolution process,
some of which relate to the practices of
the Federal Court and NNTT. Further recommendations are made regarding other
participants
in the native title system such as State and Territory governments,
Native Title Representative Bodies (NTRBs) and third party respondents.
NNTT mediation
6. One of the key concerns raised during the course of the Review was the
effectiveness of NNTT mediation. While mediation by the
NNTT can be effective in
some cases, many parties expressed dissatisfaction with the timeliness of NNTT
mediation and the outcomes
achieved through the mediation process. We concluded
that a major factor inhibiting the effectiveness of NNTT mediation was the lack
of statutory powers for the NNTT, which limit its ability to ensure that parties
participate productively in the mediation process.
We recommend that the
Native Title Act 1993
(Cth) (NTA) be amended to provide additional powers
for the NNTT to improve its ability to effectively conduct mediation.
7. A further issue raised with us during the Review was that a matter can
currently be referred to Court-annexed mediation while still
in mediation with
the NNTT. This duplication of mediation can lead to confusion and resource
implications for parties. We recommend
that mediation should not be carried out
by more than one body at the one time. (See paragraphs 4.31 and 4.32 below.)
8. We also consider it would be beneficial for parties to mediation to be
obliged to act in good faith and we recommend that the NTA
be amended to impose
this obligation.
Communication between the Federal Court and
9. There is room for improvement in relation to the communication and
coordination between the Court and the NNTT in relation to both
claims and overall approaches to claims management. We make recommendations
strongly encouraging the Court and the NNTT
to coordinate their efforts as far
as possible to ensure that parties are able to focus their limited resources on
resolving the
key issues in a particular matter. We recommend increasing
informal communication between the Court and NNTT, giving the NNTT a right
appear in certain court proceedings and strengthening the ability of the NNTT to
report to the Court and obliging the Court to
consider those reports.
Overlapping claims and inter-Indigenous and
intra-Indigenous disputes
10. Overlapping claims and disputes between Indigenous groups can cause
serious delays in negotiations towards resolving native title
claims. We have
identified several suggestions for dealing with overlapping claims. We also
recommend amendments to clarify the authorization
provisions in the NTA.
Uncertainty
11. Another factor preventing parties from reaching negotiated outcomes is
uncertainty about the claim and uncertainty about the law.
Uncertainty about the
claim arises from a lack of clarity in the claim documents about the area and
rights claimed and about the
identity of the claimants. This uncertainty makes
it difficult to identify the correct parties to the claim and the main issues
the parties. We recommend that more details and better particulars be
provided by parties at an early stage in proceedings.
12. While many of the main legal principles about native title have now been
settled, the law is still being developed in relation
to a number of important
aspects. We recommend that greater use be made of the provisions in the NTA
allowing particular issues of
fact and law to be referred to the Court for
determination.
Connection evidence and tenure research
13. Connection material is complex and can be costly and time-consuming to
prepare. One mechanism to reduce the cost and time required
connection material would be to utilize the research services performed by the
NNTT. The NNTT member presiding over mediation
can request the preparation of a
detailed report containing publicly available background material about a
particular claim including
ethnographic, anthropological and linguistic
research. We consider these reports to be an important resource that would
assist parties
and recommend that they be circulated as widely as possible.
14. In addition to establishing connection, it is necessary to undertake
research about the tenure status of the claimed land. Tenure
research is
required to establish the extent of any extinguishment and identify the areas
over which native title could be determined
to exist. We recommend that State
and Territory governments and NTRBs give priority to conducting tenure research
at an early stage.
15. We also recommend that consideration be given to assisting the NNTT to
continue to develop a database of current tenure information
for use by all
parties. This would assist parties to identify the current tenure status of the
claimed land as early as possible.
Reducing the backlog of native title claims
16. It is necessary to consider ways to reduce the backlog of existing native
title claimant applications, particularly claims that
appear unlikely to proceed
to determination. One way to address the backlog is to reduce the number of
unregistered claims and claims
lodged in response to a future act notice which
are primarily aimed at obtaining procedural rights.
17. We recommend that the NTA be amended to require the Court to dismiss
future act claims and unregistered claims in certain circumstances.
Third party respondents
18. There is a perception that some third party respondents take a
disproportionately active role in a claim, despite having only
a relatively
minor interest. We recommend that consideration be given to limiting the
participation of third parties to the extent
of their interest and allowing
industry bodies to become parties in certain circumstances. We also recommend
that applications to
remove parties be dealt with by Federal Court registrars
where NNTT mediation discloses that the party does not have an interest
19. There are potentially a wide range of matters that could be resolved
through an inquiry conducted by the NNTT. Examples would
include inquiries
directed at resolving inter-Indigenous or intra-Indigenous disputes. We
recommend a new inquiry function for the
NNTT and that the President of the NNTT
be empowered to direct the holding of such an inquiry. We also recommend that
the Chief Justice
be empowered to request the NNTT to conduct an inquiry into a
particular issue or matter. We do not make any recommendations for
amendments to
section 137
of the NTA.
Other recommendations
20. Chapter 4 makes other recommendations about amendments to the NTA in
relation to authorisation, notification and registration
of claims. In addition,
we recommend that the Court and parties be encouraged to make greater use of
limited evidence and preservation
21. We also recommend that the Court be encouraged to prepare practice notes
setting out its preferred methods for managing native
title claims.
Options for institutional reform
22. Chapter 5 considers whether it would be desirable to re-assign functions
between the Court and the NNTT. We have formed the view
that there is a need for
some institutional reform to facilitate more effective ways to resolve native
title claims.
23. In the course of the Review, we considered a number of options for
institutional reform which are set out in Chapter 5. We have
reached different
conclusions about which option would lead to the greatest improvement to the
efficiency and effectiveness of the
native title system.
24. Graham Hiley QC recommends that the Court be given greater flexibility in
relation to the management of native title claims, particularly
by being able to
use various means of alternative dispute resolution (ADR), including the ability
to decide when it is appropriate
to refer a matter or issue to NNTT
25. Dr Ken Levy recommends that the current provisions in the NTA requiring
the Court to refer matters to NNTT mediation be retained
but that the Court be
prohibited from conducting mediation while the matter remains with the NNTT.
The full text of this Report and the terms of reference provided by the
Commonwealth Attorney-General are available online at the
Attorney-General’s website:
http://www.ag.gov.au/claimsresolutionreview.
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (27 KB)
PDF format (407 KB)
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter