URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/journals/HRD/2007/9.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 15:01:32
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Burnside, Julian; McAdam, Jane (update) --- "Australia's refugee policy: The great lie" [2007] HRightsDef 9; (2007) 16(1) Human Rights Defender 23
Australia’s refugee policy: The great lie
Australia’s refugee policy:
The great lie
Julian Burnside
This article was originally given as a speech at the Brisbane Social
Forum in May 2004. It was then printed in the HRD, Vol 13 issue
It is followed by an update written for this issue by Jane McAdam.
I want to talk about refugees in the larger framework of what is happening
to values in this country.
The reality is that you can assess any government by the way it treats its
most disadvantaged, its weakest, its most vulnerable. The
way we have treated
refugees in the last few years means that we have got a very long way to go, and
no weak group can feel safe.
The Government has got away with this in part because of their dishonesty
‘queue-jumpers’, people who would throw their children overboard,
come here uninvited; that they take a place which should
be taken by other
people; that they are people who, mostly, should be sent back. And of course if
we don’t take steps we will
be ‘swamped’.
Every element of the Government rhetoric is false.
First of all, they are not illegal. They are not illegal in any meaningful
sense. It is not an offence to come to Australia without
papers, it is not an
offence to come here informally and ask for asylum. It is a right given to every
human being under Article 14
of the Universal Declaration of Human Rights, which
Australia actively promoted in 1948.
Are we being swamped?
In the last two decades the number of people coming here by boat, informally,
seeking asylum, averaged a thousand people a year.
Every year the number of authorised arrivals in the country - people coming
for holidays or business or whatever - is 4.7 million.
We have got the most
watertight borders in the world, apart from Antarctica.
The largest number of boat people arriving here in any twelvemonth period
over the last two decades was 4,100. We think we are going
to be swamped?
It’s absurd!
History and geography both demonstrate that we are not going to be swamped.
This means that what we have been doing to asylum seekers
with such enthusiasm
in the last few years is so much pointless cruelty.
What do we do with them? Well, of course, we lock them up.
Migration Act
(Cth) says that the person who arrives here
without papers must be detained and must be kept in detention until they either
visa or they are removed from the country.
The realities of detention are difficult to summarise, but the real face of
detention at the moment I think is Baxter. Baxter was
heralded by (then
Immigration Minister) Phillip Ruddock in the middle of 2002 as the
“family-friendly detention centre”.
I was at a public meeting in the Barossa Valley in April 2002, on a platform
together with an Assistant Secretary of the Department
of Immigration. I had
learnt a few things about Baxter. I’d seen a ground plan of Baxter, which
is a gigantic facility in the
South Australian desert, surrounded by what the
ground plan calls a ‘courtesy fence’. I took it upon myself to ask
woman, why is it that an electric fence is described as a ‘courtesy
She contradicted me immediately, publicly. She said “It is not an
electric fence” – I thought I had been misinformed.
“it’s an energised fence”!
A nine thousand volt energised courtesy fence surrounds the “family
friendly” detention centre of Baxter.
To get to Baxter you have to drive four or five hours north-west of Adelaide
to Port Augusta, another ten or fifteen kilometres out
of there, and you arrive
If you stand at the gates of Baxter and face east you’re looking at a
Fred Williams landscape – the original outback Australian
landscape that
we all carry in memory or imagination.
If you turn and face west, as far as you can see from left to right is a 20
foot high, glittering, silvery wire fence. This is the
“energised courtesy
fence”, and by the way it is energised on the outside so that protesters
are the ones who get electrocuted
There is twenty metres of no-man’s land, just red dirt, and then
another perimeter fence, twenty feet high, topped with razor
wire. There is a
sort of cage or chute that joins the outside perimeter fence to the inner fence.
Inside the inner fence is a series of compounds made out of corrugated iron,
but you notice that they don’t have any windows
in them, because the
people who are held in the compounds are not allowed to see the Australian
desert that surrounds them. And more
importantly, Australians who are concerned
It takes quite a rigmarole to get into the facility.
The shock comes in waves that increase with each step. First of all it takes
you about an hour to be processed – you need a
hundred points of
identification; you have to identify the person you want to see; leave your
personal possessions in a locker.
Then you go across to the electric fence and an electronic gate opens; you
step into the chute and the gate closes behind you. You
may be there for up to
20 minutes before another electronic gate
opens in front of you, at the other end of the cage. Then airport-style
security, and then eventually you will be escorted across
to the visitors’
Here you get the real shock, because here we have innocent human beings who
have been detained for months, or years. In one case –
one man in Baxter
has been detained for five years and ten months. During which time, by the way,
he has run up a bill for his own
detention of approximately $580,000. We make
them liable for the cost of their own detention.
These people are mostly from Iran, some from Afghanistan, some from Iraq.
There is a very strange sensation because, although they offer you
hospitality – a plastic cup of water or even a cup of tea
got it – and they talk to you and ask if you can help with their case, and
so on — there’s something
[The author quoted journalist Rebecca West’s word portrait of Rudolf
Hess at the Nuremburg Trials: “He looked as though
his mind had no
surface. It looked as if it had been blasted away except for the depths where
nightmares dwell.”]
That’s what you see when you meet people in Baxter. There is an absence
behind their eyes that makes you realise that in all
but their organic survival,
we have destroyed them.
It is a terrible thing to do, because they have done nothing but come and ask
for our help.
Ninety per cent of the people who have come to Australia in the last ten
years asking for help have turned out to be genuine refugees.
Yet we lock them
up and effectively destroy them.
The cruelty seems to be a matter of official government policy.
In October 2001 a number of people escaped from Woomera during the
disturbances there. They were charged with escaping from Immigration
We ran the defence that conditions in detention were so cruel and inhumane
that it could not be legal, constitutionally valid Immigration
Therefore what they escaped from was some different condition, not Immigration
The matter went to the High Court.
In November last year, in the High Court, the Australian Government solemnly
argued that, no matter how inhumane the conditions in
detention, it was
nevertheless valid and lawful and the courts could not do anything about it.
At the same time they dealt with a parallel case of a stateless Palestinian
who had come to Australia seeking asylum but had been
refused a visa. So he
signed a form saying please remove me from the country.
He couldn’t bear it in Woomera any longer. Nothing happened.
He was a stateless Palestinian. There is nowhere on earth he is allowed to
be, and there was no country on earth willing to take him.
The question was, what could be done with a person in this unforeseen
circumstance?
The obvious thing to do, the decent fair thing to do, would be to amend the
Act to get rid of an obvious anomaly.
What your government did was to argue in the High Court of Australia in
November last year that in those circumstances they can keep
that innocent man
in detention for the rest of his life.
[Note: since this speech was delivered, the High Court delivered judgment
in these cases - see Al-Kateb v Godwin
[2004] HCA 37
(6 August 2004) and
Minister for Immigration and Multicultural and Indigenous Affairs v Al Khafaji
[2004] HCA 38
(6 August 2004). On 6 August 2004, the Court held that inhumane
conditions in detention do not render the detention unlawful, and
stateless Palestinian may be held in detention for the rest of his life.]
There is a man who had come from Iran almost three years ago with his
daughter. He was locked up in Curtin first, and then in Baxter.
He and his daughter, seven years old last July, were in their room in the
“family friendly” detention Centre in Baxter
on 14 July when three
ACM guards came into their room, and they ordered him to strip.
“But apart from that his daughter was in the room. So he refused to strip.
They beat him up, handcuffed him and took him to
the management unit.”
Why? Because he, although innocent of any offence, was thought
to have a cigarette lighter.
Now, if you have followed what happened in Abu Ghraib prison, you know
exactly how shameful it is for a Muslim man to be naked in
front of other
people. But apart from that, his daughter was in the room. So he refused to
strip. They beat him up, handcuffed him
and took him to the management unit.
Let me tell you about the management unit in Baxter.
It has a number of solitary confinement cells, each three metres square. They
have bare concrete walls. The only furniture is a mattress
on the floor.
The occupant of the cell has got nothing to read, nothing to write with, no
television, no radio, no distractions of any sort, no
– and no privacy because he is video-monitored twenty-four hours a day.
There is narrow doorway, without a door, in the opposite wall. It leads into
a tiny, unventilated bathroom, but the camera is positioned
so that it can see
into the bathroom.
The room is lit twenty-four hours a day.
The video monitor also records, so you can watch the tapes, if you are able
to get your hands on one, and what you see is like a caged
He sleeps for a while, then he sits, grooms his beard obsessively, gets up
and draws his knees up and rocks back and forward for a
couple of hours. He
paces around the room for a while, and then he lies down and has another sleep.
Then he rocks back and forwards,
then he paces around the room, then he goes
into the bathroom, comes back, rocks, paces around the room…and so it
goes, twentythree
and a half hours a day.
His only respite was a visit from his daughter. On 23 July she did not come.
He was told that the manager of the centre had taken
her shopping at Port
Augusta. They assured him that she would come and visit the following day, but
she didn’t. In the end
Greg Wallace, the manager of Baxter, came and
explained to him that his daughter was now back in Tehran. The Department of
Immigration
had removed her from Australia without giving her father a chance to
say good-bye.
There’s John Howard’s “family values” for you.
The Government does not contradict these facts. They just say the courts
don’t have any role to play in the way people are treated
in detention.
In this case the judge disagreed and ordered the man to be released from
solitary confinement and moved to a different detention centre.
Government, with your tax money, appealed against that order to argue that they
could throw him back into solitary whenever
they wanted to, and that there was
nothing the courts could do about it. The Appeal Court disagreed.
The importance of this lies in the fact that these outrages are not the
result of an overzealous guard misbehaving: the Government
actively argued that
it was entitled to treat people this way.
During budget week the Government released the Human Rights Commission Report
on the effects on children of Immigration Detention.
They tried to bury it – and they might have succeeded, but for the few
journalists who pursued it.
The report said, after two-and-a-half years of careful examination of the
facts, that the treatment of children in Australia’s
detention centres
amounts to cruel, inhumane and degrading treatment, and taken collectively
constitutes systemic child abuse.
I thought Amanda Vanstone would be smart enough to say “that was
Woomera, it’s past now, it’s closed, big mistake,
sorry about
I thought she would say, “This wasn’t me, it was Mr Ruddock. It
was on his watch.” What did she say? “It’s
necessary! Or else
we will be sending a green light to people smugglers”.
So the values we have now embraced in Australia are that child abuse is
necessary in order to deter other people from trying to come
The Government is a bit touchy about children in detention, as well they
might be. At the moment they are forcing people with children
residential housing projects – then they tell you there are fewer people
in detention.
Let me quote you some observations from people who are in the residential
housing projects at Port Augusta:
“I hate the way the guards treats us – we have to ask for
everything. The worst thing about it is you have to wait for
someone else to
decide for your life.”
These people are in the
community, they are in houses – but they are locked in houses. Surrounded
“Even when we go out shopping, we go out in groups with two or three
officers. We are just allowed to buy fruit and vegetables,
no ice-cream or
cookies. — We get awoken by guards coming into the house every night. They
come back at 5am or 6am while it
is still dark. — There are head counts
twice a day.—I hate the guards checking me, they are there all the time.
night I hear their big, fat footsteps stomping through the house. —
They do not knock, they just come through the house to
the bedrooms.”
This is the new liberal policy of keeping people out of
detention. The reality is that it is just a different form of detention.
I guess the best marker of how we have treated these people is what they say
in moments of candour.
In February 2002 a man wrote a letter to an Australian from Port Hedland.
He’d been in there two years and according to his
letter, the letter he
had received from her was the first contact he’d had with any Australian
apart from the guards.
He expressed the hope that she would write again, but he ended up with the
comment, “Please don’t forget us. We are humans”.
Just think about that – that we are holding people in circumstances
that make them beg us to remember that they are humans too.
It matters not only that human beings have been treated so harshly that they
seek to harm themselves with a self-harm rate ten times
the rate in the
It matters because it has betrayed democracy.
Because when your leaders lie to you about what they are doing, democracy has
not got a chance.
Julian Burnside QC is a Melbourne barrister and took silk in 1989. He has
acted in many high-profile human rights cases including
for Ok Tedi natives
against BHP, for the Maritime Union of Australia in the 1998 waterfront dispute
against Patrick Stevedores and
for Liberty Victoria in the Tampa litigation. In
2003, he published From
Nothing to Zero
(Lonely Planet), a compilation of
letters from asylum seekers in held in Australia’s detention camps.
Australia continues to be the only western country to pursue a policy of
mandatory detention. However, two events in 2005 prompted
certain operational
and substantive changes to the system. In February 2005, it was discovered that
an Australian permanent resident
(Cornelia Rau) had been held in immigration
detention for over 10 months and an Australian citizen (Vivian Alvarez Solon)
deported. The Palmer inquiry into the Immigration Department’s
practices revealed systemic cultural problems within the Department’s
detention and compliance sections, which were described as ‘overly self
protective and defensive’ and ‘largely
unwilling to challenge
organisational norms or to engage in genuine self-criticism or analysis’.
As a result, the Federal Ombudsman
was given powers to investigate 201 other
cases of potentially wrongful immigration detention of citizens and permanent
and the Department instituted a review of its processes, directing
funding towards information and case management systems, improved
mechanisms, and training programmes.
In May 2005, motivated by the threatened introduction into Federal Parliament
of two private members’ bills by Liberal MPs,
the government agreed to
permit the discretionary release of certain individuals into the community
pending the outcome of their
asylum claim (including children, those over 75,
those married to Australians, and victims of torture or trauma). The
now affirms that, as a matter of principle, children will only be held in
immigration detention centres as a measure of last resort.
However, although
families with children are eligible for community release, the Immigration
Department acknowledges that they may
in fact be detained for up to six weeks
before a decision is made.
In response to the High Court’s decision in
effectively sanctioned (as a matter of law) the indefinite detention of a person
who could not be removed from Australia,
a new visa category was created. The
Removal Pending Bridging Visa permits the release of cooperative long-term
detainees who might
otherwise remain in detention indefinitely, but its grant is
entirely discretionary.
Jane McAdam is Director of the International Law Programs and Senior
Lecturer in the Faculty of Law, UNSW. She is also the Associate
Rapporteur of
the Convention Refugee Status and Subsidiary Protection Working Party for the
International Association of Refugee
Law Judges. Jane recently published
Complementary Protection in International Refugee Law
(Oxford University
Press, 2007).
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (44.7 KB)
PDF format (122 KB)
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter