URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/journals/ALRCRefJl/2009/34.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 14:12:39
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Wilcox, Karen; McFerran, Ludo --- "Staying home, staying safe: the value of domestic violence protection order provisions in homelessness strategies" [2009] ALRCRefJl 34; (2009) 94 Australian Law Reform Commission Reform Journal 24
Reform Issue 94 Summer 2009
This article appears on pages 24–26 of the original
Staying home, staying safe
The value of domestic violence protection order provisions in homelessness
By Karen Wilcox* and Ludo McFerran*
Studies have shown that domestic violence—also known as family
violence and intimate partner violence—is a leading cause
of homelessness
for women and children in
On any given week, victims of domestic violence flee their homes to sleep
rough: in cars, on friends’ floors or, if they are
fortunate, in refuges.
For this reason, there has been a rising tide of policy development and activism
in the past decade aimed
at containing and remedying homelessness for victims of
domestic violence. This has led to legal and policy responses which provide
framework for victims to remain safe while residing in their own homes.
The legal framework
Domestic violence protection orders are a key feature of Australia’s
legal response to domestic
They offer protection
against violence through court orders restraining the future conduct of an
individual towards one or several
victims. Domestic violence protection orders
can be tailor-made to suit the needs of individual victims by way of particular
imposed through the provisions, or conditions, of the order. In all
states and territories, these orders have a degree of open-endedness
in relation
to proscribed behaviours, to ensure individualised outcomes can be determined by
Nonetheless, two
specific provisions in protection order laws have the direct potential to impact
on homelessness. These are the
so-called ‘exclusion’ or
‘ouster’ orders, which contain conditions preventing perpetrators of
violence from
approaching or coming into the home where the victim lives; and
court-ordered changes to residential tenancy agreements, often required
exclusion orders effective if victims have shared rented accommodation with
defendants who are the leaseholders. These provisions
will be considered in this
The first specific domestic violence protection order legislation in
Australia was the New South Wales
Crimes (Domestic Violence) Amendment Act
(NSW). It was possible for victims of domestic violence to obtain an
‘exclusion’ condition under this Act, but by 1987
only 3.2% of
orders made in NSW included such
conditions.
Research has shown a
low utilisation of exclusion conditions in protection
The reasons for this are likely to be complex. For some victims of domestic
violence, remaining in the relationship is desirable or
necessary (for financial
or other reasons), so protection from future violence is best provided by a
‘basic’ protection
order prohibiting future violent conduct, but
permitting ongoing contact. For example, under
Crimes (Domestic
and Personal Violence) Act 2007
(NSW), every order prohibits the defendant
assaulting, molesting, harassing, threatening or otherwise interfering with the
protected person or a person with whom the protected
person has a domestic
relationship.
For other victims of domestic violence at high
risk, safety can only be found by escaping into hiding and ensuring the offender
not know their whereabouts.
However, for the victims of domestic violence who
find it best
to stay in their own home and ‘have the violence leave’, exclusion
orders with appropriate practical supports
offer a sound protective strategy.
The fact that courts may not be issuing such orders in these situations reflects
a complex web
of community and judicial unease, with concern for the hardship
for defendants leading to the conditions being seen as
controversial.
Concern for the
property rights and accommodation needs of the defendant, deferral of occupancy
issues to property settlements under
family law, or a belief that exclusion is
only warranted when the violence was physical, has at times underpinned judicial
Community beliefs
‘a man’s home is his
In its 2006 report,
the Victorian Law Reform Commission noted,
despite the legislation being relatively clear, there seems to be a hesitation
in removing a person from ‘his’ home with
a related failure to
acknowledge that this is exactly where the violence
legislation itself in some states and territories has, in practice, discouraged
the use of exclusion conditions. For example,
if the option is not explicitly
mentioned in an Act, it can be ‘invisible’ to lawyers or police
prosecutors when seeking
orders on behalf of
Similarly, where equal
priority is given to the accommodation needs of both the complainant and the
defendant, this makes it difficult
for exclusion orders to be
Some governments in recent years have passed laws to increase the visibility
of exclusion orders in their legislation, and to prioritise
the victim’s
accommodation needs in any determination. In Tasmania, the court may require the
person against whom the order
is made ‘to vacate premises
... whether
or not that person has a legal or equitable interest in the
Recent law reform activity in some jurisdictions has further strengthened
exclusion order provisions, with courts now directed to
consider them in certain
circumstances. In the Northern Territory, this applies to matters where a child
is involved:
The issuing authority must presume that the protection of the protected person
and child is best achieved by them living at
Domestic Violence and Protection Orders Act 2008
(ACT) states
that in deciding
the application for a final order, the court must
The accommodation needs of the aggrieved person, each child of the aggrieved
person, and each child of the
respondent.
Victoria, under
Family Violence Protection Act 2008
whether to include an exclusion condition,
or not a child is involved. This means that the court
make a decision as to whether the perpetrator
should be excluded from the
premises occupied
by the aggrieved person and child; it cannot simply
avoid this question. Furthermore, it
the ‘desirability of minimising disruption’
to the aggrieved
person and child. This has the
potential to address homelessness for
already facing the hardship of violence.
Some domestic violence laws have been drafted to recognise that exclusion
orders are unworkable where there is a lease for the home
defendant’s name. In Queensland, s 62A of the
Domestic and Family
Violence Protection Act 1989
(Qld) allows the court to consider a sole
tenancy application at the same time as it considers the protection order.
Section 150
Residential Tenancies Act 1994
(Qld) also allows a
tenancy tribunal to grant sole tenancy to the person experiencing violence.
Changes to residential tenancy laws
in Victoria contained within the
Violence Protection Act 2008
(Vic) provide an avenue for victims to apply
for changes to leases with the state’s tenancy
Two jurisdictions fast-track this process by providing for concurrent
alteration of tenancy agreements at the protection order determinations.
Family Violence Act 2004
(Tas) gives the court the power to terminate a
tenancy agreement and establish a new one benefiting the ‘affected
agreements can be redrafted in the victims’ name, even where they
previously may not have been a party to it. A similar
provision is also
available in the NT and is before the SA Parliament at the time of publication
of this article.
Other provisions in domestic violence laws have also been of value in
preventing homelessness for victims. Police holding powers (available
states and territories), bail provisions and ‘cooling-off’ police
orders also provide potential for short-term
removal of perpetrators at times of
high risk, so that victims are less compelled to flee in emergencies. For
example, under the
Family Violence Act 2004
(Tas), the court can require
a violent person to vacate
and a police officer
may detain a person without charge for a period ‘reasonably’
required to secure the safety of the
Where there has been an
arrest, bail is only available where the release of the offender would not
‘adversely affect the safety,
wellbeing and interests of an aggrieved
Western Australia and Victoria, police can directly issue short-term
‘cooling-off’ orders or notices which
require the perpetrator of
violence to remain away from the victim for up to 72
The need for a supportive service system
In order for exclusion orders to be effective in keeping victims safe as well
as out of homelessness, a range of other factors needs
to be addressed. These
include the availability of funding for security alarms, new locks and security
upgrades; risk assessment
and safety planning; case tracking; enhanced policing
responses; and outreach support and counselling. In addition, victims of
need sufficient financial security to pay for their mortgage or rent,
which may be difficult under current social security, child
support and family
law property arrangements. As many victims of violence remain concerned about
the potential homelessness of their
partner, an adequate system supporting
exclusion orders would also contain targeted shelter beds for removed
perpetrators.
The need for support to enhance the practicality of exclusion orders was
recognised and embraced by the first system-wide ‘integrated
response’ to domestic violence, the ACT Family Violence Intervention
Project (FVIP), whereby crisis support workers work with
police during or after
domestic violence call-outs. Between 2000 and 2006, the proportion of domestic
violence victims having to
seek refuge accommodation in the ACT was reduced from
13% to 4%, and offenders remaining at home fell from 38% to
In the ACT, a specialist domestic violence court bolsters the system of
protection orders available under the law. In this court,
a specially trained
and experienced magistrate hears protection order matters, and arguably, this
leads to enhanced understanding
of the complexities of victims’ needs and,
presumably, better outcomes.
The Tasmanian Government has built on the successes of the FVIP in the ACT
with its integrated whole-of-government response to domestic
violence, known as
‘Safe at Home’.
Safe at Home response has included practical support systems, such as safety
planning, security patrols, and funding for security
upgrades, transport and
emergency perpetrator accommodation, in addition to the law reforms noted above.
Since its introduction,
there has been a decrease in the proportion of shelter
residents seeking accommodation because of domestic
In NSW, a pilot program known as ‘Staying Home, Leaving Violence’
has been expanded to additional regions across the state.
This program supports
exclusion orders by providing easier access to lock changes, security upgrades
and safety plans for escape
in the event of a critical incident.
Several developments in Victoria have also complemented the new legal
framework. These include the specialist Magistrates’ Court
pilot, where
protection order, criminal, victim compensation and family law issues can be
resolved concurrently in the one court,
providing an opportunity for the court
to address inconsistent outcomes, such as those which arise when there is a
conflict between
state protection orders and federal family law
In addition, the
Victoria Police
Code of Practice
aims to ‘support aggrieved family
members to stay safely in their own
The ‘exclusion order’ approach to tackling the problem of
domestic violence-related homelessness is relatively new, but
is gaining ground
through law reforms and policy developments across the country. This solution is
in keeping with our current understanding
and accords with notions
of fairness and justice, insofar as those already suffering abuse are prevented
from enduring additional
suffering through homelessness. While exclusion orders
are not the solution in every case, the promotion of this option should be
considered an important strategy in any homelessness policy.
* Karen Wilcox (BA (Hons) LLB) is the Good Practice Officer at the
Australian Domestic and Family Violence Clearinghouse at the University
* Ludo McFerran (B Soc Sc (Hons)) is a project officer at the
Australian Domestic and Family Violence Clearinghouse at the University
South Wales.
The authors have worked in tertiary education, non-government
organisations and as consultants to government and the community sector
than 20 years. They thank Dom Wilcox-Watson, Smith’s Hill High School, for
research assistance.
Department of Families, Housing,
Community Services and Indigenous Affairs,
The Road Home: A National Approach
to Reducing Homelessness
(2008); S Murray,
Somewhere Safe to Call Home:
Violence Against Women During Homelessness
Various names are used in each
order, restraining order,
family violence order), so the generic term
‘protection order’ is used in this article.
In some states and territories similar
orders are also available to prevent workplace, neighbour and street
L McFerran,
Taking Back the Castle:
How Australia is Making the Home Safer for Women and Children
Ibid. ACT commentators, however, suggest
that exclusion orders have been well-used in ACT courts.
Ibid; Victorian Law Reform Commission,
Review of Family Violence Laws
(2006), 320–324.
L McFerran,
Taking Back the Castle:
How Australia is Making the Home Safer for Women and Children
Victorian Law Reform Commission,
Review of Family Violence Laws
(2006), 321.
For example, the
Restraining Orders
(WA) provides a general condition preventing approach to the
victim’s residence (s 13) but does not have specific ouster
provisions.
See also Victorian Law Reform Commission,
Review of Family
Violence Laws
(2006), 323.
For example, s 12(d) of the
Restraining Orders Act 1997
(WA) states that the court is to have regard
to ‘the accommodation needs of the respondent and the person seeking to be
protected’.
Family Violence Act 2004
s 16(3) (emphasis added).
Domestic and Family Violence Act
Domestic Violence and Protection
Orders Act 2008
(ACT) s 47.
Family Violence Protection Act
(Vic) s 262.
Family Violence Act 2004
Intervention Orders (Prevention of
Abuse) Bill SA 2009.
Family Violence Act 2004
Ibid s 11(1).
Ibid s 12(1).
Restraining Orders Act 1997
Domestic and Family Violence Protection Act 2007
(NT) pt 2.6;
Family Violence Protection Act 2008
R Holder and J Caruana,
Justice Intervention in Family Violence in the ACT
(2006), 59.
This is not to be confused with the
evaluation project being undertaken in Victoria which uses the same name.
L McFerran,
Taking Back the Castle:
How Australia is Making the Home Safer for Women and Children
Problems arise for victims of violence
where they have a protection order preventing contact by the perpetrator, but
family court
arrangements requiring a degree of shared parenting. In Victoria,
the capacity to resolve this is bolstered by s 90 of the new
Family Violence
Protection Act 2008
Victoria Police,
Code of Practice
for the Investigation of Family Violence
(2004), [1.2].
Victorian Law Reform Commission,
Review of Family Violence Laws
(2006), 324.
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (223 KB)
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter