URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/journals/UNSWLawJl/2025/27.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 15:44:56
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Bhatti, Maria; Noakes, Sandy --- "Belonging in Law School and the Legal Profession: Muslim Law Students' Experiences" [2025] UNSWLawJl 27; (2025) 48(3) UNSW Law Journal 834
A Theme 1: Diversity at the WSU School of Law as an Advantage
B Theme 2: Transition from Law School to Profession
C Theme 3: Fostering a Sense of Belonging and Islam in the Curriculum
D Theme 4: Gendered Discrimination and Intersectionality
1 Intersectionality and Classroom Engagement
A Diversity at Law School: An ‘Advantage’?
B Transition from Law School into the Legal Profession
1 Knowing the Students
2 Understanding the Link between Cultural Capital and the Relevant Discourse of the Dominant Institutions
C Fostering a Sense of Belonging and Islam in the Curriculum
D Gendered Discrimination and Intersectionality
Gender-based discrimination permeates through all the previously identified themes in this article. For example, as discussed under
the theme ‘Diversity at Law School as an
“Advantage”?’, while students at WSU may feel a strong sense of
belonging and identity, they may not find the same level of belonging at other universities. Research indicates that this lack of
belonging intensifies for women, with female students reporting higher levels of discrimination based on their religious identity.230
As highlighted in the theme ‘Transition from Law School into the Legal Profession’, the intersecting identities of Muslim
women also influence their transition from law school to the legal profession. Additionally, the theme ‘Fostering a Sense of
Belonging and Islam in the Curriculum’ highlights that women of colour, in particular, are more likely to feel a lack of belonging
compared to other groups within the legal education context.231
BELONGING IN LAW SCHOOL AND THE LEGAL PROFESSION: MUSLIM
LAW STUDENTS’ EXPERIENCES
AND SANDY NOAKES
Despite the increasing diversity of student cohorts in Australian law
schools, there is very little research on the experiences of
law students from
diverse backgrounds, and none that specifically focuses on Muslim law students.
This article discusses the findings
of a study conducted at Western Sydney
University on the experiences of Muslim law students. Using a focus group
methodology, it
provides insight into students’ perspectives on
representation and belonging in law school and the legal profession.
sense of belonging and identity at law school may be confined to
their experience of ‘safe spaces’, with that sense of
often diminishing as they transition into the legal profession. Greater
consideration is needed in relation to how Islam
is discussed in the Australian
law curriculum, along with the need to address the intersectional challenges
faced by female students
who identify as Muslim.
I INTRODUCTION
Australian universities have pursued a
widening participation agenda for at least 25
and it has been claimed that
Australian law schools are becoming more diverse
However, in Australia,
while there is research on the experiences of university students with carer
responsibilities,
students with
disabilities,
and LGBTQIA+
there is a notable lack
of research specifically addressing the experiences of Muslim
and none on the
experiences of Muslim law students. This gap is concerning given reports
highlighting a rise in discrimination against
Muslims in Australia. Increased
negative attitudes towards Muslims have been documented, especially since the
September 11 attacks
and the Christchurch Mosque massacre in March
Reports from the Australian
Human Rights Commission
Islamophobia Register indicate a rise in
Islamophobia.
The most recent
Islamophobia in Australia
report indicates that there has been
a 250% increase of reported online incidents and 150% increase in offline
incidents during the
period between 1 January 2023 and 31 November 2024,
compared to previous study periods by the Islamophobia Register between
Additionally,
recent discussions surrounding freedom of speech, academic freedom and research
related to Palestine further emphasise
the need to understand the experiences of
Muslim law students in Australian universities, who are likely to be impacted by
events. They may face increased self-censorship, marginalisation or
heightened surveillance, particularly when students express solidarity
Palestine or critique dominant political
narratives.
While research advocates for supporting diversity at Australian law
there is very little
research into the experiences of law students from diverse
backgrounds.
It has been
suggested that increased diversity in law schools should ideally lead to greater
diversity in the Australian legal
profession,
potentially
enhancing access to justice.
However, experience in other jurisdictions suggests that diversity in law
schools does not always translate into a more diverse legal
profession. Instead,
it can lead to a stratified legal field where practitioners from diverse
backgrounds are marginalised.
Reports indicate that the Australian legal profession may be at risk of
replicating this stratification and
marginalisation.
Against this background, we present a preliminary case study on the
experiences of Muslim law students. Employing focus groups to
examine the
experiences of Muslim law students, we found that students’ sense of
belonging and identity at law school may be
limited to their sense of
‘safe spaces’, and that their sense of belonging is significantly
diminished as they consider
their transition to the legal profession. Our
findings suggest that greater consideration is needed in relation to how Islam
is discussed
and taught in the Australian law curriculum, and that there is a
need to consider the intersectional challenges experienced by female
who identify as Muslim. We recognise that there is also an antecedental question
concerning the inclusion of Islamic perspectives,
or indeed any religious
frameworks, within legal education. This inquiry falls beyond our present
analysis and is acknowledged peripherally
given our article’s focused
scope. Part II of this article explores the current research relating to the
experience of Muslim
students and suggests some reasons why a greater
understanding of the experience of Muslim law students might be important for
education and the legal profession. In Part III, we outline the
methodology for our case study, and in Parts IV and V we present
and analyse our
findings. We argue that understanding the experiences of Muslim law students
requires acknowledging the interplay
of cultural capital, Islamophobia and the
sociopolitical dynamics within which educational institutions and the legal
Mark Massoud’s work on positionality encourages socio-legal researchers
to explicitly acknowledge both marginalisation and
One of the authors of
this article identifies as a woman of colour and a Muslim, and many of the
students’ experiences in this
study resonated with her own personal
experiences as a law student. The other author is a white woman of
Anglo-Australian heritage
who does not identify as Muslim, but who attempts to
adopt a sensitive and ‘ally’ style approach to her research relating
to legal education and students from diverse backgrounds. Both authors
acknowledge their position of privilege and power in relation
to the students
who participated in this study. As will be discussed further in this article, as
both authors were academics in the
School of Law at Western Sydney University
(‘WSU’) who might teach the students involved in this study, neither
authors conducted the focus groups, and instead we engaged members of the
Muslim Legal Network to support an ethical separation of
teaching practice from
teaching research.
II MAPPING THE RESEARCH LANDSCAPE: MUSLIM STUDENT
EXPERIENCES IN LAW
It is well established that universities
need to understand the lived experiences of students from diverse
backgrounds.
Research shows that
a sense of belonging and integration into a community of learners is crucial for
student success.
research relating specifically to the experience of Muslim law students in
Australia is virtually non-existent. Instead,
as is consistent with
international research in this
studies tend to focus on
the experience of Muslim students at university generally.
Research before the September 11 attacks found that many Muslim students at
Australian universities felt they did not fully belong,
despite the
institutions’ efforts to create inclusive
communities.
This sense of not
fitting in was often linked to how others perceived them, particularly through
negative stereotypes. For example,
Muslim women were often viewed as oppressed,
leading to feelings of exclusion and isolation within the university
environment. These
perceptions underscored the need for universities to foster a
more inclusive and supportive atmosphere for Muslim
Australian studies conducted post-9/11 reveal that most Muslim university
students experience some form of religious discrimination,
with female students
reporting higher levels of
discrimination.
Christine Asmar,
Elizabeth Proude and Lici Inge’s research highlighted concerns about
discrimination faced by Muslim students
on- and off-campus, particularly for
Muslim women who wore headscarves or face-coverings, making them more visible
and thus more
apprehensive about
discrimination.
In Asmar, Proude
and Inge’s survey, when asked whether teaching staff treated Muslim
students the same as others, 73% of Muslim
male students agreed, compared to 66%
of Muslim female students. Notably, a further 24% of female students responded
some ways,’ compared to only 14% of male students –
suggesting greater ambivalence among Muslim
Additionally, Muslim
women often felt singled out due to their religious attire and refusal to shake
hands for religious reasons.
Research suggests that most Australian Muslim university students faced
discrimination based on their religious
The survey conducted
by Adam Possamai et al in 2013 indicated that approximately 10% experienced
frequent discrimination, while over
25% encountered it
occasionally.
The Australian literature also explores formal support for Muslim students,
including prayer facilities, formal learning experiences
and student groups like
the Muslim Students Association.
These associations manage prayer rooms, social events and other Islamic
facilities. Findings from a national study in 2000–01
revealed that only
one-third of Muslim students were satisfied with the provided services and
support from universities.
particular, it found prayer rooms to be generally inadequate, however it is
important to note that given the age of this data,
and the possibility of
renovations since then, further research is needed to assess current
conditions.
highlighted the need for dedicated prayer facilities and halal food options,
with specific requirements for separate prayer
Regardless, the
literature did not address the equality of access to prayer spaces for Muslim
men and women. Overall, adequate formal
support, such as sufficient prayer
facilities, was shown to empower Muslim students and enhance their
Additionally,
research by Possamai et al showed that 39 students expressed concerns about the
adequacy of prayer facilities, including
clean bathrooms and
overcrowding.
According to
Asmar, Proude and Inge’s study, many Muslim students reported discomfort
with the centrality of alcohol in university
Studies also explore Muslim students’ sense of belonging, which also
links to principles of Self-Determination Theory emphasising
relatedness,
autonomy and competence as essential for motivation and
More specifically,
the national study from 2000–01 found that 61% of Muslim students felt
part of a learning community, 51%
felt they could explore academic interests,
and 31% felt they belonged to the university
Concerns were raised
well as the teaching of Islam
non-Muslims.
More recent research has applied critical race theory to explore Muslim
university students’ experiences in Australian higher
education. Unlike
studies that focus solely on institutional barriers and policies, Randa
Abdel-Fattah frames her analysis by comparing
the experiences of Muslim and
non-Muslim students in New South Wales (‘NSW’). In her study, she
explores how Muslim students
engage with the university as a predominantly white
institution and how this affects their coping strategies and
experiences.
The lack of empirical research concerning the experiences of Muslim law
students in Australia may be explained by various factors.
This includes the
fact that, historically, Australian law schools have not been places where
students from diverse backgrounds were
represented.
It has been
recognised that diversity in the profession and in legal education is needed to
‘reflect the multicultural and
heterogeneous make-up of the Australian
population, to meet diverse client needs and to promote a professional culture
of respect,
sensitivity, awareness and inclusion more
However, despite
this recognition, there is still ‘very little quantitative or qualitative
data on diversity in Australian
law schools and even less research examining how
students’ diverse backgrounds and social identities ... affect their law
experiences’.
Another factor impacting the experience of
Muslim students may be tension between religious identity and secular academic
frameworks,
as documented in law and religion
scholarship.
Although this
article does not examine the tensions in detail as it is beyond the scope of
this article, it is important to note
that many Muslim students may find
themselves negotiating what scholars of law and
describe as a boundary
between the secular and religious
In this framework,
secularism operates as the dominant, active force, while religion is
increasingly positioned in a passive, reactionary
This creates
institutionalised discomfort where Muslims must manage religious expression
while establishing academic credibility.
These dynamics reveal how supposedly
neutral academic spaces can inadvertently require religious minorities to
perform additional
identity work to gain institutional
acceptance.
It is often asserted that diversity in the legal profession has implications
for greater access to justice.
In Australia, the need for a more diverse legal profession has been linked to
addressing access to justice for First Nations
and people from
culturally and linguistically diverse
backgrounds.
There is also a
link made between the need for a more diverse judiciary and public confidence in
the judiciary.
It would be hoped that an increasingly diverse cohort of students in
Australian law schools should lead to greater diversity in the
profession.
However, the
experience in jurisdictions other than Australia has been that diversity at law
necessarily translated into diversity
legal profession but has instead led to a stratified profession that situates
practitioners from diverse backgrounds at the
Research from England and Wales, for
example, shows that the significantly increased diversity of the student cohort
at law schools
over the past two decades has not led to diversity at
‘senior levels of the
profession’.
This research
examines how the intersectional impact of cultural background and socioeconomic
status (‘SES’) affects
students’ admission to particular law
schools, and from there, entry into and participation in different strata of the
profession.
Chronopoulou has recently argued that, in the upper echelons of the legal
profession in England and Wales ‘homosociability,
the process of
socialising among groups possessing similar social characteristics, including
race, is promoted and
reinforced’,
despite the
recruitment advertising of large commercial law firms and the Bar purporting to
embrace diversity and inclusion.
Homosociability limits access to personal contacts and networks, entrenching the
exclusion of law graduates from diverse backgrounds
who do not have the
‘right’ contacts.
Lack of access to ‘elite’ networks is also a barrier to career
progression.
profession in the United Kingdom (‘UK’) is ‘fragmented’,
with lawyers from diverse backgrounds
being ‘under-represented in
corporate firms’
long legacy of legal culture and networks dominated by the white, male and
middle-class.
Instead, lawyers
from more diverse backgrounds are concentrated in less prestigious and less
lucrative areas of legal practice, smaller
suburban practices and legal
This segmentation of the
legal profession has also led to a lack of diversity in the judiciary in the
The legal profession in the Netherlands has
experienced a similar pattern. Law graduates from non-Western backgrounds are
over-represented relative to the proportion of the population of the
Netherlands.
‘older native Dutch men are over-represented at the higher levels and
under-represented at the middle and lower levels
[of legal practice], while the
reverse is true for legal professionals from ethnic minority
Sylvia van der
Raad’s detailed study of cultural diversity in the Dutch legal profession
examines the experiences of legal
professionals in large city firms and the
judiciary, and law students, all of whom had a ‘(perceived or actual)
Islamic background’.
research demonstrates the ‘othering’ of the legal practitioners in
her study, because they do not meet the stereotype
of the ‘ideal legal
professional’
‘a privileged male, white, and depending on the career ladder mid-thirties
or mid-forties, early
Despite a strong
commitment by Dutch legal profession and judiciary to increase diversity,
neither are ‘brimming with the much
diversification’.
Raad argues that this is because ‘the legal sector has a specific elitist
culture that is manifested in particular
sets of values, beliefs, meanings,
norms, traditions, symbols and rituals. These affect how organisational members
interact and are
expected to
The common thread of the research in both jurisdictions is that the root
cause of the stratification of the legal profession is an
assumption about an
ideal legal professional, in terms of cultural background, SES, education and
access to cultural capital. Despite
a strong commitment to improving diversity
in the legal profession in these jurisdictions, the systemic
‘othering’ of
legal practitioners from diverse backgrounds means
that those who have traditionally held high-status positions in the profession
still set the benchmark of the ideal legal
practitioner.
Whether a similar stratification exists in
Australia is not clear because, as noted by Sally Kift and Kana Nakano, in
Australia, ‘[t]here
is little research, data and/or evidence available
that can provide insight into the experiences of diverse student and
practitioner
populations’.
Demographic data relating to the cultural backgrounds of Victorian and NSW
barristers shows that the Bar in these jurisdictions is
‘overwhelmingly
culturally homogenous’
not representative of the broader Australian
population.
This is also true of
the Australian judiciary.
some cases, demographic data concerning the cultural background of solicitors
indicates that it is more representative of the
population.
However, there is,
to date, no uniform method of capturing data concerning cultural diversity in
the Australian legal profession.
In addition, the data that does exist has not captured the experiences of
practitioners from culturally diverse backgrounds, nor
has it explored whether
there is a stratification/fragmentation of the profession similar to that in
other jurisdictions.
One report that is often cited in relation to cultural diversity in the
Australian legal profession is the 2015 ‘snapshot’
report of the
Asian Australian Lawyers Association
limited in its methodology,
2015 report points to stratification in the Australian legal profession. For
example, it found that Asian Australians accounted
for 9.6% of the Australian
population, but only 3.1% of partners in law firms, 1.6% of barristers and 0.8%
of the judiciary.
A more recent qualitative study conducted by the AALA captures the same
barriers to entry and participation in certain strata of the
legal profession
experienced in the UK and the
Netherlands.
The 2022 AALA study
conducted surveys, focus groups and interviews with solicitors in NSW who had at
least four years of post-admission
experience and who identified as culturally
Barriers of entry into
and participation in certain strata of the legal profession identified in the
2022 AALA report included a
lack of mentors from diverse
backgrounds,
exclusionary
cultural norms (such as the reliance on alcohol at networking
and tokenistic
initiatives of law firms to increase diversity, rather than a real commitment to
a more diverse workforce.
Research concerning the experiences of Muslim law students in Australia, even
on a small scale, might foster a better understanding
of how law schools can
contribute to students’ sense of identity and belonging, and how law
schools and the profession might
collaborate to avoid reproducing the
stratification of the profession that appears to have occurred in other
very least, this research can contribute to promoting
‘a professional culture of respect, sensitivity, awareness and inclusion
more broadly, all of which seem greatly
These themes
informed our case study relating to the experiences of Muslim law students.
III METHODOLOGY
The authors employed qualitative methods in the form of focus groups to
gather information from current WSU law students who identified
Focus group methodology
was selected to attempt to capture the shared lived experiences of this group of
As a self-contained
method, focus groups also ‘reveal the participants’ experiences and
perspectives that may not be
accessible without group
interaction’.
Focus groups
are also ‘suitable for examining sensitive issues and for research
involving marginalised populations because
people may feel more relaxed about
talking about these issues when they see that others have similar experiences or
The authors also ensured that this study
ethically separated our teaching practice from our research relating to the
student experience.
As most university students are adults they are not always
seen as vulnerable research
Nevertheless, measures
should be taken to ensure that students’ participation in higher education
research is not influenced
by ‘deference to the researcher’s
perceived position of power’.
As both authors were academics in the WSU School of Law who might teach
the students involved in this study, neither of the authors
conducted the focus
groups. Instead, the focus groups were conducted by members of the Muslim Legal
Network. The Muslim Legal Network
was founded in 2008 and is a professional
association of Australian Muslim lawyers and law students. It arranges
internships and
mentoring for law students, community legal education workshops,
professional development workshops for practitioners, and a legal
referral service.
There were two focus groups: one for male students only and one for female
students only. The facilitator of the female focus group
was a solicitor who had
been practising for about three years in the areas of family law, migration and
domestic violence. The male
focus group facilitator was a final-year law student
from another Australian university. Both identified as Muslim, and both were
members of the Muslim Legal Network. The aim was to make the participants feel
more comfortable to participate because the focus
groups were not facilitated by
academics who might teach them. Gender segregation was also important to ensure
that participants
felt culturally and religiously safe, and this approach
reflected an awareness of the cultural and religious norms within Muslim
communities, where gender dynamics can shape comfort levels and
communication.
The focus groups were also conducted once semester had finished, so that they
did not clash with class time. Students were recruited
from all three campuses
where law is taught at WSU. Students were recruited via email through the School
of Law ‘vUWS’
In addition, subject
coordinators of each law subject were asked to advertise this project in
classes. Participants also joined by
Participants were offered a $30 book gift voucher for participation in the
focus group.
Participants
were advised that they would be asked to consider the following matters during
the focus groups:
● experiences as a Muslim law student;
● experiences relating to formal and informal support and networks,
both at law school and in the legal profession;
● experiences in terms of representation at law school and in the legal
profession;
● sense of belonging and identity at law school;
● what the WSU School of Law does well to support Muslim students;
● ways that the WSU School of Law could improve its support for Muslim
The facilitators were provided with training in conducting focus groups with
semi-structured questions and were provided with suggested
probe/prompt
questions to follow up the main themes discussed above.
There was potential for the participants to
be uncomfortable or distressed discussing their experiences, particularly if the
disclosed experiences of discrimination. The students were advised in
advance about the types of questions they would be asked, so
that they could
choose not to participate if they believe participation might cause them
distress. Students were advised of support
services available to them should
they experience distress as a result of their participation in the focus
Eight students participated in the female focus group. There were originally
two male students who indicated that they would attend
the male focus group.
However, only one attended on the day, so the focus group with the male
participant was conducted more as an
interview with the facilitator.
The focus groups were conducted online via Zoom. This is now a
well-established method of conducting focus
The focus groups were
video recorded, so that the different speakers could be identified when the
video was transcribed. To support
de-identification, participants were asked to
use a pseudonym for their Zoom ID to participate in the focus group.
The video recordings were transcribed by a professional transcription service
and conventional qualitative content analysis was employed
to code the
using NVivo software.
At the commencement of the focus groups, the participants were asked to share
some basic information about themselves, if they felt
comfortable doing so. This
information is set out below:
Table 1: Background Information of Consenting Focus Group Members
Female focus group
Background information shared with group
Studying Bachelor of Business/Bachelor of Laws, with a major in Economics
in her Business degree. In third year of a five-year degree.
Studying Bachelor of Accounting/Bachelor of Laws. Mature-aged student from
Afghanistan.
Just completed Bachelor of Law/Bachelor of Business majoring in Accounting.
Studying Bachelor of Laws/Bachelor of Communications, with major in Public
Relations in Communications Degree.
Studying Bachelor of Laws. Mature-aged student with three children.
Studying Bachelor of Business/Bachelor of Laws. Has nearly completed her
degree. Background is Fijian Indian.
Did not provide background details.
Studying Bachelor of Laws (graduate entry). Has nearly completed her
degree. Mature-aged student. Hoping to practice in the areas
of family law and
dispute resolution.
Male participant
Background information shared with group
Studying Bachelor of Laws/Bachelor of Business majoring in Finance. In
final semester of degree. Has studied full time.
IV FINDINGS
The themes which emerged from our analysis, and which will be discussed in
this article, were:
● diversity at the WSU School of Law as an advantage;
● concerns about the transition from law school into the
profession;
● subject and co-curricular experiences in law school; and
● gendered discrimination and intersectionality.
A Theme 1: Diversity at the WSU School of Law as an
The diverse student cohort at the WSU School
of Law is representative of the diversity of WSU generally and of the community
WSU is located. WSU’s campuses are situated in the fastest
growing region of greater metropolitan
with the third
largest economy in Australia.
Western Sydney is an extremely culturally diverse region, with 40.9% of people
born overseas
speaking a language other than English at
WSU pursues a widening
participation agenda ‘to champion higher education and make it accessible
for all who want to pursue
Programs to
encourage widening participation include programs which target First Nations
students from
Pasifika communities
students from refugee and new and emerging
communities.
These programs
commence as early as primary school and are maintained throughout
students’ high school
Demographic data
relating to WSU’s first year law cohorts from 2018–21 indicated that
that 45% of students were from
35% were from
culturally and linguistically diverse backgrounds, 39% were the first in their
families to attend university, 53% had
not entered their law course directly
from school, and 10% entered their law program through vocational training,
rather than the
completion of formal high school
The fact that the WSU School of Law is a microcosm of the broader community
in which WSU is located appears to have been a significant
factor which
supported the students’ sense of identity and belonging. Student A spoke
in positive terms about that fact that
there were ‘a lot of other Muslim
students overall felt that the diverse student cohort at WSU generally provided
them with a sense of connectedness. Student
B speculated that she might feel
‘alienat[ed]’ and out of her depth at another university:
Hypothetically, if I was at another university and if I was in a learning
situation where there wasn’t much diversity, like
let’s forget about
Muslim law students, if there wasn’t much diversity in terms of male,
female or like different cultures
and what not, then you sort of have this sort
of alienating feeling, where it’s like ‘
am I in way over my
’ because some demographics are more outspoken than others, some
of them learn in different ways and are more high content in
Other students drew on experiences of family and friends at other
universities to contrast their positive experiences at WSU:
I was just going to say, I’ve got friends that
attend other unis and they’re not doing law, per se, but they are doing
very competitive fields like law and they’ve said that at their university
they find that, as being a Muslim, they’re
like one of the few in their
classes and in their units and no matter what unit they take, they walk in and
everyone is just like
kind of almost staring and alienating them and they find
that it’s a bit intimidating and it’s like ‘do I belong
here[?]’. So I find that it’s different [at
Now I do have a child who’s at another university who
did their first year at Western Sydney and there is a very big culture
difference in a different field. She’s not studying law, but another
really competitive field and it is more male dominated
and even in the
atmosphere, a lot less multicultural and whilst there are advantages of doing
certain degrees at certain universities,
definitely there was a clear distinct
difference between her experience at Western Sydney and elsewhere, and obviously
me doing my
second degree here, I can definitely agree with that perspective
Student J, the male participant in the focus group, stated that the diversity
of the student cohort at WSU and in the law school meant
that he did not think
of himself as a ‘Muslim law student’ but as a ‘law student who
is also Muslim’:
[W]hen I first decided to come to WSU obviously it was getting the offer into
the law school and I was prepared to take the offer
for many [reasons], but I
was glad that it came from WSU because I knew generally it’s more diverse
and at the other university
I was aware of, for example, the [other university]
a few years ago where the prayer room got thrashed and lots of students were
verbally and sometimes physically abused on campus and assaulted on campus, I
never had that worry even coming so that, even as a
high school student, my
perception was
coming to the WSU law school is somewhere I will be safe and
can just worry about study
. So ... where I’ve said
I wanted to be a
law student who is also Muslim, I think that WSU Law School’s generally
welcoming attitude has allowed for
me to have that happen and still be a
practising Muslim whereas actually if I was at a different law school I would
have had to hide
my religion to be safe on campus or not be, if I didn’t
want to hide I would be able to face the consequences, and that’s
been a consideration here at WSU
. I can show as much as I want or not at
all. Safety is not a concern or vilification is not a concern
However, while the students’ sense of belonging and identity was
supported by the diversity of the cohort generally, they were
circumspect about their sense of belonging as they transitioned into the legal
profession.
B Theme 2: Transition from Law School to
Students in the focus groups, and particularly the mature-aged female
students, were anxious about their transition from law school
to the legal
profession. These students felt that the high level of support they received at
law school was not as overt once they
began their pathway into the workforce.
They also noted that their responsibilities as carers prevented them accessing
opportunities
for paralegal work, clerkships and internship opportunities
because, ‘our second job is the home and is taking care of three
at different stages of life and so
The discussions in the focus groups revealed that students were keenly aware
of the disjunct between their sense of belonging and
identity at law school, and
their sense of belonging and representation in the legal profession:
I’m at the end of my degree, looking at that
representation outside of law school, I don’t see it as much,
especially in traditional firms
. It’s very hard to find somebody
that really reflects you, especially when you’re ethnic and identified
ethnic and Muslim,
like the two, you’re not really fitting into the
Eurocentric standards of tradition firms, because when you’re looking
‘yes there is diversity in these firms’,
but it only goes up to
Associate Graduate, Associate, you don’t see it in the partner of the
directory board
, like that kind of
... when you go out [into the profession] ... they’re
not the kinds of environments that we’re really comfortable with
So it’s sort of like that disconnect between feeling supported here [at
law school] but then once you’re out
in the big bad world, it’s like
you have to turn down events. Personally I would turn down events where
there’s wine
or alcohol involved etc. So you kind of feel it’s easy
to get alienated if you’re not really surrounded by your people
you’re in environments where you don’t have as much access to other
likeminded people from the same culture,
same religion essentially, because
unless you go into one of those firms that’s Muslim dominated, owned by
Muslims and what
not, if you’re thinking more of like corporate, the
really high-class sort of firms, then that’s sort of what you have
expect going into it, that you might not always feel like you belong but you
kind of have to make peace with that and just be
like ‘okay, why am I in
this field to begin with? Is it to be liked by everyone? Should I just put my
head down, do my thing
and then go home?’ There’s just sort of like
this inner struggle, that it’s like ‘why am I
Students indicated that they were aware of the importance of
‘networking’ to secure employment, but pointed to barriers
networking opportunities and concerns about tokenism, as two obstacles to their
sense of belonging in the legal profession:
...[s]ometimes a disadvantage would sort of be
sometimes with major law [networking] events or where to meet [members of the]
profession, sometimes the events aren’t at places that I could go
So as a Muslim girl, I wouldn’t be able to go to those
places where you can connect with big people
and you can get to know
different people and be able to have that connection for a future job. I
wouldn’t be able to go to those
places to meet those people. So I guess
other people do have an advantage on me ... I feel like we are so disadvantaged
don’t have that life. Because where do most legal professionals
meet? At a bar. Or like where are most of their events? At
a bar. That’s
how they communicate with others.
That’s how others get to the job
or get to where they want to. But as me, as a Muslim student, as a female, I
be able to go to those places and so I guess I’m somehow
disadvantaged ...
Students expressed scepticism about employers who sought out Muslim law
graduates to appear more ‘diverse’, but did not
necessarily have a
genuine commitment to supporting Muslim lawyers:
... sometimes [employers] prefer to have that diverse, to
have an Islamic background or just like a different cultural background
able to seem diverse in whatever legal profession ... I’d say sometimes
in order to have that image and look diverse for many big companies
will hire you just to have that image of themselves
... I’ve been to a legal event and once they realise
that I’m a Muslim I’ve heard them say ‘
Oh, that’s so
brave of you
that’s so courageous
didn’t want to say anything, but I was thinking ‘had I have been in
another religion would you say the same
thing? Is it because I am a female and I
am a Muslim? Is that why you’re thinking that?’ It depends, like
Student F was
saying, different companies do it, so they look a bit more
multicultural ...
One participant in the female focus group observed that they had noticed the
emergence of ‘Muslim law firms’ and the student
perceived this as an
advantage for them in terms of potential future employment. However, her
enthusiasm was tempered by her observation
that being a female Muslim lawyer was
seen as an advantage only for certain areas of legal practice:
: It is nice and it is inspiring to see a lot more Muslim
women specifically in the profession and a lot of firms that are all Muslim
women or majority Muslim lawyers and half of them to be women, although I do,
when you see the opportunities you see coming across,
I do feel that there is
somewhat an advantage, which is not the reason why I want to go into it, but in
family law or dispute resolution,
it’s welcomed. Anything to do with any
multicultural background ... helps in those sorts of fields because there is a
obviously in that. So there’s that aspect as well, I suppose, which
is encouraging for the profession
C Theme 3: Fostering a Sense of Belonging and Islam
in the Curriculum
A theme emerging from the student focus
groups was the need for improvements in the way that Islamic law and topics
pertaining to
Muslim communities are taught in the law school curriculum. For
instance, Student J (male participant) provided positive feedback
subject ‘Islam, Human Rights and International Law’ taught at the
WSU School of Law. However, this student argued
that there should be a stronger
emphasis on distinguishing between culture and religion throughout the
curriculum:
I think they’ve started to bring in like the study of Islam and how
that interacts with laws into units. I did a unit
The Human Rights
International Law
[sic]. We looked at human rights in the context of Islam
and I felt that was really good progress, that it offers an objective view
it goes more in-depth into Islam rather than a 10- or 15-minute discussion where
there’s no class materials assigned
to it. Having said that though, there
was not still enough of a distinction in that unit and other units about the
distinction between
culture and religion and the impact that has on both culture
and religion on the laws in Muslim majority nations
Student J further noted a general lack of awareness among students regarding
the diversity of views within the Muslim world. He argued
that it is essential
to recognise that the experience of being a Muslim and the interpretation of
Islamic law can vary significantly
depending on the country of origin, cultural
background and individual perspectives:
I think there was a general lack of awareness, amongst students at least,
that just because, like a country may call this the Sharia
Code doesn’t
necessarily mean that it is part of the religion but it’s the culture and
religion in that particular country
has affected that that has gone to create
whatever laws that is and I think there needs to be more work done across the
having discussions to recognise that ‘I come from one part of
the world and the experience of being a Muslim from that part
of the world and a
Muslim from that part of the world in Australia maybe vastly different to
someone who comes from a different country
or even a country neighbouring mine,
the country of my parents’. I think there’s just not enough
acknowledgment of the
diversity of views
However, while it is crucial for the law
school curriculum to embrace the diversity of views within Islamic law and the
Muslim community,
Student E commented on the important role of curriculum in
dispelling stereotypes and providing a nuanced understanding of Islam:
[G]oing back to the point about having a unit for Islamic and International
Law, I feel like not only just getting the views of non-Muslim
students, but
also just because one thing that we do know is that Islam, our religion does
have some stigmas around it, it does have
some stereotypes around it, Muslims
have stereotypes around them. I think having a unit there that actually
gives core knowledge
of the religion is really a good insight for people that
have no idea and probably go off the norms and the stereotypes. So
really good in that sense of like as a representation than what I
think even Muslims can be, because I wouldn’t say I’m
representation of my religion. I try my best to be, but I wouldn’t say
I’m the perfect representation, but I
think studying a course that’s
giving the right guidance of what our religion is, is definitely a lot more
better [sic].
Students in our case study also saw potential for discussions of Islam to be
incorporated into subjects such as family law, criminal
law and dispute
resolution in a way that was culturally sensitive. Student A also emphasised the
importance of being aware of the
dominance of whiteness in the core law school
curriculum:
[T]here was even this one unit that I did in first year, which was Legal
Analysis and Critique and it was basically introducing us
to different legal
jurisprudence, ways of thinking, theoretical frameworks that make up Australia
Law, obviously it would make sense
for it to be Eurocentric, but I thought it
would be really interesting if they had have added something to do with Islamic
even Eastern, because we had a golden aged period as well and we have
really interesting and insightful ways of thinking when it
comes to approaching
law. So I think it would have, even not for Muslim students, it’s
just a more holistic idea, instead of
just focusing on European ways of
thinking, if that makes
D Theme 4: Gendered Discrimination and
Intersectionality
The female students in our focus groups discussed the intricate interplay of
identity, perception and professional settings. It is
important to acknowledge
that the experiences of Muslim students vary significantly, with the extent of
discrimination or marginalisation
they encounter being shaped by various
factors, such as personal presentation, cultural heritage and geographical
context. Student
Z observed:
I’m not necessarily easily identifiable. People don’t normally
assume I’m Lebanese or Muslim, but even when they
do find out, I’ve
never had an issue with that and surprisingly in the law, I do agree, I find
that there’s more women
studying law now so even more of my colleagues are
women, whether they’re Muslim or otherwise, so I haven’t really felt
a difference.
On the other hand, Student A’s experience provides a distinct
perspective that underscores the impact of visibility on the experiences
Muslim students. Although Student A’s experience is positive overall, as
someone who wears the headscarf, her experience
is arguably
‘racialised’ in the way that she is perceived by others:
In terms of my community, I’m one of the only people
from my family who’s female, Muslim scarfed, going to Law School,
it’s sort of brought up a couple of
raised eyebrows
on the whole it’s not like something that’s ... because I feel like
nowadays the thing with basically all fields,
nothing’s kind of boxed into
like ‘you can only go do this if you’re ticking off this
criteria’. Like it’s
not just we only have teachers and arts and
these kinds of options available to us. So even if it does raise some
eyebrows, it’s
not something that’s out of the ballpark, you
Facilitator:
So what I’m hearing you say is the visibility
aspect of being at a university, where others are visibly Muslims, has been of
noteworthy importance to you?
Yeah, it has for sure. Because if you’re coming from
your family and community, it’s kind of raising eyebrows, but then
you’re actually going there you’re seeing something else.
So it sort of fills in a gap and it helps you, yourself, sort of enjoy
experiencing studying and makes you feel more connected, not
only to the Muslim
Law students, but because it’s very diverse. I would say it’s a
good experience overall
The crucial need to address
intersectionality was also highlighted in the comments of Student B:
I’m a single parent and it was very hard for me as I am a new English
speaker ... I talked with the peer services and I talked
with some unit
coordinators and they suggested for me to go ahead with the accounting subjects
and then coming back and doing the
law subjects ... I told my situation to the
welfare and they gave me the AIP that is helping me with extension for my exams
think the service of Western Sydney University is amazing. It’s
really helped me.
In the context of the legal profession in
the United States (‘US’), Bethool Haider examines judicial systems
decisions that reflect both implicit and explicit forms of
Islamophobia and Orientalism, particularly in how Muslim women wearing
headscarves are treated within the legal
profession.
Haider contends
that these women are often expected to conform to a neutral workplace identity,
which may conflict with their personal,
religious and social identities,
illustrating what she terms as ‘bleached out
professionalism’.
advocates for creating inclusive spaces where veiled Muslim women can speak
openly about their gender, religion and identity,
challenging preconceived
notions of oppression and allowing them to define their own professional
This approach, she
argues, not only promotes autonomy and diversity but also facilitates greater
inclusion of Muslims in professional
environments traditionally closed off to
Our research also
indicates that students view representation as important in these traditionally
‘closed off’ environments.
Student F noted:
... there’s been a lot of representation like in the days. Like now you
see female with a Hijab, I think she works at Stirling
Legal in Auburn, she
became a magistrate in the Court ... I just see her on Instagram and a lot of
other lawyers within the western
Sydney areas that have represented with the
Hijab on in Court, and that leads to something, like this is a good thing for
is the start because I can’t imagine what it would have been
like, let’s say 30 years ago, if a Hijab lawyer would have
walked into a
court to represent
1 Intersectionality and Classroom
Research identifies gender gaps in classroom
engagement at law schools, where women tend to participate less frequently,
adverse effects on their overall law school experience and subsequent
career outcomes.
relevant for Australian legal education where class participation has been
identified as an important tool for student engagement
The intersectional
impact of gender and faith on classroom engagement was evident in our focus
groups. Student J commented on how
he responds to the representation of Islam in
class discussions. He indicated he was quite vocal in correcting misconceptions
both academics and student peers:
I think it’s not just actually limited to law students. I think some of
the lecturers or the tutors that I’ve had in class
as well, sometimes tend
to do that as well and it can be because, for example, we are searching and
looking at a country that has,
it might be Muslim majority and has for example
like human rights violations or things that are not the social norm in
So I think I have often felt the need to say, ‘When we are
talking about this you have to please be mindful that you’re
talking about
the situation in that particular country’, because very quickly ...
although it’s more students than lecturers
that do this, but very quickly
it can devolve into ‘well yes that’s because Islam says or
that’s what Muslims say’.
There’s no real appreciation of
there is a difference between Islam religion and the local culture that binds
together and
how that affects it.
There is, I think, a great lack of nuance and I often feel the need to just
sort of point that disclaimer out, like ‘no, it’s
monolith’. We’re talking about over a billion people so
it’s actually not a monolith and let’s make
the discussion, keep
that mind when having this
discussion.
In contrast, Student B’s reflections indicated that she was not as
willing to vocalise her views and, in fact, classroom discussions
in relation to
Islam led her to question aspects of her faith and potentially impacted her
mental health:
I just was deeply thinking about Islam sometimes when I’m sitting in
law classes and discussing about the issue, that is conflicted
religion. For example, when talking about the women’s rights ...
It’s causing me to fundamentally question about
the religion, that is
sometimes I feel like what way is correct, you know ... Going deep down
it’s causing maybe mental health
issue or something because or religion
also they say ‘don’t think too much, go deep into some things’
you keep thinking ... it is not good for the Muslim people to just
keep repeating something that doesn’t have an answer. When
in law classes it’s causing me that, the feeling that what I believe is
true or not.
V DISCUSSION
A Diversity at Law School: An
‘Advantage’?
Often, when the issue of diversity at law school is discussed, the focus is
to law school for students from diverse
backgrounds.
What is often
overlooked in these discussions is that the responsibility of law schools in
relation to students from diverse backgrounds
does not end once the student
gains entry to law school; this is really where the responsibility
It is apparent from
the responses in this study that the students’ sense of belonging at law
school was supported by the diversity
at WSU more generally.
As legal educators, the students’ reflections about the diversity at
WSU generally initially provided us with some reassurance
that they derived a
sense of belonging and identity from the fact that WSU, and its School of Law,
was more representative of them;
that the diversity of the student cohort
generally made them ‘feel more
and the fact
that they were not the only visibly Muslim students contributed to their sense
of confidence. However, we have been
challenged by Abdel-Fattah’s research
in relation to the experiences of Muslim and non-Muslim students in Australian
universities,
and in particular her observations about the possible source of
this sense of comfort and
Abdel-Fattah notes
the observations of one Muslim student in her study, Shahinda, who chose to
study law at WSU rather than accepting
a place at the ‘more
prestigious’ University of Sydney. Shahinda indicates that she chose WSU
because she perceived she
would be less likely to be subject to racism and abuse
if she stayed in Western
Drawing on Rhonda
Abdel-Fattah observes
that a student’s decision not to venture beyond Western Sydney may occur
because racism has limited their
choice to spaces that they already know, and
that the ‘anticipation of racism therefore creates “inventories of
of fear” among racialised minorities’ outside of these
safe spaces.
The comments
from the students in our study indicate that, where their friends or family
ventured beyond WSU, they experienced exactly the type of
alienation that students in Abdel-Fattah’s research anticipated they
experience. As legal educators, we need to interrogate whether the level of
comfort and sense of belonging experienced by Muslim
students may in fact limit
their choices and options if they do not venture outside their ‘safe
This critical reflection is important because, as demonstrated by our
findings, while the students had a strong sense of belonging
and identity at
WSU, their sense of belonging and identity in the legal profession was in stark
juxtaposition to their experiences
as law students.
B Transition from Law School into the Legal
In relation to the students’ concerns about transitioning from law
school and into the legal profession, it is important to
acknowledge that many
law students undertaking a law degree will not go on to legal
Kift and Nakano
have recently documented the ongoing tension between the demand from the
profession for ‘practice-ready graduates’
and the increasingly
generalist nature of the law degree in
However, given
that our study focused on students’ sense of belonging and identity at law
school and in the legal profession,
we have confined this discussion to the
implications of our study in relation to Muslim students’ transition into
legal practice.
The experiences of the students in our study indicate that law
schools and the legal profession in Australia may need to consider
barriers to
entry to and progression in the profession for Muslim students.
As discussed above, there is limited empirical research relating to the
experience of lawyers from culturally diverse backgrounds
in Australia. The 2022
AALA report indicates that ‘diverse lawyers are more willing to mentor
other diverse lawyers’.
However, the lack of diverse mentors at senior levels in the
profession posed challenges for culturally diverse solicitors attempting
advance to the Bar. Like the students in our case study, the AALA report also
identified a lack of access to networks. The AALA
participants commented that
‘[l]ike hires like’ and that ‘clients and the legal industry
only accept and take advice
from white, male
[b]arristers’.
described the Bar as a ‘[n]etworking boys
‘Caucasian club’,
observing that ‘it doesn’t help when there are not a lot of Asian
represented’.
Again, like the students in our case study, the link between networking and
alcohol in the legal profession was identified in the
AALA study as a barrier to
participation and inclusion, because drinking was ‘where the bonds and
access to opportunities often
and respondents
did ‘[n]ot [fit] into the pub culture because [they] didn’t grow up
drinking beer’.
qualitative data in the 2022 AALA report also indicated that the respondents
experienced barriers to networking with clients,
because ‘the client
social events involved golfing or other “elitist white”
sports/hobbies which involved exclusive
memberships that many Asian background
lawyers do not have the benefit
The AALA report pointed to the presence of diversity tokenism in the
profession. Respondents expressed concerns about ‘tokenistic
initiatives
within the workplace instead of real rewards/promotions’, which they
described as ‘diversity
They observed
that, while employers may be well intentioned, they did not appear prepared to
devote proper resources to supporting
What was needed
was ‘[e]ncouraging and fostering GENUINE opportunities for those
culturally diverse solicitors (rather than
just hosting a “harmony
day” morning
Respondents in
the AALA study also noted that ‘culturally diverse lawyer[s] ... [were]
being pigeon-holed for ... certain stereotypes
These observations from culturally diverse legal practitioners in Australia
resonate with Student A’s perception that there
is a choice to be made
between ‘Muslim dominated’ firms on the one hand, and
‘corporate’ or ‘really
high-class’ firms, where they may
need to compromise their
Student Z’s
comments about her cultural background being perceived as an asset, but only in
certain areas of practice (family
law, dispute resolution), is also pertinent
here. Van der Raad’s study of legal professionals from Islamic backgrounds
Netherlands notes the sense of agency experienced by some of the legal
professionals who had harnessed their identity and promoted
it as an asset in
certain areas of legal
However, as Van der
Raad points out, where it is assumed that, as a group, practitioners from an
Islamic background may possess language
skills or cultural connections that are
valuable in legal practice, ‘individual competencies are not
acknowledged’.
a need to critically reflect on whether being Muslim and a lawyer involves
engaging only in certain types of legal work,
or being valued to do only certain
Assuming that we want to avoid the stratification of the Australian legal
profession as it becomes more culturally diverse, what might
this mean for legal
In the UK legal education context, it is possible to observe at least two
concerning responses to the stratification of the legal
profession. The first is
that, rather than challenging or addressing the structural impediments to
diversification across the profession,
legal educators educate students about
these barriers, so that students develop strategies to ‘find possible ways
through such
is that law schools design curricula around the assumption that students from
diverse backgrounds will graduate to practice
in certain areas of law, or may
not practice at all.
approaches are problematic because they perpetuate, rather than challenge, the
stratification of the legal profession.
The widening participation agenda in higher education tends to focus on
extending access to admission into and participation in university
students from diverse
backgrounds.
‘on the other end of the pipeline, the onus is on students to navigate the
transition into the labour
It has been
observed that the experiences of ‘non-traditional students’ as they
transition from university into employment
under-researched.
Australian research demonstrates that students from culturally and
linguistically diverse backgrounds have poorer outcomes
in relation to
employment after graduation.
Sally Baker et al argue that generic graduate employability support within
Australian universities are not an effective means of
supporting culturally and
linguistically diverse (‘CALD’) students’ ‘transition
out’ of university
and into the workforce, and that
‘profession-specific employability support’ is needed, tailored to
the needs of CALD
However, they also point to the ‘pull factors’ in the labour market
which impede CALD students’ transition into
the workforce. These include
inherent biases and racism in recruitment
They point to the
important role that universities can play in advocating for CALD students in
relation to the value they bring to
workplaces,
and in educating
employers ‘using research and expertise to foreground the strengths that
[CALD] graduates can bring to the
workforce’.
Legal education in Australia has been the locus of considerable energy and
innovation in terms of transition ‘in’ to university
first-year experience.
However, it has been argued that transition pedagogy in legal education should
focus on both ends of the transition
experience,
transition “out” ... can be as demanding as the transition
“in” to university in the first
Studies concerning transition pedagogy for final year law students in Australia
have demonstrated that students experience a high
level of anxiety and
psychological stress as they transition from law school, emphasising
students’ uncertainty concerning
employer expectations and the need for
closer mentoring.
al emphasise also law schools’ responsibility to ‘ensure they
provide support for [student] well-being at this
crucial point in their
professional
development’.
The most recent comprehensive report relating to the final year transition
experience for Australian law students was published in
This report focuses
entirely on law school curriculum renewal to enhance the student experience in
their final year, ‘to close
the loop on tertiary legal studies and better
prepare students for a smooth transition into the world of work and professional
advocates for a capstone experience in students’ final year of study and
recommends that such capstone experiences
should be guided by the same
principles developed in relation to first year transition pedagogy: transition;
integration and closure;
diversity; engagement; assessment; and
evaluation.
However, in
relation to the principle of ‘diversity’, this report focuses on the
capstone experience preparing students
for the diverse range of people they may
encounter in their professional lives, suggesting that students need support in
the development
of their cultural
competence.
recommendation appears to assume that the students are already part of a
dominant legal culture and that they therefore need
support in learning how to
interact with those from diverse backgrounds. The report acknowledges that the
principle of ‘diversity’
also relates to supporting students from
diverse backgrounds.
its recommendations in relation to how this might be achieved are limited. They
include, for example, ‘promoting diversity
in the law school community ...
by employing and recruiting non-traditional staff and students’ and
providing ‘special
support’ for ‘students who are more likely
to encounter discrimination in the
workforce’.
limited treatment of the principle of diversity in ‘transition out’
law pedagogy can be contrasted to the considerable
attention that it is given in
the ‘transition in’
literature.
Butler et al argue that the optimal type of ‘transition out’ law
program would ‘involve collaboration with the
profession’.
such collaborations should avoid the deficit framing of Muslim students. Van der
Raad’s work examines a program called
Brug naar de Top
(‘Bridge to the Top’), a mentoring program for law students from
culturally diverse backgrounds conducted by a large,
elite corporate law firm in
Amsterdam and the Council for the
students’ experiences of this program were that it was condescending,
primarily because the program adopted a deficit framework
in relation to these
students. There was an assumption that the students would be lacking in the
‘right (language) skills as
well as cultural and social capital to fully
and equally participate in the [legal
profession]’.
We suggest that collaborations between law schools and the legal profession
to support Muslim students’ transition out of legal
education could avoid
this deficit framing and increase students’ sense of belonging, inclusion
and identity by adopting the
framework of ‘bridging socio-cultural
incongruity’ developed by Marcia Devlin and Jade
This framework has been employed to support ‘transition in’
pedagogy for ‘non-traditional’ university students.
approaches to ‘transition in’ pedagogy which frame these students in
deficit and which makes the students
solely responsible for adapting to the
implicit norms and culture of university. At the same time, it also rejects
models of ‘transition
in’ pedagogy that suggest that universities
are ‘the problem’ and that what is required to ‘fix’ the
problem with universities is simply for the institution’s expectations of
students to be made more
The framework of bridging sociocultural incongruity suggests a two-way
approach: ‘Rather than requiring students to fit the
institutional culture [of university], it suggests that institutional cultures
be adapted to better fit the needs of an
increasingly diverse student
In advocating
for an approach which challenges universities to adapt, however, this approach
cautions against denying agency, because
this can further marginalise students,
and also assumes (incorrectly) that students from ‘non-traditional’
backgrounds
are ‘passive recipients of the middle and upper class culture
and discourse of
university’.
students should be encouraged to use their ‘outsider’ knowledge to
challenge and critique these dominant cultures
discourses.
Devlin and McKay’s work relating to bridging sociocultural incongruity
focuses on students from low-SES backgrounds. However,
as Devlin acknowledges,
the conceptual framework derives from the concept of cultural congruity
developed in relation to CALD students
in higher education settings in the
It has also been
suggested that the concept of ‘bridging sociocultural incongruity’
could be used to better understand
the experiences of students as they enter
into employment, as there are similarities between students’
‘transition in’
to university and their transition from university
into the workforce.
There are two key principles of the ‘bridging sociocultural
incongruity’ framework that may better support ‘transition
out’ law programs involving collaboration with the profession: knowing the
students; and understanding the link between cultural
capital and the relevant
discourse of the dominant institutions.
1 Knowing the Students
As applied to ‘transition in’ pedagogy, the principle of
‘knowing the students’ refers to ‘understanding
abilities and experiences which ... non-traditional students bring with them to
university’.
‘transition out’ pedagogy, this would require collaborations between
the profession and law schools which
encourages a dialogue about students’
unique abilities and experiences. In the context of ‘transition in’
Kift warns against ‘making assumptions about particular cohorts
of students’.
having some understanding of the common experiences of particular groups of
students may assist to bridge sociocultural
incongruity. In relation to the
experiences of Muslim law students, it is important to note the critique in Van
research of the
Brug naar de Top
program. The
participants in this program were meant to adopt precisely the type of
‘two way’ approach advocated in Devlin
and Kift’s model; the
law students were ‘allowed to take a look behind the legal scenes and the
legal professionals were
able to take a look in the law students’ worlds
and what kept them busy during their daily
However, in
practice, there appeared to be little appetite from the practitioner-mentors in
Brug naar de Top
program to get to know about the students’
lives. It would be important for collaborations between law schools and the
in Australia to ensure that the ‘bridge’ does not operate
unilaterally.
2 Understanding the Link between Cultural Capital
and the Relevant Discourse of the Dominant Institutions
Devlin and McKay’s framework links the importance of cultural capital
to the discourse of academia.
Harnessing Pierre Bourdieu’s concept of cultural capital as
‘proficiency in and familiarity with dominant cultural codes
practices’,
that are ways of thinking and doing at university that are so obvious to those
embedded in the institution that they are
never explained or articulated to
students from non-traditional backgrounds, nor are they interrogated by those
who are part of the
dominant culture at university. This further entrenches the
academic advantage of traditional students, who already know these implicit
rules and have a ‘feel for the
As noted by Ryan Naylor and Nathan Mifsud, the concept of cultural capital
has been widely deployed in academic literature concerning
the support of
students from diverse backgrounds in higher
However, they
caution that Bourdieu’s concept of cultural capital is sometimes misused
in this literature to implicitly frame
students from diverse backgrounds in
deficit, that is, by framing them as ‘lacking’ the requisite
cultural capital.
framework places onus on the students to access support services within the
university that permit them to ‘assimilate’,
their cultural capital.
ignores one of the key components of Bourdieu’s framework, which is that
‘capital gives privileged access to further
capital, allowing the dominant
classes to monopolise resources and reinforce their
dominance’.
It is therefore important that the concept of cultural capital is used to
interrogate the dominant, invisible norms and assumptions
of the relevant
institution, rather than as a framework which positions Muslim law students as
‘lacking’ certain types
of capital. For example, Lisa Webley et al
use Bourdieu’s framework to critically examine structural and social
barriers to
entry into the legal practice for students from CALD and low-SES
backgrounds in Britain.
study demonstrates that ‘hiring practices occur within a neo-liberal
market that is viewed as rational, equal and justified,
but as they are heavily
reliant on constructed notions of talent and merit they reproduce the dominant
group’s position within
profession’.
recent analysis of the recruitment advertising of elite commercial law firms and
the Bar in England and Wales, Chronopoulou
documents the ways in which this
material implicitly signals that there is an ideal candidate, by preferencing
and foregrounding
the social and cultural practices of white middle-class
graduates. This is despite the recruitment material also being replete with
commitments to inclusion and
Applied to ‘transition out’ pedagogy for Australian law schools
in collaboration with the profession, this principle would
require honest, frank
and, sometimes, confronting discussions about current networking, mentoring and
recruitment practices. It may
also involve discussions about the experiences of
CALD practitioners in jurisdictions such as the UK and further research into the
experiences of CALD practitioners in Australia. As legal educators working
closely with students applying for clerkship and graduate
roles in large
corporate firms, it appears that little has changed since our own participation
in these programs two or three decades
ago, despite the firms’ stated
commitment to engaging students from diverse backgrounds.
C Fostering a Sense of Belonging and Islam in the
Research indicates that fostering a feeling of belonging among students is
crucial for strengthening their connection to their law
This feeling of
belonging correlates with favourable academic outcomes, such as increased
academic drive, involvement, continuity
attainment.
According to the
national study of Muslims in Australian universities conducted prior to the
September 11 attacks, 61% of Muslim
students agreed that they belonged to a
group of staff and students committed to learning, 51% felt that they were able
their academic interests with staff and students, and 31% agreed that
they belonged to the university
Although slightly
dated, this research from Australia is consistent with more recent research from
the US. Elizabeth Bodamer’s
study delves into the concept of belonging
within the realm of diversity and equity in legal education.
Bodamer’s results indicate that the law school experience is contingent
on race and gender, with women of colour notably more
prone to experiencing a
sense of detachment compared to other
The impact of gender
on the experience of Muslim students is discussed further in the next section.
Bodamer’s research also
highlights the prevalence of bias incidents and
stereotype concerns among students, particularly those from minority
backgrounds,
which are closely associated with a diminished sense of
Addressing bias, stereotypes and institutional practices in the teaching of
Islam in law schools is key to enhancing student wellbeing
and academic success.
Taking into account the impact of colonialism on Islamic law can also help
improve the way Islamic law is taught
to make it more comprehensive and
informative. Additionally, integrating critical race theory, as advocated by
Abdel-Fattah, can
how they respond to the university as a white institution.
While limited research exists on how Islamic law is taught at Australian
universities,
more extensive
studies have been conducted internationally. Understanding how Islamic law is
taught in law schools in the US, the
UK and Canada is particularly relevant. For
example, Professor of Law in the UK, Shaheen Sardar Ali, notes that when
teaching Islamic
law, she makes it clear to students that she is ‘not
teaching a course on Islam as a religion ...’ and ‘... no
taught in an ideological, social, or political vacuum. Thus, teaching and
learning Islamic law, like any other subject,
is a political act and never
devoid of moral, ethical, social and political
She further
notes that:
Islamic Law course is not like western courses in contracts, trusts or
banking law and so on, because Islamic law is not statute law
and thus has no
single definitive content. Teaching Islamic law thus means teaching a range of
possible rules on a particular topic
based on the interpretation of those rules
employed to resolve problems arising in various spheres of
Ali’s statement resonates with the sentiments expressed by students in
our case study, stressing the importance of teaching
content and delivery
methods in law schools to embrace a spectrum of perspectives within the Muslim
In her research, Ali also found that:
In the present global political and social climate, where discomfort and
distrust of Islam and Muslims is an alarmingly high level,
including Islamic law
in the list of law school offerings would present an opportunity to engage
firsthand with the Islamic legal
tradition. For most law students in western
universities, this would likely be their first and perhaps only interaction with
law, or indeed Islam and Muslims, and a chance to dispel pre-conceived
However, it is important to note that the goal of curriculum development
should not be limited to dispelling stereotypes and combating
Islamophobia. It
is also imperative to acknowledge and address the structural inequities
impacting the experiences of Muslim students.
In fact, Abdel-Fattah critiques
the sole focus on inclusion, diversity and accommodating religious and cultural
This is because
Abdel-Fattah’s research shows that the experiences of Muslim students
transcend mere inclusion and diversity
and that these challenges should be
understood through the lens of educational inequities and racial power
structures. For example,
the teaching of Islamic law at the University of Sydney
in 2017–18 faced significant challenges, including an online petition
calling for the dismissal of lecturers teaching the subject. This was compounded
by the effects of Islamophobia and sensationalised
media coverage, which fuelled
fear and misunderstanding,
affirming Abdel-Fattah’s
Consequently, the
inclusion of religious content within secular academic institutions can also
present significant complexities.
Upholding scholarly neutrality and
institutional integrity can create inherent tensions, especially when
educational frameworks risk
being perceived as endorsing specific religious
traditions.
Drawing on the insights of First Nations scholar Aileen Moreton-Robinson,
Abdel-Fattah highlights how whiteness operates in the Australian
She argues that
whiteness is not just an identity but also a political position and a set of
institutional practices that wield coercive
power, symbolising national
belonging and identity.
way in which this can be addressed is by extending the understanding of Islam
and Muslim societies beyond the boundaries of the
‘Islamic law’
As noted earlier, Abdel-Fattah focuses on the impact of colonialism in
understanding the experiences of Muslim university students.
There is a need to
examine student wellbeing through the lens of critical race theory by examining
how student experiences intersect
with wider institutional practices, including
settler colonialism and its link with
Islamophobia.
indicates that curriculum reform should be deeply embedded in institutional
practices that help students cultivate a sense
of belonging, engagement and
connection with their university
It is important for
students to feel a sense of belonging through a holistic law curriculum that
does not limit the discussion of
Islam to the ‘Islamic law’
elective. However, there needs to be more research on the integration of Islamic
the legal profession, as well as the economics and budgets of
curriculum design. This includes examining the justifications for not
subjects like Islamic law and understanding the barriers to its inclusion. A
more comprehensive understanding of these factors
is also essential to
developing an inclusive and relevant curriculum that reflects the diverse needs
of students and the legal profession.
D Gendered Discrimination and
Intersectionality
Gender-based
discrimination permeates through all the previously identified themes in this
article. For example, as discussed under
the theme ‘Diversity at Law
School as an
“Advantage”?’, while students at WSU may feel
a strong sense of belonging and identity, they may not find the same
belonging at other universities. Research indicates that this lack of belonging
intensifies for women, with female students
reporting higher levels of
discrimination based on their religious
As highlighted in
the theme ‘Transition from Law School into the Legal Profession’,
the intersecting identities of Muslim women also influence their transition
from law school to the legal profession. Additionally,
‘Fostering a Sense of Belonging and Islam in the Curriculum’
highlights that women of colour, in particular, are more likely to feel a
lack of belonging compared to other groups within the legal
As discussed above, although Student A’s experience at law school of
being among other students who are ‘visibly
is positive
overall, her experience is arguably ‘racialised’ in the way that she
is perceived by others. ‘Gendered
racialisation’ refers to the
intersectional analysis focusing on how Muslim bodies are coded both racially
and gender-wise,
influenced by expressions of religion and politics, such as the
symbolic significance of the hijab in distinguishing Muslim women
visibly from
For instance,
research by Nuray Karaman and Michelle Christian reveals that Muslim women
students experience racialisation and a
This emphasises
the significant roles played by intersecting factors such as nationality,
gender, racial body signification and religious-political
expression and how
Muslim women negotiate their racialisation through various coping strategies
shaped by their intersecting
identities.
Student A discusses the ‘raised eyebrows’, presumably from her
community, regarding her choice to study law rather than
teaching or arts, but
she counters this by noting that nowadays, boundaries are less
She copes by focusing
on her university experience, where she embraces diversity. Research indicates
that ‘familism’
among Muslim women in higher education has dual
implications, encompassing both positive and negative
Familism is defined
as the influence of familial bonds on decision-making processes and subsequent
behavioural outcomes among Muslim
The expectation to
take into consideration family and community for Muslim women adds to the
intersecting challenges. However, most
empirical research into the experiences
of Muslim women reject stereotypes depicting Muslim women leading ‘double
or their families as ‘backward’, instead emphasising
these women as active agents who challenge such
stereotypes.
We can see this
play out with Student A’s comment when she says that she enjoys the
experience of study and feels connected
to the university community.
Student B’s experience of the intersectional challenges she faced as a
single parent and ‘new English
resonates with
research findings on how Muslim women manage multifaceted identities
encompassing gender, religion, educational pursuits,
familial roles and cultural
background, including factors like ethnicity and wearing or not wearing a
In her case, being a
single parent and a new English speaker significantly influences her journey as
a Muslim law student, shaping
how she navigates these intersecting identities.
Student B’s experience also highlights the need for support systems and
practices to foster academic success and personal wellbeing.
As observed in the theme ‘Transition from Law School into the Legal
Profession’, these intersecting identities that Muslim
women face also
have an impact on their transition from law school to the law profession.
Students in our focus group, particularly
mature-aged female students such as
Student M and Student Z, expressed anxiety about their transition from law
school to the legal
profession. Also discussed under this theme, the
marginalisation of Muslim female students is compounded by barriers related to
networking,
as exemplified by the observation of Student F that ‘
Muslim girl, I wouldn’t be able to go to those locations where you can
connect with influential people
, get to know different individuals, and
establish connections for future job
prospects’.
These findings are also consistent with the results presented in the most
Islamophobia in Australia
This report underscores
that a significant majority of Islamophobia victims are
Possamai et al
similarly found that Muslim female students in Australia may experience a
heightened level of discrimination compared
to their male counterparts due to
their visibility and intersectional
This resonates with
the experiences of Muslim female students in the higher education sector in the
notably through the lens
of intersectionality acknowledging intersecting forces such as race, culture,
ethnicity, language, SES,
geographical location, religious interpretation and
religious-political
expression.
The students’ reflections about class participation reveal gender gaps
that are familiar to legal education. Scholars attribute
these disparities to
teaching methods like Socratic teaching styles, which can disadvantage women,
and suggest that institutional
environments historically dominated by
‘masculine virtues’ perpetuate barriers to gender
Research from the
US shows that despite women constituting approximately half of current law
school enrolment, they do not contribute
proportionally in classroom
discussions.
Studies such as
those referred to as ‘Speak Up’ across various law schools including
Harvard, Yale, Stanford, the University
of Chicago and the University of
Pennsylvania reveal systemic disparities in classroom participation between male
and female students.
studies consistently indicate that women speak less frequently than men,
influencing their overall educational experience,
self-confidence, grades and
professional outcomes.
In her research, Abdel-Fattah finds that Muslim students frequently feel
pressured to self-censor their political and religious expressions.
This concern
is further highlighted in the current climate, where new university policies may
limit students’ ability to, for
instance, openly express pro-Palestinian
views in the classroom.
in turn affects the ability of students to participate in classroom
discussions.
The complexity
of being both female and Muslim must be considered in relation to its
intersectional impact on classroom engagement
at Australian law schools. In
fact, consideration should go beyond simply providing alternative methods for
female students to engage
in class participation, such as discussion boards or
group work. It is important to also address the structural aspects: do Muslim
female law students feel seen and represented at law school? Are there Muslim
female academics on staff? Does the law school actively
foster connections with
Muslim women in the legal profession, inviting them to speak and engage with
students? Representation at
both academic and professional levels is also key to
creating an inclusive environment where Muslim female students feel supported
and acknowledged.
VI CONCLUSION
In this article, we argue that it is important to understand the lived
experiences of Muslim law students, particularly given the
lack of research on
the topic in Australia. A concern about the lived experience of Muslim students
in the current context is heightened
given Islamophobia Register statistics
indicate a rise in Islamophobia, with the most recent
Islamophobia in
report indicating alarming statistics that there has been more
than 2.5 times the number of offline/in-person incidents identified
compared to
previous reporting period
Additionally, the
current context of self-censorship, challenges to freedom of speech, academic
freedom and research related to Palestine
further emphasise the need to
understand the experiences of Muslim law students in Australian universities,
who are no doubt impacted
by these events.
This novel study, using a focus group methodology, provides a preliminary
insight into these experiences and advocates for greater
inclusivity in legal
education. We also considered some implications for the legal profession. We
caution against marginalisation
within the profession, which can occur despite
increased diversity in law schools. Our findings reinforce the need for systemic
that recognises the underlying inequalities that may hinder students from
non-traditional backgrounds from fully participating in
the legal profession. As
Australian law schools continue to diversify, it is crucial that both law
schools and the profession develop
more comprehensive mechanisms to better
support Muslim students and ensure their success.
We recognise that implementing these changes faces institutional and
structural challenges, such as competing priorities, limited
resources and
resistance to change in established pedagogical traditions. The legal profession
also struggles with cultural norms
that can perpetuate exclusion. However, law
schools can lead transformation by critically examining curricula, engaging with
communities and challenging norms that fail to serve all students.
Collaboration across stakeholders is also essential to create
spaces where
Muslim law students can contribute their perspectives without compromising their
identities. Future research could explore
the long-term impact of such
initiatives on career outcomes, conduct comparative studies on inclusivity
across law schools and examine
the tension between teaching religion in secular
universities, as well as the impact of university rules on free speech.
Ultimately,
true inclusivity requires continuous reflection and action to
dismantle barriers and create environments where students can thrive.
Senior Lecturer, School of Law, Western Sydney University.
Email: m.bhatti@westernsydney.edu.au.
Associate Professor, Sydney Law School, University of Sydney.
Email: Sandra.noakes@sydney.edu.au. This article was written on the
lands of the
Cabrogal Clan of the Darug Nation and the Gadigal people of the Eora Nation. We
are grateful to the anonymous reviewers
who provided feedback on this article
and to Ms Caitlin Konzen and Ms Maryam Hashimi who provided research
assistance.
Tim Pitman, ‘Widening
Participation in Higher Education: A Play in Five Acts’ (2017) 59(1)
Australian Universities’ Review
Aidan Ricciardo et al,
‘Understanding, Promoting and Supporting LGBTQI+ Diversity in Legal
(2022) 56(3)
The Law Teacher
<https://doi.org/10.1080/03069400.2021.1949183>; Mark Israel et al,
‘Fostering “Quiet Inclusion”:
Interaction and Diversity in the
Australian Law Classroom’
(2017) 66(2)
Journal of Legal Education
Lisa Andrewartha and Andrew
Harvey, La Trobe University,
Supporting Carers to Succeed in Australian
Higher Education
(Final Report, March 2021).
Kate de Bruin, ‘The
Impact of Inclusive Education Reforms on Students with Disability: An
International Comparison’
(2019) 23(7–8)
International Journal of
Inclusive Education
<https://doi.org/10.1080/13603116.2019.1623327>.
Ricciardo et al (n
Randa Abdel-Fattah,
‘Negotiating Australian Academia as a Historically White Settler Colonial
Institution: A Comparison between
Muslim and Non-Muslim Students’
Journal of Sociology
<https://doi.org/10.1177/14407833221110929>.
See Australian Human Rights
Commission,
Sharing the Stories of Australian Muslims
(Report, 2021)
Sharing the Stories
’); Susan Carland et al,
Islamophobia
in Australia: Report V 2023–2024
(Report, 2025); Andrew Markus,
Mapping Social Cohesion: The Scanlon Foundation Surveys 2020
Sharing the Stories
Carland et al (n
Jumana Bayeh and Nick
Riemer, ‘Palestine Solidarity and Zionist Backlash in Australian
Universities’ (2024) 33(3)
Middle East Critique
<https://doi.org/10.1080/19436149.2024.2334147>; Lana Tatour,
‘Censoring Palestine: Human Rights, Academic Freedom
and the IHRA’
(2024) 30(1)
Australian Journal of Human Rights
<https://doi.org/10.1080/1323238X.2024.2385504>; Sara Dehm,
‘Australian Universities and the “Plausible”
Genocide in Gaza:
What Are the Legal and Ethical Risks and Responsibilities?’,
Religion and Ethics
(online, 22 March 2024)
<https://www.abc.net.au/religion/australian-universities-icj-plausible-genocide-gaza/103620064>.
generally comments by the New South Wales Commissioner on Islamophobia,
Aftab Malik: Alexandra Jones and Jessica Bahr, ‘“Endemic
Unreported”: Islamophobia “Normalised” in Australia’,
(online, 24 January 2025)
<https://www.sbs.com.au/news/article/endemic-and-unreported-aftab-malik-says-islamophobia-normalised-in-australia/a0n6s1zm7>.
Ricciardo et al (n
) 307–8; Israel et al (n
Ricciardo et al (n
) 308; Sally Kift and Kana Nakano, Council of
Australian Law Deans,
Reimagining the Professional Regulation of Australian
Legal Education
(Report, 1 December 2021) 80–1.
Maxine Evers, Bronwyn
Olliffe and Angela Dwyer, ‘Law’s Not Hard; It’s Just Hard to
Get into: A Study of Alternative
Entry Students to Law School’
The Law Teacher
<https://doi.org/10.1080/03069400.2015.1126445>; Naveed Khan, ‘An
Evolution, Not a Revolution’
(2017) 91(10)
Law Institute Journal
Russell G Pearce and Sinna
Nasseri, ‘The Virtue of Low Barriers to Becoming a Lawyer: Promoting
Liberal and Democratic Values’
(2012) 19(2–
International
Journal of the Legal Profession
<https://doi.org/10.1080/09695958.2013.771125>; Avner Levin and Asher
Alkoby, ‘Is Access to the Profession Access to
Justice? Lessons from
Canada’ (2012) 19(2–
International Journal of the Legal
<https://doi.org/10.1080/09695958.2013.771123>; See
generally, Tina McKee et al, ‘The Fairness Project: The Role of Legal
Educators as Catalysts for Change’
(2021) 55(3)
The Law Teacher
<https://doi.org/10.1080/03069400.2020.1796061>; Lady Hale, ‘Lord
Upjohn Lecture 2021: “When There Are 12”’
(2021) 55(4)
Law Teacher
<https://doi.org/10.1080/03069400.2021.1966251>; Dennis Foley,
‘Quadrivum: So You Want to Be a Lawyer?’
[2014] IndigLawB 12
(2014) 8(11)
Law Bulletin
; Asian Australian Lawyers Association,
The Australian
Legal Profession: A Snapshot of Asian Australian Diversity in 2015
A Snapshot of Asian Australian Diversity in 2015
Kift and Nakano (n 13) 80; Michael Kirby, ‘Unmet Needs for Legal Services
in Australia: Ten Commandments for Australian
Law Schools’ (Leo Cussen
Justice Lecture, Australian Law Teachers’ Association Conference, 2015)
Lizzie Barmes and Kate
Malleson, ‘The Legal Profession as Gatekeeper to the Judiciary: Design
Faults in Measures to Enhance
(2011) 74(2)
<https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1468-2230.2011.00845.x>; Hilary
Sommerlad et al, ‘Race, Ethnicity and the Legal Profession’
Richard L Abel et al (eds),
Lawyers in 21
-Century Societies:
(Hart Publishing, 2022) 173
<https://doi.org/10.5040/9781509931248.ch-008>; Hilary Sommerlad et al,
Diversity in the Legal Profession in England and Wales: A Qualitative Study
of Barriers and Individual Choices
(Report, 2013) (‘
Diversity in
the Legal Profession in England and Wales
’); Hilary Sommerlad and Ole
Hammerslev, ‘Lawyers in a New Geopolitical Conjunction: Continuity and
Change’ in Richard
L Abel et al (eds),
-Century Societies: Volume 1
(Hart Publishing, 2020) 1
<https://doi.org/10.5040/9781509915170.ch-001>.
Asian Australian Lawyers
Association,
Cultural Diversity Focus Groups Project: Pilot Outcomes
(Report, 27 October 2022) (‘
Cultural Diversity Focus Groups
’); Jerome Doraisamy, ‘Cultural Diversity Cannot Be
Pushed to Backburner’,
Lawyers Weekly
(online, 25 September 2020)
<https://www.lawyersweekly.com.au/biglaw/29530-cultural-diversity-cannot-be-pushed-to-backburner>.
Mark Fathi Massoud,
‘The Price of Positionality: Assessing the Benefits and Burdens of
Self-identification in Research Methods’
(2022) 49(S1)
Journal of Law
and Society
S64 <https://doi.org/10.1111/jols.12372>.
Muslim Legal Network
(Website) <https://www.muslimlegalnetwork.com/>.
Sophie Gilliat-Ray,
Religion in Higher Education: The Politics of the Multi-Faith Campus
(Routledge, 2000) <https://doi.org/10.4324/9781315190495>; C John
Sommerville,
The Decline of the Secular University
(Oxford University
Press, 2006)
<https://doi.org/10.1093/acprof:oso/9780195306958.001.0001>.
Christine Asmar, Elizabeth
Proude and Lici Inge, ‘“Unwelcome Sisters?” An Analysis of
Findings from a Study of
how Muslim Women (and Muslim Men) Experience
University’ (2004) 48(1)
Australian Journal of Education
<https://doi.org/10.1177/000494410404800104>; Megan Louise Pedler, Royce
Willis and Johanna Elizabeth Nieuwoudt, ‘A
Sense of Belonging at
University: Student Retention, Motivation and Enjoyment’ (2022) 46(3)
Journal of Further and Higher Education
<https://doi.org/10.1080/0309877X.2021.1955844>; Mi Young Ahn and Howard
Davis, ‘Four Domains of Students’
Sense of Belonging to
University’ (2020) 45(3)
Studies in Higher Education
<https://doi.org/10.1080/03075079.2018.1564902>; Lauren AJ Kirby and
Christopher L Thomas, ‘High-Impact Teaching
Practices Foster a Greater
Sense of Belonging in the College Classroom’ (2022) 46(3)
Further and Higher Education
<https://doi.org/10.1080/0309877X.2021.1950659>; Daryl G Smith and Natalie
B Schonfeld, ‘The Benefits of Diversity:
What the Research Tells Us’
(2000) 5(5)
<https://doi.org/10.1177/108648220000500505>. See generally
Self-Determination Theory, which highlights how relatedness,
autonomy and
competence support students’ sense of belonging: Fiona McGaughey et al,
‘What Have We Here? The Relationship
between Law Student Attendance and
[2019] MonashULawRw 21
(2019) 45(3)
Monash University Law Review
Benjamin B Stubbs and
Margaret W Sallee, ‘Muslim, Too: Navigating Multiple Identities at an
American University’ (2013)
Equity and Excellence in
451 <https://doi.org/10.1080/10665684.2013.838129>; Nisreen
Alameddine, ‘Supporting Muslim Students through Culturally
Responsive, and Sustaining Pedagogies’ (2021) 52(2)
Canadian Social
22 <https://doi.org/10.29173/css20>; Mathew Guest et al,
Islam and Muslims on UK University Campuses: Perceptions and Challenges
(Report, 2020); Darnell Cole and Shafiqa Ahmadi, ‘Reconsidering Campus
Diversity: An Examination of Muslim Students’
Experiences’ (2010)
Journal of Higher Education
<https://doi.org/10.1080/00221546.2010.11779045>.
Christine Asmar, ‘A
Community on Campus: Muslim Students in Australian Universities’ in
Shahram Akbarzadeh and Abdullah
Saeed (eds),
Muslim Communities in
(University of New South Wales Press, 2001) 139.
Adam Possamai et al,
‘Muslim Students’ Religious and Cultural Experiences in the
Micro-publics of University Campuses
in NSW, Australia’ (2016) 47(3)
Australian Geographer
<https://doi.org/10.1080/00049182.2016.1191136> (‘Religious and
Cultural Experiences in the Micro-publics of University
Campuses’); Adam
Possamai et al, ‘Muslim Students’ Cultural and Religious Experiences
in City, Suburban and Regional
University Campuses in NSW, Australia’
(2016) 38(6)
Journal of Higher Education Policy and Management
http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/1360080X.2016.1211950
(‘Cultural and
Religious Experiences in City, Suburban and Regional University
Campuses’).
Asmar, Proude and Inge (n
Possamai et al,
‘Religious and Cultural Experiences in the Micro-publics of University
Campuses’ (n 25) 319–20.
Nayeefa Chowdhury,
‘Presenting Islam: The Role of Australia-Based Muslim Student
Associations’ (2006) 26(2)
Journal of Muslim Minority Affairs
Asmar, Proude and Inge (n
Possamai et al,
‘Cultural and Religious Experiences in City, Suburban and Regional
University Campuses’ (n 25) 643.
Asmar, Proude and Inge (n
See generally McGaughey et
Asmar, Proude and Inge (n
See generally Abdel-Fattah
David Weisbrot,
‘Recent Statistical Trends in Australian Legal Education’
[1991] LegEdRev 11
Legal Education Review
<https://doi.org/10.53300/001c.6010>; Israel et al (n
) 335–6; Kirby (n 15) 10–14.
Kift and Nakano (n 13)
Ricciardo et al (n
) 308. See also ibid.
See generally Charles
A Secular Age
(Belknap Press, 2007); Sherman A Jackson,
Islamic Secular
(Oxford University Press, 2024); Talal Asad,
of the Secular: Christianity, Islam, Modernity
(Stanford University Press,
2003); Salim Farrar and Ghena Krayem,
Accommodating Muslims under Common Law:
A Comparative Analysis
(Routledge, 2016)
<https://doi.org/10.4324/9781315867618>.
Sherman A Jackson,
‘The Islamic Secular’ (2017) 41(1)
American Journal of Islam and
170, 175 <https://doi.org/10.35632/ajis.v41i1.3424>.
Farrar and Krayem (n 45)
examine the extent to which secular systems have been able to and should
accommodate Muslims and their
religious practices. They argue that if Western
societies can accommodate racial and ethnic groups, then they should also
accommodate
Muslims, as the ability to practice or manifest religious belief is
a fundamental human right.
Pearce and Nasseri (n 15);
Levin and Alkoby (n 15); Kirby (n 15) 10–16; McKee et al (n 15)
283–4; Hale (n 15) 425–6;
Foley (n 15); Khan (n 14);
of Asian Australian Diversity in 2015
Foley (n 15). The authors
wish to make clear that we are not equating the experiences of First Nations
people with other minority
groups. However, Dennis Foley’s article argues
that increasing the number of First Nations law graduates may result in greater
access to justice for First Nations people.
Khan (n 14);
of Asian Australian Diversity in 2015
Brian Opeskin,
‘Dismantling the Diversity Deficit: Towards a More Inclusive Australian
Judiciary’ in Gabrielle Appleby
and Andrew Lynch (eds),
The Judge, the
Judiciary and the Court: Individual, Collegial and Institutional Judicial
Dynamics in Australia
(Cambridge University Press, 2021) 83, 88
<https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108859332.007>.
Evers, Olliffe and Dwyer (n
Sommerlad and Hammerslev (n
Lisa Webley et al,
‘Access to a Career in the Legal Profession in England and Wales: Race,
Class, and the Role of Educational
Background’ in Spencer Headworth et al
Diversity in Practice: Race, Gender, and Class in Legal and
Professional Careers
(Cambridge University Press, 2016) 198, 198
<https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781316402481.007>. See also Jennifer
Barton-Crosby
et al, National Centre for Social Research,
Judicial Diversity:
Barriers and Initiatives
(Report, February 2023); Sommerlad et al,
‘Race, Ethnicity and the Legal Profession’ (n 16) 190–1; McKee
(n 15) 287. The 2021 changes to the regulation of entry to practice as a
solicitor via the common Solicitors Qualifying Exam (‘SQE’)
promoted as a means of increasing access to the profession for people from
diverse backgrounds. See Solicitors Regulation Authority,
The Business Case
for Diversity
(Report, 2018). But see Jessica Guth and Kathryn Dutton,
‘SQE-Ezed Out: SRA, Status and Stasis’
(2018) 52(4)
<https://doi.org/10.1080/03069400.2018.1534341>;
Solicitors Regulation Authority, ‘Positive Results from First Ever SQE1
Assessment’ (News Release, 21 January 2022)
<https://www.sra.org.uk/sra/news/press/2022-press-releases/results-sqe1-assessment/>.
See generally Webley et al
(n 56); Barton-Crosby et al (n 56) 20–1; Sommerlad et al, ‘Race,
Ethnicity and the Legal
Profession’ (n 16) 190–1.
Anna Chronopoulou,
‘Neo-tribal Sociality in the Upper Echelons of the Legal Profession:
Issues of Race’ in Avis White,
Patricia Tuitt and Judith Bourne (eds),
The Long Walk to Equality: Perspectives on Racial Inequality, Injustice and
(University of Westminster Press, 2024) 55, 58
<https://doi.org/10.16997/book63.d>.
Ibid 58–9. See also
Webley et al (n 56) 210–12; Sommerlad et al,
Diversity in the Legal
Profession in England and Wales
Barton-Crosby et al (n 56)
26; Sommerlad et al,
Diversity in the Legal Profession in England and
(n 16) 8, 10, 55.
Sommerlad et al,
Diversity in the Legal Profession in England and Wales
(n 16) 51. See
also Barton-Crosby et al (n 56) 12, 24; Sommerlad et al, ‘Race, Ethnicity
and the Legal Profession’ (n
Sommerlad et al, Diversity
in the Legal Profession in England and Wales (n 16) 39.
Ibid 51. See also
Barton-Crosby et al (n 56) 25; Sommerlad et al, ‘Race, Ethnicity and the
Legal Profession’ (n 16)
Barmes and Malleson (n 16);
Barton-Crosby et al (n 56) 30.
Sommerlad et al,
‘Race, Ethnicity and the Legal Profession’ (n 16) 186.
This definition captures
the following: 1) participants with an Islamic background practicing Islam; 2)
participants with an Islamic
background but not practicing Islam or being
non-religious; and 3) non-Western participants who do not have an Islamic
background,
but felt they were seen as Muslim by coworkers or by their
non-Islamic environment due to their foreign-looking appearance: Sylvia
Raad, ‘Othering and Inclusion of Ethnic Minority Professionals: A Study on
Ethnic Diversity Discourses, Practices and
Narratives in the Dutch Legal
Workplace’ (PhD Thesis, Vrije Universiteit Amsterdam, 2015) 24.
See, eg, Webley et al (n
Kift and Nakano (n 13)
Sara Dehm, ‘Legal
Exclusions: Émigré Lawyers, Admissions to Legal Practice and the
Cultural Transformation of
the Australian Legal Profession’
(2021) 49(3)
Federal Law Review
http://dx.doi.org/10.1177/0067205x211016574
Ingmar Taylor and Chris
Winslow, ‘Data on Diversity: The 2018 Survey’ [2019] (Autumn)
39. See also Duncan Buchanan,
State of the Bar Report
29 January 2024) 39–41.
Opeskin (n 53)
See, eg, Urbis,
Annual Profile of Solicitors NSW
(Final Report, 26 May 2023) 12
2022 Annual Profile of Solicitors NSW Final Report
notes that 7 in 10 NSW solicitors were born in Australia (70%) and over one
quarter (30%) were born overseas. This
is consistent with recent years and in
line with the general population of NSW. Based on 2021 Census data, 29% of all
people living
in NSW were born overseas. The report further notes that
‘[t]he proportion of solicitors born in Asia is slowly increasing,
7% increase over the past 11 years’.
Cultural Diversity Focus
Groups Project
2022 Annual Profile of
Solicitors NSW Final Report
(n 78) provides more granular data about the
seniority, earnings, employment status, etc, on the basis of gender, but not on
basis of cultural background.
A Snapshot of Asian
Australian Diversity in 2015
These limitations are
acknowledged in the report and include the research being based on publicly
available information on law firm,
Bar and court websites; identification of the
cultural backgrounds being based on surnames; the short time frame in which the
was carried out; and the data not including tribunals, in-house
lawyers, academia and government lawyers: see ibid 5.
Cultural Diversity Focus
Groups Project
Ibid 28, 39.
Ibid 25, 39.
Kift and Nakano (n 13)
This study was conducted
under WSU’s Student TrAnsition and ReTention (‘STaRT’)
Umbrella Ethics Approval (H13567),
‘The Experience of Muslim Law
Students’ (Ethics Approval Subproject No H15117): ‘Research into
Student Retention’,
Western Sydney University
(Web Page, 10 April
<https://www.westernsydney.edu.au/learning_futures/home/curriculum_renewal/academic_transition/stars/research_and_publications>.
Pranee Liamputtong,
Focus Group Methodology: Principles and Practice
(SAGE Publications,
2011) 4 <https://doi.org/10.4135/9781473957657>.
Shirley K Comer, ‘The
Ethics of Conducting Educational Research on Your Own Students’
Journal of Nursing Law
National Health and Medical
Research Council, ‘National Statement on Ethical Conduct in Human Research
2023’ (Statement,
2023) 17 [2.2.9]. See also at ch 4.3. See also Comer (n
94); Scott DeVito, ‘Experimenting on Law Students: Why Imposing No
Constraints on Educational Research Using Law Students Is a Bad Idea and
Proposed Ethical Guidelines’
(2010) 40(2)
Southwestern University Law
; Mark MacLean and Gary Poole, ‘An Introduction to Ethical
Considerations for Novices to Research in Teaching and Learning in
(2010) 1(2)
Canadian Journal for the Scholarship of Teaching and Learning
http://dx.doi.org/10.5206/cjsotl-rcacea.2010.2.7
Muslim Legal Network (n
See generally Shabana Mir,
Muslim American Women on Campus: Undergraduate Social Life and Identity
(University of North Carolina Press, 2014)
<https://doi.org/10.5149/9781469610801_mir>; Line Nyhagen, ‘Mosques
as Gendered
Spaces: The Complexity of Women’s Compliance with, and
Resistance to, Dominant Gender Norms, and the Importance of Male Allies’
(2019) 10(5)
<https://doi.org/10.3390/rel10050321>.
‘vUWS’ is the
Learning Management System used by the University.
This has been found to be
appropriate in research of this nature, because it involves individuals
‘with strong connections
to the community of interest’ encouraging
other community members to join the focus groups and is more likely to increase
participation:
see Lori Peek and Alice Fothergill, ‘Using Focus Groups:
Lessons from Studying Daycare Centers, 9/11, and Hurricane Katrina’
Qualitative Research
<https://doi.org/10.1177/1468794108098029>.
The value of the gift
voucher was such that it was not likely to influence students’ decision to
participate in the research
but was a symbol of the authors’ respect for
the investment of time to participate in research: see Liamputtong (n 91)
These included the
WSU’s free counselling service, Hayat Line (a Muslim community Counselling
service), the Centre for Muslim
Wellbeing, Beyond Blue and Lifeline.
Participants were also advised that they could withdraw from the focus group
meeting if they
experienced distress, but that the information they had provided
up to that point could not be withdrawn from the study, because
it involved a
focus group. The facilitators of the focus groups were alert to the possible
need to interrupt the discussion if the
conversation moved into risky areas and
for signs of participant distress. In addition, the facilitators were made aware
of services
available to students and were instructed that, if a student
disclosed an instance of discrimination on campus, to acknowledge the
significance of the event. The facilitators were also advised to approach the
student after the focus group, to ask if the student
would be comfortable with
the researchers being provided with details of the event and/or the
student’s details to ensure that
the event is appropriately followed up
and investigated. As there was no instance of discrimination on campus disclosed
focus groups, this was not necessary.
Michelle M Falter et al,
‘Making Room for Zoom in Focus Group Methods: Opportunities and Challenges
for Novice Researchers
(during and beyond COVID-19)’ (2022) 23(1)
Forum: Qualitative Social Research
<https://doi.org/10.17169/fqs-23.1.3768>; Lekshmi Santhosh, Juan C Rojas
and Patrick G Lyons, ‘Zooming
into Focus Groups: Strategies for
Qualitative Research in the Era of Social Distancing’ (2021) 2(2)
176 <https://doi.org/10.34197/ats-scholar.2020-0127PS>; Scott
B Greenspan et al, ‘Use of Video Conferencing to Facilitate
Focus Groups
for Qualitative Data Collection’ (2021) 5(1)
American Journal of
Qualitative Research
85 <https://doi.org/10.29333/ajqr/10813>.
Hsiu-Fang Hsieh and
Sarah E Shannon, ‘Three Approaches to Qualitative Content Analysis’
(2005) 15(9)
Qualitative Health Research
<https://doi.org/10.1177/1049732305276687>.
Phillip O’Neill,
Centre for Western Sydney,
Where Are the Jobs? Part 1: Western Sydney’s
Short-Lived Jobs Boom
(Report, 2020).
‘About Greater
Western Sydney’,
Western Sydney University
(Web Page, 11 July 2022)
<https://www.westernsydney.edu.au/rcegws/rcegws/About/about_greater_western_sydney>.
‘Western Sydney
(LGA): Birthplace’,
.idcommunity
<https://profile.id.com.au/cws/birthplace>.
‘Western Sydney
(LGA): Language Used at Home’, .
idcommunity
<https://profile.id.com.au/cws/language>.
‘School Programs:
Widening Participation’,
Western Sydney University
<https://www.westernsydney.edu.au/schools-engagement/connecting-with-western/school-programs>.
‘Aboriginal and
Torres Strait Islander Student Success’,
Western Sydney University
<https://www.westernsydney.edu.au/future/student-life/aboriginal-and-torres-strait-islander-student-support>.
Achievement to Higher Education (PATHE)’,
Western Sydney University
<https://www.westernsydney.edu.au/schools-engagement/connecting-with-western/school-programs/pathe>.
‘Refugee, New and
Emerging Communities: Years 9–12, Current Students’,
Sydney University
<https://www.westernsydney.edu.au/schools-engagement/connecting-with-western/school-programs/refugee-new-and-emerging-communities>.
See, eg, ‘First
Foot Forward: Years 5–6’,
Western Sydney University
<https://www.westernsydney.edu.au/schools-engagement/connecting-with-western/school-programs/first-foot-forward>;
‘Fast Forward: Years 9–12’,
Western Sydney University
<https://www.westernsydney.edu.au/schools-engagement/connecting-with-western/school-programs/fast-forward>.
WSU bases low-SES status
on the students’ postcode of permanent home residence within the SES value
derived from the Postal
Area Index for Education and Occupation, in the
Australian Bureau of Statistics 2016 Census Socio-Economic Indexes for Areas:
Western Sydney University,
The Year in Review: Volume 1
Report, 2020) 55 tbl 7; Australian Bureau of Statistics,
Census of Population
and Housing: Socio-Economic Indexes for Area (SEIFA), Australia, 2016
(Catalogue No 2033.0.55.001, 27 March 2018)
<https://www.abs.gov.au/AUSSTATS/abs@.nsf/DetailsPage/2033.0.55.0012016?OpenDocument>.
Anna Cody and Sandy
Noakes, ‘Valuing Diverse Students: An Ethical Response to Building Success
in First-Year Law Students
and Broadening the Legal Profession’ (2022)
Legal Ethics
<https://doi.org/10.1080/1460728x.2023.2208964> (‘Valuing Diverse
Students’); Sandra Noakes and Anna Cody,
‘Building a (Self)
Reflective Muscle in Diverse First-Year Law Students’
[2022] LegEdRev 4
(2022) 32(1)
Legal Education Review
, 88 (‘Building a (Self) Reflective
Muscle’). This data supports the findings of a 2016 earlier report
concerning the
make-up of the student cohort in the WSU School of Law, which
found that it was ‘more diverse and socio-economically disadvantaged
... in traditional law schools, with a high incidence of students from low
socio-economic status backgrounds, who are first
in family to attend university
and who speak a language other than English at home’, and that 12% of
students entered the law
degree at WSU via a vocational education and training
pathway: Michelle Sanson,
WSU Law First Year Review
(Consultation Paper,
June 2016) 43.
Interview with Students
A, B, E, F, M, O, S and Z (Muslim Legal Network, Female Focus Group, 23 November
2022) (unpublished, copy
on file with authors) (‘Female Focus Group
Interview’).
Student B, ‘Female
Focus Group Interview’ (n 115) (emphasis added).
Student S, ‘Female
Focus Group Interview’ (n 115).
Student Z, ‘Female
Focus Group Interview’ (n 115).
Interview with Student J
(Muslim Legal Network, Male Focus Group, 23 November 2022) (unpublished, copy on
file with authors) (emphasis
added) (‘Student J Interview’).
Student Z, ‘Female
Focus Group Interview’ (n 115).
Student O, ‘Female
Focus Group Interview’ (n 115) (emphasis added).
Student A, ‘Female
Focus Group Interview’ (n 115).
Student F, ‘Female
Focus Group Interview’ (n 115) (emphasis added).
Student S, ‘Female
Focus Group Interview’ (n 115) (emphasis added).
Student Z, ‘Female
Focus Group Interview’ (n 115).
Interview’ (n 119).
Student E, ‘Female
Focus Group Interview’ (n 115).
Student A, ‘Female
Focus Group Interview’ (n 115).
Student Z, ‘Female
Focus Group Interview’ (n 115).
Student A, ‘Female
Focus Group Interview’ (n 115) (emphasis added).
Student B, ‘Female
Focus Group Interview’ (n 115).
Bethool Zehra Haider,
‘Asking the Muslim Woman Question: Understanding the Social and Legal
Construction of Muslim Women’
Berkeley Journal of Gender, Law
and Justice
, 103–8 <https://doi.org/10.15779/Z38X921K6B>.
Student F, ‘Female
Focus Group Interview’ (n 115).
Kenneth Khoo and Jaclyn
Neo, ‘Gender Gaps in Legal Education: The Impact of Class Participation
Assessments’
(2023) 20(4)
Journal of Empirical Legal Studies
<https://doi.org/10.1111/jels.12372>.
Anna Huggins and Alex
Steel, ‘The Relationship between Class Participation and Law
Students’ Learning, Engagement and
Stress: Do Demographics Matter?’
in Rachael Field, James Duffy and Colin James (eds),
Promoting Law Student
and Lawyer Well-Being in Australia and Beyond
(Routledge, 2016) 67, 67.
Interview’ (n 119).
Student B, ‘Female
Focus Group Interview’ (n 115).
Kift and Nakano (n 13)
Cody and Noakes,
‘Valuing Diverse Students’ (n 114) 65.
Student A, ‘Female
Focus Group Interview’ (n 115).
Abdel-Fattah (n
Rhonda Itaoui,
‘The Geography of Islamophobia in Sydney: Mapping the Spatial Imaginaries
of Young Muslims’ (2016) 47(3)
Australian Geographer
<https://doi.org/10.1080/00049182.2016.1191133>.
Abdel-Fattah (n
Productivity Commission,
Australian Government,
Access to Justice Arrangements: Productivity
Commission Inquiry Report
(Report No 72, 5 September 2014) vol 1, 246.
Kift and Nakano (n 13)
Cultural Diversity
Focus Groups Project
Student A, ‘Female
Focus Group Interview’ (n 115).
Van der Raad (n 68)
McKee et al (n 15)
See, eg, Susanna Menis,
‘Non-traditional Students and Critical Pedagogy: Transformative Practice
and the Teaching of Criminal
Law’ (2017) 22(2)
Teaching in Higher
<https://doi.org/10.1080/13562517.2016.1237492>.
David R Carroll and Ian
W Li, ‘Work and Further Study after University Degree Completion for
Equity Groups’
(2022) 44(1)
Journal of Higher Education Policy and
, 21 <https://doi.org/10.1080/1360080X.2021.1988841>.
Violetta Parutis and
Camille Kandiko Howson, ‘Failing to Level the Playing Field: Student
Discourses on Graduate Employability’
(2020) 25(4)
Research in
Post-Compulsory Education
<https://doi.org/10.1080/13596748.2020.1846312>.
Tenorio-Rodríguez, Teresa Padilla-Carmona and José
González-Monteagudo, ‘Between Adaptation
and Equity: Access to the
Labour Market for Non-traditional Students and Graduates’ (2022) 40(2)
Revista de Investigación Educativa
http://dx.doi.org/10.6018/rie.473771
Carroll and Li (n 169)
Sally Baker et al,
‘Disrupting Assumptions about Graduate Employability: Exploring Culturally
and Linguistically Diverse University
Students’ Graduate Capitals in
(2023) 45(2)
Journal of Higher Education Policy and
<https://doi.org/10.1080/1360080X.2023.2180165>.
Ibid 184–5.
Ibid 185. See also David
Gilani, ‘Creating Connections: The Role of Universities in Enhancing
Graduates’ Social Capital
and Challenging Nepotism’ (2020) 24(1)
Perspectives: Policy and Practice in Higher Education
<https://doi.org/10.1080/13603108.2019.1678528>.
Baker et al (n 173)
Des Butler et al,
‘Embodying Life-Long Learning:
and Capstone
Experiences’ (2017) 43(2)
Oxford Review of Education
<https://doi.org/10.1080/03054985.2016.1270199>. See also, eg, Sally Kift,
Karen Nelson and John Clarke, ‘Transition
Pedagogy: A Third Generation
Approach to FYE’ (2010) 1(1)
International Journal of the First Year in
Higher Education
1 <https://doi.org/10.5204/intjfyhe.v1i1.13>; Susan
Armstrong and Michelle Sanson, ‘From Confusion to Confidence:
Transitioning
to Law School’
[2012] QUTLawJJl 3
(2012) 12(1)
Law and Justice Journal
<https://doi.org/10.5204/qutlr.v12i1.467>; Leon Wolff and Maria Nicolae
The First-Year Law Experience: A New Beginning
(Halstead Press,
2014); Cassandra Sharp et al, ‘Taking Hints From Hogwarts: UOW’s
First Year Law Immersion Program’
(2013) 6 (1–2)
Journal of the
Australasian Law Teachers Association
Susan Armstrong and
Judith McNamara, ‘Transition Pedagogy in First and Final Year Law
Programs’ in Sally Kift et al
Excellence and Innovation in Legal
(LexisNexis Butterworths, 1
ed, 2011) ch 8, 208.
Mandy Shircore et al,
‘From the First Year to the Final Year Experience: Embedding Reflection
for Work Integrated Learning
in a Holistic Curriculum Framework’ (2013)
International Journal of the First Year in Higher Education
<https://doi.org/10.5204/intjfyhe.v4i1.158>. See also Sally Kift et al,
Curriculum Renewal in Legal Education
(Final Report, 2013) 43.
Butler et al (n 177)
Kift et al,
Curriculum Renewal in Legal Education
For a detailed analysis
of this literature, see Cody and Noakes, ‘Valuing Diverse Students’
(n 114) 73–5; Noakes
and Cody, ‘Building a (Self) Reflective
Muscle’ (n 114) 74–81.
Butler et al (n 177)
Van der Raad (n 68)
Marcia Devlin,
‘Bridging Socio-Cultural Incongruity: Conceptualising the Success of
Students from Low Socio-Economic Status
Backgrounds in Australian Higher
Education’ (2013) 38(6)
Studies in Higher Education
<https://doi.org/10.1080/03075079.2011.613991>; Marcia Devlin et al,
Effective Teaching and Support of Students from Low Socioeconomic Status
Backgrounds: Resources for Australian Higher Education
(Final Report, 2012);
Marcia Devlin and Jade McKay, ‘Reframing “the Problem”:
Students from Low Socio-Economic
Status Backgrounds Transitioning to
University’ in Heather Brook et al (eds),
Universities in Transition:
Foregrounding Social Contexts of Knowledge in the First Year Experience
(University of Adelaide Press, 2014) 97.
Devlin (n 192)
Ibid 944. See also Sarah
O’Shea et al, ‘Shifting the Blame in Higher Education: Social
Inclusion and Deficit Discourses’
(2016) 35(2)
Higher Education
Research and Development
<https://doi.org/10.1080/07294360.2015.1087388>.
Devlin and McKay (n 192)
Devlin (n 192) 943;
Darnell Cole and Araceli Espinoza, ‘Examining the Academic Success of
Latino Students in Science Technology
Engineering and Mathematics (STEM)
Majors’ (2008) 49(4)
Journal of College Student Development
<https://doi.org/10.1353/csd.0.0018>.
Paul Jewell et al,
‘Information Skills for Business Acumen and Employability: A Competitive
Advantage for Graduates in Western
Sydney’ (2020) 95(2)
Education for Business
<https://doi.org/10.1080/08832323.2019.1610346>.
Devlin and McKay (n 192)
Van der Raad (n 68)
Devlin (n 192)
940–2; Devlin and McKay (n 192) 99–101.
Devlin and McKay (n 192)
99. See also Karen Aschaffenburg and Ineke Maas, ‘Cultural and Educational
Careers: The Dynamics
of Social Reproduction’
(1997) 62(4)
Sociological Review
<https://doi.org/10.2307/2657427>.
Farenga, ‘Early Struggles, Peer Groups and Eventual Success: An Artful
Inquiry into Unpacking Transitions
into University of Widening Participation
Students’ (2018) 20(1)
Widening Participation and Lifelong Learning
60, 61 <https://doi.org/10.5456/WPLL.20.1.60>.
Ryan Naylor and Nathan
Mifsud, ‘Towards a Structural Inequality Framework for Student Retention
and Success’ (2020)
Higher Education Research and Development
259, 260 <https://doi.org/10.1080/07294360.2019.1670143>.
Webley et al (n 56).
Chronopoulou (n 58).
Elizabeth Bodamer,
‘Do I Belong Here? Examining Perceived Experiences of Bias, Stereotype
Concerns, and Sense of Belonging
in US Law Schools’
(2020) 69(2)
Journal of Legal Education
Asmar, Proude and Inge
Bodamer (n 213) 457.
See generally Zuleyha
Keskin and Mehmet Ozalp, ‘Islamic Studies in Australia’s
Universities’ (2021) 12(2)
<https://doi.org/10.3390/rel12020099>; Ann Black and Jamila Hussain,
‘Responding to the Challenge of Multiculturalism:
Islamic Law Courses in
Law School Curricula in Australasia’
[2006] FlinJlLawRfm 11
(2006) 9(2)
Flinders Journal of
; Halim Rane, Adis Duderija and Jessica Mamone, ‘Islamic
Studies in Australia’s Higher Education Sector’ (2021)
Australian Journal of Islamic Studies
Shaheen Sardar Ali,
‘Teaching and Learning Islamic Law in a Globalized World: Some Reflections
and Perspectives’
(2011) 61(2)
Journal of Legal Education
Ahmad Ghouri,
‘Pedagogy of Islamic Law in a Diverse Student Cohort: The Challenges and
Approaches to Teaching and Learning’
(2021) 7(2)
Journal of Educational
Sciences and Research
Ali (n 219) 230.
Abdel-Fattah (n
Max Margan, ‘From
Polygamy to the Age of Consent: Sydney University’s Elite Law School
“Teaching Students How
Elements of Sharia Could Be Integrated into
Australia’s Legal System”’,
Daily Mail Australia
(online, 14 July 2017)
<https://www.dailymail.co.uk/news/article-4693950/Sydney-University-s-Sharia-law-teachings-Australia.html>.
Abdel-Fattah (n
See Sally Kift and Karen
Nelson, ‘Beyond Curriculum Reform: Embedding the Transition
Experience’ (Conference Paper,
HERDSA Annual Conference, 3–6 July
See generally Possamai
et al, ‘Religious and Cultural Experiences in the Micro-publics of
University Campuses’ (n 25);
Possamai et al, ‘Cultural and Religious
Experiences in City, Suburban and Regional University Campuses’ (n
Bodamer (n 213) 456.
Student A, ‘Female
Focus Group Interview’ (n 115).
Saher Selod,
‘Gendered Racialization: Muslim American Men and Women’s Encounters
with Racialized Surveillance’
(2019) 42(4)
Ethnic and Racial
552 <https://doi.org/10.1080/01419870.2018.1445870>; Nuray
Karaman and Michelle Christian, ‘“My Hijab Is Like My
Color”: Muslim Women Students, Racialization, and Intersectionality’
(2020) 6(4)
Sociology of Race and Ethnicity
<https://doi.org/10.1177/2332649220903740>.
See generally Karaman
and Christian (n 233).
See generally Farzaneh
Khosrojerdi, ‘Muslim Female Students and Their Experiences of Higher
Education in Canada’ (PhD
Thesis, University of Western Ontario,
Student A, ‘Female
Focus Group Interview’ (n 115).
Hala Alnagar,
‘“Reclaiming Our Muslimness”: Intersectional Identities of
Muslim American Women College Students’
(PhD Dissertation, University of
California, Merced, 2021) 10.
Khosrojerdi (n 235);
David Tyrer and Fauzia Ahmad,
Muslim Women and Higher Education: Identities,
Experiences and Prospects
(Summary Report, 2006).
Student B, ‘Female
Focus Group Interview’ (n 115).
Alnagar (n 237).
Student F, ‘Female
Focus Group Interview’ (n 115) (emphasis added).
Carland et al (n
Possamai et al,
‘Cultural and Religious Experiences in City, Suburban and Regional
University Campuses’ (n 25); Possamai
et al, ‘Religious and Cultural
Experiences in the Micro-publics of University Campuses’ (n 25).
Tyrer and Ahmad (n
Khosrojerdi (n 235).
Zahra Rafie and Hemchand
Female Muslim Student Experiences in Higher Education: A Narrative
(Palgrave MacMillan, 2024)
<https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-031-41424-4>.
Karaman and Christian (n
233); ibid.
See generally Khoo and
Neo (n 139).
See generally Molly
Bishop Shadel, Sophie Trawalter and JH Verkerke, ‘Gender Differences in
Law School Classroom Participation:
The Key Role of Social Context’ (2022)
Virginia Law Review Online
See generally Lani
Guinier, Michelle Fine and Jane Balin, ‘Becoming Gentlemen: Women’s
Experiences at One Ivy League
Law School’
(1994) 143(1)
University of
Pennsylvania Law Review
; Judith D Fischer, ‘Portia Unbound: The
Effects of a Supportive Law School Environment on Women and Minority
(1996) 7(1)
UCLA Women’s Law Journal
<https://doi.org/10.5070/L371017668>; Khoo and Neo (n 139).
Caitlin Cassidy,
‘Australian Universities’ New Antisemitism Definition Has Some
Academics Worried: Here’s Why’,
The Guardian
(online, 28
February 2025)
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2025/feb/28/australian-universities-new-antisemitism-definition-impacts-go8>.
Abdel-Fattah (n
Carland et al (n 7)
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (281 KB)
PDF format (434 KB)
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter