URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/journals/HRD/2007/17.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 15:01:21
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Morris, Tony --- "1 year on - The new United Nations Human Rights Council" [2007] HRightsDef 17; (2007) 16(2) Human Rights Defender 15
1 Year On: The new United Nations Human Rights Council
The Commission on Human Rights
The New Council
The new United Nations Human Rights
Tony Morris
Human rights, along with development and security, constitute what Kofi
Annan, the former United Nations (‘UN’) Secretary
General, refers to
as the ‘three pillars’ for UN work. Recent reform has sought to
increase the institutional capacity
of the UN and cooperation among its state
party members in order to support the effective implementation of these pillars.
The centerpiece
of human rights reform, the new Human Rights Council
(‘Council’), first met in Geneva in July 2006. Some commentators
have anticipated that this heralds a ‘New Chapter for Human Rights’.
This article explores the first year of the Council.
The Commission on Human Rights
The Commission on Human Rights (‘Commission’) was established in
1946 by the UN Economic and Social Council to ‘promote
and protect human
For 60 years the Commission did some good
When it was established just after World War II there was
minimal human rights law. Since then the Commission has made an important
contribution to standard setting and developing the institutional capacity
required to promote and protect human rights. Significantly,
it drafted and
adopted the
Universal Declaration of Human Rights
, and drafted the
International
Covenant on Civil and Political Rights
International Covenant on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights
However, the Commission, as a political body consisting of member states,
increasingly became the subject of criticism from various
quarters. Up until
1989 a general polarisation between Cold War spheres of influence was evident.
Since then, many states have been
determined to avoid accountability for their
human rights obligations. Some of this criticism of the Commission was warranted
its overall credibility became the topic of discussion in the corridors of
Geneva’s Palais des Nations. States with poor human
rights records were
consistently selected as members. The Commission developed a reputation for
selectivity in the treatment of country
situations and a lack of objectivity in
debates. Double standards became a problem. At times, serious violations by some
would not be addressed, while resolutions would be adopted on
comparatively less serious situations. Other resolutions were watered
Regional groupings and subsequent bloc voting hindered open debate.
Important urgent action required to stop human rights violations did not always
happen. The system of Special Procedures
- independent rapporteurs
whose mandate is to examine, monitor and report on country human rights
or thematic issues
- were under threat, as
was the participation of civil society. The Commission only met for six weeks
each year, ensuring frantic
discussion for a short period while failing to
adequately address issues arising during the remainder of the year. These
indicated the poor collaboration between states, which consequently
weakened the potential for the Commission to contribute to the
protection of human rights and fundamental freedoms.
The High-level Panel’s report on ‘Threats, Challenges and
Change’ in 2004, along with Secretary General Annan’s
response in
2005, pointed to the end of the Commission. Annan’s words were strong. He
The Commission’s capacity to perform its tasks has been increasingly
undermined by its declining credibility and professionalism.
In particular
States have sought membership of the Commission not to strengthen human rights
but to protect themselves against criticism
or criticise others. As a result, a
credibility deficit has developed, which casts a shadow on the reputation of the
United Nations
as a system as a whole.
The Secretary
General asked states for a number of concessions: the replacing of the
Commission with a smaller Council; the creation
of a universal peer mechanism to
review the human rights performances of members; more regular meetings; and a
strengthening of the
position of human rights within the UN system. On 15 March
2006 the General Assembly (‘GA’) established the Council.
The New Council
“The Council’s institution building and its substantive human
rights work are central to the global protection of human
rights. At stake is
the will to collaborate and find multilateral solutions to major human rights
concerns of the day. . ”
The inaugural session of the
Council took place in Geneva on 19 June 2006. An important change is that the
Council meets more regularly
than its predecessor; it will meet at least three
times a year for a total of 10 weeks. At the time of writing, five regular
Unfortunately the Council was not
granted additional and four special sessions12 have been held. Council members
status within the
UN system akin to that enjoyed by the Security Council have
been reduced from 53 to 47, allowing for marginally fairer and the GA;
it is a subsidiary body of the GA.
proportional representation of
geographic groupings of the UN’s 192 state members; representation from
the Asian and African
groups has The Council was given one year for institution
Through a tedious process of negotiation and consensus modalities introduced
at the end of the Fifth Session in June 2007 were, on
the whole, positive.
The Special Procedures remain largely in tact, although two country mandates
– those of Cuba and Belarus - were removed. A new
appointment process was
developed. A Consultative Group made up of representatives of the regional
groups will recommend candidates
for mandates to the President of the Council,
who, after consultation with members of the Council, will then make
appointments. After
considerable debate, a Code of Conduct which sets out
criteria for mandate holders to follow in their work was agreed to.
A Universal Periodic Review was created to periodically review the extent to
which a state has fulfilled its human rights obligations
and commitments under
international law. All member states of the Council will be reviewed during
their membership, as will all observer
states over time. A Working Group
comprised of all member states and the President will review each state’s
performance. The
strength of the new mechanism will be the attention it draws to
a state’s human rights violations in a non-selective way due
compulsory nature of the review. Attention to the human rights records of states
who seek election to the Council will also
occur. A state’s technical
capacity to protect and promote human rights will be enhanced, as on the ground
assistance will
be provided by the Office of the High Commissioner for Human
Rights (‘OHCHR’) in the implementation of the report.
A Human Rights Council Advisory Committee (‘Committee’) replaces
the old Sub-Commission. Composed of 18 experts, the Committee
will act as a
think tank to the Council. Special Sessions can be convened far more easily and
there has been greater participation
of civil society.
Over the first year, enhanced non-government organisation (‘NGO’)
participation, combined with increased access to advocacy,
the ability to
present statements to the Council, and participate in interactive dialogues
between states and experts, has provided
Council debates with alternative
perspectives and evidence. The transparency of the process has accordingly
A Complaint Procedure is being developed to address consistent patterns of
gross and consistent violations. Based on the old 1503
two Working Groups will be established to examine communications and to bring
violations to the attention of the Council.
While the institution building of the Council has been largely positive, its
substantive record has been less impressive. At the first
session of the Council
in June 2006, hopes were high when two standard setting pieces of work were
completed: adoption by consensus
International Convention for the
Protection of All Persons from Enforced Disappearances
adoption by majority vote of the UN
Declaration on the Rights of Indigenous
The Council referred these instruments to the GA for
adoption. Further, a resolution extending the mandate of the Working Group
considering the elaboration of an Optional Protocol to the
International
Covenant on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights
for a further
two years was passed. The Chairperson of the Group was requested to present a
draft text in two years.
Cooperation seemed positive. This
continued into the next regular session where discussions were generally
constructive and positive,
except on the topic of the Occupied Palestinian
Territories. However, cooperation needs to be sustained during the discussions
a variety of challenging issues to ensure that the new Council does not
repeat the mistakes of the Commission. The Council’s
inability to address
many egregious human rights abuses continued, demonstrating a lack of
cooperation and multilateralism.
With one year passed it can be said that a lack of objectivity and balance
remains. The Council’s independent experts have had
minimal opportunities
to engage with the Council. In the second and third regular sessions some states
attacked individual mandate
holders. For example, Algeria, on behalf of the
African Group, attacked the Special Representative of the Secretary General on
Rights Defenders; Pakistan, on behalf of the Organisation of Islamic
Conference (‘OIC’), attacked the Special Rapporteur
on the Right to
Housing and the Special Rapporteur on the Right to Health; Nigeria attacked the
Special Rapporteur on Extrajudicial
Executions. The High Commissioner for Human
Rights (‘Commissioner’) failed to defend mandate holders when their
and independence were criticised. There has been limited debate
concerning the situation of human rights in Iraq and Afghanistan.
Many states
are careful not to introduce debate. For example, Russia will not engage in
debate about Afghanistan as it risks criticism
from the OIC for its own human
rights violations in Chechnya.
Polarisation has also continued. The Africa Group and the OIC portray
confrontation as characteristic of the North-South divide. When
the African
Group and OIC combine, they control the majority of votes. Their members are
urged to follow the position of the Group
and the OIC in return for protection
from future criticism. This practice was evident in the Council’s inaction
over atrocities
being committed in Darfur. Throughout the past year, the
Commissioner maintained a strong focus on Darfur, calling for urgent action
stop attacks on villages, the killing of civilians, rape and forced
displacement. However, the African Group and the OIC watered
down a resolution
condemning the Sudanese Government for aiding militia. Sudan is a member of the
African Group, the OIC and the
Arab League of States. Consequently, during the
Council’s third session the resolution merely expressed ‘deep
regarding the situation, avoiding any outright criticisms of the
Sudanese Government.
The African Group argues that double standards
exist, specifically, that the continuing acquiescence of the UN over
occupation of Palestine, and its implementation of policies and
actions which violate the human rights of Palestinians and Israeli
Arabs, erodes
the credibility of the Western European and Others Group in asking the Council
to condemn the Government of Sudan.
“The Council’s institution building and its substantive human
rights work are central to the global protection of human
rights. At stake is
the will to collaborate and find multilateral solutions to major human rights
concerns of the day. . ”
The Council’s
institution building and its substantive human rights work are central to the
global protection of human rights.
At stake is the will to collaborate and find
multilateral solutions to major human rights concerns of the day. The first 12
of the new Council has witnessed consensus on institution building.
However, in its substantive work, old rivalries have reappeared,
collaboration difficult. The Council’s first year provides a warning:
without international solidarity, collaboration
and consensus, the
interconnected pillars of human rights, development and security will not stand
as strong as they can, thereby
endangering quality of life, not just for the
world’s least powerful, but for all of us.
Dr Tony Morris wrote this article while working for the International
Service for Human Rights (ISHR), a Geneva based NGO. The contents
article are the personal views and comments of the author and do not necessarily
reflect the views of ISHR. Dr Morris is
now based in Phnom Penh working for a
development NGO.
UNESCO Res E/RES/9(II) (21 June 1946).
See M Nowak, ‘From the Human Rights Commission to the New
Council’ in J Almqvist and Isa Gomez,
The Human Rights Council:
Challenges and Opportunities
GA Res 217A(III) (10 December 1948).
All three are collectively known as the
International Bill of
There are five regional groupings within the UN system: WesternEuropean and
Others Group (WEOG); Eastern European Group (EEG); Group
of Latin American and
Caribbean States (GRULAC); Asia Group; African Group; as well as the powerful
Organisation of Islamic Conference
(OIC) and the Arab League of States.
. Special Procedures include special rapporteurs, representatives of the
Secretary General, independent experts and working groups.
. The UN has previously focused its attentions on Belarus, Burundi,
Cambodia, Occupied Palestinian Territories (OPT), Somalia, and
. Specific issues that have attracted the attention in the UN have included
adequate housing, arbitrary detention, extreme poverty,
human rights defenders,
rights to health, torture, trafficking in persons, and violence against women.
. Kofi Annan, ‘In larger freedom: development, security and human
rights for all’, Report of the Secretary-General of
the United Nations for
decision by Heads of State and Government in September 2005 (21 March 2005)
. GA Res 60/251. 170 Member States voted in favour of the Resolution with 4
voting against (United States, Israel, Marshall Islands
and Palau).
. 19-30 June 2006; 18 September-6 October 2006; 29 November-8 December
2006; 12-30 March, 2007; and, 11-18 June 2007.
. 5-6 July 2006 on the human rights situation in the Occupied Palestinian
Territory (‘OPT’) since 1967; 11 August 2006
on the human rights
situation in Lebanon caused by Israeli military operations; 3-15 November 2006
on Israeli military incursions
in the OPT, including Northern Gaza and the
assault on Beit Hanoun; 12-13 December 2006 on the human rights situation in
. Allocated seats are: African Group: 13 seats; Asian Group: 13 seats;
Eastern European Group: 6 seats; Latin American and Caribbean
Group: 8 seats;
and Western and Others Group: 7 seats. To be elected to the Council, a state
must achieve an absolute majority of
the 192 members of the General Assembly -
. GA Res 60/251[1].
. Working groups, whose task is to draft procedures for these mechanisms,
have been regularly meeting in Geneva for the last 12 months
and their final
drafts were adopted at the 5th Session of the Council, 11-18 June.
. ECOSOC Res 1503 (27 May 1970) as revised by ECOSOC Res 2000/3 (19 June
. HRC Res 1/1 (29 June 2006) A/61/53, 3.
.. HRC Res 1/2 (29 June 2006) A/61/53, 8.
. The protocol will allow for individuals or groups under the jurisdiction
of state parties to submit complaints of violations of
the Covenant after
domestic remedies have been exhausted.
. HRC Res 1/3 [2].
. HRC Res A/HRC/2/L.44.
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (39.3 KB)
PDF format (179 KB)
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter