URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/journals/UNSWLawJlStuS/2025/24.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 15:46:30
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Lu, Han --- "Navigating Chemical Pleasure and Legal Boundaries: Sexual Consent and Risk in the Chemsex Community" [2025] UNSWLawJlStuS 24; (2025) UNSWLJ Student Series No 25-24
NAVIGATING CHEMICAL PLEASURE AND LEGAL BOUNDARIES: SEXUAL
CONSENT AND RISK IN THE CHEMSEX COMMUNITY
This article examines the tension between
contemporary models of sexual consent and lived practices of chemsex. As
affirmative consent
gains prominence, the fluid, drug-mediated, and specific
dynamics of chemsex complicate its straightforward application. The article
provides a highly original theoretical intervention on how sexual consent is
formed, suspended, and renegotiated in chemsex. It approaches
this inquiry
through three interrelated dimensions: the role of drug practices, the voluntary
suspension of consent rights, and the
negotiation of sexual risk. Moving beyond
victim/perpetrator binaries, it proposes alternative models of legal agency
rooted in subcultural
logics and embodied experience. Reframing sexual consent
through the lens of drug-enabled, negotiated subjectivity offers a more
context-sensitive foundation for legal and normative analysis.
I INTRODUCTION
A Background and Context
term ‘chemsex’ emerged in the 21st century, and describes a practice
among gay and bisexual men of using drugs during
sexual activity, to heighten
sexual enjoyment, boost endurance and extend the length of
Methamphetamine and other
drugs (mephedrone, GHB, and GBL) are commonly used by the chemsex
community for pleasure
enhancement.
Many jurisdictions pay
little attention to chemsex and rarely use it in judicial
However, films
and television productions have brought public attention to the
possibility that chemsex relations offer insights
into the behaviours of chemsex
communities from a mainstream perspective – capturing how they lead to the
pursuit of chemically
mediated intimacy and how they create subcultures, and how
participants negotiate consent.
Chemsex is a stigmatised community, and it is difficult for individuals in this
community to place themselves in
The traumatic experiences
of homosexuals are constantly reactivated throughout their lives, creating a
vicious cycle of shame and
Thus, for many, chemsex as a form of healing is less about sexual
satisfaction than an attempt to respond to protracted social
marginalisation,
stigma, and psychic suffering.
It creates a space for belonging where pleasure can exist, allowing some
people to rise above their trauma or the echoes of
As the social and cultural significance of chemsex has
come under scrutiny, legal and ethical discussions have increasingly focused
one of the central issues: sexual
In chemsex, many participants reported having non-consensual sex, which has
sparked widespread scholarly concerns about sexual consent
in the context of
Much of the legal back
and forth has been focused on the affirmative consent model that centres on
ongoing, explicit agreement
Although this
framework has its significance, its applicability to the chemsex context
demonstrates both theoretical and practical
limitations that may lead to
over-penalisation of chemsex
participants.
This reductive
conception of motivation fails to account for key realities: the long-term
duration of chemsex encounters, altered
states of consciousness, and the complex
elements and relations of substances themselves as being both desires and
decision-makers.
affirmative consent has the intention of protecting
it might impose conservative or rigid standards that do not reflect the
complexities and fluidities of lived experience in
the context of
Investigating how
consent can still be productively realised – even in altered states
– helps clarify and reshape predominant
legal understandings of
autonomy, responsibility, and harm. Revisiting the framework of sexual
consent in the chemsex context
may provide new pathways to understanding the
inconsistencies between affirmative consent laws and ‘the many and varied
expressions
of human sexuality, and the many and varied contexts in which sexual
interactions take
Findings consistent with the dynamics and complexities of chemsex from a
combination of theoretical and practical perspectives can
shed light on sexual
consent as it is currently defined and regulated by statute.
B Literature Review
The question of sexual consent during chemsex is now
worth discussing, particularly with the development of affirmative consent in
recent years.
Two main scenarios
can be identified in chemsex: the first one is drug use first, then sex; the
second one is drug use during
In cases where drugs
are taken before sex starts, consent is generally considered legally void once
the person reaches incapacitation,
rendering any subsequent sexual activity
potentially criminal.
drug use before sex leads to incapacitation, the person is thereby unable to
effectively consent or refuse. A more complicated
situation, however,
emerges when drugs are used during the actual act of sex. The boundaries of
sober thought and intoxication
action here are easily traversed. Chemsex
typically involves prolonged, non-linear encounters with episodic drug use,
making it difficult
to evaluate a participant’s capacity to consent
at a given time point.
practices operate within complex ethical frameworks (especially in a political,
economic, and social context fraught with
contradictions), challenging
conventional legal assessments of controversial sexual acts in contexts
involving pleasure, altered
consciousness, and social
marginalisation.
Such contextualisation, broadened by theorising the social and cultural
insights of chemsex, is essential to understanding sexual
consent in this
It is worth repeating
that drug use is not incidental: it defines the experience, co-mingling with
pleasure, identity, and
social belonging.
is often negotiated in advance on digital platforms, through implicit norms, or
through mutual understanding in group contexts,
where expectations around a
prompt verbal yes–no exchange do not always fit the realities of the
interaction.
The community
also demonstrates a high level of self-regulation: most participants clearly
understand the substances involved,
the effects, and the general structure and
expectations of the encounters they are
Thus, this informed
participation counters the more rigid position that drug use nullifies consent
and makes room for reconsidering
how legal systems conceive of capacity,
intention, and responsibility in non-normative sexual
Instead of considering chemsex exchanges as
inherently incapable of granting legal consent, a more fine-grained
framework is
needed – one that acknowledges the potential for agency,
negotiated power exchange, and voluntary risk-taking. Modern legal
theories on
sexual consent must be challenged against the lived practices of
communities, where drug use, sexual behaviour,
and consent are co-constructed in
subversive yet intentional
As widely recognised in recent scholarship, sexual consent is inherently dynamic
and relational, with evolving social understandings
increasingly being absorbed
frameworks.
These developments raise a key question: Can subcultural practices such as
chemsex, with their anticipatory and negotiated consent
frameworks, inform more
context-sensitive legal conceptions of sexual consent? This article addresses
this question by turning to
three aspects: drug-mediated sexual subjectivity,
the suspension of rights, and risk negotiation.
C Legal Framework under the Australian Legal System
The central controversy in the issue of sexual consent in chemsex communities
is the dynamic relationship between the ability to consent
and drug use. In
terms of sexual consent, it is commonly defined as affirmative consent under the
laws of the Australian states and
territories. For example, New South Wales
defines sexual consent as ‘freely and voluntarily agree to the sexual
defines sexual consent as ‘free and voluntary
agreement’.
When someone
is under the influence of alcohol or drugs and is unable to consent to sex, the
sex that occurs at that point is considered
non-consensual.
The 2022 NSW
Sexual Consent Reforms go further by requiring that sexual consent must be
expressed by word or deed – ‘silence
is not consent’ –
and that reasonable steps must be taken to confirm the consent of the other
However, there is
ambiguity in the definition of incapacity in these laws, and such definitions do
not allow the public to understand
accurately.
This article
primarily analyses the legal framework of sexual consent as defined under the
Crimes Act 1900
(NSW) (as amended). It does not engage in a comparative
analysis across Australian or international jurisdictions.
In the chemsex context, parties often have sex after
reaching a state of
intoxication.
The impact of
drugs on the cognitive ability of an individual is very complex and is closely
related not only to the type of drug,
but also to the physical and psychological
state of the person. In
Director of Public Prosecutions v Poole
judge held that the effect of drug use on the person concerned should be
considered on a case-by-case basis and also depended
on factors such as the
seriousness of the offence.
DPP v Morgan
, by concluding that the
defendant’s drug use was completely unrelated to his violent behaviour,
the judge directly denied that
drug use had a significant impact on the
perpetrator’s subsequent
These cases reveal
the courts’ reluctance or inconsistency in acknowledging the substantial,
context-dependent impact that
drug use can have on both cognitive function and
subsequent behaviour.
The trend toward legislative reform of affirmative consent, which seeks to
increase the burden of proof on the defendant, has not
adequately responded to
the complexities of drug-mediated sexual practices. First, the law requires a
sexual offence case defendant
to demonstrate that he actively affirmed consent.
However, ‘collective consent’ may be tacitly recognised among
participants
in chemsex group parties, making it difficult for a defendant to
prove they discharged their legal
obligations.
Second, the
legislation and judgment also ignored the differences between the chemsex
subculture and the mainstream culture, where
affirmative consent is the trend in
law, but this instead exacerbated the legal risks for chemsex
participants.
II DISCURSIVE ALIENATION IN CHEMSEX DRUG PRACTICES
the chemsex community, the use of drugs is intricately interwoven with sexual
practices, making it untenable to delineate stages
of sexual activity based
solely on the timing of drug
consumption.
The prevalent
pattern is not linear but cyclical, often described as an intersection of drug
use and sex.
Notably, the
concept and effects of ‘drugs’ in this context are neither
monolithic nor inherently incapacitating. Rather,
the legal and social
definitions of ‘drugs’ (much like ‘pornography’) are
shaped by regulatory frameworks
that reflect broader governmental efforts to
categorise and control
behaviours.
Defining drugs
primarily through the lens of diminished autonomy overlooks that chemsex
participants deliberately and knowledgeably
use substances to achieve specific
sexual and social goals. For participants, drug use serves to heighten sexual
pleasure, enhance
performance, and mitigate anxieties surrounding sexual image,
rather than nullifying will or
The functional role of
substances here is distinct from conventional narratives of drug dependence or
Thus, within chemsex,
participants deliberately use substances as tools to enhance sexual pleasure,
performance, and social connection,
challenging narratives of loss of control or
incapacitation.
A Non-Linear Nature of Drug Use
In the setting of chemsex, the use of drugs is extremely intractable.
That complexity is reflected not just in the diversity
of drugs and their
use, but also in their deep entanglements with sexual
expression.
Chemsex should not
simply be understood as a single act of drug use, but rather a series of
ritualised, negotiated and context-dependent
arrangements embedded in particular
cultural and social contexts.
These arrangements couch drugs within and throughout the entire process of
sexuality, serving to enhance sexual pleasure and
connection.
Notably, drug use in
chemsex is highly cyclical rather than a linear or one-off experience;
individuals can use drugs over hours
or days, resulting in the constant
displacement and enhancement of
In one study, some chemsex participants reportedly injected drugs on an hourly
Also, the combination of
chemicals with alcohol intensifies the affective and embodied experience of
‘the scene’ –
a socio-cultural space of sexualised risk and
performative
It thus may be too reductive to consider chemsex as a series of fragmented
activities in separate behaviours. This makes
the certain moment of sexual
consent and its legal interpretation impossible to quantify, and chemsex needs
to be seen as a compound,
fluid and holistic process.
B Subversion of Traditional Drug Narratives
In the chemsex context, the traditional stories of drug dependence or abuse
are hard to apply to the chemsex community, so arguments
consent that rely on this narrative perspective are untenable. Society often
constructs people who use drugs as pathological
existences stripped of
subjectivity and agency, embedding them within a crime and disorder
Using legislation,
law enforcement, and propaganda mechanisms, the state defines illicit
‘drugs’ as wholly negative
objects and stigmatises people who
are involved in drugs as potential social
The ‘war in
drugs’, an oppressive campaign to criminalise people who oppose the state,
including those who oppose wars,
racial segregation, and heteropatriarchy,
negates the subjectivity of illicit drug-using
communities.
fear-based control paradigm, reinforced by legal narratives, dismisses a complex
set of motivations and practices among
participants.
Indeed, drugs are
frequently employed in chemsex to increase sexual pleasure, to prolong
acts of sexualised behaviour and to
foster emotional connection, serving
distinct functional and pragmatic
Researchers have noted
that the ‘effects of drugs’ do not emerge from the chemical
properties of the substances
themselves but their intermingling with bodies,
technology and power in certain social
Chemsex participants
interpret drugs not as intruding control of the body but as mediating
agents for sexual gratification
and intimacy, and as means of evading
Using GHB, for
instance, makes it feel like the person is indulging, while MDMA adds
excitement to the need to be touched,
Therefore, chemsex
practices cannot be adequately understood through conventional frameworks that
treat drug use as inherently criminal
or pathologise sexual risk as disordered
or deviant.
We must articulate a
greater understanding of the social role of drugs and re-examine the meaning at
the junction of sex, law, and
sexual consent in chemsex.
C Challenge of Informed
Participation
It is important to highlight that the chemsex
community is highly proactive and desirous to use particular, illicit drugs,
which destabilise
the ingrained assumptions based on the ‘consent’
frameworks utilised in legal
discussions.
Despite evidence of
strategic engagement, prevailing legal and public health narratives continue to
frame chemsex participants through
stereotypical lenses. The prevailing
discourse relies on the ‘passive addict’ metaphor, which fails to
capture the reality
of most drug-using communities, including the chemsex
Most of the time,
chemsex participants possess an informed understanding of drugs, the effects and
the risks involved and use this
knowledge as a foundation to decide whether to
engage in a specific chemsex behaviour or
Not only does this
proactivity reflect in drug intake, but also in the planning of sexual behaviour
and social strategies.
example, in a chemsex community, it is common for sex dating platforms to
be used to find partners with the same
And they communicate
preferences (including boundaries and expectations) and design the sexual
encounters themselves in terms of
what type of drug will be used, mode of use
(eg, injection) and how often the drug will be
This intentionality
extends even further: for some, drugs are even a necessary medium for
sexual functioning, such that some
participants are unable to perform sex acts
or reach sexual climax without the use of these
substances.
Importantly, this
reliance is not born of subconscious indulgence at all; it is the result
of a conscious seeking of pleasure,
intimacy and inclusion in a
By enhancing identity
within the gay community, chemsex motivates participants to use drugs and
actively participate in these practices
In such a context,
‘consent’ is no longer a static legal proposition, but a
process that is animated and reshaped
through interactions with bodily states,
social situations and personal histories. The active use of drugs, the clear
boundary setting
and tactical deployment of the act by chemsex participants
indicates a logic of consent not captured by the legal logic of
consent. By interrogating the legal logic of sexual consent against the
background of highly contextualised practices
such as chemsex, we can better
understand and delineate more precisely the expression, and ultimately the
codification, of individual
will manifest as sexual autonomy.
III SUSPENDED
RIGHTS: AMBIGUITY AND CONTEXTUALISATION
A Legal Foundation of Voluntary Rights Suspension
In the chemsex community, individuals, as rights-bearing subjects, often
voluntarily suspend their right to sexual consent under the
use of drugs. This
suspension reflects a voluntary recalibration of sexual autonomy, where
participants consciously negotiate power
dynamics through prior agreement,
rather than a simple waiver of rights. Within this framework, sexual consent can
hardly be reduced
to a binary state of ‘yes’ or ‘no’, as
the pattern of chemsex is inherently fluid and
Some participants may
voluntarily divest themselves of their legal right to consent and suspend it in
a particular field under rational
control. This not only illustrates the
potential for suspension to be embedded in drug use but also highlights the
applicability
of the concept of ‘consensual non-consent’ to this
than coercion or oppression, such arrangements are negotiated roles and power
It is similar to the
consensual nature of the ‘risk-aware consensual kink’
(‘RACK’) model in the BDSM
In particular, before
drug use, many participants had already communicated, set preferences, and
expressed their will through social
platforms, constructing a complex and
predetermined consensual
This form of
‘prior consent’ challenges existing legal definitions of the
immediacy and continuity of sexual consent.
Therefore, to understand sexual
consent in chemsex, it is necessary to move away from the framework of
affirmative consent to the
dimension of negotiated power suspension and transfer
to more accurately assess the embodiment of sexual
In this context, the
act of substance use itself constitutes a figurative manifestation of power
suspension, where the participant
actively puts the body and consciousness into
a non-conscious state to experience a sensory dimension that would be
inaccessible
in a rational
B Pre-negotiation Networks
Further, through conscious acts of power suspension, participants in chemsex
not only reconfigure the operative boundaries of sexual
autonomy but also
redefine their subjectivity in sexual
Their role in this
mode of interaction is not a passive object or victim, but rather a subject who
deliberately participates in the
construction of power relations in a particular
While it is true that substances like GHB and methamphetamine do affect the body
and mind of the individuals who partake, that effect
does not entirely abolish
the subjects’ abilities of judgement and
In various contexts,
medication is taken to attain an even more heightened or targeted sexual
experience, rather than to just
elude rational
Thus, active acts of suspension should be understood as a reassertion of bodily
autonomy rather than a denial of the capacity for
Such acts invert
traditional jurisprudential narratives of victim-perpetrator dichotomies and
instead emphasise how individuals can
achieve self-empowerment through voluntary
submission.
In practice,
drug-related behaviours often involve setting boundaries and determining risk
tolerance before using drugs.
Those acts are not expressed in the form of a contract, but are characterised by
informed consent in a substantive
Therefore, this
suspension of rights should be understood by the law as a free-will choice,
rather than as evidence of impaired sexual
C Judicial Quantification Dilemma
From the perspective of legal regulation, the phenomenon of suspension of
rights in chemsex shakes the logic underlying the current
mechanism for
assessing sexual consent.
the legal consent model, sexual consent must be maintained throughout the sexual
act, and individuals must remain conscious
and capable of giving consent for it
to remain legally valid.
However, the realities of chemsex often fails to meet this requirement: for
example, if a participant clearly expresses his or her
desire to have sex before
the effects of a drug become apparent, or gives consent by ingesting the drug or
responding to the other
person’s behaviour, there is no uniform standard
for determining whether his or her silence during the subsequent period of
impaired consciousness constitutes continuous
This challenge is
likely to arise in judicial practice, particularly in situations where a
participant experiences partial memory
loss after drug use, making it difficult
to reconstruct the sequence of
In such cases,
determining whether consent was present could place courts in a highly complex
and uncertain position, especially
under affirmative consent
While there is
currently no case law in jurisdictions like NSW, such scenarios highlight
potential interpretive difficulties in future
applications of the law –
particularly in subcultural contexts like chemsex, where communication norms may
To address the unique
practices of chemsex communities, the law must break out of its formalistic
constraints and recognise the legitimacy
of the suspension of autonomy by
negotiation. Only by constructing a paradigm of sexual consent that focuses on
the experiences and
intentions of the participants can the law truly respond to
the complexity and diversity of the chemsex community, and thus realise
substantive progress in the protection of sexual autonomy by the
IV RISK NEGOTIATION
A Internalisation of Subcultural Risk and Responsibility
Chemsex is inherently risky, and participants perceive and manage it through
their own experiences and interactions with others as
an autonomous
self-risk-taking behaviour.
Informal norms are generated from the collective practical experience of chemsex
participants accumulated over a long and sustained
period of involvement in
chemsex parties.
Attending a
chemsex party is not likely to be an accidental event, but a routine practice
deeply embedded in the lifestyles of specific
This repetitive
participation shapes a field of interaction with unique behavioural expectations
and sexual language.
Within this
field, participants gradually develop cognitive preconceptions about the typical
context of a sex party, for example,
the frequent flow of sexual encounters
throughout a party may make it a norm for individuals to have sex with
Under the influence
of drugs and prolonged sexual encounters, individuals may experience a blurring
of the distinction between long-term
sexual partners and casual participants,
and may be more likely to engage in sexual activity with unspecified
Through actively
choosing to enter and repeatedly integrating into such scenarios, many
participants come to accept, and even seek
out, the experience of such highly
uncertain interactions as a pleasurable practice in
risk-taking.
In this sense,
uncertainty of sexual partners constitutes an established feature of the chemsex
party, reflecting a cultural posture
of voluntary
risk-taking.
Sexual consent
exhibits a high degree of contextualisation and challenges the legal
understanding of explicit, continuous consent
models in this
environment.
As such, the negotiation of risk in chemsex communities can provide valuable
insights for moving beyond the simple victimisation/harming
dichotomy to a more
nuanced understanding of collective responsibility and contextualised consent
mechanisms for the attribution
of legal responsibility in chemsex
B The Influence of Subculture and Bodily Tacitness on
Consent Models
The chemsex community is not only a collection of people participating in
negotiated behaviours, but also a subcultural community
constructed through
specific cultural experiences, ethical identities and practical
Many individuals
enter this community to pursue a sense of belonging, escape from social
discrimination, and even the psychological
self-repair.
In this process,
the identification of subcultural identity strengthens the trust mechanism and
sense of responsibility within the
community, and to a certain extent, blurs the
traditional line between autonomous choice and legal responsibility – both
terms of private duties owed to others (consent), and public duties owed to
the state (criminal
liability).
Similar to other subcultural formations, the internal structure and norms allow
participants to understand the practice of chemsex
through a group lens rather
than an individualistic
In this community,
sexual consent is often communicated not through explicit language, but by
relying on body language, behavioural
practices, and group tacit
understanding.
However, this
tacit agreement is not always symmetrical: experienced participants or those who
pursue sexual stimulation more overtly
may interpret silence or passivity as
tacit consent, while newcomers or more conservative participants may perceive
the same behaviour
as hesitation or
In addition, the
effects of drugs may also impair individuals’ ability to accurately
interpret the intentions or emotional
states of others in the
That said, this does
not mean that participants’ behaviour is entirely passive or lacking in
autonomy – on the contrary,
individuals actively choose to enter these
arenas while sober, accepting the inherent ambiguity and uncertainty in such
From this perspective, sexual consent is not a static expression of a specific
moment in time, but a dynamic process of negotiation
and reconfiguration that
evolves with the state of consciousness, power structures and community
While not unique to chemsex communities, these dynamics foreground how chemsex
practices can expose broader limitations in legal
and normative understandings
of sexual consent, particularly those shaped by heteronormative assumptions that
privilege static, binary
communication.
C Informed Risk and Voluntary Participation
The key premise underpinning the acceptance of
risk-taking in the practice of chemsex is that participants voluntarily and
enter a sexual space that is known to be characterised by a high
degree of risk. Although participants’ judgement may be physiologically
impaired by drug intake, decisions to participate in chemsex in the first place
are mostly made in a sober
On a practical
level, such gatherings may be initiated by acquaintances or convened through
social platforms, and are usually informed
in advance of the situational
expectations associated with anonymous sexual
Anonymity and
uncertainty are embedded features of chemsex subculture, actively maintained
through community norms rather than incidental
byproducts.
Engagement in
chemsex tends to be an act based on explicit intent, and participants usually
undergo a series of preparations, such
as taking PrEP medication to reduce the
risk of infection.
This pattern of subjectively motivated behaviour
demonstrates that they voluntarily and independently entered into this
Analogous to players
in a rugby match entering the playing field with the knowledge of the risk of
collision, participants in chemsex
consciously accept uncertainty as part of a
negotiated and embodied
This leaves room for further legal reflection on the
boundaries between ‘implied consent’ and ‘informed
participation’,
and prompts us to revisit the applicability of the legal
definition of sexual consent in the context of chemsex.
V CONCLUSION
Drugs are voluntarily adopted in chemsex
communities, blurring the normative legal binary between sober consent and
intoxicated
incapacity. The view that drug use is irrational, hedonistic
or coercive misses the culturally derived, socially mediated,
self-conscious realities of chemsex as a
Drugs in chemsex
serve functional purposes, which far from numbing agency: such purposes include
enhancing intimacy, facilitating
social bonding, and enabling participants to
redefine their sexual roles and
boundaries.
In these fluid,
nonlinear encounters, the legal concept of affirmative consent, which
involves continuous, explicit, informed,
and voluntary agreement, becomes unfit
for purpose.
Rather than presupposing that altered
consciousness always negates the potential to consent, the law must grapple with
a more nuanced
reality. This includes recognising the possibility of
meaningfully negotiating the terms of consent prior to drug ingestion, and
manifesting those terms during an altered state through established norms,
practices, and anticipatory communication. The chemsex
community challenges
orthodox framing where sexual consent is defined as an explicit and ongoing
process, instead presenting it as
a negotiated experience embedded in social
context, bodily awareness, and affective orientation.
In sexual encounters involving drug use, chemsex participants
demonstrate a clear awareness of the associated risks, entering
experiences with intentionality and a high level of
preparation.
Through prior
negotiations, common expectations, and a finely-tuned set of community norms,
they construct frameworks of sexual consent
that, while different from
mainstream legal models, are far from being devoid of agency or ethical content,
as the binary model may
suppose. In this context, the chemsex community can be a
locus of legal innovation – one in which the perimeters of autonomy,
and consent are continually negotiated. The legal system needs to break with the
binary logic of consent-no consent that now
governs sexual assault laws if it is
to respond adequately to these complexities. Chemsex practices can illuminate
more nuanced and
contextualised understandings that include negotiated power
suspension, voluntary submission and informed participation as expressions
of sexual autonomy with value. Legal reform must recognise contextual
agency by developing consent frameworks that actually
respond to or even prevent
harm rather than regulating the vast variety of human sexual expression. This
could manifest as statutory
recognition of pre-negotiated consent protocols,
subject to judicial review for indicators of coercion.
Florêncio, ‘Chemsex Cultures:
Subcultural Reproduction and Queer Survival’ (2023)
Sexualities
‘Mephedrone and crystal meth are
physiological stimulants, increasing heart rate and blood pressure, as well as
triggering euphoria
and sexual arousal. GHB (and its precursor GBL) is a
powerful psychological disinhibitor and also a mild anaesthetic’: Hannah
McCall et al, ‘What Is Chemsex and Why Does It Matter?’ (2015) 351
BMJ (Online)
h5790:1–2, 1.
Entering the term
‘chemsex’ into the Lexis+ Australia database only returns this case,
and the core issue of the case
is not chemsex:
Mann v Serendipity WA Pty Ltd
(Advanced Personnel Management)
[2023] NSWPICMP 633.
This documentary exposes
frankly and intimately a dark side to modern gay life. Traversing an underworld
of intravenous drug use
and weekend-long sex parties, it broadens the
understanding of people outside this group. However, it partially deviates from
perspective of those who benefit from chemsex: Chemsex (William Fairman and
Max Gogarty, 2015).
Hordyk and Wanslea Family
Services Inc
[2022] WASAT 117.
Stephen Morris, ‘Yes,
Has No Meaning If You Can’t Say No: Consent and Crime in the Chemsex
Context’ (2019) 19(1)
Drugs and Alcohol Today
Tom Platteau et al, ‘The
Problematic Chemsex Journey: A Resource for Prevention and Harm Reduction’
(2019) 19(1)
Drugs and Alcohol Today
Susanne Druckler et al,
‘Sexual Consent and Chemsex: A Quantitative Study on Sexualised Drug Use
and Non-Consensual Sex among
Men Who Have Sex with Men in Amsterdam, the
Netherlands’ (2021) 97(4)
Sexually Transmitted Infections
Annette Bohn et al,
‘Chemsex and Mental Health of Men Who Have Sex with Men in Germany’
Frontiers in Psychiatry
542301:1–10, 4.
Pineau et al, ‘Affirmative Consent and Due
Diligence’ (2018) 46(2)
Philosophy and Public Affairs
Janet Halley, ‘The
Move to Affirmative Consent’ (2016) 42(1)
Signs: Journal of Women in
Culture and Society
McKie et al, ‘Is There Space for Our Stories? An
Examination of North American and Western European Gay, Bi, and Other Men Who
Have Sex with Men’s Non-Consensual Sexual Experiences’ (2020) 57(8)
Journal of Sex Research
1014, 1015.
This report was published before legislative reform
in New South Wales and mentions the legislative purpose of shifting to
affirmative
consent: New South Wales Law Reform Commission,
Relation to Sexual Offences
(Report No 148, September 2020) 137–8.
Morris (n 6) 23.
Queensland Law Reform
Commission,
Review of Consent Laws and the Excuse of Mistake of Fact
(Report No 78, June 2020) 85, quoting Queensland Law Society, Submission to
Queensland Law Reform Commission,
QLRC Review of Consent Laws and the Excuse
of Mistake of Fact
(4 February 2020) 4.
Katelyn Rose Malae,
‘Policy Relay: How Affirmative Consent Went from Controversy to
Convention’ (2022) 65(6)
Sociological
Perspectives
Platteau et al, ‘Drug Behaviors, Sexually
Transmitted Infection Prevention, and Sexual Consent during Chemsex: Insights
in the Budd App after Each Chemsex Session’ (2023) 11
Frontiers in Public Health
1160087:1–6,
Morris (n 6) 26.
Philippe Trouiller et al,
‘Injecting Drug Use during Sex (Known as “Slamming”) among Men
Who Have Sex with Men:
Results from a Time-Location Sampling Survey Conducted in
Five Cities, France’ (2020) 79
International Journal of Drug Policy
102703:1–7, 3.
Sharif Mowlabocus,
‘Fucking with Homonormativity: The Ambiguous Politics of Chemsex’
(2023) 26(5–6)
Sexualities
Amanda Wilson and Iain R
Williamson, ‘“Navigating Risk and Responsibility?” A
Mixed-Methods Study Addressing Stigma
and Well-Being Among Men Who Have
“Sex on Chems” with Other Men in the English Midlands’ (2024)
Healthcare (Basel)
2479:1–21, 8–12.
LJ Hunter et al,
‘Recreational Drug Use in Men Who Have Sex with Men (MSM) Attending UK
Sexual Health Services Is Significantly
Higher than in Non-MSM’ (2014)
Postgraduate Medical Journal
Zixin Wang et al,
‘Influence of Social Media on Sexualized Drug Use and Chemsex among
Chinese Men Who Have Sex with Men: Observational
Prospective Cohort Study’
(2020) 22(7)
Journal of Medical Internet Research
e17894:1–19,
Alysha-Karima Ahmed et al,
‘Social Norms Related to Combining Drugs and Sex (“Chemsex”)
among Gay Men in South
London’ (2016) 38
International Journal of Drug
Filippo Maria Nimbi et al,
‘Chemsex in Italy: Experiences of Men Who Have Sex with Men Consuming
Illicit Drugs to Enhance
and Prolong Their Sexual Activity’ (2020) 17(10)
Journal of Sexual Medicine
1875, 1878–9.
Rowland Atkinson and Tammy
Ayres (eds),
Shades of Deviance: A Primer on Crime, Deviance and Social
(Routledge, 2
ed, 2022) 66.
Malae (n 17). See also J
Wilkerson et al, ‘Sexual Violence and
Chemsex among Substance-Using Sexual and Gender Minorities in Texas’
(2021) 56(14)
Substance Use and Misuse
Crimes Act 1900
Crimes Act 1958
Crimes Act 1900
(n 29) s 61HJ(1)(c).
‘Affirmative Consent
Becomes Law in NSW’,
NSW Government
(Web Page, 1 June 2022)
<https://dcj.nsw.gov.au/news-and-media/media-releases-archive/2022/affirmative-consent-becomes-law-in-nsw.html>.
In addition, it should be emphasised that the 2022 NSW Sexual Consent Reforms
remained judicially untested at the time of writing.
This legislation lists
circumstances in which there is no consent. When it comes to using drugs, the
clause says ‘the person
is so affected by alcohol or another drug as to be
incapable of consenting to the sexual activity’. This statement is too
and does not clearly define the circumstances of drug use, which largely
depends on the judge’s judgment:
Crimes Act 1900
(n 29) s 61HJ.
Florêncio (n 1).
Director of Public
Prosecutions v Poole
[2015] TASCCA 10.
Director of Public Prosecutions (Acting) v
[2015] TASCCA 11
(2015) 28 Tas R 365.
While voluntary
intoxication is not a legal defence in legislation, its impact on a
person’s capacity to form intent or to
give and interpret consent should
be carefully considered, particularly in contexts involving complex drug use
such as chemsex:
Crimes Act 1900
(n 29) s 428.
Marie Claire Van Hout et
al, ‘Chasing the Rainbow: Pleasure, Sex-Based Sociality and Consumerism in
Navigating and Exiting
the Irish Chemsex Scene’
(2019) 21(9)
Health and Sexuality
Pineau (n 11).
McCall (n 2) 1.
Ngai Sze Wong et al,
‘Delineation of Chemsex Patterns of Men Who Have Sex with Men in
Association with Their Sexual Networks
and Linkage to HIV Prevention’
International Journal of Drug Policy
102591: 1–8.
Florêncio (n 1)
Bourne et al,
The Chemsex Study: Drug Use in
Sexual Settings among Gay and Bisexual Men in Lambeth, Southwark and
(London: Sigma Research, 2014) 41–8.
Jorge Flores-Aranda et al,
‘Let’s Talk about Chemsex and Pleasure: The Missing Link in Chemsex
Services’ (2019)
Drugs and Alcohol Today
Bourne (n 43).
Zila M Sanchez et al,
‘Sexual Behavior among High School Students in Brazil: Alcohol Consumption
and Legal and Illegal Drug
Use Associated with Unprotected Sex’ (2013)
Kristian Møller and
Jamie Hakim, ‘Critical Chemsex Studies: Interrogating Cultures of
Sexualized Drug Use beyond the
Risk Paradigm’ (2023) 26(5–6)
Sexualities
Jamie Hakim and Kane Race,
‘The Gay Scientist: Kane Race on the Unexpected Possibilities of
Experimental Intimacies’
(2023) 26(5–6)
Sexualities
Trouiller (n 20).
Hirshfield et al, ‘Substance Use and High-Risk
Sex among Men Who Have Sex with Men: A National Online Study in the USA’
(2004) 16(8)
1036, 1040–1. See also Engin F Isin and Greg
Acts of Citizenship
Macmillan, 2008).
Florêncio (n 1) 558.
Song and Jize Jiang, ‘Coercive Rehabilitation
and Therapeutic Control: How the Police Navigate the Penal-Welfare Nexus in
Drug Governance’
Policing and Society
Michelle Alexander,
The New Jim Crow: Mass
Incarceration in the Age of Colorblindness
(New Press, rev ed, 2012)
75–109; Gideon Lasco and Vincen Gregory Yu, ‘Taking Flight:
Narratives, Logistics, and Risks
of Chemsex Scenes in the Philippines’
(2024) 61(5)
Journal of Sex Research
Pienaar et al, ‘Drugs as Technologies of the
Self: Enhancement and Transformation in LGBTQ Cultures’ (2020) 78
International Journal of Drug Policy
102673:1–9, 2.
Fay Dennis,
Bodies in More-than-Human Worlds
(Routledge, 2019) 21.
Íncera-Fernández et al, ‘Understanding Sexualized Drug Use:
Substances, Reasons, Consequences, and Self-Perceptions
among Men Who Have Sex
with Other Men in Spain’ (2023) 20(3)
International Journal of
Environmental Research and Public Health
2751:1–15, 8.
Maitena Milhet et al,
‘Chemsex Experiences: Narratives of Pleasure’ (2019) 19(1)
and Alcohol Today
Florêncio (n 1)
Patrick O’Byrne and
Dave Holmes, ‘Drug Use as Boundary Play: A Qualitative Exploration of Gay
Circuit Parties’
(2011) 46(12)
Substance Use and Misuse
Monica J Barratt, Matthew
Allen and Simon Lenton, ‘“PMA Sounds Fun”: Negotiating Drug
Discourses Online’
(2014) 49(8)
Substance Use and Misuse
Flores-Aranda (n 44)
VL Gilbart et al,
‘Sex, Drugs and Smart Phone Applications: Findings from Semistructured
Interviews with Men Who Have Sex
with Men Diagnosed with Shigella Flexneri 3a in
England and Wales’ (2015) 91(8)
Sexually Transmitted Infections
Ahmed (n 25).
Milhet (n 59) 14–15.
Amelia M Stanton et al,
‘“It’s How We Get to Know Each Other”: Substance Use,
Connectedness, and Sexual
Activity among Men Who Have Sex with Men Who Are
Living with HIV’ (2022) 22(1)
BMC Public Health
Jaspal, ‘Chemsex, Identity and Sexual Health
among Gay and Bisexual Men’ (2022) 19(19)
International Journal of
Environmental Research and Public Health
12124:1–16, 12.
McKie (n 13).
Sophie Franklin et al (eds),
Consent: Legacies,
Representations, and Frameworks for the Future
(Routledge, 2024)
Ibid 61–71.
In the BDSM community,
although sexual behaviour may involve risks, it is considered ethically
acceptable as long as the behaviour
is based on the participants’ full
understanding of the risks and their voluntary consent: Brandy L Simula,
Power, and Pain: A Review of the Literature on the Experiences
of BDSM Participants’ (2019) 13(3)
Sociology Compass
Wang (n 24).
Rittenhour and Michael Sauder, ‘Identifying
the Impact of Sexual Scripts on Consent Negotiations’ (2024) 61(3)
Journal of Sex Research
Lindsay Palmer et al,
‘Chemsex and Harm Reduction Practices Among Men Who Have Sex with Men in
Malaysia: Findings from a Qualitative
Study’ (2024) 56(4)
Psychoactive Drugs
585, 587–8.
Jaspal (n 69)
Nikolay Lunchenkov et al,
‘“A Way to Liberate Myself”: A Qualitative Study of Perceived
Benefits and Risks of
Chemsex among Gay, Bisexual, and Other Men Who Have Sex
with Men in Almaty, Kazakhstan’ (2024) 264
Drug and Alcohol
112464:1–11.
Belinda Brooks-Gordon and Euan Ebbitt, ‘The
Chemsex “Consent Ladder” in Male Sex Work: Perspectives of Health
on Derailment and Empowerment’ (2021) 10(2)
Social Sciences
69:1–17, 7–8.
Johanna Schwarz et al,
‘What Chemsex Does to the Brain: Neural Correlates (ERP) Regarding
Decision Making, Impulsivity and
Hypersexuality’ (2025)
Archives of Psychiatry and Clinical Neuroscience
275:227–40.
Ine Vanwesenbeeck,
Understanding Sexual Agency. Implications for
Sexual Health Programming’ (2021) 2(4)
Julian A Rodriguez,
‘Lesbian, Gay, Bisexual, Transgender, and Queer Media: Key Narratives,
Future Directions’ (2019)
Sociology Compass
e12345:1–10, 2–3.
Corinne Herrijgers et al,
‘Harm Reduction Practices and Needs in a Belgian Chemsex Context: Findings
from a Qualitative Study’
(2020) 17(23)
International Journal of
Environmental Research and Public Health
9081:1–18, 7–8.
Sam Szoke-Burke and Kaitlin
Y Cordes, ‘Mechanisms for Consultation and Free, Prior and Informed
Consent in the Negotiation
of Investment Contracts’
(2021) 41(1)
Northwestern Journal of International Law and Business
Here, the notion of
‘suspension of rights’ refers not to the legal revocation or
limitation of state-bestowed rights,
but rather to an individual’s
voluntary or involuntary suspension of their natural rights – such as the
capacity for
self-determination – within the context of chemsex. This
usage departs from the legal understanding of rights as institutional
and instead frames rights as personal, embodied faculties that can be
consciously relinquished or functionally lost due
to chemical impairment.
Crimes Act 1900
Brooke de Heer, Meredith
Brown and Julianna Cheney, ‘Sexual Consent and Communication Among the
Sexual Minoritized: The Role
of Heteronormative Sex Education, Trauma, and Dual
Identities’
(2021) 16(5)
Feminist Criminology
Lauren A Smith, Katerina Z
Kolokotroni and Rhys Turner-Moore, ‘Making and Communicating Decisions
Drug-Involved Sex: A Thematic Synthesis’
(2021) 58(4)
Journal of Sex Research
Milena Popova,
(MIT Press, 2019) 83–5.
Chemsex practices highlight the limitations of
affirmative consent laws, which often assume sobriety, clarity, and linear
communication.
While reforms in NSW are well-intentioned, there is little
evidence they will reduce sexual violence, suggesting a deeper structural
in how consent is legally framed.
In 1989, Feinberg discussed
risk-taking in criminal law. He believed that if someone fully understands the
risks and still voluntarily
takes them, this choice may be voluntary enough and
should not be subject to coercive intervention: Joel Feinberg,
Limits of the Criminal Law Volume 3: Harm to Self
(Oxford University Press,
1989) 98–142. See also: Oscar
Cano-Ruiz and
Lupicinio Íñiguez-Rueda, ‘Community Experiences and
Strategies of Risk Management within Chemsex
Practices: A Qualitative
Study’ (2024) 29(6)
Ciência and Saude Coletiva
e10752023:1–10.
Michael du Plessis and Kathleen Chapman,
‘Queercore: The Distinct Identities of Subculture’ (1997) 24(1)
College Literature
Nimbi (n 26) 1877.
Jaspal (n 69) 8.
Alastair Macfarlane,
‘Sex, Drugs and Self-Control: Why Chemsex Is Fast Becoming a Public Health
Concern’ (2016) 42(4)
BMJ Sexual and Reproductive Health
This aligns with theories
of cultural criminology, particularly the notion of edgework, where individuals
engage in risky behaviours
not despite the danger but because of the subjective
rewards such experiences offer: Stephen Lyng,
Edgework: The Sociology of
Risk-Taking
(Routledge, 2005); Jacob W Richardson, ‘Queering
Edgework’ (2024) 5(1)
Journal of Autoethnography
Milhet (n 59)
Franklin (n 71)
In academic discourse,
scholars have long critiqued the victim/perpetrator binary as overly simplistic,
noting its limitations in
accounting for ambivalence, mutuality, and contextual
complexity in sexual encounters: Cynthia Godsoe, ‘The Victim/Offender
Overlap and Criminal System Reform’
(2022) 87(4)
Brooklyn Law
; Nicola Gavey,
Just Sex? The Cultural Scaffolding of Rape
(Routledge, 2005). While legal reforms such as the
Crimes Legislation
Amendment (Sexual Consent Reforms)
(NSW) articulate an
ostensibly neutral approach to consent – emphasising voluntary agreement
and mutual communication –
this legislation can obscure structural power
dynamics in practice. For instance, it declares that ‘every person has a
to choose whether or not to participate in a sexual activity’, and
that ‘consent to a sexual activity is not to be presumed’:
(n 29) s 61HF. However, this universalist framing may obscure the
socio-cultural dynamics of power, especially in subcultural contexts
chemsex, where normative expectations and drug-induced states challenge
conventional legal models of consent.
Jordan DX Hinton et al,
A Systematic and Meta-Analytic Review of Identity
Centrality among LGBTQ Groups: An Assessment of Psychosocial Correlates’
Journal of Sex Research
Marcus Gertzen et al,
I Can’t Get No Satisfaction”:
Psychosocial Aspects and Awareness of Negative Impacts in Chemsex Users’
(2024) 14(7)
Brain Sciences
666:1–21, 2.
Mundy et al, ‘The Complex Social, Cultural and
Psychological Drivers of the “Chemsex” Experiences of Men Who Have
Sex with Men: A Systematic Review and Conceptual Thematic Synthesis of
Qualitative Studies’ (2025) 13
Frontiers in Public Health
1422775:1–31, 26.
‘Mediated Intimacies: Raw Sex, Truvada, and the Biopolitics of
Chemoprophylaxis’ (2015) 18(1–2)
Sexualities
Van Hout (n 38).
Wilkerson (n 28)
Adam Bourne et al,
‘“Chemsex” and Harm Reduction Need among Gay Men in South
London’ (2015) 26(12)
International Journal of Drug Policy
Pablo Santoro et al,
‘One “Chemsex” or Many? Types of Chemsex Sessions among Gay
and Other Men Who Have Sex with
Men in Madrid, Spain: Findings from a
Qualitative Study’ (2020) 82
International Journal of Drug Policy
102790:1–7, 3–5. This also reflects the broader dynamic of suspended
autonomy discussed earlier.
Rittenhour (n 75).
de Heer (n 87).
Laura H Goldstein and
Jane E McNeil,
Clinical Neuropsychology: A Practical Guide to Assessment and
Management for Clinicians
(J. Wiley, 2004) 99–119.
Van Hout (n 38)
Cano-Ruiz (n 92)
Steven Maxwell, Maryam
Shahmanesh and Mitzy Gafos, ‘Pre-Exposure Prophylaxis (PrEP) Uptake and
Adherence Experiences of Gay
and Bisexual Men Who Engage in Chemsex: A
Qualitative Study’ (2022) 103
International Journal of Drug Policy
103630:1–6, 3–4. Although preparation behaviours such as taking PrEP
medications do not inherently address the risks
associated with consent, they
demonstrate that participants in chemsex are consciously reducing biomedical
risks and can be used
as evidence of their active participation.
In this context, while a
homosexual male’s repeated participation in chemsex may indicate informed
engagement with its norms
and risks, it does not necessarily amount to tacit
consent to specific sexual acts unless such acts have been explicitly
negotiated.
This is consistent with the analysis outlined in Part III.
Stephen W West et al,
‘Injury Rates, Mechanisms, Risk Factors and Prevention Strategies in Youth
Rugby Union: What’s
All the Ruck-Us About? A Systematic Review and
Meta-Analysis’ (2023) 53(7)
Sports Medicine
Gertzen (n 103).
Florêncio (n 1)
Cano-Ruiz (n 92).
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (109 KB)
PDF format (323 KB)
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter