URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/journals/MqLawSymp/2006/1.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 15:21:47
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Croucher, Rosalind F; Stewart, Cameron --- "Conversations on Law, Religion and Medical Science" [2006] MqLawSymp 1; (2006) 1(1) Macquarie Law Symposium 1
CONVERSATIONS ON LAW, RELIGION AND MEDICAL SCIENCE
ROSALIND F CROUCHER
CAMERON STEWART
I THE MACQUARIE LAW SYPOSIUM
The idea for the ‘Syposium’ developed from the Macquarie
Lectures. The Lectures have provided a focus for a special presentation
year by Distinguished Visiting Professors to the Division of Law, Macquarie
University. In 2005 we held the Macquarie Lecture
in the Banco Court of the
Supreme Court of New South Wales. George P Smith, II of the Columbus School of
Law, Catholic University
of America, was our Distinguished Visiting Professor.
His title for the Lecture was as memorable as George’s journal pieces:
‘Of Panjandrums, Pooh Bahs, Parvenus, and Prophets: Law, Religion and
Medical Science’. The audience comprised invited
guests representing the
legal, academic and wider communities. Given that it was our 30th anniversary
year, it also provided an opportunity
to create space for a new kind of dialogue
in the form of the
Macquarie Law Symposium.
The concept is consonant
with the motto of Macquarie University – ‘And gladly teche’
– and with the nature
of our speaker, George Smith, himself. The concept
builds upon the idea of ‘gladly learning’ and ‘gladly
We hope that the Macquarie Lecture will become the basis of a
series of occasional publications in which leading scholars in the
field of the
speaker might be invited to make comments in response. The dialogue is imagined
not as a finite conversation, verse
and response, but more in the nature of a
relay – using the ideas in the lecture as a trigger for intellectual
engagement,
or jousting, in turn inviting others to pick up the threads of the
debate. Gladly teaching; gladly learning; and gladly teaching
in turn. The idea
Macquarie Law Symposium
In this inaugural issue of the
Macquarie Law Symposium
presented George’s Macquarie Lecture and the responses to it from some of
Australia’s finest legal academics.
Those who have picked up the baton in
George’s dialogue are leaders in the health law field, and in the study of
law and religion,
both nationally and internationally. In his body of work
George has engaged each of us in differing ways. As Justice Michael Kirby
commented in his speech commemorating the founding of the Chair in
George’s honour at the University of Indiana, ‘[George]
obligations, and the means, to respond. But will we have the imagination and the
courage to follow?’
George P Smith II first came to Australia in the mid-1980s. He was a Visiting
Professor, on one of his now many, and regular, visits
to Australia. On that
occasion he was the Fulbright Visiting Professor of Medical Law and Medical
Jurisprudence.
It was 1984. A momentous year. Orwellian indeed. The
Artificial Conception
(NSW) was passed. It rang a bell for those intrigued by property,
inheritance and medical law questions. For some it may have seemed
beginning of the end. The new dawn of the Frankenstein era. Philosophically, it
was fascinating.
By this time George was already a household name in medical law circles
– renowned for pushing the boundaries – and for
the incredibly witty
and sharp style of his law review pieces. One of his articles that a struck a
chord with the time was ‘Through
a Test Tube Darkly: Artificial
Insemination and the Law’.
jousted with the questions of the day: artificial insemination and adultery;
artificial insemination and illegitimacy;
artificial insemination and
inheritance. It went into the ‘perhaps’ zone:
Perhaps controlled breeding is a dangerous and foolhardy undertaking. Perhaps
determining the size and quality of a family is a human
right, inextricably
related to human dignity. Perhaps attempting to interfere with the natural
process of procreation would ruin
the very fiber of our
But George did not leave his conclusion in the air. He ventured upon
One fact does remain: population forecasts indicate that ours will soon be an
overpopulated world if appropriate steps are not taken.
Improve the quality by
public sueprvision? Absurd! Yet, who would have ever dreamed of test-tube
In such passages George toyed with eugenics – in the
‘perhaps’ zone – but only in the loving sense –
to families, linked to human dignity, linked to ability to love and be loved.
‘Appropriate’ to George, was, if
one might venture upon it, always
linked to love. If he was construed in any other sense he was misinterpreted,
misconstrued.
George was indeed a ‘pilgrim’ as he has come to call himself,
taking time to spend time with all around
him. He listened. He gave gentle counsel. He guided. Most of all, he engaged.
Clerk amongst the group making the pilgrimmage to Canterbury in
Canterbury Tales
(1342-1400),
it can be said of
George that:
Sounding in moral virtue was his speech:
And gladly would he learn and gladly
George’s path has been an odyssey. Some would say he has ‘tilted
at windmills’. But, windmills or not, he has engaged,
and often driven, a
dialogue in bioethics from 1976. In, one might say, a very ‘70s’
fashion, ‘love’ has
been his catchcry. Love/unlove –
loving/unloving – have been
in his writing. His
writings show him to be fundamentally a social utilitarian, but one in which
utilitarian approaches are as nothing
without love. Utility, for George, is an
expression of love, but only if it is loving in its ramifications. ‘Life
preserved’, yes, but only ‘when it holds a potentiality
for human relationships’.
Life, death,
disease, sex, are focused through a ‘loving lens’. It is the
capacity for love that defines life –
and death. The ability to love is
the definition of a useful life. But utilitarianism with a loving lens can still
be brutal. Love
subjectifies the utilitarian: softens it, but it is utilitarian
George’s passion and enthusiasm for scholarly engagement – and
those who will engage with him – is positively infectious.
He has a magic
touch. But it is also the touch of the ‘Devil’s advocate’
– as George is not one to back
off from an argument. He jousts rigorously
and enthusiastically, with an ‘utter rejection of quiet orthodoxy and
understatement’, as the Hon Justice Michael Kirby has
George is socratic in his teaching
style and bullish in his writing. He perhaps poses more questions than he
answers, but he has
never been shy of asking them; and repeatedly. His questions
and his manner of asking them have prompted much continuing enquiry
George came to Sydney, a pilgrim again, in 2005. He came as the Distinguished
Visiting Professor to Macquarie Law school in a celebratory
30th anniversary of the admission of our first law students. He came to present
the Macquarie Lecture for 2005 as
a special tribute to the Michael Kirby. This
was an elegant conjunction. The Hon Justice Michael D Kirby AC CMG had been the
of Macquarie University from 1984 to 1993. The judge, like many of
us, had met Professor Smith in the 1980s and continued a lively
conversation
from that time.
Justice Kirby paid tribute to George in a particular way in 2000 when Indiana
Unviersity celebrated the endowment of the George P
Smith II Distinguished
Visiting Chair of Law and Legal Research to broaden students’ exposure to
scholars and judges of national
and international reputation and to allow
distinguished visiting scholars the opportunity to do research at Indiana
University School
of Law. Justice Kirby delivered an address to inaugurate the
endowment of the Chair on Australia Day,
He remarked:
I have watched with fascination and admiration his remarkable career and
virtually unequalled scholarly output. He did not choose
a safe area of the law
with perimeters charted in the Year Books and dilemmas that had been scrutinized
for centuries. Instead,
his inquisitive mind took him into the most puzzling
interface of law and modern technology; he simply could not leave the topics
alone. He cogitated, analyzed, lectured, and wrote. All the time, the scientific
and technological foundation for his studies was
dramatically.
George’s foundational principle in love was acknowledged by Justice
Kirby when he recalled the words of St Paul’s first
letter to the
Corinthians in his tribute to George.
described these words as ‘so familiar to people of all religions, and no
religion’ and as those that explain ‘the
dilemmas which bioethicist,
lawyer, and philosopher must face and how none of us is excused from the
obligation to face them’:
Love never faileth: but whether there be prophecies, they shall fail; whether
there be tongues, they shall cease; wheterh there be
knowledge, it shall vanish
For we know in part, and we prophesy in part.
But when that which is perfect is come, then that which is in part shall be
When I was a child, I spake as a child, I understood as a child, I thought as
a child: but when I became a man I put away childish
For now I see through a glass, darkly; but then face to face: now I know in
part; but then shall I know even as also I am known.
And now abideth faith, hope and love, these three; but the greatest of these
The principle of love is one that, in George’s theoretical framework,
makes sense of human rights. In this Justice Kirby agrees:
‘Like Professor
Smith, I have always thought that the foundational idea behind respect for the
human rights of family and strangers,
indeed of every other member of our
species and beyond, is a love that we potentially feel for them as creatures
whose lives are
overwhelmingly similar to or shared with our
But law demands more. Love is well enough and good. But law requires
pinpoints: definition – beginnings and ends – responsibilities.
is accepting and forgiving; law is questioning and demanding. In investing in
love as a theoretical linchpin George is ultimately
tilting at windmills.
Beautiful windmills. But windmills still. Law is a harder beast.
George is aspirational. And law – especially medical law – needs
its aspirational framework. As Kirby remarked at the
end of his address,
‘George Smith holds up the light of his scholarship to the rest of us. He
sheds light into dark and mysterious
places, where the darkness threatens to
encircle us and the mysteries deepen and multiply into a gloom. For this we must
be grateful’.
Kirby ‘crossed
the world’, as he said, to pay tribute to George, and ‘to express
the gratitude of many outside
the United States’:
Professor Smith should continue to cajole, stimluate, irritate, and aggravate
us. He should continue to seize our attention and to
present us with the great
puzzles of our time. Given the changes that have come about in the thirty years
of scholarship and the
acceleration of change we have witnessed, we will need
him and others like him to apply human intelligence to great issues as we
this new century where the dilemmas will only become more difficult.
Can our democratic law-making institutions survive these challenges? Or will
our institutions remain as ofent-irrelevant relics of
an earlier, simpler age?
That is the fundamental question which bioethics presents to the law. Professor
George Smith ... is not
content to walk away from such questions. He shows the
obligations, and the means, to respond. But will we have the imagination and
courage to follow?
III THE COURAGE TO FOLLOW ...
Professor Smith’s paper in this volume is a representation of the
Macquarie Lecture he delivered in 2005. This, in turn, was
a snapshot of his
life’s work, even, one might venture to say, an entire scrapbook. There
are threads – cameos –
drawn from a large volume of published work
stretching over a lifetime – a composite of ideas that are difficult to
the formal space of an article.
In response to this composite of ideas, we have assembled scholars from
across the fields of law, religion and health. George’s
trumpet has
sounded with many echoes. The first of these echoes comes from Associate
Professor Belinda Bennett, one of Australian
health law’s heaviest
hitters. Belinda reflects on George’s arguments that religious principles
can be drawn upon by
judges for the resolution of disputes. As Belinda states,
with increasing secularisation disputes which were once in the Churches’
domain, are now being resolved by the courts.
Our second response comes from Professor Colin Thomson, arguably the father
of Australian medical law, being one of the first to teach
the subject as a
discrete discipline. His response contrasts the American ‘public’
approach to the discussion of religious
values to the inherently private and
individualised approach experienced in Australia, and offers insights into how
ideas might be explored in the Australian context.
If Colin is the father of Australian medical law, Professor Loane Skene might
well be described as its ‘mother’. Her impact
on the field, in all
aspects, has been monumental. Her response looks closely at the role of
organised religions in the litigation
process. While Loane accepts that the
Churches have a role in debating social issues, she is critical of Church
intervention in litigation,
particularly where it seeks to dominate the
assessment of ‘private’ legal claims. For Loane, it is acceptable to
a religious view, but not one which seeks to be conclusive of the
debate, merely because it is religious.
The penultimate response belongs to Associate Professor Roger Magnusson,
arguably the finest of Australia’s second generation
of health lawyers.
While Roger appears to be interested in George’s ideas on religious
values, he is suspicious of the ability
of institutional religion to act in a
principled way, and not give in to its own political agendas. Roger asks the
important question
of why some health issues are labelled as having religious
import, while others, of seemingly equal scope and importance, are not
on by organised religion at all.
The final response comes from Associate Professor Peter Radan, Macquarie
Law’s own resident expert on matters of law and religion.
focus is on the issue of ‘intelligent design’ and the establishment
of religion. It flows from George’s
comments on the notorious
Peter’s comment
focuses on the issue of the appropriateness of allowing courts to be the
arbitrators of these issues. Peter
asks the question as to whether the continued
resort to courts to resolve disputes between religion and science is really
solve anything. For Peter, the most appropriate forum for debate is the
legislature.
IV FURTHER CONVERSATIONS
We hope you enjoy this first issue of the
Macquarie Law Symposium
would like to thank all our contributors and our administrative staff, Maggie
Liston and Jenny Shedden for their tireless work.
In a volume like the
it would be wrong to complete our
introduction with a conclusion. Instead we invite all our readers to view the
contributions, think
contributors have started. Law, religion and health are universal experiences
being human, and as humans our lives can only be enriched by learning more about
their inter-dependence and inter-relationship.
Professor and Dean of Law, Macquarie
University.
Associate Professor, Division of Law,
Macquarie University.
Michael D Kirby, ‘The New Biology
and International Sharing – Lessons from the Life and Work of George P
Indiana Journal of Global Legal Studies
(1968-69) 67
Michigan Law Review
‘Pilgrimage’ and being a
‘pilgrim’ is George’s own choice of terminology, as he
introduced himself
in present the Macquarie Lecture in 2005 in Banco court.
General Prologue, lines 307-308: a pdf
version of the
Canterbury Tales
was accessed at
http://academic.brooklyn.cuny.edu/webcore/murphy/canterbury/2genpro.pdf on 23
March 2006.
Smith, above n 2, 62.
Kirby, above n 1, 428.
Kirby, above n 1.
I Corinthians 13:8.
Kirby, above n 1, 434.
Scopes v State
154 Tenn 105,
289 SW 363 (1927).
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
No downloadable files available
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter