URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/journals/UMonashLRS/2010/14.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 15:42:15
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Emerton, P --- "Political freedoms and entitlements in the Australian Constitution - an example of referential intentions yielding unexpected legal consequences" [2010] UMonashLRS 14
POLITICAL FREEDOMS AND ENTITLEMENTS IN THE AUSTRALIAN
CONSTITUTION
EXAMPLE OF REFERENTIAL INTENTIONS YIELDING UNINTENDED LEGAL CONSEQUENCES
This paper was originally published as: Emerton, Patrick, ‘Political
freedoms and entitlements in the Australian
Constitution
- an example of
referential intentions yielding unexpected legal consequences’
[2010] FedLawRw 6
Federal Law Review
This article is about the interpretation of legal texts. Its immediate aim is
to defend, against a certain sort of originalist objection,
the well-known cases
that hold that the
Constitution
, by implication, guarantees
certain political freedoms and entitlements. That is not to say that the article
intends to vindicate
the outcome of every one of those cases — rather, it
intends to vindicate the general methodology and orientation of those
stated by the High Court in
v Australian
Broadcasting
Corporation
The general character of the originalist objection I have in mind is that no
implication (other than perhaps a strictly logical implication)
can be drawn
from a legal text which is at odds with the actual intentions of the authors of
that text. This claim is taken to rest
on a more general account of the role of
intentions in interpretation. Thus, for example, Goldsworthy contends that:
courts conceive of statutes as utterances ... Crucial to utterance meaning ...
is evidence of speaker's meaning, which in this case
is legislative intent. ...
If ... genuine implications depend on evidence of speaker's meanings, then the
absence of such evidence
entails the absence of
implications.
he then goes on to assert that 'utterances of people well known not to intend
something should be interpreted to imply that they
did intend it only as a last
resort, if there is no other way of making sense of their
utterance.'
This assertion is crucial to Goldsworthy's argument against the soundness of
the implied political freedom cases. Whereas I accept
the first quoted passage,
however, I reject the second: it is possible for a word to refer to something
even if its so referring
would be at odds with the desires, expectations and
intentions of the one who uttered the word.
of the article will explain
how the political freedoms and entitlements that the High Court has purported to
find to be guaranteed
Constitution
can be understood as
implications arising from such 'unintended' reference.
This immediate aim is, in certain respects, modest. For example (and
consistently with the first quotation above), the article assumes
argument that to know the meaning of the text is to know the content of the law.
The way is therefore left open for originalists
(and others) to continue to
object to the political freedoms cases, but such continued objection would have
to rest upon an originalism
(or other interpretive doctrine) which advocated
departure from, rather than fidelity to, the text. Such a doctrine would have to
be defended on expressly political grounds, rather than as a necessary
consequence of apolitical considerations of meaning and
interpretation.
The article therefore deprives originalists of what has, to date, appeared to be
a low-cost objection to the political freedoms cases.
Furthermore, the article draws upon two important areas of contemporary
philosophy of language — the theory of speech
and the realist semantics of Hilary
— to advance an account of interpretation that is attractive independent
of its consequences for a certain family of Australian
constitutional decisions.
In a manner that will become clear over the course of
account identifies as the key interpretive question for most words — those
words that are not logical particles
or similar grammatical devices — a
question about
. Consequently, interpretation requires
consideration not only of the intentions of those who use words, but of the
nature of the
things that are talked about by using them. As we shall see, it is
Goldsworthy's failure to consider the importance of the second
of these two
elements of the inquiry that leads him to misconstrue the relationship between
intention and interpretation. Not only
is this relationship more complicated
than the originalist critics have generally allowed: as
and onward will
demonstrate, getting it right will require that sociological and historical
inquiry play something like the role
in interpretation that many
non-originalists might favour. Thus, apolitical considerations of meaning and
interpretation in fact
seem to push the other way.
I SOME VARIETIES OF IMPLICATION
The political freedoms and entitlements with which
this article is concerned are generally said to be implied by the
Constitution
. It is therefore appropriate to begin with a consideration
of the workings of implications. Goldsworthy identifies four varieties
implication:
• logical implications;
• implications arising from deficient expressions;
• deliberate implications; and
• implicit assumptions.
logical implications
, he identifies as following from
conventions.
sense of the claim that logical and mathematical truths are true by convention
is not a straightforward
article will not consider the
The second,
implications arising from deficient expressions
actually communicate (if anything), and what it
is evident that the speaker was
actually intending to communicate, such that it is rational to infer some sort
of misuse of words
or incompleteness in the speaker's
Everyday examples of such misstatement abound, as for example when a parent
addresses one of her children but mistakenly uses the
name of another. The
deliberate implications
, arise in a manner that is similar to
implications arising from deficient expressions, except that in this sort of
case the rational
inference is not that the speaker has misused words or
produced an incomplete utterance, but rather that she has intended us to 'read
between the lines' in order to close the gap between what has actually been said
and what she was attempting to
communicate.
example of deliberate implication is the following: when asked by you how our
mutual friend is getting on in his new job at a
bank, I reply, 'Oh quite well, I
think; he likes his colleagues, and he hasn't been to prison yet.' There is an
apparent gap between
) what seems to be an attempt to answer your
question and (
) what my reply actually says, because the reference to
our mutual friend not yet having gone to prison appears irrelevant to your
question. But if I think that our mutual friend is potentially dishonest, and
intended that you realise this, then the gap is closed
— because that
would be a communication relevant to your question. Thus, I have successfully
and deliberately given rise to
an implication that our mutual friend is
potentially
In legal contexts, deliberate implications are likely to be rare. Canons of
legal drafting, reflecting at least in part the publicity
requirements that are
generally taken to be part of the rule of law, and also (at least in many cases)
the requirement that the meanings
of legal instruments be accessible even to the
obtuse, mean that legal instruments will rarely set out to communicate in this
Implications arising from deficient expressions are more common in legal
contexts, but nevertheless are likely to be less frequent
than in ordinary
conversation. Legal instruments are typically interpreted in a context that is
very austere compared to ordinary
conversation, and one consequence of this is
that it will be correspondingly more difficult to identify
between what has actually been communicated, and what the author
intended to communicate. Goldsworthy acknowledges this,
suggesting that in many cases of deficient expression in legal instruments
is required is not interpretation but rather
rectification
: the imputing
into the instrument of meaning that is not there, but is needed to render the
Goldsworthy suggests that the separation of judicial power is an example of a
constitutional implication arising from deficient expression.
He identifies, as
the deficiency in expression, the conveyance of the separation of powers 'in an
elliptical way by the language
vesting legislative, executive and judicial
powers in three different organs of
government.'
description of the way in which the implication arises is itself somewhat
elliptical, as it does not expressly identify the
evident gap between actual
communication and evident intention. The deficient expression presumably is in
, which reads 'The judicial power of the Commonwealth shall be vested in
[various specified courts]', but which is, presumably, intended
to communicate
the judicial power of the Commonwealth, and only that power, shall be
vested in, and only in, the various specified courts
. The evidence that this
is what the instrument is intended to communicate, presumably, consists, as
Goldsworthy says, in the way
that each of ss 1,
vests a distinct
governmental power in a distinct organ. It is beyond the scope of this article
to determine whether this evidence
is sufficient to actually support the drawing
of such an implication in the
Constitution
. Even if this evidence of
deficient expression was thought to be insufficient to support the drawing of an
implication, however,
it would not therefore follow that the doctrine of the
separation of the judicial power must be regarded as an instance of
rectification
by the High
For it may be able to be defended as an instance of what Goldsworthy calls
'implicit assumption'.
Implicit assumptions
are those matters which speakers take for granted
as apt to be taken for granted by their
assumptions are important in many contexts. In the legal context, for example, a
legal instrument is likely to implicitly assume
the operation of various legal
precepts which are essential both to its effectiveness, and to an understanding
of what it is that
the instrument in question has
communicated.
Goldsworthy suggests as a constitutional example the power of judicial
not expressly set forth in the
Constitution
, but which appears to be
presupposed by it (for example, by
suggested above, another example might be the separation of judicial power: the
drafters of the
Constitution
may have implicitly assumed that the words
— 'The judicial power of the Commonwealth shall be vested in
[various specified courts]' — would be taken to mean that
the judicial
power of the Commonwealth, and only that power, shall be vested in, and only in,
the various specified courts
. Support for the attribution of such an
assumption — that the vesting of power is to be understood as an
vesting — can be drawn from the way that ss 1,
each vests a distinct governmental power in a distinct organ, and also from the
itself. As the majority in
Boilermakers'
[T]he true contrast in federal powers ... is between judicial power within Chap
III and other powers. To turn to the provisions of
Constitution
dealing with
those other powers surely must be to find confirmation for the view that no
functions but judicial may be reposed in
the judicature. If you knew nothing of
the history of the separation of powers, if you made no comparison of the
American instrument
of government with ours, if you were unaware of the
interpretation it had received before our
Constitution
was framed according to
the same plan, you would still feel the strength of the logical inferences from
Chaps I, II and III and the
form and contents of ss 1,
. It would be
difficult to treat it as a mere draftsman's arrangement. Section 1 positively
vests the legislative power of the Commonwealth
in the Parliament of the
Commonwealth. Then
, in exactly the same form, vests the executive
power of the Commonwealth in the Crown. They are the counterparts of
in the same way vests the judicial power of the Commonwealth in this Court, the
federal courts the Parliament may create and
the State courts it may invest with
federal jurisdiction. This cannot all be treated as meaningless and of no legal
consequence.
[T]o study Chap III is to see at once that it is an exhaustive statement of the
manner in which the judicial power of the Commonwealth
is or may be vested. It
is true that it is expressed in the affirmative but its very nature puts out of
question the possibility
that the legislature may be at liberty to turn away
from Chap III to any other source of power when it makes a law giving judicial
power exercisable within the Federal Commonwealth of Australia. ... The fact
that affirmative words appointing or limiting an order
or form of things may
have also a negative force and forbid the doing of the thing otherwise was noted
very early in the development
of the principles of interpretation ... [I]t would
be difficult to believe that the careful provisions for the creation of a
judicature as the institution of government to exercise judicial power
and the precise specification of the content or subject matter
of that power
were compatible with the exercise by that institution of other powers. ... It
would seem a matter of course to treat
the affirmative provisions stating the
character and judicial powers of the federal judicature as exhaustive. What
reason could there
be in treating it as an exhaustive statement, not of the
powers, but only of the judicial power that may be exercised by the judicature?
It hardly seems a reasonable hypothesis that in respect of the very kind of
power that the judicature was designed to exercise its
functions were carefully
limited but as to the exercise of functions foreign to the character and purpose
of the judicature it was
meant to leave the matter at
does not appear to be the drawing of an inference from deficient expression.
Rather, the expression (as found in the constitutional
text and structure)
appears to be taken as
adequate and sufficient
— adequate and
sufficient to signal an implicit assumption of exhaustiveness in the vesting of
II IMPLICIT ASSUMPTIONS AND THE REFERENCE OF WORDS
One important role that implicit assumptions play is
to fix the reference of words. For example, if I say to a waiter 'Bring me a
hamburger, medium rare!', I take for granted that the hamburger shall be one
that is ready to be eaten. If the waiter instead brings
me a hamburger encased
in a cube of solid Lucite plastic, able to be opened only by a jackhammer, it is
plausible to think that my
order has not been complied
you to 'Show the children a game', and you teach them gaming with dice, again it
is plausible to think that my request
has not been complied
utterance, the reference of a key term —
— is constrained by an implicit assumption that has been made by me, and
that my audience knows to have been made by me. In
giving my order to the
waiter, the waiter knows that I implicitly assume that
only to a certain sort of hamburger, namely (and roughly), one which is ready to
be eaten. In asking you to play with the
children, you know that I implicitly
assume that
refers only to certain sorts of games, namely (and
roughly), those that are suitable for children to play.
Goldsworthy doubts that these sorts of constraints on reference contribute to
the express meaning of an utterance, saying that if
this is taken to be so, then
'it is difficult to preserve any meaningful distinction between what is implied
and what is
expressed.'
does not explain, however, why this distinction is, in general, an important
sometimes suggested that only express meaning goes to the
but this does not seem right: if the waiter hands me a hamburger encased in
Lucite plastic saying 'Here is the hamburger that you
asked for', not only is it
the case that I have not been given what I wanted. It also seems to be the case
that I have not been given
what I asked for
. To put this point more
technically, an imperative utterance does more than simply signal that its
speaker wants something —
a grunt or a gesture can do that. The utterance
of an imperative signals that the speaker wants her audience to bring it about
the assertion which would result, were the words of the imperative uttered
in the indicative mood, is correct. Thus, in the case
of 'Bring me a hamburger,
medium rare!' what is signalled is a desire that the waiter bring it about that
the assertion 'A hamburger,
medium rare, is brought to me' is
, as it occurs in this linguistically structured desire, has the
same content — including content dependent upon an implicit
— as it does in the utterance of the imperative. Thus, to bring me a
plastic-encased hamburger is not to satisfy
the desire signalled by my order.
Furthermore, given that I have not been given what I asked for, it follows that
the waiter's utterance,
'Here is the hamburger that you asked for,' is false,
not true. But this could only be so because (
, as used by the waiter, inherits its content, at least partly,
from my earlier utterance of the word, and (
) the content of
, as it occurred in my order to the waiter, depended not only on
what was express, but also (at least in part) on the implicit assumption.
of these two points — namely, that words, on subsequent occasions of use,
inherit content from earlier occasions of use,
and that the content of words may
depend (at least in part) on implicit assumptions — are significant in
what follows.
Let us consider another example. Suppose that I say to you 'I took your
cheque to the bank.' On any ordinary occasion of utterance,
you would take it
that I had taken your cheque not to a riverside location, but to a financial
house. Goldsworthy suggests that this
rather than
process of interpretation of this utterance does not appear to be significantly
different from that considered above in relation
: the reference of a key term, in this case
constrained by an implicit assumption that
refers, on this occasion
of use, to financial houses and not to riverside locations. It is true that an
English dictionary will disambiguate
two different meanings of
whereas it will not disambiguate two different meanings of
— the ones ready to be eaten, and the others encased in Lucite plastic.
But this is a consequence, not a cause, of the content
of individual utterances.
There is a long-established pattern of use of the word
speakers, wherein each deliberately follows the practice of earlier speakers in
using the word to refer to financial houses.
There is a similarly
long-established pattern of the use of the word
by English speakers,
wherein each deliberately follows the practice of earlier speakers in using the
word to refer to riverside locations.
The existence of these temporally extended
chains of co-reference —
referential chains
— is what makes
it useful to incorporate two different meanings of
into English
dictionaries. But on any given occasion of use of the word
determines the content of that word is not the workings of a dictionary, but
rather a speaker's implicit assumption that her
use of the word is located in
one or the other referential chain.
Of course, on some occasions of utterance a speaker, rather than relying upon
an implicit assumption, may expressly signal an intention
that her use of the
be located on one or the other referential
for example, the following explanation as to why a cheque has not yet been
deposited: 'I had your cheque with me at the
bank — at the riverside, that
is — and it fell into the water with the rest of my wallet. I'm still
waiting for it to
dry out so I can take it to the bank — that is, the
financial house — and deposit it.' Such expressly signalled intentions
not change the fundamental character of how reference is determined, however
— what determines the reference of the speaker's
word is its location in a
particular referential chain, whether this location be achieved expressly or
implicitly. For the remainder
of the article, I will generally disregard the
distinction between express and implicit determinations of reference, and will
describe these determinants of reference as speakers'
referential
. (Goldsworthy discusses at some length the extent to which it is
proper to say that an implicit assumption, which is something
by a speaker, and perhaps not even consciously adverted to, was
nevertheless
intentionally communicated
follows I will not concern myself with this question, for, as Goldsworthy also
notes, what is crucial in communication is
not what is actually intended, but
rather those intentions which are publically signalled and epistemically
accessible to
when I utter
in the examples above, I publically
signal (in virtue of context and shared expectations among participants in the
conversation)
an intention to constrain the reference of those words in the
relevant ways, and it is this publically signalled referential intention
crucial to the meaning of my utterance.)
In the case of
, we have seen how speakers' referential
intentions, whether implicitly assumed or expressly signalled, determine the
reference of
the word, by locating it in a particular referential chain. We
shall now see that in the case of my hamburger order and the waiter's
there is also a referential chain. The waiter, by using in his reply the phrase
hamburger that you asked for
, does two things. First, he apposes
and the relative pronoun
, thereby signalling an
intention that
inherit content from
. Second, he
signals an intention that
include, as content,
thing asked for by
. This referential intention, in turn, contributes further content to
, and hence (via apposition) to
particular, it contributes the constraint upon the reference of
that I signalled (by implicit assumption) when I used the word to ask for
referential chain is, however, confined to my conversation with the waiter, and
hence (and unlike the referential chains with
is associated)
it is unlikely that any other speaker will attempt to locate her use of
within it, whether expressly or by implicit assumption. There
is, therefore, no utility in incorporating multiple meanings of
into English dictionaries. It may be that the distinction between express and
implied meanings, at least when what is at issue is
the content of referring
terms, amounts to no more than this: that in some cases referential chains are
sufficiently durable and
extended in time that it makes sense to differentiate
them in dictionaries; and in other cases they are not. As we have seen, however,
the distinction is not of any relevance to content or
III THE RELATIONSHIP BETWEEN INTENTION AND CONTENT
One interesting feature of the referential chain that
arises between me and the waiter is that the waiter, by participating in the
conversation, finds his words inheriting content that is, to a certain extent,
independent of his intentions. When the waiter utters
'Here is the hamburger
that you asked for,' and thereby signals the referential intentions that
contribute to the content of
as used by him, he brings it about
that part of the content of
depends upon
referential
intentions, namely, to refer only to hamburgers that are (roughly speaking)
ready to eat. Here, then, we find a counterexample
to Goldsworthy's claim that
'utterances of people well known not to intend something should be interpreted
to imply that they did
intend it only as a last resort, if there is no other way
of making sense of their
utterance.'
For there is a clear sense in which the waiter obviously does not want to use
with the same referential intentions as I used it in making my
order — this much is shown by the waiter's description of the
plastic-encased hamburger as
the hamburger that you ordered
. The waiter
clearly desires that
should refer to the plastic-encased thing.
Nevertheless, it does not, because, in virtue of the referential intentions that
has signalled by his use of relative pronouns and the technique of
apposition (as discussed in the previous part), the waiter becomes
the content that results from
referential intentions. It is because of
this that what he says is not true but false: what he brings me is not the
hamburger that
I asked for. And this conclusion is not reached as a last resort
— rather, it is the first conclusion that one reaches when
applying the
rules of English usage within the conversational context.
The general lesson to be learned is that it is an error, and indeed in many
cases impossible, to attempt to interpret an utterance
in light only of its
speaker's desires concerning the reference of their words. Language is replete
with devices — such as,
in English, relative pronouns and the technique of
apposition — intended to facilitate communication by signalling particular
referential intentions. And, as we saw above in relation to imperatives, the
intention that is signalled by the use of these devices
is not simply a generic
desire, nor even a generic communicative desire, but a particular
linguistically-structured intention. Indeed,
the point of these sorts of devices
is to make it easy to publically signal such intentions, as successful
communication requires.
And as we have seen in the previous paragraph, one
consequence of these devices may be that a speaker's referential intentions
out to incorporate the referential intentions of another speaker, thereby
bringing it about that her words have a content that is
at odds with what she
would actually like to communicate.
Of course, the waiter could have uttered a different sentence. He could have
said, while handing me the plastic-encased hamburger,
'Here is a hamburger.'
With no relative pronoun and no apposition, the waiter would signal
intention that
, as used by him, has the same content as when
used by me, and
clearly signal his referential intention that
should refer, among other things, to plastic-encased
hamburgers.
there would be a communicative cost to this — the waiter's utterance would
no longer communicate that the hamburger being
adduced is the one that I asked
for, being given to me in satisfaction of my order. The waiter cannot have it
both ways — cannot
simultaneously displace my referential intentions with
his own, while at the same time actually engaging me in intersubjectively
meaningful conversation. And even if the waiter does reply in this alternative
fashion, he is not deploying referential intentions
that are solely his own. His
use of the common noun
signals a referential intention that his
use of the word be located in a referential chain constituted by the common
practice of
English speakers to use
to refer to a meal
consisting of a meat patty served between the two halves of sliced bun. And what
is it for a speaker to signal,
by her use of a common noun, a referential
intention that the word in question, as used by her, is to be located in a
referential chain? It is simply to signal that the word is used with
the same referential intentions as others who have used it with
the intention
that the word, as used by them, be located in the referential chain in
public language is to continuously draw upon the referential intentions of
others to fill out the content of one's own words.
If this were not so, there
would be no public language, but only a system of grunts and gestures (and,
demonstratives
IV THE RELATIONSHIP BETWEEN CONTENT AND REFERENTIAL CHAINS
At the end of the last part, I said that for a
speaker to signal, by her use of a common noun, a referential intention that
word is to be located in a particular referential chain, is for her
to signal that the word is used with the same referential intentions
who have used it with the intention that
word be located in the
referential chain in question. This explanation obviously contains a degree of
circularity. The circularity
is not vicious — each speaker's intention, on
any given occasion of word use, incorporates the prior intentions of prior
— but it does require an explanation of how speakers are able to
start referential chains.
The standard philosophical answer to this question appeals to the notion of a
baptismal speaker
. Such a speaker — call her
confronted with a new kind of thing to which she wishes to refer, and having no
word ready-to-hand in the public language
(or not wanting to use an existing
word), coins a new word —
— with the referential intention
that it refer to things of this new
are then able to piggy-back their use upon
baptismal referential intention, in one or more of the ways described above (eg
implicitly assuming that it is located on the referential
chain of which
has forged the first link, or by expressly signalling
such location by apposing, to
the thing named by
Thus is a referential chain born.
While this account is true of some common names (eg canonically introduced
scientific terms), in the case of many common nouns —
including many of
those which occur in legal instruments — it is an oversimplification. For
many common nouns there has occurred
(as far as we know) no baptismal event.
Rather, there are (something like) canonical or paradigmatic occasions of use,
to which can
be imputed referential intentions of a more-or-less baptismal sort.
Such occasions could involve demonstration of an instance of
the kind in
question, or could involve descriptions of it. For example, when teaching a
child the word
, one utters the word
in an exaggerated
fashion while taking the spoon out of the drawer, using it to feed the child,
taking it from the child when she
starts to make a mess with it, etc. In doing
this one is intending to locate one's use of the word in a referential chain
constituted
by many other English speakers' uses of spoon. But equally, and
importantly from the child's point of view, one is intending that
should have as its content
things of the kind I am currently instancing to
. That is, one simultaneously has a baptismal referential
intention. It is plausible to think that it is these overlapping, frequently
repeated baptismal intentions that constitute the 'first link' in the
referential chain for many common nouns referring to ordinary
artefacts (eg
cutlery, clothing, buildings
Things are slightly different when teaching a (somewhat older) child the word
. One might well walk down Spring Street and point out the
august public building to help get the meaning across. But one is likely
use descriptions and analogies — 'You know how we sometimes have a family
meeting to decide where to take our holidays
— well, the Parliament is a
bit like that, but for the whole community. Only we don't all go there —
we choose people
to attend the meeting in our place.' The child might then use
the word with the referential intention that
kind of whole-community-representative meeting that other English speakers use
it to refer to
. This locates
, as uttered by the child, in
the right chain. But what is the first link in the chain? Some of those other
English speakers will
have referential intentions containing richer descriptions
(eg employing political, legal, constitutional and/or historical notions),
the richest overlapping set of such descriptions can then be taken to yield the
'first link'. Let us call that overlapping set
: the baptismal intention
is then (roughly)
things of the kind instanced by that
thing (or those things) of which the descriptions in
When we reflect on these ways in which referential chains are established,
various interesting possibilities present themselves. Consider,
for example, a
to refer to
the same kind of
representative body as other English speakers use it to refer to
also believes that
parliaments are meetings of the representatives of various
. Such a speaker then learns that, in a particular political
community there meets a representative body whose members do not represent
particular localities, but rather are elected by the entire political community
on the basis of proportional representation. Should
she describe that body as a
parliament, or not? This depends primarily on whether she should, or should not,
take her belief about
members of parliament being representatives of particular
localities, as going to the
of body that
to refer to.
When the kinds to which common nouns refer are natural kinds (eg zoological,
botanical, chemical and similar kinds) then determining
whether or not a
newly-discovered thing falls within or without the reference of a pre-existing
term is simply a matter of applying
the scientific criteria for kind-hood.
(While this is simple at the level of analysis, it may be extremely complex at
the level of
practice. For example, the experimental and theoretical
investigation required to determine that x-rays are of the same kind as light,
namely, electromagnetic radiation, whereas cathode rays are not, was extremely
challenging and of tremendous scientific significance).
And, conversely, when
the application of those criteria determines that what was hitherto believed to
be a single kind is in fact
not one (as happened in the case of
that has to be done is to introduce new canonical terms that distinguish the
(newly discovered) different kinds, and form
the first links in a number of new
and distinct referential chains.
But with the sorts of common nouns with which the law is typically concerned,
matters may be more complex. What we might call
kinds, such as parliament, are not constituted by nature but by
human practices, including linguistic practices. Part of what will
newly-encountered representative body a parliament is that we choose to call it
one. But this is not all that matters, for
that choice will be driven by our
view as to whether the new body resembles those things that we already judge to
be parliaments
in various salient
We can see, then, that there are a number of ways in which
She may choose to piggy-back in the way described above, deferring to other
speakers and following them in calling or not
calling this new body a
parliament. But obviously not all speakers can
to contribute to the set of overlapping descriptions
that is central to
the content of the 'first link' for
. What if there is
disagreement among those whose usage is not deferential (or not entirely
deferential) over whether or not it is
a salient feature of parliaments as a
kind that its members represent particular
localities?
Salience is, of course, context relative, and it may therefore be possible
for a consensus to emerge (expressly, or implicitly in
the course of usage) that
means one thing in one context, and another thing in another.
Just as in the case where we discover we had mistaken multiple natural
a single kind, two (or more) referential chains might come into being where
hitherto there was just one. It might turn
out, for example, that sociologists
decide (for various reasons related to their intellectual concerns) that it
makes sense to call
the new body a parliament, while certain historians of
English constitutional practice decide that, for their purposes, it does not.
this case, those few individuals who are both sociologists and historians of
English constitutional practice, if they were to
avoid inadvertently uttering
falsehoods, would simply need to take care that their usage, from occasion to
occasion, was in accordance
with the practices of these audiences.
Sometimes, however, while there will be differences of opinion as to what are
the salient features of parliaments as a kind, there
will be no consensus that
permits the peaceful emergence of multiple referential chains. In such cases,
there will consequently be
disagreement among non-deferential speakers as to
whether or not the new body is a parliament, and hence it will be uncertain
or not the new body falls within the reference of
used by deferential speakers. A similar situation can, of course, arise in
relation to natural kinds — a new material is
discovered, for example, and
until experiments are undertaken there is disagreement over whether it is a new
allotrope of carbon
(and hence an instance of a known kind to which the word
refers) or a mineral compound of some sort. The difference in
relation to social and political kinds is that there are no canonically-accepted
criteria of kind-hood — the notion of
non-canonical and informal — and hence the disputes are prone to endure in
a way that, typically, they do not in
relation to natural kinds.
A further interesting possibility is the following: it may be that a
consensus emerges which appears to settle the meaning of
— whether as being located in one, or multiple, referential chains —
but that consensus is in error. That is to say that
non-deferential speakers may
agree that the new body either does, or does not, possess the salient features
of parliaments as a kind,
but they may be in error. If this were so, then many
utterances in which the word
occurs might in fact be false,
because users of the word have a mistaken belief about that to which it refers.
The same thing can
obviously occur in relation to natural kinds. Suppose the
tests indicate that the newly discovered material is an allotrope of carbon.
Many beliefs might then be formed, and utterances performed, which assert or
presuppose that the allotrope is carbon. But then it
turns out that there was an
error in the tests, and it turns out that the material is in fact a mineral
compound of carbon with a
hitherto undiscovered element. It turns out that all
those beliefs and utterances were mistaken, because (
) the content of
is (roughly) a
substance of the same chemical kind as these
baptismal samples of carbon
) the material in question does
not satisfy this description.
While acknowledging the possibility in the scientific case, it might be
thought that this is impossible when it comes to
salience in the eye of the beholder? And how can we be mistaken in our beliefs
concerning what is salient about the very
social and political institutions that
we, through our collective practices, constitute? This article will not set out
answer to these questions. But, at least since Freud, we have become
familiar with the possibility that a person's self-conception
of her beliefs and
motivations, and of their salient features, may not always be correct. And, in a
similar vein, at least since
Marx and Nietzsche we have become familiar with the
possibility that a society's self-conception of its institutional arrangements,
and of their salient features, may not always be correct. As Marx puts it,
'[j]ust as our opinion of an individual is not based on
what he thinks of
himself, so we cannot judge [a social situation] by its own
consciousness'.
What counts as a salient feature of a political or social kind is, above all,
relative to our
that relate to various such kinds; and our
those practices with respect to salience, are only one component of
practices as a
Of course — and just as is the case for mistaken beliefs about natural
kinds — to the extent that we misunderstand what
counts as a salient
feature of a given political or social kind, we will be likely to misconceive
what our words do and do not refer
to, and hence will be unable to correct
resultant errors in our beliefs and our assertions. The best we can do is to be
in our attempts to get to the truth. A number of contemporary
philosophers have emphasised that this requires more than simply appeals
intuition — to get to the truth about our practices will require
undertaking the best sociological and historical investigations
that we can.
Thus, Scott Veitch, having noted that 'there is a mutually constitutive relation
between moral philosophies (and hence,
by extension, moralities themselves) and
the empirical conditions within which they exist, or which they seek to bring
on to say that we therefore 'should be very wary of any moral (or
political) discourse that does not make every effort to ground
itself in the
sociological understandings of the conditions within which it is
In a similar
vein, Geuss says that:
political philosophy ... must start from and be concerned in the first instance
with ... the way the social, economic, political,
etc, institutions actually
operate in some society at some given time ... and ... must recognise that
politics is in the first instance
thinks that understanding one's world is a minimal precondition to having
sensible human desires and projects, history is not going
dispensable.
addressing questions of meaning and interpretation, Sally Haslanger writes:
Social constructionists are interested in cases ... where assumptions about
what's natural are misleading us about what we're talking
Constructionists come in many forms, of course, but at least a good number of us
argue, concerning certain specific concepts,
that contrary to common
assumptions, we are tracking something social when we think we're tracking
something natural, and pointing
this out is a way of understanding what we're
she emphasises that 'the investigation of social kinds will need to draw on
empirical social/historical inquiry ... [and] cannot
be done in a mechanical way
and may require sophisticated social
V SOME EXAMPLES CONSIDERED
Constitution
confers upon the
Commonwealth Parliament a legislative power with respect to certain
suppose, instead, that it confers a power with respect to
the discussion into the realm of the hypothetical both makes the example easier
to work with, and also avoids the need to
interact with any actual jurisprudence
in respect of the fisheries power). The Commonwealth tries to pass a law about
whaling. Is
this valid under the hypothetical fishing power?
What was the framers' referential intention when they used the word
? Did they intend to refer to
those activities which are
harvestings of fish
? Or did they intend to refer to
those activities
which are harvestings of water creatures
? If the latter, then the whaling
law is within power. If the former, then a further question arises. Let us
suppose that, in 1900
(and presumably unlike today), at least some mariners were
ignorant of the zoological fact that whales are not fish, and hence that
used the word
to refer to a kind individuated by its simple anatomy,
namely, the kind consisting of all aquatic vertebrates. Thus, let us suppose,
1900 a situation obtained, analogous to that discussed above, of a consensus
among non-deferential speakers that different features
are salient for kind-hood
in different contexts, and that as a result there were two distinct referential
— one zoological, having scientists as its
baptismal speakers, and the other a kind differentiated by simple anatomy,
mariners as its baptismal speakers, and having since fallen into disuse
because the spread of zoological knowledge has led contemporary
English speakers
to locate their uses of
on the zoological referential chain. The
question then arises, when the framers' used the word
intend to refer to the
kind, or to the mariners'
kind? If the latter, then the whaling law is within power; if the
former, then it is not.
Notice that, in answering this question, it is of comparatively little
interest to know that (let us suppose) the framers would have
believed the
whaling law to be within power, or even to know that (again, let us suppose) the
framers intended the fishing power
to authorise legislation with respect to
whaling. Until we know
the framers held such beliefs, or
they thought that the fishing power would support the enactment of whaling laws,
we do not know whether (
) the framers intended to refer to
activities which are harvestings of water creatures
framers intended to refer to
those activities which are harvestings of fish,
where 'fish' is understood to refer to the mariners'simple anatomical kind
) the framers intended to refer to
those activities which are
harvestings of fish, where 'fish' is understood to refer to the zoological
, but had the mistaken zoological belief that whales were fish. Nor will
looking at a dictionary from 1900 necessarily help us: even
if it tells us that
can, on at least some occasions of use, refer to whales, that does
not help us choose between alternatives (
which entail very different consequences for the validity of the whaling
This article will not consider what sort of further evidence might resolve
these questions of framers' intentions, in a way consistent
with general
principles of legal and judicial method. I do note, however, that alternative
) certainly cannot be excluded from the start, which is to say, it
cannot be excluded that the referential intentions of the framers
have brought
follow from the words that they
(We might also think that if a contemporary court reached the view that
alternative (
) was not what was intended, then it should prefer
alternative (
) to alternative (
) on basic rule of law
grounds, namely, that a law whose meaning depended upon a now dead referential
chain would not be one which
is publically knowable in the requisite sense. How
far such rule of law considerations might extend, however, is a question beyond
the scope of this article.)
Consider, now, a more politically charged example pertaining to the
Commonwealth Parliament's power to legislate with respect to
it to have been the case that the framers of the
Constitution
believe that racially mixed marriages resembled, in the salient way, marriages
of the sort they were intending to refer to.
That is, suppose that they believed
there to be a certain social kind —
marriages in the strict sense
— of which racially mixed marriages were not an example. And suppose,
then, that when they used the word
Constitution
their referential intention was that it should refer to marriages in the strict
sense. What consequences, if any, flow from this
combination of beliefs and
intentions, as to the scope of the marriage power?
I take it that no argument is needed to support my assertion that there is no
such social kind as
marriages in the strict sense
. That is to say, the
belief that I am supposing the framers to have had about the existence of such a
kind is and was a mistaken
one. It follows, then, that there is and was no
distinct referential chain, pertaining only to marriages in the strict sense, on
which their use of
is located. Either the word, as used by them,
does not refer at
or (and more
plausibly) it refers to
marriages in general
, including racially mixed
ones, this being the only referential chain in the neighbourhood of the framers'
intentions and the one
in which their practice, when we attend to its actually
salient features, locates their use of the
interpretation we end up preferring, we once again find ourselves in a situation
in which the meaning of the framers' language
is quite different from what they
hoped and believed it to be. (This conclusion might be different if the
Constitution
undertook to constitute, and then to baptise, a new kind, by
stipulating a legal definition of
. But it does not.)
Goldsworthy discusses an actual (non-constitutional) case that resembles the
hypothetical ones we have been considering, of legislation
enacted in respect of
psychopathic personalities
by a legislature which believed homosexuality
to be a psychopathology. The law-makers hoped that the law would apply to
homosexuals,
but in fact it does not, because homosexuality is in fact not a
psychopathology.
This appears to be a situation comparable to alternative (
relation to the fishing power above: the law-makers intended to refer to
those personalities which are psychopathic, where 'psychopathology' is
understood to refer to a psychiatric kind
, and they had the mistaken
psychiatric belief that homosexuality is a psychopathology.
Goldsworthy explains this outcome, whereby the law has an effect quite
different from that desired by the law-makers, using a somewhat
vocabulary. He describes it as turning on a distinction between 'enactment
intentions' — that is to say, the provision
that the law-makers actually
enacted — and 'application intentions', by which Goldsworthy means 'their
possibly mistaken beliefs
application.'
seems to be a contrast between (
) a speaker's referential intentions,
) a speaker's beliefs and hopes about what it is that the words
used with those intentions refer to. While this can sometimes be an
interesting
contrast to draw, it does not, on its own, explain how it is that (
) can come as far apart as they obviously can do in a situation like
that of alternative (
), or in the attempt to confer a power in
relation to
marriages in the strict
Explaining this requires, as we have seen, recognition of the key role played by
the speaker's mistaken belief about the existence
or character of a particular
Goldsworthy goes on to say the following:
[E]nactment and application intentions are not mutually exclusive, and the
distinction between them may be ... perhaps in some cases
illusory. Well known
application intentions also serve as enactment intentions when they clarify the
meaning of a law. For example,
they may clarify what would otherwise be an
ambiguity, or make it obvious that a word or phrase has been used in a
non-literal or
special sense. Or they might justify holding general terms to be
subject to an implied qualification, because they make it obvious
law-makers expressed themselves ineptly [thus giving rise to an implication
arising from deficient expression] or, quite
reasonably, took something for
granted [thus giving rise to an implicit
assumption].
is interesting, however, that Goldsworthy does not suggest that
psychopathology
, as that word occurs in the statute mentioned above,
should be interpreted in a 'special or non-literal sense.' That is, he does
suggest that we should infer from the known beliefs and hopes of the law-makers
that they used the word in a special sense that
includes homosexuals. A reason
for this is not easily extracted from his argument, however, because it is
confined to the vocabulary
of contrasting categories of intention and does not
consider referential chains, kinds, and beliefs about kinds. Using these
the following explanation can be given. To begin with, a speaker's
beliefs and hopes about what it is that her words, used with a
referential intention, refer to, are not themselves referential intentions at
all. They are, therefore, of no direct relevance
They may be indirectly relevant, however, serving as evidence to help determine
what referential intentions a speaker may have had,
where this otherwise is in
doubt. In the case of
psychopathology
, however, there is presumably no
doubt. The lawmakers have not sought to be baptismal speakers — they have
not started a new
referential chain by stipulating a statutory definition of
psychopathology
. And, unlike in the example of the fishing power, there
is no distinctive colloquial use of
psychopathology
that locates it in a
referential chain having at its end a kind of which homosexuality is an
instance. And, similarly to the imagined
marriage in the strict
, the only referential chain in the neighbourhood of the lawmakers'
utterance is the one which has a psychiatric kind, of which homosexuality
an instance, at its end. It is this, therefore, to which their word refers.
This part will finish with a consideration of a non-hypothetical
constitutional example in which reference has ended up departing
framers' expectations. In
Roach v Electoral
Commissioner
Gleeson CJ discusses the meaning of
foreign power
, as that phrase occurs
Constitution
In 1901, the words 'foreign power' in
did not include the United
Kingdom, yet in
Court held that, by reason of changes in Australia's relations with the United
Kingdom and in national and international circumstances
over the intervening
period, they had come to include the United Kingdom. The meaning of the words
'foreign power' did not change,
but the facts relevant to the identification of
the United Kingdom as being included in or excluded from that meaning had
Goldsworthy
considers comparable words and phrases —
— and explains in the following manner how, today, it can be
the case that many British subjects are, in Australia, aliens,
and that the
pound is, in Australia, no longer legal tender:
'[L]egal tender' and 'alien' are relative terms. Their connotation includes
criteria whose application varies dramatically from one
time to another, and
from one place to another. In these two cases, those criteria refer to laws,
regulating currency and citizenship,
which vary according to time and place. In
the case of other terms, non-legal criteria produce the same kind of
variability, or relativity.
Consider, for example, the term 'politeness'. What
is polite in Australia today may not be polite in Japan, or in Australia 50
from now. It all depends on the social conventions of each time and
it is true that 'alien', 'foreign', 'legal tender' and 'politeness' are all
relative terms in Goldsworthy's sense, this relativity
is not essential to the
explanation of the interesting interpretive issue, which is that certain words
or phrases in the
Constitution
today refer to things very different from
what the framers envisaged.
Consider the case of
. The framers used this word with (roughly)
the intention of referring to
people who are not members, whether by birth,
ancestry or allegiance, of the national community with which the
Constitution
is concerned
. Now it so happens that the framers
believed that no British subject failed to be a member of the national community
with which the
Constitution
is concerned. And, indeed, in 1900 they were
correct, because there was no Australian national community that was relevantly
from the broader community of the British Empire. As Mason CJ, Wilson,
Brennan, Deane, Dawson, and Toohey JJ put it in
Nolan v Minister for
Immigration and Ethnic
As a matter of etymology, 'alien', from the Latin alienus through old French,
means belonging to another person or place. ... The
word could not, however,
properly have been used in 1900 to identify the status of a British subject
vis-a-vis one of the Australian
or other colonies of the British Empire for the
reason that those colonies were not, at that time, independent nations with a
citizenship of their own. At that time, no subject of the British Crown
was an alien within any part of the British Empire. Even
after federation,
Australia did not immediately enjoy the international status of an independent
nation. The terms 'British subject'
and 'subject of the Queen' were essentially
synonymous. The British Empire continued to consist of one sovereign State and
its colonial
and other dependencies with the result there was no need to modify
either the perception of an indivisible Imperial Crown or the
doctrine that,
under the common law, no subject of the Queen was an alien in any part of Her
Majesty's dominions
same point was also made by Gaudron J:
An alien (from the Latin alienus — belonging to another) is, in essence, a
person who is not a member of the community which
constitutes the body politic
of the nation state from whose perspective the question of alien status is to be
determined. For most
purposes it is convenient to identify an alien by reference
to the want or absence of the criterion which determines membership of
community. Thus, where membership of a community depends on citizenship, alien
status corresponds with non-citizenship; in the
case of a community whose
membership is conditional upon allegiance to a monarch, the status of alien
corresponds with the absence
allegiance.
1900, however, for the reasons to which Gleeson CJ refers in the passage
it has come
Australia has been falsified. Today,
there are some people who satisfy the
description
British subject
— that is to say, are of the right kind
to fall within the reference of that phrase — but who also satisfy the
description
person who is not a member of the national community with which
Constitution
is concerned
, and thus are of the right kind to fall
within the reference of the word
. (An almost identical story can be
told for the phrase
foreign power
.) It is apparent, therefore, that it is
not the relativity of
that explains why the framers' beliefs and
expectations are falsified. Rather, it is the framers' false beliefs about the
of the kinds lying at the end of the relevant referential chains —
and in particular their false belief that no one can simultaneously
instance of both kinds — that does the explanatory work. To put the same
point using more metaphysical language: there
has been a change, which the
framers did not envisage and perhaps falsely believed to be impossible, in the
way in which the relevant
properties, by virtue of which a person satisfies one
or both descriptions, are distributed across the population of property-bearers.
This is the change in the facts to which Gleeson CJ refers, and which explains
why the reference of
has come to be so different from that
envisaged by the framers.
VI IMPLIED POLITICAL FREEDOMS AND ENTITLEMENTS
Constitution
give rise, by
implication, to certain political freedoms or entitlements which (because the
powers of Australian organs of government
are subject to the
Constitution
) may not be infringed by the actions of Australian organs of
government?
The key passages relevant to answering this question are contained in ss 7 and
, which state that the senators for a state are to be 'directly chosen by the
people of the State' and that members of the House of
Representatives are to be
'directly chosen by the people of the Commonwealth.' Each contains two key
directly chosen
the people of the
State/Commonwealth
. The use by the framers of the first of these signals an
intention to refer to a certain kind of political event, namely,
. The use of the second signals an intention to refer to a certain
political or social kind, namely,
the people of a particular political
A Direct choice
Constitution
mandates that a certain
kind of event is to take place, that is a good reason to think that powers
conferred subject to the
Constitution
may not be exercised in such a way
as to prevent such an event taking place. The use of the words
must, then, give rise to at least a minimal sphere of political
freedom, as Dawson J noted in
Australian Capital Television Pty Ltd v
Commonwealth
[I]t must nevertheless be recognized that the
Constitution
provides for a
Parliament the members of which are to be directly chosen by the people ... Thus
Constitution
provides for a choice and that must mean a true choice. It may
be said — at all events in the context of an election —
choice is not a true choice when it is made without an appreciation of the
available alternatives or, at least, without an
opportunity to gain an
appreciation of the available alternatives. ... Perhaps the freedom is one which
must extend beyond the election
time to the period between elections, but that
is something which it is unnecessary to consider in this case. ... Thus an
in which the electors are denied access to the information necessary
for the exercise of a true choice is not the kind of election
envisaged by the
Constitution
. Legislation which would have the effect of denying access to that
information by the electors would therefore be incompatible with
Constitution
degree of freedom is required for a true choice to occur? Aroney has discussed
this matter in some detail. Thus, after referring
to Dawson J's judgment quoted
above, Aroney goes on to say that 'the majority did not stop there. They held
Constitution
implies a guarantee of freedom of political communication
which will strike in principle at any law which interferes to any degree
communications of any kind concerning political
read him, Aroney's principal concern here is not the extent of the freedom, but
whereby the extent of the freedom is worked out, and he
criticises the majority in
for setting limits to the scope of the
freedom not by reference to the text of ss 7 and
, but by reference to a
self-standing notion of legitimate ends pursued by way of proportionate
Consistently with this reading, Aroney writes:
McHugh J ... in
Theophanous
... rejects the conclusion that the
Constitution
implies a general freedom of political communication. Sections 7
, his Honour points out, refer to elections, not general political rights,
and the only legitimate freedoms that are implied by these
provisions concern
communications made during the course of, or are of relevance to, federal
elections. In this way, McHugh J's approach
looks increasingly similar to
(although certainly not identical to) the dissenting position adopted by Dawson
[T]here is one important point at which the
decision appears to go
beyond McHugh J's previous judgments. ... the unanimous judgment in
affirms that the freedom extends to political communication generally and is
not limited to election periods. But how significant
is this apparent concession
by McHugh J? Not very momentous at all, and certainly no great departure from
his previous reasoning.
This is because the argument advanced in the judgment
for a generally applicable freedom of political communication draws upon the
same basic considerations McHugh J himself had advanced for restricting the
scope of the freedom in the previous cases. Thus, the
Court begins in
by tying the implied freedom to what is necessary to enable the people to
exercise a free and informed choice as electors —
which is precisely the
touchstone that McHugh J had advanced in
Theophanous
However, it is noted in the
judgment that much of the information
needed for this will in fact be disseminated during the period between the
holding of one election
and the calling of the next — a fact that McHugh
J's previous judgments had not considered. And yet, once this last proposition
is accepted, it follows from the premises that the freedom cannot be limited to
election periods. In this way, the
judgment, while going beyond
McHugh J's earlier conclusions, appeals to his Honour's own formulation of the
question, an approach
that is evidently traced to the text of the
Constitution
in particular the mandate in sections 7,
that members of Parliament
are to be chosen by the people, voting in elections. The availability of
information relevant to federal
electoral choices is a touchstone that is
peculiar to McHugh J's (and Dawson J's) distinct
reasoning that leads to the conclusion that the freedom of political
communication to which the
Constitution
gives rise does indeed extend to
the period between elections is sociological reasoning. Not very sophisticated
sociology, perhaps,
but sociology nevertheless. Our knowledge of how politics
works in contemporary Australia tells us that an election simply will not
instance of direct choice unless at least certain information is freely
available for dissemination and discussion not only
during election periods but
in between elections. (The reference here to 'contemporary Australia' is not
insignificant. It may be
that changes in social conditions bring it about that
limitations upon political communication which once would have interfered with
direct choice by the people now do not, or vice versa. The meaning of the words
has not changed, but circumstances may have.)
What is the relevance to this conclusion of the fact — frequently
remarked upon — that the framers of the
Constitution
did not intend
to create a constitutional system of
while they intended that Australia should be a representative democracy, they
also intended that to a significant extent
this should be the result not of the
operation of the
Constitution
alone, but of its operation in conjunction
with an important range of conventions (including those conventions central to
responsible
government), and with the Parliament operating as a democratic
legislature?
The short answer is: not all that much. Dawson J, in
Theophanous
asserted that:
if those who drafted the
Constitution
had believed that the existing defamation
laws impaired the representative government for which they sought to provide, it
is inconceivable
that they would not have sought to correct the situation
explicitly.
may be true, but if so it simply suggests that the framers had false beliefs
of direct choice (just as,
in earlier examples, we saw that framers might have false beliefs about such
psychopathology
marriage in the strict sense
This same conclusion, that the framers' desires and expectations are of
little relevance, can be stated affirmatively rather than
negatively. The
framers used the words
directly chosen
, and therefore signalled
referential intentions to locate their use of those words in a referential chain
which has, at its end,
a particular kind of political event. The framers may not
have foreseen that, in the future, constitutional mandating of direct choice
would impose limits upon the power of Australian organs of government, but this
does not change the fact that they used the words
that they used. Had the
framers wanted to use other words, located in other referential chains, they
could have: for example, they
might have said
directly elected
directly chosen
, and it is less clear that
political kind, bring with them the same requirement of genuineness, and hence
the same degree of free communication, as do
. Or they could have
mandated a method for the election of the first parliament, and then made
provision for Parliament itself to
provide how it should be elected in future
years. But they did not.
There is a slightly different sort of objection sometimes put to the
contention that the
Constitution
provides for (a more than minimal degree
of) political freedom, which is that the contention rests upon a notion of
representative democracy
that cannot be found in the text, that is not
implied by the text as a matter of necessity, and that is therefore
extra-constitutional
and an illegitimate basis for inferring the meaning of the
Constitution
It is true that the
Constitution
does not, in its text, set forth any
notion of representative democracy — as already noted, what it does is to
provide for
a direct choice. As McHugh J put it in
Theophanous
does not follow either logically or as a matter of necessary implication that,
because some provisions of the
Constitution
give effect to an aspect of a
particular institution, that institution itself is part of the
Constitution
consequence of this conclusion is that the freedom of political communication
be established or defended by the following argument: (
Constitution
establishes representative democracy; (
representative democracy requires free political communication; and (
therefore, the
Constitution
ensures free political communication by
making unconstitutional the infringement of such freedom by the organs of
government. This
argument is bad in two ways: first, as McHugh J points out in
the passage cited above, the first premise is false; and second, as
Goldsworthy
has repeatedly argued, the inference to (
) is unsound, as it is
possible to have representative democracy without having such constitutional
protection.
But establishing and defending the freedom does not depend upon such an
argument. As we have seen, it follows from a simple consideration
required for a political event to be an instance of direct choice, as the
Constitution
consequent power of the courts to declare legislation or other governmental acts
unconstitutional if they unduly burden political
communication or otherwise
interfere with direct choice is simply a particular instance of the courts'
general power to ensure that
Australian organs of government act within
It follows from this that I agree with Aroney that 'eliminating balancing
from freedom of speech adjudication ... is a worthy
to the extent that such balancing appeals to considerations independent of the
constitutionally mandated requirement of
direct choice. It follows equally that
I disagree with Stone's suggestion that a protection of individual autonomy
might be extracted
from 'the constitutionally prescribed form of
government'.
however, sociological investigation were to reveal that certain forms of
autonomy were necessary incidents of the occurrence
of a direct choice, then I
would agree with Stone that such autonomy would enjoy constitutional
protection.
Finally, these considerations also suggest a (somewhat banal) understanding
of the High Court's remark, in
, that in mandating a direct choice
Constitution
does 'not confer personal rights on individuals. Rather
[it] preclude[s] the curtailment of the protected freedom by the exercise
legislative or executive
is not personal in that it is not a direct conferral of any privilege or
entitlement upon individuals. Rather, the
Constitution
, by making the
governmental powers that it confers subject to the requirement that there be a
direct choice of the members of parliament,
prohibits interference with that
mandated event. But it, of course, follows from this prohibition that
individuals might come to
enjoy particular entitlements or privileges as a
result of it, if such privileges or entitlements are themselves necessary
concomitants
of the organs of government acting so as not to interfere with the
mandated event taking
(This point
is likely to be particularly significant in relation to the common law, which in
Australia creates the background of
private rights against which the election of
members of parliament takes
Who falls within the reference of
the people of
the State/Commonwealth
? If we focus simply on
, there seem to
be at least three distinct referential chains in which the framers' word might
be located: one whose reference is
zoological kind
as a synonym for
); one whose reference is a
philosophical
(it is in this sense that it is sometimes debated whether those in
persistent vegetative states are nevertheless people, or whether
non-human people such as angels or gods); and one whose reference is a social
and political kind (
used to describe the members of a polity).
When we consider that the words used are
people of the
State/Commonwealth
, and that what the constitutional text is doing is to
specify the method of choosing members of Parliament, it becomes overwhelmingly
plausible to suppose that the framers intended
, as used by them,
to be located in the last of these referential chains. Who, then, are members of
the State or Commonwealth polities
in the relevant sense?
This inquiry bears some resemblance to that we have seen the High Court
undertaking in relation to
. One interesting feature of the
reasoning in
both the majority and Gaudron J take national communities — which
constitute the social and political kind crucial
to the meaning of
— to be at least partially constituted by legal understandings and
practices, with respect both to the identity of nations
(at both domestic and
international law Australia was not an independent nation in 1900) and the
criteria for membership of a national
community (membership of the British
Empire being legally characterised in terms of allegiance to the Crown). There
was disagreement,
however, on the
to which national communities
are constituted by law. The majority held that 'Parliament can ... treat as an
person who was born outside Australia, whose parents were not
Australians, and who has not been naturalized as an
Australian',
whereas Gaudron J expressed the view that
[a]s the transformation from non-alien to alien requires some relevant change in
the relationship between the individual and the
community, it is not, in my
view, open to the Parliament to effect that transformation by simply redefining
the criterion for admission
to membership of the community constituting the body
politic of Australia. Nor, in my view, does a mere failure on the part of a
non-alien to acquire citizenship involve any fundamental alteration of his or
her relationship with that
people of the State/Commonwealth
, it seems clear that law will
be highly relevant when it comes to the identity of the polity in question
— both the States
and the Commonwealth are significantly dependent upon
law for their constitution. What is less clear is the role played by law in
constituting membership of these polities. This is, therefore, an instance where
evidence of the expectations of the framers as to
the effect of their words can
those words.
The relevant evidence is found in ss 8,
(xxxvi) of the
Constitution
. These provisions establish, as the default Commonwealth
franchise, that pertaining under the law of each State for the more numerous
house of parliament in that State, but confer upon the Commonwealth Parliament
the power, subject to the
Constitution
, to displace the operation of
these State laws and to settle the franchise for Commonwealth elections. These
sections make it clear
that the framers did not take themselves, in using the
people of the State/Commonwealth
, to have referred to a kind
constituted solely by State laws, as they expressly confer the power for these
to be displaced. Nor did
they take themselves to have referred to a kind
constituted solely by Commonwealth laws, as prior to the exercise by the
Commonwealth
Parliament of its power to settle the franchise its members had to
be directly chosen by the people — so the reference of
already assumed by the framers to be established. It may be, however, that the
framers took themselves to have referred to a
kind constituted by the conjoint
operation of State and Commonwealth laws according to the rules set forth in
these sections of the
Constitution
. Does such a kind exist, such that a
referential chain can be created in respect of it? Or is it like
marriage in
the strict sense
? There seems no reason to suppose that it does not —
the operation of law would bring it into existence, just as it brings
existence (in the view of the majority in
) facts of nationality
— and hence one candidate referential intention we might attribute to the
framers, in their use of the
people of the State/Commonwealth
to refer to a social and political kind constituted by the conjoint operation of
State and Commonwealth laws.
This is not the only kind, however, in respect of which the framers may have
had referential intentions when they used the word
. For what was
described earlier as a third possible referential chain for
— namely, the chain whose reference is the social and political kind of
members of a polity
— is in fact two possible chains —
namely, one whose reference is
members of a polity, with membership legally
constituted
, and one whose reference is
members of a polity, with
membership non-legally constituted
. What sort of thing is this latter sort
of kind? This is a question of sociology and history. We could look to the
republican tradition,
running from ancient Greece and Rome through Machiavelli
to the American and French Revolutions. Or we could look to modern political
history, from those revolutions through the nineteenth and twentieth centuries
up to contemporary movements for self-determination,
as an ongoing working out,
independently of the law (indeed, transforming the law), of an answer to the
question: Who are the members
of any given polity? One important part of that
answer seems to be that political agency — both individual agency, and
agency worked out through individuals' civic engagement — is
crucial. (This explains, for example, why children are (typically)
in the relevant sense, and it also explains how in different times
and places it might make sense to set the age threshold for the
franchise at
Would it be consistent with the expectations displayed by ss 8,
(xxxiv) of the
Constitution
to attribute to the framers an intention to
, to this non-legally constituted social and political
kind? It may well be. Membership of a polity constituted by facts of civic
engagement is subject to change over time, as those facts change. If the framers
were aware of this, then it would make sense for
them to include ss 8 and
Constitution
, so as to confer a power on the Commonwealth Parliament
that would enable it to accommodate such changes. But did the framers have
an awareness? The answer, surely, is that they did. As Gummow, Kirby and Crennan
, the fact that:
[t]he criteria for qualification and disqualification of electors were left by
Constitution
to State law, until the Parliament provided otherwise
... reflected stresses and strains which in the 1890s affected the whole subject
of the franchise. ... [T]he thorny issues of the female franchise and racial
disqualification (of indigenous Australians and even
of immigrant British
subjects) were left by ss 8 and
Constitution
to State law
until the Parliament otherwise
issues were thorny precisely because the question of who was civically engaged
in the relevant sense — propertied white
men, all white men, white women
also, or even people of colour — was up for grabs and being worked out in
the political debates
of the time (and subsequently). The framers may even have
believed that one important piece of evidence that a group was civically
in the right sort of way was that it was able to persuade the Parliament to
grant it the
does refer to a kind that is constituted by facts of civic
engagement, it follows that ss 7 and
today make it constitutionally
impermissible to disenfranchise women. But, given that facts of civic engagement
can change, Goldsworthy
is wrong to argue that, if such disenfranchisement is
impermissible today, then it must have been impermissible even in 1900, contrary
to the beliefs of the framers and to their clear intention in including ss 8 and
Constitution
Such disenfranchisement may have been impermissible, of course, for it may in
fact have been the case that women already were civically
engaged, in the
relevant sense, in 1900; but it may be that they were not, or at least not
clearly. This is a historical question
which this article does not seek to
answer. The point is that to establish and defend a present-day prohibition on
the disenfranchisement
of women does not depend upon attributing to the framers
a referential intention that is inconsistent with their clear purpose in
including ss 8 and
Constitution
I will not attempt to establish, in this article, which referential intention
we should attribute to the framers — the intention
in the chain that terminates in a legally constituted, or a non-legally
constituted, kind. It is sufficient, for my purposes, to
have shown that the
constitutional text itself gives rise to no obvious objection to the opinion of
the majority of the High Court
, that we should attribute the
second of these candidate referential intentions. In
, Gleeson CJ
[T]he words of ss 7 and
, because of changed historical circumstances
including legislative history, have come to be a constitutional protection of
to vote. That, however, leaves open for debate the nature and extent
of the exceptions. The
Constitution
leaves it to Parliament to define
those exceptions, but its power to do so is not unconstrained. Because the
franchise is critical
to representative government, and lies at the centre of
our concept of participation in the life of the community, and of citizenship,
disenfranchisement of any group of adult citizens on a basis that does not
constitute a substantial reason for exclusion from such
participation would not
be consistent with choice by the people ...
Since what is involved [in disenfranchising prisoners] is not an additional form
of punishment, and since deprivation of the franchise
takes away a right
associated with citizenship, that is, with full membership of the community, the
rationale for the exclusion must
be that serious offending represents such a
form of civic irresponsibility that it is appropriate for Parliament to mark
such behaviour
as anti-social and to direct that physical separation from the
community will be accompanied by symbolic separation in the form of
fundamental political right. ...
It is consistent with our constitutional concept of choice by the people for
Parliament to treat those who have been imprisoned for
serious criminal offences
as having suffered a temporary suspension of their connection with the
community, reflected at the physical
level in incarceration, and reflected also
in temporary deprivation of the right to participate by voting in the political
the community. It is also for Parliament, consistently with the
rationale for exclusion, to decide the basis upon which to identify
incarcerated
offenders whose serious criminal wrongdoing warrants temporary suspension of a
right of citizenship. ...
The adoption of the criterion of serving a sentence of imprisonment as the
method of identifying serious criminal conduct for the
purpose of satisfying the
rationale for treating serious offenders as having severed their link with the
community, a severance reflected
in temporary disenfranchisement, breaks down at
the level of short-term prisoners. ... At this level, the method of
discriminating
between offences, for the purpose of deciding which are so
serious as to warrant disenfranchisement and which are not, becomes
The step that was taken by Parliament in 2006 of abandoning any attempt to
identify prisoners who have committed serious crimes by
reference to either the
term of imprisonment imposed or the maximum penalty for the offence broke the
rational connection necessary
to reconcile the disenfranchisement with the
constitutional imperative of choice by the
passages make it clear that Gleeson CJ is attributing to the framers, in their
, the intention to refer to a kind constituted primarily
non-legally, by facts of civic engagement. Parliament is to enjoy a margin
appreciation in respect of these facts, but is not to be the constitutor of
Gummow, Kirby and Crennan suggest the same (although with less care to locate
their remarks by reference to constitutional
rather than extra-constitutional
notions) when they conclude that:
The legislative pursuit of an end which stigmatises offenders by imposing a
civil disability during any term of imprisonment ...
[goes] beyond what is
reasonably appropriate and adapted (or 'proportionate') to the maintenance of
representative
government.
same idea can be seen to be at work in earlier remarks by justices of the Court
Constitution
is intended to secure the fundamental sovereignty
For the reasons discussed in the previous sub-part, it would be an error to hold
Constitution
gives effect to an abstract principle of popular
sovereignty, from which constraints upon governmental power can be inferred. But
it is quite legitimate to have regard to relevant evidence of the framers'
desire to achieve popular sovereignty, and in light of
that evidence to form a
view as to which of two possible referential intentions was in play when they
used the phrases
people of the State/Commonwealth
Goldsworthy reaches an alternative conclusion from the one defended here. He
argues that, from the fact that the framers of the
Constitution
understand the
Constitution
to guarantee to women the right to vote, it
follows that
was not intended by them to refer to
people, irrespective of sex, and hence that the only tenable interpretation of
is one which allows women to be
disenfranchised.
As we saw in the previous part, Goldsworthy's analytical vocabulary does not
expressly address the questions: What are the relevant
kinds in relation to
which referential chains exist? And what were the framers' beliefs about those
kinds? Once these questions have
been asked it might seem that we can impute an
answer to Goldsworthy, namely, that the framers used
to refer to a
legally constituted kind. But what is Goldsworthy's reason for excluding the
alternative possibility, that the framers
were referring to a kind constituted
by (potentially changing) facts of civic engagement? If he cannot exclude this
possibility,
then his conclusion is a non sequitur.
Although Goldsworthy does not expressly address the questions about kinds, he
does make some remarks relevant to answering them:
[T]he founders ... did not understand these words [
directly chosen by the
] to guarantee that women would be entitled to vote. ... To treat the
founders' understanding ... as a mere 'application intention',
which should now
be ignored because it amounted to a misunderstanding of the meaning of the words
they enacted in ss 7 and
(they said 'people', and women are people!), is to
attribute to them an elementary mistake which would have been obvious at the
Even in 1900, women were regarded as people. The founders did not stupidly
overlook this fact when they adopted the words of ss 7
; rather, they used
those words in a loose and non-literal, but idiomatic, sense. The same would be
true if those words were re-enacted
today: they would not be understood
literally, as guaranteeing the right of children to vote, even though children
saw earlier that Goldsworthy takes the reference of
psychopathology
a natural (psychiatric) kind. Consistently with this view, Goldsworthy
identifies as the
the first of the
candidate referential chains identified above, namely the natural (zoological)
. He then notes, correctly, that the framers' cannot have
, as used by them, to have this meaning, that is, to be
located on this chain. But he fails to note the clear difference from the
psychopathology
, namely, that there
alternative
referential chains in the neighbourhood, and rather than attempting to identify
these candidate chains and to consider
in detail which referential intentions
can plausibly be attributed to the framers of the
Constitution
on to talk of loose, idiomatic senses of the word
. And this,
despite the fact that he adduces evidence of a long pattern of usage of
clearly intended to refer to the social and political kind
members of a
Obviously, I agree with much in Goldsworthy's pattern of reasoning in
relation both to
psychopathology
. But I object to
the slide from notions of literal meaning — implicitly if not expressly
understood as reference to natural
kinds — to notions of loose, idiomatic
meaning, which are not analysed in relation to candidate referential chains, and
thereby makes it easy for Goldsworthy to conclude, falsely, that there is
only one tenable interpretation of the phrases
people of the
State/Commonwealth
Why does Goldsworthy find the slide so easy to make? Because, like others
writing on constitutional interpretation, he is insufficiently
sensitive to the
existence of social and political kinds whose nature can be elucidated by
sociological and historical inquiry. He
seems to assume, without argument, that
if interpretation is not undertaken by reference to natural kinds (with which we
he implicitly identifies literal meanings) or to legally constituted
kinds (which we have seen he takes, implicitly, to be the reference
in ss 7 and
Constitution
), then what must be in
play are moral
principles.
Thus, for example, he writes:
It might still be argued that the founders' enactment intention was to entrench
the principle of representative democracy, understood
as an abstract principle
of political morality ... [But] [i]f the same interpretive method were applied
to every clause, constitutional
interpretation would explode into political
philosophy, judges in every case applying abstract principles of political
morality rather
than the words by which those principles were given whatever
practical implementation the founders thought
a somewhat similar vein, Allan and Aroney refer to 'vague, rather indeterminate
rights guarantees in a constitution' and say, of
Constitution
, that 'it is clear that an American-style set of vague,
amorphous rights was explicitly
Elsewhere, Aroney has characterised the process of determining whether or not an
exercise of governmental power is consistent with
the constitutional mandate of
direct choice
as requiring 'normative judgments' and 'value
judgments,'
although he notes that framing the question as one about the true character of
the electoral choice to be made, rather than as
an abstract question about
representative democracy, imposes strictures on judicial
discretion,
does not take the extra step of noting that this is, at least to a significant
degree, a result of the question having been rendered
sociological and
historical in character. This article will not consider the question of proper
judicial method for undertaking sociological
and historical inquiry. But I think
it can be taken for granted that this would require more than simply consulting
the opinions
of the framers as to the truths of sociology and
For reasons similar to those just considered, Hayne J's dissent in
, on the grounds that '[p]olitical acceptance and political
acceptability find no footing in accepted doctrines of constitutional
construction,'
simply misses the mark. Assuming that 'politically acceptable' means 'conforming
to the requirements of political morality', it is
no part of the reasoning of
that case that the disenfranchisement of (certain) prisoners, or of women, does
not conform to those
requirements. As we have seen, what matters (taking
to refer to a non-legally constituted kind) is that those whose
franchise is at stake are civically engaged in the relevant sense.
If Hayne J intended 'politically acceptable' to be understood in a
descriptive, rather than a moral, sense, it remains the case that
his reason for
dissent is not a good one. For if what is at issue is the identity of the
members of a polity, where membership is
(at least in part) a function of civic
engagement, then facts of political acceptance and acceptability may be
relevant, as they
may be one source of evidence as to facts of civic engagement.
There will be other sources of evidence as well. For example, one
that can be drawn from Patricia Williams' discussion of the relationship between
black Americans and rights
that if a politically self-conscious collective takes itself to be engaged in
civic discourse, then it is, and its members are
therefore members of the
polity. To this extent, political agency is self-validating. In his dissent in
, Heydon J expresses concern that
[t]he plaintiff's key assumption was that it is a necessary but not sufficient
condition for the validity of electoral laws that
they maintain or widen the
franchise: 'one cannot wind the clock back'. ... Many think that one of the
advantages of having a liberal
democratic legislature, particularly when the
legislators belong to political parties having different opinions on some
its capacity to experiment, to test what does or does not work, to
make up for unsatisfactory 'advances' by carrying out prudent
'retreats'. That
capacity stands in contrast to the tendency of totalitarian regimes to become
gerontocratic and ossified, faithful
to only one technique of government. It
would be surprising if the
Constitution
operated so as to
inhibit the capacity of the legislature, having changed the electoral laws in a
particular way, to restore them
to their earlier form if that change was found
wanting in the light of
experience.
does indeed refer to a non-legally constituted kind, and if as a
result of an extension of the franchise members of the community
were to become
civically engaged to such an extent that their membership of the polity became
entrenched, then it would be unconstitutional
to subsequently disenfranchise
them. It does not therefore follow that there can, on this interpretation, be no
winding back, for
not all extensions of the franchise will necessarily be to
those who are civically engaged (indeed, some extensions of the franchise
themselves be unconstitutional if they extend to those who are not, and who as a
result of being enfranchised do not become,
civically engaged). But to assume
that it must
be open to the Parliament to retreat as well as to
advance, is simply to assume what needs to be shown, namely, that the
referential
intentions of the framers' were to refer to the legally constituted,
rather than the non-legally constituted, kind.
C Do the political freedoms and entitlements arise from an implication?
Should the reasoning defended in this article,
whereby certain political freedoms and entitlements are (at least plausibly, if
definitively in the case of the franchise) identified as mandated by the
Constitution
, be described as the identification of an
implication
Constitution
? The reasoning has two stages. First, there is the
identification of the framers' referential intentions. For the reasons given
not think that it matters whether we describe the content of these intentions as
express or implied. Second, there is the working
out of the consequences that
flow from the referential intentions that the framers had. It seems reasonable
to describe this as the
working out of an implication, although it is not one of
the four sorts of implication identified by Goldsworthy.
Theophanous
, Dawson J said that 'it has never been thought that the
implications which might properly be drawn are other than those which are
necessary or obvious having regard to the express provisions of the
Constitution
As Goldsworthy has argued, it cannot be said that the constitutional
protection of political freedoms and entitlements is necessary
representative democracy to
However, that is not the only question of necessity that arises, as McHugh J has
pointed out:
[I]n addition to those implications that are embedded in the language of a legal
instrument, an implication may sometimes have to
be made in respect of a legal
instrument so that it can achieve its apparent purpose or be given a meaning
that avoids absurdity
or irrationality ... Similarly, a necessary implication
may arise from the need to protect the rights or even the existence of a
named in a legal
instrument.
Constitution
the direct choice of the people of the
State/Commonwealth
. It mandates that this event should take place. Hence, as
McHugh J observes, it is reasonable to say that a necessary implication
to protect the occurrence of this event.
Nationwide News
, Brennan J says that:
[W]here a representative democracy is constitutionally entrenched, it carries
with it those legal incidents which are essential to
the effective maintenance
of that form of government. Once it is recognized that a representative
democracy is constitutionally prescribed,
the freedom of discussion which is
essential to sustain it is as firmly entrenched in the
Constitution
system of government which the
Constitution
the reasons we have seen, the claim that the
Constitution
representative democracy must be rejected. But the
Constitution
'entrench' the
direct choice of the people
, and thereby entrenches its
'essential incidents', that is to say, whatever is inherent to the occurrence of
such an event.
Faculty of Law, Monash University. This article was originally presented to the
2009 Constitutional Theory Colloquium,
Centre For Comparative Constitutional
Studies, University of Melbourne Law School. I would like to thank Steve Barker
and Jeff Goldsworthy
for many helpful discussions on the subject matter of the
article, Jayani Nadarajalingam for her research assistance, and John Daley,
Natasha Guantai, Toby Handfield, Kevin Heller and Dale Smith for their comments
on earlier versions.
[1997] HCA 25
(1997) 189 CLR
Goldsworthy, 'Implications in Language, Law and the
Constitution
' in Geoffrey
Lindell (ed),
Future Directions in Australian Constitutional Law
150, 166–67. Although this article takes Goldsworthy's writings on the
Constitution
as its principal target, the argument of the
article has broader relevance to debates about originalism and the meaning of
texts in other jurisdictions. Solum notes that 'Predating much of the
American work on the New Originalism was Jeffrey Goldsworthy's
work, addressed
to the Australian
Constitution
, but developed with an explicit awareness of the
theoretical debates swirling around American constitutionalism': Lawrence B
'Semantic Originalism' (2008)
Illinois Public Law and Legal Theory
Research Papers Series No 07–24
(draft created on 22 November 2008)
Social Science Research Network
http://papers.ssrn.com/abstract=1120244
at 28 May 2010, 19. It follows from this that a consideration of the
implications or limitations of Goldsworthy's position will
have ramifications
for the American debate (for one example of such ramifications, see below n 55).
(Solum, at 19, identifies as
Goldsworthy's 'first major statement' of his
position Jeffrey Goldsworthy, 'Originalism in Constitutional Interpretation'
[1997] FedLawRw 1
Federal Law Review
But much of the technical argument of
this later piece is anticipated by 'Implications in Language, Law and the
Constitution
Goldsworthy,
'Implications', above n 2, 182.
For example,
Allan and Aroney argue that the purpose of a written constitution is to 'lock
in' certain political outcomes, and that
it would vitiate this purpose if the
process of interpretation were permitted to lead to constitutional outcomes at
odds with the
beliefs and expectations of the framers: James Allan and Nicholas
Aroney, 'An Uncommon Court: How the High Court of Australia Has
Australian Federalism'
[2008] SydLawRw 15
Sydney Law Review
251–55. This is, in effect, an argument that there should be a judicial
power of constitutional rectification
if the proper interpretation of the text
would lead to outcomes different from those contemplated and desired by the
framers (on
the notion of rectification, see below n 16 and accompanying text).
Goldsworthy rejects the existence of a power of rectification
grounded in such
political considerations: 'Implications', above n 2, 183.
Renewing Meaning: A Speech-Act Theoretic Approach
(2004). Unlike
earlier work on speech acts, including that which Goldsworthy discusses
('Implications', above n 2), Barker presents
the theory of speech acts, not
as an adjunct to a general semantic theory but,
a general semantic
theory: see below n 29.
'Dreaming and
Depth Grammar' in R J Butler (ed),
Analytical Philosophy
(1962) 211,
218–21; 'The Meaning of "Meaning"' in
Mind, Language and Reality:
Philosophical Papers, Volume 2
(1975) 215–217.
Goldsworthy,
'Implications' above n 2, 154.
Alberto Coffa,
The Semantic Tradition from Kant to Carnap: To The Vienna
(1991) chs 7, 17.
Goldsworthy
does not consider an additional interesting category of semantically-determined
implications, namely,
conventional implicatures
, which contribute to
meaning without contributing to truth-conditions: see Barker, above n 5, 40,
42–44, 100. An example is
the non-truth-conditional implication,
introduced by use of the conjunction 'but' in place of 'and', that a contrast
obtains between
the conjuncts. This article will not consider conventional
implicatures either.
Goldsworthy,
'Implications', above n 2, 154, 156, 163–64, 165, 169.
154–56. Paul Grice calls these 'conversational implicatures':
in the Way of Words
(1989) 26–31, 39–40.
The example,
together with a more technical analysis, can be found in Grice, above n 13, 24,
Goldsworthy,
'Implications', above n 2, 164.
164–165, 169, 183.
The reasons
that might support such rectification are stated by the majority in
Boilermakers'
[T]he distinction was perceived [by the framers of the
Constitution
between the essential federal conception of a legal distribution of governmental
powers among the parts of the system and what was
accidental to federalism ...
The position and constitution of the judicature could not be considered
accidental to the institution
of federalism: for upon the judicature rested the
ultimate responsibility for the maintenance and enforcement of the boundaries
which governmental power might be exercised and upon that the whole
system was constructed.
R v Kirby; Ex parte Boilermakers' Society of Australia
[1956] HCA 10
(1956) 94 CLR
, 275–76 (Dixon CJ, McTiernan, Fullagar and Kitto JJ)
Boilermakers'
). That is to say, the role of the federal judicature
in upholding the federal arrangements mandated by the
Constitution
requires that there be a separation of judicial power. If this is true, and if
the separation of judicial power is neither expressly
provided for nor implied,
then judicial rectification becomes one way of meeting the necessity. For a
discussion of when, if at all,
judicial rectification of the
Constitution
is permitted, see Goldsworthy, 'Implications', above n 2, 183.
Goldsworthy,
above n 2, 154, 157–61.
Thus, in the
Communist Party Case
Fullagar J observed that 'in our system the
principle of
Marbury v Madison
is accepted as axiomatic':
Communist Party v Commonwealth
[1951] HCA 5
(1951) 83 CLR 1
, 262 (footnote omitted).
Goldsworthy also suggests that rather than being an implicit assumption, the
power of judicial review may
arise under pre-existing law: 'Implications', above
Boilermakers'
[1956] HCA 10
(1956) 94 CLR 254
The example
is from John R Searle, 'Literal Meaning' in
Expression and Meaning: Studies
in the Theory of Speech Acts
(1979) 127–28. It is discussed by
Goldsworthy, 'Implications', above n 2, 158.
The example is from Ludwig Wittgenstein,
Philosophical Investigations
E M Anscombe trans, 1958) [70]. It is discussed by Goldsworthy, 'Implications',
above n 2, 158–59. Earlier, Wittgenstein
introduces his well-known notion
of 'family resemblance', that (for example) there is no common set of properties
shared by all the
things referred to by 'game', but rather 'a complicated
network of similarities overlapping and criss-crossing': at [66]–[67].
This may be true of a word like 'game' considered in the abstract from any
occasion of use, but as
go on to explain, the intention with which
such a word is used on any given occasion constrains its reference so as to
considerably greater determinacy. See also below n 47.
Goldsworthy,
'Implications', above n 2, 158.
assert that the distinction is important: ibid 152.
sustained defence of this claim, locating it within a Davidsonian,
truth-conditional account of semantic content, see Herman
Cappelen and Ernie
Insensitive Semantics: A Defence of Semantic Minimalism and Speech
Act Pluralism
(2005). For Donald Davidson on the relationship between
truth-conditions, semantic content and pragmatics, see 'Truth and Meaning'
(1967), 'What Metaphors Mean' (1978) and 'Communication and Convention' (1982)
Inquiries into Truth and Interpretation
(1984). As will become clear,
I think this position is mistaken. This article draws on the alternative account
of the relationship
between truth, content and pragmatics developed by Barker,
according to which semantics simply is a highly abstract formal and
compositional
pragmatics: above n 5.
Barker, above
n 5, 82 (note also that Barker's analysis at 50 is overly simplistic, as it
fails to draw the crucial distinction
between generic and linguistically
structured desires).
Goldsworthy's discussion of this example, see 'Implications', above n 2,
Barker, above
Goldsworthy,
'Implications', above n 2, 159–61.
166. See also the discussion of 'advertising an intention' in Barker, above n 5,
7, 11, 113.
technical account of apposition and relative pronouns, see Barker, above n 5,
112, 180–83.
That is not
to say that in other cases, where it is not the content of referring terms that
is at issue, there may not be an interesting
distinction between express and
implied meanings. For example, implicatures (of which deliberate implications
are an example) are
components of meaning that do not contribute to the truth
conditions of utterances: see the extensive discussion in Barker, above
Goldsworthy,
'Implications', above n 2, 182.
A further way
in which the waiter's two imagined utterances differ is that the second contains
the indefinite rather than the definite
article. Use of the definite article
the hamburger that you ordered
— signals that the
is already sufficiently established in the
conversational context to uniquely fix its reference. This further contributes
, as used by the waiter, inheriting the content it has when
used by me (the reference-fixing content is (roughly) 'hamburger to be
to me on this occasion'). Conversely, use of the indefinite article — as
a hamburger
— signals that the conversation has not yet
sufficiently established the content of
in order to uniquely
fix its reference, and invites the audience to fill out that content by
processing the utterance itself. In
the case of 'Here is a hamburger', that
processing would include noting that what is adduced is a plastic-encased
hamburger, and
this would signal that the reference of
intended to include such things. On these differing contributions to meaning
made by 'the' and 'a', including when relative pronouns
are also used, see
Barker, above n 5, 111–12, 136–37, 141–44, 181.
simplification of the technical account found in Barker, above n 5, 111,
118–19, 122–23, 126–27, 132,
153. The apparent circularity in
this explanation will be taken up in the next part.
For a sketch
of an account of language in which meanings result entirely from a speaker's own
referential intentions, with no incorporation
of the intentions of others, see
Bertrand Russell,
The Philosophy of Logical Atomism
(first published
1918, 1985 ed), especially at 61–65. On Russell's account the only truly
referring terms are (
) demonstratives, and (
) the names of
sensory properties such as colours and tones. All other grammatically referring
terms are logically complex combinations
of these truly referring terms. It is
generally accepted by contemporary philosophers that this sort of account does
not have sufficient
resources to account for the communicative power that public
languages actually possess.
See, eg, the
discussions in Barker, above n 5, 120, 122; Kripke, above n 7, 96, 106,
134–35, 162. These discussions are concerned
primarily with proper names
rather than common nouns. In the case of a proper name, the referential
intention is that
should refer to the baptised object. In either case,
is a homonym (which will frequently be the case if
proper name) then a further referential intention will be that the content of
the newly-coined
be distinct from the content of
describes this piggybacking, whereby a speaker is able to refer to a kind with
which she is not personally familiar (and
whose properties may be completely
unknown to her), by using a word for it coined by someone else who was familiar
with it, as the
'division of linguistic labour': 'The Meaning of "Meaning"',
above n 6, 227–29.
This account
of baptism for (certain) common nouns is adapted from the account of the
drifting meaning of
found in Barker, above n 5, 121. On that
account, the cumulative weight of uses of the word while demonstrating the
island off the
east coast of Africa, rather than that coast itself, explains how
comes to refer to the island rather than the coast, despite
the coast being the initial object of baptism. Not all common nouns involve
sort of drift (although some may), but the cumulative weight of uses of the word
in demonstrative contexts is able to substitute
for the lack of a primordial act
of baptism. See also Putnam's discussion of non-natural kind terms in 'The
Meaning of "Meaning"',
above n 6, 242–5.
Putnam, 'The
Meaning of "Meaning"', above n 6, 241.
relevant notion of resemblance, see Sally Haslanger, 'What Are We Talking About?
The Semantics and Politics of Social Kinds',
(2005) 20(4)
Which is to
say, using the language of the division of linguistic labour, that at least
speaker must do the labour: see above n 42.
It should be
noted that this disagreement might arise even if there is agreement that
includes the description
consists of members who represent
particular localities
includes this description, it might
be that things that do not satisfy it, nevertheless, are of the same kind as
those things that
do. The function of
is to identify the baptismal
instance of
, not to specify the essential characteristics of
parliaments as a kind. Thus, although the notion of 'family resemblance' (above
n 26) may be true of the instances of certain kinds, that notion does not help
us to understand how referential chains are established.
Baptism depends upon
picking out an instance of a kind, not upon describing more-or-less vaguely the
essential nature of all instances
of that kind. Indeed, as Putnam points out, it
may well be possible to baptise a kind while being quite ignorant of its
nature — thus, neurologists were able to baptise the kind
multiple sclerosis
by pointing to an instance exhibiting its typical
symptoms, although ignorant of its aetiology, and eighteenth century chemists
able to baptise the kind
although ignorant of the underlying
chemical nature of acids: 'Dreaming and Depth Grammar', above n 6, 218–21.
Unfortunately,
discussions of family resemblance do not always draw this
distinction. For example, Simon Evans refers indifferently to 'the essential
features of a thing' and to 'the essential features of the concept to which [a]
term corresponds' (that is, to the essential features
representation of the kind referred to by the word in question
likewise to 'similarities between instances of concepts' (that is, to
similarities between instances of a kind) and '[similarity]
in relevant respects
to some representation of the concept' (that is, to similarities to mental
representations of kinds): 'The Meaning
of Constitutional Terms: Essential
Features, Family Resemblance and Theory-Based Approaches'
[2006] UNSWLawJl 43
, 211–13, 217. As we have seen, for a word to refer to a
kind, the mental representation of that kind by the use of the word
have any particular features at all — essential, resembling in the family
way or otherwise — provided only that
it locates the use of the word in
the correct referential chain.
Contribution to the Critique of Political Economy
(1859) in Lewis S Feuer
Karl Marx and Friedrich Engels: Basic Writings on Politics and
At least some
social theorists take the view that, at least in some cases, part of the
function of those practices is to engender
false beliefs about them and their
salient features: see the discussion of ideology in Raymond Geuss,
and Real Politics
(2008), especially at 51–54.
Irresponsibility: On the Legitimation of Human Suffering
Geuss, above
n 49, 9–15 (footnote omitted).
above n 45, 20 (emphasis in original).
Ibid 17. This
relevance of social and historical inquiry to questions of legal interpretation
may be one way of making sense of
Ronald Dworkin's notorious claim that 'no firm
line divides jurisprudence from adjudication ... Jurisprudence is the general
of adjudication, silent prologue to any decision at law':
(1986) 90. Of course, the jurisprudence in question may not be quite
the sort of jurisprudence that Dworkin has in mind, being concerned
political philosophy than with social theory.
conclusion is sufficient to cast doubt on theories of interpretation that
identify the meaning of a constitutional text as
original conventional
semantic meaning
(such as the 'semantic originalism' defended by Solum,
above n 2): as the discussion in the text has shown, the conventions that
a word's usage may rest upon false beliefs about the properties of the kinds to
which the speakers in question intend to refer.
Solum asserts that an
originalist theory of this sort could simply 'incorporate the role of linguistic
convention in creating the
necessary relationships between words and phrases, on
the one hand, and ... kinds, on the other': above n 2, 95. Such an attempt
incorporation, however, would in fact result in a transformation of the theory,
in two respects. First, it would render interpretation
dependent upon the
referential intentions of law-makers, because it is these intentions which
determine in which referential chains
law-makers' utterances are located, and
any conventional meanings of the sort that might be recorded in a dictionary are
to, the location of particular utterances
within particular referential chains (see above n 36 and accompanying text);
whereas Solum,
at 38–50, puts forward a theory of interpretation based on
original conventional semantic meaning precisely to
having to make
these sorts of inquiries into law-makers' intentions. (It is beyond the scope of
this article to consider Solum's
reasons for believing that the relevant
intentions of the law-makers
be identified.) Second, for reasons
we have already seen (above n 49 and accompanying text), recognition of the
importance to legal
interpretation of social and political kinds naturally
shifts the burden of the interpretive inquiry
from original
understandings and
inquiries into the nature of social and
political arrangements, which inquiries will naturally draw upon our best
contemporary
understandings of such matters (of course, our best
contemporary understandings of how things were in the past will remain highly
relevant, but we will likely be interested in far more than simply past
conventional meanings).
case, eg, for
: see the discussion in Barker, above n 5, 132
(although Barker talks of
, reserving
to the speech act of uttering a referring term: at 7, n 10).
discussion of the rationale for subordinating beliefs to practices, see
Haslanger, above n 45, 13–17.
Goldsworthy,
'Originalism', above n 2, 30.
Dworkin's drawing of much the same distinction (using the phrases
political or expectation intention
), while perhaps
sufficient to rebut an originalism that fastens on the second category of
intentions, does not on its own do very
much to establish the implications and
limitations of originalism as an approach to interpretation: Ronald Dworkin,
Justice in Robes
(2006) 29–30, 125–26.
Goldsworthy,
'Originalism', above n 2, 31.
Allan and Aroney, who say that 'a purposive approach in statutory interpretation
is, in effect, an appeal to enactors' intentions.
in enacting this contested provision?', thereby implying that these two sets of
mental states — a speaker's referential
intentions, and a speaker's
beliefs and hopes about what her words refer to — are identical: above n
[1999] HCA 30
(2007) 233 CLR 162
Goldsworthy,
'Originalism', above n 2, 42.
[1988] HCA 45
See above n
66 and accompanying text. The majority in
also draws attention to
the same facts:
The transition from Empire to Commonwealth and the emergence of Australia and
other Dominions as independent sovereign nations within
the Commonwealth
inevitably changed the nature of the relationship between the United Kingdom and
its former colonies and rendered
obsolete notions of an indivisible Crown.
Ibid 184. However, while the majority then goes on to assert that '[i]t is
not that the meaning of the word "alien" had altered',
no account is given, of
the sort provided by Gleeson CJ, of the interaction between changing facts and
unchanging meaning.
Aroney has recently characterised the freedom as one that operates to invalidate
legislation, both Commonwealth and State
legislative powers being subject to the
Constitution
): 'The Implied Rights Revolution —
Balancing Means and Ends?' in H P Lee and Peter Gerangelos (eds),
Constitutional Advancement in a Frozen Continent
(2009) 173, 183. The
High Court in
held that the freedom also operates to constrain the
activities of the executive: above n 1, 560–61. Adrienne Stone has
persuasively
argued that the freedom — assuming that it exists —
should also operate to prevent infringement by the common law that
is developed
and applied by the Australian judiciary: 'Rights, Personal Rights and Freedoms:
The Nature of the Freedom of Political
Communication'
[2001] MelbULawRw 13
University Law Review
; 'The Common Law and the
Constitution
[2002] MelbULawRw 33
Melbourne University Law Review
186–87. It may be that, besides
true choice
, there is another
relevant kind in the neighbourhood, namely,
But as the quoted passage shows, even Dawson J does not entertain the suggestion
that the framers intended to refer to this
kind. I therefore exclude it from
further consideration.
Aroney, above
Aroney, 'Justice McHugh, Representative Government and the Elimination of
[2006] SydLawRw 23
Sydney Law Review
, 515–16 (footnotes
(1992) 177 CLR 106
, 182–83 (Dawson J); Allan and Aroney, above n 4,
Aroney, above n 4, 292;
Theophanous v Herald & Weekly Times Ltd
[1994] HCA 46
(1994) 182 CLR 104
, 193 (Dawson J), 200–201 (McHugh J)
Theophanous
'); Goldsworthy, 'Implications', above n 2, 179–80;
Jeffrey Goldsworthy, 'Constitutional Implications and Freedom of Political
Speech: Reply to Stephen Donaghue'
[1997] MonashULawRw 22
Monash University Law Review
, 371; Aroney, above n 77, 528–29; Aroney, above n 72,
[1994] HCA 46
Aroney, above
n 72, 182–184, 187; Goldsworthy, 'Implications', above n 2, 180;
Goldsworthy, 'Reply', above n 79, 372–74.
[1994] HCA 46
Goldsworthy,
'Implications', above n 2, 180; Goldsworthy, 'Reply', above n 79, 372. See also
Aroney, above n 72, 182;
Theophanous
[1994] HCA 46
(1994) 182 CLR 104
, 192 (Dawson
Even Dawson J
sometimes has difficulty confining his attention to the constitutionally
direct choice
, instead addressing the more general notion of
representative government:
Sections 7 and
, and the other provisions of the
Constitution
guarantee free speech but provide for representative government. The only
necessary or obvious implication, if indeed it
be a matter of implication at
all, is that there must be freedom of communication to the extent that it is a
requirement of representative
government.
Theophanous
[1994] HCA 46
(1994) 182 CLR 104
, 190. Aroney suggests that
consideration of what is required by direct choice amounts to an
extra-constitutional basis for establishing
and defending the freedom, but he
also notes that this is unavoidable (and hence, presumably, unobjectionable):
having observed that
'the task is limited to one of attributing meaning to the
text of the
Constitution
' (above n 77, 530), he further observes that:
On the assumption that constitutions are a form of legally authoritative
communication on which judges rely in order to justify their
semantics, syntax and pragmatics are thus unavoidable. And yet constitutions do
not come with their own ready-made instructions
syntax and pragmatics are external to the
Constitution
above n 72, 177. As we have seen, interpretation also requires sociological
and historical investigation. These are similarly external
but unavoidable
Aroney also
makes this point: above n 77, 530.
'Implied Rights Revolution', above n 72, 187, and see also Aroney, above n 77,
especially at 519–28, 531–34.
Dawson J makes a similar point in
Theophanous
, stating that '[i]f a law interferes with the essential
elements of representative government, it is beyond power, regardless of
justification. No balancing process occurs':
[1994] HCA 46
(1994) 182 CLR 104
'Rights', above n 72, 399–400, and see also the discussion at
[1997] HCA 25
(1999), John Rawls seems to analyse human rights in a similar
indirect way, as being enjoyed by individuals not directly, but because
necessary incidents of a political community being the right sort of community
to participate in international life: see
the discussion in Patrick Emerton,
'International Economic Justice: Is a Principled Liberalism Possible?' in Sarah
Joseph, David
Kinley and Jeff Waincymer (eds),
The World Trade Organization
and Human Rights: Interdisciplinary Perspectives
discussion in Stone, 'Rights', above n 72, especially at 400–417.
accompanying nn 69 and 70.
[1988] HCA 45
(1988) 165 CLR 178
, 185, quoting
Pochi v Macphee
[1982] HCA 60
(1982) 151 CLR 101
109–10 (Gibbs CJ). The emphasis is added by the majority in
accompanying n 63 above.
understanding of
membership of a polity
, from which follows the same
conclusion about the enfranchisement of children, is suggested in
The Commonwealth
[1975] HCA 53
(1975) 135 CLR 1
, 36 (McTiernan and Jacobs JJ)
not such a belief was plausible in 1900, or remains plausible in some cases, it
is probably not plausible in all cases
(for example, in the case of prisoners,
or of certain racial minorities).
Goldsworthy,
'Originalism', above n 2, 43–45, 47. Heydon J raises a similar objection
in his dissent in
(2007) 233 CLR 162
, 226. The suggestion that the
limits upon permissible disenfranchisement imposed by ss 7 and
has changed
with time can be found in
[1975] HCA 53
(1975) 135 CLR 1
, 36 (McTiernan and
Jacobs JJ);
McGinty v Western Australia
[1996] HCA 48
(1996) 186 CLR 140
, 201 (Toohey
J), 221 (Gaudron J), 286–87 (Gummow J);
Langer v Commonwealth
[1996] HCA 43
(1996) 186 CLR 302
, 342 (McHugh J);
(2007) 233 CLR 162
(Gleeson CJ).
(2007) 233 CLR 162
, 174, 176–77, 179, 182.
discusses the parliamentary margin of appreciation in relation to the
constitutionally mandated political freedoms: above
n 77, 525, 532.
(2007) 233 CLR 162
Nationwide News Pty Ltd v Wills
[1992] HCA 46
(1992) 177 CLR 1
, 47 (Brennan J), 70
(Deane and Toohey JJ) ('
Nationwide News
(1992) 177 CLR
, 137–138 (Mason CJ), 210–211 (Gaudron J).
Goldsworthy, 'Originalism', above n 2, 45-47.
exception to this is his discussion of
, as that word occurs in
Constitution
. Goldsworthy suggests that
refers not to
the legally-constituted kind 'a panel of men' but to the non-legally constituted
kind 'a panel representing the community':
ibid 32. But as he does not frame the
issue in terms of referential chains with social and political kinds at their
ends, he appears
not to notice that this suggestion can be generalised to
provide an account of the meaning of
Aroney, above n 4, 254–55, 292, and see also 255, fn 56.
above n 77, 531, 534.
(2007) 233 CLR 162
Williams, 'The Pain of Word Bondage (a tale with two stories)' in
The Alchemy
of Race and Rights
(2007) 233 CLR 162
accompanying n 36 above.
Theophanous
[1994] HCA 46
(1994) 182 CLR 104
Theophanous
[1994] HCA 46
(1994) 182 CLR 104
[1992] HCA 46
, 48–49 (footnote omitted).
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (359 KB)
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter