URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/journals/UNSWLawJl/2025/23.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 15:45:06
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Bhatia, Neera; Koplin, Julian --- "Trading the Golden Egg: Understanding the Differences Between Compensation, Reimbursement and Inducements for Egg Donation in Australia" [2025] UNSWLawJl 23; (2025) 48(2) UNSW Law Journal 714
TRADING THE GOLDEN EGG: UNDERSTANDING THE DIFFERENCES
BETWEEN COMPENSATION, REIMBURSEMENT AND INDUCEMENTS FOR EGG DONATION IN
There is a shortage of donor eggs in Australia, driven (inter alia) by
age-related infertility, the family creation needs of same-sex
couples, and the
emerging needs for donor eggs in the context of mitochondrial donation. We
explore the ethical, legal and social
implications of different strategies to
promote egg donation, focusing particularly on strategies that involve payment.
We distinguish
between three distinct approaches to offering payment –
reimbursement, compensation and inducement – that are often conflated.
explain how these categories relate to Australian laws and regulations, and
determine how various proposals for increasing supply
should be categorised. We
close by making some concrete proposals for how payments can be used to promote
egg donation while avoiding
financial inducements.
I INTRODUCTION
The demand for egg donors has grown globally since the birth of the first
baby using donated eggs almost four decades
This demand has increased in
part due to the number of same-sex male couples seeking to create families using
donated eggs and age-related
infertility in
In Australia, the demand for
donor eggs is currently unmet.
note two specific circumstances where the shortage of donor eggs is expected to
impact individuals or couples. The first, and
most likely, reason for seeking
the use of donor eggs is for embryo and subsequent family creation. The shortage
of donor eggs for
this purpose requires further discussion and action by
fertility clinics and scholars
It has also attracted the
attention of the mainstream media.
We suggest that a second, emerging reason for seeking the use of donor eggs is
for mitochondrial donation and the use of assisted
reproductive techniques to
assist women diagnosed with mitochondrial DNA disease to create a healthy
A Aims and Structure of This Article
In this article, we critique some of the approaches that are fundamental to
the discourse on strategies to increase egg donation in
Australia and we explore
some of the practices currently being undertaken in the United Kingdom
(‘UK’) and the United
States (‘US’). More specifically,
we focus on three broad
strategies that could be employed to increase egg
donation rates namely: (i) reimbursement; (ii) compensation; (iii) financial
inducements
(or ‘incentivisation’); with some further discussion of
(iv) rewards (or ‘rewarded gifting’). We argue that
it is important
to clearly distinguish between these strategies as they raise distinct ethical
and legal issues. At present, however,
these terms are being applied loosely and
often inaccurately. We argue that there must be a clear understanding of the
nuances and
differences between these four
terms to be able to have a
meaningful societal discussion about ways to increase egg donation for family
creation and in the context
of mitochondrial donation. We attempt to address
this issue in this article, and in so doing, attempt to bring some much needed
and precision to discussions of egg donation and various strategies for
increasing donation rates. While many of our suggestions
are relevant across
Australia (and indeed internationally), much of this article focuses on the
Victorian jurisdiction. The reason
for this is because we refer to the
recommendations made in the
Reproductive Treatment: Final Report of the Independent Review of Assisted
Reproductive
Gorton Report
’), a thorough and
relatively recent investigation of egg donation law and ethics that is
especially valuable and relevant.
In Part II, we briefly discuss the process of egg donation and its importance
and explore the motivations and experiences of egg donors
and those seeking
eggs. Part III considers the legal and regulatory landscape in Australia in the
context of the donation of eggs
and consider the concept of ‘reasonable
expenses’ that are provided to egg donors. We turn to critique the three
that form the main focus of this article, namely: (i) reimbursement;
(ii) compensation; and (iii) financial inducements/incentives
to overcome the
current shortage of eggs in Part IV of this article. In Part V, we explore some
specific approaches and proposals
that might alleviate some of the current donor
egg shortages that do not sit squarely within our discussions in Part IV. These
a discussion about egg-sharing schemes and variable payments based on
income (amongst others). We make some recommendations in Part
concluding remarks follow. First, we set out the issues of shortage of eggs,
possible reasons for the shortage and strategies
to increase supply.
B Donor Egg Shortage for Family Creation
Gorton Report
noted a scarcity of donor eggs for assisted
reproduction (not related to mitochondrial
It highlighted that due
to the current shortages of gametes, including sperm available in regulated
fertility clinics, individuals
and couples might turn to using informal
unregulated systems such as the internet or social media sites to source
gametes, including
raises several ethical, legal and social concerns that have been discussed
elsewhere by one of the authors of this article and
reported extensively in the
media recently.
The report also
documented a number of other contributing factors that might deter individuals
or couples from seeking to source
donor eggs from regulated fertility clinics.
These included the associated costs, delays and limitations in sourcing donor
eggs through
regulated clinics. For these reasons, some people may elect to seek
donor eggs through friends or other known networks. However,
in some cases
choosing to find an egg donor using this informal avenue results in low quality
eggs and overall outcomes are also
Other concerns raised by
stakeholders
consultation and later published in the
Gorton Report
included lack of
public awareness and information about the need for donors and donor programs,
limited scope for financial ‘compensation’
of donors and
restrictions on advertising and barriers to the importation of gametes (lengthy
formal process).
Further, the
need for a more robust and proactive approach to addressing these issues was
discussed, including active recruitment
of potential donors – enabling
better access to treatment for people who need donor gametes or embryos to
create a family.
It has also been suggested that the high demand for and shortage of
Australian donor gametes (sperm and eggs) for family creation
exacerbated by the global COVID-19
During the peak
pandemic period, potential donors (primarily sperm) were unable to donate to
fertility clinics due to several lockdowns
and restrictions on
Simultaneously, there
was a surge in single women and same-sex couples wishing to conceive a child
using donor gametes and seeking
access to assisted reproductive treatment
(‘ART’) through regulated fertility
This resulted in an
increase in waitlists for donor gametes. One Victorian fertility clinic noted a
90% fall in sperm donation
In 2020, one
fertility clinic reported an average waiting period of twelve months for donor
eggs from its Australian egg bank, before
partnering with an American egg bank
in an attempt to relieve some of the wait time
Recently, the Victorian Government began the rollout of public fertility
Thus far, the
government has invested $120 million in the delivery of the program to enable up
to 5,000 Victorians to annually access
fertility services, including up to 3,375
treatment cycles.
The program is
operating from several partner health services that are delivering a range of
fertility services.
The services
are also accepting sperm and egg donations with specific eligibility for access
to free public fertility
For a person to be
able to access the services they must meet certain criteria, including: being a
resident of Victoria, holding
a Medicare card and having a specialist or GP
Further, eligibility
criteria state that at the time of treatment, the person must be a maximum age
of 42 years old, and there is
a lifetime cycle limit of two in vitro
fertilisation (‘IVF’) or intra-cytoplasmic sperm injection cycles
per person.
For some hopeful individuals or couples, this might assist in creating a
family; however, these criteria will exclude many who have
an interest in
fertility treatment, especially in cases where fertility treatments are used by
those over the age of 42 years or
where there is a need for several cycles of
fertility treatment due to fertility issues or, indeed, simply bad luck. Despite
eligibility restrictions, since the operation of the program, one baby has
been born and more than 2,800 Victorians have commenced
their fertility
treatment. Additionally, 140 women have become pregnant. The Labor Government
invested a further $2 million in its
2024/2025 budget to the
The criteria for donation are also restrictive, not just for recipients of
gametes. The public sperm and egg bank operating from the
Victorian Royal
Women’s Hospital stipulates a range of criteria for those wishing to
donate sperm or eggs.
seeking to donate eggs, the donor must not have had a baby within 12 months of
wishing to donate, must not be undertaking
fertility treatment at the time of
wishing to donate, or have a partner who is pregnant at the time that they wish
In Victoria, no
donors (sperm or egg) can be paid for the donation of gametes and must be
prepared for their identifying information
to be registered with the statutory
body – the Victorian Assisted Reproductive Treatment Authority
procedures for the registration of births from donated gametes, and the
provisions regarding access to identifying information
donors’ identity vary across states and territories.
C Donor Egg Shortage for Mitochondrial Donation
On 1 October 2022, the
Mitochondrial Donation Law Reform (Maeve’s
Law) Act 2022
Maeve’s Law
’) came into
effect. The culmination of several years of advocacy by those impacted by
mitochondrial DNA disease, their families
and scientists marked a historic
moment for this polarising and controversial Federal legislation to pass the
Senate after a conscience
vote and eventually become
The passing of
Maeve’s Law
casts fresh urgency on Australia’s egg shortage.
In our discussion earlier, we speculate that the current and more notably
shortfall in available donor eggs might be attributed to the recently passed
legislation permitting the use of eggs in the
creation of non-defective
This important
legislation amends the law relating to human cloning and research involving
human embryos (and related purposes).
Mitochondrial donation therapy is a type
of assisted reproductive technology that can assist women in circumventing the
transmission
of (certain types of) mitochondrial disease to their biological
This is achieved by several methods that can ensure that only healthy
mitochondria are passed to the embryo, resulting in a healthy
live birth. The
two techniques that are legally permitted (with a license) during the trial
phase of mitochondrial donation are maternal
spindle transfer and pronuclear
transfer. The first involves the transfer of the ‘maternal spindle’
(a structure containing
chromosomes) from the intending parent’s egg into
a donor egg. The second involves the fertilisation of two eggs (the first
the intending mother and the second from an egg donor), followed by the transfer
of the pronuclei (a structure containing nuclear
DNA) from the first early
embryo into the second. The success of mitochondrial donation thus relies on the
availability of donor
Since these techniques are experimental, they might indeed require more donor
eggs than other, more established forms of assisted
reproduction.
We foresee a potential shortage of donor eggs that might be used as
‘mitochondria donors’ in both research and future
clinical practice
for mitochondrial donation therapy and further research in this emerging
The importance and
critical urgency of this issue is highlighted by the $15 million Australian
Government investment in 2023 into
a university-led project to conduct a pilot
program for mitochondrial donation – mitoHOPE. The project includes a
trial to ensure the safety, efficacy and feasibility of implementing
mitochondrial donation in clinical practice settings. Further,
research will be
conducted to refine and improve the techniques available – all of which
require the use of donor
D Strategies to Increase the Supply of Donor Eggs
There has been legal, bioethical and philosophical consideration of
approaches to broadly ameliorate the shortfall of donor eggs,
many of which
involve the exchange of money.
These have included methods that promote compensation, reimbursement,
incentivisation and more radical solutions such as open markets
for donor eggs
– where donors might be willing to sell their eggs to recipients who are
willing to pay for them.
is also ongoing discussion in Australia and overseas jurisdictions about
strategies to promote and increase the supply of donor
Some of the debate has
surrounded egg sharing programs (within which egg donors receive discounted
fertility treatment), greater
facilitation of altruistic donations, and methods
to improve the reimbursement of
A recent study led by Molly Johnston investigated the use and outcome of
frozen unused eggs over ten
The researchers found
that ‘3,082 cycles resulted in egg freezing with 2,800 eggs discarded,
donated or exported to another
clinic. In total, 645 egg thaw cycles were
performed, which translated to less than 13 per cent of patients with eggs in
returning each
Further, ‘of
those patients who removed their eggs from storage, very few elected to donate
their surplus eggs to others for
reproductive purposes (23/151,
They noted that no
surplus eggs were donated to research throughout the study period. This was due
to a legislative requirement that
a clinic be running an active research project
to accept eggs, a condition that was not met by any of the clinics included in
The researchers
observed that fertility clinics in Australia do not store eggs prospectively for
future research. The study highlighted
that surplus eggs are not commonly
donated to research or for reproduction. Later in this article, we consider
whether compensation
or financial incentives could or should be used to
encourage such donations.
The shortage of donor eggs in Australia is a contemporary and live issue that
demands the attention of public health, law and policymakers
to assist in family
creation and better understanding of critical health conditions.
II WHAT IS EGG DONATION AND WHY IS IT IMPORTANT?
The use of donor eggs varies among women. Some might elect to use donor eggs
due to menopause or attempt to use donor eggs rather
than their own where donor
eggs might result in an increased chance of a successful
This is especially
relevant in cases of advanced or advancing maternal age and associated declining
circumstances, women who have survived serious illnesses such as cancer, or
cannot use their eggs due to genetic reasons,
might opt to use donated eggs. For
some, the use of donor eggs might be necessary as part of a surrogacy
In Australia and New Zealand in 2021, ‘[t]he average age of females
donating oocytes/embryos was 32 years, with 39.3% of cycles
in females aged 35
‘donation cycle’ is defined as an ART treatment cycle in which a
woman intends to donate or donates her oocytes to
There were 689 (54.8%) donation cycles where the recipients were female-male
intending parents followed by 284 (22.6%) donation cycles
where the recipients
were female-female intending parents ... There were 53 donation cycles where the
recipients were single male
or male-male intending parents, for use with a
surrogate gestational carrier and 59 cycles where oocytes were donated but no
parents had been assigned to receive the oocytes at the time of the
donation cycle.
The nuances and multifaceted governance processes to access donor eggs are
likely to contribute to the current shortfall of eggs in
Egg donation is only
permitted altruistically – where eggs are gifted and cannot be sold. The
same prohibition applies to donated
sperm. However, recently there has been a
surge in people sourcing sperm via unregulated systems through the internet and
media sites such as Facebook groups. Online sperm donors are readily
accessible online and have been providing sperm for artificial
insemination at
unregulated practice is a controversial live
issue of debate amongst scholars
and regulated fertility clinic providers and has captured widespread media
Despite the risks
involved with the practice, women and couples are using informal sperm donation
to circumvent waitlists and costs
involved with regulated fertility clinics.
The same, however, does not easily apply to those seeking donor eggs. While
women and couples seeking donor eggs might use the internet,
social media
platforms or other informal advertising
to seek donors or those
interested in donating, for example, existing surplus eggs stored in fertility
clinics – the process
of extracting or harvesting eggs requires medical
intervention and pre-egg collection medication and
monitoring.
It is arguably also
physically, psychologically, financially demanding and significantly time
Egg donation is not a
process that can be undertaken in the comfort of a person’s home or other
location where there is a simple
requirement of privacy and storage equipment
for the donation. Further, the quality and quantity of eggs collected are
on the age of the woman from whom the eggs are being
A Egg Donation: Process and Procedure
Most egg donors in Australia are not anonymous. Instead, most donors are
women donating eggs to a close friend, relative or acquaintance.
Where anonymous
egg donation does take place, donors tend to be recruited through fertility
clinics or online forums.
Regardless of how a (potential) donor is sourced, as noted earlier, donation
must be altruistic (in the sense of being unpaid). Some
requirements must be met
for a woman to become a donor when arranged through a fertility clinic including
psychological counselling
for both donor and recipient, it is preferable that
the donor has completed her own family, has had successful pregnancies and is
between 25–38 years of
During counselling the potential donor and recipient will be required to
consider a range of social, ethical and legal implications
donate or receive donor eggs. These might include matters such as: whether the
donor might seek to contact
any child born to the recipient in the future, how
the donor might feel about a child born using donated eggs, how the
relationship might shift with the recipient (if at all) if the
recipient and donor are known to one
Similarly, the
potential recipient of donor eggs will be required to consider questions such
as: whether they will inform any child
born to them about their conception
story, if the recipient has allowed themselves time to prepare and come to terms
with connecting/bonding
with a child that does not have a genetic connection to
them, how they might feel about a child seeking information about their egg
donor in the future – where the egg donor is anonymous and unknown to the
The egg retrieval process briefly discussed earlier, requires medical
intervention and consultation and can be time and cost-consuming.
Prior to egg
retrieval the egg donor will be requested to disclose medical and family
histories and blood and genetic screenings
for a variety of different conditions
such as HIV, Hepatitis B, Hepatitis C, the Sickle Cell trait and others. Daily
hormone injections
are required to stimulate the ovaries with the aim of
obtaining more eggs from the follicles. The hormone injection period can last
to 14 days, with regular transvaginal ultrasound scans (and internal
examinations) and blood tests to check the growth of the
follicles and ovarian
maturation. When deemed medically appropriate, the eggs are retrieved while the
egg donor is under general
anaesthetic and sedated usually in a day procedure.
The retrieval is made using a fine needle inserted into the vagina to locate
identify follicles to retrieve the eggs.
There is usually some discomfort and minimal bleeding after the egg
retrieval. However, like any medical procedure, there are risks
involved that
can present in some cases. Some mild complications can include nausea, water
retention and hot flushes. More serious
complications can include
hyperstimulation which can require hospitalisation, development of cysts on the
ovaries, or in some rare
cases pelvic
Likewise, there might
be risks to recipients of donor eggs such as infection, multiple pregnancies
from a single embryo transfer
and genetic diseases affecting offspring (despite
donor screening during egg
retrieval).
The costs involved
in egg retrieval vary across Australian
Some fertility clinics
have dedicated egg donation programs to assist donors and recipients. Given the
invasive nature of egg retrieval,
it is useful to have some understanding of the
motivations and experiences of egg donors. A better insight into this might also
in how to increase donation rates. We briefly explore some of the reasons
why women donate below.
B Egg Donation: Motivation and Experiences
A study was conducted by Rosemarie G Hogan et al about the motivations of egg
donors in Australia. Of the 18 women who had donated
their eggs, eight donated
to a known recipient (friend/relative), and the others donated to someone they
did not know but had connected
with in the online space or via a third
Only two of the donors
had not had children before making an egg donation. Interestingly, none of the
study participants had significant
knowledge about egg donation until they had a
personal experience of knowing someone who had suffered fertility issues or
were exposed to egg donation via the media. Thus, discussion of egg
donation appeared not to be a common or everyday discussion point
parlance – rather a nuanced and particular public and health concern with
a narrow purview for those experiencing
fertility issues and for those around
them. The study found that almost half of the participants became aware of egg
donation after
being approached by a friend or relative experiencing fertility
issues, who requested their help by asking for a
Others learned about
egg donation from reading or hearing about it in traditional and social media. A
common driver for donating
was a desire to help others. This was especially
pertinent in cases where being asked to be a donor by a friend or relative
experiencing
fertility problems. Linked to this, was a desire to help others
experience motherhood/parenthood by becoming an egg donor and helping
potential egg recipient realise their dream of having a
Jordan P Duncan, Lucy E Caughey and Katherine M White found that donors were
more likely to donate to friends or family members, followed
closely by donating
to research. Additionally, women were less likely to want to donate to fertility
clinics and even less likely
to couples online. Some women may be deterred by
the idea of having their genetically linked child raised in an unknown
The findings from the
Australian study are similar to those of studies conducted overseas. Others have
found that a desire to help
others was a strong motivator to donate eggs in
countries such as the UK, Finland, Greece, Poland, Spain and Portugal (amongst
Recent research by Caughey et al noted that ‘oocyte disposition
decisions are dynamic and complex for women, exacerbated by
a general lack of
understanding of these
decision is framed by ‘whether women achieved motherhood, dealing with
grief if they did not achieve motherhood,
and considering the complexities of
donating to others. Additional decision support through counselling, decision
aids and early
consideration of disposition when eggs are initially stored may
decisions.’
Conversely, Stephen Whyte et al, have highlighted a range of barriers to
donation. In a survey conducted of 1,035 people, only a stark
eight people had
donated gametes (eggs or sperm).
Along with a physical impossibility to donate due to a vasectomy or infertility,
other reasons for lack of willingness to donate
included: a conscientious
objection to donation, a willingness to donate if there were certain conditions
that were met, and some
participants had never given donation any thought as
they were never ‘asked’ about
Arguably, much work is
needed to raise social and educational awareness about egg donation. We aim to
raise better awareness and
a clearer understanding of
that are used to increase donation rates via payments. Namely: (i)
reimbursement; (ii) compensation; (iii) inducement/incentivisation;
rewards, and how they should be applied in the context of egg donation in
Australia with the aim of improving donation.
Before we turn to examine these,
we first consider the legal landscape concerning egg donation in Australia.
III EGG DONATION: THE LEGAL AND REGULATORY LANDSCAPE
The law in Australia is clear concerning any commercial trade in human
gametes – it is strictly prohibited. This prohibition
articulated in Federal and State
legislation.
Prohibition
of Human Cloning for Reproduction Act 2002
Cloning Act
’) states in section 21(1) that ‘[a] person commits
an offence if the person intentionally gives or offers valuable consideration
another person for the supply of a human egg, human sperm or a human
embryo’. The term ‘valuable consideration’
is defined as
‘any inducement, discount or priority in the provision of a service to the
person, but does not include the payment
of reasonable expenses incurred by the
person in connection with the
It is unambiguous in the legislation that the donation of eggs or sperm must
be altruistic, whereby the donor is not ‘induced’
or provided with
any payment – other than ‘reasonable expenses’ that they might
incur in fulfilling the supply
of the service. Here, for example, reasonable
expenses that an egg donor might incur and are permissible include collection,
and transport of the
It would, presumably
instance, not include a lump sum payment of a large amount of money, for
example, $30,000 for the
of becoming an egg donor. The penalty for a
breach of section 21 of
Cth Human Cloning Act
is 15 years’
imprisonment.
A What Are ‘Reasonable Expenses’?
In Australia, ‘reasonable expenses’ can legally be paid to the
donor. However, exactly what expenses fall within the category
‘reasonable expenses’ is deeply ambiguous. A 2011 Parliament of
Australia Legal and Constitutional References Committee’s
(‘References Committee Report’) noted that:
While there is a prohibition on commercial trading in human gametes and
embryos, ‘reasonable expenses’ are able to be
paid to donors for
costs incurred in making a donation. However, the term ‘reasonable
expenses’ is not defined, and this
appears to have created confusion in
practical terms.
The References Committee Report further noted one submission suggesting that
there was a difference between ‘reasonable expenses’
that were paid
to men for sperm donations and to women for oocyte
In some cases, this ‘reimbursement’ took the form of small, fixed
payments of, for example, $200 (without egg donors
being required to prove that
they had in fact incurred these
Other submissions
claimed that the amounts provided to donors did not take into account the
inherent difficulties in harvesting oocytes
Among other ambiguities, the References Committee Report noted that various
contributors to the inquiry held that ‘reasonable
expenses’ eligible
for reimbursement should be considered to include only travel expenses, both
travel and medical expenses,
and in one case the ‘time commitment’
Gorton Report
has likewise noted that Australia lacks ‘clear guidance on what is fair,
non-commercial reimbursement’, with different
ART providers paying
differing amounts.
Inconsistency also applies in guidance from industry bodies. The Reproductive
Technology Accreditation Committee (‘RTAC’)
of the Fertility Society
of Australia has advised, in a technical bulletin, that ‘reasonable
expenses’ should be understood
to include medical, travel and
accommodation costs, as well as any legal advice associated with donation. They
hold that reimbursement
should occur only if donors can provide verification of
the expenses (for example, via receipts), except for small expenses below
value of $50.
The VARTA adopts a
slightly different understanding of ‘reasonable expenses’. Like
RTAC, they include medical and travel
expenses. However, unlike RTAC, they
exclude legal expenses but include counselling expenses and loss of
The National Health
and Medical Research Council (‘NHMRC’) Guidelines offer yet another
list. In common with RTAC and
VARTA, the NHMRC holds that it is reasonable to
reimburse verifiable medical and counselling costs, travel and accommodation
loss of earnings and legal costs. It also additionally permits
reimbursement of insurance costs and childcare costs associated with
Given this context, different fertility clinics interpret ‘reasonable
expenses’ in different ways. For example, Monash
IVF specifies that it
will reimburse
costs that directly result from donation, as well as
providing certain additional benefits – such as providing donors with
genetic screening results free of
By contrast, Melbourne
IVF considers the Victorian legislation to allow reimbursement for reasonable
expenses such as travel and
parking, but not for loss of work
Others explicitly
argue that ‘time off work’ is covered by the category of reasonable
The ‘reasonable expenses’ threshold has also, controversially,
been thought by some to cover substantial payments to egg
donors, without any
requirement to verify that these costs have been incurred. In 2015, the IVF
chain City Fertility Centre offered
women a fixed $5,000 payment ostensibly to
cover ‘reasonable expenses,’ though this offer was removed from the
after a media backlash and associated uncertainty regarding whether this
offer complies with the relevant legislation and
regulations.
To our knowledge,
however, the question of whether a $5,000 fixed payment is consistent with
Australian regulations remains unsettled.
Indeed, alongside calling for more
explicit guidance on acceptable ‘reimbursement amounts’ for
Gorton Report
suggests that one option is to publish a global fixed ‘reimbursement
amount’ available to all
with additional
reimbursement possible to ‘recognise additional costs in exceptional
suggestion that to some extent resembles City Fertility Centre’s strategy,
and that seems to have been treated as
consistent with the current legislation
in Victoria.
We argue that there is a need for legal clarity and consistency as to what
should be deemed as ‘reasonable expenses’ for
egg donation, and that
there should be uniformity across all states and territories.
Gorton Report
’s suggestion has international precedent. In
the UK, a settled figure exists for expenses related to egg donation, regardless
of where a person donates or their particular
circumstances.
recommends following the practice in the UK. However, this suggestion
is not without difficulties. As the controversy surrounding
Fertility’s $5,000 fixed ‘compensation’ amount demonstrates,
it is unclear whether offering substantial fixed
sums falls within the remit of
existing laws. As we illustrate below, the notion that a substantial fixed
payment (modelled on the
UK system) would constitute ‘reimbursement’
is open to challenge. Indeed, we suggest below that a substantial fixed payment
is better characterised as compensation, or even in some cases as an inducement,
depending on the amount of the payment and the circumstances
of the donor.
For ease of reference please see Table 1 below which highlights how various
Guidelines in each
‘compensation’ (understood
in varying ways) but draws the line
between ‘compensation’ and ‘inducement’ in sometimes
very different places.
Table 1: Comparative Regulation of Egg Donor Compensation and
Reimbursement
Donors can be reimbursed for ‘reasonable expenses’; however,
what constitutes a reasonable expense is arguably open to
interpretation.
The Human Fertilisation and Embryology Authority (‘HFEA’) sets
guidelines for ‘reimbursement’, comprising
a set sum (£985
pounds) intended to cover expenses (eg, travel and time taken off work), with
the possibility to claim more
if expenses incurred as a result of donation are
higher than this.
undergoing IVF are able to receive free or discounted treatment in exchange for
donating some of their eggs as part of ‘egg
sharing’ schemes.
Financial ‘compensation’ associated with egg sharing can far exceed
the set sum for HFEA reimbursement,
with a single cycle of IVF costing
European Union (‘EU’)
Tissues and Cells Directive
requires donation to be
‘voluntary’ and ‘unpaid’ but permits reimbursement
‘strictly limited to making
good the expenses and inconveniences related
to the donation’.
Payments are managed through industry self-regulation. 2021 Guidelines from
the American Society for Reproductive Medicine recommend
compensating donors an
amount that ‘reflect[s] the time, inconvenience, and physical and
emotional demands associated with
participating in oocyte
No specific sum
is mentioned, but a previous iteration of the guidelines suggested that sums of
up to $5,000 are appropriate, that
sums above $5,000 require justification, and
that sums above $10,000 are
inappropriate.
There is evidence
that ‘compensation’ often exceeds recommended
In practice, donation is
often framed as a form of ‘work’; requests for egg donors are
frequently listed online as job
ads, and ‘compensation’ is
considered taxable income.
The purchase of gametes is illegal. Donors may be reimbursed for
out-of-pocket expenses (eg, travel costs, childcare), but must supply
documentation.
IV CONCEPTUAL CATEGORIES AND PAYMENT FOR EGG
As noted earlier, there is a significant and growing shortage of eggs in
Australia. This has led to a discussion of a variety of different
strategies to
overcome the current shortage. Many of these strategies involve the exchange of
money in some form or another, although
the quantity, size and circumstances of
such payments vary considerably between proposals.
The options available in Australia are presumably constrained by the
requirement that payment does not exceed the threshold of ‘reasonable
expenses’. However, as mentioned above, precisely where this threshold
falls is ambiguous. It is also questionable whether
limiting payment to
‘reasonable expenses’ is itself justifiable; it could be argued
(and, indeed, many do argue) that
there is, in principle, no moral problem with
offering egg donors much larger payments, including something akin to a market
Indeed, money can play
a very different role in different contexts, depending on how and the purpose
for which it is deployed. Its
exchange can be mapped according to the following
conceptual categories.
A Financial Inducements
Providing a
to take a course of action, by offering to make
the target of the incentive better off than they would otherwise be. To be
financial inducement incentives need to provide financial benefits
that outweigh any drawbacks of the course of action they are incentivising.
(Financial) incentives are examples of financial inducements. So are market
payments; as Smith famously wrote, ‘[i]t is not
from the benevolence of
the butcher [sic] the brewer, or the baker that we expect our dinner, but from
their regard to their own
B Reimbursement
Unlike inducements, reimbursement aims to reduce or eliminate the
financial costs
associated with a course of action (eg, travel expenses
and/or lost wages). At most, reimbursement can render an act financially
by definition, it cannot make one financially better off.
C Compensation
Counteracting the
disadvantages
of doing something – including,
eg, time, effort and suffering. Compensation can leave somebody
financially
better off but should not constitute an incentive to take a course of
action. The benefits of payment should not outweigh the drawbacks
that they aim
to compensate for, but instead aim to return the compensated party to their
former baseline of wellbeing.
Recognising service, effort or achievement. While rewards can have financial
value, they are not meant to operate as a financial incentive
example, the cash award associated with winning the Nobel prize is meant to help
recognise the contribution that the winner has
made, not to (directly)
incentivise attempts to win the prize.
In the discussion that follows we
examine how these categories can be distinguished from each other and which we
think deserve further
consideration.
1 Financial Inducement
We will be taking for granted that the exchange of eggs should
involve financial inducement. Organ and tissue donation in Australia (and
most of the world) is governed according to a ‘gift
whereby bodily parts and products are neither sold for financial gain nor
treated like a market
This is not just
the case for eggs, but also for blood, solid organs and sperm. It is even partly
the case for human milk, a ‘product’
that is not explicitly
regulated in Australia, but which informal Australian milk-sharing networks
nonetheless insist should be exchanged
altruistically rather than for
Perhaps unsurprisingly,
given this backdrop, qualitative research with potential egg donors has found a
significant degree of resistance
to the possible use of cash payments to
incentivise donation.
To be consistent with the gift paradigm, payments to egg donors must not
women to donate. Inducements are payments designed to encourage
people to ‘donate’ (or, perhaps more accurately, sell)
something by
offering to make them better off, on balance, than they would have been
otherwise. Inducement is inconsistent with the
norms that currently underpin
organ and tissue donation in Australia, regardless of whether these inducements
constitute direct financial
incentives (like cash payments) or indirect
financial incentives (which could include tax credits, discounts on health
educational scholarships and other offers to provide donors with
something of significant financial value). Both kinds of incentives
introduce new reasons to donate – this is why it makes sense to describe
them as ‘incentives’ – and
hence are incompatible with the
gift ethos that currently underpins organ and tissue donation in Australia.
There might be a case for rethinking this ‘gift paradigm’ and
treating bodily parts and services akin to commodities.
Some scholars have made
the case for financial incentives for organ
and others for
paying egg donors in both research and assisted reproduction
There may be good
reasons for Australia to consider such a change. Such an approach would,
however, involve a significant change
to the norms that currently underpin organ
and tissue donation in Australia, require changes to both federal and state
legislation,
and raise serious ethical concerns and related issues such as
commodification, exploitation and ‘undue
inducement’.
ambitious undertaking, and while it may be worth attempting, we will not assess
the case for doing so here. Instead, we
will consider a range of possible
strategies that do
involve financial inducement.
Perhaps surprisingly, the rejection of financial
inducements
open a broad range of alternative strategies. Regardless of what might be
thought about financial inducements for egg donation,
there is value in
exploring these (potentially more practical) alternatives.
2 Reimbursement
On the definitions we are using, reimbursement involves
counteracting
financial costs associated with egg
money changes hands, by our definition any money received as part of
reimbursement
make a person financially better off than they would
have been otherwise; otherwise, it would cease to be
reimbursement.
reimbursement can cover direct costs (such as the costs of the egg retrieval
treatment cycle) and/or indirect costs associated
with donation (such as travel
costs or lost income).
Reimbursement does not provide any new incentives to donate; it merely
mitigates some of the (financial) disincentives that might
otherwise have
dissuaded some women from donating. It is thus compatible even with the most
thoroughgoing possible rejection of financial
inducements.
There are both pragmatic and ethical reasons in favour of reimbursing egg
donors. Pragmatically, the more that is done to dissolve
incentives to
donation, the more likely it is that those interested in becoming an egg donor
will follow through. Ethically, it seems
reasonable to help people act on a
desire to help others, without forcing them to take on financial burdens in
addition to the inconveniences
and risks associated with egg donation. On both
grounds, payments that cover as many of the costs associated with donation as
seem desirable.
3 Compensation
Reimbursement aims to avoid creating an
to donate by
preventing donors from becoming better off financially. However, there is a
middle-ground between reimbursement and inducement,
in which donors may end up
better off financially without being incentivised to donate. Financial
compensation can serve as a kind
for (non-financial) losses
without spilling over into the category of an
Consider, for
example, workplace injury compensation. While it is possible to receive a
substantial payment for losing a limb on
a job site, this payment serves to
the (non-financial) losses experienced by the
worker; it is quite obviously not intended to increase workplace injury rates by
a new incentive for workers to lose
Thus, not all payments that leave recipients better off
financially
necessarily constitute inducements. They can, instead, constitute
compensation insofar as they serve to repair the inconveniences
experienced by the donor. Notably, some opponents of
parts nonetheless defend compensation, so understood. For example, in relation
to surrogacy, Anne Phillips calls for ‘compensation
for actual costs,
combined with some monetary recognition of the generosity of the donor; but not
a market-driven payment reflecting
overall supply and
claim could be made about egg donation. So long as the payment does not become
so large that it provides a
new incentive
to donate, compensation is
morally akin to reimbursement. (And if payment
to become so large
that it provides a new incentive to donate, it would cease to
compensation and instead become a financial inducement.)
Compensation, then, is compatible with the current altruistic, unpaid system
of organ and tissue donation – though compensation
for time, effort,
inconvenience, discomfort and risk does go beyond mere reimbursement and seems
to fall outside the remit of ‘reasonable
expenses’, since these
‘costs’ are not monetary expenses. Even if compensation is accepted
in principle, any compensation
beyond proven expenses must be carefully
implemented. Compensation must avoid being so generous that it motivates donors
not be interested in donating in the absence of these
entitlements.
For the sake of completeness, we want to flag one additional role that
payments (or other things with monetary function) could play
reward, which is distinct from reimbursement, compensation or inducement. There
are efforts underway to create new rewards
and honours for organ and tissue
donors. To our awareness, however, no efforts are currently underway to explore
gifts in relation
to egg donation, and we are unsure how effective they would
A recent Australian example of a ‘rewards’ program can be found
in the Australian Red Cross, which is trialling a program
whereby donors can
receive gifts such as t-shirts, mugs and socks following
Such gifts do,
strictly speaking, have financial value; receiving gift socks might very
slightly defray a person’s financial
outlay on future clothing purchases,
for example.
However, there are two reasons why it seems appropriate to distinguish such
inducements.
First, because t-shirts, mugs and socks
are not of significant financial value and hence the opportunity of receiving a
t-shirt, mug
or even a pair of socks is unlikely to motivate any donors who
would not otherwise wish to donate.
Secondly, because the main value of these goods is independent of, and indeed
would be destroyed by, their exchange for cash. The
significance of a Red
Cross-themed reward is enmeshed with what they represent, much like the
significance of a Nobel Prize is enmeshed
represents. A
blood donation milestone t-shirt or a Nobel Prize statue purchased in a store,
without any screening for eligibility,
would not have the same meaning as the
version given in recognition of a person’s efforts; a market would, to use
terminology, ‘corrupt’ the good in question and
diminish its value relative to the uncommodified version of these
These goods are
valuable not primarily because of the financial value of the t-shirt or the
statue itself, but because of the achievements
and sacrifices that they honour.
Exchanging these goods for cash destroys this symbolic value that they would
otherwise hold.
Rewards, then, are not necessarily incompatible with the rejection of
financial inducements. However, they will need to be implemented
carefully to
ensure that any rewards of significant financial monetary value do not
constitute an incentive.
5 Terminological Confusion
The definitions we have provided here do not neatly map into how these terms
are used in practice. This is unavoidable since terms
‘reimbursement’, ‘compensation’, ‘payment’,
‘markets’ and ‘financial incentives’
are used in a wide
variety of ways, and often in ways that are inconsistent with each other. This
is common not just in the literature
on egg donation, but also in other health
law and bioethics literature on organ transplantation and surrogacy. Some of the
contradictory
ways that the term ‘compensation’ has been used are
documented in Table 2 below.
Table 2: Interpretations of ‘Compensation’ in Egg Donation
Policy and Ethics Literature
‘Compensation’ includes egg sharing schemes, wherein women
undergoing IVF can donate some of their eggs to women in need
of donor eggs in
exchange for reduced or free IVF
Ethics Committee of the American Society for Reproductive Medicine
(‘ASRM Ethics Committee’)
‘Compensation’ is treated as synonymous with
‘remuneration’; ‘high levels of compensation’ are
described as potentially posing an ‘undue inducement’ to
Meredith Nash
‘Compensation’ includes paying up to $5,000 ‘in a
carefully regulated market’ to ‘recognise the inconveniences
associated with donation and make it worthwhile for egg
Hogan et al
Compensation is described in terms of ‘recompense’;
‘countries with an altruistic model of egg donation allow egg
donors to be
compensated for costs
compensation is also described in terms that include financial incentives;
‘[a]s an incentive to increase the number
of egg donors in Australia, the
introduction of financial compensation for the risk and personal time invested
in the donation process,
similar to the UK model, is currently being
Malinda Lee et al
Compensation is described both as an incentive and as a means of offsetting
risks and inconveniences associated with
Compensation is treated as distinct from market payment: money as
compensation serves to recognise the work and generosity of
Anna Curtis
Advocates compensation in the sense of substantial payment: ‘If we
are going to allow gamete transfer in the United States,
women should be well
paid for it, because it is time-consuming, uncomfortable, risky, and potentially
life-threatening.’
Michelle J Bayefsky, Alan H DeCherney and Benjamin E Berkman
The terms ‘reimbursement’, ‘compensation’ and
‘reward’ are all used to refer to payments that
may induce donors to
Proposals that would meet our criteria for a financial inducement have been
framed as ‘rewarded
compensation’,
mechanism to ‘offer a symbolic reward for the gesture of
On the other
end of the spectrum, some theorists of commodification hold that
exchanges involving cash – including very small sums of cash offered
merely as a symbolic gesture – can be described as
This, too, is
misleading, since (as mentioned above) market exchanges typically involve
motivations.
Still others use distinct terms interchangeably. For example, the ASRM Ethics
Committee holds that ‘high levels of compensation’
could pose an
‘undue inducement’ to
thus blurring
together what we treat as two distinct categories (‘compensation’
and ‘inducement’). In the
Australian context, Nash has proposed
‘compensation’ that comprises payment of up to $5,000 ‘in a
carefully regulated
market’ to ‘recognise the inconveniences
associated with donation and
make it worthwhile
[emphasis added] for egg
donors’ – the last part of which strongly suggests that the payment
is at least partly intended
as an inducement or
‘compensation’, then, seems to be employed in (sometimes radically)
different ways by different commentators
and across different socio-legal
6 Terms Such as ‘Reimbursement’ Are No Less
Gorton Report
notes that some stakeholders felt that ‘the
current model for reimbursement does not sufficiently acknowledge the time,
inconvenience,
risk and discomfort associated with
implication, an alternative model of ‘reimbursement’ might cover
these non-financial costs. However, on our understanding
of these terms, any
payment model that uses money to offset donors’ risks, discomforts and
inconveniences is no longer a model
reimbursement,
since the scope of
payment is no longer limited to helping donors break even, financially
(It may, however, constitute a type of
compensation
inducement,
depending on how substantial the payments are).
It is questionable what weight, consideration and explanation should be given
to such terminological confusion. One possibility is
that the terms have not yet
been sharply defined. Another, though more cynical, possibility might be that at
least some authors seek
to make their proposals seem more palatable by
describing inducements as ‘compensation’ instead, thus downplaying
difference between current practice and what is being proposed. Regardless
of the cause, terminological confusion is an obstacle
to understanding what is
at stake in any specific proposal to pay egg donors. Therefore, to assess these
proposals, it is important
to be able to describe – concisely –
their most relevant features.
the following section, we examine what inducement, reward, compensation and
reimbursement
mean in the context of egg donation and make
suggestions about their applicability to various proposals to improve egg
donation rates.
V APPLICATION TO ‘EGG DONATION’
For the purposes of this article, we have rejected financial inducements,
welcomed reimbursement and cautiously endorsed compensation
and rewards –
though we have raised worries about identifying where the line between
compensation and inducement lies. We now
turn to assess some specific proposals
and practices where it is not obvious which category they belong to. In doing
so, we hope
to offer some constructive suggestions to improve egg donation in
A Financial Neutrality
One possible approach is to limit payment to strict reimbursement, ie, to pay
only enough to offset financial expenses that donors
have incurred as a result
of a donation. These might include travel expenses or reimbursement for lost
wages if time is taken off
work. This appears to align with at least some
current practices in Australia, as well as the gift model for organ and tissue
transplantation
operating in our country.
It is questionable how extensive such reimbursement should then be. One
possibility, widely endorsed in relation to live organ donation,
is to aim for
financial neutrality
leaving donors no worse off, financially,
than they would have been had they not decided to
Financial neutrality
seems to us to be a reasonable goal, arguably, donors should not be expected to
make further financial sacrifices
beyond the inconveniences, discomfort and
risks associated with donation. Financial neutrality also promises to indirectly
the number of egg donors by erasing one important set of
disincentives
to donation (ie, the financial costs).
There has been some objection, however, that precisely
donation involves nontrivial sacrifices on the part of donors, they ought to
receive payments that go beyond mere reimbursement. For
example, the ASRM Ethics
Committee argued in 2016 that failing to provide financial benefits to donors
might ‘demean their
significant
contribution’.
Similarly, Curtis has argued that ‘[i]f we are going to allow gamete
transfer ... women should be well paid for it, because
it is time-consuming,
uncomfortable, risky, and potentially
life-threatening’.
But is this a reasonable objection? If egg donation
conceived as a
market transaction, there is a sense in which it might be thought unfair to
receive a low wage for such onerous and
dangerous work. But the underlying
question is whether egg donation
be conceived of as a market
transaction – and the risks and discomfort involved do not help establish
whether egg donation should
be seen this way. If eggs are instead seen as a gift
(as they currently are in Australia), then insisting on a financial benefit
seems misguided; gifts are characteristically provided
expectation of receiving financial benefit in
From the standpoint of the gift paradigm, we suggest that financial
neutrality is a useful benchmark for morally appropriate reimbursement.
ensure that the sacrifices of donating a woman’s eggs are no greater than
they need to be and removes one important
set of disincentives to donation. It
should thus be welcomed both on the grounds of fairness and out of the pragmatic
hope that eliminating
financial disincentives may indirectly increase donation
B Fixed Payments
Although payments to Australian egg donors should theoretically follow the
‘gift model’ discussed above, some fertility
clinics have offered
substantial lump sum payments ostensibly as a form of reimbursement. For
example, a 2015 news article describes
City Fertility Centre offering a lump sum
of $5,000 intended to cover the ‘reasonable expenses’ of egg donors.
included ‘consultations and counselling, transport to the hospital,
time off work for both the woman and her partner and follow
up visits’ as
well as ‘“[p]otential adverse events” leading to two days off
work or more’. At least
six women ultimately received this
‘reimbursement’.
Whether such a lump sum does, in fact, constitute ‘reimbursement’
is questionable; this would be the case only if the
actual expenses of egg
donors consistently fell below the $5,000 payment provided. If (as seems likely)
the expenses of at least
some donors would fall below this threshold, the term
‘reimbursement’ is inappropriate. For the term to apply, payment
should match expenses that are actually incurred in individual cases.
In this case, a $5,000 lump payment might be considered an example of an
‘inducement’. However, we note that this might
not be the case per
se. However much financial benefit remains after genuine expenses have been
covered would presumably not be very
large – and hence might not pose a
strong enough incentive to induce anybody to donate. The excess could, then,
compensation
for the inconveniences and efforts
undertaken by the donor. However, there would be
value at which the
payment would tip over into an inducement. We contend, that if a lump sum is to
be offered it needs to be set at
a value that is sufficiently low that it would
not provide a meaningful incentive to ‘donate’. One suggestion here
be to set variable payment amounts, based on the donor’s income; we
explore this option in more detail below.
1 Variable Payment Based on Income
The value at which ‘compensation’ (for non-financial costs) would
spill over into ‘inducement’ will vary between
individual cases. A
key factor is the donor’s financial situation. For instance, $1,000 might
be an insignificant amount of
money to a high-income earner, but to somebody in
a dire financial situation, an opportunity to earn $1,000 might be very
compelling.
We suggest that one possibility might be to tether the size of the
payment to the financial situation of the donor, on the grounds
that this can
providing an inducement to others.
At first glance, this approach may appear inconsistent with international
guidance on monetary compensation. The ASRM Ethics Committee
Guidelines caution
that providing different levels of compensation to women with specific
characteristics may be morally objectionable,
since doing so arguably
constitutes a form of eugenics and might convey the message that oocytes are
commodifiable.
However, those
concerns are specifically aimed at selecting donors with ‘desirable’
traits – such as higher education
or specific ethnicities – not at
calibrating payments according to income. Indeed, anchoring compensation to
financial need
arguably reduces commodification, since it avoids market-style
incentives and helps maintain the framing of donation as a gift. In
Australia is not bound by the ASRM Ethics Committee Guidelines.
Another issue that is worthy of consideration is the ethical appropriateness
of variable compensation. We note one main objection
to the practice, which
resembles the objection to financial neutrality considered earlier. Intuitively,
it seems unfair for some
women to receive significantly larger payments for
their eggs than others. This objection seems all the more powerful when the
women stand to receive the least and the wealthiest women the most. Such
an arrangement seems inegalitarian in the extreme.
Nonetheless, the problem we foresee with this objection is that the charge of
unfairness makes sense
insofar as the payment is intended to make
donors better off. If the aim is to help women meet their financial needs, then
it would be wrongheaded to provide those with the greatest need with the
least cash. Financial compensation, however, aims not to
benefit donors, but to
restore them to some former baseline of wellbeing; it is a form of recompense
for past losses, not an attempt
to confer some advantage or benefit. The amount
of money required to meet the donor’s prior baseline of wellbeing will
inter alia, on the donor’s existing financial situation. The
threshold at which a payment moves from compensation to an inducement
depend crucially on one’s financial need. From the standpoint
of the ‘gift model’, variable compensation does not
raise concerns
‘compensation’ bleeding into the
category of
‘inducement’ for those with little income.
We recommend that if compensation beyond financial neutrality is implemented,
any such ‘compensation’ should be tailored
as carefully as possible
to avoid unwittingly constituting an incentive. Adjusting any payments that go
beyond financial neutrality
according to the donor’s financial situation
may be one strategy for ensuring that compensation remains compensation and not
an inducement. This strategy should not be dismissed out of hand.
C ‘Egg-Sharing’ Schemes
Egg-sharing schemes, which currently operate in the UK, are programs where
women undergoing IVF can donate surplus eggs in return
for discounted or free
IVF treatment.
arrangement helps reduce the cost of IVF for the donor and to increase the
availability of donor eggs for recipients. Egg sharing
appears to be widely
endorsed by donors and recipients in the UK, with the caveat that some egg
sharers who are ultimately unsuccessful
in their attempts to conceive regret
their participation.
considered by the HFEA to constitute a form of
compensation.
Whether this
categorisation is correct, however, is open to question.
Like other forms of egg donor ‘compensation’, the key question
for our purposes is at what value this payment would tip
over into becoming an
inducement to donate. This value might actually be
than for egg
donors that are not already undergoing IVF, since IVF patients would already be
undergoing many of the inconveniences,
risks and discomforts associated with egg
collection. The idea that payment provides recompense for these harms and risks
sense when donors would experience these effects anyway and are not
experiencing them solely in order to donate their
What this means is that
whatever value is appropriate for compensation for egg donation
might not be the same value as is appropriate for egg donation
context of egg-sharing schemes,
where smaller compensatory amounts might be
appropriate.
Interestingly, however, the degree of financial compensation provided to egg
sharers via discounted IVF treatment tends instead to
greatly exceed that
available to egg donors outside of IVF contexts. Compensation for egg donors
usually amounts to £985 or
whereas the discounts
to IVF treatment provided to egg sharers can amount to
£2,500–£5,000 per cycle (with multiple
discounted cycles
sometimes provided).
financial benefits to egg sharers can thus greatly exceed those to egg
Is there some reason why offering payment
the context of IVF
would constitute a lesser inducement than offering payment
We are unclear as to why this would be the case. A £2,500 discount on IVF
treatment leaves egg sharers £2,500 better
off, just as surely as a
£2,500 payment would. It is inconsistent to offer more generous payments to
egg ‘sharers’
than to egg ‘donors’; egg-sharing should
be subjected to the same standards as other forms of compensation. We reject
egg-sharing schemes as a viable option. In our view, such schemes carry the
potential for disguising inducements as ‘compensation’
and involve a
double standard with traditional egg donation that is difficult to justify.
VI PAYMENT FOR EGGS IN THE CONTEXT OF EGG
DISPOSITION
In our introductory section, we briefly discussed the issue of egg
disposition. This is a live issue that has received attention recently.
Australia, storage periods for eggs, sperm or embryos vary from 10–15
years between states.
UK storage of eggs, sperm and embryos was extended to up to 55 years from 1 July
2022, on the proviso that a person reconsents
every ten years. If a person does
not renew their consent for storage their gametes will be removed from storage
and disposed of
as they will no longer be considered to be lawfully
This significant
extension in storage time raises certain ethical concerns that go beyond the
remit of this article.
There has been an increase in the number of women freezing their eggs and
embryos in Australia. Notably, one clinic reported 674 developing
storage in 2013. Ten years later in 2023 that number increased by a factor of
Anthony Marren has
explored the implications of this, largely concerning a lack of fertility
clinic’s storage capacity for
frozen eggs, with roughly 80% in storage and
not being used. Further, Johnston noted that between 2011–21 egg-freezing
in Australia
and New Zealand rose by
Women are freezing
their eggs for a variety of reasons – choosing to postpone pregnancy for
career progression or as a ‘backup
plan’ for future fertility.
Others are compelled to freeze their eggs at an early age, in some cases due to
the commencement
of chemotherapy treatment.
We do not comment here on whether egg freezing is, on balance, a justifiable
strategy – particularly in cases of ‘social’
egg freezing,
where egg freezing is undertaken for non-medical reasons to extend women’s
reproductive options into the future.
As Emily Jackson points out, the current
paucity of data on the success of this strategy means that we do not yet know
constitutes a ‘sensible precautionary step, or a physically
invasive waste of
Some critics
further worry that social egg freezing is subtly shaped by a commercial conflict
of interest between medical professionals
and the interests of women considering
this option.
purposes, however, the key takeaway is that the use of egg freezing is
increasing (whether or not this is ultimately desirable).
Many women have kept their eggs frozen for over a decade and many do not
have been able to
conceive a child without the need for IVF assistance. It has been noted that
approximately 10% of women return
to use eggs that have been frozen and stored.
Further, the quality of frozen eggs cannot be guaranteed and some eggs do not
the thawing process.
A study conducted in the UK found that only 21% of a cohort of 129 women who
returned to use eggs that had been frozen over ten years
were successful in
conceiving a child.
Gorton Report
recommends better education delivery and awareness programs
community-wide about the need for donors and proactive recruitment. Further,
report makes a valuable suggestion about having early discussions with women
the time of egg freezing
procedures and close to egg storage limit expiry in the hope that this might
boost egg donation.
Thus, surplus eggs, or those in storage that will not be used by women or
couples, will eventually be discarded. As Alex Polyakov
and others have argued,
this provides benefit neither to women who have stored eggs nor to anyone
These stored eggs offer
the potential for another solution to the donor egg
One option might be to request that women or couples with surplus eggs donate
them altruistically, without payment. Another strategy
would be to offer payment
for the eggs to be used by someone in need. What role, then, should money play
in egg disposition decisions?
In this context, payment could operate very
differently from the others we have discussed. It makes little sense to describe
payment as ‘compensation’ or ‘reimbursement’ since
the ‘work’ associated with egg donation has
already been performed
(with the original intention being for this to support the donor’s own
purposes), and no additional
costs are being borne by signing over the eggs for
reproductive use. Instead, payment would seem to constitute an
‘inducement’
and should be treated as such.
If considered carefully, payments to potential egg donors at the end of their
storage life have the potential to benefit those seeking
donor eggs and to
ameliorate storage issues (and the cost of storing eggs). However, it is worth
noting that – like the other
forms of inducement discussed above –
such payments would depart from the gift model that currently underpins
Australian organ
and tissue donation. It also might be counter-productive; while
money can be an effective incentive, it can also ‘crowd out’
altruism in some contexts, such as blood
Many women might be
motivated to donate stored eggs in order to help others achieve their
family-making goals. If offering payments
deters those who would otherwise
donate from altruistic motivations (or, more precisely, from a desire to help
others struggling
with fertility), they might backfire, reducing overall
Any proposals to
incentivise the donation of stored eggs would thus need to carefully consider
the legal, regulatory and ethical
issues, and carefully investigate whether
incentives would in fact have the desired effect.
VII RECOMMENDATIONS
Two distinct sets of recommendations can be drawn from our discussion in this
article. The first deals with the language used in the
discourse regarding egg
donation and the second deals with practical measures to increase the
availability of donor eggs. We discuss
each in turn below.
A Careful Use of Language and Terminology
First, we recommend that proposals for new strategies to increase donation
rates should use more careful language to describe what
their proposal consists
of. At present, terms such as ‘reimbursement’,
‘compensation’, ‘payment’
‘incentivisation’ are used more or less interchangeably, despite the
significant differences between these practices
and their distinct legal,
regulatory and ethical implications. Calls to offer money to egg donors –
whether in the guise of
financial neutrality, egg sharing, compensation or
incentivisation – should use terminology that best represents the role
money would play in the proposal and how it might affect donors’
motivations. While we have not rejected the case for financial
inducements
outright, we think that any proposals to incentivise egg donation should be
argued for directly, rather than presented
in the guise of
‘compensation’. Terminology related to payments in egg donation
should be used with care and consistency
in order to ensure that academics,
lawmakers, policymakers and the public properly understand exactly what is being
B Egg Donation Promotion Strategies and Uniform Definition
of ‘Reasonable Expenses’
Secondly, we suggest that there are several potential strategies for
promoting egg donation that deserve serious consideration and
others that we
have found less promising. We consider that ‘financial neutrality’
provides a useful guide for appropriate
reimbursement of egg donors, on both
ethical and pragmatic grounds. Egg donors should not face financial costs in
addition to the
inconveniences, risks and discomforts of the process, and some
potential donors might be more willing to come forward were the financial
disincentives removed. While we do not have a principal objection to
‘compensation’ in excess of what is required to
achieve financial
neutrality, we have argued that it will be difficult to ensure such payments do
not (at least for some donors)
result in constituting inducements. We have also
raised concerns about ‘egg sharing’ schemes and that they might,
their name, provide a disguised inducement to donate, and we have argued
against their adoption in Australia. Finally, we have highlighted
that the many
frozen eggs currently nearing their storage time limits present another
opportunity to significantly increase the supply
of human eggs, and we have
suggested that the most appropriate strategy for utilising this resource likely
involves unpaid, altruistic
A meaningful and appropriate exploration of these
options also requires a concrete understanding of what is permitted by law.
there is a need for clarity regarding a precise definition of
‘reasonable expenses’ (and, perhaps, the replacement of
‘reasonable’ expenses with one that is more precise), and we
recommend that it should be adopted uniformly across
each state and territory.
The framework we have provided – and the distinctions we have drawn
between reimbursement, compensation,
inducements and rewards – provides
one way of navigating this uncertainty; financial neutrality, at least, seems to
fit squarely
within the boundaries of ‘reasonable expenses’, and is
thus a particularly promising option that can be explored even
while clarity on
the ‘reasonable expenses’ threshold is still forthcoming.
VIII CONCLUSION
In this article, we have explored four strategies that are commonly used to
increase egg donation rates: namely, (i) compensation;
(ii) reimbursement; (iii)
inducements; and (iv) payment for eggs to boost egg donation rates. We have
critically examined these nuanced
strategies and the use of language and
terminology related to egg donation, with a particular focus on the ethical and
legal distinctions
between compensation, reimbursement, inducements and rewards.
Our analysis has highlighted the need for clearer and more consistent
terminology to facilitate meaningful discourse and policymaking related to egg
We have underscored the importance of achieving financial neutrality for egg
donors, advocating for a system where donors are reimbursed
for their direct
expenses without crossing into the territory of financial inducements. This
approach aligns with the ‘gift
model’ of organ and tissue donation
operating in Australia and can potentially increase donor participation without
compromising
the integrity of the donation process. Moreover, we have explored
various strategies for promoting egg donation, including the reconsideration
existing ‘egg sharing’ schemes and the utilization of surplus frozen
eggs nearing their storage limits. These strategies
must be carefully designed
to avoid disguised inducements.
Payments and egg donation have an understandably uneasy relationship in law,
ethics and the public imagination. On the one hand, in
capitalist societies,
financial inducements play a central role in motivating individuals to
participate in various activities; wages
are an obvious driver of employment and
productivity. Against this backdrop, the most obvious solution to the shortage
of some goods
is to pay for it or to increase the price that it goes for. But in
the case of human eggs, familiar market-based approaches lose
much of their
appeal. Commerce sits uneasily alongside human reproduction, and there are
longstanding legal, social and ethical norms
against trade in human bodily
tissues and organs. Commercialising the ‘gift of life’ is a hard
We have argued that there
some role that money can play in egg
donation that does not require the abandonment of the gift model that currently
operates, with
seemingly widespread endorsement, in Australia. But in order to
work out the appropriate forms and methods of payment, it is necessary
able to distinguish between contexts where payment serves as a form of
recompense (‘reimbursement’ and ‘compensation’),
where it actively incentivises donation (‘inducement’). Conceptual
clarity is all the more important given how regularly
these distinct terms are
used interchangeably. In providing this clarity, we hope to contribute to the
process of developing a less
ambiguous and more ethically robust system for egg
donation in Australia.
Associate Professor, Deakin
University, Geelong, Australia, School of Law, Faculty of Business and Law,
Director of Law, Health
and Society Research Unit:
neera.bhatia@deakin.edu.au.
Dr Julian Koplin,
Lecturer, Monash Bioethics Centre, Monash University, Australia:
julian.koplin@monash.edu.
We thank the anonymous reviewers for their valuable comments and suggestions.
Rosemarie G Hogan et al,
‘“Battery Hens” or “Nuggets of Gold”: A
Qualitative Study on the Barriers
and Enablers for Altruistic Egg
Donation’ (2022) 25(4)
Human Fertility
<https://doi.org/10.1080/14647273.2021.1873430>.
Ibid; Centers for Disease
Control and Prevention,
Assisted Reproductive Technology Fertility Clinic and
National Summary Report 2019
(Annual Report, 2019) 26;
Jade E Newman, Repon C Paul
and Georgina M Chambers,
Assisted Reproductive Technology in Australia and
New Zealand 2021
(Report, September 2023) 30.
See Alex Polyakov and Genia
Rozen, ‘Social Egg Freezing and Donation: Waste Not, Want Not’
(2021) 47(12)
Journal of Medical Ethics
See also Hogan et al (n 1). It
should be noted that the Victorian Government has recently introduced a public
sperm and egg bank
and has invested millions of dollars towards making fertility
treatment more accessible to Victorians. We discuss this later in the
See Karin Hammarberg et al,
‘We Asked People Why They Don’t Donate Their Eggs or Sperm. Their
Responses Could Help Us
Attract More Donors’,
The Conversation
(online, 21 November 2022)
<https://theconversation.com/we-asked-people-why-they-dont-donate-their-eggs-or-sperm-their-responses-could-help-us-attract-more-donors-193386>;
See also Edwina Storie, ‘Agnes Donated Her Embryo in a Coparenting
Agreement. Now That She Sees the Child Being Raised, She
Regrets It’,
(online, 9 May 2024)
<https://www.sbs.com.au/news/the-feed/article/agnes-donated-an-embryo-and-is-now-watching-her-child-grow-up-from-afar-she-regrets-it/pkdjfoswy>.
We discuss this in more detail
in Part I(B) below. This involves removing the nuclear DNA from the
woman’s egg that contains
the faulty mitochondria and inserting it into a
healthy donor egg that has had its nuclear removed. This technique allows the
to retain unique genetic information because the nuclear DNA is retained,
and the defective mitochondria no longer exists. Mitochondrial
disease is a
group of conditions caused by mutations in either mitochondrial DNA or nuclear
DNA. Severe mitochondrial disease can
have a devastating effect on families,
including: the premature death of children; painful, debilitating and disabling
long-term ill health; poor quality of life. In Australia, between one
in 5,000 and one in 10,000 people develop severe mitochondrial
disease during
their lifetime. Around one child per week is born with a severe form of the
disease. See Andy Greenfield, ‘Use
of Mitochondrial Donation’ in
Botros Rizk and Yakoub Khalaf (eds),
Controversies in Assisted Reproduction
(CRC Press, 2020) 116. See generally Marie A Dziadek and Carolyn M Sue,
‘Mitochondrial Donation: Is Australia Ready?’
(2022) 216(3)
Medical Journal of Australia
<https://doi.org/10.5694/mja2.51309>.
Michael Gorton,
Victorians Create Families with Assisted Reproductive Treatment: Final Report of
the Independent Review of Assisted Reproductive
(Report, May 2019)
Gorton Report
Anita Stuhmcke, Jenni Millbank and Isabel Karpin,
‘Assisted Reproductive Technologies, the Internet and Information Seeking:
A Case Study of Australian Women Using Peer Online Forums to Seek Donor Eggs
across Borders’ (2020) 24(2)
Gender, Technology and Development
<https://doi.org/10.1080/09718524.2020.1719597>.
See Neera Bhatia and Lily
Porceddu, ‘Donors and Dads Online: Emerging Trends and Legal Implications
Involving the Internet
in the Creation of Non-traditional Families in
[2022] AdelLawRw 31
(2022) 43(2)
Adelaide Law Review
See also Maani
Truu, ‘Inside the Facebook Group where Australian Women Subvert the System
and Go Looking for Sperm’,
(online, 28 July 2024)
<https://www.abc.net.au/news/2024-07-28/inside-the-growing-online-sperm-marketplace/104103648>;
Cook and Farrah Tomazin, ‘Sperm Drought Fuels Unregulated Online
Market and Sex Assault Concerns’,
(online, 22 May 2021)
<https://www.theage.com.au/national/victoria/sperm-drought-fuels-unregulated-online-market-and-sex-assault-concerns-20210521-p57u0s.html>.
Gorton Report
These stakeholders included
but were not limited to fertility clinics, health practitioners, lawyers,
regulators, parents and intended
parents, donors, surrogates and donor-conceived
See recommendation 56 in
Gorton Report
(n 7) xxvii. The Victorian Assisted Reproductive
Treatment Authority (‘VARTA’) suspended the importation of donor
from Ukraine in 2022 due to the current conflict and the potential for
exploitation of donors. The
Gorton Report
recommended simpler streamlined
processes to approve the impartation of donor gametes in Victoria. However, this
recommendation has
not been implemented. Under
Reproductive Treatment Act 2008
(Vic), importation of donor materials into
Victoria requires approval from VARTA. The legislation pertaining to importation
specify the determining factors for VARTA to consider when approving
donor gamete or embryo applications.
Gorton Report
Jaya Keaney and Tessa Moll,
‘Fertility Care in the Era of COVID-19’ (2020) 1(6)
Briefing Papers
1, 5; Sam Everingham and Andrea Whittaker, ‘The Impact
of Covid-19 on Gamete Shipping by Australian and New Zealand Patients’
(2023) 63(1)
Australian and New Zealand Journal of Obstetrics and
Gynaecology
105 <https://doi.org/10.1111/ajo.13623>.
This was especially
pertinent in Victoria, where six lockdowns occurred, comprising one of the
longest aggregate periods of
strict lockdown
in the world. See also
Hassan Vally and Catherine Bennett, ‘COVID in Victoria: 262 Days in
Lockdown, 3 Stunning Successes and
4 Avoidable Failures’,
Conversation
(online, 17 December 2021)
<https://theconversation.com/covid-in-victoria-262-days-in-lockdown-3-stunning-successes-and-4-avoidable-failures-172408>.
Shona Hendley, ‘Too
Many Women, Not Enough Sperm: The Victorian Donor Dilemma’,
Morning Herald
(online, 17 September 2022)
<https://www.smh.com.au/lifestyle/health-and-wellness/too-many-women-not-enough-sperm-the-victorian-donor-dilemma-20220906-p5bfqy.html>.
‘Donor Eggs Available
Now with No Waiting Periods (QLD and NSW Only)’,
City Fertility
(Web Page, 20 October 2020)
<https://www.cityfertility.com.au/partnership-with-the-world-egg-bank-reduces-one-year-waiting-list-for-donor-eggs/>.
‘Public Fertility Care’,
(Web Page, 25 March 2025)
<https://www.health.vic.gov.au/public-health/public-fertility-care>
(‘Public Fertility Care’).
‘One Year of Fairer and More Affordable
Fertility Care’,
Premier of Victoria: Hon Jacinta Allan MP
Page, 12 November 2023)
<https://www.premier.vic.gov.au/one-year-fairer-and-more-affordable-fertility-care>
Fertility Care’).
The following partner
health services are now delivering a range of fertility services: Royal
Women’s Hospital, Monash Health,
Mercy Health, Northern Health –
Epping Hospital, Mildura Base Public Hospital, Bendigo Health, Southwest
Healthcare –
Warrnambool, Barwon Health – Geelong, Goulburn Valley
Health – Shepparton, Grampians Health – Ballarat, and Western
– Sunshine: see ‘Public Fertility Care’ (n 20).
‘Fairer Fertility
Care’ (n 21).
‘Donor Egg and Sperm
The Women’s: The Royal Women’s Hospital
Page, 6 December 2024)
<https://www.thewomens.org.au/patients-visitors/clinics-and-services/fertility-genetics/donor-egg-sperm-program>.
Notably, VARTA ceased
operation at the end of 2024 and its responsibilities were transferred to the
Victorian Department of Health.
Any further reference in this article to VARTA
is in the former tense, not the present.
Jemima W Allen et al,
‘The Parliamentary Inquiry into Mitochondrial Donation Law Reform
(Maeve’s Law) Bill 2021 in Australia:
A Qualitative Analysis’
Journal of Bioethical Inquiry
<https://doi.org/10.1007/s11673-023-10257-4>. See also Myrisha S Lewis,
‘Segmented Innovation in the Legalization of
Mitochondrial Transfer:
Lessons from Australia and the United Kingdom’
(2022) 22(1)
Journal of Health Law and Policy
; Julian Koplin et al, ‘Ethical
Implementation of Mitochondrial Donation in Australia’ (2022) 62(6)
Australian and New Zealand Journal of Obstetrics and Gynaecology
<https://doi.org/10.1111/ajo.13603>.
Mitochondrial Donation
Law Reform (Maeve’s Law) Act 2022
(Cth). It is now lawful for partial
DNA donations, allowing women to give birth without passing on a genetic
disease. The former
bill amended the
Prohibition of Human Cloning for
Reproduction Act 2002
Cth Human Cloning Act
Research Involving Human Embryos Act 2002
(Cth) which was subject to
a conscience vote. The treatment involves replacing mitochondrial DNA from the
mother with healthy mitochondrial
DNA from the egg of a woman who is a donor. We
discuss this in more detail later in this article.
Koplin et al (n 30) 922.
Ibid. See generally Angela
Ballantyne and Sheryl de Lacey, ‘Wanted: Egg Donors for Research’
(2008) 1(2)
International Journal of Feminist Approaches to Bioethics
Mitochondrial Donation?’,
Mito Foundation
https://www.mito.org.au/mitochondrial-donation/>.
Nancy J Kenney and Michelle
L McGowan, ‘Egg Donation Compensation: Ethical and Legal Challenges’
(2014) 4(4)
Medicolegal and Bioethics
<https://doi.org/10.2147/MB.S51328>; Bonnie Steinbock, ‘Payment for
Egg Donation and Surrogacy’ (2004) 71(4)
Mount Sinai Journal of
Payments beyond
reimbursement have been discussed favourably in Saylor S Soinski, ‘Paid
Donation: Reconciling Altruism and
Compensation in Oocyte Transfer’
Yale Journal of Health Policy, Law, and Ethics
(which argues
that financial motivations for egg donations are legitimate); C Samorinha et al,
‘Payment to Gamete Donors: Equality,
Gender Equity, or Solidarity?’
(2020) 37(1)
Journal of Assisted Reproduction and Genetics
<https://doi.org/10.1007/s10815-019-01625-4> (which defends compensation
for discomfort); Alex Polyakov et al, ‘Providers’
Attitudes Towards
Payment to Egg Donors: An International Survey’ (2023) 26(6)
1439 <https://doi.org/10.1080/14647273.2023.2265151> (which
finds widespread support among fertility professionals for regulated
payments beyond compensation). Cf Sonja Goedeke, Daniel Shepherd and Iolanda S
Rodino, ‘Support for Recognition and Payment
Options for Egg and Sperm
Donation in New Zealand and Australia’ (2020) 35(1)
Reproduction
117 <https://doi.org/10.1093/humrep/dez257>, which found
limited support among fertility industry professionals or the public
payments beyond reimbursement of expenses, and in many cases ethical discomfort
with financial rewards.
For example, Virtus Health
is one the world’s top providers of assisted reproductive services in the
world including Australia.
They created an innovative online donor campaign
– ‘Life. Pass It On.’ – to promote and encourage
donations for the creation of families: see ‘Virtus Health:
The Open Arms
<https://www.theopenarms.com.au/our-work/virtus-health-donor-life-pass-it-on-5ya72>.
There has been considerable
focus on egg disposition and making surplus frozen
eggs available to those in need. We discuss this later in this article. Polyakov
and Rozen noted in 2021, 4,048 women in Victoria had eggs in storage, an
increase of almost 30% since 2019. However, of those, only
159 (3.9%) women
sought to access their eggs to use them in the last year: see also Polyakov and
Rozen (n 3).
Gorton Report
7) 103 [8.1]. We discuss reimbursement in more detail in
and V below.
Molly Johnston et al,
‘Storage Trends, Usage and Disposition Outcomes following Egg
Freezing’ (2024) 48(4)
Reproductive BioMedicine Onlin
103728:1–8 <https://doi.org/10.1016/j.rbmo.2023.103728>.
‘New Research
Provides Fresh Insights into Egg Usage, Donation and Disposal after Egg
Monash University
(Web Page, 28 December 2023)
<https://www.monash.edu/news/articles/new-research-provides-fresh-insights-into-egg-usage,-donation-and-disposal-after-egg-freezing>
(‘New Research’), discussing Johnston et al (n 39).
Johnston et al (n 39)
‘New Research’
Caitlin Dunne, ‘Donor
Eggs for the Treatment of Infertility’ (2020) 62(9)
The findings from a study
conducted by Hogan found that women aged <40 were five times more likely to
conceive a child using
donor eggs than using their own. Additionally, where
women used donor eggs from a donor <35 years of age there was a statistically
higher live birth rate chance than using donor eggs from a donor <35 years of
age. Notably, women in the age 40 range who were
undergoing ART however still
largely used their own eggs despite the minimal chance of a resulting birth: see
Rosemarie G Hogan,
‘Egg Donation and Having a Baby in Australia’
(PhD Thesis, University of Technology Sydney, June 2020).
See Catherine Pesce,
‘Donor Egg, Surrogacy, and Adoption for Breast Cancer Survivors’
Current Breast Cancer Reports
<https://doi.org/10.1007/s12609-023-00477-3>. See generally Anika L
Nelson, ‘Sorting the “Good Eggs” from
Eggs”: Exploitation and Discrimination in Surrogacy and Egg
Donations’ (2024) 45(3–4)
Women’s Rights Law Reporter
Newman, Paul and Chambers
We discuss the legal
landscape in
See Bhatia and Porceddu (n
See, eg, online forums such
as ‘About Me and My Website’,
Egg Donor Angels
http://www.eggdonorangels.com.au/
. See also Stuhmcke, Millbank and
Karpin (n 9).
Chris Russell, ‘Your
Guide to a Successful Egg Collection’,
NewLife IVF
(Web Page, 20
October 2023)
<https://www.newlifeivf.com.au/your-guide-to-a-successful-egg-collection/>.
Linsay B Gezinski et al,
‘Exploring Motivations, Awareness of Side Effects, and Attitudes among
Potential Egg Donors’
(2016) 41(2)
Health and Social Work
<https://doi.org/10.1093/hsw/hlw005>; Susanna Graham et al, ‘Being
an Identity-Release Donor: A Qualitative Study
Exploring the Motivations,
Experiences and Future Expectations of Current UK Egg Donors’ (2016) 19(4)
Human Fertility
Virtus Health, ‘Egg
Freezing Success Rates’,
IVF Australia
(Web Page, 6 October 2023)
https://www.ivf.com.au/blog/tas-egg-freezing-success-rates
Stuhmcke, Millbank and
Karpin (n 9); ‘Finding Your Perfect Match: Egg and Embryo Donation in
Victorian Assisted Reproductive Treatment
(Web Page, January 2020)
<https://www.varta.org.au/resources/news-and-blogs/finding-your-perfect-match-egg-and-embryo-donation-victoria>.
Access Australia,
‘Donor Oocyte’ (Fact Sheet No 8, March 2011) 1
<https://access.org.au/wp-content/uploads/2010/01/8-donor-oocyte.pdf>.
See generally Michail
Pargianas et al, ‘Complications in Oocyte Retrieval’ in Antonio
Malvasi and Domenico Baldini (eds),
Pick Up and Oocyte Management
(Springer, 2020) 305. An extreme case can be found here: Swati Tyagi, Asit
Ranjan Mridha and Chittaranjan Behera, ‘Sudden Death
of an Egg Donor
during Oocyte Retrieval Due to Ovarian Hyperstimulation Syndrome’ (2022)
Autopsy and Case Reports
e2021385:1–7
http://dx.doi.org/10.4322/acr.2021.385
Monash IVF is one example:
see ‘Using Donor Eggs’,
https://monashivf.com/services/fertility-treatment-options/donor-eggs/
Hogan et al (n 1) 691.
Ibid 691–2.
Jordan P Duncan, Lucy E
Caughey and Katherine M White, ‘Examining Willingness to Donate Frozen
Oocytes among Women of Reproductive
Age’ (2023) 47(5)
Reproductive
BioMedicine Online
103294:1–9, 6
<https://doi.org/10.1016/j.rbmo.2023.103294>.
See Sonja Goedeke, Heather
Gamble and Rebecca Thurlow, ‘Motivations for Egg Donation to Previously
Unknown Recipients: Donation
as a Personal, Relational Act of Giving’
(2023) 26(2)
Human Fertility
<https://doi.org/10.1080/14647273.2021.2005263>; Michiel De Proost, Nicky
Hudson and Veerle Provoost, ‘“Nothing
Will Stop Me from Giving the
Gift of Life”: A Qualitative Analysis of Egg Donor Forum Posts’
(2021) 23(5)
Culture, Health and Sexuality
<https://doi.org/10.1080/13691058.2020.1722242>.
Lucy E Caughey et al,
‘Elective Egg Freezers’ Disposition Decisions: A Qualitative
Study’ (2023) 120(1)
Fertility and Sterility
<https://doi.org/10.1016/j.fertnstert.2023.02.022>.
Stephen Whyte et al,
‘Understanding the Reasons Why Men and Women Do Not Donate Gametes’
(2023) 30(5)
Reproductive Sciences
1651, 1652–3
<https://doi.org/10.1007/s43032-022-01112-9>. These included things such
as willingness to donate to friends
or relatives, more information about
donation; if the potential donor has completed their own family creation; and if
they were paid
Hammarberg et al (n 5).
Human Cloning and
Embryo Research Act 2004
Human Cloning for Reproduction and
Other Prohibited Practices Act 2003
Research Involving Human
Embryos and Prohibition of Human Cloning for Reproduction Act 2003
Prohibition of Human Cloning for Reproduction Act 2003
Human Cloning for Reproduction and Other Prohibited Practices Act 2003
Prohibition of Human Cloning for Reproduction Act 2008
Human Reproductive Technology Act 1991
National Health and Medical Research Council, ‘Ethical Guidelines on the
Use of Assisted Reproductive Technology in
Clinical Practice and Research’
(Guidelines, 2023) 77 [13.23.3] (‘NHMRC Ethical Guidelines’).
Cth Human Cloning
(n 31) s 21(3).
We discuss this later in
this article.
Cth Human Cloning Act
(n 31) s 21.
Senate Legal and
Constitutional References Committee, Parliament of Australia,
Conception Practices in Australia
(Final Report, February 2011) 53
Ibid 55 [4.9].
See, eg, ibid 53–4
Ibid 59 [4.23].
Gorton Report
John Peek, ‘Donor
Issues’ (Technical Bulletin No 3, RTAC, April 2011) [3]
<https://web.archive.org/web/20160229100241/https://www.fertilitysociety.com.au/wp-content/uploads/20110506-technical-bulletin-number-3.pdf>.
‘Becoming a
VARTA: Victorian Assisted Reproductive Treatment Authority
<https://www.varta.org.au/understanding-donor-conception/becoming-donor>.
‘NHMRC Ethical
Guidelines’ (n 71) 32 [5.4.1].
‘Become an Egg
<https://monashivf.com/services/donor-surrogacy/become-an-egg-donor/>.
Melbourne IVF,
Donation Patient Information: Becoming or Using an Egg Donor
(Booklet, 29
June 2016) 3
<https://www.mivf.com.au/sites/mivf/files/2019-11/miv_20ppa5_eggdonationbooklet_webformat_0_0.pdf>.
‘Egg Donors:
Legalities and Requirements’,
Associate Professor
(Web Page, 9 August 2024)
<https://dralexpolyakov.com.au/egg-donors-legalities-and-requirements/>.
Craig Butt,
‘Government Investigates Fertility Clinic over $5000 Egg Donor
Reimbursement’
(online, 22 April 2015)
<https://www.theage.com.au/national/victoria/government-investigates-fertility-clinic-over-5000-egg-donor-reimbursement-20150422-1mqlv0.html>.
See recommendation 52 in
Gorton Report
(n 7) 104–5.
‘Using Donated Eggs,
Sperm or Embryos in Treatment’,
Human Fertilisation and Embryology
<https://www.hfea.gov.uk/treatments/explore-all-treatments/using-donated-eggs-sperm-or-embryos-in-treatment/>.
‘Donating Your
Human Fertilisation and Embryology Authority
<https://www.hfea.gov.uk/donation/donors/donating-your-eggs/>
(‘Donating Your Eggs’).
Fertilisation (IVF)’,
Human Fertilisation and Embryology Authority
<https://www.hfea.gov.uk/treatments/explore-all-treatments/in-vitro-fertilisation-ivf/>.
2004/23/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council of 31 March 2004 on
Setting Standards of Quality and Safety for
the Donation, Procurement, Testing,
Processing, Preservation, Storage and Distribution of Human Tissues and
[2004] OJ L 102/48 (‘
Tissues and Cells
Ethics Committee of the
American Society for Reproductive Medicine, ‘Financial Compensation of
Oocyte Donors: An Ethics Committee
Opinion’ (2021) 116(2)
Fertility and
319, 322 <https://doi.org/10.1016/j.fertnstert.2021.03.040>
(‘ASRM 2021 Opinion’).
Ethics Committee of the
American Society for Reproductive Medicine, ‘Financial Compensation of
Oocyte Donors’ (2007)
Fertility and Sterility
<doi:10.1016/j.fertnstert.2007.01.104>.
Aaron D Levine,
‘Self-Regulation, Compensation, and the Ethical Recruitment of Oocyte
Donors’ (2010) 40(2)
Hastings Center Report
<https://doi.org/10.1353/hcr.0.0245>.
Anna E Hartman and
Erica Coslor, ‘Thinking about Using Donated Eggs to Start a
(online, 7 February 2020)
<https://pursuit.unimelb.edu.au/articles/thinking-about-using-donated-eggs-to-start-a-family>.
‘Reimbursing a
Sperm or Ova (Egg) Donor or a Surrogate for Expenditures Related to Donation or
Surrogacy’,
Government of Canada
(Web Page, 9 June 2020)
<https://www.canada.ca/en/health-canada/services/drugs-health-products/compliance-enforcement/information-health-product/reimbursing-surrogacy-donor-expenditures.html#a2>.
See, eg, Janet Radcliffe
Richards, ‘Selling Organs, Gametes, and Surrogacy Services’ in
Rosamond Rhodes, Leslie P Francis
and Anita Silvers (eds),
The Blackwell
Guide to Medical Ethics
(Blackwell Publishing, 2007) 254.
See Ruth W Grant,
Strings Attached: Untangling the Ethics of Incentives
University Press, 2011).
Adam Smith,
Inquiry into the Nature and Causes of Wealth of Nations
(Oxford University
Press, 1976) 9.
In Australia, health
sociologists have described blood and organ donation following a ‘gift
template’ modelled after
‘gift relationships’, with ideas
role in legitimising organ exchanges. See Kieran Healy,
Gifts: Altruism and the Market for Human Blood and Organs
(University of
Chicago Press, 2006). Organ donation is routinely described as a ‘gift of
life’: see, eg, ‘The Gift
of Life: What It’s Like to Receive
an Organ Donation in Australia’,
(ABC Radio National, 29
<https://www.abc.net.au/listen/programs/radionational-drive/organ-donation-donate-life-register-australia/104156530>.
Neera Bhatia, Julian
Koplin and Ainslee Spadaro, ‘White Gold on the Black Market: The Need for
Regulation of Banking and Donation
of Human Milk in Australia’
Australian Feminist Law Journal
<https://doi.org/10.1080/13200968.2022.2138187>.
Catherine Waldby et al,
‘From Altruism to Monetisation: Australian Women’s Ideas about
Money, Ethics and Research Eggs’
Social Science and
34 <https://doi.org/10.1016/j.socscimed.2013.05.034>.
James Stacey Taylor,
Stakes and Kidneys
Why Markets in Human Body Parts Are Morally
(Routledge, 2005).
Insoo Hyun, ‘Fair
Payment or Undue Inducement?’ (2006) 442
<https://doi.org/ 10.1038/442629a>; Daniel B Shapiro, ‘Payment to
Egg Donors Is the Best Way to Ensure Supply Meets
Demand’ (2018) 53
Best Practice and Research Clinical Obstetrics and Gynaecology
<https://doi.org/10.1016/j.bpobgyn.2018.07.009>; Anna Curtis,
‘Giving ‘Til It Hurts: Egg Donation and the Costs
of Altruism’
(2010) 22(2)
Feminist Formations
<https://doi.org/10.1353/ff.2010.0009>.
See generally
Declaration of Istanbul Custodian Group,
The Declaration of Istanbul on Organ
Trafficking and Transplant Tourism
Grant (n 101) 37.
Consistent with the
characterisation of reimbursement by NHMRC regarding the payment of participants
in research as ‘[m]oney
that is paid to participants toward their recovery
of any expenses incurred as a result of participation in research (e.g. travel,
accommodation, meals)’: National Health and Medical Research Council,
‘Payment of Participations in Research: Information
for Researchers, HRECs
and Other Ethics Review Bodies’ (Guideline, 2019) 1. Consistent also with
the language of the Council
for International Organizations of Medical Sciences
and World Health Organization, ‘International Ethical Guidelines for
Health-Related
Research Involving Humans’ (Guidelines, 2016) 53.
We are here following
the usage of this term by Grant. ‘Compensation means “rendering
equal,” a “recompense
or equivalent,” “payment for value
received or service rendered,” or something that “makes up for a
... Compensation in all of its forms equalizes or redresses a
balance’: Grant (n 101) 37. This is consistent with the
Tissues and
Cells Directive
, which limits compensation to ‘
making good
expenses and inconveniences related to donation’:
Tissues and Cells
Workplace injury
compensation has been variously conceptualised as a form of social insurance, a
no-fault substitute for tort liability,
and as a tool for managing workplace
disability and facilitating return to work: Emily A Spieler,
‘(Re)Assessing the Grand
Bargain: Compensation for Work Injuries in the
United States, 1900–2017’
(2017) 69(3)
Rutgers University Law
The possibility that workers’ compensation might promote
risky workplace behaviours is sometimes treated as a ‘moral
or possible undesirable side-effect, of such schemes: Allard E Dembe and Leslie
I Boden, ‘Moral Hazard: A Question
of Morality?’ (2000) 10(3)
257 <https://doi.org/10.2190/1GU8-EQN8-02J6-2RXK>.
Anne Phillips,
‘It’s My Body and I’ll Do What I Like With It: Bodies as
Objects and Property’ (2011) 39(6)
Political Theory
<https://doi.org/10.1177/0090591711419322>.
‘Lifeblood Gifts
Program to Boost Donations’
Australian Red Cross Lifeblood
Page, 28 November 2022)
<https://www.lifeblood.com.au/news-and-stories/media-centre/media-releases/lifeblood-gifts-program-boost-donations>.
Michael J Sandel,
What Money Can’t Buy: The Moral Limits of Markets
(Penguin Press,
Human Fertilisation and Embryology Authority,
‘Donation Review: Compensation of Donors and Benefits in Kind’
Paper No 612, 19 October 2011) 6 (‘Donation Review’); Eric
Blyth and Berenice Golding, ‘Egg Sharing: A Practical
and Ethical Option
in IVF?’ (2008) 3(4)
Expert Review of Obstetrics and Gynecology
<https://doi.org/10.1586/17474108.3.4.465>.
Opinion’ (n 95).
Meredith Nash,
‘Women Who Donate Their Eggs Deserve Compensation: Here’s
The Conversation
(online, 9 November 2012)
<https://theconversation.com/women-who-donate-their-eggs-deserve-compensation-heres-why-10515>.
Hogan et al (n 1)
Malinda S Lee et al,
‘Limitations on the Compensation of Gamete Donors: A Public Opinion
Survey’ (2017) 107(6)
Fertility and Sterility
<https://doi.org/10.1016/j.fertnstert.2017.03.001>.
Phillips (n 113) 735.
Curtis (n 107)
Michelle J Bayefsky,
Alan H DeCherney and Benjamin E Berkman, ‘Compensation for Egg Donation: A
Zero-Sum Game’ (2016)
Fertility and Sterility
<https://doi.org/10.1016/j.fertnstert.2016.01.019>.
B Larijani, F Zahedi and
S Ghafouri-Fard, ‘Rewarded Gift for Living Renal Donors’ (2004)
Transplantation Proceedings
<https://doi.org/10.1016/j.transproceed.2004.11.013>.
Jack W Harbell and Amit
K Mathur, ‘Financial Compensation for Organ Donors’ (2019) 24(2)
Current Opinion in Organ Transplantation
<https://doi.org/10.1097/mot.0000000000000617>; Curtis (n 107); Nash (n
Mélanie Levy,
‘State Incentives to Promote Organ Donation: Honouring the Principles of
Reciprocity and Solidarity Inherent
in the Gift Relationship’ (2018) 5(2)
Journal of Law and the Biosciences
<https://doi.org/10.1093/jlb/lsy009>.
Julian J Koplin,
‘Commodification and Human Interests’
(2018) 15(3)
Bioethical Inquiry
<https://doi.org/10.1007/s11673-018-9857-6>.
Opinion’ (n 95) 320.
Nash (n 118).
Gorton Report
Dominique E Martin et
al, ‘Strengthening Global Efforts to Combat Organ Trafficking and
Transplant Tourism: Implications of
the 2018 Edition of the Declaration of
Istanbul’ (2019) 5(3)
Transplantation Direct
<https://doi.org/10.1097/TXD.0000000000000872>.
Ethics Committee of the
American Society for Reproductive Medicine, ‘Financial Compensation of
Oocyte Donors: An Ethics Committee
Opinion’ (2016) 106(7)
Fertility and
http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.fertnstert.2016.09.040
Curtis (n 107) 94.
Again, it could be the
case that an overhaul of altruistic norms in organ and tissue donation is
appropriate. But an argument to
this effect needs to show why this is, not just
point out that blood and kidneys are worth less under an altruistic model than a
commercial model.
Craig Butt, ‘Egg
Donor Money: Fertility Clinic Offers Women $5000’,
The Sydney Morning
(online, 12 April 2015)
<https://www.smh.com.au/national/egg-donor-money-fertility-clinic-offers-women-5000-20150411-1miw9h.html>.
Opinion’ (n 95) 321.
See Timothy
Bracewell-Milnes et al, ‘Exploring the Knowledge and Attitudes of Women of
Reproductive Age from the General Public
towards Egg Donation and Egg Sharing: A
UK-Based Study’ (2021) 36(8)
Human Reproduction
<https://doi.org/10.1093/humrep/deab157>.
Zeynep B Gürtin,
Kamal K Ahuja and Susan Golombok, ‘Egg-Sharing, Consent and Exploitation:
Examining Donors’ and
Recipients’ Circumstances and Retrospective
Reflections’ (2012) 24(7)
Reproductive Biomedicine Online
<https://doi.org/10.1016/j.rbmo.2012.02.008>. Any consideration of egg
sharing should consider the consequences of egg
sharing for all stakeholders,
including possible psychological ramifications for women who failed to conceive
and learn that the
recipients of their eggs did conceive.
Review’ (n 116) 6; Blyth and Golding (n 116).
Admittedly, there would
presumably be some cases in which egg sharers are required to undergo additional
treatments when the eggs
remaining to them do not allow them to meet their
reproductive goals; however, the drawbacks of egg donation would be experienced
egg donors outside of egg sharing schemes without any compensatory
‘Donating Your
Eggs’ (n 92).
Stephen Wilkinson,
‘Is the HFEA’s Policy on Compensating Egg Donors and Egg Sharers
Defensible?’
(2013) 21(2)
Medical Law Review
<https://doi.org/10.1093/medlaw/fws027>.
For storage ranges
between states, see Eloise Chandler and Anita Stuhmcke, ‘Storage Limits of
Gametes and Embryos: Regulation
in Search of Policy Justification’
Journal of Law and Medicine
Human Fertilisation and Embryology Authority
<https://www.hfea.gov.uk/treatments/fertility-preservation/egg-freezing/>.
For example, one issue
to consider is that if a person donates sperm at the age of 35 years and their
gametes are stored for 55
years, children might be born from that donation when
the donor is 90 years old. This also means that the children born from that
person’s donation might have donor siblings who are older than their
parents. Donor-conceived people should be aware of the
possibility that their
donor might be a very elderly person, deceased and that they may have donor
siblings, and possibly other older
relatives. See also Caroline AB Redhead et
al, ‘Eggs and Sperm Can Now Be Stored for Up to 55 Years: Here’s
Means for Donors and People Seeking Fertility Treatment’,
Conversation
(online, 4 July 2022)
<https://theconversation.com/eggs-and-sperm-can-now-be-stored-for-up-to-55-years-heres-what-that-means-for-donors-and-people-seeking-fertility-treatment-186087>.
See also Panagiota Nakou, ‘Women’s Reproductive Choice and
(Elective) Egg Freezing: Is an Extension of the Storage Limit
Missing a Bigger
Issue?’ (2024) 30(1)
New Bioethics
<https://doi.org/10.1080/20502877.2023.2300233>.
Sophie Kesteven,
‘More People Are Freezing Their Eggs to Preserve Their Fertility but Some
IVF Clinics are Struggling to Keep
Up with Storage’,
(online, 11 July 2024)
<https://www.abc.net.au/news/2024-07-11/ivf-fertility-egg-freezing-storage-australia-issues/103868746>.
Emily Jackson, ‘The
Ambiguities of “Social” Egg Freezing and the Challenges of Informed
Consent’ (2018) 13(1)
Biosocieties
<https://doi.org/10.1057/s41292-017-0044-5>.
Christopher Mayes, Jane
Williams and Wendy Lipworth, ‘Conflicted Hope: Social Egg Freezing and
Clinical Conflicts of Interest’
(2018) 27(1)
Health Sociology
45 <https://doi.org/10.1080/14461242.2017.1349545>.
Johnston et al (n
Zeynep Gurtin,
‘More and More Women Are Freezing Their Eggs: But Only 21% of Those Who
Use Them Have Become Mothers’,
The Conversation
(online, 23 May
<https://theconversation.com/more-and-more-women-are-freezing-their-eggs-but-only-21-of-those-who-use-them-have-become-mothers-117028>.
See recommendation 48 in
Gorton Report
Polyakov and Rozen (n
Johnston et al (n
Peter Singer,
‘Altruism and Commerce: A Defense of Titmuss against Arrow’ (1973)
Philosophy and Public Affairs
Sandel (n 115) 100.
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (223 KB)
PDF format (452 KB)
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter