URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/journals/MqLawSymp/2006/5.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 15:21:52
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Skene, Loane --- "Conjunctions and Disjunctions" [2006] MqLawSymp 5; (2006) 1(1) Macquarie Law Symposium 51
CONJUNCTIONS AND DISJUNCTIONS
LOANE SKENE
It is inevitable, as Professor Smith states, that new and challenging issues
require legislators and judges to look beyond settled
legal principles to
become, as he says, ‘architects of the new Age of
Biotechnology’.
However, the process of
looking to religious values in making decisions on how we should behave and how
we should resolve disputes
may take different forms. These are implicit in
Professor Smith’s paper but not distinguished in their significance to his
fundamental question: Is religion conjunctive or disjunctive in our
understanding of law and medicine? In my view, the answer depends
religion and its values are ‘used’ by the proponents of religious
arguments when participating in debates and
decision making.
There are many ways in which religion is disjunctive in policy discussions
– polarising issues, attempting to impose its views
as the only ones that
are defensible, stifling the arguments and sentiments of other people. In part,
this flows from what Professor
Smith calls the
two legal elements [within every religion] – one which relates to the
social processes of the
particular community
sharing a faith and the
other ‘to the social processes of the
larger community
of which the
religious community is a part’.
If this means that religious adherents should not only observe the canons of
their faith themselves (within the ‘particular
community’), but also
proselytise and impose their views on others (working on the ‘social
processes of the larger community’),
then one can see at once the
potential dangers in a culturally diverse liberal democracy. There is no reason
why members of a church
should not encourage others to join their faith but who
are those people to dictate to others who are not members of their church
view of what is ‘right’ and ‘wrong’?
At most, the authority of church leaders is an authority to speak on behalf
of their members and even that has been questioned. Professor
Tony Coady, a
philosopher based at the University of Melbourne, said in relation to his fellow
Roman Catholics:
What evidence there is suggests Australian Catholics are nowadays no
different from other citizens in their attitudes to [reproductive
technology],
and the same is likely to be true about controversial issues, such as lesbian
access to it.
However, even if church leaders are entitled to speak on public issues,
Professor Coady says, they should not move from statements
of religious
principles that are part of their shared faith to ‘detailed injunctions
or other social issues ... that are
legitimately open to debate and decision amongst the laity and indeed people of
good will of
various persuasions’.
this view, the Catholic, Anglican and Uniting churches are acting outside their
legitimate role in speaking publicly against the
federal government’s
recent policies on industrial relations and anti-terror legislation. Those
issues should be left to politics
and not the church.
Traditionally, the Roman Catholic Church has been the most active of the
churches in promoting its doctrine in civil society. Professor
Smith gives a
number of examples in the United States where religious groups have used the law
in their attempts to prevent the teaching
in schools of Darwinian evolution,
such as the ‘Scopes monkey trial’ in 1928.
In other countries, religious bodies, especially the Roman Catholic Church,
have also used the courts to promote their doctrine. One
method is by seeking
intervener status in litigation between private individuals or bodies. This
occurred in an appeal to the High
Court of Australia in the New South Wales
abortion case,
CES v Superclinics
which the Roman Catholic Church was granted
amicus curiae
status. The
case arose from a woman’s claim for damages against a medical clinic
because its employee doctors failed to diagnose
that she was pregnant until
after a number of consultations and two pregnancy tests. She said that the
delayed diagnosis of pregnancy
deprived her of the opportunity to have the
pregnancy terminated. One issue was whether such a termination, if it had
occurred, would
have been lawful. This was an opportunity for the Roman Catholic
Church to influence the development of the common law, both by influencing
outcome in the particular case and also by creating a precedent for subsequent
The church gained the standing, or legal status, to intervene in the
litigation, together with the Australian Catholic Health Care
Association, by
virtue of the church’s role in providing services to pregnant women. The
church said it had special knowledge
and experience that ordinary members of the
community would not have. Given this aspect of the case, it is not surprising
arguments presented by the church were not doctrinal. There were no
quotations from the Bible or other church teachings. Rather,
the arguments were
pragmatic – based on such matters as the effect on health-care facilities
if they were required to provide
pregnancy counselling and advice. The appeal
did not proceed, so the arguments were not fully developed. However, one might
that a primary aim of the intervention was an attempt by the church to
limit the circumstances in which women may obtain lawful abortions.
Perhaps more problematic was the Roman Catholic Church’s intervention
in the case of
McBain v State of
which concerned the right of
single women to gain access to assisted reproductive technology (ART) programs
in Victoria. The case
was brought by Dr McBain, who was treating a single woman
who wanted to gain access to screened semen in order to have a child. The
Infertility Treatment Act
(Vic) limited ART to married or stable de
facto heterosexual couples. Dr McBain argued that this prohibition was
inoperative because
it was inconsistent with the federal
Sex Discrimination
. The Roman Catholic Church applied for, and was granted,
status in the Federal Court and in fact presented all of the
arguments in response to Dr McBain. Justice Sundberg devoted a large
part of his
judgment to ‘Submissions of the Roman Catholic Church’ (he rejected
all of the Church's arguments). Later,
the Church applied to the High Court for
an order to review Justice Sundberg's
and leave was granted for the case
to be heard by the Full Court of the High Court of Australia but the appeal did
not proceed.
I have argued, with Associate Professor Mal Parker, that such intervention by
church groups is open to criticism.
litigation essentially involves a dispute between private parties who have
(though their counsel) defined the issues and decided
what arguments to make to
the court. Why should they should have their actions delayed, be required to
address new issues, or bear
additional costs, because of third party
intervention? While churches may properly intervene if they are service
providers and directly
affected by the outcome of the legislation, they should
not be permitted to do so for political purposes. Arguments advanced by a
religious body are unduly powerful because they seem to rest on God-given
morality, even if that is not specifically stated. As noted
above, churches are
not ‘representative’ in a ‘democratic’ sense, as the
laity is not consulted in their
formulation and there are often diverse views in
the laity. Also, allowing churches to intervene confers advantages on those who
are financially well resourced (the Roman Catholic Church) over those who are
not (members of minority groups – individual
litigants).
Finally, the religious bodies
who act in this way are acting disjunctively, seeking to impose their view of
what is morally right
on other people who may not share the faith on which the
view is based.
A more acceptable means of religious intervention in ethical and legal
discussion about medical procedures is one in which religious
beliefs and ideas
the debate, to
rather than to dictate the outcome.
Professor Smith calls this an ‘interrogative’
requiring an acknowledgement of
‘fallibilism’:
In other words both parties need to accept the proposition that they may not
only be incorrect in their understandings of each other,
but ‘in their
inferences about implications of their positions, in their development of their
own arguments and even in some
basic claims they have never
questioned’.
This provides scope for what Professor Smith calls a ‘Creative
Partnership’.
In the law, an example is the intervention by the Roman Catholic Church in
the English case called
Re A (Children)
, or the ‘conjoined twins
The principal issue in the
case was whether it would be lawful to kill one of two conjoined twins in order
to save the other one.
If that was not done, both twins would die. The Court of
Appeal ‘[e]xceptionally allowed the Archbishop of Westminster and
Pro-Life Alliance [a political party] to make written submissions to [the
court]’, and said that the court was ‘grateful
The Archbishop’s
submission made ‘five salient points, based on Roman Catholic faith and
human life is sacred and inviolable;
a person’s bodily integrity should not be invaded when that can confer
no benefit;
the duty to preserve one person’s life cannot without grave injustice
be effected by a lethal assault on another;
there is no duty on doctors to resort to extraordinary means in order to
preserve life;
... the rights of parents should be overridden only where they are clearly
‘contrary to what is strictly owing to their
The submission of the Pro-Life Alliance in the conjoined twins case was more
specific than the Archbishop’s concerning the moral
issues in separating
conjoined twins where that will cause one to die. For example, Pro-Life argued
that ‘the negative obligation
to refrain from the intentional deprivation
of life in effect trumps the positive obligation to take steps to protect the
of the right to life’.
Although the judges clearly considered the Archbishop’s submissions
carefully and discussed them in the judgments, they were
not accepted. Walker LJ
said, ‘The five salient points made by the Archbishop are entitled to
profound respect’ but ‘ultimately
the court has to decide this
appeal by reference to legal principle, so far as it can be discerned and not by
reference to religious
teaching or individual
conscience’.
What was different in this case from the Australian cases on abortion and
access to ART was that here, the arguments were specifically
stated to be from a
religious perspective, ‘based on Roman Catholic faith and morality’.
The religious arguments were
not disguised as secular ones. They were placed and
judicially considered alongside a range of other arguments from other
perspectives.
The Church was not attempting to override all other arguments on
the basis that its view was the only ‘right’ one. It
conjunctively and not disjunctively.
The Roman Catholic Church has recently stated what appears to be a similar
position to that of Professor Coady concerning the role
of the Church and the
State. Pope Benedict XVI said in his most recent Encyclical
Catholic social doctrine has its place: it has no intention of giving the
Church power over the State. Even less is it an attempt
to impose on those who
do not share the faith ways of thinking and modes of conduct proper to faith ...
A just society must be the achievement of politics, not of the
Dr Paul Collins, a historian and former priest, reportedly praised this
Encyclical Letter as a return to mainstream Catholic thinking:
material about not replacing the state and not directly participating in
politics is particularly good and is also in
a way a veiled attack on movements
such as the Right to Life, which impose what they see as a Catholic theology on
the state’.
If that is true, we may
see a decline in court interventions and political lobbying by the Church and
its members.
On the other hand, whether the Encyclical Letter in fact signifies a new
approach on the part of the Roman Catholic Church may depend
Pope’s words are interpreted by members of the church. In practice, little
may change. The Pope states the church
‘has no intention of giving the
Church power over the State’, but says that the Church should ‘help
purify reason’;
blindness caused by the dazzling effect of power and special interests’;
and ‘help form consciences in political
How will the faithful
interpret these injunctions? Will Roman Catholic members of Parliament continue
not only to vote according
to their own faith but also to impose it on others in
order to enlighten
‘ethical blindness’, and form
consciences? Will church members still feel they are on a
‘mission from God’ to convert others to their views?
The recent debate on the Australian ban of the abortion drug RU486 was a test
of the Roman Catholic Church's new approach to direct
political lobbying.
Opponents of the drug encouraged worshippers to write to members of parliament
opposing any loosening of control
More than 200 Catholic doctors
apparently threatened to resign from the Australian Medical Association and the
Royal Australian College
of General Practitioners over
The legislation to transfer control
over RU468 from the Health Minister to the Therapeutic Goods Administration was
passed by the
Senate after a lively debate on 9 February 2006. Some members put
fervent arguments clearly based on their own religious beliefs.
However, there
is a fine line between giving a view and the reason for it, as Senator Lyn
Allison did with her experience of having
an abortion, and Senator Nick Minchin
did when telling of his child being aborted by a former
girlfriend.
It is quite different to argue
that one’s view is right and must be accepted by others because the Roman
Catholic Church states
that it is right!
Finally, I do not accept the assertion with which I suspect Professor Smith
agrees, that ‘without religious beliefs, moral teachings
“hang in the air” without any
foundation’.
There are other values
that may guide our decision making. These include the human rights perspective
underlying what Professor Smith
calls ‘the Kirby Ethic’ (‘an
abiding respect for human goodness and dignity together with a tolerance for
and ‘participatory
). There is also what I
call ‘lived experience’ – the views of gay and lesbian women
and their children, scientists
undertaking embryonic research, people suffering
from diseases that may be cured by embryonic stem sell research. From a personal
perspective, I can cite my own experience as a member of the ‘Lockhart
Committee’ on embryonic stem cell research in
I was more persuaded of what the
Roman Catholic Church calls ‘the moral status of the embryo’ by
hearing women speak
of the meaning for them of their embryo than dogmatic
statements of church doctrine (human life starts at fertilisation). When women
described an embryo created in love with their partners, and formed to make a
baby combining their genes, one could see at once why
the embryo should not be
treated instrumentally in a research project (unless they specifically wanted
that to happen) – and
why such an embryo may be regarded differently from
one created specifically for research by somatic cell nuclear transfer (the
technique).
Thus, in conclusion, I believe that Professor Smith’s paper challenges
us to examine more closely not so much the meaning of
religion and whether it is
conjunctive or disjunctive to law and medicine. Rather, how is religion used in
particular contexts? It
may be used disjunctively to stampede its opponents
without reflection or doubt. That seems to me to have occurred in Terri
where religious
intervenors would not accept the views of the courts despite the matter being
considered on numerous occasions by
judges. If, on the other hand, religious
views are expressed alongside others in a genuine attempt to find a way forward
a shared acknowledgment of difficulty and uncertainty, a conjunctive
approach, then religion may be a helpful source of reference
and wisdom in the
development of law and medicine.
Professor of Law, University of
G P Smith, ‘Law, Religion, and
Medicine: Conjunctive or Disjunctive?’ (2006)
Macquarie Law Symposium
– Law, Religion and Medical Science
Ibid 20, citing H J Berman,
Interaction of Law and Religion
(1974) 79 (emphasis added).
C A J Coady, ‘Religious Meddling: A
Comment on Skene and Parker’ (2002) 28(4)
Journal of Medical Ethics
221, 222, referring to L Skene and M Parker, ‘Religion, the Law, and
Medical Ethics’ (2002) 28(4)
Journal of Medical Ethics
CES v Superclinics Australia Pty
(1995) 38 NSWLR 47.
[2000] FCA 1009
(28 July 2000); discussed
by L Skene, ‘Voices in the ART Access Debate’ (2001) 20(1)
Bioethics Review
9. See also K Walker, ‘1950s Family Values v Human
Rights: In Vitro Fertilisation, Donor Insemination and Sexuality in
Public Law Review
Re The Honourable Justice Sundberg; Ex
parte Australian Catholic Bishops Conference and Anor
(C21/2000).
See, L Skene and M Parker, ‘The
Role of the Church in Developing the Law’ (2002) 28(4)
Medical Ethics
215. See also, L Skene and M Parker, ‘The Role of the
Church in Developing the Law: Response to Commentators’ (2002)
Journal of Medical Ethics
Nevertheless, Professor Parker and I
ultimately concluded that there is no principled basis on which church
participation could
be excluded from court participation. One reason is the
difficulty in distinguishing for legal purposes between ‘doctrinal’
and religious views, in the traditional sense, and the views of people with
other ‘doctrinal’ perspectives, such as wilderness
societies, public
interest safety groups, consumer advocates and the like.
Smith, above n 1, see text to n 123,
citing K Greenwalt,
Private Consciences and Public Reason
(1995) 142.
Smith, above n 1, citing at, n 78, D H
Smith, ‘Creation, Preservation and All The Blessings’ (2001) 81
Anglican Theol Rev
Re A (Children) (Conjoined Twins:
Surgical Separation)
[2000] EWCA Civ 254
[2001] Fam 147
[2001] 2 WLR 480
; [2000] 3 FCR 577 (CA
(Civ Div) 22 Sept 2000).
Ibid 155 (Ward LJ).
Ibid 257 (Walker LJ).
Ibid 204 (Ward LJ).
Ibid 257 (Walker LJ).
Benedictus PP.XVI,
Deus Caritas Est
http://www.vatican.va/ holy_father/benedict_xvi/encyclicals/documents/hf_ben-xvi_enc_20051225_deus-caritas-est_en.html
30 January 2006.
Ibid 28 (emphasis added).
J Rowbotham and N Bita, ‘Church
Can’t Do State’s Work: Pope’,
The Australian
26 January 2006
<http://www.theaustralian.news.com.au/common/story_page/0,5744,
17941312%5E2702,00.html> 13 February 2006.
AAP, ‘Opponents of Abortion Pill
Look to Churches',
(Melbourne), 30 January 2005
http://www.theage.com.au/news/national/opponents-of-abortion-pill-look-to-churches/2006/01/29/1138469607159.html
13 February 2006.
T Livingstone, ‘Catholic GPs Set
to Quit Over RU-486’,
Courier-Mail (Brisbane), 3 February 2006
http://www.thecouriermail.news.com.au/printpage/0,5942,18023795,00 .html
at 13 February 2006.
N Khadem and M Grattan, ‘Senate
Backs Contentious Abortion Bill’,
(Melbourne), 10 February
http://www.theage.com.au/news/national/senate-backs-contentious-abortion-bill/2006/02/09/1139465796961.html
13 February 2006.
Smith, above n 1, citing at n 213, P
Writings on an Ethical Life
(2000) xviii.
Smith, above n 1, citing at n 12, Hon
Through the World’s Eye
(2000) 6, 13 and 40.
Smith, above n 1, citing at n 15, Hon
M Kirby, ‘Teaching Australian Civics’ (1997) 13
Queensland U Tech
Legislation Review Committee for the
Review of the
Prohibition of Human Cloning Act
Human Embryos Act
J Robertson, ‘
Its (In)significance’ (Research Paper Series No 72, Public Law and Legal
University of Texas, March 2005).
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
No downloadable files available
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter