URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/journals/MqLawJl/2018/6.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 15:21:33
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Wand, Anne; Peisah, Carmelle; Draper, Brian; Brodaty, Henry --- "The Nexus between Elder Abuse, Suicide and Assisted Dying: The Importance of Relational Autonomy and Undue Influence" [2018] MqLawJl 6; (2018) 18 Macquarie Law Journal 79
THE NEXUS BETWEEN ELDER ABUSE, SUICIDE, AND ASSISTED DYING: THE IMPORTANCE OF RELATIONAL AUTONOMY AND UNDUE INFLUENCE
I INTRODUCTION
II UNDERSTANDING RELATIONSHIPS, ABUSE AND SUICIDE
III UNDUE INFLUENCE AND RELATIONAL AUTONOMY IN RELATION TO ELDER ABUSE, ASSISTED DYING, AND SUICIDE
A Undue Influence
B Relational Autonomy
C Elder Abuse and Undue Influence
D Assisted Dying and Undue Influence
E Suicide and Undue Influence
IV ASSISTED DYING AND CRIMINAL PROSECUTIONS
V IMPLICATIONS FOR POLICY AND GUIDELINES FOR ASSISTED DYING
VI CONCLUSION
ADDRESSING ELDER ABUSE: PERSPECTIVES FROM THE COMMUNITY LEGAL SECTOR IN THE ACT
I INTRODUCTION
II UNDERSTANDING THE FACTORS THAT INFLUENCE ELDER ABUSE IN THE COMMUNITY
A Current Service Challenges in Addressing Elder Abuse in the ACT
B Defining People Who are at Risk of Elder Abuse
1 Cultural and Social Issues in Defining Who is at Risk
III HOW WE MUST RESPOND TO THE RECOMMENDATIONS MADE BY THE AUSTRALIAN LAW REFORM COMMISSION REPORT
A The Role of Legal Aid Commissions in Helping Develop a National Plan
1 Using Community Legal Education to Prevent Elder Abuse
B The Potential for Abuse through Enduring Powers of Attorney
1 Appropriate Protections of Principals and Restriction of Attorneys
2 Managing Principal and Attorney Conflicts of Interest
C The Potential for Financial Abuse in Family Agreements
D The Difficulty in Enforcing Rights under an Assets for Care Arrangement
E Providing an Appropriate Forum for Resolving Disputes in Elder Abuse Matters
F The Risks of Instituting Adult Safeguarding Legislation – Balancing Autonomy and Protection
1 Placing the Focus on the Rights of the Older Person
2 Improving Coordination between Organisations in Responding to Elder Abuse
IV DEVELOPING A SOCIO-LEGAL MODEL OF SERVICE DELIVERY
A The Importance of Outreach Services in a Socio-Legal Model
V HOW LEGAL AID SERVICES ARE RESPONDING TO THE CHALLENGES OF ELDER ABUSE
A Instituting Health Justice Partnerships and Outreach Services
B Providing Social Liaison Support to Vulnerable Clients
C Expanding Legal Aid Services in the Future
VI CONCLUSION
THE NEXUS BETWEEN ELDER ABUSE, SUICIDE, AND ASSISTED
DYING: THE IMPORTANCE OF RELATIONAL AUTONOMY AND UNDUE INFLUENCE
ANNE P F WAND*, CARMELLE PEISAH**, BRIAN DRAPER*** AND HENRY
BRODATY****
The term elder abuse encompasses a wide range of acts or lack of action
(neglect) which cause harm or distress to an older person
and occur within
trusted relationships. Harm may occur when older people are unduly influenced to
make decisions, including to end
their lives. With the legalisation of assisted
dying in Victoria, there is an urgent need to consider the relevant aspects of
decision-making
in this setting. Assessment of the social and relational context
of older individuals is essential in evaluating whether decisions
for assisted
dying are autonomous or potentially an extreme form of elder abuse, or anywhere
in between.
I INTRODUCTION
With the introduction of the
Voluntary Assisted Dying Act
(‘the Act’) in
Victoria, and active bills and parliamentary inquiries into assisted dying in
New Zealand, New South Wales,
the Australian Capital Territory and Western
Australia, there is an urgent need to discuss the potential implications of such
legislation
for elder abuse. Notably,
of that Act specifically
acknowledges ‘there is a need to protect individuals who may be subject to
Implicit to such
‘protection’, and arguably the safe and effective functioning of any
assisted dying legislation, is
the recognition and mitigation of risks of such
Older people, the age group with the highest rate of suicide
internationally,
particularly vulnerable to abuse under this
legislation
given their
interpersonal contexts, especially the frequently dependent nature of their
relationships and comparatively greater health
burden, combined with other
psychosocial factors such as perceived burdensomeness influencing decision
According to the World Health Organisation, elder abuse can be defined as
a single, or repeated act, or lack of appropriate action, occurring within any
relationship where there is an
expectation of trust
which causes harm or
distress to an older person.
Elder abuse can take various forms such as physical,
psychological or emotional, sexual and financial
It can also be the result of
intentional or unintentional neglect
. This definition clearly includes
harm and distress incurred within the context of a relationship where there is
exploitation of
trust and vulnerability, a key factor distinguishing abuse of
older adults and that of younger
One means of incurring harm
is to adversely influence decision making, otherwise conceptualised as undue
a prominent target of
Articles 12 and 16 of the Convention on the Rights of Persons with
Disability.
Hitherto used in the
context of will-making and the execution of contractual
but also in reference
to treatment consent (see
undue influence has
relevance to both suicide and assisted dying.
Decisions to suicide or to request assisted dying are never undertaken in a
vacuum. Relational autonomy
suggests that autonomy emerges within and because of
relationships,
and the corollary
of this is that decision-making occurs within and because of relationships.
There is evidence of the impact of
relationships on the decision to die by
but little attention
has been given to the impact of relationships on requests for assisted dying.
Clarification of these issues
is of upmost importance with the passage of the
Voluntary Assisted Dying Act 2017
The aim of this paper is to explore the ways in which relationships can cause
harm mediated by suicide or requests for assisted dying,
which by definition
constitute elder abuse. We firstly discuss how interpersonal (relationship)
factors relate to abuse and suicide.
Secondly we explore concepts of undue
influence and relational autonomy in the context of suicide and assisted dying
in older people;
and thirdly, criminal prosecutions. Finally, the implications
for policy and guidelines in regards to requests for assisted dying
II UNDERSTANDING RELATIONSHIPS, ABUSE AND SUICIDE
People rarely exist in isolation, but function within various interacting
social and family systems, which are inextricably linked
with mental health.
Most older adults with functional and/or cognitive impairment are in dependent
relationships with family members
and carers, rendering them vulnerable to
abuse. Carers may feel stressed and burdened by their caregiving role and the
shift in family
anger and conflict culminating in
of a myriad of
psychological, physical, neglect and financial
In a more indirect way, family relationships have an impact on suicide in
older people. The interpersonal theory of
recognises the role of
relationships in the decisions to end one’s life. According to this
theory, three factors of thwarted
belongingness, perceived burdensomeness and
capability for suicide must be present for the decision to suicide. There is
evidence to support this hypothesis in older people. Van Orden and
colleagues found that greater perceived burdensomeness and painful
provocative experiences were associated with suicide case
The sense of being a
burden to loved ones and/or society has also been identified in quantitative
studies of risk factors for
as well as in
qualitative work on why older people have
self-harmed.
This includes our
own empirical work that demonstrated the combined effects of feeling like a
burden to others, and often compounded
by the very helplessness of family and
professional caregivers alike.
As such, carer stress may amplify the older person’s internalised
perceptions of burdensomeness.
When a carer’s burden culminates in an older person’s suicide in
order to relieve the carer of that distress, it clearly
does not constitute
abuse. However, it shows the relational pathways of decision making in suicide,
which at their extreme can constitute
abuse, as will be discussed.
In depressed older adults, the psychiatric and physical health of their
carers, and reported difficulties caring, increase the risk
of suicidal
behaviours in older adults.
this is mediated is unclear, although it has been postulated that the older
person may become demoralised by viewing their own
depression as burdensome to
the family carer and their relationship with
This demoralisation may
lead them to conclude that their family member would be better off without them.
On the other hand, it may
be that when the family caregiver is not coping they
are unable to provide social support to their depressed older relative,
the risk of a suicide
It is likely that both
possibilities contribute to suicide risk, but passively so. In our own
qualitative work on late-life self-harm
we have empirically confirmed that the
relational context is important, with perceptions of family and caregiver
rejection acting
as both a trigger for, and consequence of,
person’s self-harm may reflect a defensive response of projective
identification (when a person projects, onto another,
unacceptable feelings or
impulses that the recipient adopts as their own), whereby the older person acts
out their burdened caregiver’s
unexpressed wish for their
Another mechanism for family relationships culminating in suicide or
influencing the decision of an older person to end their life
is the untenable
situation. In some cases, older people are ‘bullied’ into suicide.
Family conflict, elder abuse, and
complex interpersonal dynamics may lead to
untenable situations, whereby suicide is perceived by the older person to be
option. The following situation illustrates this outcome.
Mrs B was an 86 year old widow with dementia who had recently moved to a
nursing home after a prolonged medical admission following
a fall. She was
referred to an aged care psychiatry service for assessment due to continued
refusal to eat and take medications.
She was largely mute upon review, but her
daughter, a geriatrician and nursing home staff provided a history of massive
weight loss
(20kg in four months), low mood, reduced talkativeness, and poor
engagement with staff. Her daughter had been her primary co-resident
the preceding two years. Mrs B’s son had learned his sister, and not he,
was appointed their mother’s representative
under Power of Attorney (POA).
This was perceived as an unforgivable slight against his expected role as the
male of the family in
their cultural context. He was also angry his mother had
chosen to live with his sister and not move to a nursing home, concerned
would diminish his inheritance. He became increasingly hostile, accusatory and
abusive towards his mother for choosing his sister
for the POA role. This
involved him shouting at her, abruptly stopping and starting the car when
driving with her, throwing her rosary
beads, accusing his sister of taking
advantage of her, and verbally threatening his mother. Her daughter explained:
she’d rush at me [after outings with her son] and just
sob and I was powerless to do anything.’ The abusive behaviours
when Mrs B was alone with her son on weekly scheduled outings. Mrs B’s
daughter offered her mother an excuse of being
‘unwell’ to protect
against having to experience the weekly visits, but she declined saying
‘he’s my son
and I love him’.
When Mrs B was admitted to hospital after a fall she developed a delirium (an
acute confusional state) during which time she voiced
paranoid ideas about her
son electrocuting her and coming to ‘throw me in the Nile’. She was
increasingly withdrawn and
started to refuse food, most fluids and medication.
Her son’s abusive behaviours continued in hospital and escalated to the
point where he had to be escorted from the building by security staff. Mrs B
refused to look at or speak to her son. Subsequently,
he was allowed to visit
his mother for short periods, and was reportedly quiet and non-confrontational
towards her, with no further
accusations made about her finances. Mrs B’s
delirium resolved, but her cognitive and functional impairment had progressed
the point where she needed nursing home care. Upon discharge to a nursing home
her oral intake improved, but it was noted she
would not eat after her son
Mrs B’s indirect self-harm (refusal to eat and take medications)
emerged in the context of an untenable situation – elder
abuse from her
son whom she simultaneously loved and feared. Although she would withdraw during
his visits and was visibly distressed
afterwards, she was unable to voice this
and would not agree to suggested measures to stop him visiting. This response
derived from
her role as a mother, and also culturally, as he was the eldest
child and a man, and as such his position was the head of the family.
indirect self-harm inadvertently served to solve this problem as her son’s
accusations and overt hostility stopped when
she stopped speaking, eating, and
taking medications. Mrs B’s daughter and others were aware of the abuse,
but felt unable
to protect her, understanding the complexity of the
interpersonal dynamics of the situation for Mrs B. As her daughter summarised,
‘She would put up with anything and just wanted to see him because she
loves him. He’s her son.’ Her daughter,
the nursing home staff,
geriatrician and GP all felt torn between respecting Mrs B’s apparent wish
to maintain contact with
her son and wanting to protect her from her son’s
abuse. Notably there was no requirement for the abuse to be reported or clear
guidelines for how they should respond. Moreover, the reluctance of the older
person to cease contact with or prosecute the perpetrator
is a common phenomenon
for several reasons.
Other situations perceived as untenable which have been implicated in the
suicide deaths of older adults analysed by psychological
autopsy include loss of
self-esteem following migration to a different culture, guilt, shame, rejection
by spouse, financial disaster
and inability to stop drinking
III UNDUE INFLUENCE AND RELATIONAL AUTONOMY IN RELATION
TO ELDER ABUSE, ASSISTED DYING, AND SUICIDE
Undue Influence
The legal construct of undue influence is usually applied to testamentary
undue influence,
but it has much
broader application. O’Neill and Peisah argue that the concept should be
extended to consideration of how relationships
may influence decision making,
particularly in people with cognitive impairment, who may be influenced by
others to make a range
of legal decisions in the other person’s
Undue influence is also
relevant to discussions about euthanasia and suicide, particularly when the
decision making of individuals
is recognised as bound to their relationship
context. Peisah and colleagues described several risk factors or ‘red
for undue influence in will-making, which remain relevant to other
areas of decision making.
red flags relate to the social environment, the social circumstances, and
vulnerability of the person
(testator):
(i) The social environment includes consideration of the relationship with
the ‘influencer’, such as a relationship between
cognitively impaired person and a family member, helpful neighbour or friend,
carer, distant relative, a ‘suitor’/de
facto partner or spouse
(often younger and not cognitively impaired), and professionals (doctors,
lawyers, clergy etc).
(ii) The social circumstances that may indicate risk include the presence of
family conflict, loss of favour of previously trusted
relatives or friends,
psychological and/or physical dependency on a carer, and isolation and
sequestration.
(iii) The personal factors that render a person vulnerable to undue influence
include: physical illness, disability and/or sensory
impairment; substance
misuse; mental illness (eg depression, schizophrenia, paranoid ideas) and
cognitive disorders (delirium, dementia,
intellectual disability); psychological
factors including mourning and grief, personality disorders; and impaired
neuropsychological
functions required for decision making capacity (eg problems
with judgement and reasoning, apathy/passivity).
Relational Autonomy
Many older people are burdened by these risk factors outlined in the previous
section. An understanding of how these factors affect
decision-making can be
drawn from the concept of relational autonomy, which proposes that the autonomy
of individuals is founded
upon their social connections and
Our identity is shaped
by social environments and our interactions with other people. Nedelsky
suggested that autonomy emerges within
and because of
relationships.
According to this
concept, self-identity and decision making capacity are dynamic and change with
the individual’s network
of relationships, and their cultural and social
For example, in Maori
people (and some other indigenous peoples), decisions about an individual may be
made as part of a family group
in a cultural context:
taha whanau
In relation to decision
making specifically, a relational autonomy approach promotes understanding and
incorporating a person’s
interpersonal context when assisting them to make
choices in line with their sense of self and
A related concept in evaluating whether a decision is made autonomously is
authenticity. Conditions for authenticity stipulate that
the persons’
decisions, beliefs, values and commitments are identified as their own, coherent
with their sense of self and
Thus, even though most
tests of decision making capacity focus upon procedural aspects (ie
understanding, retaining and weighing
up relevant information and then
communicating a decision) and emphasise capacity being decision-specific, the
context of the person
should also be considered to ensure the decision is
autonomous.
This context
includes authenticity, consistency and social dimensions – that decisions
are made in line with the persons’
values, commitments and beliefs and in
continuing interactions with
As we are social beings,
we are accountable for these decisions and must be able to explain the reasons
for making decisions and
take responsibility for them and their consequences.
Understanding undue influence and relational autonomy may be the key to
understanding
why some older people decide (or not) to attempt suicide or, in
the future, request assisted dying.
Long term abuse and family violence also affect autonomy and decision-making
through the insidious undermining of self-esteem and
identity. When a person has
a mental disability, including vulnerability in terms of sense of self and
identity, more time must be
spent understanding their values and decisions and
exploring aspects of authenticity, accountability and social context necessary
for autonomy.
One example is the
following case of Mrs H, as discussed by Mackenzie:
Mrs H is a woman with an aggressive bone cancer who has had a leg amputation as
part of treatment. Her husband has just left her
due to her disability,
disfigurement and the anticipated burden she would pose on him. She is a woman
who has a poor sense of self,
with a practical identity determined by norms of
traditional femininity, such that her husband’s leaving her results in her
feeling worthless and with no reason to live.
This self-concept informs her decision to decline further treatment and to
tell the treating team that she wants to
It is not difficult
to see how her position could extend to a request for assisted dying. The
difficulty in assessing the autonomy
of decision making here is that her sense
of self or identity and the values she endorses seem to stem from an oppressive
relationship.
suggests that Mrs H’s autonomy in the decision to stop treatment, and
potentially to go on to request assisted dying,
is therefore compromised. This
is because her capacity to reflect has been impacted by distorting influences,
and the appropriate
response for the medical team would be to try and shift Mrs
H’s perception of her situation, for example, by helping her explore
whether she could see her life as having value within a broader social network
(other than just her husband) and identifying sources
of self-esteem around
which she could reconstruct her
Thus patient autonomy
can be supported by attention to the relational
The issue of autonomy and requests for assisted dying are complex. On the one
hand, if ever there was a decision that had to be autonomous
it should be the
request to end one’s life. On the other hand, we have previously
encouraged discussion and family consultation
In reaching an
informed decision to end one’s life, we have suggested that the person
requesting assisted dying should demonstrate
that they have considered the
potential adverse impact of their death on their loved
Distorted perceptions of
relationships and how their death might affect family and friends are relevant
here. Discussion with family
also allows an opportunity to explore these
perceptions, and potentially resolve issues underlying the decision to request
dying. Rabins has also pointed out that whether there is a ‘good
reason’ to die by suicide, family and friends are often
permanently and
seriously damaged by such a death of their loved
Whether this is also the
case in assisted dying remains to be seen, although some families have reported
feeling pressured to accept
a relative’s wish for assisted dying when
repeatedly threatened with the alternative prospect of their
The reality is that notwithstanding burdened carers and a failing sense of
self, a decision for assisted dying is never made in a
vacuum, nor should it be.
Principles of relational autonomy may be used to protect older people from this
most serious potential
form of abuse. Constraints on the competence condition
for autonomy may come from influences which distort capacity for reflection
self-awareness. Cognitive impairment in older people is an obvious cause of
such. Traditionally, this has been interpreted narrowly,
in terms of impairments
in the practical operation of capacity, through compromised functions such as
understanding and appreciating
information, weighing up the pros and cons of
various options and applying these to one’s situation and values, and then
at a decision.
cognitive impairment may also impede accurate appraisals of relationships and
consequently guide decisions through mechanisms
such as changes in personality
or family alliances, persecutory ideas, and
apathy/passivity.
gives other examples of distorting influences such as overpowering emotions,
depression or other mental illness, being
subject to physical, emotional or
verbal abuse, being under the influence of substances which distort perception,
or being deprived
of educational and social opportunities to develop skills in
reasoning, criticism and
reflection.
Lack of self-esteem
or self-confidence, often the end result of longstanding abuse, impair
one’s capacity to understand his
or herself and to respond in a flexible
way to life changes. Autonomy is compromised by lack of self-esteem because it
make a decision if one does not think his or her life and activities
are worthwhile.
Given the array
of potential factors described by Christman which may distort self-awareness in
younger adults, the additional challenges
faced by older adults are particularly
sobering. These challenges include impaired cognition causing passivity,
impaired reasoning
and reflection, and the disintegration of a sense of self,
which is conferred not only by impaired cognition but also by disintegration
Elder Abuse and Undue Influence
These concepts of undue influence and relational autonomy are highly
pertinent to elder abuse in general, as well as to decisions
for assisted dying
and suicide in older people. Firstly, we deal with elder abuse. Older age often
comes with more ill health, which
impacts on a person’s view of
themselves, their needs within relationships, and how they respond to
maltreatment in these
relationships.
Dementia, for
example, is more prevalent with increasing age and has been associated with
greater risk of elder abuse compared to
people without dementia. The risk of
elder abuse increases incrementally with the degree of cognitive
impairment.
Several reasons have
been proposed for this increased risk of elder abuse in dementia, including
greater ill health, frailty and
dependency on family/carers for support, and
less ability to defend oneself from physical and verbal
Neglect may occur due to
the dependency upon others for activities of daily living and personal self-care
(eg continence management).
People from culturally and linguistically diverse
communities may be at heightened risk of abuse due to language difficulties if
their primary language is not English due to dependency on family members for
support with instrumental activities of daily living
(eg paying bills, seeking
health care) and social contact, and potential conflict from different
expectations of care between
generations.
Abuse in older people may also be long standing, such as ‘domestic
violence grown old’.
some families and couples, conflict and abuse may be well entrenched patterns of
relating which simply persist into old age (thus
called domestic violence grown
old), rather than arising for the first time in late life. Cognitive or
functional changes and ill
health in older age may shift the balance of needs in
a relationship, for example, with a long-term victim of abuse struggling to
provide care for the
perpetrator.
Additionally,
perpetrators of domestic violence may not make good carers, as a poor premorbid
relationship may lead to elder
Furthermore, long-term
domestic violence is associated with depression and anxiety and the undermining
of confidence and self-esteem,
capability for independence, opportunities for
success and personal development and resilience. Additionally, it may promote
Many of these
consequences are also risk factors for undue influence. As discussed above,
individuals make decisions in the context
of their social environment, personal
factors (physical, psychological and cognitive) and significant relationships.
Decisions are
also guided by how people conceptualise themselves, which may be
distorted by abusive interpersonal relationships and social structures,
impairing autonomy.
as in the circumstance of making wills, these factors may interact to render an
older person vulnerable to undue influence
and abuse within their significant
relationships.
Assisted Dying and Undue Influence
Assisted dying is potentially a fertile ground for undue influence, and this
has been recognised in the recent Victorian
legislation.
Eligibility for
assisted dying under the
Voluntary Assisted Dying Act 2017
(Vic) requires
a person: to have lived in Victoria for a minimum of one year; to be over the
age of 18; to have decision making capacity
in relation to voluntary assisted
dying; to have a condition which is incurable, advanced, progressive and will
cause death; to have
six months to live (or 12 months if suffering from
particular neurodegenerative conditions such as motor neurone disease which they
are expected to die from with 12 months); and experience suffering which cannot
be relieved in a manner perceived as tolerable to
individual.
Apart from the
formal three-step request process, which mandates two independent medical
assessments and a written declaration from
the person requesting assisted dying,
the legislation includes safeguards to protect vulnerable people from coercion
and abuse. Requests
will be subject to review by a dedicated
Notably, the Act also
requires that the two doctors involved in assessing the person are satisfied
that they are ‘acting voluntarily
and without
clearly stipulated that a person whose primary reason for requesting assisted
dying is a mental illness (as defined under
Mental Health Act 2014
(Vic)) or a disability (as defined by the
Disability Act 2006
is ineligible.
Thus, in addition to assessing decision making capacity in relation to
assisted dying, clinicians must assess or screen for undue
influence. In a
proposed legal test for competence to request assisted suicide, we previously
emphasised both components of the assessment
task. Specifically in relation to
undue influence, we suggested that the decision must be made by the person him
or herself and not
one he/she feels compelled to make, or coerced by others
involved in their care into making, in order to relieve them of
The possibility of
making a voluntary and informed decision despite the likely presence of
dependent relationships with carers was
The person’s
strength of will and the degree of pressure upon them to request assisted
suicide should also be considered when
assessing for undue influence. The same
assessment could be usefully applied to the determination of their capacity to
request assisted
Terminal illness is of itself a risk factor for undue influence, and it is
conceivable that people suffering from the associated physical
and psychological
symptoms would be more vulnerable to pressure, whether express or implied, from
significant others. The definition
of a terminal illness is in itself complex.
There is a clear difference, for example, between someone with a condition that
a very short life expectancy and someone with a diagnosis of early
Alzheimer’s dementia. Whilst a person with early dementia
statistically shorter life expectancy than someone without dementia of the same
age, there is uncertainty about when or how
they will die many years before
their death. Knowledge of having, or even fear of developing, dementia may
confer anxiety about the
imagined experience of functional and cognitive
decline, which is not often
Notably, the
Voluntary Assisted Dying Act
specifies that, for a person to be eligible
for access to voluntary assisted dying, they must have a disease that is
expected to cause
death within weeks or months, not exceeding six
which is perhaps a
protective measure for those contemplating assisted dying in early dementia.
Depression is not uncommonly comorbid with terminal illness and may influence
decision making capacity. It may compound perceptions
of hopelessness, isolation
and burdensomeness,
when accompanied by a poor prognosis. For example, depression in patients with
cancer with a poor prognosis of less than
three months life expectancy was found
to be associated with requests for
euthanasia.
Further, the wish
for euthanasia may be state-dependent, as preferences for euthanasia in
depressed older people mostly resolved
upon treatment for
depression.
Depression can be
screened for in the terminally ill, and there is evidence that treatment is
effective and can improve quality of
It is worth noting,
however, that the presence of depression does not automatically preclude
decision making capacity, a point which
has been raised
Suicide and Undue Influence
Older people, especially those reliant on carers, may feel obliged to end
their lives by suicide to reduce care giver burden, for
similar reasons to those
proposed to potentially underlie euthanasia requests. We have previously
described two cases of older people
who requested euthanasia, but as it was not
legal in their jurisdiction, they attempted suicide instead. In one case, an
88-year-old
woman who was the primary carer for her frail older husband took an
overdose with suicidal intent in the context of acute chronic
pain. She had
previously expressed a wish to die by euthanasia should she ever lose her
independence. The acute pain was a trigger
to her suicide attempt as she could
no longer perform her caregiving role for her husband and feared both placement
in residential
aged care facility and becoming a burden on her family. In the
other case an 89-year-old man with cognitive impairment and alcohol
lived alone made multiple attempts to end his life. He stated he would have
opted for euthanasia were it legal, and concluded
that the only solution was to
take matters into his own hands. With some awareness of his declining cognition,
death for him meant
avoiding becoming a burden on his family, nursing home
placement and dependency. Avoiding placement also meant that his children
receive the full amount of his
In both of these cases, although there was no apparent external undue
influence, it was the interpersonal or relational factors that
underpinned their
requests for euthanasia and ultimately, as it was unavailable, their decisions
to attempt suicide.
IV ASSISTED DYING AND CRIMINAL PROSECUTIONS
Manslaughter and homicide are extreme manifestations of elder abuse. However,
the line between assisting a person to die if they ask
for help to end their
life and abuse or criminal behaviour is not always clear. According to
Australian law,
abetting a suicide is a crime. We have previously discussed
an Australian case
of involuntary euthanasia due to
incapacity.
Two women, Justins
and Jennings, were found guilty of the manslaughter of Graeme Wylie, a man with
severe dementia and depression
who had requested euthanasia but lacked capacity
to suicide. Justins was Wylie’s long term de facto partner and Jennings
a friend of the couple and a member of the voluntary euthanasia organisation
Exit International. Wylie had made suicide attempts
and expressed to friends and
family a wish to end his life rather than succumb to the inevitable stages of
decline in dementia.
prepare an advance directive outlining his wishes at the end of life in the
event that he had lost capacity or give any
indication as to who should make
health care decisions for him. An application to visit the Dignitas
for euthanasia was
written by Jennings on behalf of Wylie in 2005. Dignitas rejected his
application due to concerns about his capacity
to consent to assisted suicide.
Following this rejection, Wylie unsuccessfully attempted suicide again, whilst
Justins – who
was aware of the attempt – was out of the house at his
request. Jennings then visited Mexico in order to procure Nembutal
(pentobarbitone),
after reading about the effectiveness of the drug for
euthanasia, and gave it to Justins upon her return. In the same month Justins
took Wylie to his solicitor to change his will which substantially increased her
proportion of his estate. The couple had a medical
certificate stating Wylie was
competent to make his own decisions. Justins testified that she left the open
bottle of Nembutal on
the table in front of Wylie, which he then poured into a
glass. She left the house. Wylie then drank from the glass. Justins returned
found him deceased. An autopsy revealed the Nembutal in his system and confirmed
the presence of Alzheimer’s disease. The
prosecution rejected the
women’s offer to plead guilty to assisting suicide and a jury subsequently
found both women guilty
of manslaughter. Jennings killed herself before
sentencing and Justins was sentenced to periodic detention. The verdict rested
two key issues: Wylie’s capacity to decide to end his life by taking
the Nembutal, and whether a reasonable person in Justins’
position would
have known he had the capacity or explored whether he had the capacity to end
Justins subsequently successfully appealed her conviction in 2010 in the
Court of Criminal Appeal (CCA),
with a key element in the determination being that a decision to commit suicide
need not necessarily be informed in order to be
Specifically, Johnson
J (with Simpson J agreeing) held that:
[4] The concept of ‘an informed decision’ is not apt to an
assessment of the capacity of a person to decide to commit
suicide. Nor is it
useful to speak of a rational decision for which a good reason may be ascribed
or identified.
[5] A person possessing capacity may decide to commit suicide on a basis
that is ill-informed or not supported by reason, but it may
be the reasoned
choice of the person, which the law accepts will render the act of suicide the
act of the person and not another
person who provides the means of
It is important to note that the CCA found that, in suggesting a sequential
set of capabilities the deceased must have in order to
have capacity, the trial
judge fell into error because these transformed factual propositions into legal
requirements.
Notwithstanding
these findings, which disconnected clinical criteria for capacity from the
determination of whether the act of suicide
was the act of the person or the
other providing the means of death, the case highlighted the relational context
of assisted suicide,
notably the question of aiding and abetting a suicide or
manslaughter,
an important
distinction in the discourse about assisted
It is unclear what constitutes aiding and abetting in suicide in Australia as
there have been no tested cases and, unlike the
there are no guidelines for
prosecution. The six public interest factors against prosecution that comprise
the Policy for Prosecutors
in Respect of Cases Encouraging or Assisting Suicide
(‘the Policy’) for prosecuting assisted suicide cases in England
emphasise the following: the importance of the victim reaching a determined,
voluntary, settled and clear informed decision to end
their life; the accused
being motivated by compassion; the accused trying to dissuade the victim from
ending their life; the minor
and reluctant encouragement or assistance to the
victim; and the reporting of the suicide to police and assisting in the
investigation
of the circumstances of the
The emphasis is on the
motivation of the accused who assisted the suicide, not the victim. The Policy
also suggests that it is not
in the public interest to prosecute someone who has
reluctantly and compassionately assisted in the suicide of a competent and
Assisting suicide will include conduct where the defendant supplies an
instrument or drug that a person then uses to kill herself
or himself. It can
also consist of advice on methods which help the suicidal person in his or her
task. If the assistant takes a
more active role and actually kills the person
(for example, by injecting the patient with drugs), the charge of murder or
murder may apply. This was the question in Kate Gilderdale’s
Gilderdale’s
daughter Lynn had myalgic encephalomyelitis that resulted in a form of chronic
fatigue syndrome. She had consistently
asked for help to end her life, had
attempted suicide and made an advance directive indicating she refused
life-sustaining treatment.
After Lynn tried and failed to end her life by
morphine overdose, Gilderdale administered morphine and injected air into her
veins. She pleaded guilty to assisting a suicide but was found
not guilty of attempted murder. The jury expressed much sympathy for
Gilderdale’s case, deeming her role in the suicide to be compassionate.
She was sentenced to 12 months’ conditional
The motivation of the person assisting the suicide is an important
determinant for prosecution. In contrast to the Gilderdale case,
that in the
is a clear case of (elder)
Mrs McShane was in
serious financial difficulty and was convicted under the
Suicide Act 1961
for trying to persuade her mother to kill
McShane was video
recorded instructing her mother to take an overdose and cautioning her mother,
before she took the overdose, not
to tell anyone of her (McShane’s) role
in assisting the suicide in case she would lose her inheritance claim. Her
not want to end her life and did not make an attempt.
illustrates malevolent motivation leading to coercion and pressure on a
potential victim, in direct contrast to someone who makes
an informed and
voluntary decision to end their
having asked for the
assistance of another.
V IMPLICATIONS FOR POLICY AND GUIDELINES FOR ASSISTED
We have previously recommended an approach to assessing mental capacity to
request assisted suicide.
proposed criteria for assessment include evaluating the following: the
person’s understanding of their conditions and prognosis;
perceptions of quality of life; their ability to give informed consent
(including comprehending and retaining relevant information
on the potential
risks and likely result of taking a drug for assisted suicide, and feasible
alternatives); their reasons for requesting
physician assisted suicide; and
their process of reasoning (weighing up the information and arriving at a
Consistency in
decision-making should be present over time and in line with past expressed
wishes and the person must be able to
communicate their wish. Focus was also
given to the patient’s mental status, mood (and possible mood disorders),
general and
interpersonal functioning, the presence of internal or external
coercion; and
[t]he decision must be free from undue influence. While patients will still be
able to make competent decisions when they are highly
dependent on others for
care, their decisions must truly be ones that they have made, rather than
decisions which they have been
forced to make or feel they should make to
relieve others of burden. Undue influence must be assessed by having regard to
patient’s strength of will and level of pressure being placed on
the patient by others to commit
In addition, we have highlighted how concepts of relational autonomy are
relevant to the assessment of requests for assisted dying.
Whilst such a
decision must be autonomous, the person must be considered in the context of
their relationships, with the accompanying
complexity. Where possible, people
requesting assisted dying should be encouraged to discuss this decision with
their friends and
family, not only for support or to ensure they understand the
broader effects of this decision on others, but to safeguard against
Noting the reference in the Act to the need to protect individuals who may be
subject to abuse,
that a robust set of guidelines be developed to support this and indeed all of
the other principles of capacity assessment
for the purposes of that Act. Such
guidelines need to be promulgated amongst all health practitioners involved in
assessments for
the purposes of the legislation in line with the principles of
training embodied within it.
It is the responsibility of all health practitioners involved in assessments for
the purposes of the Act to understand the importance
of determining capacity and
undue influence and the potential for abuse in this context. It is important for
the implementation of
this legislation that health practitioners understand the
legislation and their responsibilities under the legislation. Active policy
regarding such specific education is essential given what is already known about
the gaps amongst medical practitioners in understanding
capacity in
and other key
provisions pertaining to end of life, such as withholding and withdrawing
life-sustaining medical
The Royal Australian and New Zealand College of Psychiatrists (RANZCP)
published a Position Statement on Physician Assisted
It was recognised
that the practice was illegal at the time of publication and the emphasis was on
the ethical issues inherent in
physician-assisted suicide, particularly in
relation to psychiatrists. Several key points were raised: the rights of people
mental illness and that psychiatric illness should never be the
justification for physician-assisted suicide; the rights of older
especially those with dementia; misconceptions about older people and factors
underpinning high suicide rates in older people;
and the right of doctors to
determine whether or not they will be involved in physician-assisted
The RANZCP concluded
that the main role of doctors in end of life care is to promote good quality,
comprehensive, accessible patient-centric
care; that psychiatric assessment and
treatment should be provided for people requesting physician-assisted suicide;
and that psychiatrists
should add their expertise to the debate. Noting the
reference to psychiatric expertise in the Victorian
legislation,
we would add the
requirement that psychiatrists be trained in capacity and undue influence
assessment.
VI CONCLUSION
With assisted dying now legal in one state of Australia, there is an urgent
need to consider how capacity to request assisted dying
should be assessed,
including the potential for undue influence and abuse. We are social beings and,
as such, decision-making capacity,
including for assisted dying, must be
considered within a relational autonomy framework. Older people are at
particular risk of undue
influence in decision-making, and we know that
relational factors drive decisions to self-harm and suicide in older people.
Relationships
would therefore be expected to influence requests for assisted
ADDRESSING ELDER ABUSE: PERSPECTIVES FROM THE
COMMUNITY LEGAL SECTOR IN THE ACT
JOHN BOERSIG* AND DOMINIC ILLIDGE**
The report of the Australian Law Reform Commission (ALRC) into elder abuse
highlighted the urgent need to formulate an appropriate
legal response to the
complex nature of elder abuse. Legal aid commissions across Australia will
ultimately play a large role in
this response, in no small part due to the
extensive assistance already provided to vulnerable members of the community.
will explore how legal aid services in Australia can respond to the
recommendations of the ALRC. This will be done with particular
reference to some
measures already taken by Legal Aid ACT to address elder abuse in the Australian
Capital Territory (ACT). This
includes examining the need for a socio-legal
model of service delivery which is reflective of a rights-based dialogue that
for the views of an elderly person about their legal problem. Ensuring
that an effective legal service model is established, particularly
recognises elder abuse as a violation of an elderly person’s rights, is
imperative if elder abuse is to be appropriately
I INTRODUCTION
Elder abuse, because it can be physical, financial, emotional or
psychological, is a highly complex social and inter-personal issue.
factors can also combine to isolate an elderly person suffering abuse, making it
difficult for them to seek legal advice. In
consequence, formulating an
appropriate legal response to elder abuse will require careful consideration of
the impact that multiple
issues – including familial relationships,
disabilities or cultural backgrounds – may have on an elderly
risk of abuse. The Australian Law Reform Commission’s
Elder Abuse—A National Legal Response
’) has highlighted the urgent need for legal
assistance.
exposed the wide variety of areas posing legal issues in relation to
elder abuse, such as wills, enduring powers of attorney and
guardianship and the
problems posed by the ‘hidden’ nature of elder abuse in the
Legal aid commissions throughout Australia already provide extensive advice
and representation to vulnerable people, and this places
them in a prime
position to extend legal assistance to victims of elder abuse. This paper will
explore the contribution that can
be made through legal aid services to
addressing elder abuse in the context of the
ALRC Report
and illustrate
some innovative legal assistance strategies that can be implemented. The paper
will utilise the experience of elder
abuse in the ACT and the recent approaches
taken by Legal Aid ACT to improve legal services for victims of elder abuse. In
this context
the paper will argue that we need to move towards a more
rights-based dialogue, taking into account the views expressed by an elderly
person, when examining how the risk factors of elder abuse must be woven into an
appropriate legal assistance strategy.
II UNDERSTANDING THE FACTORS THAT INFLUENCE ELDER ABUSE
IN THE COMMUNITY
It is useful to set out the current situation regarding elder abuse in the
ACT to understand the difficulties that may be present
in responding to elder
abuse. As of the 2016 Census, there were 49,969 people over the age of 65 living
in the ACT,
with 6,158 of
these being persons over the age of
The ACT, like the rest of
the country, is an ageing jurisdiction, with the percentage of elderly people in
the territory having increased
from 8.6% in 2001 to 12.6% in 2016, the second
largest increase in the nation behind Tasmania over that
Despite the rapidly ageing population in the ACT, little is known about the
incidence of elder abuse in the jurisdiction. A 2015 Council
of the Ageing ACT
report noted the true incidence of elder abuse in the Territory was
‘unknown’, primarily due to the
difficulty collecting information
and the vulnerability of victims of elder
However, one
‘concrete’ figure has been recorded by the Australian National
University (ANU) in 2011. While conducting
a survey in relation to the status of
Canberra as an ‘age-friendly city’, the ANU found 6.1% of elderly
people in the
ACT had experienced a form of elder abuse, whether financial,
psychological, physical or
This figure is in
line with the 2015 estimate by the World Health Organisation (WHO) noting 2.2%
to 14% of elderly people in middle
to high income nations have experienced some
form of elder abuse.
these figures are likely a conservative estimate given the difficulty in
collecting information regarding elder abuse. The
difficulty has often been
attributed to the fact an elderly person may not recognise certain behaviour as
abuse, or they may be reluctant
to report a close friend or family member for
fear of reprisal, destroying the relationship or losing the care they require,
deflating the numbers
As more people are required to access healthcare services or rely on their
children or family members for everyday care, they are
also placed at a greater
risk of suffering from elder abuse. This is not to say that every arrangement
made, whether it is to place
an elderly person into an aged care facility or to
execute an ‘assets for care’
will result in
elder abuse. However, such arrangements increase the dependence of the elderly
person on their caregiver, elevating
the risk of
Arguably elder abuse
will become more prevalent in the ACT, and indeed the country in general, as the
population ages and more people
become dependent on others for financial or
health care.
Current Service Challenges in Addressing Elder
Abuse in the ACT
Canberra, as an ‘age-friendly
should be at the
forefront of putting in place mechanisms to ensure elder abuse is appropriately
managed. However, while there have
certainly been positive responses such as the
ACT Elder Abuse Prevention Program
services remain
disjointed and in need of greater exposure to the wider public. For instance,
the Older Persons’ Abuse Prevention
Referral and Information Line which
was initially established in 2004, received only 125 calls in 2016-17 from
people seeking information
or advice about elder
At Legal Aid ACT there
are proxy indicators for identifying elder abuse matters, such as statistics
indicating the age of clients
assisted and the presence of family violence. In
2016, 17,560 services to clients over the age of 65 were
These numbers, assuming the estimates of abuse in the ACT are correct,
indicate that there is a much larger and hidden unmet need
in the ACT for senior
legal services addressing elder abuse. Additionally, Legal Aid ACT along with
the other community legal services
in the ACT are only able to provide
preliminary advice on complex matters (such as wills or contractual arrangements
involving equitable
interests). This is problematic, as misfeasance in these
areas of law can sometimes be an indication of elder abuse, particularly
financial abuse, further illustrating the difficulty of meeting the legal needs
of an ageing ACT
population.
These statistics are further compounded by the fact that social isolation may
be a predictor of abuse.
must be a primary consideration in recalibrating service delivery, particularly
in a jurisdiction such as the ACT where a high
average income coupled with
policies that have spread public housing across the Territory, known as a
‘salt and pepper’
have had the effect
of making those who are disadvantaged even more difficult to see within the
community, as there are few obviously
‘poor’ suburbs or areas in the
The hidden nature
of abuse informs the need for the consideration of a rights-based solution to
elder abuse.
Defining People Who are at Risk of Elder
The statistics outlined above do not tell the full story of elder abuse in
the ACT, or indeed the pervasiveness of elder abuse within
the wider community,
meaning a better evidence base must be developed. The starting point must be
doing away with the assumption
that one is at risk of elder abuse simply by
virtue of being over 65 and no longer working. It is suggested here that these
assumptions
are wrongly made because people over 65 are a statistical
‘benchmark’ recorded by the Australian Bureau of
Statistics.
As submitted by
Legal Aid ACT to the
, assessing an elderly
person’s capacity independently of their age may be a far more effective
metric by which to measure the
of risk elder abuse than simply age
Making the assumption
a person over 65 is unable to enter an arrangement without it being tainted by
abuse is highly paternalistic.
This does nothing more than foster the very same
assumptions that allow elder abuse to occur – namely, an assumption that
elderly person is incapable of managing their own
It ultimately
represents a simplistic notion of vulnerability that assumes because a person
possesses a particular characteristic,
in this case age, they are therefore at
risk of abuse or neglect.
By the same token, it cannot be assumed that a person under 65 has the
capacity to enter into agreements without an appropriate assessment
that they understand the effect of those
agreements.
Taking a more
nuanced approach than simply checking a person’s age to how we assess
whether a person is at risk of abuse is
ultimately necessary to ensure legal
services are appropriately targeted to address elder abuse. This necessarily
requires a rights-based
approach, in an endeavour to ensure an open and active
dialogue with the older person to get a full understanding of the circumstances
in which they find themselves.
This is critical whether they are
a 90 year old man living with a loving and caring family or a 59 year old
cognitively impaired
woman living alone with limited family
interaction.
Cultural and Social Issues in Defining Who is at
The difficulty in defining who may be at risk of elder abuse is made even
more problematic when considered from a non-Anglo-Saxon
background, particularly
the Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander community. The statistics are
compelling in this regard: an Indigenous
woman is likely to live 9.5 years less
than a non-Indigenous woman while an Indigenous man will likely live 10.6 years
a non-Indigenous
While this gap has
slowly been closing over the
it is nonetheless
substantial. Additionally, Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander people are more
likely to become grandparents
at a younger age than those from a non-Indigenous
background.
factors in mind, how we define an elderly person in the Indigenous community for
the purpose of elder abuse cannot be
undertaken in the same manner as with the
wider community. In fact, even the term ‘elder’ has a special
connotation in
the Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander community, being
associated with authority and
underlines why notions of elder rights, rather than simply elder abuse, provide
a better paradigm for identifying need
and best practice modes of service
Disabilities can also have a large impact on the risk of elder abuse for an
individual. Cognitive impairment in particular has been
shown to increase the
risk a person faces of being subject to elder
Cognitive function can
in fact be impacted by an older person’s environment, with those who are
in a socially secure situation
less likely to experience cognitive
impairment.
Losing cognitive
function can impact a person’s capacity to effectively manage their
finances, opening up an elderly person
to financial abuse, as an abuser will
often be in a position to access and take control of that person’s
problematic, impairment of capacity can be a consequence of elder
with those who suffer
abuse more likely to be hospitalised, even when accounting for other factors
such as socioeconomic status.
This can have the effect of possibly aggravating any condition an elderly person
may have, further increasing their risk of experiencing
abuse. Abuse could also
have the impact of impairing the cognitive function of someone not considered an
elder, yet opening them
up to further abuse commonly categorised as elder abuse,
particularly asset mismanagement. This again muddies the waters surrounding
is at risk of elder abuse beyond simply looking at their age, further
illustrating the need for a nuanced approach to how legal
services are delivered
to those at risk of elder abuse.
The limited information regarding elder abuse in the ACT is reflective of the
underreporting of elder abuse that has been a constant
feature of the literature
in this area.
This, combined
with socio-economic and cultural context couching who is at risk of elder abuse,
is why legal services must take into
account the actual circumstances of an
individual. In particular, noting that a person’s cultural background,
socio-economic
status or cognitive ability may have a far bigger impact on their
risk of elder abuse than simply age itself.
Given the hidden nature of elder abuse, and socio-economic disadvantage
generally, in the ACT, it is a challenge to assess and provide
an appropriately
individualised legal service response to elder abuse. This issue is further
compounded by the constant battles with
funding the legal sector faces, limiting
capacity to provide early intervention services, often an efficient and
cost-effective means
of legal problem
Despite these
issues, what is certain is that the need for legal services addressing elder
abuse in the ACT clearly exists and is
not being met.
III HOW WE MUST RESPOND TO THE RECOMMENDATIONS MADE BY
THE AUSTRALIAN LAW REFORM COMMISSION REPORT
ALRC Report
detailing a national legal response to elder abuse is
a policy milestone and will form a substantial platform for the future. It
imperative that the recommendations and findings from the Report are not left as
mere academic curiosities without any action
taken towards their implementation.
With that in mind, consideration is now given to some of the key points raised
ALRC Report
, particularly those which will impact on how both
legal service delivery and law reform can complement each other to address elder
abuse. Of particular significance is the recognition that the acknowledgment of
elder abuse must mature into a discussion about elder
rights ensuring that
informed and appropriate decisions can be made, and how that may be balanced
with a number of the protective
recommendations made.
The Role of Legal Aid Commissions in Helping
Develop a National Plan
The headline recommendation to come out of the ALRC report was that of a
National Plan to combat elder
The ALRC even noted
that the National Plan, as the ‘capstone recommendation’, would
provide an opportunity to develop
any future policy planning on the back of
programs and work already undertaken in multiple
expectancy continues to rise and fertility rates continue to fall across the
country, with those trends not confined to particular
little doubt that a coordinated and national response to elder abuse is
To be effective,
such a plan would require consideration of how it operates at a national, state
and territory level. Additionally,
consideration would need to be given to the
role that both legal aid commissions and community legal service providers would
in liaising with both government and non-legal community institutions.
Already, legal aid commissions and community legal centres operate under a
National Partnership Agreement
which regulates
funding and performance indicators along with indicating priority clients (such
as those who are over 65).
While not specifically related to elder abuse, the NPA places legal aid
commissions and community legal centres in a position to
be easily integrated
into any national plan that is implemented. However, it is important the role of
legal aid services is not limited
only to providing legal advice and
representation. Rather, legal aid services are able to play a large role in
preventing elder abuse
from occurring through community legal education.
Using Community Legal Education to Prevent Elder
Under the NPA, community legal services are tasked with providing community
legal education (CLE).
a critical tool in intervening early before legal issues become serious, or
before they even arise at
This is done through
informing people about their rights and empowering them to solve legal issues as
they arise.
Therefore, it is
critical that any national plan implemented considers how CLE can play a role in
addressing elder abuse, not only
in educating those at risk but informing the
wider community of the warning signs and potential consequences. Utilising the
of community legal services that are already in place should certainly
be a major consideration in implementing a nationwide CLE
program. Involving
both legal aid commissions and community legal centres would allow for
consistency in the message that is produced.
Furthermore, the nature of CLE as
an outreach service provides a means of reaching out to the ‘hidden’
victims of elder
abuse empowering them, or sympathetic friends and family, to
speak up and seek legal advice or redress.
To illustrate the need for a national community education plan, there was an
emphasis in the
ALRC Report
on education regarding wills, especially
dispositions.
primarily due to concerns that many individuals may not have the ability to
engage a lawyer to help them draft a comprehensive
will. However, due to the
increasing need for drafting wills, because of both an ageing population and the
complexity of some testamentary
wishes, many private firms are rejecting
performing pro bono work on wills at an increasing
As the population ages
further, it is likely more people will be unable to afford appropriate services
to help draft wills. Already,
legal aid commissions provide limited advice in
regards to wills, meaning it is not even the case that people fall into the
gap’. Rather, they simply will be unable to get a will
drafted if they cannot afford to engage a private
For these people,
they may have no choice but to draft a will using a publicly available and
generic kit. While drafting your own
will is a reasonable choice which people
should be able to make,
a kit also brings with it a further risk of undue influence from a person who
may have been caring for an elderly person, even
if the elderly person is
assessed to have testamentary
Providing CLE to older people about wills is critical, especially to ensure
that they understand the importance of testamentary capacity
and the risks
involved in drafting your own will. This education can not only involve
information provided on websites, but also
outreach taking place at health care
facilities, retirement villages or seniors centres mitigating some of the
barriers older people
may experience in accessing legal
For instance,
outreach services are a critical aspect of Legal Aid ACT’s operations, and
play a large role in further fostering
connections with the community. It is
important this connection is used to inform elderly people about the
complexities and issues
that must be addressed when drafting a will, including
the need for testamentary
Making sure that
people are aware of the risks involved in drafting a will before it comes time
to put pen to paper is critical in
upholding the principle of autonomy
underlying the ALRC Report, as legal education will help provide the person with
the requisite
knowledge to make an informed choice that reflects their
The Potential for Abuse through Enduring Powers of
Executing an enduring power of attorney (EPOA) is a common step taken by many
elderly people to ensure decisions can be made regarding
their finances or
medical treatment in the event that they lose decision making capacity. However,
the power received by a person
who is appointed by an EPOA necessarily imposes a
risk that power can be
As raised by the
ALRC Report
, while each jurisdiction allows a mechanism for appointing an
attorney, there are differences in the obligations and reporting mechanisms
across the states and
territories.
Furthermore,
many principals and attorneys enter these agreements without regard to the legal
ramifications involved or the obligations
imposed upon the
Accordingly, when
the elderly person loses decision-making capacity, they will be placed in a
position where they will be unable
to identify any breaches of the power of
attorney and lack the ability to seek
The potential for abuse occurring under an EPOA is, for the most part,
self-evident because the person for whom decisions are being
made will not be in
a position to challenge those decisions. As the elderly person will not have
capacity whilst an EPOA is in effect,
often there may not be a chance for any
decisions made under an EPOA to be challenged or examined until after the
elderly person
dies and the effects of the decisions can be
identified.
Furthermore, a
person appointed under an EPOA may potentially also be the executor of an
elderly person’s estate, making it
difficult for the elderly
person’s wishes to be enforced even by a third
Appropriate Protections of Principals and
Restriction of Attorneys
An EPOA is intended to provide appropriate protections for the principal,
that is, the person who may be subject to the abuse. In
the ACT, there is no
requirement for the parties to seek legal advice nor for there to be a witness
present with either legal expertise
or the ability to assess capacity when the
agreement is executed. Currently, a witness to the execution of an EPOA need
a certificate noting the principal executed the EPOA voluntarily and
they appeared to understand the nature and effect of the power
There would be
benefits to having more restrictive processes in safeguarding the interests of
older people when they execute an EPOA.
However, this need not necessarily be
done through demanding witnesses have an ability to assess capacity, rather the
an EPOA agreement (particularly the principal) should be required to
seek legal advice before entering into the
This would allow
for an assessment of a person’s decision-making capacity without the need
for a specialised witness to be
present when the EPOA is executed, and would
their decision-making capacity.
Currently, in the ACT, there are no restrictions on who can be appointed as
an attorney. Creating restrictions was addressed in the
ALRC Report
through making a list of ineligible persons, including if the person:
(a) is an undischarged bankrupt;
(b) is prohibited from acting as a director under the
Corporations Act
(c) has been convicted of an offence involving fraud or dishonesty; or
(d) is, or has been, a care worker, a health provider or an accommodation
provider for
the principal.
Both (a) and (c) are identical to criteria found in the
Guardianship and
Management of Property Act 1991
(ACT) preventing a person from being
appointed a guardian or
Meanwhile, paragraph
(b) reflects the fiduciary nature of the director-company relationship, with
those individuals who have made
dishonest or seriously reckless decisions
regarding a company disqualified from being appointed as a
Considering an
attorney is burdened with similar fiduciary duties to a director, due to the
vulnerability of the
this represents an
appropriate safeguard. The final criterion (d) preventing care workers from
being appointed with an EPOA is clearly
made in response to some of the issues
highlighted surrounding elder abuse in aged care
facilities.
These criteria represent sensible restrictions and, at least in the ACT, are
consistent with criteria preventing people from being
appointed guardians. As
recognised by the ALRC,
indeed submitted by Legal Aid ACT, an exception should exist to criteria (d) for
family members who provide care for an elderly
Despite the fact that
often elder abuse will be perpetrated by a close family
it is important to
remember that in many cases an elderly person will want to have their affairs
dealt with by a person they trust
and who often will understand their wishes.
Restrictions on appointments are certainly necessary but it is important they do
undermine the purpose of the appointment, ensuring the principal’s
wishes, and consequently their rights, are respected.
Managing Principal and Attorney Conflicts of
In some cases, even if the appointed attorney is acting in good faith, their
interests and the interests of an older principal may
In other cases, the
attorney may attempt to make a decision against the principal’s wishes
before the principal loses their
This risk is
certainly intensified where the attorney is a family member who is controlling
assets from which they may stand to benefit
if the principal were no longer the
The potential for
conflicts of interest when a family member is appointed as an attorney can go
unnoticed, even by a solicitor who
uncritically accepts the instructions of an
attorney without considering the wishes of the principal, as was shown in
Reilly v Reilly
ALRC Report
indicated legislation specifically targeted at
conflict transactions should be enacted to protect the assets of an elderly
who has executed an
This would be in
addition to the already present legislative provisions dealing with conflict
transactions generally.
Specific legislation enacted would require legal education, and indeed legal
advice, before any agreement to enter into an EPOA arrangement
is made. Legal
advice to both principals and attorneys, would help both parties recognise a
conflict transaction when it occurs (either
generally or in reference to any
enacted legislation), preventing the need for an independent party to identify a
conflict and authorise
that particular
transaction.
elderly people with the information required to execute an EPOA ensures that
they are heavily involved in the decision,
reflecting the importance of a
rights-based dialogue in this area. Legal advice could also be coupled with
mandatory registration
of those who have been appointed with powers of
providing more
accountability for decisions made under an EPOA and an additional safeguard for
any appointment.
measures, while not necessarily completely preventing situations such as those
Reilly v Reilly
from occurring, would increase the scrutiny given to
EPOA arrangements where a family member is appointed as an Attorney.
The Potential for Financial Abuse in Family
With financial abuse being particularly associated with elder
it is no surprise
informal family agreements can play a large part in enabling abuse to occur. As
elder abuse often is a complex
interaction between social factors such as
familial relationships, environmental factors such as low levels of social
support and
physical factors such as decreased mobility or disease and
disorders, it is easy to see how informal ‘assets for care’
agreements lead to abuse as elderly people become more dependent on others for
For the most part, an elderly person will look to a family member for
support, possibly one who is currently living with them, even
if that family
member is not entirely capable of undertaking such a
Hoping to keep assets
within the family, or because they believe payment of some kind is required, an
elderly person may transfer
the interest they have in their own property to the
caregiver as consideration for the care they will receive moving
This agreement does
not necessarily lead to elder abuse, but certainly increases the risk of it
The Difficulty in Enforcing Rights under an Assets
for Care Arrangement
These arrangements necessarily bring with them a heightened risk of a
transaction being tainted by undue influence or unconscionability,
then provide a legal avenue for the elderly person to challenge the transaction.
However, a transaction made where property
is transferred from a parent to a
child is not one where the law presumes that undue influence exists, rather
factors showing an
antecedent relationship must be
It is likely that
in those cases where an elderly person has a cognitive impairment,
unconscionability or undue influence will be
a highly relevant
circumstances any argument over whether such a transaction was unduly influenced
will often not be put forward until after
the death of the elderly person and
the estate has been
In cases where cognitive impairment is not present, identifying undue
influence or unconscionability may prove more difficult as on
its face the
agreement made was mutually beneficial at the
This may mean, as noted
by the ALRC, proprietary or equitable estoppel provides a more appropriate
Nonetheless, this
course of action would still require conduct on behalf of the family member that
would make it unconscionable to
not honour the agreement the elderly person has
relied upon.
conduct can be assessed on inferences and conduct
the absence of any
formal documentation in these agreements would likely negatively impact on the
evidentiary burden the elderly
person would ultimately bear. For a court,
examining family arrangements many years after the fact with a view to
determining a legal
or equitable interest is ultimately not an easy task, even
when there is a level of agreement as to the wishes of the elderly
In any event, if such an agreement is made, it is often done quite informally
and without the benefit of legal advice as to how it
may affect an elderly
person’s rights or income
If the relationship
breaks down, which will occur if elder abuse arises, the older person may be in
a situation where they have no
legal interest in their property and are
unwilling to pursue a remedy due to the costs involved or the further damage it
relationships.
The provision
of independent legal advice is a critical factor in rebutting the presumption
that a transaction was unduly
influenced.
Clearly it is
important that legal advice is given early to ensure that the consequences are
appropriately understood. This could
members following the death of an elderly person and provide appropriate
protection for
elderly people making these transactions.
A further complication, as outlined in the
ALRC Report
, in preventing
these agreements is because the arrangements may result in a ‘granny flat
interest’ which is exempt from
the ‘gifting rules’ affecting
the older person’s asset assessment for the purposes of social welfare
Therefore, any
changes that formalise these agreements may encourage older people to undertake
them. Noting the gifting exemption
that currently exists, this could potentially
place a larger number of people at risk of abuse. It is therefore critical that
people considering these arrangements are informed about the
consequences and their rights, as it can be difficult to enforce a legal
equitable interest after an agreement breaks down. Financial arrangements are
therefore an area where CLE can be vital, informing
elderly people of the risks
involved in ‘assets for care’ arrangements and perhaps even
providing limited assistance.
Providing an Appropriate Forum for Resolving
Disputes in Elder Abuse Matters
An important procedural element in elder abuse matters is providing an
appropriate forum to resolve disputes. While in some situations
a crime will
have been committed and it will be appropriate to involve the police, for the
most part the issues that will be faced
by the elderly are unlikely to attract
the immediate interest of police – disputes involving wills, estates and
powers of attorney,
all of which have been discussed to some extent
These are areas of law
in which great care needs to be taken when seeking specialist advice from
solicitors. The nature of these
disputes often means a matter will require a
hearing in the Supreme Court,
depending on the monetary value
The cost and time
that it would take for an elderly person to pursue such a matter is often more
than enough to discourage them from
engaging a lawyer to help them enforce their
rights. Additionally, in the ACT, if any loss has been suffered due to the
exercise of an EPOA, an application must be made to the Supreme Court
to receive compensation, whether made by the elderly person
interested party.
This places
a near-insurmountable barrier on an elderly person who may have been left
without any assets due to elder abuse.
However, this barrier could be removed, as the ALRC and multiple stakeholders
suggest, through extending the jurisdiction of state
and territory tribunals in
relation to family agreements and EPOA
This would make the
process much easier, since the ACT Civil and Administrative Tribunal (ACAT)
already has the power to revoke or
Extending the
determination in family agreement disputes
would remove the significant cost
barrier associated with taking court action along with simplifying the process,
something which
is key considering the vulnerability of many of those suffering
from elder abuse and the complexity of the current legal framework.
A simplified
system of resolving these disputes would help empower elderly people to enforce
their rights in cases of abuse.
The Risks of Instituting Adult Safeguarding
Legislation – Balancing Autonomy and Protection
This paper has argued against a reductionist approach to elder abuse and
vulnerability. In that regard, it is important that special
attention is given
to Chapter 14 of the
ALRC Report
discussing at-risk adults and safeguards
that could be put in place to protect
The fallacy of assuming
that only those over 65 need protection, while those under 65 do not, was
recognised by the ALRC, who noted
a ‘functional’ approach to
vulnerability was preferred.
How we safeguard those at risk of elder abuse is an important factor in the
law’s response to the issue, particularly noting
that implementing
safeguarding laws without nuance or consideration of the particular individual
has the potential to do more harm
It is important that,
in line with the ALRC’s focus on respecting the autonomy and agency of the
we ensure that we do
not take away the ability of elderly people to make informed decisions about
their treatment and care.
Placing the Focus on the Rights of the Older
Ensuring a person consents to any safeguard measure is critical if the
guiding principle of respecting the autonomy of older people
After all, the common
law makes the presumption a person has the capacity to consent, with the burden
of proof being placed on the
party seeking to show
incapacity.
This principle
must be kept in mind when adult safeguarding legislation is drafted. However,
with that being said, the ALRC Report
notes the problem of respecting a
person’s autonomy to the point of not acting within their best
It is important
that whatever policy change is put in place, it strikes a balance between
respecting autonomy and removing an at-risk
elderly person from a situation
where they are experiencing elder abuse. Importantly it must be recognised, as
submissions to the
ALRC noted, that abuse can have an impact on a person’s
autonomy, meaning even if they may objectively be assessed as having
decision-making capacity in regards to refusing a safeguard measure, they may
not be expressing their actual
Hence, if on the one hand there is a principle espousing autonomy and on the
other hand protection, how do we respond to the ALRC’s
proposed principles
relating to adult safeguarding legislation in cases where an older
person’s decision-making capacity is
compromised?
After all, any assessment of
capacity is already a protectionist measure where an external party makes a
decision as to whether someone
has the autonomy to make decisions for
themselves.
As noted by the
ALRC, a balance between protection and respect for an older person’s
rights is required.
Additionally, the Report goes on to note an older person’s ‘will,
preferences and rights’ must be respected and
that they have the
‘right to refuse support’, further highlighting the importance of
Furthermore, there
is a risk that in instituting adult protection legislation, the principles
guiding child protection legislation
are used to inform the drafting of
legislation directed at protecting older people. While these principles, in the
ACT, do account
for the wishes of a child in determining their best interests,
their wishes are but one factor of 12 to be
considered.
This approach
could potentially clash with a number of human rights as found in the
Rights Act 2004
(ACT), most notably the right to equal recognition before
As noted in a report
by the Secretary-General of the United Nations to the General Assembly, the
analogue to s 12(3) of the ACT
Human Rights Act
(being Article 26 of the
International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights) extends to discrimination
in any field regulated by
authorities.
Conceivably,
this could include protection agencies established for elderly people. In this
regard, formulating adult protection
legislation without appropriate
consideration of the autonomy of the older person would potentially be a
discriminatory action impacting
upon an elderly person’s recognition
before the law.
Consequently, the best approach must be to balance the potential risks
associated with an over-paternalistic approach, and using a
decision to not receive protection as a means to pursue the principle of
autonomy at the expense of their
assessments of decision making capacity under the
Mental Health Act 2015
(ACT), the starting point must be that an older person understands the decision
that they are making, meaning that decision must
There is room in a
rights-based approach to undertake some protectionist measures, especially in
regards to cognitively impaired
older people, but those measures should not be
considered without accounting for the views of the older person.
Improving Coordination between Organisations in
Responding to Elder Abuse
The ALRC report made a number of recommendations about increased coordination
and cooperation between health, medical and legal services,
seeking consent from
the at-risk adult before commencing action or investigation, and instituting
statutory protections from civil
liability for those who may report suspected
abuse to the authorities.
Having a coordinated response is critical, as the current safeguard system is
quite disjointed with multiple services and agencies
involved in protecting the
A potential factor
is the discombobulated responsibilities regarding elder abuse, with the
Commonwealth having appropriated power
over aged-care facilities, but none over
adult protection legislation.
It is deeply problematic if people are unaware of what service may be required,
or may be reluctant to report abuse for fear of reprisal
or straining family
relationships if they report elder abuse to the
For instance, in the
presentation of a vulnerable older client a lawyer should recognise if there are
capacity issues coupled with
a risk of elder abuse. The lawyer may then contact
the Public Trustee and Guardian along with other services such as the ACT
Disability,
Aged and Carer Advocacy Service or community support organisations.
The obvious problem with this approach is that the pathway for
assistance is ill
defined and ultimately reliant on the lawyer’s personal knowledge and
Additionally, while there are multiple legislative definitions of
decision-making capacity,
is possible different organisations may assess a person’s capacity in
different ways – whether from a legal or medical
perspective.
Furthermore, a
service provider, whether they are legal or medical in nature, may only have a
short period of time in which to identify
abuse and, even if that abuse is
identified, often there will not be a chance for that service provider to follow
up with the report.
it is clearly in the best interests of victims of elder abuse for there to be a
reporting agency or process that can streamline
and coordinate an investigation
into an older person’s capacity or well-being. This also points towards
establishing publicly
available and inexpensive legal aid services.
The Age Discrimination Commissioner, Dr Kay Patterson, has recently commented
that we should all have an aversion to reports, inquiries
or plans that never
get implemented.
vulnerability of elderly people subject to abuse, the
ARLC Report
points out that it is the duty of all governments, community organisations and
those with the power to reform the law to
ensure these findings are properly
considered and implemented. What has been outlined above represents a broad view
of how these
findings may be received and implemented. It also suggests that the
debate needs to take more cognisance of how the rights of elderly
impacted by abuse, and that we need to shift the discussion toward a
rights-based dialogue. In short, the response to
ALRC Report
re-envisage legal services around notions of the civil rights of the older
person. Practice must also be informed by the recognition
that elder abuse is an
infringement of a person’s rights and affects them in a variety of
IV DEVELOPING A SOCIO-LEGAL MODEL OF SERVICE
Currently, our mode of legal service delivery could be improved to better
meet the legal needs and wishes of the elderly, particularly
those who are most
at risk of suffering elder abuse. This was illustrated by the 2012 Legal
Australia-Wide Survey, which indicated
those over 65 were less likely to seek
cohorts in the
population.
Many elderly
people may not understand their rights or are not aware of the availability of
legal services to address their
Additionally,
elderly people from a culturally or linguistically diverse (CALD) background are
even less likely than the general
elderly population to seek out advice to
redress legal issues.
not unsurprising as cultural attitudes regarding the elderly (or indeed
reporting abuse inflicted by family members) can
differ wildly between
Furthermore, using
the internet or phone services can be a difficult task that prevents those
elderly people with a cognitive impairment
from seeking
The interwoven and complex nature of all social factors and the legal
problems arising from elder abuse necessitates a holistic approach
take into account the various barriers preventing elderly people from achieving
just outcomes. A holistic approach in
this area can best be delivered though a
socio-legal method of service delivery. This is a method of delivery requiring
cooperation
across multiple disciplines including legal, law enforcement, health
and social organisations and the client
themselves.
The coordination
between a team made up of professionals from a wide variety of disciplines has
proven to be an effective means of
addressing elder
While this represents
a ‘gold standard’ approach, with a fully coordinated team working to
address the issues of one
elderly client, it often will not be feasible in
Often a member of
one profession, whether a lawyer, doctor or social worker, will take on a form
of ‘accidental case management’,
using their own connections with
other organisations and agencies to respond to the issues raised by an elderly
Even with this ad-hoc
approach, referrals to different agencies are critical in addressing the complex
environmental and social factors
associated with elder
In other words, a
legal service cannot simply focus on the legal problem at hand in relation to a
matter raising the possibility
of elder abuse.
It is worth noting from a legal services perspective, if an elderly client
presents with a legal issue, it is quite likely abuse has
already occurred, or
indeed is continuing to
This often means that
prevention will not often be the primary goal of a legal services
In other words, our
job in the legal services industry is often to focus on harm-reduction, looking
to mitigate the harm a client
has already suffered and the risk of further harm
in the future.
obviously further complicated by the ‘hidden’ nature of elder abuse,
with there being a large risk that an elderly
client may not present at all,
especially when coupled with the hidden nature of disadvantage in the ACT.
However, this can be mitigated
through the provision of outreach services.
The Importance of Outreach Services in a
Socio-Legal Model
It is critical for a socio-legal model of service delivery that outreach
services are provided at locations where vulnerable elderly
people are likely to
be found. This not only has the effect of informing the elderly about the
services available, but also helps
to break down some of the barriers the
elderly may face in accessing services, notably inabilities to go out to legal
This also helps to
establish relationships with community organisations, further expanding the
ability of a legal service to make
referrals, enhancing their ability to deliver
services consistent with a socio-legal
Not only can education
be provided through outreach, but a lawyer can also be present to provide
limited legal advice or to facilitate
a further session if
Once a client does engage a legal service provider, it is important that
services are in place or easily accessible, so as to address
the social and
environmental problems accompanying the legal issue at hand. One way of doing
this is through embedding a social worker
in the legal service, helping the
client to understand the advice given and placing the lawyer in a better
position to understand
the multitude of issues that have led the client to seek
legal advice.
This is not a
unique concept, or indeed a modern one, with research going back over 35 years
indicating the benefits of having social
workers and lawyers operate in
A vulnerable older
person may have experienced forms of social exclusion or marginalisation in the
past, making them reluctant to
access a legal
A social worker can
client’s problems are understood.
The social worker would also be able to
follow-up with the client, ensuring that they understood any advice given and to
that they are ‘doing okay’.
The ultimate goal of a socio-legal model of service delivery is to break down
the barriers faced by older people in accessing justice.
Once those barriers
have been broken down, it then becomes possible to provide them with a service
that addresses more than just
the legal problem at hand. Outreach and education
are vital factors in achieving the first goal while a multi-disciplinary
that coordinates legal, health and social services is critical to
achieving the second. Use of this approach has evolved out of discussion
elder abuse in relation to human rights, a recognition of elder abuse as a
violation of many of the rights an elderly person is
entitled to
In fact, a socio-legal
approach rather neatly relates to discussion of respecting a person’s
equality before the law.
this sense, a socio-legal model is a critical aspect of a rights-based approach,
treating the elderly person as more than simply
a legal problem and involving
them in the resolution of their issues.
V HOW LEGAL AID SERVICES ARE RESPONDING TO THE
CHALLENGES OF ELDER ABUSE
The responses to the
ALRC Report
, such as those outlined above, and a
socio-legal model of service delivery, detail how the ‘big picture’
response to
elder abuse may take shape. Legislative reform and national
coordination regarding CLE are initiatives that will take time to develop
implement, even when considering the already present infrastructure provided by
legal aid commissions and community legal centres.
For instance, in Victoria and
Queensland, seniors’ rights services have been established with a mind to
protecting and respecting
the rights and dignity of older people in providing
legal services.
services provide a model for legal assistance that can be replicated across the
country either by legal aid commissions or
independent providers, particularly
with a focus on rights-based delivery. In that regard, over the last 12 months
Legal Aid ACT
has been investigating how best to provide services to the elderly
community in the ACT ensuring their rights are acknowledged and
For legal aid service providers such as Legal Aid ACT, it is critical that
the particular problems surrounding service delivery to
those suffering elder
abuse are clearly identified. This is further highlighted by the demographics of
the ACT, particularly in relation
to the hidden nature of disadvantage in the
This ultimately places
more emphasis on the outreach and social service referral aspects of legal
service delivery. These services
not only help to ‘shine a light’ on
hidden victims, but also serve to empower an elderly person to assert any rights
that have been violated due to the occurrence of elder abuse.
Instituting Health Justice Partnerships and
Outreach Services
One way in which we can reach the most vulnerable in our community is through
instituting health justice partnerships. These types
of partnerships were
originally seen in the United States, where the aim was to provide a better
means to address the social factors
surrounding illness, especially in regards
to vulnerable patients.
critical for these partnerships to be successful that there is input from all
parties involved, including the clients themselves,
with a particular focus on
barriers to justice that they
These partnerships
ultimately allow for a greater awareness of legal issues for health
practitioners and indeed awareness of medical
Having lawyers
present at the hospital helps to alleviate some of the issues that may prevent
people from accessing a lawyer, whether
it is the stress associated with seeking
legal assistance or limited
Health justice
partnerships also allow for warm referrals, as information can be taken back to
a lawyer or community worker, providing
them with a ‘head start’
before the client comes to see
In the context of elder
health justice
partnerships facilitate medical staff to take action once it is recognised that
a vulnerable elderly person may be
at risk of abuse while they are in the
hospital. The medical staff can then refer the matter to a lawyer or
representative from a
legal service present at the hospital, who can then
provide information back to the legal service allowing a lawyer to be briefed
and get in touch with the client. This cooperation allows for early intervention
by legal services, preventing issues from arising
and moving the focus from harm
minimisation to harm prevention. Furthermore, these are individuals who would
likely be considering
an assets for care arrangement, providing an opportunity
to provide them with advice on the potential consequences.
Currently, for example, Legal Aid ACT runs outreach sessions at the Canberra
Hospital, providing a way for patients, families or visitors
to ask for legal
information or limited advice, or even to be booked for a further interview at a
later time. The program was initiated
in August 2017, and recorded 135 client
interactions as of December 2017. Of these 135 interactions, 54 were referred to
make a further
appointment with Legal Aid or to an external organisation.
Additionally, the largest age group of individuals seen were those over
of age. While this may be reflective of the higher likelihood of hospitalisation
of elderly people, especially those with
it also illustrates
why hospitals and other health care facilities in the ACT are appropriate places
for establishing a legal presence
to combat elder abuse. This partnership is in
its infancy but, as time goes on, a closer relationship is being built, allowing
greater cooperation in the provision of a socio-legal service. Importantly,
this partnership allows legal advice and assistance to
be provided at the early
stages of a matter when a client presents to a hospital rather than the legal
service itself.
explicitly part of any plan to combat elder abuse, outreach at the Canberra
Hospital serves to connect elderly clients
with legal services at a stage when
it is possible to prevent legal issues, such as those involving EPOAs, before
they arise.
Additionally, Legal Aid ACT has partnered with Libraries ACT to not only
place lawyers and staff at Libraries across the ACT, but
also to package Legal
Aid ACT information so it can be provided to clients of the Home Library Service
(who have 300 house-bound
people to whom they deliver library
While only a small
step, those who are serviced by the Home Library Service will often be
vulnerable individuals with limited mobility
and often a small support
This approach can
Legal Aid ACT. Furthermore, noting
the difficulties in simply using age as a
risk factor for elder abuse, this service will help to connect Legal Aid ACT
with a greater
number of people who may be at risk of elder abuse rather than
simply servicing those over 65.
Providing Social Liaison Support to Vulnerable
As part of the socio-legal model of service delivery, it is optimal that a
social worker is present and embedded within a legal service
non-legal support. Currently Legal Aid ACT provides social support workers for
Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander clients,
clients from a culturally and
linguistically diverse background and clients who are suffering from family
violence. These liaison
officers are an invaluable resource to Legal Aid ACT,
community organisations. These officers often work with some of the most
vulnerable clients who come to Legal Aid ACT, and indeed
clients who could be at
a greater risk of elder abuse than the general
population.
Ensuring these
liaison officers are available to elderly clients is critical in providing a
holistic service which is sensitive to
attitudes that may cause or allow the
perpetration of elder abuse. This is especially important in the context of
Aboriginal and
Torres Strait Islander clients, where there are unique issues
regarding elder abuse, because an Indigenous liaison officer can break
of the barriers faced by older people in the Aboriginal and Torres Strait
Islander community from accessing legal services.
Expanding Legal Aid Services in the
Early resolution of disputes through a structured mediation process is the
most obvious area to next reform. Legal aid commissions
have shown to address
elder abuse an approach that draws from family dispute resolution (FDR)
services, especially if the signs of
elder abuse are picked up early, provides a
non-confrontational means of resolving the
Legal Aid ACT, as is
the case with all legal aid commissions, has a large amount of experience in
running FDR conferences, and this
experience can certainly be applied in the
elder abuse sphere. The use of FDR-like conferencing in elder abuse matters
would likely
be best placed as an early intervention
This situation might
arise where there is a dispute over assets or care arrangements before any
tangible harm has occurred. Early
intervention would also serve to remove one of
the major barriers to justice faced by elderly people – the fear of
down family
relationships.
The complex
nature of these family relationships often requires a ‘delicate’
approach that cannot be provided in the
courtroom. Moreover, mediation and
dispute resolution can be tailored to meet the needs of all parties
Arguably, it is
also important that the conference is not used as a method of assessing
capacity, as that could be used to unduly
influence not only the mediation
session but the relationship between the elderly person and the other party
moving forward.
sense, FDR-like conferencing would best serve older adults who have
decision-making capacity, which would fit in with its
purpose as an early
intervention service.
would allow for an elderly person’s views to be reflected in any decision
or solution reached, which is vital in ensuring
their rights are appropriately
Finally, it is important to acknowledge that the formal processes of
obtaining legal assistance can be a specific barrier for elderly
people. Older
people can often be in a situation where they are asset-rich, as they may own an
unencumbered property, yet income-poor,
preventing them from accessing the
services of a private lawyer.
This is problematic, as in cases of elder abuse, while the older person may own
the property, they may not have control over it,
thus preventing them from using
that asset to fund private
representation.
options include relaxing the means tests employed by legal aid commissions, and
providing more flexibility in how they are
applied to older people who may own
property but who are suspected of being affected by elder
With Legal Aid ACT
approving 28 grants of 73 applications received from those over 65 in
and the majority of
these applications being rejected on the means
this option should be
given serious consideration, including possible amendments to legal aid
commission legislation across the country.
VI CONCLUSION
Legal aid commissions will be at the forefront of Australia’s response
to elder abuse. Vulnerable and disadvantaged people form
the core clientele of
legal aid. The
ALRC Report
shows that the justice system and its
attendant institutions are not yet well designed to meet the legal needs of the
elderly community,
and their recommendations for a coherent national response to
elder abuse is timely. The innovative work performed by legal aid commissions,
as has been illustrated in this paper by the approach taken in the ACT, shows
that solutions can be found to enhance the accessibility
of legal assistance to
victims of elder abuse. In particular, whether through outreach services or
clear lines of referral from social
services to legal services providers, early
identification of people at risk of abuse is crucial to a successful provision
assistance to the elderly in our community. Legal aid services must
find ways to cross the gap that can be created by age and isolation,
so that the
often hidden nature of elder abuse is exposed.
Clearly, legal aid commissions are well placed to develop better platforms
for delivering services to victims of elder abuse. They
already have extensive
experience providing community legal education and specialist service to
vulnerable and disadvantaged people
– including Aboriginal and Torres
Strait Islanders and people from culturally and linguistically diverse
communities. However,
the ability to improve specialised service to elderly
people, or indeed to relax means tests, is related to the capacity of legal
commissions to provide that service. This is not simply a question of
redirecting resources, but is fundamentally a challenge
to government to make
the necessary investment in legal aid. Capacity is necessarily tied to funding,
and the battles legal aid commissions
and community legal centres have had with
insufficient funding are well
documented.
funding would allow specialised service to better redress the disadvantaged who
are faced by the often hidden nature of
elder abuse. With the national spotlight
on elder abuse becoming ever brighter, it is hoped Federal and State and
Territory governments
will quickly respond to the bourgeoning needs of the most
vulnerable and disadvantaged ageing population and, most significantly,
resituate strategies around a new notion of elder rights.
* B(Sc)Med(Hons); MBBS(Hons); FRANZCP; M(Psychiatry). Conjoint Senior
Lecturer, University of New South Wales, Sydney, Australia.
** MBBS (Hons); FRANZCP; MD. Conjoint Professor, University of New South
Wales, Sydney, Australia and Clinical Associate Professor,
University of
*** MBBS (Hons); MD; FRANZCP. Conjoint Professor, University of New South
Wales, Sydney, Australia.
**** MBBS; MD; DSc; FRACP; FRANZCP; FAHMS. Scientia Professor, University of
New South Wales, Sydney, Australia.
Voluntary Assisted Dying Act 2017
(Vic). Notably when
using the term ‘assisted dying’ we use the definition from the Act,
namely ‘the administration
of a voluntary assisted dying substance and
includes steps reasonably related to such administration’. Euthanasia is
legal term and does not have a universally accepted definition, so is not
otherwise used in this paper unless specifically used by
the reference
Voluntary Assisted Dying
Ajit Shah, Ravi Bhat, Sofia
Zarate-Escuredo, Diego DeLeo and Annette Erlangsen, ‘Suicide Rates in
Five-Year Age-Bands after
the Age of 60 Years: The International
Landscape’ (2016) 20
Aging and Mental Health
Voluntary Assisted Dying
World Health Organization,
A Global Response to Elder Abuse and Neglect: Building Primary Health Care
Capacity to Deal with the Problem Worldwide
http://www.who.int/ageing/publications/ELDER_DocAugust08.pdf
Rae Kaspiew, Rachel Carson and
Helen Rhoades, ‘Elder Abuse: Understanding Issues, Frameworks and
Responses’ (Research
Report No 35, Australian Institute of Family Studies,
February 2016) 8.
Carmelle Peisah et al,
‘The Wills of Older people: Risk Factors for Undue Influence’ (2009)
International Psychogeriatrics
United Nations Convention
on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities
, opened for signature on 30 March
2007, A/RES/61/106 (entered into force on 3 May 2008).
Peisah et al, above n 8,
(An Adult):
Refusal of Medical Treatment
[1992] All ER 649.
Carolyn Ells, Matthew R
Hunt and Jane Chambers-Evans, ‘Relational Autonomy as an Essential
Component of Patient-Centered Care’
(2011) 4(2)
International Journal
of Feminist Approaches to Bioethics
Jennifer Nedelsky,
‘Reconceiving Autonomy: Sources, Thoughts and Possibilities’
Yale Journal of Law and Feminism
Gustavo Turecki and David A
Brent, ‘Suicide and Suicidal Behaviour’ (2016) 387
1227, 1239. This review paper describes the social, including relationship
factors associated with suicide, such as living alone,
interpersonal stressors,
loss and bereavement.
Voluntary Assisted Dying
Carmelle Peisah,
‘Practical Application of Family and Systems Theory in Old Age Psychiatry:
Three Case Reports’ (2006)
International Psychogeriatrics
Susan Kurrle, Paul Sadler
and Ian Cameron, ‘Patterns of Elder Abuse’
(1992) 157(10)
Journal of Australia
Ibid. Kurrle and colleagues
describe the frequency of various forms of elder abuse in a sample of community
dwelling older people.
Thomas E Joiner,
People Die by Suicide
(Harvard University Press, Cambridge, Massachusetts,
Kim Van Orden et al,
‘A Case Controlled Examination of the Interpersonal Theory of Suicide in
the Second Half of Life’
(2016) 20(3)
Archives of Suicide Research
Jerome Motto and Alan
Bostrum, ‘Empirical Indicators of Near-Term Suicide Risk’ (1990)
Van Orden et al, above n
20, 324; Anne Wand et al, ‘Understanding Self-Harm in Older People: A
Systematic Review of Qualitative
Studies’ (2018) 22(3)
Mental Health
289, 298; Joiner, above n 19.
Anne Wand et al, ‘Why
Do the Very Old Self-Harm? A Qualitative Study’ (2018)
American Journal
of Geriatric Psychiatry
<https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jagp.2018.03.005>.
Kimberley Van Orden et al,
‘The Interpersonal Theory of Suicide’ (2010) 117(2)
Psychological
Gregory A Hinrichsen and
Nancy A Hernandez, ‘Factors Associated with Recovery from and Relapse into
Major Depressive Disorder
in the Elderly’ (1993) 150(12)
Journal of Psychiatry
1820, 1825; Richard A Zweig and Gregory A Hinrichsen,
‘Factors Associated with Suicide Attempts by Depressed Older Adults:
Prospective Study’ (1993) 150(11)
American Journal of Psychiatry
1687, 1692.
Zweig and Hinrichsen, above
n 25, 1692.
Wand et al, above n 23.
Projective identification
is a defence mechanism or interpersonal communication whereby subtle
interpersonal pressure from the carer
is placed upon another [older] person to
take on the feelings/thoughts of an aspect of the carer – in this context
their elder relative was dead. The older person who is the target of
that projection then begins to think, feel and behave in the
way the carer
projected, ie ‘I want to die’.
Australian Law Reform
Commission,
Elder Abuse—A National Legal Response
, Report No 131
(2017) 209.
John Snowdon and Pierre
Baume, ‘A Study of Suicides of Older People in Sydney’ (2002) 17(3)
International Journal of Geriatric Psychiatry
Peisah et al, above n 8,
Nick O’Neill and
Carmelle Peisah,
Capacity and the Law
(Australasian Legal Information
Institute (AustLII) Communities, 2
Peisah et al, above n 8,
Ells, Hunt and
Chambers-Evans, above n 12, 86.
Nedelsky, above n 13,
Ells, Hunt and
Chambers-Evans, above n 12, 86.
Tane Ora Alliance,
Whanau – Family Health
<https://www.maorimenshealth.co.nz/te-whare-tapa-wha-health-whare/taha-whanau-family-health/>.
Ells, above n 12, 87.
Catriona Mackenzie and
Wendy Rogers, ‘Autonomy, Vulnerability and Capacity: A Philosophical
Appraisal of the Mental Capacity
(2013) 9(1)
International Journal
of Law in Context
Catriona Mackenzie,
‘Relational Autonomy, Normative Authority and Perfection’ (2008)
Journal of Social Philosophy
Ells, Hunt and
Chambers-Evans, above n 12, 95.
Cameron Stewart, Carmelle
Peisah and Brian Draper, ‘A Test for Mental Capacity to Request Assisted
Suicide’ (2010) 37(1)
Journal of Medical Ethics
Peter V Rabins, ‘Can
Suicide be a Rational and Ethical Act in Persons with Early or
Pre-Dementia?’ (2007) 7
American Journal of Bioethics
Claudia Gamondi, Murielle
Pott, Sheila Payne, ‘Families’ Experiences with Patients Who Died
after Assisted Suicide:
A Retrospective Interview Study in Southern
Switzerland’ (2013) 24(6)
Annals of Oncology
1639, 1644.
Re C (Adult: Refusal of
Medical Treatment)
[1994] 1 All ER 819.
O’Neill and Peisah,
above n 33; Carmelle Peisah et al, ’Family Conflict in Dementia: Prodigal
Sons and Black Sheep’
(2006) 21(5)
International Journal of Geriatric
John Christman,
‘Relational Autonomy, Liberal Individualism and the Social
Constitution
Selves’ (2004) 117
Philosophical Studies
Mackenzie, above n 45,
Lucy Knight and Marianne
Hester, ‘Domestic Violence and Mental Health in Older Adults’ (2016)
International Review of Psychiatry
Xinqi Dong et al,
‘Decline in Cognitive Function and Elder Mistreatment: Findings from the
Chicago Health and Aging Project’
American Journal of
Geriatric Psychiatry
Knight and Hester, above n
Dale Bagshaw, Sarah Wendt
and Lana Zannettino, ‘Preventing the Abuse of Older People by their Family
Members’ (Stakeholder
Paper 7, Domestic Violence Clearing House, 2009) 16
http://citeseerx.ist.psu.edu/viewdoc/download?doi=10.1.1.843.2682 & rep=rep1 & type=pdf
Chanaka Wijeratne and
Sharon Reutens, ‘When an Elder is the Abuser’
(2016) 205(6)
Medical Journal of Australia
Knight and Hester, above n
Claudia Cooper,
‘Abuse of People with Dementia by Family Carers: Representative Cross
Sectional Survey’
British Medical Journal
Knight and Hester, above n
Mackenzie, above n 45,
Voluntary Assisted Dying
ss 20(1)(c)
Stewart, Peisah and Draper,
above n 50, 38.
Brian Draper et al,
‘Early Dementia Diagnosis and the Risk of Suicide and Euthanasia’
Alzheimer’s and Dementia
Voluntary Assisted Dying
Van Orden et al, above n
Marije L van der Lee et al,
‘Euthanasia and Depression: A Prospective Cohort Study among Terminally
Ill Cancer Patients’
Journal of Clinical Oncology
Stuart Hooper et al,
‘Preferences for Voluntary Euthanasia during Major Depression and
Following Improvement in an Elderly
Population’ (1997) 16(1)
Australasian Journal on Ageing
Lauren Rayner et al,
‘Antidepressants for the Treatment of Depression in Palliative Care:
Systematic Review and Meta-Analysis’
(2011) 25(1)
Stewart, Peisah and Draper,
above n 50, 37.
Anne Wand et al,
‘Rational Suicide, Euthanasia, and the Very Old: Two Case Reports’
Case Reports in Psychiatry
Crimes Act 1900
R v Justins
(12 December 2008)
Stewart, Peisah and Draper,
above n 50, 37.
Thomas Faunce,
‘Medical Law Reporter:
Justins v The Queen
: Assisted Suicide,
Juries and the Decision to Prosecute’
(2011) 18(4)
Journal of Law and
Dignitas is an association
founded in Switzerland in 1988 with the objective of ensuring a life and death
with dignity for its members.
They offer services to people internationally,
including the possibility of assisted suicide for people making a reasoned
in the context of medical proof and cases of terminal illness, pain or
disability.
Stewart, Peisah and Draper,
above n 50, 37.
Justins v R
[2010] NSWCCA 242
79 NSWLR 544
Faunce, above n 85, 706.
Justins v R
[2010] NSWCCA 242
79 NSWLR 544
R v Justins
(12 December 2008).
Faunce, above n 85,
Director of Public
Prosecutions,
Suicide: Policy for Prosecutors in Respect of Cases of
Encouraging or Assisting Suicide
(October 2014) Crown Prosecution Service
http://www.cps.gov.uk/publications/prosecution/assisted_suicide_policy.html
Alexandra Mullock,
‘Overlooking the Criminally Compassionate: What Are the Implications of
Prosecutorial Policy on Encouraging
or Assisting Suicide?’
Medical Law Review
‘Mother Cleared of ME
Daughter’s Attempted Murder’,
(online), 25 January
http://news.bbc.co.uk/2/hi/uk_news/england/sussex/8479211.stm
Afua Hirsch, ‘Kay
Gilderdale Case: A Clear Verdict on the Law’s Confusion on Assisted
The Guardian
(online), 26 Jan 2010
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/2010/jan/25/kay-gilderdale-case-expert-view>.
(1977) 66 Cr App Rep 97
Euthanasia, Ethics and the Law: From Conflict to Compromise
(Routledge-Cavendish, 2007) 60.
Suicide Act 1961
Cr App Rep 97
Stewart, Peisah and
Draper, above n 50, 38.
Voluntary Assisted
Dying Act 2017
Greg Young, Alison
Douglass and Lorraine Davison, ‘What Do Doctors Know about Assessing
Decision-Making Capacity?’
New Zealand Medical Journal
Ben White et al,
‘Doctors’ Knowledge of the Law on Withholding and Withdrawing
Life-Sustaining Medical Treatment’
(2014) 201(4)
Medical Journal of
Royal Australian and New
Zealand College of Psychiatrists, Physician Assisted Suicide, Position Statement
No 67 (2016) 1, 4.
Voluntary Assisted
Dying Act 2017
* LLB (Macq), BA (Macq), PhD (USyd). Chief Executive Officer, Legal Aid ACT;
Adjunct Professor of Law, University of Canberra.
** LLB (Hons) (ANU), BSc (ANU). Research Assistant, Legal Aid ACT.
Australian Law Reform Commission,
Elder Abuse—A
National Legal Response
, Report No 131 (2017).
Australian Bureau of
Statistics,
2016 Census Quick Stats: Australian Capital Territory
October 2017)
http://www.censusdata.abs.gov.au/census_services/getproduct/census/2016/quickstat/8?opendocument
Australian Bureau of
Statistics,
2001 Census Quick Stats: Australian Capital Territory
March 2006)
http://www.censusdata.abs.gov.au/census_services/getproduct/census/2016/quickstat/036
Australian Bureau of Statistics,
2016 Census Quick Stats: Australian Capital
(23 October 2017) Australian Bureau of Statistics
http://www.censusdata.abs.gov.au/census_services/getproduct/census/2016/quickstat/8?opendocument
Eva Cotterell et al,
‘Elder Abuse in the ACT: A Literature Review’ (Report, Council on
the Ageing, June 2015) 7.
Centre for Mental Health
Research, ‘A Baseline Survey of Canberra as an Age-Friendly City’
(Report, Australian National
University, 2011) 51 (‘
World Health
Organisation, ‘World Report on Ageing and Health’ (Report, World
Health Organisation, 2015) 74
http://apps.who.int/iris/bitstream/10665/186463/1/9789240694811_eng.pdf?ua=1
Cotterall, above n 5,
10; Suzana Leonardi, ‘Elder Abuse? What’s That When It’s at
in the ACT’ (Draft Report, Council of the
Ageing ACT, 2015), 11
http://www.cotaact.org.au/wp-content/2015/10/Elder-Abuse-Experiences-draft.pdf
An assets for care
arrangement generally involves an elderly person either selling their home to
provide funds for a family member
in exchange for care or transferring their
interest in their property to a family member in exchange for care.
Louise Kyle,
‘Assets for Care: A Guide for Lawyers to Assist Older Clients at Risk of
Financial Abuse’ (Guide, Seniors
Rights Victoria, 2012)
<https://assetsforcare.seniorsrights.org.au/assetsforcare/wp-content/uploads/2014/10/Assets-for-Care.pdf>.
World Health
Organisation,
, Age-Friendly
World<https://extranet.who.int/agefriendlyworld/network/canberra/>.
ACT Government,
‘ACT Elder Abuse Prevention Program Policy’ (Policy, ACT Government,
http://www.communityservices.act.gov.au/data/assets/pdf_file/0004/317605/Elder_Abuse_Prevention_Program_Policy_2012_FINAL_2.pdf
Community Services
Directorate, ‘Community Services Directorate – Annual Report
2016-17’ (Annual Report, ACT Government,
Internal Legal Aid ACT
figures, so far in 2017-18 (as of 10 May 2018) 282 services to clients over 65
have been provided.
Ashurst Australia,
‘Older People Law Brief’ (Report, Ashurst Australia, 14 January
2016). This report was prepared by
Ashurst Australia for Legal Aid ACT.
Ron Acierno,
‘Prevalence and Correlates of Emotional, Physical, Sexual and Financial
Abuse and Potential Neglect in the United
States: The National Elder
Mistreatment Study’ (2010) 100(2)
American Journal of Public Health
ACT Government,
Frequently Asked Questions:
Answers to Your Questions about Public
Housing Renewal in the ACT
(4 January 2018) Public Housing Renewal Taskforce
<https://www.planning.act.gov.au/topics/public-housing-renewal/frequently-asked-questions>.
Robert Tanton, Riyana
Miranti and Yogi Vidyattama, ‘Hidden disadvantage in the ACT: Report for
ACT Anti-Poverty Week’
(Report, National Centre for Social and Economic
Modelling – University of Canberra, October 2017), 13-14
http://www.natsem.canberra.edu.au/storage/2017-hidden-disadvantage-in-the-act-anti-poverty-week-report.pdf
Kirsten Lawson, ‘ACTCOSS calls for budget concessions to help increasing
numbers of poor in Canberra’
The Canberra Times
(online), 6 June
http://www.canberratimes.com.au/act-news/actcoss-calls-for-budget-concessions-to-help-increasing-numbers-of-poor-in-canberra-20170605-gwko98.html
Australian Law Reform
Commission,
e, Discussion Paper 83 (2016), 22.
Legal Aid ACT,
Submission No 58 to Australian Law Reform Commission,
Inquiry into Protecting
the Rights of Older Australians from Abuse
, August 2016, 5.
Joan Harbison,
‘Understanding “Elder Abuse and Neglect”: A Critique of
Assumptions Underpinning Responses to the
Mistreatment and Neglect of Older
People’ (2012) 24(2)
Journal of Elder Abuse & Neglect
Laura Pritchard-Jones,
‘The Good, the Bad, and the “Vulnerable Older Adult”’
(2016) 38(1)
Journal of Social Welfare and Family Law
, 56; James
O’Brien and Desmond O’Neill, ‘Prevention of Elder Abuse’
2005, 2006.
Lise Barry,
‘Capacity and Vulnerability: How Lawyers Assess the Legal Capacity of
Older Clients’
Journal of Law and Medicine
Australian Human Rights
Commission,
A Human Rights Approach for Ageing and Health - A Human Rights
Approach and the Aged Care Reforms
, Australian Human Rights Commission
<https://www.humanrights.gov.au/human-rights-approach-ageing-and-health-human-rights-approach-and-aged-care-reforms>.
Pritchard-Jones, above n
Australian Bureau of
Statistics,
Life Tables for Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander Australians
(Catalogue number 3302.0.55.003, 15 November 2013), 6
http://www.ausstats.abs.gov.au/ausstats/subscriber.nsf/0/BD51C922BFB7C6C1CA257C230011C97F/$File/3302055003_2010-2012.pdf
Mick Gooda,
‘Introduction’ (Paper presented at the AAG Elder Abuse and Neglect
Conference, Alice Springs, 5 September
Xinqi Dong,
‘Association of Cognitive Function and Risk for Elder Abuse in a
Community-Dwelling Population’ (2011) 32(3)
Dementia and Geriatric
Cognitive Disorders
Susan Charles and Laura
Carstensen, ‘Social and Emotional Aging’ (2010) 61
Annual Review
of Psychology
Rae Kaspiew, Rachel
Carson and Helen Rhoades, ‘Elder Abuse: Understanding Issues, Frameworks
and Responses’ (Research
Report No 35, Australian Institute of Family
Studies, February 2016) 12.
Ibid 11–12.
Xinqi Dong and Melissa
Simon, ‘Elder Abuse as a Risk Factor for Hospitalization in Older
Persons’ (2013) 173(10)
JAMA Internal Medicine
Robert Kohn and Wendy
Verhoek-Oftedahl, ‘Caregiving and Elder Abuse’ (2011) 94(2)
Medicine and Health, Rhode Island
47; Amy Carney, ‘Indicators of
Abuse in the Elderly ICU Patient’ (2015) 38(3)
Critical Care Nursing
Jason Burnett, W Andrew Achenbaum and Kathleen Pace Murphy, ‘Prevention
and Early Identification of Elder Abuse’ (2014)
Geriatric Medicine
Christine Coumarelos et
al, ‘Legal Australia-Wide Survey: Legal Need in Australia’ (Report,
Law and Justice Foundation
of New South Wales, August 2012) 15.
A draft of the National
Plan is expected in late 2018: see Christian Porter, Attorney-General (Cth)
‘National Plan to Address
Elder Abuse’ (Media Release, 20 February
<https://www.attorneygeneral.gov.au/Media/Pages/National-Plan-to-address-elder-abuse.aspx>.
ALRC Report,
above n 1, 59.
Australian Bureau of
Statistics,
Feature Article: Population by Age and Sex, Australia, States and
Territories
(15 December 2016), 3101.0 – Australian Demographic
Statistics, Jun 2016
http://www.abs.gov.au/AUSSTATS/abs@.nsf/Previousproducts/3101.0Feature%20Article1Jun%202016
Council of Australian
Governments, ‘National Partnership Agreement on Legal Assistance
Services’ (Australian Government,
28 June 2017)
<https://www.ag.gov.au/LegalSystem/Legalaidprogrammes/Documents/NationalPartnershipAgreementOnLegalServices.pdf>.
Ibid 6, 12.
National Association of
Community Legal Centres, Submission No 91 to Productivity Commission,
into Australia’s System of Civil Dispute Resolution
, November 2013,
ALRC Report
above n 1, 290.
Productivity Commission,
Access to Justice Arrangements
, Report No 72 (2014), 820.
Wills/probate/estates was indicated by 25% of firms as one of the top 5 areas
they reject doing pro bono
work. This also may be indicative of the number of
request received, however is reflective of the larger number of people who will
not be able to get assistance in these areas.
For instance, Legal Aid
ACT provides education regarding wills, however will often not provide advice
and does not assist a person
in drafting a will.
Victorian Law Reform
Commission,
Succession Laws
, (Report, Victorian Law Reform Commission,
August 2013), 12
http://lawreform.vic.gov.au/sites/default/files/Succession_Laws_final_report.pdf
Ibid, 15. The common law
tests for testamentary capacity are well established: see
(1870) 5 QB 549
Elizabeth Samra, Elder
Abuse Report (Report, Legal Aid ACT, June 2017) 15. This report was prepared for
Legal Aid ACT by Elizabeth
Samra following community consultation with
stakeholders in the ACT.
As noted by Kunc J in
Ryan v Dalton
[2017] NSWSC 1007
, [106] an assessment of testamentary
capacity will always be a fact sensitive process, making it difficult to provide
a specified
Queensland Law Reform
Commission,
A Review of Queensland’s Guardianship Laws
, Report No
67 (2010), 320.
ALRC Report
above n 1, 163.
Legal Aid ACT, above n
20, 58; see also
Ryan v Ryan
[2017] VSC 490
, [130] the Attorney in this
case did not appear to understand the position of trust she was placed in,
despite drafting loan agreements
with legal assistance and providing her
principals with care. See also
Downie v Langham
[2017] NSWSC 113.
Legal Aid ACT, above n
Re McFadyen
[2015] ACTSC 219
, involving a cognitively impaired woman who had executed a new
will leaving her attorney the residue of her estate. Following her
trustee of the second will made an application to the ACT Supreme Court to seek
a revocation of the second will as the
principal did not have the testamentary
capacity to make a valid will.
This risk was outlined
Alcazar-Stevens v Stevens
[2017] ACTCA 12
, [47], and was used as an
argument by the court for rejecting an interpretation of
of Attorney Act 2006
(ACT) put forward that only would have allowed the
executor of an estate to make an application under that section for the
or the estate, to receive compensation for a loss caused by a failure
of the Attorney to comply with the Act.
Powers of Attorney
Legal Aid ACT, above n
ALRC Report,
above n 1, 174.
Guardian and
Management of Property Act 1991
(ACT) s 10(2).
Corporations Act
Natalia Wuth,
‘Enduring Powers of Attorney with Limited Remedies – It's Time to
Face the Facts!’
Elder Law Review
ALRC Report,
above n 1, 101; Kate Kersey et al, ‘Professional Discipline of the New
Zealand Nursing Residential Care Workforce: A Mixed Methods
Analysis of HPDT
Decisions 2004-2014’
Journal of Law and Medicine
ALRC Report,
above n 1, 174.
Legal Aid ACT,
Submission No 223 to Australian Law Reform Commission,
Inquiry into
Protecting the Rights of Older Australians from Abuse
, February 2017, 9.
Sarah Ellison et al,
Access to Justice and Legal Needs: The Legal Needs of Older People in NSW
(Law and Justice Foundation of NSW, 2004) 269.
Tsharna Stewart,
‘Enduring Powers of Attorney: An Effective Advanced Planning Tool or an
Avenue for Financial Abuse’
Queensland Lawyer
ALRC Report
above n 1, 172.
[2017] NSWSC 1419
[380]–[381].
In the ACT this is found
Powers of Attorney Act 2006
Legal Aid ACT, above n
As announced by the
Treasurer Scott Morrison, as part of the 2018-19 Budget the Federal Government
will be working with the States
and Territories to develop a national online
register of Enduring Powers of Attorneys (see Commonwealth,
Budget Measures
, Budget Paper No 2 (8 May 2018) 77).
Stewart, above n 68,
World Health
Organisation, ‘World Report on Ageing and Health’ (Report, World
Health Organisation, 2015) 74
http://apps.who.int/iris/bitstream/10665/186463/1/9789240694811_eng.pdf?ua=1
Andrew Day et al,
‘An Assessment of Interventions that Target Risk Factors for Elder
Abuse’ (2017) 25(5)
Health and Social Care in the Community
Shelly Jackson,
‘Theory-Based Models Enhancing the Understanding of Four Types of Elder
Maltreatment’ (2016) 22(3)
International Review of Victimology
Kyle, above n 10, 9.
Legal Aid ACT, above n
Christodoulou v
Christodoulou
[2009] VSC 583
[2015] VSC 600
Hartley v Woods
[2017] NSWSC 1420
Thorn v Boyd
[2014] NSWSC 1159
[2015] VSC 600.
ALRC Report
above n 1, 211; see also
Pinter v Pinter
[2016] QSC 314
, [126], while
this matter was brought by a son after his parents had died to protect his own
interests following an assets for care
the existence of undue influence will likely be examined at the time the
transaction was
ALRC Report,
above n 1, 213.
The principles regarding
estoppel were outlined in
Waltons Stores (Interstate) Ltd v Maher
164 CLR 387
Rixon v Horseshoe
Pastoral Co Pty Ltd
[2017] NSWSC 1293
As illustrated by
Hurst-Meyers v Public Trustee and Guardian (ACT)
[2018] ACTSC 61
determinations can be time consuming especially when the elderly person is
otherwise incapacitated, in this case suffering
from dementia.
Legal Aid ACT, above n
Samra, above n 50,
Christodoulou v
Christodoulou
[2009] VSC 583
ALRC Report
above n 1, 224;
Social Security Act 1991
Coumarelos et al, above
This complexity is
perfectly illustrated by the case of
Smith v Smith
[2017] NSWSC 408.
case concerned the abuse of an EPOA by the widow (who herself was an elderly
person) of the deceased (who had been suffering
from dementia in the last few
years of his life). In this case, the validity of the will was not challenged,
rather the widow was
accused of falling short in her fiduciary duties to the
principal under the EPOA. This case required a complex examination of equitable
principles regarding not only fiduciary duties, but also receipt of trust money
by other beneficiaries to the will.
For instance, in the ACT
Magistrates Court Act 1930
Powers of Attorney
; while an application by family members following the
death of the elderly person, this was demonstrated in
Alcazar-Stevens v
[2017] ACTCA 12
involving a beneficiary of a will seeking an
extension of time from the ACT Supreme Court to apply for a s 50(1) order under
Powers of Attorney Act 2006
ALRC Report,
above n 1, 178, 218.
Guardianship and
Management of Property Act 1991
ALRC Report,
above 1, 375.
Harbison, above n 21,
ALRC Report,
above n 1, 69.
Billy Boland, Jemima
Burnage and Hasan Chowhan, ‘Safeguarding Adults at Risk of Harm’
ALRC Report
above n 1, 20.
Re T (An Adult:
Consent to Medical Treatment)
[1992] EWCA Civ 18
[1992] 4 All ER 649.
ALRC Report
above n 1, 395–6.
Kelly Purser and Tuly
Rosenfeld, ‘Assessing Testamentary and Decision-Making Capacity:
Approaches and Models’
(2015) 23(1)
Journal of Law and Medicine
Children and Young
People Act 2008
Human Rights Act
Secretary-General,
Follow-up to the Second World Assembly on Ageing: Report of the
Secretary-General
sess, UN Doc 66/173 (22 July 2011)
Suzy Braye, David Orr
and Michael Preston-Shoot, ‘Autonomy and Protection in Self-Neglect Work:
The Ethical Complexity of
Decision-Making’ (2017) 11(4)
Social Welfare
Mental Health Act
ALRC Report
above n 1, 25.
Ibid 378–9.
Wendy Lacey,
‘Neglectful to the Point of Cruelty? Elder Abuse and the Rights of Older
Persons in Australia’
[2014] SydLawRw 4
Sydney Law Review
Legal Aid ACT, above n
Powers of Attorney
Mental Health Act 2015
See Jennifer Moye,
Daniel Marson and Barry Edelstein, ‘Assessment of Capacity in an Aging
Society’ (2013) 68(3)
American Psychologist
Tony Rosen,
‘Emergency Medical Services Perspectives on Identifying and Reporting
Victims of Elder Abuse, Neglect and Self-Neglect’
(2017) 53(4)
of Emergency Medicine
Kay Patterson,
‘Violence, Neglect and Abuse’ (Speech delivered at the 2017 UN
Open-ended Working Group on Ageing, New
<https://www.humanrights.gov.au/news/speeches/violence-neglect-and-abuse-un-oewga-new-york>.
Coumarelos et al, above
n 36, 361. Issues arise using the over 65 metric as an indicator are noted in
the paper above.
Christine Coumarelos,
Zhigang Wei and Albert Zhou, ‘Justice Made to Measure: NSW Legal Needs
Survey in Disadvantaged Areas’
(Report, Law and Justice Foundation of New
South Wales, March 2006), 167.
Susannah Sage-Jacobson,
‘Access to Justice for Older People in Australia’
E-Shien Chang, Xin Qi
Dong, ‘Understanding Elder Abuse in the Chinese Community: The Role of
Cultural, Social and Community
Factors’ in the National Academy of
Elder Abuse and Its Preventions
(National Academies Press,
2014), ChII.1.
People with Disability
Australia, Submission No 104 to Legislative Council General Purpose Standing
Committee No 2, Parliament of
New South Wales,
Inquiry into Elder Abuse in
New South Wales
, 12 February 2016, 22.
World Health
Organisation, ‘Active Ageing: A Policy Framework’ (Report, World
Health Organisation, April 2002), 29.
See Adria Navarro et al,
‘Do We Really Need Another Meeting? Lessons from the Los Angeles County
Elder Abuse Forensic Center’
(2010) 50(5)
The Gerontologist
Mark Lachs and Karl
Pillemer, ‘Elder Abuse’
New England Journal of
Arlene Groh and Rick
Linden, ‘Addressing Elder Abuse: The Waterloo Restorative Justice Approach
to Elder Abuse Project’
(2011) 23(2)
Journal of Elder Abuse &
See Coumarelos, above n
36, 107 which details a number of reasons why a person delays taking legal
action, such as having bigger
problems, fear of damaging the relationship they
have with the other party, the cost and the stress involved. These are factors
could prevent an older person from taking legal action until it becomes
absolutely necessary.
Xin Qi Dong,
‘Elder Abuse: Systemic Review and Implications for Practice’ (2015)
Journal of the American Geriatrics Society
1214, 1234.
David Burnes,
‘Community Elder Mistreatment Intervention with Capable Older Adults:
Toward a Conceptual Practice Model’
(2017) 57(3)
The Gerontologist
People with Disability
Australia, above n 130, 7.
Ashurst Australia, above
See Heather Craige,
‘The Practice of Social Work in Legal Services Programs’ (1982) 9(2)
Journal of Sociology & Social Welfare
Elizabeth Peel, Helen
Taylor and Rosie Harding, ‘Sociolegal and Practice Implications of Caring
for LGBT People with Dementia’
(2016) 28(10)
Nursing Older People
Sage-Jacobson, above n
128, 156–7.
See Senior Rights
Your Rights – Elder Abuse
, Senior Rights Victoria
<https://seniorsrights.org.au/your-rights/>.
See Tanton, Miranti and
Vidyattama, above n 18.
Fiona Hum and Jennifer
Faulkner, ‘Medical-Legal Partnerships: A New Beginning to Help Australian
Children in Need’
Journal of Law and Medicine
Susan Ball, Cindy Wong
and Liz Curran, ‘Health-Justice Partnership Development Report 2016’
(Report, Victorian Legal
Services Board and Commissioner, July 2016) 3.
Edward Paul et al,
‘Medical-Legal Partnerships: Addressing Competency Needs Through
Lawyers’ (2009) 1(2)
Journal of Graduate Medical Education
Liz Bishop, Hana
Shahkhan and Bebe Loff, ‘A Hospital-Based Patient Legal Clinic’
Journal of Law and Medicine
, 682–3; Elizabeth Tyler,
‘Medical-Legal Partnership in Primary Care: Moving Upstream in the
Clinic’ [2017]
American Journal of Lifestyle Medicine
(forthcoming).
Bishop, Shahkhan and
Loff, above n 152, 679.
Population Health
Division – ACT Health, ‘Health and Wellbeing of Older Persons in the
Australian Capital Territory’
(Health Report No 63, ACT Government, May
<https://health.act.gov.au/sites/default/files/Health%20and%20Wellbeing%20of%20Older%20Persons%20in%20the%20ACT%20Report.pdf>.
Dong, above n 137,
This includes a bookmark
containing a checklist with various factors which may indicate elder abuse such
as lack of control over
one’s money, medication or safety.
ACT Government,
Library Service
(4 January 2018) ACT Government Libraries
<https://www.library.act.gov.au/library_services/home-library-service>.
Legal Aid ACT, above n
Ian Fletcher, ‘Can
Specialised Family Mediation Prevent Elder Abuse in Australia’ (Paper
presented at the Australian
Mediation Conference, Sydney, 2012) 2.
Samra, above n 50,
Gemma Smyth,
‘Mediation in Cases of Elder Abuse and Mistreatment: The Case of
University of Windsor Mediation Services’
Windsor Review of
Legal and Social Issues
Lise Barry, ‘Elder
Australasian Dispute Resolution Journal
Fletcher, above n 161,
Productivity Commission,
above n 46, 1020.
Samra, above n 50,
From internal numbers of
Legal Aid ACT.
Samra, above n 50,
See Productivity
Commission, above n 46.
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (564 KB)
PDF format (256 KB)
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter