URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/journals/HRD/2007/12.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 15:01:37
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Celemajor, Danielle --- "Beyond the "God Delusion": Towards a complex engagement of religion and human rights." [2007] HRightsDef 12; (2007) 16(2) Human Rights Defender 2
Beyond the “God Delusion”: Towards a complex engagement of religion and human rights.
Beyond the “God Delusion”: Towards a
complex engagement of religion and human rights.
Danielle Celermajer
This century has seen the extraordinary rise of a pair of
(mutually hostile) movements whose principal concern is the place of religion
the public sphere. On one side we have witnessed the very obvious rise of
stridently public religion, and the call for a more
prominent role for religious
norms, voices and world views in the construction of public policy; on the
other, there is the vehement
rejection of religion as a force in public life,
and the publication of a growing list of extremely popular (and populist) books
by prominent public intellectuals damning religion as the greatest force of
social violence and oppression in our times. Given that
one of the key
disagreements in this dispute concerns what types of foundational and regulatory
norms are legitimate in contemporary
societies and what types should be struck
out, human rights, even when not explicitly mentioned, are deeply implicated
throughout.
To a cool observer (assuming it is possible to remain cool in the midst of
the swarming invective), what stands out in this debate
is the lack of
sophistication in most of the public argumentation on both sides. Richard
Dworkin, leading the front guard of the
charge against religion, feels no
compunction nor any need for empirical data, when he declares that
who adheres to Islam, Judaism or Christianity could possibly feel wonder at the
living embodied universe because all such religious
adherents only value an
elsewhere after-life. And the representatives of Evangelical Christianity in
Andrew Denton’s
God on My Side
seem to see no reason that their
argument that
direct experience of the Christian God is more
legitimate than the direct experience that Muslims have of their God
it just is’, may fail to convince the impartial bystander.
Lacking on both sides is the type of sophisticated dialogue between
faith that one can find in religious and scientific or secular political texts
from Maimonides, Avicenna, Aquinas, Barth
and Heschel to Locke, Paul Davies,
Martin Luther King Jn and Abdullah An-Na’im.
This lack of complexity is not just to the intellectual detriment of the
debate (though to its benefit as a commercial product), but,
more pressingly,
anathema to the resolution or even negotiation of the real conflicts that
exist between worldviews and normative frames. From its modern
inception (the framing of the
Universal Declaration of Human Rights
field of human rights has tended to take a pragmatic approach to foundational
differences, as captured by Jacques Maritain,
a member of the UNESCO committee
established to explore the different philosophical and religious foundations of
human rights. Maritain
once famously remarked, ‘Yes, we agree about the
rights, but on condition no one asks us why’.
Similarly, it
has attempted a capacious approach to interpretive difference, hoping that the
‘margin of appreciation’
in different national or cultural
interpretations of broadly expressed rights would nevertheless fulfil the
essential objectives
of the human rights ideal.
Perhaps this approach seemed viable in 1948, when the nations there were more
thoroughly united by their shared experience of the
post-Shoah moment and the
exhilaration of their vision. As Isaiah Berlin put it, in the post holocaust
moment, what sustained people’s
commitment to a moral law was not reason
(as it once had in Kant), but horror.
But 60 years later,
Maritain’s statement is evidently false, on a number of counts. First, we
all agree about the rights, particularly those concerning the
status and treatment of women and children. Second, we increasingly
ask why, and we have a great deal to say about those foundational differences.
And third, the answer to the ‘why’ question
that has captured the
popular imagination is that the greatest impediment to the adoption of the full
set of universal human rights
is religious belief.
At the same time, now walking over to the other side, one cannot avoid the
fact that nearly 60 years of human rights, including the
formal adoption of
human rights principles, the ratification of human rights treaties and even the
enactment of domestic human rights
laws, has not produced the type of deeply
embedded human rights culture that the visionaries of the system hoped it would.
the most selfavowedly secular states, where publicly endorsed religious
norms do not stand in the way of official deference to human
rights standards,
we have not seen the deep adoption of human rights as a nonnegotiable lens
through which all public policy must
pass. This has been all too graphically
evidenced in the ease with which states that hold themselves as beacons of
liberal democracy
have traded off even non-derogable rights, like protection
from torture (let alone freedom of speech and association) in the post
context (and of course also before that, though mostly ‘offshore’
under the guise of Cold War politics and in a
less explicit manner).
Evidently human rights standards have not yet attached themselves to human
beings with sufficient tenacity to hold up to the challenges
of pragmatism.
After all, adhering to the norm against torture, until you really want to
torture someone, or permitting free speech
until that speech actually challenges
your values, is hardly testament to the effective action of the human rights
norms. One could
only reliably claim evidence of their independent action where
their presence brought about genuine forbearance of the proscribed
(and on other
grounds attractive) behaviours. Certainly, there are a range of legitimate
interpretations for why this deep embodiment
has not been achieved, including
the simple fact that 60 years of rights internationalism is a relatively short
time against the
history of the Westphalian system and associated realism, and
beyond that deep cultural differences. Nevertheless, the pressing question
‘what would it take for human rights to become an absolute
standard?’ or, to put it otherwise, ‘what do we
need beyond a
framework of laws and formal institutions, for human rights to be deeply
integrated into our individual and collective
normative systems?’
The answers to these questions place human rights and religion in a far more
complex relationship than the simple opposition that
populist creeds would
suggest. Undoubtedly, many authoritative interpretations of religious texts and
prominent religious doctrines
prescribe norms that directly contravene human
rights standards, particularly those relating to women. As these conflicts form
of the major thematic areas of contemporary human rights literature, I will
not treat them in depth here, other than to make a pragmatic
observation.
Irrespective how externally located human rights activists view the overall
legitimacy of the religious systems in question,
the most effective way to
ensure the long-term success of the rights struggles of women who themselves
identify with a religion that
prescribes norms inimical to their access to basic
rights is to support their intrinsic critiques. Certainly, they should have
exit strategies, should they wish to take this route, but for those who
do not, the role of the outsider must be to support them
to create new spaces
within their own religion to articulate alternative interpretations consistent
with the full enjoyment of their
rights. Jewish women’s groups in Israel
(for example the Schechter Institute Center for Women in Jewish Law) and Muslim
groups in Indonesia (such as Muslimat NU) provide powerful
illustrations of this type of strategy of intrinsic engagement, where
speak as Jews and Muslims for a legitimate reading of their religion that
inscribes women’s voices and thereby their
interests. Their work defies
the stereotype that religious doctrine is essentially and necessarily static and
demonstrates the productive
possibilities of what we might think of as a
normative permaculture across religious and human rights frameworks.
Albeit the most obvious face of the relationship, the conflict between the
substantive
prescriptions of religions and human rights exposes only part
of what is available to us when we bring these two fields into a discursive
relationship. To start to give outline to the less obvious dimension, one might
distinguish the
substantive
content of normative systems from the form in
which those normative systems become part of human experience. Returning to my
observation that we have not embodied human rights norms, one might ask
whether the processes that religions have traditionally adopted
to bring about
an embodied normative commitment, or a deep social integration of values, might
not be a model that an overly rationalistic
human rights canon would do well to
Writing in this vein, Albert Einstein observed that while clear thinking
plays a critical role in forming ethical judgments, ‘those
convictions
which are necessary and determinant of our conduct and judgments cannot be found
solely along this solid scientific way’.
Rather, he argued,‘to make
clear these fundamental ends and valuations, and to set them fast in the
emotional life of an individual,
seems to me to the most important function
which religion has to perform in the social life of man’.
so invoking religion, Einstein of course had a very particular conception in
mind, in which God was not conceived as an anthropomorphic
source of fear or
reward and in which the religious experience itself precluded the formation of
dogma (he called it cosmic religious
feeling). Beyond this important
qualification, however, what he was pointing to was a particular quality of the
relationship that
has to hold between human beings and a set of norms or
practices for them to be, ‘as the air which he breathes’.
Einstein was not the first leader of modernist rational thought to struggle
with this problem. Indeed, those of us who associate Adam
Smith with the
creation of the free market and its rampant individualism might be surprised to
turn to the pages of his ethical treatises,
where he struggled with the problem
of how to create moral sentiment in a post traditionalist society in which
ascription to any
norm, including respect for others, had to pass before the
tribunal of the individual mind.
Smith, like Einstein, understood
the importance of finding a way in which the modernist enterprise of liberating
individuals from
dogmatic (religious) systems could remain consistent with their
experiencing a commitment beyond their individual self. More directly,
French sociologist (and descendent of a line of Rabbis) Emile
despite his call for a scientific approach to society,
recognised that it was through religions that societies integrated and embodied
social norms. True, this formal observation tells us nothing about the content
of those norms, which as we know may include prescriptions
for cruelty and
systematic violation of certain classes of humans. But it does tell us something
beings to internalise any norms to the extent
that they will trump selfinterest, as we are required to do in the case of human
Religious ritual, for example, including the use of music, symbolic speech
and traditional (‘mythic’) stories, so easily
scorned if assessed by
rationalist standards, plays a powerful role in transforming external norms (as
rules) into felt and embodied
standards of conduct. Assessed with a hostile eye,
such ‘non-rational’ processes may be classified as brainwashing.
assessed with a more pragmatic eye informed by the latest neuroscience
on the primacy of emotion in our thinking processes, they
are intelligent means
of making the abstract concrete and immediate to consciousness. Indeed, moving
back into the field of human
rights, we would do well to notice that many
advocates have recognized that legal frameworks alone are insufficient to change
and minds, and are increasingly turning to precisely these types of
processes. Thus for example, narratives of violation and redemption
rights and even collective rituals like Truth and Reconciliation Commissions and
collective forms of repentance have taken
their place along ‘naming and
shaming’ and legal ascription in the human rights toolkit. Of course, a
thoroughgoing understanding
of the power of such processes must include an
awareness of their potential for abuse and the degeneration so well described by
whereby a primary experience, even as lofty and initially universal as
Einstein’s cosmic religious feeling, becomes institutionalised
material for the dynamics of power.
Critically, this engagement with what I have loosely termed the non-rational
integrative processes of religion in no way implies the
idolatry and associated loss of agency of which Ignatieff warned.
Indeed, the idea that one might need to compromise the freedom and
responsibility of the individual to better strengthen her ascription
rights is oxymoronic. The challenge then for human rights is to find a way
through this apparent dichotomy between affirming
the free and responsible
individual and ensuring commitment to acting according to a set of norms,
irrespective of personal desire.
To do this, human rights as religion must, I
suggest, cut through the dichotomy of the free agent and the agent embedded in
responsibility
to treat others in a certain way. As Einstein put it: ‘Free
and responsible development of the individual, so that he may place
freely and gladly in the service of all mankind’.
Danielle Celermajer is the Director of the Bachelor of Global Studies,
University of Sydney. She received her PhD with distinction
from Columbia
University and directed a project on Religion and Human Rights at the Center for
the Study of Human Rights, Columbia
University. She is also a former director of
policy in the indigenous rights policy unit of the Australian Human Rights and
Opportunity Commission.
Jacque Maritain,
‘Introduction’ in UNESCO, Human Rights:
Comments an
Interpretations: a symposium
Isaiah Berlin,
The Crooked Timber of Humanity,
(1991) 204.
Albert Einstein,
Ideas and Opinions
(Sonja Bargmann trans) (1954)
41-42 [trans of
Ideen und Meinungen].
Adam Smith,
The Theory of Moral Sentiments
(D D Raphael and A L
(eds)) (1976).
Emile Durkheim, The Elementary Forms of Religious Life (Carol Cosman
(2001) [trans of Les Formes Elémentaires de la Vie Religieuse].
Michael Ignatieff, Human Rights as Politics and Idolatry (2001).
Einstein, above n 3, 43.
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (29.6 KB)
PDF format (95.4 KB)
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter