URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/journals/WAStuLawRw/2020/3.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 15:59:02
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Cooney, Henry --- "Procedural Fairness, Codification And The Problem Of Specificity" [2020] WAStuLawRw 3; (2020) 4 Western Australian Student Law Review 46
PROCEDURAL FAIRNESS, CODIFICATION AND THE PROBLEM OF
SPECIFICITY
PROCEDURAL FAIRNESS—CODIFICATION—THE RULE AGAINST BIAS—THE
FAIR HEARING RULE—SPECIFIC CODIFICATION—UNIVERSAL
CODIFICATION—SUPER-CODIFICATION—SPECIFICITY
The increased attention to the operation of migration law within Australia
over the last two decades has thrown the doctrine of procedural
fairness into
the spotlight. Accompanying this increased attention have been sporadic calls to
change or codify those rules of procedural
fairness. This article seeks to
demonstrate that calls to codify rules of procedural fairness are misplaced.
While both general and
specific forms of codification can be imagined, this
article addresses both broad forms and concludes that, due to the inherent
nature of the rules of procedural fairness, such rules should remain
firmly within the domain of the common law. This assessment
is made with a close
focus upon the supposed benefits that codified procedural fairness would entail.
A particular focus is given
to the ‘problem of specificity’—a
problem that, as will be explored, appears insurmountable.
I INTRODUCTION
Procedural fairness, in its many forms, has guided the use of executive power
its discovery as inferred from the
This paper assesses
whether the rules that make up procedural fairness should be codified. This
assessment is made with a close focus
upon various types of codification that
are relevant to this question. Broadly, these types of codification can be
grouped within
the categories of ‘universal’ or
‘specific’ codification, and both of these broad categories are
within this article. In Part II, this article examines the rules of
procedural fairness in order to give context to the discussion
that follows.
Part III considers justifications for codification and explores the notion of a
singular, universal statutory framework
for the rules of procedural fairness.
Part IV presents a detailed analysis of the possibility of codifying specific
procedural fairness
rules that relate to individual administrative powers. This
it is assessed with a close focus upon attempts to codify the rules of
procedural fairness within the
Migration Act 1958
These attempts are
of particular relevance to this article, as migration decisions are frequently
the subject of judicial review
on procedural fairness grounds (and those review
proceedings provide an insight into the operation of codified procedural
rules). This article concludes that, for a variety of reasons, both
specific and universal codification should be rejected.
II PROCEDURAL FAIRNESS
Conventionally, procedural fairness has two distinct
requirements.
The first requirement is known as the fair hearing rule and the second
requirement is known as the rule against bias. The focus of
this article is not
a detailed analysis of those rules, and the
‘threshold’
question in
relation to procedural fairness is also not relevant to this article. However,
in order to provide context, it is necessary
to briefly outline the rules of
procedural fairness.
The Fair Hearing Rule
Broadly, the fair hearing rule requires a decision-maker to allow a person
affected by a decision an opportunity to be
The decision-maker must
‘hear him before exercising the
The fair hearing rule
has distinct sub-requirements
brief discussion of these requirements is necessary to explain the inherently
flexible nature of this aspect of procedural
fairness. This flexible nature will
become relevant in
and IV of this article, as the nature of
codification is examined.
The Provision of Notice
A decision maker’s
under the fair hearing rule is to provide the subject of their decision with
prior notice of the decision‑maker’s
intent to make a
While such an
obligation does not appear to involve any significant discretion on its face, in
practice the required content of such
notice is essentially
fact-specific.
decisions which are likely to affect an individual’s ‘livelihood or
will require a
corresponding level of
particularity,
opposite is true of minor or procedural decisions. In addition, the amount of
notice required to be given (in a temporal
sense) is equally dependent upon
circumstance—relevant factors include the subject matter of the
and the amount of time
that would be taken to ‘consider the allegations ... and, if necessary, to
obtain material to rebut
Disclosure of Information
Similarly inexact is a decision‑maker’s obligation to disclose
the substance of the information upon which their decision
will be made.
Generally, a decision maker has an obligation to disclose any adverse
information that is ‘credible, relevant
significant’
to the making
of their decision.
However, this
requirement to disclose is not
and, given a decision
maker is not bound to disclose their
information,
the level of any
disclosure required (and the usefulness of the disclosure to the subject) will
depend significantly upon the subject
and type of information being disclosed.
The Opportunity to Comment
A decision maker must also provide the subject of their decision the
opportunity to comment and to present their
One would be forgiven for
assuming that a requirement as simple as ‘the opportunity to
comment’ would lend itself to
a precise or strict application to facts.
Such an assumption would be inaccurate—the reality of this requirement is
content is inexact. The hearing (in which the subject may comment) does
not always need to be conducted by the
decision‑maker.
hearing does not need to be, necessarily, conducted in
In relation to sensitive
matters, the hearing may be given in restricted
circumstances.
In some cases,
the subject may be given the right to cross-examine
but this is, at least
as a matter of practice, unusual.
The preceding section should not be taken to be critical of the operation of
any of the rules of procedural fairness. Nor is it the
position of this article
that the fair hearing rule does any injustice to the parties to a decision. The
above has served only to
highlight the inherent flexibility of the fair hearing
rule—flexibility that is shared equally by the rule against bias. The
argument advanced in
of this article will rely upon this inherent
flexibility in rejecting the idea that such rules could be codified.
The No-Bias Rule
procedural fairness is the rule against bias. Sir Coke’s famous
judex in causa sua
—’no man may be a judge in his own
—has evolved
into a rule prohibiting ‘actual’ and ‘apprehended’ bias
in connection with administrative
The circumstances in
which bias arises and the impartiality required to satisfy this rule are beyond
the focus of this article. It
will suffice at this stage to note that while
actual bias is a question of
the test for apprehended
bias involves one of the quintessential features of the common law: a test based
in legal fiction.
As the English
Court of Appeal said:
[A court must] first ascertain all the circumstances which have a bearing on
the suggestion that the judge was biased ... then ask
whether those
circumstances would lead a fair-minded and informed observer to conclude that
there was a real possibility, or a real
danger ... that the tribunal was
This test has been adopted in Australia—as the High Court said in
Ebner v Official Trustee in Bankruptcy
... in the absence of any suggestion of actual bias ... a judge is
disqualified if a fair-minded lay observer might reasonably apprehend
judge might not bring an impartial mind to the resolution of the question the
judge is required to decide.
While a more detailed examination of the rule against bias is not necessary
for our purposes, the nature of the test for bias will
remain relevant
throughout this article.
III CODIFICATION
This part of the article has two goals. In section A, the article seeks to
explore the arguments surrounding calls to codify the rules
of procedural
fairness. In section B, the article seeks to show that a certain type of
codification—referred to here as ‘universal
codification’—is destined to fail from the outset. Broadly, two
The first, which
would involve bringing ‘together the relevant rules into one
is what the author
will call ‘universal’ codification. Such codification would
establish a unified statutory guide to
the requirements of procedural fairness
for administrative decision-makers at either the Commonwealth or State level.
The other type
of codification is what will be referred to as
‘specific’ codification. This refers to codification of the precise
requirements
of procedural fairness in provisions within a statute conferring
administrative power. Specific codification will be the focus of
article; only universal codification is considered in this part. Before
considering the notion of universal codification,
however, it is worth examining
arguments in favour of codifying the rules of procedural fairness.
Why Codify?
The motivations for codification of the rules of procedural fairness are of
vital importance to the question of codification. If a
scheme of codification
would in all events fail to confer the benefits supposed, the question of
codification is, at best, a moot
one. Determining whether the rules of
procedural fairness should be codified is therefore ultimately an exercise in
consequentialism:
what must be examined is the effect that codification would
It is not hard to understand why one might argue the rules of procedural
fairness should be codified. Increased clarity and simplicity
and, indirectly,
decision making that is less likely to involve breaches of procedural fairness
are all possible consequences of
codification.
consequences, if realised, would present a convincing motivation for codifying
the rules of procedural fairness. Procedural
fairness is a creature of the
common law yet administrative decision makers are typically not lawyers or
legally trained
and, in any
event, the law surrounding procedural fairness is continually
As a result, there is
a ‘widening gap in understanding between the rule makers and those obliged
to comply with them’.
Given that one motivation behind procedural fairness is the promotion of proper
decision making,
this problem
threatens to undermine procedural fairness. Why should the common law refine the
rules of procedural fairness if such
refinement leads to the alienation of
decision-makers from the rules that they are bound by? Codifying the rules of
procedural fairness
might avoid this issue by ensuring that decision-makers, be
them legally trained or not, can follow the rules of procedural fairness
It might also be argued that the codification of procedural fairness
requirements can allow for the rules of procedural fairness to
be tailored to
the requirements of legislative purpose or factual circumstance. Some
administrative powers have a wide application
to a variety of different
scenarios—take, for example, the power of a Commonwealth employer to
dismiss an employee. In occasional
cases of extreme employee misconduct, it
might be necessary to curtail the provision of procedural fairness to allow the
to act immediately. Codifying the rules of procedural fairness could
involve the legislature expressly recognising this necessity
by allowing for
varied (or even suspended) rules of procedural fairness in those circumstances.
This need for flexibility has been
the apparent rationale behind some existing
codification attempts in relation to Commonwealth
However, the extent to
which this is a genuine benefit of codification is unclear.
As noted above, it is well established that both the fair hearing rule and
the rule against bias have a flexible
application.
The fair hearing
rule requires no more ‘than is reasonable in the
circumstances’,
standard of impartiality required by the rule against bias is
In this respect, one
could argue that the requirements of procedural fairness
tailored on
a case-by-case basis, at least insofar as they can be modified to fit a given
scenario without losing their inherent
focus on justice and
Indeed, any statutory
‘tailoring’ of the requirements that goes beyond common law
modifications might be argued to be
of procedural fairness.
In any event, the following analysis assumes that this purported benefit is
Universal Codification—One Statute to Rule Them
The nature of procedural fairness appears to dictate that universal
codification would fail to achieve any of the above benefits and,
indeed, might
fail to have any meaningful effect whatsoever. Intuitively, there are two ways
in which a statute could set out rules
of procedural fairness in a universal
fashion; either the statute could set out differing requirements of procedural
fairness for
various administrative powers, or the statute could provide for one
set of procedural fairness rules for all administrative decision-making.
former of these is, in truth, just a form of specific codification—if
individual sets of rules are devised for various
administrative powers, the
location of those rules hardly changes their nature. As such, this type of
codification will be dealt
This part of the article deals with
the latter of these types.
It is immediately apparent that any codification of procedural fairness rules
that would apply ‘across the board’ would
not allow for rules
tailored to specific circumstances. This is necessarily the case—if
migration visa assessors, the Federal
police, and Commonwealth administrative
tribunals are all bound by the same rules of procedural fairness, the rules
would have to
be formulated at a high level of abstraction and generality. It is
therefore difficult to see how such a proposal could help tailor
the rules of
procedural fairness to unique factual scenarios.
More importantly, it is not clear whether the main benefit of
codification—that of increased clarity and ease of
understanding—could
be achieved by way of universal codification. Abstract
requirements intended to apply to all administrative bodies would be, logically,
likely to fall back upon considerations of reasonableness—for example, a
‘decision maker must provide as much notice
reasonable’.
Without such
broad descriptions, it is hard to conceive of a way in which rules appropriate
to all administrative decision makers
could be formulated.
Even if one accepts that the rules of procedural fairness
formulated in a clear and simple manner, the question becomes whether such
formulations would operate concurrently with the common
law rules of procedural
fairness. If the codified rules were to operate concurrently, it is difficult to
see how the resulting framework
of rules would result in anything other than
reduced clarity.
universal framework of procedural fairness rules must displace the common law
requirements of procedural fairness. Such
displacement is itself problematic. As
is examined in
of this article, it is not entirely clear that it is
to exclude the common law requirements of procedural fairness by
way of legislative provisions formulated at a general level. In relation
Migration Act
provisions attempting to do exactly this, it has been
suggested that High Court decisions have signalled ‘the beginning of
end for any hope’ that procedural fairness requirements could be replaced
by general statutory
requirements.
These decisions
did not involve ‘universal’ codification—they involved
‘specific’ codification—but
the decisions remain relevant
given there has been no attempt at universal codification in Australia. There
are examples of decisions
requirements of procedural
fairness (for example, the procedural requirement of acting in a way that is
‘fair and just’)
have been used to ‘re-import the general law content of natural
decisions have moved away from such
re-importation,
however, the
precise boundaries of this problem remain uncertain—particularly given the
fact that any broad adjectives used
in such codification might rely on the
courts for their content. In the event that the codified procedural fairness
rules do rely
on the courts for their content, it is difficult to see what
benefit the codified rules would have over their common law alternatives.
absence of such benefit, the justification for such codification disappears.
IV SPECIFIC CODIFICATION
Specificity
The problem, as Jones put it, is
specificity.
There are two broad
ways in which the specific codification of the rules of procedural fairness
could occur. First, a statute conferring
administrative power could codify
existing common law procedural fairness requirements (for example, the decision
maker must ‘provide
a fair hearing’). This might be called
‘reflective specific codification’, as the statutory requirements
simply reflect those at common law. Alternatively, a statute conferring
administrative power could formulate its own exclusive procedural
rules, divorced from those at common law. The former of these
alternatives—reflective specific codification—does
not lend itself
to critical analysis. While possible, the only benefit of such codification
would be a more accessible location (from
the point of view of non-legally
trained decision makers) of the common law rules. This can be achieved without
statutory codification.
For this reason, it is the latter type, which this
article will refer to as ‘super-codification’, that will form the
focus of the remainder of this article.
Super-Codification
Super-codification does not carry with it the problems described in
of this article in relation to general statutory requirements of procedural
fairness. It is established that the legislature may
provide for specific rules
of procedural fairness that exclude the requirements of procedural fairness at
common law.
Intuitively, one
would think super-codification could be done in a way that provides an
easy-to-understand set of rules of procedural
fairness. One can quickly point to
examples of Australian statutes that express complicated legal concepts in a
clear, concise and
user-friendly
However, as the
following discussion will show, this benefit has not been realised in respect of
procedural fairness in Australia.
Even though super-codification has the
potential to be accompanied by increased clarity, this increased clarity does
not come without
a cost—a cost no more apparent than in relation to
attempts to codify procedural fairness within the
Migration Act
It is useful to examine the effects that codification of procedural fairness
rules has had in Australia. Beginning in the early 2000’s,
attempts at
codification of procedural fairness in the
Migration Act
‘narrowed the scope of [the procedural fairness] ground of
recognising the value of simplicity, these codified requirements have been
‘more limited than those ... the courts
would otherwise
Any apparent goal
of simplicity has not been achieved. Attempts at super-codification of
procedural fairness in the
Migration Act
have caused ‘enormous
interpretative
difficulties’,
degree of confusion’,
have meant that various tribunals ‘could not implement the legislative
code with any certainty’.
Not only have such attempts caused issues of practical uncertainty, they also
appear to have caused genuine
uncertainty. The Federal Court
has seesawed between approaches to attempted super-codification in relation to
Migration Act
. Many decisions initially adopted the ‘whole
division approach,’
which an intent to extinguish the common law procedural fairness requirements
was read into codifying
provisions.
Other decisions
adopted an approach focused upon individual
while later decisions
adopted the ‘exact text
approach diametrically opposed to the ‘whole division approach’.
This ‘exact text approach’ appears
to involve the court attempting
to actively minimise any exclusion of procedural fairness
This result has meant
that the precise procedural fairness obligations of a decision-maker are not
ascertainable simply by reference
to the relevant statute.
Furthermore, this super-codification has had a negative impact upon
individual justice and fairness. As was mentioned earlier in this
abstract formulations of procedural fairness are apt to confuse non-legally
trained officials. However, attempting to avoid
this level of abstraction with
super-codification leads to rules of procedural fairness that lack flexibility
and this, in turn,
appears to sacrifice justice at an individual level. In 2011,
the Migration Review Tribunal and Refugee Review Tribunal said, in
relation to
super-codification of the fair hearing rule, that ‘[the codified rule] in
many cases, does not enhance justice
to the individual one
Similarly powerful
comments were made by Weinberg J in
SZEEU v Minister for Immigration and
Multicultural and Indigenous
The problems that have arisen stem directly from the attempt to codify, and
prescribe exhaustively, the requirements of natural justice,
without having
given adequate attention to the need to maintain some flexibility in this area
... As is demonstrated by the outcome
of at least some of these appeals,
codification in this area can lead to complexity, and a degree of confusion,
resulting in unnecessary
and unwarranted delay and
Weinberg J’s comments reflect the self-defeating nature of
super-codification—in order to avoid rules that
fairness, the rules must be formulated in a general way. But formulating the
rules in a general way denies codification
its chief benefits of simplicity,
transparency and ease-of-understanding.
Procedural Fairness and Good Government
It is worth finally and briefly considering normative and policy-based
considerations, insofar as they relate to the rejection of
procedural fairness
by way of explicit statutory displacement. It is conceivable that for certain
administrative powers (for example,
those that could impact upon national
security), the legislature may wish to exclude all aspects of procedural
fairness. This could
be considered super-codification (or, more accurately,
codifying an entire
of the rules of procedural fairness).
Despite some indication that displacement of judicial review grounds
generally could raise constitutional
the notion that
expressly removing the requirements of procedural fairness is unconstitutional
is not presently accepted in Australia.
Furthermore, this article does not argue
that such codification is otherwise theoretically legally impossible. However,
not confuse a ‘can’ with a ‘should’. Callinan
J once said that procedural fairness is ‘the law of many
societies’.
difficult to see why. The rules of procedural fairness have a fundamental
philosophical,
basis. Rules of
procedural fairness encourage good governance and promote effective and fair
uses of administrative power.
The aspirational notion of good government militates strongly against any
proposal to codify an express rejection of the rules of
procedural fairness.
Above all else, the rules of procedural fairness ensure that those subject to
administrative decisions are treated
fairly. In this regard, it is worth ending
with a passage from a judgment of Sir Robert Megarry, sitting as a judge on the
High Court:
It may be that there are some who would decry the importance which the courts
attach to the observance of the rules of natural justice.
‘When something
is obvious,’ they may say, ‘why force everybody to go through the
tiresome waste of time involved
in framing charges and giving an opportunity to
be heard? The result is obvious from the start.’ Those who take this view
not, I think, do themselves justice. As everybody who has anything to do with
the law well knows, the path of the law is strewn with
examples of open and shut
cases which, somehow, were not; of unanswerable charges which, in the event,
were completely answered;
of inexplicable conduct which was fully explained ...
Nor are those with any knowledge of human nature who pause to think for a moment
likely to underestimate the feelings of resentment of those who find that a
decision against them has been made without their being
afforded any opportunity
to influence the course of
It is within the topic of procedural fairness that the wisdom of the common
law is at its most undeniable. One hopes that procedural
fairness is here to
V CONCLUSION
This article has provided an assessment of the various forms that
codification of the rules of procedural fairness could take. The
conclusion of that assessment is that there is no form of codification that can
both preserve the inherent focus of procedural
fairness and also deliver the
benefits that proponents of codification envisage. There are both practical and
doctrinal considerations
that support the conclusion that the rules of
procedural fairness should remain, substantively, rules of the common law.
codification is destined to fail from the outset. Specific
codification of the mere
of the rules of procedural fairness is
without purpose. Finally, specific, substitutionary codification is fatally
challenged by the
problem of specificity. To put it simply, the forms of
codification considered in this article raise more questions than they answer.
One cannot help but recall the words of the eclectic Victor Cousin, when he said
‘the universal and absolute law is that natural
justice which cannot be
written down’.
century wisdom remains true to this day.
BA, Juris Doctor candidate at the
University of Western Australia, Nedlands. I am indebted to Julie Falck for her
on an earlier version of this article. Any errors are my own.
Chief Justice Robert French,
‘Procedural Fairness — Indispensable to Justice?’ (Speech, The
University of Melbourne
Law School, 7 October 2010) 4. In Australia, the present
view is that procedural fairness is a common law duty implied as a matter
construction. See, eg,
v Minister for Immigration and
Citizenship
(2012) 246 CLR 636
, 666 [97] (Gummow, Hayne, Crennan and Bell
Migration Act 1958
Migration Act
Grant Hooper, ‘Parliament
v The High Court? Natural justice, codification and the Australian
’ (PhD Thesis, University of New South Wales, 2016) 111;
for Immigration & Multicultural & Indigenous Affairs v Eshetu
[1999] HCA 21
197 CLR 611
, 666 (Gummow J); Mark Aronson and Matthew Groves,
Judicial Review
of Administrative Action
(Thomson Reuters Australia, 5
2013) 398‑–9.
Kioa v West
[1985] HCA 81
, 582–4 (Mason J). The threshold question is an integral part of
the law of procedural fairness as it determines whether and
when the rules of
procedural fairness will apply.
Kioa v West
(Gibbs CJ); Aronson and Groves (n
Kioa v West
(Gibbs CJ).
Aronson and Groves (n 3) 517;
Andrews v Mitchell
[1904] UKLawRpAC 28
[1905] AC 78
, 80 (Lord Halsbury).
R v Small Claims
Tribunal; Ex parte Cameron
[1976] VicRp 41
[1976] VR 427
, 432 (Anderson J).
Matthew Groves,
‘Exclusion of the Rules of Natural Justice’
[2013] MonashULawRw 11
(2013) 39(2)
University Law Review
[1937] HCA 77
(1937) 59 CLR 467
, 474–7 (Latham CJ).
Creyke et al,
Government Action
(LexisNexis Butterworths Australia, 5
Ibid 718. See also,
Durani v Minister for Immigration and Border Protection
[2014] FCAFC 79
314 ALR 130
Seiffert v Prisoners Review Board
[2011] WASCA 148.
Minister for Immigration and Multicultural Affairs
[2006] FCA 1807
it was held that 14 days’ worth of notice of an intention to cancel a visa
was inadequate.
Answell v Wells
[1982] FCA 186
(1982) 43 ALR 41
, 62 (Lockhart J).
Applicant VEAL of 2002 v
Minister for Immigration and Multicultural and Indigenous Affairs
[2005] HCA 72
, 95–7 [16]–[18] (Gleeson CJ, Gummow, Kirby, Hayne and Heydon
Minister for Immigration
and Border Protection v SZSSJ
[2016] HCA 29
(2016) 259 CLR 180
, 207 [83]–[84]
(French CJ, Kiefel, Bell, Gageler, Keane, Nettle and Gordon JJ).
SZBEL v Minister for
Immigration and Multicultural and Indigenous
[2006] HCA 63
(2006) 228 CLR 152
165–6 [47] (Gleeson CJ, Kirby, Hayne, Callinan and Heydon JJ).
John McMillan,
‘Natural Justice – Too Much, Too Little or Just Right?’
Australian Institute of Administrative Law Forum
FAI Insurances Ltd v
[1934] ArgusLawRp 109
(1982) 41 ALR 1
, 58 (Brennan J).
Minister for Immigration
and Border Protection v WZARH
(2015) 256 CLR 326, 336 [33] (Kiefel, Bell and
Applicants M16
of 2002 v Minister for Immigration and Multicultural and Indigenous Affairs
[2005] FCA 1641
(2005) 148 FCR 46
, in which a female applicant was, for cultural reasons, heard
in the presence of women only.
Hurt v Rossall
[1982] FCA 188
, 258 (Fox J).
Bread Manufacturers (NSW)
[1981] HCA 69
(1981) 180 CLR 404
, 433 (Mason and Wilson JJ).
John Frank,
‘Disqualification of Judges’
(1947) 56(4)
Yale Law Journal
Matthew Groves, ‘The
Rule Against Bias’ (2009) 1
Monash University Law Research Series
Minister for Immigration
and Multicultural Affairs v Jia
(2001) 205 CLR 507,
519–20 [35]–[36], 531–2 [72] (Gleeson CJ and Gummow J).
Groves, ‘The Rule
Against Bias’ (n 26) 11.
Re Medicaments and
Related Classes of Goods (No 2)
[2002] 1 WLR 700
, 726–7 (Lord Phillips
Ebner v Official
Trustee in Bankruptcy
[2000] HCA 63
(2000) 205 CLR 337
, 344 (Gleeson CJ, McHugh, Gummow
and Hayne J).
Chris Wheeler,
‘Judicial Review of Administrative Action: An Administrative
Decision-Maker’s Perspective’
[2017] AIAdminLawF 7
Australian Institute of
Administrative Law Forum
Ibid 88–9; Hooper (n
3) 37; M R Topping and J P M Vandenlinden, ‘Ibi Renascit Jus
Modern Law Review
, 171–4; Explanatory
Memorandum,
Migration Reform Bill 1992
Wheeler (n 31) 79–80,
Timothy H Jones,
‘Judicial review and codification’
(2000) 20(4)
Legal Studies
Wheeler (n 31) 79.
French, ‘Procedural
Fairness - Indispensable to Justice’ (n 1) 1–2; Chief Justice Robert
French, ‘Administrative
Law in Australia: Themes and Values
Revisited’ in Matthew Groves (ed)
Modern Administrative Law in
Australia: Concepts and Context
(Cambridge University Press, 2014) 25,
Replacement Explanatory
Memorandum,
Maritime Powers Bill 2012
Kristina Stern,
‘Procedural Fairness - Its Scope and Practical Application’
[2008] AIAdminLawF 2
Australian Institute of Administrative Law Forum
, 8; Bruce Dyer,
‘Determining the Content of Procedural Fairness’
[1993] MonashULawRw 7
(1993) 19(1)
Monash University Law Review
CPCF v Minister for
Immigration and Border Protection
[2015] HCA 1
(2015) 255 CLR 514
, 622 [367] (Gageler
Minister for Immigration
and Multicultural Affairs v Jia
(n 27), 539 [102] (Gleeson CJ
and Gummow J).
John McMillan (n 19) 33.
(n 39) [367]
(Gageler J).
Jones (n 34) 533.
Hooper (n 3) 111, 345. See
Minister for Immigration and Citizenship v Kumar
[2009] HCA 10
(2009) 238 CLR 448.
Minister for Immigration and Citizenship v SZKTI
(2009) 238 CLR
Ortiz v Minister for
Immigration and Citizenship
[2011] FCA 1498
[31] (Logan J).
John Carroll and Rebecca
Heath, ‘Minister for Immigration & Citizenship v Li’
Australian Journal of Administrative Law
Minister for Immigration
and Citizenship
[2012] HCA 61
(2013) 249 CLR 332
, 340 [5] (French CJ), 361
[58] (Hayne, Kiefel and Bell JJ) (‘
). See also, generally,
Minister for Immigration and Citizenship
[2012] FCAFC 74
(2012) 202 FCR 387
which was overruled in
Jones (n 34) 521.
Plaintiff S10/2011 v
Minister for Immigration and Citizenship
(2012) 246 CLR 636
(Gummow, Hayne, Crennan and Bell JJ).
For a Western Australian
example, see the
Residential Tenancies Act 1987
Emily McDonald and Maria
O’Sullivan, ‘Protecting Vulnerable Refugees: Procedural Fairness in
the Australian Fast Track
[2018] UNSWLawJl 34
(2018) 41(3)
University of New South
Wales Law Journal
Maria O’Sullivan,
‘Fairness and Efficiency in the Migration “Fast Track”
Australian Public Law
(Web Page, 14 May 2018)
<https://auspublaw.org/2018/05/fairness-and-efficiency-in-the-migration-fast-track-process/>.
Hooper (n 3) 323.
SZEEU v Minister for
Immigration and Multicultural and Indigenous Affairs
[2006] FCAFC 2
(2006) 230 ALR 1
[183] (Weinberg J).
Hooper (n 3) 322.
Ibid 314. See also, eg,
Minister for Immigration and Multicultural and Indigenous Affairs v Lay Lat
[2006] FCAFC 61
[66] (Heerey, Conti and Jacobsen JJ).
Hooper (n 3) 314.
Enzo Balperio, ‘What
Procedural Fairness Duties Do the Migration Review Tribunal and Refugee Review
Tribunal Owe to Visa Applicants’
[2007] AIAdminLawF 20
Australian Institute of
Administrative Law Forum
, 84. See also, eg,
Wu v Minister for
Immigration and Multicultural and Indigenous Affairs
[2002] FCA 1242
[52]–[65] (Sackville J).
Balperio (n 57) 84;
v Minister for Immigration and Multicultural and Indigenous Affairs
[59] (French J).
Hooper (n 3) 314.
Migration Review Tribunal and Refugee
Review Tribunal, Submission to Administrative Review Council,
Judicial Review
in Australia
(5 July 2011) 1.
Ibid 41 [183] (Weinberg J).
Jones (n 34) 535.
Re Minister for
Immigration and Multicultural Affairs; ex parte Hieu Trung Lam
[2010] HCA 19
James Edelman, ‘Why do
we have rules of procedural fairness?’ (Speech, Supreme Court of
Victoria/University of Melbourne
Colloquium, 4 September 2015) 3–7.
‘Administrative Law in Australia: Themes and Values Revisited’ (n
French, ‘Procedural
Fairness - Indispensable to Justice’ (n 1) 1.
John v Rees
2 All ER 274
David Glover,
Literature,
Immigration, and Diaspora in Fin-de-Siècle England: A Cultural History of
the 1905 Aliens Act
(Cambridge University Press, 2012) 177.
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (254 KB)
PDF format (463 KB)
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter