URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/journals/MqJlBLaw/2008/17.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 15:20:51
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Junita, Fifi --- "Experience of Practical Problems of Foreign Arbitral Awards Enforcement in Indonesia" [2008] MqJlBLaw 17; (2008) 5 Macquarie Journal of Business Law 369
I Introduction
II The Relevance of the Indonesian Pluralistic Legal Tradition and Cultures to the Enforceability of Foreign Arbitral Awards
III Enforceability of Foreign Judgments and Arbitral Awards: Historical Development
IV The General Regulatory Problems of the Enforcement of Foreign Arbitral Awards
Basic Principles and Structure of the New Arbitration Law
The Lack of Implementing Legislation
Municipal Court Intervention – Proceeding limited to the Question of Exequatur
The Lack of Centralized Jurisdiction
Inconsistent Municipal Court Competence over “Agreement to Arbitrate”
The Dualistic Approach to the New York Convention
The Discretionary Power of Domestic Court to Enforce Foreign Arbitral Awards
The Distinction between Domestic and Foreign Arbitral Awards
The Absence of Common International Standard of Public Policy Exception Internationally
Indonesian Approach to Public Policy Exception:
Domestic or International Public Policy?
The Legal Tension of Restrictive and Expansive Approach to the Public Policy Exception
VI COnclusion
Experience of Practical Problems of Foreign Arbitral Awards
Enforcement in Indonesia
Despite the increasing
growth of parties resolving their disputes by means of arbitration, the
difficulty in enforcing the foreign
awards has not ceased. Even if an award has
been received, it then has to meet the problem of enforcement in the host
Indonesia, for example, the judicial hostility problems may range
from regulatory, procedural, as well as legal traditions and cultures.
of integrated legal framework, high level of national courts’ intervention
and a domestic public policy exception
as an implication of the Indonesian
pluralistic legal traditions and cultures have been considered as some potential
factors influencing
the enforcement of foreign arbitral awards. This paper will
explore whether and to what extent those internal factors play a major
upholding the finality and enforceability of the awards in Indonesia.
I Introduction
The recognition and enforcement of foreign judgments and foreign arbitral
awards have a great concern in Indonesia. Such concerns
have started from the
period of Dutch colonialism until the new reform era in which the new
Arbitration Act No. 30 of 1999 concerning
Arbitration and Alternative Dispute
Resolution (ADR) has been enacted. The fact that Indonesia has ratified both the
New York Convention
and the ICSID (The International Centre for the Settlement
of Investment Disputes) convention has not meant that the spirit of these
conventions has been totally adopted in the Indonesian judiciary system. One of
the most notable constraints is the application of
public policy exception.
Domestic public policy – known as public order (
ketertiban umum
– has become the most common application to oppose enforcement of foreign
arbitral awards in Indonesia.
This paper is concerned with the ongoing judicial hostility of the
enforceability of foreign awards in Indonesia. Firstly, this article
the Indonesian legal tradition and legal culture which significantly impact on
the Indonesian approach to the enforcement
of foreign arbitral awards and
judgments. It then will be correlated to the historical and current legal
framework of the enforcement
of the awards. This part covers both regulatory and
procedural flaws in order to identify some obstacles of the ‘pro
enforcement’
achievement before and after the enactment of new arbitration
law reform.
II THE RELEVANCE OF THE INDONESIAN PLURALISTIC LEGAL
TRADITION AND CULTURES TO THE ENFORCEABILITY OF FOREIGN ARBITRAL
The enforceability of foreign arbitral awards in Indonesia has a great
correlation with the Indonesian legal tradition and
. Indonesia as a civil law
country has a unique feature since the most of its legal system has been
inherited from the ancient Dutch
legal system based on the principle of
concordance (
concordantie beginsel
) which was determined by centuries of
colonialism
Basically, the
basic principle of the enforceability of ‘agreement to arbitrate’
has been encapsulated in article 1338
of the Dutch Civil Code (
) 1847 concerning the principle of freedom of contract (
/the sanctity of
Based on this provision,
all valid agreements should be binding on the contracting
” (including “agreement to arbitrate”). What can be
noted from this provision is that it embodies the value of contractual
which greatly emphasizes on the consent of the parties (consensual principle).
It also resemblances the implementation of
party autonomy
international commercial arbitration has not been regulated in the old Dutch
Code on Civil Procedure known as
Reglement op de Burgerlijke
Rechtsvordering
(hereafter Rv).
Furthermore, this ancient Dutch legal product has not dealt with the recognition
and enforcement of foreign judgment and arbitral
The arbitration practices
are traditionally based on a strong dichotomy of private and public
international law traditions which
can expand global barriers of international
business practices.
This sort of
approach stems from traditional concept of
territorial sovereignty
(jurisdictional theory) root.
most common feature of this sovereignty based approach is the dominancy of
national or domestic basis.
The emergence of pluralistic legal culture in Indonesia was inherently
influenced by the article 131 and 163 of the Dutch regulation
Indische Staatsregeling
(abbreviated IS) which divided the Indonesian
population into three distinct groups based on their
, namely: (1)
Europeans and Japanese, (ii) the indigenous Indonesians, (iii) East Asians
(including Chinese, Arabs and Indians) and (iv) other groups
not falling within
these three categories.
of those groups has its judicial institution and procedures and each group has
possibility to settle dispute over the “
(arbitrator).
Not only does this
pluralistic legal feature confines to the coexistence of national and the
ancient Dutch legal system, but it also
relates to the application of customary
law which is known “
” law and Islamic law (
law) as part of the Indonesian legal system. Thus, each of racial origin of the
pluralistic society may have its own customary law
Since an individual ethnic
group pursues its own self interest, the recognition and enforcement of foreign
arbitral awards will be
influenced by the variety of domestic rules which are
inconsistent with the global economy objective.
III ENFORCEABILITY OF FOREIGN JUDGMENTS AND ARBITRAL
AWARDS: HISTORICAL DEVELOPMENT
Phase I: Judicial Hostility and Jurisdictional
Historically, the enforcement of foreign judgments in Indonesia met with
disfavor. In the first phase – roughly from the Dutch
colonialism until
before 1927 – the regulatory and procedural legal framework established
poorly, as did reflect from economic
crisis in Indonesia. During this period,
there has been a rule that foreign awards are not enforceable under the
Indonesian law.
execution of foreign judgments against property in Indonesia has to be
considered as a new case and an action should be
brought in an Indonesian
Although the contracting
parties have agreed to submit their cases to foreign jurisdiction or
arbitration, the Indonesian court has
a high competence to
This judicial hostility
to arbitration is not only concerned with the enforceability of pre-dispute
arbitration clauses, but it also
includes any arbitration agreement and the
unenforceability of foreign
The controversy of
judicial hostility to arbitration and foreign judgments enforcement was
expressly stated in the Code of Civil
Procedure which was taken over from the
Dutch Code of Civil Procedure – known as the
Reglement op de
Burgerlijke Rechtsvordering
(Rv) – based on the concordance principle
concordantie beginsel
The implementation of Rv was fundamentally based on the Dutch Gazette
Staatblad Hindia Belanda
) No. 52 of 1947 jo No. 63 of
The article 436 of Rv
expressly provides that the foreign judgments cannot be enforced voluntarily in
Thus, these judgments
had to be re-examined or re-trial by the Indonesian court as a new
In addition, the article
Algemene Bepalingen
(hereafter AB) provided the exception of the
recognition and enforcement of foreign judgments in Indonesia on the ground of
Not only does this
article attempts to limit the party autonomy principle in regards to contractual
issue, but it also confines to
all legal activities
rechtshandelingen
means that public policy exception as an escape clause can be applied
Despite a legal
controversy of the applicability of article 23 AB in the Indonesian Private
International Law, it has been obvious
that domestic legal pluralism followed by
the absence of integrated national legal framework have created practical
inconsistencies
concerning the execution of foreign judgments and arbitral
awards in Indonesia.
Principally, based on the jurisdictional theory, the enforcement of foreign
judgments and awards can be considered as a violation
sovereignty.
juridictionalists legitimate the dominant role of sovereign states
(jurisdiction) in regulating any activities within their territories
implementing a given system of domestic laws and they have rights to control
both substantive and procedural of awards enforcement
based on their own
mandatory rules.
In Indonesia,
where municipal courts greatly interfere with the enforcement of foreign
arbitral awards, it reflects a major juridical
sovereignty. Hence, it seems that
the Indonesian judicial system is primarily based on a jurisdictional theory
emphasizing on national
sovereignty rather than contractual theory.
However, it has to be noted that such situation is primarily inconsistent
with the provision of article 1338 of the Civil Code providing
that all valid
agreements (including agreement to arbitrate) have a binding effect on the
contracting parties.
addition, article 1337 of the Civil Code states that the ‘causa’
(lawful purpose) of a valid contract should not be
contrary to the Indonesian
mandatory rules and public order (
ketertiban umum
). Despite a controversy
of public order definition, these provisions suggest that the Indonesian
judicial system is not mainly based
on the contractual theory since the freedom
of contract is not absolute but it should be limited by national mandatory
Based on those two
articles of the Civil Code, Indonesia fundamentally has a feature of a hybrid
theory which acknowledges both contractual
basis and the jurisdictional
It means that agreement
to arbitrate which is agreed by the parties should be regarded as a valid
contract subject to domestic mandatory
rules and public order (
The inconsistency of
substantive and procedural laws have become a major constraint of the
enforcement of foreign awards in Indonesia.
Phase II: The Ratification of Geneva
The ratification of this convention was fundamentally based on the Dutch
Staatblad Hindia Belanda
) No. 13 jo No. 133 of
Theoretically, based on
the Indonesia’s accession to the Geneva Convention, the enforcement of
foreign arbitral awards should
be possible. In practice, however, enforcement
procedure remained have difficulty. After the end of Dutch imperialism, a
controversial
issue concerning the validity of the implementation of Geneva
Convention arouse. The lack of centralized jurisdiction handling the
enforcement
of the foreign arbitral award worsen the issue. There had been a distinctive
point of view between the District court
and the Supreme Court resulting in a
confusing and uncertainty judicial
According to the
supreme court, since the Geneva Convention was ratified in the period of the
Dutch imperialism, thus it cannot absolutely
bind the Republic of Indonesia as a
sovereign and independent state.
The absence of legal basis of the enforceability of the awards led to a
controversial situation and inconsistent domestic judicial
decisions in
Phase III: The Ratification of New York Convention on the
Recognition and Enforcement of Foreign Arbitral Awards
This historical background has led the Indonesian government to ratified the
New York Convention 1958 based on the Presidential Decree
No. 34 of 1981 as the
implication of the emergence of global economy. The implementation of this
convention subject to three basic
conditions namely: (1) reciprocity
reservation; (2) commercial reservation and (3) public policy exception. After
the ratification
of the New York Convention, however, the enforcement of foreign
arbitral awards still have an inherent flaw regarding the lack of
implementing
legislation. The lack of arbitration legal framework has led to the
inconsistency and uncertainty of the implementation
of the Presidential Decree
No. 34 of 1981. The case of
Navigation Maritime Bulgars v. PT Nizwar
one of the legal realities of an unfriendly execution of foreign arbitral award
in Indonesia right after the ratification of
the Convention due to the violation
of national sovereignty.
period, the Indonesian Supreme Court (the
Mahkamah Agung
exequatur rendered in London on the basis that the absence of implementing
regulation of the Presidential Decree No. 34
of 1981 has considered the award as
a foreign judgment.
Thus, based
on article 436 of the Civil Code Procedure (
Reglement op de Burgerlijke
Rechtsvordering/BRv),
it cannot be enforced in
In this case, it can
be noted that the ancient Dutch Civil Code Procedure has been out of date in
global economy perspective and
it should be reformed since it can create some
practical gaps.
Phase IV: Indonesian Arbitration Law Reform –
The Enactment of the Act No. 30 of 1999 Concerning Arbitration and Alternative
Dispute Resolution (ADR)
The need to improve national economic development, Indonesian government has
tried to accelerate a high level of international business
transactions. This
objective cannot be achieved without an international approach to dispute
settlement issue in Indonesia, including
international arbitration and the
enforcement of foreign arbitral awards. It has been a patent risk of the
developed countries that
municipal courts and unfamiliar national laws of host
states tend to protect their own interests. Thus, foreign investors have given
preference over international commercial arbitration rather than domestic
litigation. In order to increase national economic development,
new arbitration
law reform has come into effect in Indonesia on August 1999 by the enactment of
the Act No. 30 of 1999 regarding
Arbitration and Alternative Dispute Resolution.
Previously, the Indonesian arbitration law was based on the Code of Civil
of 1847, book III, article 615 –
According to the article II
of the Indonesian
Constitution
, the Dutch legislations can be applied in
Indonesia as long as they do not contrary to the Indonesian
Constitution
Ironically, however, the Indonesian Supreme Court only considered the Code
Civil Procedure merely as a guideline, thus it had no binding
The lack of integrated
legal basis of arbitration at this period has exemplified the discretion
application of the recognition and
enforcement of foreign arbitral awards in
Finally, based on
article 81 of the Act No. 30 of 1999, the Code of Civil Procedure was no longer
applied after the enactment of
new arbitration law. Although the new Indonesian
Arbitration Act can be considered as an arbitration friendly legal framework,
flaws concerning the binding effect of the arbitration agreement need
to be uphold. Basically, article 3 of the Arbitration Act provides
District Court has no legal jurisdiction to the settlement of dispute between
parties having agreed to be bound by arbitration
However, misleading
approach to this provision has led to inconsistent implementation of this
article. One of the most prominent
feature of inconsistency application of the
new Arbitration Act is the huge level of municipal court intervention. It can be
from the case between
PT Perusahaan Dagang Tempo v. PT Roche
This, of course,
violates the principle of party autonomy and the freedom of contract which are
enshrined in article 1338 of the
Civil Code (
and article 11 of
the 1999 Act. Based on this latter article, the agreement to arbitrate waives
the parties rights to settle their
disputes to the district court. As a
consequence, the chairman of the district court shall reject and do not involve
in the dispute
settlement arise from the
Yet it is important to
note that the historical record of the Indonesian arbitration practices appears
to show that municipal courts
generally attempted to obstruct enforcement of
foreign arbitral awards.
IV THE GENERAL REGULATORY PROBLEMS OF THE ENFORCEMENT
OF FOREIGN ARBITRAL AWARDS
Basic Principles and Structure of the New
Arbitration Law
Compared to the previous legislation (Code of Civil Procedure – known
as CCP), the 1999 Act contains provision relating to the
enforcement’ approach of the New York Convention. Principally, national
and international arbitral awards are final
and binding as long as it fall
within the prerequisite of the article 66 of the Indonesian Arbitration
It has no differentiation
and discrimination in terms of the enforceability of domestic and foreign
arbitral awards. What can be
noted from this provision is that the Indonesian
Arbitration Act 1999 applies the monistic approach to the enforcement of
awards. This approach is conceptually aimed to uphold the finality and
enforceability of arbitral
There is no discretion
between ‘domestic’ and ‘international’ arbitration in
order to achieve a ‘
unified regulatory mode
arbitration.
In practice,
however, there has been a discretionary treatment between domestic and
international arbitration.
there has been a ‘hidden dualism’ of the Act 1999.
In respect of the enforcement of awards, however, the Act no. 30 of 1999
expressly implements a dualistic approach by distinguishing
‘domestic’ and ‘international’
The preference of
dualistic approach has been primarily inspired by a desire to promote a
centralized jurisdiction system in the
enforcement of foreign arbitral awards in
In addition, this
statutory regime can also maintain the unified law enforcement standard among
all court across the country and
to upgrade the quality of judgment in respect
of the enforcement of foreign arbitral
From an economy
perspective, however, this dualism approach can promote inefficiency since the
discretionary power of the municipal
courts can obstruct the achievement of
mutual benefit of the contracting
Moreover, this approach
can be used as a parochial devise in order to protect state’s political
and economic interests.
The Lack of Implementing Legislation
The recognition and enforcement of foreign arbitral awards in Indonesia is
primarily influenced by the increase of Foreign Direct
The Investment and
International trade need a strong legal protection and a speedy dispute
resolution mechanism. One of the most
possible solutions is arbitration since it
can provide both a speedy dispute settlement and participant’s
confidentiality.
Thus, Indonesia has ratified the New York Convention 1958 based
on the Presidential Decree No. 34/1981. However, the lack of implementing
legislation has led to the ineffectiveness of the application of the convention,
particularly in respect of the enforcement
This inherent flaw is
not only a distinctive feature of Indonesia, but it also happened in some other
countries such as Bangladesh
and Nigeria.
The debate of the issue of the
need of implementing regulation has led to inconsistent and controversy judicial
decision regarding
the enforceability of foreign arbitral
These controversies in
regard to the absence of implementing legislation have become a major inherent
flaw of the enforceability
of the awards.
The lack of implementing legislation has led to the refusal of two
arbitration awards made in London based on the Indonesian Supreme
In fact, the need of
implementing legislation had been a controversial issue. Since the ratification
of the Convention was based
on the Presidential decree – not based on act
or legislation product - some argued that there was no need of implementing
legislation.
While others
insisted upon the enactment of the implementing legislation to enforce the
Convention. Compared to the ratification
of International Centre for Settlement
of Investment Disputes (ICSID) convention, it has been approved by the
legislative or the
Indonesian parliament (
Dewan Perwakilan Rakyat
abbreviated DPR) by the enactment of the Act No. 5 of
These two distinct
situations basically exemplified the lack of integrated legal framework of the
Indonesian legal system. In order
to handle this controversy situation and
uphold the New York Convention, Indonesian government finally had enacted the
Supreme Court
Regulation No. 1/1990 (
Peraturan Mahkamah Agung
) on 1 March
1990 which was ‘implicitly’ considered as an implementing regulation
of the promulgation of the Presidential
However, this
regulation still did not guarantee a consistent attempt to upheld the
enforceability of the awards. Moreover, following
the enactment of the Supreme
Court Regulation No. 1/1990, there were two reported cases refused to be
enforced such as the case of
Sikinos Maritime Ltd. (Malta) v. PD Perdata Lot
(Indonesia)
E.D. & Mann (Sugar) Ltd. (London) v. Yani Haryanto
(Indonesia)
The latter was
refused to be enforced due to the violation of the ambiguous concept of the
Indonesian public policy.
Municipal Court Intervention – Proceeding
limited to the Question of Exequatur
As mentioned previously, the arbitral awards fall within the 1999 Act is
considered as final and binding. It should be noted that
since Indonesia follow
a dualistic regime in terms of enforcement, this has led to different
enforcement mechanism between ‘national’
‘international’ awards. Based on article 59 of the 1999 Act,
domestic arbitration awards can be enforced by the District
Courts. In this
case, there is no centralization of jurisdiction. Foreign arbitral awards, on
the other hand, can only be enforced
by the Central Jakarta District Court and
the Supreme Court if it involves state
Despite the fact that
arbitral awards are deemed final and binding, it has to be noted that not all of
the foreign arbitration awards
can be enforced in Indonesia. Based on the 1999
Act, the arbitration awards can be enforced in Indonesia if: firstly, the awards
was made by the member country having a bilateral or multilateral agreement with
Indonesia in respect of the recognition and enforcement
of foreign arbitral
awards (reciprocity reservation); secondly, the scope of the awards is
commercial or trade under the Indonesian
law (commercial reservation); thirdly,
the awards do not violate the public order (
ketertiban umum
It is argued that the spirit of liberalism and unification of laws in the
global economy have led to an autonomous of arbitration
procedure and the
reduction of municipal courts
intervention.
However, this is
not always the case. In Indonesia, for example, the enforcement of foreign
arbitral awards should previously receives
an ‘exequatur’ (writ of
execution) from the Chairman of the Central Jakarta District
In line with this
provision, state contracts can also be enforced in Indonesia upon the receipt of
an ‘exequatur’ from
the Supreme
‘exequatur’ is then used by the Central Jakarta District Court to
enforce the awards.
these provisions, the enforceability of the awards mostly depends on the
approach of national courts. Therefore, domestic
courts still have a major role
of enforcement mechanism. In responds to the high level of municipal court
intervention, it may be
said that foreign arbitral awards may not be enforceable
despite its final and binding characteristic. The major role of the domestic
courts can also be an inherent flaw of the enforcement of foreign arbitral
awards. Thus, the involvement of court should be limited
and there must be a
balance between the supervisory jurisdiction and a limitation of court
intervention in order to support the finality
The Lack of Centralized Jurisdiction
Basically, Indonesia implements dual
institutions
dealing with the
recognition and enforcement of foreign arbitral
The article 66 point (d)
and (e) differentiate between international arbitral awards in regards to pure
private contracts and state
contracts. Based on this article, there are two
institutions dealing with the issuance of exequatur (writ of execution) of
arbitral awards namely: the Central District Court of Jakarta and the
Supreme Court. As a rational consequence of this dual execution
system, the law
enforcement standard of any cases cannot be unified since both of them can issue
a different judicial decisions.
Principally, the arbitration resolution is
primarily aimed to avoid a multiple proceeding of domestic litigation and
promote single,
centralized dispute resolution procedure in a single forum.
However, this is not always the
case in regards to the enforcement of the awards. Since the enforceability of
international awards
is primarily depended on the rule of procedure of the
enforcing states, thus each sovereign state has its own authority to determine
the procedure of enforcement.
This, of course, may lead to exhaustive enforcement proceeding worldwide.
The controversy of a judicial decision which was rendered by the District
Court and the Supreme Court can be seen from the case of
E.D. & F. Man
(Sugar Ltd) v. Yani Haryanto.
In this case, the Central Jakarta District
Court had annulled the underlying contract based on the violation of the
Indonesian public
the other hand, the Indonesian Supreme Court (the
Mahkamah Agung
rendered the exequatur (writ of execution) upon this case. However, the
exequatur of the Supreme Court was then considered as unenforceable
underlying contract was invalid. It can be noted from this case that the absence
of centralized jurisdictional system can
promote a legal gap and inconsistent
judicial decision between the two judicial institutions.
Inconsistent Municipal Court Competence over
“Agreement to Arbitrate”
Most of the provision of the 1999 Act relating to the form and content of
arbitration agreement is no longer based on the Code of
Civil Procedure (CCP)
and have undergone several changes. A number of new provisions have also been
introduced, specifically with
respect to the place of arbitration, applicable
law, and the correction of the award and additional awards.
In terms of form and content of
arbitration agreement, the 1999 Act has no differentiation between the
arbitration agreement at the
present dispute (submission) and the future
comprommitendo
existence of two types of arbitration agreements do not impose any distinctive
features of treatment in respect of their validity.
The Act only provides for
their separate treatment concerning the mechanism for commencing arbitration and
the contents of a submission
The proceeding of
arbitration agreement are considered to have been initiated on the day when a
party receives a written notice containing
information that the other party
commencing arbitration.
In practice, however, Indonesian court usually disregard ‘agreement to
arbitrate’. Although article 3 and 11 of the Act
No. 30 of 1999 embody a
“limited court involvement
and expressly
states that domestic courts have no authority or competency to litigate the case
of the contracting parties, it is
not always the case in practice. Inconsistency
of application of this provision remain exists. This controversial situation can
noted from the case of
Bankers Trust Company and Bankers Trust
International PLC (BT) v. Mayora Ltd
which has justifiably raised
since the contract of both parties had agreed to resolve their disputes on the
arbitration, the District court of Jakarta
certainly had no authority to settle
this dispute based on article 11 of the Act No. 30 of
However, the court
disregard the arbitration clause provision of the contract and issued a court
decision No. 46/Pdt.G/1999 on 9
December 1999 due to the lack of commerciality.
This inconsistency, of course, fundamentally violates the provision of the 1999
as a basic arbitration regulation in Indonesia and undermines the article
III of the New York Convention.
The Absence of Integrated Legal Framework of Procedural and
Regulatory of Pro Enforcement Procedure
The inherent obstacles of the enforcement mechanism do not only relate to
procedural issues, but it also concern with the substantive
regulatory issues.
Since some of the Indonesian law mostly based on the ancient Dutch Codes e.g.
Civil Code, most of the provisions
are inconsistent with the global legal
standard. Moreover, Indonesian legal pluralism has also become a major
characteristic of the
Indonesian contemporary legal
This, of course, one
unfortunate feature of the Indonesian civil law system. In regards to the
contract formation, for instance,
the ‘causa’ (lawful purpose) still
required to be the most important prerequisite in determining the validity of
The article 1320 of
Burgerlijk Wetboek
states that: the
validity of contract is mainly based on offer and acceptance, subject
capability, subject matter and legitimate
‘causa’. It means that the
objectives of the contracting parties should not be contrary to the Indonesian
public order
and mandatory law (
dwingend rechts
). If a contract is
contrary to national mandatory rules, it can be deemed as null and void, thus it
cannot be enforced in Indonesia.
From this point, the validity of contract as
stated in article 1320 of the Civil Code (
Burgerlijk Wetboek
equated with public order (
ketertiban umum
). Compared to the New Dutch
Contract Law (
Niew Burgerlijk Weboek/NBW
) and the UPICC (UNCITRAL
Principles of International Commercial Contract), the prerequisite of
in civil law system has been removed since it can
create legal uncertainty and vagueness. Unfortunately, the coexistence of public
policy and the validity of contract has become the major feature of the refusal
of enforcement of foreign arbitral awards in Indonesia.
This, of course, may
expand the application of public policy exception.
Mandatory rules of economic regulations also play a significant role in the
application of public policy exception. However, the absence
restriction of what can be called as mandatory rules has caused potential
sources of inconsistency of the application of
public policy
The centrality
emergence of delegated legislation in the form of presidential decrees,
ministerial decrees and other administrative
decrees has led to inconsistency,
overlapping and contradiction between lower level decrees and legislations on a
daily basis of
administrative
activities.
Most of economic
activities in Indonesia has been administratively regulated by delegated
legislation.
It has been claimed
that the Indonesian law is primarily influenced by administrative and government
Consequently,
administrative regulation plays a major role rather than the formal legislation.
This peculiar feature of the
”lawlessness”
situation in Indonesia has widened the scope of public policy exception in terms
of the violation of public order or the Indonesian
mandatory laws.
Interestingly, as a civil law country, Indonesian laws are not mainly based
on the rigidity of codification or legislation. The freedom
of contract,
economic liberalization and investment openness policy have forced Indonesia to
become more receptive to international
commercial treaty and agreement. Despite
those peculiarities of the Indonesian legal framework which has been previously
it is arguably to claim that the Indonesian law does not receptive to
usages and customs law. In respect of contract law, for instance,
based on the
article of 1339, good faith (
) which is known as one of the
major principle of UNCITRAL Principles of International Commercial Contracts
(UPICC) has always been
a major legal basis in every contract formation. In
addition, since Indonesia does not apply
parol evidence rules
to be more receptive to the usage and customs. According to article 1397 of the
Civil Code (
Burgerlijk Wetboek
), not only do the contracting parties bind
to the written provisions, but they also bind to usage and customs in relation
contract. This, of course, exemplifies the receptiveness of the
Indonesian law to the implementation of the general principles of
international
law and the
lex mercatoria
pacta sunt servanda
(sanctity of contract), freedom of contract,
force majeure
, good faith
etc. However, it should be noted that the uncertainty of those general
principles application can also be a problematic
issue in the finality and
enforceability of the awards.
V THE RELEVANCE AND PROBLEMATIC ISSUES OF THE
INDONESIAN ARBITRATION ACT, THE NEW YORK CONVENTION AND THE MODEL
The Dualistic Approach to the New York
Although Indonesia has ratified the New York
Convention based on the Presidential Decree No. 34 of 1981 and the substance of
the Indonesian
Arbitration Act No. 30 of 1999 basically adopts the New York
Convention, there are still some controversies of enforcement mechanisms
foreign arbitral awards in practice. Theoretically, since Indonesia has ratified
the New York Convention, the enforcement of the
awards should be possible. In
practice, however, the public policy exception and court intervention have
become the ongoing judicial
hostility to arbitration. In other words, the
Indonesian law system remains apply traditional “dualistic
implementation of the New York Convention in domestic legal
In terms of the
Indonesian judicial experience which has been mentioned in previous section, it
can be seen that the municipal courts
tend to apply domestic public policy
rather than international public policy. Consequently, it can undermine the
spirit of pro enforcement
bias of the New York Convention.
Basically, the tension of the dichotomy of municipal law and international
law has led to a major ambivalent of the distinction application
of domestic and
international public policy.
Some scholars
argue that both
laws are totally two different legal
The opponents of this
approach (monists), however, claim that international law is a part of domestic
legal system.
What is notable
distinctive application of domestic,
international and transnational (truly
international) public policy
The international
standard of public policy exception which has been drafted by the International
Law Association (ILA) aimed to
provide a restrictive approach to public policy
defense through the formulation of international public
However, it has to be
noted that international law is not merely a part of domestic law unless it is
enacted in the national law.
Thus, although most countries have ratified the New York Convention, the scope
of public policy exception which is enshrined in the
article V (2) (b) remains
ambiguous and vague. Since international public policy basically derives from
restrictive approach of national
public policy, its application mainly focuses
on the national law basis rather than international law
Therefore, it is
believe that each state has its own international public policy. Consequently,
the application of international
public policy mostly depends on how the
municipal courts in various countries have interpreted the doctrine of public
policy in the
context of global economy.
The Discretionary Power of Domestic Court to Enforce
Foreign Arbitral Awards
The article III of the New York Convention left much discretionary power of
foreign arbitral enforcement to the ‘rule of procedure’
territory where the award relied upon. Since the enforcement of foreign arbitral
awards left open to the procedural rule of
the enforcing states, it may lead to
more exhaustive conditions of enforcement procedure. Based on the article 66 (d)
of the Indonesian
Arbitration Act, foreign arbitral awards can be enforced in
Indonesia after it receives ‘exequatur’ (writ of execution)
Central Jakarta District Court or the Supreme
This enforcement
mechanism of foreign arbitral awards confine to ‘the rules of
procedure’ of Indonesia as the enforcing
state. In other words, the
Indonesian municipal courts have a judicial authority to intervene to the
enforcement of international
arbitral awards. Previously, it will also be
examined whether the enforcement of the awards will violate the Indonesian
public policy.
Thus, those awards cannot be directly enforced upon application
in writing (submission) to the competent court. The UNCITRAL Model
Law, on the
other hand, does not specifically confine to ‘the rules of
procedures’ of the competent court, but it is
more confine to ‘the
enforcement’ of foreign arbitral awards upon the
submission.
Article 35 of the
UNCITRAL Model Law on International Commercial Arbitration, by contrast,
provides that ‘an arbitral award
should be enforced upon application in
writing to the competent court.’ It means that no complicated procedure or
municipal court intervention should be applied in respect of the
enforcement mechanism.
The Distinction between Domestic and Foreign
Arbitral Awards
The ‘pro enforcement policy’ of the New York Convention
implicitly emphasizes on foreign arbitral awards rather than domestic
other words, the enforcement of international arbitral awards should not be
restricted by excessive conditions. It specifically
can be noted from the
provision of article III of the New York Convention:
“…there shall not be imposed substantially more onerous conditions
or higher fees of charges on the recognition and
enforcement of arbitral awards
to which the conventions applies than are imposed on the recognition or
enforcement of domestic arbitral
From this provision, it can be seen that the Convention implicitly
distinguish the enforcement of foreign arbitral awards and domestic
awards. However, controversies and complexities of this provision remain exists
since the distinction between domestic and
foreign awards is not always clear.
This so called “pro enforcement bias” of the New York Convention
consequently need
a narrow approach to public policy exception. Thus, it refers
to international public policy rather than domestic public policy.
Accordingly,
the phrase of public policy in the context of public policy exception should be
restricted to basic notion of justice
In terms of arbitral awards enforcement, the Indonesian Arbitration Act No.
30 of 1999 has a similar scope of application to the New
York Convention. For
example, both the 1999 Act and the New York Convention differentiate between
domestic arbitral awards and international
arbitral awards. The article 1 (3) of
the UNCITRAL Model Law, by contrast, gives specific limitation to international
arbitration (not the awards). The monistic approach to
is basically
beneficial to the enforceability of foreign arbitral awards since it creates a
single regulatory pattern for arbitration.
In terms of the product, however, the
Act 1999 does differentiates between domestic and international
The different
procedure of enforcement between two kinds of awards may lead to discriminatory
From this point,
it can be noted that the Act no. 30 of 1999 does not purely monism, but it also
implies dualistic approach to the
enforceability of foreign
The Absence of Common International Standard of
Public Policy Exception Internationally
The emergence of on going issues of judicial hostility on a legal basis of
public policy exception has not only been provided in the
article V (2) (b) of
the New York Convention 1958, but it is also stated in the article 36 (b) (ii)
of the UNCITRAL Model Law on
International Commercial Arbitration. Both
international conventions provide:
“Recognition and enforcement of an arbitral award may also be refused if
the competent authority in the country where recognition
and enforcement is
sought finds that:
(b) the recognition or enforcement of the award would be contrary to
public policy of that
“Recognition or enforcement of an arbitral award, irrespective of the
country in which it was made, may be refused only:
(b) If the court finds that:
(ii) the recognition and enforcement of the award would be contrary to
public policy of this
It can be noted from these provisions that these two
international conventions did not attempt to establish a unified and global
of public policy
Furthermore, there
has not been a fixed definition of what should be categorized as a public policy
Moreover, it also
implies a common principle that the municipal courts of the enforcing states
have an exclusive authority to set
aside the awards on the ground of public
This discretionary
power of the court of the country of origin in regard to the application of
public policy exception may lead to
an extensive interpretation of public policy
Article III of the
New York Convention, however, has restricted the discretionary power of the
states’ courts in respect of
the enforcement of international arbitral
This provision
implies that public policy exception should be construed narrowly and it should
confine to international public policy
rather than domestic public policy.
However, this provision remain vague since there has not been a clear cut
distinction between
domestic and international public policy
The Act No. 30 of 1999 concerning the Indonesian Arbitration and Alternative
Dispute Resolution (ADR) also has a similar concept of
the Convention. The
article 66 (c) of the 1999 Act provides that: “
foreign arbitral awards
can be recognized and enforced in Indonesia unless they violates the Indonesian
public order (ketertiban
there is no clear definition or standard interpretation of the meaning of public
order in this Act. The explanatory remarks
of the 1999 Act has not strictly
defined the scope and meaning of what can be characterized as the Indonesian
public order. As a
result of this vague concept of public order (
, thus, it can be widely applied. In addition, this principle is
patently used as a protective devise of national interests of the
Indonesian Approach to Public Policy Exception:
Domestic or International Public
As previously mentioned, foreign arbitral awards which fall within article 66
of the Act No. 30 of 1999 can be enforced in Indonesia.
However, Indonesian
arbitration law also provides for legal basis to set aside foreign arbitral
awards on the ground of the violation
of public order (
This provision is
fundamentally adopted article V (2) (b) of the New York Convention and article
36 (b) (ii) of the UNCITRAL Model
Law. Actually, the Indonesian arbitration law
does not distinguish between international and domestic arbitration
What can be noted
from the provisions of these two international treaties, they basically justify
non enforcement on the ground of
the violation of states’ public policy.
The term of “states’ public policy”, of course, may lead to a
of the application of public policy exception in the global legal
Since this provision opens for national interpretation of public policy, this
term is very subjective. Consequently, the municipal
court of the enforcing
states have a legal discretionary power to enforce or refuse the awards based on
their national standards
Unfortunately, public
policy has been frequently used by the loosing parties to oppose the
enforceability of contract. The article
66 (c) of the Act No. 30 of 1999 does
not specifically refer to the Indonesian public order (
ketertiban umum
It just expressly states that the enforcement of foreign arbitral awards in
Indonesia should not be contrary to public order (
ketertiban umum
no corresponding reference to
The Explanation of
the Act 1999 does not mention any specific scope and definition of what can be
characterized as public order (
However, since the
Indonesian Arbitration Act is intended to regulate both domestic and
international arbitral awards, a reference
to public policy must necessarily
refer to the public policy of
From this perspective, it can reasonably be inferred that the public policy
meaning left completely at the municipal court’s
discretion. The
difficulty is compounded by the fact that public policy meaning is frequently
equated with mandatory rules of law,
the validity of contract and commerciality.
This, of course, has widened the public policy notion. In the case of
E.D.& F. Man (Sugar) Ltd. vs. Yani Haryanto
, for example, public
policy has been interpreted as the violation of the validity of contract and the
lack of commerciality. Since
government’s issuance of economic regulation
prohibiting private party to import sugar into Indonesia based on the
Presidential
Decree no. 38 of 1978, thus, this economic activity can be deemed
as a sovereign activity – not commercial activity. In addition,
enforcement of the award will violate the Indonesian mandatory rules, this award
cannot be enforced in Indonesia. It is
mainly because the contract is considered
invalid due to its illegal ‘causa’ (unlawful purpose). From this
case, it can
be noted that the Indonesian Supreme Court defined the nature of
public policy exception as domestic public policy rather than international
public policy. Therefore, anything which the Indonesian court perceives as
contrary to the notion of public morality in Indonesia
can be considered as
contrary to public order (
ketertiban umum
This domestic interpretation of public policy exception may lead to the
reluctance of the municipal courts to enforce foreign arbitral
awards. In the
period of the post ratification of the New York Convention, for example,
Indonesian Supreme Court refuse to enforce
foreign award on the ground of public
policy exception in a wide concept and non exceptional
circumstances.
The absence of
the scope of public order (
ketertiban umum
) defense in the Arbitration
Act no. 30 of 1999 constitutes that the Indonesian courts can either apply a
narrow or wide interpretation
of the scope and meaning of public policy. This
domestic judicial practices, of course, may lead to a serious problem in
international
will increase a legal tension between domestic and international public policy
in national court practices.
Therefore, internationalisation approach to public policy exception plays a
major role in the application of public policy exception
in global business
The Legal Tension of Restrictive and Expansive
Approach to the Public Policy Exception
The absence of clear concept and scope of public policy exception in the New
York Convention has led to a dilemma of the application
of public policy in
global legal pluralism
Indonesia as one of
the developing countries has not fully positioning pro enforcement policy beyond
its own national jurisdiction
and economic
The open texture
of the scope of public policy tend to be widely interpreted by the national
courts. Not only does this trend leads
to an expansion meaning and scope of
public policy exception, but it also creates inconsistent judicial decisions and
inefficiency.
The Indonesian courts tend to define public policy exhaustively
including ‘non arbitrability’, ‘invalidity of contract
formation’ or ‘illegality’ and the violation of mandatory
Longdong also claimed
that the scope of public policy exception in the New York Convention includes
the article V (1) (b), article
V (1) (d), article V (2) (a) and article V (2)
(a) and article II (3).
can be noted from this interpretation is that it is mainly based on domestic
public policy
, without considering the international concept of
public policy exception in a globalization regime.
The emergence of transnational legal order in the twentieth century has
shifted a nationalist approach to an international approach
which is more
receptive to external legal
International
context of public policy defense has been widely promoted in a global legal
pluralism and it is rarely that public
policy exception has resulted to the
refusal of foreign arbitral
In other words, the
application of public policy exception should be construed narrowly. However,
since public policy exception as
a legal basis of the refusal enforcement of
foreign arbitral awards closely relates to policies of the
therefore, the
diversity of concept and scope of public policy worldwide has been
inevitable.
The most common
approach to achieve a narrow interpretation of public policy exception is
subject to either “international
public policy” and
“transnational or truly international public policy” as the
fundamental patterns of the awards
enforcement in global
Such international
values consist of universal values such as fundamental rules of natural law,
principle of universal justice,
in public international law
and the general principles of
This application of
these universal principles, of course, will prevent the setting aside of
international awards on the basis of
a “pure domestic requirement”
which is very unfamiliar and
subjective.
Moreover, it has
been argued that universal adoption of general principles of international law
which are universally accepted and
recognized would reduce conflict of national
laws since all of states implement a global legal
However, confusion
still exists even if international public policy is also part of the enforcement
state’s public policy due
to its general scope and the lack of precise
definition of domestic and international public policy. Neither the New York
nor the ILA resolution have achieved a global and standard
interpretation of public policy exception. It can be seen from the
characterization
of international public policy based on ILA Resolution which
consists of: (i) fundamental principles of justice and morality; (ii)
or public policy rules; and (iii) the
Principally, this
broad characterization has not absolutely revealed a certain basic standard of
public policy exception. Its wide
scope still needs a states’ court
discretionary power to interpret those principles in favor of the pro
arbitration policy.
context demonstrates that a narrow approach of public policy cannot be self
executed. Therefore, internationalisation and transnational
approach to public
policy exception should be promoted in order to shift from a traditional
domestic approach to a global approach.
VI CONCLUSION
Despite the statutory reform of arbitration law, some problematic issues
concerning the finality and enforceability of foreign arbitral
awards remain
exist in Indonesia. The judicial hostility as a reflection of territorial
sovereignty has become a common ground of
the unenforceability of foreign
arbitral awards. The domestic pluralistic legal tradition and culture as well as
the lack of internationalization
approach have also significantly influenced the
pro arbitration bias of the Indonesian judicial experience. As the number of
international
commercial transactions arises, the Indonesian courts should be
forced to uphold the finality and enforceability to assure predictability
legal certainty for parties that use arbitration as a dispute settlement body.
Lecturer of the Airlangga
University, Indonesia, and currently undertaking her PhD at the Division of Law,
Macquarie University.
The Legal tradition should be
distinguished from legal culture. In this case, the legal tradition is more
formal than legal culture.
The substance of the legal culture is expressly
encapsulated and formalized in a legal tradition in the form of codes, statutes
judicial decision which are established in the form of principles, standards
and rules of law. See Trakman, “
Legal Traditions” and
International Commercial Arbitration
, 2007, available
http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/journals/UNSWLRS/2007/29.html
, viewed on
3 June 2008, p. 2.
This principle based on the
article 131 of the
Indishe Staatsregeling
(IS). Based on this principle,
since the Dutch occupation period, the Dutch law can be implemented in Indonesia
in order to prevent
legal vacuum. However, the ancient Dutch law still become
the main part of the Indonesian legislation after the independence era.
According to article II of the Indonesian Constitution 1945 concerning the
Transitional Rule, those law can be still applied as long
as the new legislation
has not been enacted. See Sudargo Gautama,
The Commercial Laws of
, Citra Aditya Bakti, Bandung, 1998, p. 1. See also Sudargo
ndonesian Business Law
, Citra Aditya Bhakti, Bandung, 2002, p.
See Luttrel SR,
Lex Arbitri
Indonesia – The Law, Practice and Place of Commercial Arbitration in
Indonesia Today
, available at:
http://:www.srluttrell.com/articles/Lex_Arbitri_Indonesia_(Int_A_L_R-%2520Dec-2007).pdf
viewed on 29 May 2008, p. 9. See also article 1338 of the Indonesian Civil Code
Burgerlijk Wetboek
It means that the parties have
right to choose preferred legal traditions which can be applied to their
contracts. See Trakman,
above no. 1, at 5.
The ancient Dutch concerning
Civil Procedure implied an intention to isolate Indonesia from international
commercial arbitration
development. See Harahap Y,
Grafika, Jakarta, 2003, p. 13.
Trakman, above no. 1, at 6.
See article 436 of the Code of
Civil Procedure.
The jurisdictionalists often
claims that each sovereign state has its own international public policy. Thus,
there is no international
character of public policy since it is basically
derived from national public policy. See Gautama,
Hukum Perdata International
, Citra Aditya Bakti, Bandung, 1998, p. 125.
See Gautama, above no. 2,
Ibid. Although this
provision is no longer valid after the independence of the Republic of Indonesia
based on the article II of
the Constitution 1945 concerning the Transitional
Regulation, it still likely to be practically applied in some cases such as
inheritance
law, property law and contract law etc. See Gautama, above no. 2,
The judicial institution
and procedures of the indigeneous Indonesian (
and its procedural law is
Herziene Inlandsch Reglement
(abbreviated HIR). See Gautama S, above no. 2, at. 4. The dispute between the
indigenous Indonesia (bumiputera) v. East Asians can
be solved by arbitrator
upon their consents based on the Code of Civil Procedure. See article 377
Herziene Inlandsch Reglement
(HIR) and article 705
Buitengewesten
(RBg). See Widjaja G & Yani A,
Hukum Arbitrase
RajaGrafindo Persada, Jakarta, 2003, p. 13.
See Gautama, above no. 2,
Green Stephen B,
Arbitration: A Viable Alternative for Resolving Commercial Disputes in
Indonesia, Law and Societ
, Lindsey T (ed),
Federation Press, Australia, 1999, p. 292.
Ibid., at. 293.
The old judicial hostility
was also visible in the United States of America (the US) in the nineteenth
century. In this period,
as the reflection of judicial hostility to arbitration,
agreement to arbitrate was considered as non enforceable and revocable. See
Burton Steven J & Murray John F,
The New Judicial Hostility to
Arbitration: Unconscianability and Agreement to Arbitrate
, available at:
http://papers.ssrn.com/sol3/Delivery.cfm/SSRN_ID957829_code650352.pdf?abstractid=957829&mirid=1
Viewed on 24 April 2008, p. 9-10.
See also Scodro Michael A,
Deterrence and Implied Limits on Arbitral
, available at: <http//
www.law.duke.edu/shell/cite.pl?55+Duke+L.+J.+547+pdf
viewed on 24 April 2008, p. 549.
Louis Tuegeh Longdong,
Asas Ketertiban Umum dan Konvensi New York 1958, Sebuah Tinjauan atas
Pelaksanaan Konvensi New York 1958 pada Putusan-Putusan Mahkamah
Agung RI dan
Pengadilan Asing,
Citra Aditya Bakti, Bandung, 1998, p. 189. Concordance
principle is a principle stating that all of Dutch Law can also be implemented
in Indonesia as a colonialized state. Previously, the arbitration law in
Indonesia was enshrined in the Code of Civil Procedure of
1847, Book III,
articles 615-651. See also Adolf H,
Arbitrase komersial Internasional
Raja Grafindo Persada, Jakarta, 2002, p. 131.
Adolf, above no. 18, at.
See article 436 Rv,
Staatblad No. 52 of 1947 jo No. 63 of 1849.
Longdong , above no. 18,
Gautama , above no. 9, at.
Gautama, above no. 9, at.
Taylor Veronica L, Contract
and Contract Enforcement in Indonesia: An Institutional Assessment, in
Indonesia, Law and Society
, Lindsey T (ed), 2
Federation Press, Sydney,
2008, P. 581.
Barraclough A &
Waincymer J,
Mandatory Rules of Law in International Commercial
n, available at:
http//www.law.monash.edu.au/research/2005-research-publication-data.pdf>,
viewed on 24 April 2008, p. 3. The jurisdictional
theory has been challenged by
the contractual theory. Based on contractualists, the agreement to arbitrate
which is agreed by the
parties has a paramount importance of the authority of
the arbitrators to make the awards. The arbitrator, thus, play a major role
an agent of the parties. The states have no control over the arbitration
authority and it hostile to mandatory rules. See also
The Immunity of Arbitrators
, available
http://www.inter-lawyer.com/lex-e-scripta/articles/arbitrators-immunity.htm
viewed on 27 April 2008, p. 4.
See article 1338 of the
Civil Code (
Burgerlijk Wetboek
). See also Hornick RN, Indonesian
Arbitration in Theory and Practice,
The American Journal of Comparative
, Vol. 39, No. 3, 1991, p. 559.
Based on contractualist
view, arbitration and the execution of awards should be detached from domestic
legal system and municipal
court intervention. See also Barraclough A &
Waincymer, see above no. 28, at. 4.
Ibid. The hybrid theory is
not primarily based on consensual basis, but it also gives a legitimacy to the
control of the national
legal system as a reflection of national sovereignty.
Ibid., p.5.
Longdong , above no. 18,
See the case between
Navigation Maritime Bulgare v. PT Nizwar
(No. 2288/1979 P), 19 June 1981.
This case was previously executed by the district court, but the supreme court
then refuse the enforcement
of that award on the ground of violation of the
Indonesian territorial sovereignty.
Longdong , above no. 18,
Green Stephen B, above no.
14, at 296. See also Berkowitz D, Moenius J & Pistor K,
Institutions and International Trade Flows
Michigan Journal of
International Law
, Vol. 26, 2004, available at:
http:// www.pitt.edu/~dmberk/Berkowitz%20Moenius%20Pistor.pdf
Viewed on 8 May 2008, p. 22.
Luttrel SR, above no. 3,
Adolf, above no. 18, at.
131. See also Mills Karen,
Arbitration in Indonesia
, available at:
http:// www.hkiac.org/odr/DotAsia/Panelist/MILLS%20Karen.pdf
viewed on: 8 May 2008, p. 5. The application of the Dutch codification was
mainly based on the concordance principle (
concordantie beginsel
See article 3 of the Act
no. 30 of 1999 concerning the Arbitration and Alternative Dispute Resolution
See article 11 of the Act
no. 30 of 1999 regarding the Arbitration and the Alternative Dispute Resolution
This article provides that
that every valid contract shall be applied as a mandatory rules of the
contracting parties. This is also
pacta sunt servanda
(sanctity of contract).
See article 11 (2) of the
Act No. 30 of 1990 concerning the Arbitration and Alternative Dispute Resolution
See article 60 of the Act
No. 30 of 1999 regarding the Indonesian Arbitration and Alternative Dispute
Resolution.
This approach is similar to
the Netherlands Arbitration Act 1986. Adolf, above no. 18, at. 133.
Luttrell SR, above no. 3,
Ibid, at. 12.
Ibid. In contrast, the
dualist approach distinguish between international and domestic arbitration.
Thus, there is a discretionary
treatment between domestic and international
arbitration. See also article 59-65 of the Act no. 30 of 1999 concerning
Arbitration
and Alternative Dispute Resolution (ADR).
Ibid. See also article 59
– 69 of the Act No. 30 of 1999 regarding the enforcement of arbitral
awards. Based on this provision,
the District Courts have a legal jurisdiction
to enforce national arbitration awards. The recognition and enforcement of
arbitral awards and arbitral awards of state contracts, however, can
only be handled by the Central Jakarta District Court and the
Supreme Court
respectively based on article 65 of the 1999 Act.
Xiaolong L,
Recognition and Enforcement of Foreign Arbitral Awards in China
Horizons in International Commercial Arbitration and Beyond, ICCA International
Arbitration Congress
, Van den Berg AJ (ed), Kluwer Law International, the
Netherlands, 2005, p. 347.
Xiaolong L, see above no.
53, at. 347.
O’Hara EA &
Ribstein LE, From Politics to Efficiency in Choice of Law, in
Economics of
Conflict of Laws
, Edward Elgar, UK, p. 245.
Ibid., at. 12.
Albert Jan Van den Berg,
Why Are Some Awards Not Enforceable ?
the New Horizon in
International Commercial Arbitration and Beyond, ICCA International Arbitration
, Albert Jan Van den Berg (ed), Kluwer Law International, The
Netherland, 2005, p.316.
Van den Berg, above no. 58,
at. 316. This has been a debate concerning whether the ratification of the New
York Convention 1958
need to be followed by the implementing regulation or not.
Some believe that the ratification of NYC by the enactment of Presidential
Decree no. 34 of 1991 has legal implication on Indonesian government to
implement pro enforcement bias which is enshrined in article
convention. Thus, foreign arbitral awards should be enforced in Indonesia.
Another scholar claims that Based on the Indonesian
constitutional system, the
effectiveness application of international convention mostly depends on the
enactment of the implementing
legislation. Further, it is argued that the New
York Convention as an international soft law is not a transnational law and it
be legally enforced in Indonesia before it has been incorporated in the
national law. Indonesian accession to the New York Convention
has been legally
based on the Presidential Decree No. 34 of 1981 See Gautama, above no. 2, at 78.
Mahkamah Agung
(Supreme Court), 20 August 1984,
Navigation Maritime Bulgare v. PT
, Jakarta and Mahkamah Agung (Supreme Court), 1984,
Brothers v. Trading Corporation of Pakistan Limited
, See Longdong Tuegeh L,
above no. 18, at. 13-14.
Adolf, above no. 18, at.
The ratification of the New
York Convention, however, was solely based on the presidential decree. Thus, it
disregard the involvement
of parliament (Dewan Perwakilan Rakyat – DPR).
Thus, this had led to the controversy issue of whether this ratification should
be followed by the implementing regulation or not. This inconsistent legal
framework, of course, gave a negative impact on the enforceability
and finality
of the foreign awards.
Longdong, above no. 18, at.
Ibid., at. 14 -15.
See article 65 of the Act
No. 30 of 1999 regarding the Indonesian Arbitration and Alternative Dispute
Resolution.
See article 66 of the Act
No. 30 of 1999 regarding the Indonesian Arbitration and Alternative Dispute
Resolution.
Babu Rajesh R
International Commercial Arbitration and the Developing Countries,
Quarterly Bulletin
, No. 4, 2006, available at:
http://papers.ssrn.com/sol3/papers.cfm?abstract_id=981123
Viewed on: 11 May 2008, p. 394.
See article 66 (d) of the
Act No. 30 of 1999 regarding the Indonesian Arbitration and Alternative Dispute
Resolution.
See article 66 (e) of the
Act No. 30 of 1999 regarding the Indonesian Arbitration and Alternative Dispute
Resolution.
See article 66 (e) of the
Act No. 30 of 1999 regarding the Indonesian Arbitration and Alternative Dispute
Resolution. See also Mills
Arbitration in Indonesia
, available at:
http:// www.hkiac.org/odr/DotAsia/Panelist/MILLS%20Karen.pdf
Viewed on: 8 May 2008, p. 33.
Theresa Cheng SC, Comments
on Enforceability of Awards, in the
New Horizon in International Commercial
Arbitration and Beyond ICCA International Arbitration Congress,
Van den Berg (ed), Kluwer Law International, The Netherlands, 2005, p. 364.
The enforcement of foreign
arbitral awards which does not involve the Republic of Indonesia as a
contracting party , the exequatur
shall be granted by The District Court of The
Centre of Jakarta. If the enforcement of international awards involves the
Indonesian government, the exequatur should be granted by the
Indonesian Supreme Court. See article 66 point (d) and (e) of the Act
1999 concerning Arbitration and Alternative Dispute Resolution (ADR).
See article 66 point (d)
and (e) of the Act no. 30 of 1999 concerning the Arbitration and Alternative
Dispute Resolution (ADR).
Born G & Miles W,
Global Trends in International Arbitration,
available at:
http://209.85.173.104/search?q=cache:KJ-gjNdhzyAJ:www.wilmerhale.com/files/Publication/3eadc21b-4cad-4ea8-bf29-012226df50b5/Presentation/PublicationAttachment/bb9cd3fd-f046-4489-b2a9-086a72f6d24d/GlobalTrends_InternationalArbitration.pdf+centralized+jurisdiction+system+of+foreign+arbitral+awards+enforcement
& hl=id & ct=clnk & cd=2
viewed on 2 May 2008, p. 3.
See article III of the New
York Convention 1958.
The contract was considered
as contrary to public policy since it violates the Presidential Decree No. 43 of
1971 and Decree No.
39 of 1978 concerning the prohibition of private individual
to import sugar. Based on these decrees, only the Indonesian government
procurement agency (BULOG) that can import sugar. See Mills K,
Enforcement of
Foreign Arbitral Awards in Indonesia & Other Issues of Judicial Involvement
in Arbitration,
available at:
http://209.85.173.104/search?q=cache:DCUp2L_2Q8sJ:www.arbitralwomen.org/files/publication/4310102632224.pdf+ED+%26+F+Man+v.+Yani+Haryanto+and+arbitral+awards+enforcement&hl=id&ct=clnk&cd=2>,
viewed on 2 May 2008, p. 10.
Mills K, above no. 76, at.
Huala Adolf, above no. 18,
SeeArticle 8 (2) of the Act
No. 30 of 1999 regarding the Arbitration and Alternative Dispute Resolution
Faiz Mohamad, P,
Kemungkinan Diajukannya Perkara dengan Klausula Arbitrase ke Muka
, available at:
http://www.jurnalhukum.blogspot.com/2006/09/klausul-arbitrase-dan-pengadilan_18.html
Viewed on 24 April 2008, p. 9.
Taylor Veronica L, above
no. 25, at. 578.
Berkowitz D, Moenius J
& Pistor K, above no. 17, at. 25.
Luttrell SR,
Lex Arbitri
Indonesia – The Law, Practice and Place of Commercial Arbitration in
Indonesia Today
, available at:
http://www.srluttrell.com/articles/Lex_Arbitri_Indonesia_(Int_A_L_R-%2520Dec-2007.pdf
viewed on: 8 May 2008, p. 6.
Danilenko GM
Implementation of International Law in CIS States: Theory and Practice,
European Journal of International Law (EJIL)
, Vol. 10, 1999, available at:
http://ejil.oxfordjournals.org/cgi/reprint/10/1/51.pdf
viewed on: 8 May 2008, p. 1.
It means that although the
New York Convention as an international law has become an integral part of the
Indonesian legal system,
the Indonesian judicial practices and public policy
interpretation has not always been reflected in practice. The interpretation
public order (
ketertiban umum
) as one of the major grounds of application
to set aside foreign arbitral awards is mainly interpreted in accordance with
legislation rather than international laws and values. See Danilenko
GM, above No. 90, at. 1.
There has been a debate
scholars claims that the
private international law cannot be totally isolated
from the public international law since the latter can also be originated from
the customary international law which is derived from the common legal
activities of several states in a certain period. See Ma,
above n 118, at 91.
Compare with Maniruzzaman, AFM,
State Contract in Contemporary International
Law: Monist versus Dualist Controversies,
available online at:
http://www.ejil.oxfordjournals.org/cgi/content/abstract/12/2/309
viewed on May 2008, p. 309-310. He argues that the monist of international law
give the supremacy of public international law
over municipal or domestic law
(private international law).
See Winnie (Jo Mei) Ma,
Public Policy in the Judicial Enforcement of Arbitral Awards, Lessons for and
From Australia
http://epublications.bond.edu.au/context/theses/article/1023/index/0/type/native/viewcontent/ -
, viewed on 8 May 2008, p. 91. See also Kirby M,
The Growing
Rapprochment Between International Law and National Law
, available at
http:// www.hcourt.gov.au/speeches/kirbyj/kirbyj_weeram.htm
viewed on 21 May 2008, at. 1&6.
“They exist side by
side within the different sphere of action – the international plane and
the domestic plane.”
This can be considered as a traditional concept since
it views international law is not an integral part of the domestic law. See
Kirby M, above no 93, at 6. See also Maniruzzaman AFM, above no. 91, at. 319.
This concept is commonly applied by the dualist theory
which claims that the
application of international law in a particular national jurisdiction since its
application is being transformed
and incorporated within the domestic condition.
It means that the domestic law system have a supremacy over the international
Kirby M, above no. 93, at.
See Parameshwaran A,
Conflict of Laws in the Enforcement of Foreign Awards and Foreign Judgments
– The Public Policy Defense and Practice in US Courts
, available
http://.law.uga.edu/stu_llm/40/ - 14k
viewed on 8 May 2008, p. 6.
See also Blom J,
Public Policy in Private International Law and Its Evolution
, available at
http:// digitalcommons.law.uga.edu/stu_llm/40/ - 14k
, viewed on 20 March 2008, p. 395-398. He asserts that the fundamental
values of public policy exception is not mainly based
on domestic laws, but it
also fundamentally refers to the general principles of public international law.
International Law
Association,
Resolution of the ILA on Public Policy as Bar to Enforcement of
International Arbitral Awards
, 2002, available at:
http://www.epublications.bond.edu.au/context/theses/article/1023/index/2/type/native/viewcontent
viewed on 8 May 2008.
Some argues that
“international public policy is basically national law as it can be
sanctioned only by national judges.”
See United Nations Conference on
Trade and Development,
Dispute Settlement, International Commercial
Arbitration, Recognition and Enforcement of Arbitral Awards: The New York
, available
http://www.unctad.org/Templates/Page.asp?intItemID=2102 & lang=1 - 70k
, viewed on 21 May 2008, p. 39.
See Gautama, above no.
9, at 122-123.
See article 66 (d) and
(e) of the Act No. 30 of 1999 regarding the Arbitration and Alternative Dispute
Resolution (ADR). The enforcement
of state contracts should be based on the
exequatur of the Supreme Court.
See article 35 (1) of
the UNCITRAL Model Law on the International Commercial Arbitration.
Kohler Gabrielle K,
Enforcement Awards – A Few Introductory Thoughts
New Horizon
in International Commercial Arbitration and Beyond, ICCA International
Arbitration Congress
, Albert Jan Van den Berg (ed), Kluwer Law
International, The Netherlands, 2005, p. 288.
The Act no. 30 of 1999
does not distinguish between domestic and international arbitration. See Luttrel
SR, above no. 3, at 11.
See article 65 –
69 of the Act no. 30 of 1999 regarding Arbitration and Alternative Dispute
Resolution (ADR). See also Luttrel
SR, above no. 3, at. 13.
The foreign arbitral
awards should be granted exequatur from the Jakarta District Court or the
Supreme Court in order to be enforced
in Indonesia. See article 65 of the Act
no. 30 of 1999 concerning the Arbitration and Alternative Dispute Resolution
See Luttrel SR, above
no. 3, at. 14.
See article V (2) (b) of
the New York Convention. 1958.
See article 36 (b) (ii)
of the UNCITRAL Model Law on International Commercial Arbitration
Sheppard A, Public
Policy and the Enforcement of Arbitral Awards: Should there be a Global
Transnational Dispute Management
, Vol. 1, Issue 01, February
2004, available at:
http:// www.gasandoil.com/ogel/samples/freearticles/article_67.htm - 59k -
on 30 April 2008, p. 3.
Albert Jan Van den Berg,
The New York Convention of 1958
, Kluwer Law and Taxation, The
Netherlands, 1990, p. 20.
See article III of the
New York Convention 1958.
Green Stephen B, above
no. 37, at. 295.
See article 66 (c) of
the Act No. 30 of 1999.
Ibid., at. 280.
See article 66 (c) of
the Act No. 30 of 1999 regarding Arbitration and Alternative Dispute Resolution
It should be noted that
Indonesia do distinguishes in terms of the awards, namely domestic and
international arbitration awards.
In respect of this issue, Indonesian
Arbitration Act mainly adopts the article II of the New York Convention. The
UNCITRAL Model
Law, however, do recognize the differentiation between
international and domestic arbitration regimes. See Article 59 and 65 of the
No. 30 of 1999 regarding the Arbitration and Alternative Dispute Resolution
(ADR), article III of the New York Convention on
the Recognition and Enforcement
of Foreign Arbitral Awards, and article 1 of the UNCITRAL Model Law on
International Commercial Arbitration.
Winnie (Jo Mei) Ma,
Public Policy in the Judicial Enforcement of Arbitral Awards, Lessons For and
From Australia
, available at:
http://epublications.bond.edu.au/context/theses/article/1023/index/0/type/native/viewcontent
viewed on May 2008, p. 57.
This, of course,
slightly different with the provision of the article 31 (4) (b) of the Singapore
Arbitration Law (IAA) which expressly
refer to the public policy of Singapore.
See Wong K,
Public Policy – The Ride of the Unruly Steed on the
Highways of International Arbitration,
available at:
http://www.lawgazette.com.sg/2003-12/Dec03-col2.htm
viewed on 13 May 2008, p. 1.
See the explanatory of
the Act No. 30 of 1999 regarding Arbitration and Alternative Dispute Resolution
Navigation Maritime
Bulgare v. PT Nizwar
, Supreme Court Decision of Republic of Indonesia,
registration No. 2944 K/Pdt/1983, on 29 November 1984. See also Longdong, above
no. 7, at. 220. In this case, the lack of implementing legislation had been
considered as a violation of public policy exception
in Indonesia despite its
ratification of the New York Convention based on Presidential Decree No. 34 of
Wong K, above no 120,
Ibid. The international
public policy establish a narrow approach to public policy exception in order to
uphold pro enforcement
policy. The domestic public policy, however, apply a wide
concept of public policy defense in order to protect national interests.
Mills, above no. 76, at.
Karaha Bodas CO
LLC v. Perusahaan Pertambangan Minyak dan Gas Bumi (Pertamina)
, extract in
Schwartz EA,
The Enforcement of Foreign Arbitral Awards
http:// journals.cambridge.org/production/action/cjoGetFulltext?fulltextid=1529216
viewed on 13 May 2008, p. 7. In this case, the Indonesian court issued an
injuction for the advantage of the Pertamina in order
to prohibit Karaha Bodas
from enforcement of its awards in Indonesia. The Pertamina appealed to annul the
Hongkong arbitral awards
in the District Court of Jakarta on the ground of the
violation of article 1320 of the Indonesian Civil Code since the execution
this awards will violates the Presidential Decree No. 34 of 1981. Thus, the
scope of public policy does not only concern with
the fundamental justice and
morality. See also Umam K,
Pelaksanaan Putusan Arbitrase Internasional
Ditinjau dari Undang-Undang No. 30 Tahun 1999 tentang Arbitrase dan Alternative
Penyelesaian
Sengketa (Studi Kasus (Pertamina vs Karaha Bodas Company
at 13 May 2008, p. 7.
Longdong, above no 18,
at. 142. Based on this argument, the scope and meaning of public policy is
interpreted broadly including
due process of law, non arbitrability, and
impartiality
Mistelis L, Is
Harmonization is necessary Evil? The Future of Harmonization and New Sources of
International Trade Law, in
Foundation and Practices of International Trade
, Fletcher I, Mistelis L & Cremona M (eds), Sweet & Maxwell,
London, 2001, available at:
http://www.cisg.law.pace.edu/cisg/biblio/mistelis2.html
viwed on 11 March 2008, p. 2.
Van den Berg, above no.
111, at. 376.
Sheppard A, above no.
109, at. 2.
Redfern A & Hunter
Law and Practice of International Commercial Arbitration
Maxwell, London, 2004, p. 499.
Ibid., at. 498.
Garnett R, International
Arbitration Law: Progress Towards Harmonization,
Melbourne Journal of
International Law
, Vol. 3, 2002, available at:
http://www.papers.ssrn.com/sol3/Delivery.cfm/SSRN_ID1045601_code609399.pdf?
Viewed on 11 May 2008, p. 5.
International Law
Association,
Resolution of the ILA on Public Policy as Bar to Enforcement of
International Arbitral Awards
, 2002, available at:
http://www.epublications.bond.edu.au/context/theses/article/1023/index/2/type/native/viewcontent
viewed on 8 May 2008, p. 1.
It means that the
refusal of the enforcement of foreign arbitral awards should be construed
narrowly and it can only be set aside
in a limited number of exceptional
circumstances or. This, of course, is aimed to uphold the finality of the awards
in international
context. See also International Law Association (ILA),
Committee on International Commercial Arbitration
, New Delhi Conference,
2002, available at:
http:// www.epublications.bond.edu.au/context/theses/article/1023/index/2/type/native/viewcontent
Viewed on 8 May 2008, p. 2.
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (432 KB)
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter