URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/journals/MelbJlIntLaw/2024/6.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 15:17:43
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Woldemariam, Samuel Berhanu; Maguire, Amy; von Meding, Jason --- "A Centenary of Multilateral Response to Forced Human Displacement: Legacies, Limitations and the Future" [2024] MelbJlIntLaw 6; (2024) 25(1) Melbourne Journal of International Law 132
I 100-PLUS YEARS OF REFUGEE WORK: INTRODUCTION
II A HISTORICAL REVIEW OF REFUGEE RESPONSE
A Early Foundations
B Inauguration of Multilateral Response under the League of Nations
C Succession under the United Nations
III LEGACIES OF A 100-YEAR-OLD REGIME
A The Role of Humanitarian Leaders
B The Strengthening of Normative and Institutional Structures
C Humanitarian Impact and the Proliferation of Advocacy and Engagement
IV LIMITATIONS OF THE REGIME
A Ad Hoc Interventions, from Miscalculations to a Deliberate Policy Choice
B The Eurocentric Focus of the Regime
C Failure to Reflect on the Root Causes of Forced Displacement
D Neutrality versus the Politics of Refugee Response
E The Absence of a Robust Responsibility-Sharing Framework
V THE WAY FORWARD: TOWARDS A PREVENTIVE APPROACH
A CENTENARY OF MULTILATERAL RESPONSE TO FORCED HUMAN
DISPLACEMENT: LEGACIES, LIMITATIONS AND THE FUTURE
A Centenary of Multilateral Response
SAMUEL BERHANU WOLDEMARIAM,
AND JASON VON
The international community’s formal engagement with forced human
displacement, which began in 1921 under the auspices of the
League of Nations,
has now surpassed the mark of a century. Initiated as an ad hoc arrangement to
respond to the Russian refugee
crisis of the 1920s, the engagement gradually
expanded in scope to accommodate additional groups of displaced persons and
into a full-fledged mechanism to respond to forced displacement at the
international level. Although states were hesitant to provide
their full support
at the start, the growing realisation of the utility of appointing an
international actor to handle a phenomenon
that would otherwise need to be
handled by the states themselves provided the incentive for gradual state
support. This resulted
in progressively normative and institutionalised
development culminating in the adoption of the
Convention Relating to the Status
of Refugees
as the governing international law treaty on refugees and the
establishment of the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees
accepted institutional framework. However, despite a century of engagement at
the international level, the scale of contemporary
forced displacement remains
alarming in terms of the number of forcibly displaced persons, the lack of
global responsibility-sharing
and the absence of strategies to address the root
causes of forced displacement. The scope of and access to protection have also
narrowed despite the universalisation of the refugee regime. This article
situates this contradiction in a historical analysis of
the relationship between
the international regime governing forced displacement and the people and
nations of the Third World. The
article reviews the history of international
responses to forced displacement, identifies the legacies and limitations of the
century-old regime and proposes a policy priority for the future.
[1 September
I have the honour to acknowlege [sic] your telegram of August
, 1921, conveying to me the invitation of the Council that I
should act as High Commissioner on behalf of the League in connection
problems concerning Russian Refugees in Europe.
I have much pleasure in accepting this invitation.
I have the honour to be, Sir, your obedient Servant,
) Fridtjof Nansen.
The Right Hon Sir Eric Drummond, KCMG
League of Nations,
I 100-PLUS YEARS OF REFUGEE
WORK: INTRODUCTION
Formal international engagement with the phenomenon of forced human
displacement began in 1921 under the auspices of the Council of
the League of
Nations (‘the League’). This formal international response has now
passed the mark of a century. What began
as ad hoc work, with minimal financial
or institutional support, is now a large-scale global operation with entrenched
enabling sustained engagement. The work began with the efforts of
Fridtjof Nansen who, on 1 September 1921, accepted the invitation
of the League
to serve as the first High Commissioner for Russian Refugees. Nansen’s
remarkable work brought relief to thousands
of displaced persons and his
activities laid the foundations for successive institutional and policy
responses around the protection
of displaced
This paved the way for what became an enduring international commitment of
However, despite a century of action to address forced human displacement,
the general trend has been an increase to the dilemma,
with surges following
major international incidents.
the scope of the protection regime has gradually
This contradiction partly
lies in the fact that different objectives defined the international regime
governing forced human displacement
during the initial 30 years
(1921–1951) and the latter 70-plus years (1951–present). During the
initial 30 years, the
international regime of protection operated as a European,
large-scale, group-based protection
European states quickly
recognised the issuance of identity certificates and facilitated the movements,
repatriation or resettlement
of refugees as cases demanded. Towards the end of
this period though, and particularly after the creation of the International
Organisation (‘IRO’) in 1949, the protection regime began to
transition from group-based protection to protection based
on individualised
persecution.
This paved the way for a narrower and more restrictive protection regime which
characterises the last 70 years and counting.
In this article we seek to illuminate the disjuncture between the trend of
displacement and the scope of the protection regime, both
historically and
presently, using a historical analysis that situates the development of the
refugee regime in the context of the
relation between the West and the Third
World. The article will highlight and draw on themes of critiques from a broad
range of scholarship,
including Third World Approaches to International Law
A key driver of the shift in the objective of the international regime governing
forced displacement at the end of the interwar period
was the increasing
interaction of the phenomenon of forced displacement with European states’
interests and borders. European
states’ interests were at stake amidst the
rising anti-colonial struggles in the post-World War Two (‘WWII’)
and this led to the increasing interaction of refugees and asylum
seekers from the Third World with European borders. In a previous
piece, we have
argued that the international regime governing forced displacement
‘initially developed to liberally manage
forced displacement as it existed
in Europe, but later morphed to strictly regulate forced displacement as it
interacted with Europe
There, we outlined how colonialism both induced displacement in Third World
states and simultaneously led to the exclusion of these
states from the
developing protection regime. We also interrogated how self-serving shifts in
the refugee policy stance of European
states impacted Third World
In this piece, we continue to build a narrative around the significance of
in the 100-year-old international regime governing forced displacement. We
review the history of the regime to reveal dual failures
that inhibit the regime
from fully serving its underlying purpose of protecting and assisting displaced
persons. The first failure,
which is an in-built one, pertains to the reluctance
of states to assume principled obligations towards displaced
The second failure lies in the exclusivity of the international regime governing
forced displacement that emerged to defend the interests
of continental Europe.
During the interwar period, this exclusivity was openly displayed in the
geographic focus of actions and efforts
to protect displaced persons. In the
aftermath of WWII, the exclusivity became subtle in that while the
regime’s geographic
reach extended, its responsiveness dwindled. Like the
development of the international legal order, non-European states and societies
have been largely ignored, at some stage, in developing the refugee regime. At
another stage, the development centres these states
in an exclusionary sense to
evaluate how the regime should interact with them. In
, this article
offers a brief history of international responses to forced displacement over
the regime’s first full century.
and IV critically review the
regime’s legacies and limitations, while
proposes a preventive
strategy for future engagement with the global challenge of forced human
displacement.
II A HISTORICAL REVIEW OF
REFUGEE RESPONSE
Foundations
Forced displacement has been an enduring feature of human history. However,
society’s conceptualisation and response to it through
time has been
dependent on the existing structures of social and political
organisation.
Prior to the
embrace of the Westphalian state model, forced displacement was essentially
considered an issue left to be addressed
by the individuals or groups facing
displacement. This changed when a succession of early scholars of international
law characterised
forced displacement as an issue of concern for international
law and international
As early as the 16
centuries, the early
scholars of international law debated the fate of forcibly displaced persons and
the obligation of states towards
them. Their writings dealt predominantly with
displacement in the context of war. Their analysis was also informed by the
legal theory of their
In this regard, marked
differences existed between the opinions of those who subscribed to the natural
law theory and those who affirmed
the positivist theory in their application of
international law. While the former emphasised the individual’s right to
protection,
the latter emphasised the sovereign power of the state to grant admission into
its territory.
They identified a foundational dilemma in this area of the law between the
individual’s right to seek protection and the sovereign
authority of the
state to make final determinations in this regard. They also identified
fundamental principles that still resonate
The analysis of these scholars focused on identifying state obligations as
regards forcibly displaced persons, mostly in the context
of war. However, their
brief engagement with the topic did not lead to a systematic approach to assist
and protect displaced persons
or to a call for multilateral cooperation in this
The phenomenon did not
receive as much attention as other prominent issues of the time such as piracy,
war or trade and diplomatic
disputes. Ad hoc state practice was the norm during
this period and even that was typically guided by political motives or religious
affiliations with the displaced
populations.
Inauguration of
Multilateral Response under the League of Nations
The multilateral cooperation that began on the topic of forced displacement
in the immediate aftermath of World War One (‘WWI’)
further lay the foundations for a more focused approach to protect and assist
displaced persons. It also filled some of
the gaps observed in the past in
respect of the absence of an organised international regime for the regulation
of forced displacement.
formative interwar years of international cooperation to address forced
displacement were crucial for several
First, experimental
efforts were undertaken to address forced displacement that carefully navigated
the identification of actors
and negotiated responsibilities. This experiment
sought the introduction of the ad hoc mechanisms discussed below and adopted an
incremental approach that began with a single group of displaced persons, the
Russian refugees, before gradually expanding. In this
respect, there was a
tendency to pursue a minimalist approach where states assumed little to no
formal obligations with respect to
displaced persons and left the ad hoc
mechanisms to carry the lion’s share of
responsibilities.
Yet, state cooperation with ad hoc mechanisms was relatively positive and
migration policies were liberal.
Second, during the formative years, key normative and institutional
principles evolved that informed later
developments.
For example, the so-called durable solutions to displacement —
repatriation, local integration and resettlement — were
first identified
and implemented during the interwar
Nansen’s embrace of neutrality as a guiding principle of his humanitarian
work has also remained a cornerstone principle in
the work of the successive
refugee institutions established under the League and in the United Nations High
Commissioner for Refugees
(‘UNHCR’). Third, the experience of the
formative years affirmed to states the necessity of dealing with forced
displacement
through international institutions. These institutions provided a
measure of detachment for states from direct obligations to displaced
while ensuring that they maintained control over the institutions that undertook
the task of protection and
assistance.
Dealing with forced
displacement through international institutions simultaneously enabled states to
retain their sovereign prerogative
to make determinations as to who was
authorised to enter their territory.
When the League commenced refugee work in 1921, the focus was on the
1.5–2 million Russian refugees who were displaced across
The International Committee of the Red Cross (‘ICRC’) brought the
matter to the League’s attention and urged it
to take action as the
assistance required by these refugees had exceeded the capacity of
non-governmental organisations and
The ICRC particularly requested the League to appoint a Commissioner whose
mandate would be the definition of the legal status of
the Russian refugees,
their repatriation to Russia and the coordination of efforts for their
assistance.
The ICRC hoped to
replicate the success story of the repatriation of prisoners of war that was
undertaken under the League’s
supervision post-WWI.
However, the League avoided taking on direct obligations to Russian refugees.
It relegated the determination of the legal status of
refugees to the
governments of the countries where the refugees were living. The League also
stated that it could not ‘concern
itself with the problem of
repatriation’ as it was not able to negotiate with the Soviet authorities
or arrange the required
With respect to the
coordination of efforts, the League was of the opinion that ‘the relief of
distress among the refugees
can best be undertaken by the combined efforts of
the powerful international voluntary
organisations’.
took a passive stance and deferred the matter to member states who were expected
to provide suggestions on solutions to
displacement and the desirability of
international cooperation in this
In this regard, it is to
be noted that the terms of the
Covenant of the League of Nations
specifically provide for a mandate of this
Despite the lack of Covenant authority, what is noteworthy is the support the
League received from member states to move forward
with the initial proposal
from the ICRC for action in respect of Russian
Accordingly, the League primarily concerned itself with the financial
implications of establishing a permanent institution dedicated
to the refugee
As a nascent international
institution, it was not in a position to advocate for displaced persons and
allowed state interests to
decision-making.
Indeed, the
League presented itself as a defender of states’ interests. Therefore,
with the appointment of Fridtjof Nansen
Commissioner,
international regime began with minimal engagement from the League. The High
Commissioner and voluntary organisations
shouldered the bulk of
responsibilities. States reserved their engagements to small financial
contributions such that the High Commissioner
had to repeatedly plead for the
League and states to finance the
Figure 1: Timeline of international refugee institutions.
One of the early successes of the High Commissioner was convincing states to
approve and recognise the issuance of identity certificates
for Russian
On 5 July 1922, the
League adopted the
Arrangement with Respect to the Issue of Certificates of
Identity to Russian Refugees
Arrangement
Dubbed ‘Nansen Passports’, the certificates served as identification
cards and enabled the refugees to travel and return
to the issuing state subject
to applicable laws.
major success of the High Commissioner was soliciting contributions from states
for much-needed relief assistance. The assistance
of Russian refugees in
Constantinople, who were living in dire circumstances, was a case in
However, the High
Commissioner’s efforts were merely the start of what was to become an
ever-expanding engagement.
Various episodes of forced displacement arose during the interwar period that
required a continuous engagement with the phenomenon.
The disintegration of the
Ottoman Empire, the persecution of the Armenians, the Greco-Turkish war and the
ensuing state-building
process led to the forced displacement of mainly minority
The League gradually
extended the
1922 Arrangement
to various groups of displaced persons
including Armenian, Turkish, Assyrian, Assyro-Chaldaean and assimilated
This marked phase one of the history of refugee assistance under the League.
Nansen died in 1930 and the League created the Nansen
International Office for
Refugees which operated from 1931–1938.
In 1933, the League created an additional High Commissioner for Refugees
(Jewish and Others) Coming from Germany. The High Commissioner
outside the League to avoid a perception of the League interfering in the
domestic affairs of Germany.
With the coming to power of the Third Reich and its implementation of racially
repressive laws and policies, a growing number of
Jewish and non-Aryan people
fled Germany under desperate
conditions.
The League appointed James G McDonald to head the new High Commissioner’s
office. McDonald firmly believed that the displacement
phenomenon could only be
stopped by addressing the roots of the
Accordingly, he sought
to engage with the German authorities but to no avail. He was also frustrated by
the League’s leading
powers who failed to confront the Nazi leadership or
to provide meaningful support for his
He finally resigned from
his position and used the occasion to publish an extensive outline of the
policy, legislative, judicial
and administrative measures the Nazi leadership
were implementing in pursuit of racial
repression.
The last refugee organisation the League created was the High Commissioner
for Refugees under the Protection of the League of Nations
by combining the
Nansen International Office for Refugees and the High Commissioner for Refugees
(Jewish and Others) Coming from
The Intergovernmental
Committee on Refugees (‘IGCR’) and the United Nations Relief and
Rehabilitation Administration
(‘UNRRA’) were created outside of the
League under the leadership of the United
While both provided
relief to displaced persons, the former was created mainly in response to the
Jewish outflow from Germany
the latter as a WWII relief and recovery
Succession under the
United Nations
By the time the United Nations was established in 1945, the displacement
phenomenon had risen to a new
Many interwar displaced persons were not yet resettled, and WWII had driven
further mass forced displacement. The immediate attention
of the UN-era refugee
organisations was therefore on addressing the post-war displacement crisis. When
the UN later proceeded to
create refugee institutions, it had the opportunity to
learn from the formative interwar years and the experience of engagement with
the refugee phenomenon. In this regard, there were major departures from
interwar approaches to dealing with forced displacement.
In the 70 years since the adoption of the
Convention Relating to the
Status of Refugees
Refugee Convention
have observed a marked shift in the approach and objectives of the international
regime governing forced displacement.
The refugee institutions under the UN
adopted narrower definitions of the persons who qualified for
protection.
Refugee status or
protection was no longer conferred on a prima facie basis (ie based on belonging
to a group of displaced persons).
Rather it began to be conferred based on a
‘well-founded fear of being persecuted’ as an individual, except in
instances where there were calculated political gains to be attained from
offering group-based protection. The Cold War and the Hungarian
refugee episodes
are cases in
Though this period witnessed increased state participation, states also
implemented various policies and rules that were restrictive
and narrowed access
to territory and protection.
Two factors could be pointed to as the underlying motivations for this
post-WWII shift towards a restrictionist approach. First was
the assumption
that, once the war had ended and the massive wave of post-war displacements had
been addressed, a narrower protection
regime would be sufficient to attend to
future displacements. At the heart of this assumption was the distinction that
was made between
European refugees and non-European
and associated thinking that, with the end of WWII, the worst chapter for Europe
had passed.
Refugee Convention
served this purpose by restricting the refugee
definition and the Convention’s application effectively to Europe. BS
has noted that the tendency to distinguish between European refugees and
those in the Third World, which he referred to as the ‘myth
difference’, was a foundation laid in preparation for a paradigm shift in
refugee policy and law that took place in the
The ‘myth of
difference’ was a policy basis that also informed the geographic and
temporal limitations in the
Refugee Convention
An objection may be raised here that the
did provide for a geographical option under art 1B enabling
states to declare whether they wished to extend the Convention to events
occurring elsewhere. However, this geographical option was practically
meaningless even though most parties to the Convention chose
to extend its
application beyond Europe. First, though the geographic limitation expanded in
such a way, the temporal limitation
which made the Convention applicable only to
events before 1 January 1951 meant that the major focus of the Convention was
on episodes of displacements that took place in continental Europe. This
is because the normative and institutional frameworks in
place at the time were
already preoccupied with European refugees and displaced persons. Second,
considering the historical reluctance
of states to commit to principled
obligations in respect of displaced persons even across continental Europe, the
assumption that
the geographical option would indicate a change in direction is
untenable. Third, colonial powers possessed the authority to decide
whether the
Convention applied to their colonial
possessions.
This limited the decision-making of countries under colonial domination. Fourth,
the Convention entered into force in April 1954
and most of the declarations
extending the Convention to areas beyond Europe were made long after the 1967
Protocol Relating to the Status of Refugees
Refugee Protocol
’) was adopted. This again rendered the
Convention’s geographical option meaningless as the
abolished the geographical and temporal restrictions. Lastly, the
very need to introduce the geographical option as an auxiliary
to the default
geographic focus on Europe is itself indicative of the Eurocentricity of the
refugee regime.
The second factor had to do with the increasing interaction between European
states and forcibly displaced persons from outside Europe.
Growing anti-colonial
and decolonisation struggles and the responses of colonial European states were
generating large displacements
that increasingly interacted with European
The 1980s also witnessed an increase in the ‘arrival in the West of
refugees from the Third
European states
began to implement restrictive asylum policies that did not support group-based
displacements driven by conflicts.
By universalising a narrower protection
regime, states acted to protect European interests. The
served this purpose. This universalisation was self-serving for its
designers as it reflected the disjuncture between the causes
and types of
displacements unfolding in the Third World and the universal legal regime
governing refugee protection. The trend in
the scope of protection in the later
70 years of the refugee regime has therefore narrowed.
The move towards a restrictive protection regime began with the IRO, which
was the first refugee organisation created under the auspices
of the UN. The
Constitution
of the International Refugee Organization
Constitution
’) was a turning point in setting the future normative
direction of the international regime. In sharp contrast to the scope
interwar approaches, the IRO began to narrow the regime of protection. Its
mandate was limited to a tightly defined group of refugees
and displaced
Constitution
excluded certain individuals from seeking protection (mainly
‘traitors, quislings and war
criminals’).
Constitution
repeatedly used words such as ‘genuine’ and
‘bona fide’ refugees and displaced persons suggesting the need
rigorous vetting procedure. In this regard, the
Constitution
explicitly called on the IRO
to ensure that its assistance [was] not exploited by persons in the case of
whom it [was] clear that they [were] unwilling to return
to their countries of
origin because they prefer[red] idleness to facing the hardships of helping in
the reconstruction of their
countries, or by persons who intend[ed] to settle in
other countries for purely economic reasons, thus qualifying as
When the IRO was dissolved in 1949 and replaced by the UNHCR in 1950, the
normative groundwork had already been laid. The
Statute of the Office of the
United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees
Statute of the
’) broadly replicated the narrower regime adopted under the
Constitution
and added further restrictions by limiting refugee
protection to individuals whose protection needs arose from ‘events
before 1 January
These restrictions were strengthened through the adoption of the
1951 Refugee
Convention,
which engaged a temporal and geographic limitation to
continental Europe. This rendered the
1951 Refugee Convention
‘little more than [a] “regional”
The adoption of the
Refugee Convention
offered a point of
closure to the development of refugee law. While its narrow definition of
refugees meant that European states
would no longer deal with group-based
protection, the temporal and geographic limitations ensured these states would
have no obligation
to provide protection and assistance to displaced persons
from elsewhere. The latter point was of concern for colonial European states
were facing anti-colonial struggles and the increasing movement of displaced
persons from colonised countries to the Global
Reflecting on the century of legal development in this context, the longevity
Refugee Convention
is unparalleled. No binding refugee
law of universal application has been adopted since the Convention’s
adoption in 1951.
The attempt to craft an international treaty on the right of
asylum, which began with the International Law Commission’s inclusion
1949 of the topic of the ‘Right to Asylum’ in the provisional list
for codification, also failed.
It resulted in the
Declaration on Territorial Asylum
, the last global
soft-law instrument dealing with
Significantly, the
’s temporal and geographic
limitations were removed by the
Refugee Protocol
this amendment effectively universalised a treaty that developed in
consideration of European interests and was fine-tuned
to a European
The nature of forced displacement outside of Europe has resembled that of
yet the restrictive norms of the
especially its definition of a refugee, have meant that its geographic and
temporal expansion has been
artificial.
The rare occasions
where Western states supported broader protection for displaced persons
coincided with the furtherance of their
political interests, such as during the
Cold War. For example, the ‘industrial countries of the first world’
had a politically
oriented refugee regime targeted at refugees from communist
countries and forming part of their strategy to combat
The end of the Cold War then marked a shift in refugee policy that aimed to
divert from and limit the arrival of refugees and displaced
persons in Europe.
These measures included the implementation of restrictive asylum policies and
border closures which envisaged
policies of
containment,
interdiction and
the offshore processing of asylum
applications,
and the increased
securitisation of discourse on asylum and forced
displacement.
Another objection may be raised here against the contention that the
definition of a refugee under the
Refugee Convention
represented a narrowing of the scope of protection. An alternative argument may
be that the universalisation of the criteria embedded
in the refugee definition,
especially after the adoption of the
Refugee Protocol
represented an expansion from the previous ad hoc approach of identifying
specific groups of refugees. Subject to the arguments
outlined above in response
to the geographic option clause under art 1B of the
, it is true that the refugee definition under the Convention
moved away from the previous ad hoc approach of designating groups as
to a permanent definition applicable across episodes of displacement. However,
whether this universalisation of the refugee
definition has resulted in a
broader scope of protection needs to be closely scrutinised.
Protection as an international law obligation was consolidated after the
adoption of the
Refugee Convention
and later the
. While the interwar period also resulted in
international agreements in respect of displaced
the protection
obligation was mainly driven by domestic policy as opposed to international law
obligations. This is partly the reason
why ad hoc protection measures were
widely available during the interwar period and were more flexible in
accommodating different
As argued above, the episodes of displacements in interwar Europe were also
largely group-based displacements. However, obligations
that European states
were prepared to undertake as a matter of their domestic policy, which is
subject to their discretion and national
interests, were not ones they were
prepared to undertake as a matter of international law obligation. Hence, the
individuation of
the refugee definition and its embrace as the legal standard
for protection under the
Refugee Convention
normative statement that signalled a shift towards a narrower regime of
protection.
The contention that the
Refugee Convention
Refugee Protocol
represented a normative shift towards a
narrower scope of protection becomes clearer when considering the discord
between the refugee
definition and the types of displacements in the Third World
since the decolonisation movements, which were largely
group-based.
Group displacement
is also a recurring contemporary feature in Third World
A broader definition of
a refugee and the practice of granting protection on a prima facie basis have
been a major contribution of
Third World states that also host a large number of
However, while a prima facie recognition of refugee status has made it possible
to provide protection on a group basis, this has
further entrenched the
disproportionate sharing of responsibility. The approach led to massive refugee
camps in Africa and the Middle
East, while European states selectively applied
group-based protection in situations that aligned with their political and
interests. The approach also served as an instrumental strategy of
containment.
The shift towards
restrictionist immigration policies, discussed below, is another confirmation of
the desire to limit protection
obligations arising even out of a normative
framework designed to minimise such obligations. Access to territory has further
a major obstacle which renders protection more unreachable in countries
that are fortifying their borders. Accordingly, the contention
that the refugee
regime founded upon the
Refugee Convention
represented a
narrowing of the scope of protection is supported by the historical record,
evidence from state practice and a critical
look at trends in protection.
Despite the recent adoption of the
Global Compact on
Compact for Safe, Orderly and Regular
as soft-law
instruments aiming to renew the commitment of the international community to
migrants and refugees, the restrictionist
trend continues to date.
Anti-immigrant and anti-refugee sentiments are growing across the Western
These xenophobic
sentiments are also increasingly featuring in the Third World, driven mainly by
economic fear and uncertainty, arguably
a by-product of globalised
capitalism.
Australia continues
the practices of offshore processing and indefinite detention of some categories
of asylum seekers,
European states are turning to Australian-style practices.
These externalisation practices are not limited to offshore processing but
have involved offshore protection in third countries. This
latter approach is
currently becoming a strategy of choice among countries in Europe. In June 2021,
the Danish Parliament passed
a law authorising the use of offshore processing of
In November 2023, Italy
and Albania signed a protocol on migration management under which Italy would
finance the construction of
two detention centres in Albania where rescued
migrants would be taken for processing of their asylum
The United Kingdom
followed suit by striking a deal
with Rwanda for the removal of asylum seekers and other individuals to Rwanda
for settlement and protection. The
Nationality and Borders Bill 2021
introduced to give
effect to the agreement passed through several legal challenges before
international and domestic judicial bodies.
There has also been an interim
measure from the European Court of Human Rights ordering the UK government not
to remove an Iraqi
asylum seeker to Rwanda ‘until the expiry of a period
of three weeks following the delivery of the final domestic decision
ongoing judicial review
proceedings’.
This interim measure comes at the back of a High Court of Justice challenge
that found ‘[t]he inadmissibility and removal decisions
were not unlawful
by reason of any of the generic grounds of challenge or by the general claims of
procedural unfairness’.
The Court, however, found that the way ‘the Home Secretary went about the
implementation of her policy in a number of the individual
cases ... was
A group of asylum
seekers have secured permission to appeal the High Court decision on the grounds
that the Home Office has failed
to consider the safety of Rwanda as a place to
send the asylum seekers. On 15 November 2023, the UK Supreme Court held that
are substantial grounds for believing that the removal of the
claimants to Rwanda would expose them to a real risk of ill-treatment
of refoulement’.
circumvent the Supreme Court’s ruling, the Rishi Sunak government
introduced the Safety of Rwanda (Asylum and Immigration)
Bill 2024 (UK) which
was passed into law by the UK Parliament on 23 April
As of the writing of this
article, no flights have yet departed to relocate asylum seekers to Rwanda under
the forced deportation
program envisaged in the Rwanda
Such trading of
protection responsibility weakens the shared moral foundations of the
international refugee regime and renders it
a transactional regime in which some
countries will offer to host more refugees in exchange for deals on development,
trade or economic
cooperation.
externalisation measures restrict ‘access to territorial asylum’ and
‘raise questions about the applicable
international law standards, the
legality of resulting externalisation measures and the accountability of states
and other actors
for any breaches of international
Looking back at the two phases (the initial 30 years and the later 70 years)
of the development of the international regime governing
forced displacement, it
is evident that the interaction of Third World refugees with European borders
has been a major consideration
in the self-serving twists and turns in
international and domestic refugee policies of Western states. In the following
highlight the legacies of the regime governing forced displacement,
focusing on both its achievements and the systemic flaws that
threaten to
undermine gains made.
III LEGACIES OF A
100-YEAR-OLD REGIME
Forging a robust multilateral collaboration on a subject is often
challenging. Institutionalising it, even more so. This has certainly
case with regard to the protection and assistance of displaced persons. Efforts
in this regard required gauging the respective
interests of states on the topic,
championing the cause for the protection of displaced persons and the tireless
work of humanitarians.
Despite the many failures of the 100-year-old engagement
(some of which are explored in the next Part), there are positive aspects
merit recognition, particularly the zeal and dedication of individuals who have
been called to serve as high commissioners,
the gradual development of a
baseline international legal and institutional framework for the protection and
assistance of forcibly
displaced persons and the rise in advocacy for refugee
The Role of
Humanitarian Leaders
Individuals, including high commissioners of refugee organisations, state
officials who supported their efforts and staff of non-governmental
organisations have made zealous and meaningful contributions to the development
of the century-old refugee regime. Some prominent
contributors included Gustave
Ador (President of the ICRC), Fridtjof
(the first High
Commissioner for Russian Refugees) and James G
Commissioner for Refugees (Jews and Others) Coming from Germany). These
prominent figures played crucial roles during the
initial years of the
establishment of the international regime governing forced displacement,
assisting large numbers of displaced
persons at a time when resources allocated
for this purpose were minimal.
These humanitarians articulated refugee and asylum issues and demonstrated
how multilateral engagement could also advance the interests
of states. Ador was
the first to plead the case of refugees before the League. While the ICRC
provided relief and support to Russian
refugees, the scope of the challenge
quickly grew beyond the capacity of relief agencies. Accordingly, Ador proposed
and promoted
intergovernmental cooperation which led to the League’s
appointment of a High
Commissioner.
The League subsequently appointed Fridtjof Nansen, a devout humanitarian, to
this post. In his effort to assist Russian refugees,
and later an expanded group
of displaced persons, Nansen laid the groundwork for what would later become a
regime tending to displaced
persons across the globe. From the introduction of
personal identity documents to developing a funding model to provide relief and
assistance for refugees, Nansen introduced innovative policies as High
Commissioner.
He was also
known for his firm stance on maintaining the humanitarian nature of the High
Commissioner’s functions and this
enabled him to earn the trust of states
who were otherwise sceptical of the work of the League in relation to displaced
Nansen was operating
in the heat of the political division that marked Europe in the aftermath of
WWI. He was conscious that introducing
political advocacy into his work may
discourage state
cooperation.
In contrast, McDonald extended the High Commissioner’s remit beyond
humanitarian advocacy to political advocacy that confronted
states on policies
and practices he identified as driving
displacement.
He tried to put
this into practice by confronting members of the League for their reluctance to
condemn the actions of the Third
Reich in Germany leading to the persecution and
flight of Jewish people and
non-Aryans.
Claudena Skran
McDonald has the distinction of being the only refugee administrator in the
Inter- war Period to publicly criticize the German government
for its inhumane
treatment of Jews and other ‘non-Aryans’, and to call for
international intervention to deal with the
root causes of the refugee exodus.
In making his appeal, McDonald did not receive a great deal of encouragement
from the governments
composing the League of Nations. In fact, the reverse is
true. They took great pains to avoid confronting the German government on
refugee issue.
Despite the differences in their approaches and policies, the interwar
figures behind the effort to assist refugees were committed
humanitarians. The
foundations they laid significantly shaped the efforts, policies and experiences
of successive refugee institutions
and normative frameworks. From outlining the
concept of durable solutions to devising the funding arrangements for refugee
crafting principles governing humanitarian work and calling for preventive
approaches to forced displacement, the legacies of these
individuals continue to
inform policies, research and decision-making today.
The Strengthening of
Normative and Institutional Structures
The recognition of the need to protect refugees and displaced persons has a
long history in international law. However, despite such
long recognition, the
notion of protection of refugees as an attendant obligation of the state took a
long time to crystallise. Accompanied
by evolving normative and institutional
frameworks for the protection and assistance of displaced persons, the formal
response the
League initiated in 1921 sped up the process. As will be noted in
Part IV, this crystallisation took a narrower Eurocentric framing.
Nevertheless,
an effort that began as an ad hoc arrangement to respond to the Russian refugee
crisis of the 1920s gradually expanded
in scope to accommodate additional groups
of displaced persons and developed into a full-fledged mechanism to respond to
forced displacement
at the international
States undertook
various efforts to improve the situation of refugees in the interwar years
through the adoption of
Accordingly, with all its deficiencies and insufficiencies, we now have norms
and institutions that provide the bare minimum of legal
protections for
displaced persons in international
International law now
imposes core obligations on states with respect to forcibly displaced persons
such as the freedom of
the right to seek
and the obligation not
to return (
) refugees to places where their lives and freedoms
would be threatened.
substantive and due process rights stipulated in international human rights law
and in the domestic legal systems of states further
complement the legal
framework of protection for displaced persons as these norms are equally
applicable to displaced
These bodies of
norms provide the basis for a rights-based approach to forced
displacement.
Arguing for the
expanded application of human rights principles to refugees, Louis Henkin
In sum, and in a few words: Not only compassion but responsibility; not only
individual state responsibility but collective responsibility;
not only the
Refugee Convention but the International Covenants and the UN Charter; not only
UNHCR but the Human Rights Committee
and, if necessary, the UN Security
The evolution of institutional capacity in this area of international law is
also impressive. Analysing institutional development
along a spectrum that
ranges from the High Commissioner for Russian Refugees, which began its work in
1921, to the UNHCR, which began
its work in 1951, reveals a gradual
strengthening of institutional capacity in many respects. The capacity to handle
mass movements,
generate finances, secure the cooperation of states and organise
large-scale logistics has grown substantially. Most importantly,
the UNHCR holds
an authoritative position of influence in refugee policy-making and unparalleled
expertise in the area.
transformation relied on the growing recognition by states of the utility of
global institutions in this context in line with
their realisation that forced
displacement would not be a temporary phenomenon.
Humanitarian Impact
and the Proliferation of Advocacy and Engagement
With all its faults and
the international
mechanism put in place to address forced displacement has rendered much-needed
protection and assistance to millions
of people in desperate situations. The
humanitarian impact of the regime governing forced displacement has been
immense. When the
League inaugurated the international refugee regime in 1921,
the High Commissioner for Russian Refugees had to operate under severe
allocated to the office was minimal and the funding model adopted for the
refugee work forced the High Commissioner to
raise funds from states and private
further burdening
its already complex remit. Despite these resource shortages, the High
Commissioner for Russian Refugees laid the
foundations for what was to become a
fundraising model for subsequent years. This model consisted of appraising the
financial need
for the work and then engaging and pleading with states and
private actors to make contributions. This remains the model even today
The successive
international refugee institutions managed to assist millions of forcibly
displaced persons while under severe resource
The success of this work was also remarkable. Particularly with respect to
the League, it has been noted that the League was more
successful in its
technical and incidental affairs, such as its work on refugees and displaced
persons, than in its primary mandate
of peace and
This praise of
course belongs to the successive high commissioners established under the
League. In the UN era, the humanitarian
impact of the UNHCR’s work has
also been well regarded. The UNHCR was awarded the Nobel Peace Prize in 1954
efforts to heal the wounds of war by providing help and
protection to refugees all over the
and in 1981
‘for promoting the fundamental rights of
Non-governmental organisations have also been indispensable actors behind the
humanitarian impact of the now century-old
Forced displacement
places people in legal, social and economic
The protection of a host state is often not automatically gained when the loss
of the protection of a state of origin occurs. This
often leads to, at least in
the Global South, years of encampment where refugees have to wait for the
determination of their refugee
status and a durable
This brings about
social detachment and the inability to economically fend for oneself until the
recognition of the right to work
thereby placing forcibly displaced persons in a vulnerable position. In this
regard, non-state actors, such as non-governmental organisations,
community-based relief and aid associations and individual philanthropists have
always played a crucial role in the refugee work
of the past 100
It is to be noted that
even when the League’s assumption of responsibility in this area was
spearheaded by the plea of the
ICRC regarding the plight of Russian
non-state actors
stood in the gap to provide assistance and advocate for the protection of
Another mark of success in the 100-year-old regime is the persistent advocacy
for the recognition and protection of refugee rights.
This has resulted in the
proliferation of refugee
literature,
refugee rights
advocacy groups and academic institutions focusing on displaced
There have, however,
been occasions when refugee literature was complicit in aiding policymakers to
justify the adoption of narrower
and more restrictive laws and
Chimni noted that
this was particularly evident in the proliferation of refugee literature in the
Overall, the positive yields of the international engagement with the
phenomenon of forced displacement over the past 100 years have
resulted mainly
from the participation of non-state actors. State engagement has always been
reserved and politically calculated.
In the next section, we delve deeper into
the flaws of the regime governing forced displacement and will highlight how
state policy
choices and decisions expose the inability of the regime to protect
displaced persons.
IV LIMITATIONS OF THE
‘[C]harity consoles but does not
has been hobbled by various limitations from the very beginning, some emerging
from early design and implementation decisions
and others from foundational
philosophies. In this Part, we explore how ad hoc interventions became the norm
with regard to forced
displacement and how European people and states started
as, and have remained, the priority in decision-making. This Eurocentrism,
its attendant lack of self-reflection, underpins later failures to reflect on
the root causes of displacement in the second half
century through today, which failures are so often an end-product of
colonisation and Global North violence (via wars, proxy wars
and economic
exploitation) towards and in the Global South. We explore why people are forced
to move and why the regime is so inept
at preventing these phenomena.
Unfortunately, political neutrality often leads to its proponents being
complicit in maintaining the
status quo, and it has been inherently difficult
for the regime to seriously target root causes of displacement while attempting
to avoid advocacy for political and social action.
Ad Hoc Interventions,
from Miscalculations to a Deliberate Policy Choice
The regime governing forced displacement has suffered, to a greater or lesser
extent throughout its first century, from a persistent
assumption that the
displacement phenomenon is temporary. During the first 30 years of the regime,
states consistently operated under
the assumption that the various episodes of
forced displacement could be settled through ad hoc
interventions.
interventions were gradually expanded to accommodate additional groups of
displaced persons;
the ad hoc nature of the regime meant that states assumed minimal formal
obligations to displaced persons per se. The protection
function was played by
different entities at different
while the provision of
humanitarian relief remained in the hands of relief and humanitarian
organisations and sometimes in the hands
of the International Labour
Organisation.
By the end of the initial 30 years of the regime, the international community
had enough experience to appreciate the need for an
established and permanent
mechanism to handle the phenomenon, particularly as displacement was
proliferating outside Europe. However,
the ad hoc nature of the refugee work
continued until 2003 with numerous mandate renewals for the UNHCR to continue
its operation.
approach strongly suggests that beyond a mere assumption of the temporary nature
of international engagement with forced
displacement, the ad hoc engagement
evolved into a deliberate policy of choice in the post-WWII period. By
continuing the UNHCR’s
operation through mandate renewals and restricting
the refugee regime to continental Europe until 1967, states reinforced their
retreat from assuming obligations towards displaced persons,
particularly those from the Third World.
Self-serving motivations were perhaps the exception here, as elaborated
further in the next section. Contrary to the above proposition
regarding the
absence of a pre-1967 engagement with refugees outside of Europe, it is
important to note that the UNHCR had already
begun a limited engagement with
refugee work outside of Europe before 1967. An oft-cited case here is the
UNHCR’s involvement
during the Algerian War of
Independence.
However, this
was made possible primarily by virtue of a French declaration under art 40 of
Refugee Convention
which extended the Convention to
territories for whose international relations France was responsible. France had
already made this
declaration on 23 June
and this appears to have
been a strategic move to outsource the responsibility for refugees to the UNHCR
or to enlist its help in
the event of a deterioration of the political
circumstances in Algeria, which, at the time, was already on the horizon. The
War interest of the US is another example of a self-serving motivation
behind the UNHCR’s pre-1967 involvement with refugee
assistance in
The Eurocentric Focus
of the Regime
With its origins in European society and displacements within Europe, the
regime governing forced displacement has shown persistent
Eurocentrism in the
scope of protection and assistance rendered, in the exclusions from protection
and in the design of policy approaches
displacement.
framing of forced displacement issues that centre the state, rather than the
displaced persons, as the object of protection
has been a foundational narrative
of the refugee regime since its
inauguration.
This statist framing never considered all states the same but persistently
excluded Third World states and societies from the
The statist approach to displacement was evident in how European states
approached the fate of interwar refugees with a focus on the
impact of their
presence on European economies, societies and
It was notably
maintained in the post-WWII period through the discontinuation of group-based
protections. As noted above, this shift
to individuated, persecution-based
protection was out of sync with the kind of displacement occurring in that
period in the Third
World. During the Cold War, the statist approach manifested
itself in the use of refugees as ‘pawns’ to further geopolitical
The Western states
reconsidered their refugee admission policies in such a way that these policies
formed part of their Cold War
strategy to contain the spread of communism and to
discredit communist states.
This led to the liberal reception of displaced persons from communist states
and, at times, the provision of group-based protection
that detracted from the
post-WWII individuated, persecution-based
However, this gesture was not extended to displaced persons from Africa as they
carried little geopolitical significance in the context
of the Cold
The consistent omission of non-European states and societies from the refugee
regime in terms of the protection their citizens received
under it is another
mark of Eurocentricity. Unsurprisingly, the Western response to forced
displacement in the Third World was marked
by exclusions, containment,
regimes and
securitisation.
The interwar
period exclusions of non-European states and societies in Africa, Asia and Latin
America need to be seen through the
lens of colonial
domination.
policymaking did not grapple with the fact that colonial domination itself drove
displacements across these continents.
One of the strongest demonstrations of
the statist stronghold in the refugee regime is the fact that while European
states actively
caused displacement in the rest of the world, first through
colonisation and then through responses to anti-colonial movements, they
regimes to assist European refugees to whom they bore little to no formal
obligations.
With the adoption of the
Refugee Convention
, the exclusion
of Third World states and societies was formalised by limiting the
Convention’s application to continental Europe.
The geographic and
temporal limitations of the
Refugee Convention
to events that
unfolded in Europe are the clearest statement of the Eurocentric nature of the
regime. This came at a time when the
anti-colonial struggles in Africa were
generating mass displacement and a growing number of displaced persons were
finding their
way to Europe.
This legal vacuum inspired the adoption of a regional refugee instrument in
effectively rendering
Refugee Convention
to appear as a European instrument of
no relevance to African states. Though the
OAU Refugee Convention
Africa was adopted in 1969, its preparation seems to have stimulated ‘the
rapid adoption of the [1967] Protocol’ that
removed the temporal and
geographic limitations from the
The effect of
this was the universalisation of a Eurocentric
Though the temporal
and geographic limitations were removed, the normative limitations remained
Failure to Reflect on
the Root Causes of Forced Displacement
Another mark of Eurocentricity and a major limitation in the regime governing
forced displacement pertains to attitudes reflected
in the narrative and
discourse of causes of displacement. During the interwar period when forced
displacement was prevalent in Europe,
the focus of narratives and discourse was
on the need to assist and protect displaced persons. There were minimal efforts
to alleviate
the core causes of these
displacements
and many turned
a blind eye at times, such as in the case of the repressive actions of the Third
Reich in Germany.
Attempts to
shift the focus to addressing root causes were actively suppressed during the
interwar period.
suppression of a policy focused on root causes had political goals. This is
particularly highlighted in the effort of James
G McDonald who confronted
European states on their failure to address the causes of refugee outflows from
Germany in the lead-up
The Allied Powers were
also actively involved in orchestrating some of the conflicts that took place in
the interwar period.
concerns displacements in the Third World in the post-WWII period, which have
mainly been caused by the impacts of colonisation,
the minimal focus on these
causes has proven the Eurocentric utility of the refugee regime, shielding
colonisers from public scrutiny.
A deeper reflection on root causes would have
therefore exposed and confronted the powerful states on their policies and
in interwar Europe and afterwards.
The argument here is not to advance a call for the conflation of the
humanitarian nature of refugee protection with the politically
charged discourse
of root causes of displacement. The protection of forcibly displaced persons
should always be approached with a
humanitarian lens, especially by received
states, and should be decoupled from the political discussions of causes. In
other words,
a discourse on the root causes of displacement should not lead to a
situation where people are denied protection or where people
are held hostage to
demands pertaining to the resolution of root causes so identified by states.
However, approaching the displacement
phenomenon as a purely humanitarian crisis
and persistently failing to look inward into actions and policies that create
have been features of the international refugee regime since its
For a hundred years, limited deeper reflection and strategic direction were
set with the goal of addressing the root causes of forced
displacement. There
were two attempts in the late 1970s and 80s where two studies were commissioned,
one by the UN Commission on
and the other by the
UN General Assembly, to inquire into the means to address the root causes of
mass displacement.
outcomes of these studies were recommendations that did not bring about shifts
or major changes in how the international community
approached forced
displacement.
growing state-led focus on causes and prevention, albeit a vitiated one, had
already begun to surface in the post-WWII
This subtle shift in
the focus of narratives and discourse was a paradoxical double-edged sword.
While it portrayed the Western states
as the protectors of the persecuted by
shifting the focus to the internal causes of displacement in the states of
origin, it was
also used to justify restrictionist refugee policies and policies
of containment.
The myth of difference went hand in hand with an internalist interpretation
of the root causes of refugee flows which squarely laid
the blame at the door of
post-colonial societies and states, underestimating the significance of external
factors. ... And it comes
as no surprise that in the discussion of the causes of
refugee flows the focus has been on internalist explanations ... for externalist
explanations apportion blame between the state from which refugees flee and
states responsible for authoring policies or undertaking
action leading to the
outflow of refugees.
The discourse on the prevention of forced displacement has also focused on
symptoms rather than on the political and structural impediments
that exist in
the international legal order. These impediments create and sustain structures
of inequality and injustice. Until these
root causes are acknowledged and
addressed, the mere treatment of symptoms cannot resolve the forced displacement
conundrum. TWAIL
scholars make contributions in this area by exposing the
structural problems embedded in the international legal order. The norms
institutions of international law are shaped by Western states in such a way
that they further Western interests while undermining
the interests of the
non-Western majority. This domination is evident in the international economic
order, in the use of force in
international relations, in the fight against
climate change and in the enforcement of international obligations, to mention a
As we will discuss in the last Part, a principled integration of the
discourse of root causes and prevention should not shift blame
to countries of
origin or restrict access to asylum in the West. It should rather be
comprehensive, both inward and outward-looking.
Neutrality versus the
Politics of Refugee Response
In the refugee regime, the principle of political neutrality has been and
remains a peculiar feature that characterises the engagement
of non-state
humanitarian actors, particularly the multilateral refugee organisations. Ever
since the first High Commissioner, Nansen,
adopted the principle of neutrality
as a core principle of his humanitarian
it has remained a
cornerstone principle of subsequent institutions including the
Statute of the
stipulates that ‘the work of the High Commissioner shall be of
an entirely non-political character; it shall be humanitarian
and social and
shall relate, as a rule, to groups and categories of
essentially meant that in their engagement with states, humanitarian
institutions are to remain above politics and, among
other things, refrain from
confronting states on issues of the causes of forced displacement. Their
activities are limited to the
provision of protection and humanitarian support
to displaced persons, managing their movement and seeking durable solutions.
While there are continuities in the substance of the neutrality principle
from the Nansen era to the establishment of the UNHCR, there
are also marked
departures in the underlying objectives that the principle is supposed to serve.
Nansen and the early humanitarians
embraced the principle out of the conviction
that their personal, as opposed to institutional, views of the political causes
to forced displacement should not get in the way of negotiations with
refugee-producing states regarding the protection of refugees
and displaced
Such convictions
were strongly felt considering the infancy of the refugee regime and its
dependence on the individual characters
and efforts of the high
commissioners.
The interwar
period was also characterised by nationalism, animosity, high politics and
suspicion in interstate
Accordingly, the
early high commissioners perceived that any approach short of neutrality was
likely to be considered as taking sides
and therefore detrimental to achieving
the objective of protection and assistance to refugees and displaced
Conversely, even though refugee organisations embrace this policy of
political neutrality, states, who are the main actors in the
refugee regime,
often pursue refugee policies based on political calculations. States are the
main actors whose actions lead to forced
displacement. They are also the
ultimate financiers of the refugee regime and hosts to refugees. Moreover,
refugee policy forms an
increasingly contentious part of the domestic political
process of states. Both historic and current accounts of refugee policymaking
reveal the dominance of politics, rather than principle, in
decision-making.
The juxtaposition of politically neutral refugee organisations with
politically calculating states has effectively led to the former’s
assumption of more obligations towards forcibly displaced
With the rise in the
number of displaced persons and the growing restrictions of receiving states on
admission, refugee organisations
have been left to tend to millions of displaced
persons in refugee camps.
This has gradually eroded the UNHCR’s protection mandate and transformed
its functions more into those of the humanitarian
More importantly, the
conception of the “non-political character” of the UNHCR has
transformed the benign principle of
neutrality into a strategy that serves
state-centric interests.
The suggestion here is not for refugee organisations to abandon their
neutrality for that is neither the cause of nor the solution
ever-increasing phenomenon of forced displacement. Rather, our argument here is
that the benign principle of political neutrality
of refugee organisations has
been exploited by states and has paved the way for them to shirk responsibility
and pass it onto these
organisations. States have effectively substituted their
substantive responsibility towards the protection of refugees with at-will
financial commitments to refugee organisations. Chimni has argued that
‘humanitarianism’ is the ideology of hegemonic states in the
era of globalisation marked by the end of the Cold War and
a growing North-South
... [T]he ideology of humanitarianism mobilises a range of meanings
and practices to establish and sustain global relations of
domination.
Accordingly, the more passive these refugee organisations remain in accepting
more obligations beyond their mandate, the more this
renders them instruments
for the advancement of the interests of the powerful Northern/Western
This is the
discernible trend so far. In the process of time, the politically charged
reception policy of states has allowed few
refugees to be admitted in Western
states, resulting in the use of camps as spaces of containment where refugees
exist for years,
even decades, in a state of
and languish under
subpar conditions.
these conditions and contexts, “neutrality” in response to
oppressive conditions happens to be an impossibility
and a political response of
its own accord that recreates the status quo. It also does not help the
The Absence of a
Robust Responsibility-Sharing Framework
When the refugee regime was established in the aftermath of WWI,
responsibility for the protection and assistance of displaced persons
essentially the core issue to be addressed. Under the shadow of the destruction
of war in Europe, states were not prepared to
assume what was considered an
additional responsibility for displaced persons, particularly for those from
enemy states. Humanitarian
ideals were not always the dominant consideration for
policies and actions with regard to displaced
This posed a great
challenge for the institutions and individuals charged with the task of
protecting and assisting displaced persons.
It required asserting the
international character of the phenomenon and the humanitarian nature of the
project of protection of and
assistance to refugees and displaced persons.
The international character of the phenomenon received gradual recognition as
the regime governing forced displacement expanded from
dealing with Russian
refugees in the 1920s to a universal regime through the adoption of the
Refugee Protocol
. Similarly, the humanitarian nature of the
refugee work received gradual state recognition initially through the advocacy
humanitarian advocates we highlighted above.
However, despite the gradual recognition of the international scope and
humanitarian nature of forced displacement, the sharing of
responsibility did
not complement such recognition. Accordingly, the sharing of responsibility has
been asymmetric, with 76% of refugees
currently hosted by low and middle-income
countries and 70% of refugees currently hosted by neighbouring
Scholars have
criticised the contemporary refugee regime for its lack of a binding framework
for responsibility-sharing and have
shared their thoughts on how this gap could
be addressed.
V THE WAY FORWARD: TOWARDS
A PREVENTIVE APPROACH
Over the past century, states have approached forced displacement as a
self-contained phenomenon, the solution for which predominantly
lies in the
protection and assistance of displaced persons. This approach has resulted in
the gradual consolidation of a reactive
engagement with the phenomenon as
protection and assistance become crucial after people have been
This has been the
modus operandi of the international community over the past century. The
reactive paradigm has resulted from and
reproduces the failure to reflect on and
address the root causes of forced displacement. We have elsewhere noted this
as one of the major failures of the international regime governing
forced displacement and argued that:
One lesson the international community should learn from a century of
engagement with the problem of forced displacement is that reactive
have not brought lasting solutions. Unprecedented ad hoc international
cooperation is required to introduce and implement
comprehensive packages that
proactively address the root causes of displacement while responding to current
crises. For this to have
a long-term effect, a reformed system must challenge
Western hegemony and dismantle the privilege gained through an exploitative
colonial past.
While the reactive predisposition of the regime has been a characteristic
since its establishment, the discourse over the need for
a preventive approach
that addresses the root causes of forced displacement also has its roots in the
early history of the regime
and various periods since. We have highlighted above
McDonald’s call to address the root causes of the displacement coming
Germany. Other notable examples relate to the 1980s, which saw two multilateral
attempts to examine the root causes of displacement.
The first initiative came
from the UN Human Rights Committee in the form of a study on ‘Human Rights
and Mass Exoduses’.
identifying the root causes of mass exoduses during the period of the study,
Special Rapporteur Sadruddin Aga Khan emphasised
the structural conditions in
the world, such as the economic divide between the developing and developed
countries, that precipitated
displacement.
recommendations of the study also reflected on the need to address these
structural conditions to address forced
displacement.
The second initiative, an initiative to avert new flows of refugees, was
proposed by the Federal Republic of Germany and endorsed
by the UN General
Assembly in a resolution.
initiative identified the predominantly reactive nature of the existing
response, the absence of serious consideration of preventive
measures and
‘an institutional basis for a system of preventive measures’ and the
need to establish such a
States also
submitted their views on the topic upon the invitation of the Secretary-General.
The responses from states reflected
a consensus on the deficiency of the
existing system which prioritises humanitarian assistance to
and on the need to
address the root causes of the refugee
In this respect,
there was a strong recognition of the need for a comprehensive undertaking to
address the root causes of forced
displacement. The Australian
government’s reply to the Secretary-General’s call for views
encapsulates the breadth of
the call for comprehensive action:
A thorough and objective examination of the causes of mass flows of people
may indicate what kind of measures are required to stabilize
populations. For
the long term these measures may have to relate to the whole basis of the
international order and to extend widely
to its political, social and economic
Though both attempts failed in prompting a meaningful change in direction
that would curb the reactive predisposition of the refugee
regime, they
demonstrated the awareness of states of the deeply embedded structural issues.
Despite this awareness, the lack of a
strategic follow-up on these two
initiatives also demonstrated the lack of political willingness to confront the
structural issues
Unfortunately, in addition to a reactive approach, current trends are also
indicative of an ever-narrowing protection regime as states
continue to restrict
asylum and increasingly seek to outsource their asylum obligations. The
politicisation of protection and asylum
is still a dominant feature in the
distinctions made between those who
protection and those who do
not. The opposing approaches employed by European Union countries in respect of
the 2015 Syrian refugee
crisis and the current Ukrainian refugee crisis are a
case in point. While Syrian refugees were and still are subjected to various
restrictions in their pursuit of asylum protection, European states effectively
removed these barriers for refugees fleeing from
The response of the
UK to refugees from Ukraine and those from elsewhere, mainly African states,
further demonstrates this. Soon
before the UK government announced a
whole-of-government response to assist Ukrainian refugees in finding refuge in
the country,
it had signed a
deal with the Rwandan government to transport asylum seekers, whom the UK
government carefully calls ‘migrants’
in an effort to dissociate
them from refugees, to Rwanda, where, according to the Home Office, ‘they
will be able to rebuild
their lives in
vivid reminder and a re-enactment of the Cold War period’s use of refugees
The argument here is not that Ukrainian refugees are not deserving of the
protection that is being extended to them by the states.
The argument is against
the problematic association of refugee protection with political goals, which in
this case relates to the
bigger geopolitical tension with Russia. This renders
refugee protection part of a political strategy to achieve a desired goal,
thereby commodifying asylum and protection and making refugees political tools.
This case again highlights the tendency to make distinctions
between refugees
from continental Europe and elsewhere.
A corollary challenge to the reactive predisposition of the refugee regime is
the narrow conception of preventive action in the context
displacement. International efforts to pursue preventive actions, especially
contemporary policies, often squarely focus
on the socio-economic and political
problems in the state of origin as the causes of displacement and seek to
contain the movement
of people within the state or region of origin. Such a
narrow conceptualisation of prevention ignores the larger systemic and
issues in the international legal order that directly and indirectly
impact the socio-economic and political wellbeing of people
and nations,
particularly in the Global
We firmly believe that a reactive approach to forced displacement and the
consideration of forced displacement as a problem squarely
circumstances in the country of origin and requiring minimal responses from the
country of destination is a flawed approach.
Countries of destination in the
Global North are so often deeply involved with circumstances in countries of
origin in the Global
South. A TWAIL approach is particularly helpful here as it
enables a deeper exploration of the nature of this entangled past, present
future. If we are to ever witness positive progress in managing forced
displacement, there will need to be a serious reflection
on the systematic and
structural issues in the international legal system, be it in the political or
economic systems or be it internal
or external to the country of origin. Such a
reflection and a firm political commitment to address the structural
inequalities and
inequities that exist among nations will go a long way in
creating an environment that enables people to live and thrive in a place
choose freely.
Lecturer, School of Law and Justice, The University of
Newcastle, New South Wales, Australia. Email:
Samuel.Woldemariam@newcastle.edu.au.
Associate Professor and Director of the Centre
for Law and Social Justice, School of Law and Justice, The University of
New South Wales, Australia.
Associate Professor, Florida Institute for Built
Environment Resilience (‘FIBER’), University of Florida, United
of America. The authors would like to thank the anonymous reviewers for
the insightful feedback they provided on the manuscript.
The piece is more
complete having engaged with their insights. We are also grateful to the
’s editorial team for the excellent support provided
throughout the editorial process. Special thanks to Assistant Editor Momo
and her team for carefully editing the manuscript.
Eric Drummond,
Secretary-General, ‘The Question of the Russian Refugees’
League of Nations Official Journal
, 1027 (‘The Question
of the Russian Refugees (November 1921)’) (emphasis in original).
Vincent Chetail,
‘Fridtjof Nansen and the International Protection of Refugees: An
Introduction’ (2003) 22(1)
Refugee Survey Quarterly
(‘Fridtjof Nansen’).
Successive reports of the
United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees and the Internal Displacement
Monitoring Centre show that
the general trend of forced displacement is an
increasing one. See
United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees
<https://www.unhcr.org/search?comid=56b079c44&&cid=49aea93aba&tags=globaltrends>;
‘Displacement
Internal Displacement Monitoring Centre
https://www.internal-displacement.org/database/displacement-data
archived at <
https://perma.cc/DJ5E-CZS7
We use the term
‘regime’ in the sense it is used in international relations theory
to refer to ‘principles, norms,
rules, and decision-making procedures
around which actor expectations converge in a given issue-area’: Stephen D
Krasner, ‘Structural
Causes and Regime Consequences: Regimes as
Intervening Variables’ (1982) 36(2)
International Organization
185. ‘[P]rocedures, rules, or institutions for certain kinds of
activity’ or ‘sets of governing arrangements
that affect
relationships of interdependence’: Robert O Keohane and Joseph S Nye,
Power and Interdependence
(Longman, 4
ed, 2011) 5, 16. The
governance of the phenomenon of forced displacement is an area that has
developed into a strong framework of
rules, processes and institutions aimed at
garnering multilateral cooperation. Alexander Betts has expanded the notion of a
with respect to refugees to a ‘refugee regime complex’,
noting the increasing interaction of refugee protection with
different regimes
such as ‘human rights, humanitarianism, security, development, and
peace-building’: Alexander Betts,
‘The Refugee Regime Complex’
(2010) 29(1)
Refugee Survey Quarterly
See Gilad Ben-Nun, ‘From
Ad Hoc to Universal: The International Refugee Regime from Fragmentation to
Unity 1922–1954’
(2015) 34(2)
Refugee Survey Quarterly
26–7. Walter Adams provides a good summary of the group-based mass
movements of refugees: Walter Adams, ‘Extent and
Nature of the World
Refugee Problem’ (1939) 203
Annals of the American Academy of Political
and Social Science
James C Hathaway, ‘The
Evolution of Refugee Status in International Law: 1920–1950’
International and Comparative Law Quarterly
(‘The Evolution of Refugee Status’); David Kennedy,
‘International Refugee Protection’
(1986) 8(1)
Human Rights
TWAIL is a theoretical
approach that centres the experiences of Third World states and populations to
understand and illuminate how
the development and operation of international law
affected and continues to affect their interests. The Eurocentricity of the
international
legal system, the persistent exclusion of the Third World in its
development and the built-in structures and discourses that continue
undermine Third World states and populations in the various areas of
international law are some of the major themes that TWAIL
scholars engage with.
For a brief introduction to TWAIL, see Makau Mutua, ‘What Is TWAIL?’
(2000) 94 (April)
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting (American Society of
International Law)
31; James Thuo Gathii, ‘TWAIL: A Brief History of
Its Origins, Its Decentralized Network, and a Tentative Bibliography’
(2011) 3(1)
Trade, Law and Development
For an in-depth introduction,
see Antony Anghie,
Imperialism, Sovereignty and the Making of International
(Cambridge University Press, 2007); BS Chimni, ‘Third World
Approaches to International Law: A Manifesto’ in Antony Anghie
The Third World and International Order: Law, Politics and
Globalization
(Koninklijke Brill, 2003) 47.
Samuel Berhanu Woldemariam,
Amy Maguire and Jason von Meding, ‘Forced Human Displacement, the Third
World and International
Law: A TWAIL Perspective’
[2019] MelbJlIntLaw 10
(2019) 20(1)
Melbourne Journal of International Law
, 250 (emphasis omitted).
Ibid 265–7.
We make a conscious choice
to continue the TWAIL tradition of using the category ‘Third World’
as a political term ‘employed
to voice a dialect of opposition to an
international system of laws that evolved in consideration of Euro-centric
cultures, and continues
to advantage and favour the West while disadvantaging
subaltern nations’: ibid 251. In this sense, the term is less geographic
or economic but rather an affirmation of the unique position of states and
populations who share histories and experiences of colonial
domination and
exclusion in the development and operation of international law. For a further
TWAIL analysis on the continued relevance
of the term ‘Third World’
as an analytical category, see Chimni (n
) 48–51; Antony Anghie,
‘Rethinking International Law: A TWAIL Retrospective’
(2023) 34(1)
European Journal of International Law
, 62–82 (‘Rethinking
International Law’).
Gil Loescher,
Charity: International Cooperation and the Global Refugee Crisis
University Press, 1996) 41(‘
Beyond Charity
’); Louise W
Holborn, ‘The Legal Status of Political Refugees, 1920–1938’
(1938) 32(4)
American Journal of International Law
, 682 (‘The
Legal Status of Political Refugees’).
The emergence of the
Westphalian system, for example, placed forced displacement in the context of
state relations and territoriality:
Laura Barnett, ‘Global Governance and
the Evolution of the International Refugee Regime’ (2002) 14(2–
International Journal of Refugee Law
The early scholars of
international law, such as Francisco de Vitoria, Alberico Gentili, Hugo Grotius,
Christian von Wolff and Samuel
von Pufendorf dealt with the protection of
refugees and displaced persons mainly in the context of war and persecution.
They outlined
some basic obligations that sovereigns have towards displaced
persons, such as admitting them to their territory and protecting them
their persecutors, while maintaining that the state has the sovereign right to
make decisions. For a review of their views,
see Vincent Chetail,
‘Sovereignty and Migration in the Doctrine of the Law of Nations: An
Intellectual History of Hospitality
from Vitoria to Vattel’
(2016) 27(4)
European Journal of International Law
(‘Sovereignty and
Migration’); Jane McAdam, ‘An Intellectual History of Freedom of
Movement in International Law:
The Right to Leave as a Personal Liberty’
[2011] MelbJlIntLaw 2
(2011) 12(1)
Melbourne Journal of International Law
Intellectual History’).
Chetail provides an
excellent analysis that highlights the theoretical roots of the positions of
early scholars on migration: Chetail,
‘Sovereignty and Migration’
). See also McAdam, ‘An
Intellectual History’ (n
De Vitoria and Grotius are
prominent scholars who espoused the natural law theory to argue for the freedom
of movement: Franciscus
de Victoria,
On the Indians Lately Discovered
John Pawley Bate (The Carnegie Institution of Washington, 1917) 151 [trans of:
De Indis et De Iure Belli
]; Hugo Grotius,
On the Law of War and Peace:
Three Books
, tr Francis W Kelsey (Clarendon Press, 1925) 201–2 [trans
De Jure Belli Ac Pacis: Libri Tres
Von Pufendorf and von Wolff
leaned towards a positivist understanding of the state’s obligation
towards migrants and displaced
persons: Samuel von Pufendorf,
Of the Law of
Nature and Nations: Eight Books
, tr Basil Kennett (3
32–4; Christian Wolff,
Jus Gentium Methodo Scientifica
Pertractatum
, tr Joseph H Drake (Oxford University Press, 1934)
A prominent example here is
Grotius’ advocacy for the recognition of the granting of asylum as a
peaceful and friendly act:
) 819–20. This principle now forms
a foundation of refugee and asylum law and has received recognition in legal
instruments.
OAU Refugee Convention
Governing the Specific Aspects
of Refugee Problems in Africa
Declaration on Territorial
both state that ‘the grant of asylum to refugees is a peaceful
and humanitarian act and shall not be regarded as an unfriendly
Member State’:
OAU Convention Governing the Specific Aspects of Refugee
Problems in Africa
, opened for signature 10 September
1969, 1001 UNTS 45
(entered into force 20 June 1974) art 2(2) (‘
OAU Refugee
Declaration on Territorial Asylum
, GA Res 2312
(XXII), UN GAOR, 22
plen mtg, UN Doc
A/RES/2312 (XXII) (14 December 1967) Preamble (‘
Declaration on
Territorial Asylum
Our reference to
‘multilateral cooperation’ here subscribes to John Gerard
Ruggie’s conception of multilateralism
as ‘a generic institutional
form of modern international life ... [which] has been present from the start.
The generic institutional
form of multilateralism must not be confused with
formal multilateral organizations, a relatively recent arrival and still of only
relatively modest importance’: John Gerard Ruggie, ‘Multilateralism:
The Anatomy of an Institution’ (1992) 46(3)
International
Organization
The Huguenot refugee
episode is a typical refugee movement that received wide attention in the
history of refugee movements. The
religious and interstate aspects of the
movement played a significant role in this regard. For a recent take on this
history, see
Owen Stanwood,
The Global Refuge: Huguenots in an Age of
(Oxford University Press, 2020).
Eric Fripp,
Nationality
and Statelessness in the International Law of Refugee Status
Publishing, 2016) 104.
While the “interwar
period” generally refers to the years between the end of WWI and the start
of WWII (1918–1939),
we use the phrase the “formative interwar
years” liberally to refer to the initial 30 years of the development of
international refugee protection regime from 1921–1951. The bulk of
this period aligns with the “interwar period”
and the international
refugee regime’s prior concern during the “formative interwar
years” was managing the forced
displacement resulting from the two world
Gil Loescher, ‘The
International Refugee Regime: Stretched to the Limit?’
(1994) 47(2)
Journal of International Affairs
, 351–2 (‘The
International Refugee Regime’).
Chetail, ‘Sovereignty
and Migration’ (n
Claudena M Skran, ‘Historical Development of International Refugee
Law’ in Andreas Zimmermann, Felix Machts and Jonas
Dörschner (eds),
The 1951 Convention Relating to the Status of Refugees and Its 1967 Protocol:
A Commentary
(Oxford University Press, 2011) 1, 6 (‘Historical
Development of International Refugee Law’); Claudena Skran,
Refugees in
Inter-War Europe: The Emergence of a Regime
(Oxford University Press, 1995)
Refugees in Inter-War Europe
Claudena M Skran,
‘Profiles of the First Two High Commissioners’ (1988) 1(3–
Journal of Refugee Studies
, 282 (‘Profiles of the First Two
High Commissioners’); Megan Bradley et al, ‘Whither the Refugees?
International
Organisations and “Solutions” to Displacement,
1921–1960’ (2022) 41(2)
Refugee Survey Quarterly
Loescher noted that the
creation of the international refugee regime was not prompted by ‘purely
altruistic motives’
but rather by the self-serving interests of states who
also sought to control the international institutions they charged with
responsibility
through financial and budgetary constraints: Loescher, ‘The
International Refugee Regime’ (n
The initial letter of the
International Committee of the Red Cross referred to ‘eight hundred
thousand Russian refugees scattered
throughout Europe’: Eric Drummond,
Secretary-General, ‘The Question of the Russian Refugees’
League of Nations Official Journal
, 227 (‘The Question of
the Russian Refugees (March 1921)’). ‘The estimates of the numbers
that fled from Russia
have varied from slightly under a million to over two
million’: Elina Multanen, ‘British Policy towards Russian Refugees
in the Aftermath of the Bolshevik Revolution’ (1999) 12(1)
Revolutionary Russia
Drummond, ‘The
Question of the Russian Refugees (March 1921)’ (n
) 227; Gilbert Jaeger, ‘On the
History of the International Protection of Refugees’
(2001) 83(843)
International Review of the Red Cross
Drummond, ‘The
Question of the Russian Refugees (March 1921)’ (n
‘[During the interwar
period] the nature of the problems identified, and the associated solutions,
tilted towards state interests’:
Bradley et al (n
Louise W Holborn,
‘The League of Nations and the Refugee Problem’ (1939) 203 (May)
The Annals of the American Academy of Political and Social Science
124 (‘The League of Nations and the Refugee Problem’); Greg Burgess,
The League of Nations and the Refugees from Nazi Germany: James G McDonald
and Hitler’s Victims
(Bloomsbury Publishing, 2016) 47.
Hanotaux, ‘The
Question of the Russian Refugees’
(1921) 2(7)
League of Nations
Official Journal
This perhaps marks a
significant difference with the current role of the UN and its agencies,
particularly the UNHCR, which appear
to be vocal, openly advocating for
displaced persons and calling on states to assume more responsibilities.
The League attached strong
significance to the identity of the High Commissioner to be appointed, believing
that the personal characteristics
of the individual were key to obtaining the
cooperation of governments and Russian groups. Having worked in the repatriation
of prisoners
of war in Russia, Nansen was found to be an ideal candidate for the
position: Hanotaux (n
Nansen accepted his appointment on 1 September 1921: Drummond, ‘The
Question of the Russian Refugees (November 1921)’
Holborn, ‘The League
of Nations and the Refugee Problem’ (n
) 125, 128.
Skran, ‘Historical
Development of International Refugee Law’ (n
Arrangement with Respect
to the Issue of Certificates of Identity to Russian Refugees
13 LNTS 238
(signed and entered into force 5 July 1922) (‘
Arrangement with Respect
to the Issue of Certificates of Identity to Russian Refugees’
John C Torpey,
Invention of the Passport: Surveillance, Citizenship and the State
(Cambridge University Press, 2
ed, 2018) 157–8.
Fridtjof Nansen, High
Commissioner for the Russian Refugees, ‘Rationing of Russian Refugees at
Constantinople’ (1921)
League of Nations Official
Woldemariam, Maguire and
von Meding (n
Arrangement of 12 May
1926 Relating to the Issue of Identity Certificates to Russian and Armenian
, signed 12 May
1926, 89 LNTS 2004
Arrangement of 12 May
1926 Relating to the Issue of Identity Certificates to Russian and Armenian
Arrangement Concerning the Extension to Other
Categories of Certain Measures Taken in Favour of Russian and Armenian
89 LNTS 2006
Arrangement Concerning the Extension to
Other Categories of Certain Measures Taken in Favour of Russian and Armenian
Norman Bentwich, ‘The
League of Nations and Refugees’
British Year Book of
International Law
Claudena M Skran,
‘The International Refugee Regime: The Historical and Contemporary Context
of International Responses to
Asylum Problems’ in Gil Loescher (ed),
Refugees and the Asylum Dilemma in the West
(Pennsylvania State
University Press, 1992) 8, 28.
Paul R Bartrop,
Evian Conference of 1938 and the Jewish Refugee Crisis
(Springer, 2017) 6.
McDonald’s letter of
resignation outlines the details of the repression and persecution that Jewish
people and non-Aryans faced
in the 1930s: Letter of Resignation from James G
McDonald to the Secretary-General of the League of Nations, 27 December 1935
https://dl.wdl.org/11604/service/11604.pdf
archived at <
https://perma.cc/GMG9-GJZT
Susan F Martin, ‘War,
Natural Disasters and Forced Migration’ in Marc R Rosenblum and Daniel J
Tichenor (eds),
The Oxford Handbook of the Politics of International
(Oxford University Press, 2012) 53, 56.
Hasan-Askari Rizvi,
‘United Nations and the Refugee Problem’ (1985) 38(1)
46, 47; Bastiaan Bouwman, ‘Postwar Displacement, Liberalism
and the Genesis of the International Refugee Regime’ (Working
Paper No 25,
SCRIPTS Cluster of Excellence, 2023) 6, 7.
Franklin D Roosevelt
convened the Évian Conference which deliberated on assistance to Jewish
refugees and resulted in the
creation of the IGCR. The debate continues as to
the motivation for such action. Supporters point to Roosevelt as the hero who
Jewish lives, while critics see Roosevelt’s action as an attempt to
divert from and limit the arrival to the US of Jewish refugees.
See Richard
Breitman and Allan J Lichtman,
FDR and the Jews
(Harvard University
Press, 2013) 1–2.
Hathaway, ‘The
Evolution of Refugee Status’ (n
The estimate of the number
of post-WWII displaced persons ranged between 10–60 million in the span of
a few years. Louise W
Holborn notes that there were about 10–12 million
refugees in Europe upon the establishment of the International Refugee
Organization:
Louise W Holborn,
The International Refugee Organization: A
Specialized Agency of the United Nations
(Oxford University Press, 1956)
171. Arthur Rucker, writing in 1949, estimates the number of refugees in Europe
to be between 10–12
million: Arthur Rucker, ‘The Work of the
International Refugee Organization’ (1949) 25(1)
International
66, 66. Michael R Marrus cites Eugene Kulischer’s estimate
that ‘the total number of displaced Europeans during the entire
Hitler’s war was [30] million or more’: Michael R Marrus,
Unwanted: European Refugees in the Twentieth Century
(Oxford University
Press, 1985) 297 (citation omitted). Jane McAdam notes ‘[t]he Second World
War had displaced over 50 million
people in Europe, and there were 100 million
internally displaced persons in China’: Jane McAdam, ‘The Enduring
of the 1951 Refugee Convention’
(2017) 29(1)
International
Journal of Refugee Law
, 2. ‘The number of refugees in Germany alone
was 14 million’: at 2. Andrew I Schoenholtz estimates over 40 million
were displaced in Europe alone in 1945 due to war and persecution: Andrew
I Schoenholtz, ‘The New Refugees and the Old Treaty:
Persecutors and
Persecuted in the Twenty-First Century’
(2015) 16(1)
Chicago Journal of
International Law
, 83. Matthew Frank and Jessica Reinisch refer to an
estimate of 60 million Europeans displaced after WWII: Matthew Frank and Jessica
Reinisch, ‘Refugees and the Nation-State in Europe, 1919–59’
(2014) 49(3)
Journal of Contemporary History
Guy S Goodwin-Gill, Jane
McAdam and Emma Dunlop, ‘Refugees Defined and Described’ in Guy S
Goodwin-Gill and Jane McAdam
The Refugee in International Law
(Oxford University Press, 4
ed, 2021) 15, 18.
Dennis Gallagher,
‘The Evolution of the International Refugee System’ (1989) 23(3)
International Migration Review
579, 582. BS Chimni critiques the attempt
to draw and justify differences in response to Cold War and Hungarian refugees
hand and Third World refugees on the other as
‘self-serving’: BS Chimni, ‘The Geopolitics of Refugee
View From the South’
(1998) 11(4)
Journal of Refugee
, 360 (‘The Geopolitics of Refugee Studies’).
Andrew I Schoenholtz,
‘The New Refugees and the Old Treaty: Persecutors and Persecuted in the
Twenty-First Century’
(2015) 16(1)
Chicago Journal of International
James C Hathaway for
example noted that, in deciding to limit the application of the 1951
Convention Relating to the Status of Refugees
to European refugees,
Western states argued ‘that the need of European refugees for legal
protection, rather than material
assistance, distinguished this group from all
other refugees in the world’ and that ‘international protection for
group could be secured without the provision of any direct financial
assistance’: James C Hathaway, ‘A Reconsideration
of the Underlying
Premise of Refugee Law’
(1990) 31(1)
Harvard International Law
While examining the
post-WWII resettlement of refugees as evidence of a successful
responsibility-sharing scheme, Astri Suhrke noted
that one of the reasons for
its success was ‘a sense that emptying the camps of Europe was a one-time
affair that would help
to close a horrendous chapter in Western history’:
Astri Suhrke, ‘Burden-Sharing during Refugee Emergencies: The Logic
Collective versus National Action’
(1998) 11(4)
Journal of Refugee
Chimni, ‘The
Geopolitics of Refugee Studies’ (n
The territorial application
clause enabled that:
Convention Relating to the Status of Refugees
opened for signature 28 July
1951, 189 UNTS 137
(entered into force 22 April
1954) art 40 (‘
1951 Refugee
Gallagher (n
) 583; Astri Suhrke, ‘A Crisis
Diminished: Refugees in the Developing World’
(1993) 48(2)
International Journal
Chimni, ‘The
Geopolitics of Refugee Studies’ (n
Annex I to the
Constitution
of the International Refugee Organization
separate definition for ‘refugees’ and ‘displaced
persons’ who fall under the IRO’s mandate:
Constitution
International Refugee Organization
, opened for signature 15 December
(entered into force 20 August 1948) annex I
Ibid annex I para 1(c).
Ibid annex I para 1(e).
Statute of the Office of
the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees
, GA Res 428 (V), UN Doc
A/RES/428(V) (14 December 1950) annex para 6(A)(ii) (‘
Statute of the
Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees’
Itty Abraham, ‘Making
the Convention “Universal”: Other Views of the Additional
Völkerrechtsblog: International Law and International
Legal Thought
(Blog Post, 26 May 2021) <
https://voelkerrechtsblog.org/making-the-convention-universal-other-views-of-the-additional-protocol/
archived at <
https://perma.cc/34VU-ARBW
See generally Lucy Mayblin,
‘Colonialism, Decolonisation, and the Right to be Human: Britain and the
1951 Geneva Convention
on the Status of Refugees’ (2014) 27(3)
of Historical Sociology
423. Mayblin provides a case study on Britain and
uncovers how colonial subjugation impacted the rights of non-European refugees
and the substance of the
1951 Refugee Convention
‘Summary Records and
Documents of the First Session Including the Report of the Commission to the
General Assembly’ [1949]
Yearbook of the International Law
Declaration on
Territorial Asylum
detailed analysis of the history of and negotiations surrounding the
Declaration on Territorial Asylum
, see Guy S Goodwin-Gill, ‘The
1967 Declaration on Territorial Asylum’ (2012)
United Nations
Audiovisual Library of International Law
Lucy Mayblin,
‘Historically European, Morally Universal? The 1951 Geneva Convention on
the Status of Refugees’,
E-International Relations
(Article, 28
March 2010) <
https://www.e-ir.info/2010/03/28/historically-european-morally-universal-the-1951-geneva-convention-on-the-status-of-refugees/#google_vignette
archived at <
https://perma.cc/YC8G-RSZK
‘Rethinking International Law’ (n
Andrew Shacknove,
‘From Asylum to Containment’
(1993) 5(4)
International Journal of
Refugee Law
, 529; Woldemariam, Maguire and von Meding (n
Charles B Keely, ‘The
International Refugee Regime(s): The End of the Cold War Matters’ (2001)
International Migration Review
Noting the post-Cold War
shift to containment of refugees in countries of origin, T Alexander Aleinikoff
argued ‘[a]s resettlement
possibilities become more remote and
“temporary” arrangements become depressingly long-term, primary
attention is now
being directed to the countries of origin of refugee flows. In
short, in the past decade the
exilic bias
has been superseded by a
source-control
bias’: T Alexander Aleinikoff, ‘State-Centered
Refugee Law: From Resettlement to Containment’
(1992) 14(1)
Journal of International Law
, 130 (emphasis in original).
See generally Jessica
Howard, ‘To Deter and Deny: Australia and the Interdiction of Asylum
Seekers’ (2003) 21(4)
See generally Erika Feller,
‘Carrier Sanctions and International Law’
(1989) 1(1)
International Journal of Refugee Law
‘[P]ost-Cold War
reactions to migration hold novel characteristics from those responses that
existed during and before the
Cold War. This diversity of features is, according
to us, the consequence of the securitisation of migration’: Valeria Bello,
‘The Spiralling of the Securitisation of Migration in the EU: From the
Management of a “Crisis” to a Governance
of Human Mobility?’
Journal of Ethnic and Migration Studies
Some of the prominent
international agreements include the
Convention Relating to the International
Status of Refugees
, opened for signature 28 October
1933, 159 LNTS 3663
Convention Concerning the Status of Refugees Coming From Germany
opened for signature 10 February
1938, 192 LNTS 4461.
Refugees in
Inter-War Europe
Ben-Nun (n 5) 26–7; Karin Åberg, ‘Examining the Vulnerability
Procedure: Group-Based Determinations at the
EU Border’ (2022) 41(1)
Refugee Survey Quarterly
Jeremy Hein notes
‘[f]rom World War Two to the end of the Cold War, decolonization and
superpower conflict produced the largest
number of refugees’: Jeremy Hein,
‘Refugees, Immigrants and the State’ (1993) 19
Annual Review of
43, 47. James L Carlin notes that ‘[o]n the African
continent, the rapid pace of decolonization and the subsequent struggle
power, as well as racial and religious persecution, have precipitated the
displacement of countless human beings, currently estimated
to be in the
millions’: James L Carlin, ‘Significant Refugee Crises since World
War II and the Response of the International
(1982) 3(1)
Michigan Journal of International Law
, 4. See generally Albert Kraler
et al, ‘Learning from the Past: Protracted Displacement in the Post-World
War II Period’
(Working Paper No 2, Transnational Figurations of
Displacement, 2020) 3.
For example, according to
UNHCR reports, the recent conflicts that broke out in Sudan, Gaza and Myanmar in
2023 have forcibly displaced
more than 6 million, 1.6 million and 1.3 million
people respectively. These are all group-based displacements that arise from
circumstances
that subject a large number of people to conditions that are
threatening to life and safety. See United Nations High Commissioner
Global Trends: Forced Displacement in 2023
(Report, 2023)
There is significant debate
among scholars regarding the legal basis for prima facie protection, its meaning
and legal effects. See,
eg, George Okoth-Obbo, ‘Thirty Years On: A Legal
Review of the 1969 OAU Refugee Convention Governing the Specific Aspects of
Refugee Problems in Africa’ (2001) 20(1)
Refugee Survey Quarterly
79, 89. Marina Sharpe argues that neither the
OAU Refugee Convention
1951 Refugee Convention
provide for prima facie or group-based
determination of refugee status: Marina Sharpe,
The Regional Law of Refugee
Protection in Africa
(Oxford University Press, 2018) 66–70. The UNHCR
adopted a formal guideline on the topic in 2015 and notes the
OAU Refugee
1951 Refugee Convention
and resolutions of the UN
General Assembly as providing the legal basis for prima facie determination of
refugee status: United Nations
High Commissioner for Refugees,
Guidelines on
International Protection No 11: Prima Facie Recognition of Refugee
, UN Doc HCR/GIP/15/11 (24 June 2015) 2. Matthew Albert argues that
prima facie determination of refugee status is a form of individual
determination as opposed to group-determination: Matthew Albert, ‘Prima
Facie Determination of Refugee Status: An Overview
and its Legal
Foundation’ (Working Paper Series No 55, January 2010) 10.
See generally Are John
Knudsen and Kjersti G Berg (eds),
Continental Encampment: Genealogies of
Humanitarian Containment in the Middle East and Europe
(Berghahn Books,
Report of the United
Nations High Commissioner for Refugees: Part II
, UN GAOR, 73
sess, Supp No 12, UN Doc A/73/12 (2 August 2018) (‘
Global Compact on
Global Compact for Safe,
Orderly and Regular Migration
, GA Res 73/195, 73
plen mtg, Agenda Items 14 and 119, UN Doc A/RES/73/195 (11
January 2019).
See generally Mattias
Ekman, ‘Anti-Immigration and Racist Discourse in Social Media’
(2019) 34(6)
European Journal of Communication
606. In his empirical
study, Kenneth R Vaughan argues that ‘[n]egative attitudes toward
immigrants are associated with lowered
evaluations of democracy and increased
illiberal-democratic preferences’: Kenneth R Vaughan,
‘Anti-Immigrant Sentiment
and Opposition to Democracy in Europe’
(2021) 19(4)
Journal of Immigrant and Refugee Studies
See generally Adam S Harris
et al, ‘The Economic Roots of Anti-Immigrant Prejudice in the Global
South: Evidence from South
(2018) 71(1)
Political Research
This empirical study identifies how economic factors, mainly
the rate of unemployment, drive xenophobic sentiments in South Africa.
On the occasion of
Australia’s submission of its third Universal Periodic Review report in
January 2021, member states of the
UN expressed concern on the practice of
offshore processing of asylum claims and the indefinite detention of migrants
seekers, and called on Australia to stop the practice or review its
policies. See
Report of the Working Group on the Universal Periodic Review:
sess, Agenda Item 6, UN Doc A/HRC/47/8 (24 March
Nikolas Feith Tan,
‘Denmark’s Extraterritorial Asylum Vision’,
Refugee Law
(Blog Post, 19 April 2021) <
https://rli.blogs.sas.ac.uk/2021/04/19/denmarks-extraterritorial-asylum-vision/
archived at <
https://perma.cc/R535-2UCS
>. The UNHCR
provided its observation on the draft law which dubbed the Danish Bill an
attempt at ‘externalization’
and warned of its potential to
‘lead to an erosion of the international protection system’: United
Nations High Commissioner
for Refugees, ‘UNHCR Observations on the
Proposal for Amendments to the Danish Alien Act (Introduction of the Possibility
Transfer Asylum-Seekers for Adjudication of Asylum Claims and Accommodation
in Third Countries)’ (Report, 4 March 2021) 4.
Gabija Leclerc, Maria
Margarita Mentzelopoulou and Anita Orav,
Extraterritorial Processing of
Asylum Claims
(Briefing, January 2024) 7. For a detailed take on the
protocol, see Sergio Carrera, Giuseppe Campesi and Davide Colombi,
Italy-Albania Protocol on Extraterritorial Migration Management: A Worst
Practice in Migration and Asylum Policies
(Report, 2023).
Memorandum of
Understanding between the Government of the United Kingdom of Great Britain and
Northern Ireland and the Government
of the Republic of Rwanda for the Provision
of an Asylum Partnership Arrangement
, United Kingdom–Rwanda, signed 13
April 2022 (Memorandum of Understanding).
Nationality and Borders
(UK). See the UNHCR’s observations on the Bill for further
detail on how the Bill would impact the international protection
seekers: United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees, ‘UNHCR
Observations on the Nationality and Borders Bill,
Bill 141, 2021–22’
(Report, October 2021).
European Court of Human
Rights, ‘The European Court Grants Urgent Interim Measure in Case
Concerning Asylum Seeker’s
Imminent Removal from the UK to Rwanda’
(Press Release, ECHR 197, 14 June 2022).
AAA v Secretary of State
for the Home Department
[2022] EWHC 3230 (Admin)
Ibid [438].
R v Secretary of State
for the Home Department
[2023] UKSC 42
, 56 [149].
Safety of Rwanda (Asylum
and Immigration) Act 2024.
The UK has, however, sent
its first asylum seeker to Rwanda at the end of April 2024. This was done under
a voluntary scheme: Harry
Cole, ‘LIFT OFF: First Ever Migrant Sent to
Rwanda in Historic Move that Will Help Stop the Boats & Remove Thousands
The Sun (online, 30 Apr 2024) <
https://www.thesun.co.uk/news/politics/27641889/first-migrant-sent-to-rwanda-sunak/
archived at <
https://perma.cc/X22Z-SVNJ
Hanne Beirens and Samuel
Davidoff-Gore, ‘The UK-Rwanda Agreement Represents Another Blow to
Territorial Asylum’,
Migration Policy Institute
(Commentary, April
https://www.migrationpolicy.org/news/uk-rwanda-asylum-agreement
archived at <
https://perma.cc/LED8-KJSN
Refugee Law Initiative,
‘Refugee Law Initiative Declaration on Externalisation and Asylum’
(2022) 34(1)
International Journal of Refugee Law
See generally Chetail,
‘Fridtjof Nansen’ (n 2); Skran, ‘Profiles of the First
Two High Commissioners’ (n
See generally Richard
Breitman, Barbara McDonald Stewart and Severin Hochberg (eds),
Advocate for
the Doomed: The Diaries and Papers of James G McDonald, 1932–1935
(Indiana University Press, 2007); Burgess (n
); Skran, ‘Profiles of the First
Two High Commissioners’ (n
Claudena M Skran,
‘Gustave Ador, the ICRC, and Leadership on Refugee and Migration
Humanitarian Law and Policy
(Blog Post, 30 January 2018)
https://blogs.icrc.org/law-and-policy/2018/01/30/gustave-ador-the-icrc-and-leadership-on-refugee-and-migration-policy/
archived at <
https://perma.cc/8JDD-7WRN
(‘Gustave Ador’).
Loescher, ‘The
International Refugee Regime’ (n
) 354; Holborn (n
Marit Fosse and John
Nansen: Explorer and Humanitarian
(Hamilton Books, 2015) 49, 86.
Skran, ‘Profiles
of the First Two High Commissioners’ (n
) 283, 286; Skran,
Refugees in
Inter-War Europe
Refugees in
Inter-War Europe
230–1; Loescher, ‘Beyond Charity’ (n
Refugees in
Inter-War Europe
Some of the arrangements
and treaties adopted in the interwar period include:
Arrangement with Respect
to the Issue of Certificates of Identity to Russian Refugees
Arrangement of 12 May 1926 Relating
to the Issue of Identity Certificates to Russian and Armenian Refugees
Arrangement of 30 June
1928 Relating to the Legal Status of Russian and Armenian Refugees
1928, 89 LNTS 2005
Arrangement of 30 June 1928 Relating to
the Legal Status of Russian and Armenian Refugees
Arrangement
Concerning the Extension to Other Categories of Certain Measures Taken in Favour
of Russian and Armenian Refugees
Convention Relating to the
International Status of Refugees
, signed 28 October
1933, 159 LNTS 3663
Convention Relating to the International Status of
Convention Concerning the Status of Refugees Coming
from Germany
, opened for signature 10 February 1938, 192 LNTS No 4461
Convention Concerning the Status of Refugees Coming from
Thomas Gammeltoft-Hansen
and Nikolas F Tan, ‘The End of the Deterrence Paradigm? Future Directions
for Global Refugee Policy’
(2017) 5(1)
Journal on Migration and Human
International
Covenant on Civil and Political Rights
, opened for signature 19 December
1966, 999 UNTS 171
(entered into force 23 March 1976) art 12.
Universal Declaration
of Human Rights
, GA Res 217 A, UN GAOR, UN Doc A/810 (10 December 1948) art
1951 Refugee
For a detailed
discussion of how human rights law could be used to enhance the protection of
the rights of refugees, see generally
Brian Gorlick, ‘Human Rights and
Refugees: Enhancing Protection through International Human Rights Law’
(2000) 69(2)
Nordic Journal of International Law
The promotion of a human
rights-based approach to the various aspects and types of forced displacement
now holds a dominant place
in research and advocacy: see, eg, Bridget Lewis and
Rowena Maguire, ‘A Human Rights-Based Approach to Disaster Displacement
the Asia-Pacific’
(2016) 6(2)
Asian Journal of International Law
; Sébastien Jodoin, Kathryn Hansen and Caylee Hong,
‘Displacement Due to Responses to Climate Change: The Role of a
Rights-Based
Approach’ in Benoît Mayer and François
Crépeau (eds),
Research Handbook on Climate Change, Migration and the
(Edward Elgar, 2017) 205.
Louis Henkin,
‘Refugees and their Human Rights’
(1995) 18(4)
International Law Journal
, 1081 (emphasis added).
Gil Loescher,
‘UNHCR and Forced Migration’ in Elena Fiddian-Qasmiyeh et al (eds),
The Oxford Handbook of Refugee and Forced Migration Studies
University Press, 2014) 215, 217.
Some of the key
criticisms of the interwar refugee regime are summarised in Skran,
‘Historical Development of International
Refugee Law’ (n
At times, these resource
shortages meant that important and innovative projects for the settlement of
refugees could not proceed:
see Holborn, ‘The Legal Status of Political
Refugees’ (n 11) 688, where she notes the failure of Nansen and Albert
plan for mass settlement of displaced persons in the form of
agricultural communities due to an inability to secure the required
The involvement of
private actors in the interwar refugee work was high. Notable examples include
the participation of Jewish philanthropic
organisations in response to the
flight of Jewish refugees from Germany following the ascent to power of the
Third Reich: see ibid
Chetail outlines the
significant impact Nansen has had on the foundations of the current
international system of protection of refugees,
In the nine-year life of [the High commissioner for Russian Refugees], Nansen
ministered to hundreds of thousands of refugees, utilizing
the methods that were
to become the basis of the past and present international regime for the
protection of refugees: resettlement,
voluntary repatriation or local
integration. To this end, he set up a whole organization, buying food,
chartering transport and raising
the necessary funds. Nansen established what
would eventually become the basic structure of UNHCR, an office of the High
Commissioner
in Geneva with local representatives in host countries: Chetail,
‘Fridtjof Nansen’ (n 2) 4.
Ninette Kelley and Jean-Francois Durieux note that the funding model the
UNHCR has used for a while has been ‘the traditional
system of having to
rely solely on voluntary contributions’: Ninette Kelley and Jean-Francois
Durieux, ‘UNHCR and Current
Challenges in International Refugee
Protection’ (2004) 22(1)
See generally Skran,
Refugees in Inter-War Europe
) 146–84: In chapter five, Skran
outlines several episodes of displacements that the interwar refugee
institutions managed,
the number of people that received assistance and the
constant struggle to fund the initiatives to provide durable solutions to
populations.
David R Stone,
‘Imperialism and Sovereignty: The League of Nations’ Drive to
Control the Global Arms Trade’
(2000) 35(2)
Journal of Contemporary
, 213–4; FS Northedge,
The League of Nations: Its Life
and Times 1920–1946
(Leicester University Press, 1986) 165–6;
Frank and Reinisch (n
Kimberly Lowe, ‘Reassessing the League of Nations’ Humanitarian
Assistance Regimes, 1918–1939’ in Ute
Planert and James Retallack
Decades of Reconstruction: Postwar Societies, State-Building, and
International Relations from the Seven Years’ War to the Cold
(Cambridge University Press, 2017) 293, 293.
‘The Nobel Peace
Prize 1954’,
The Nobel Prize
(Web Page) <
https://www.nobelprize.org/prizes/peace/1954/summary/
archived at <
https://perma.cc/XQA2-BGQ2
‘The Nobel Peace
Prize 1981’,
The Nobel Prize
(Web Page) <
https://www.nobelprize.org/prizes/peace/1981/summary/
archived at <
https://perma.cc/U6QU-Z54V
The support given by
non-state actors to refugees and displaced persons continues as a significant
feature of the regime to date.
For a great resource documenting the role of
grassroots community movements supporting refugees and asylum seekers in the
of the 2015 ‘refugee crisis’ in Europe, see Sue Clayton,
The New Internationalists: Activist Volunteers in the European Refugee
(Goldsmiths Press, 2020).
T Alexander Aleinikoff
and David Owen, ‘Refugee Protection: “Here” or
“There”?’ (2022) 10(3)
Migration Studies
For a brief history of
encampment and analysis of encampment as a refugee distancing measure, see
generally Geoffrey Heeren, ‘Distancing
Refugees’ (2020) 97(4)
Denver Law Review
Matthew J Gibney,
‘Refugees and Justice between States’ (2015) 14(4)
Journal of Political Theory
For analysis on the role
of private and voluntary organisations during the interwar period, see Skran,
Refugees in Inter-War Europe
Skran, ‘Gustave
A list of some of the
interwar period non-state actors can be found at Skran,
Refugees in Inter-War
) 79–81. The
UNHCR also provides a list of its non-state partners at: ‘Our
United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees
https://www.unhcr.org/en-au/governments-and-partners.html
archived at <
https://perma.cc/PUY2-NN76
Refugee literature has
been robust since the interwar period, where we find contemporaneous
commentaries on the works of the series
of refugee institutions under the
League: see generally Richard Black, ‘Fifty Years of Refugee Studies: From
Theory to Policy’
(2001) 35(1)
International Migration Review
The post-WWII period also witnessed a burgeoning refugee literature including
works by Jacques Vernant, Paul Weis, Atle Grahl-Madsen,
Guy S Goodwin-Gill,
Claudena Skran, James C Hathaway, Gil Loescher, BS Chimni and so many more.
Currently, there are many journals
serving the purpose of advocacy and
engagement with refugee issues, such as the
International Journal of Refugee
Journal of Refugee Studies
Refugee Survey
Refuge: Canada’s Journal of Refugees
Academic and policy
institutions have also expanded and we now have well-established centres of
enquiry such as the Refugee Studies
Centre at Oxford (founded in 1982) and the
Andrew and Renata Kaldor Centre for International Refugee Law at the University
South Wales (founded in 2013).
For a critical
evaluation of the geopolitics of knowledge production in this area, see Chimni,
‘The Geopolitics of Refugee
Studies’ (n
See generally ibid.
Eduardo Galeano,
Upside Down: A Primer for the Looking-Glass World
(Metropolitan Books,
Bentwich (n
) 115; Bradley et al (n
) 166–7, 174.
Refugees in
Inter-War Europe
For example, after the
Nansen International Office for Refugees was created in 1930, ‘the
political and legal protection of
the refugees was ... entrusted to the organs
of the League; and a special Refugee Office would take over the humanitarian
hitherto discharged by the High Commissioner’: Bentwich (n
Bradley et al (n
Implementing Actions
Proposed by the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees to Strengthen the
Capacity of his Office to Carry
Out its Mandate
, GA Res 58/153, UN GAOR,
mtg, Agenda Item 112, UN Doc A/RES/58/153
(24 February 2004).
See generally Cecilia
Ruthström-Ruin,
Beyond Europe: The Globalization of Refugee Aid
(Lund University Press, 1993).
1951 Refugee
Gil Loescher,
‘UNHCR’s Origins and Early History: Agency, Influence, and Power in
Global Refugee Policy’ (2017)
For a detailed
discussion of the exclusion of non-European refugees from the international
refugee regime, see generally Glen Peterson,
‘Sovereignty, International
Law, and the Uneven Development of the International Refugee Regime’
(2015) 49(2)
Modern Asian Studies
This is not a denial of
the humanitarian motives that have played a role in the establishment of the
refugee regime. Scholars have
identified this as one of the plausible
explanations for the emergence of the refugee regime: Skran,
Refugees in
Inter-War Europe
However, humanitarianism does not provide the full picture of why the regime was
installed particularly when the issue is considered
in the light of the measured
and constrained commitment of states. Loescher, for example, argued that the
‘self-serving interest’
of states was one of the reasons behind the
creation of the international refugee regime: Loescher, ‘The International
351–2. Holborn also noted that ‘[p]olitical considerations of
responsibility and of expediency, the desire to build
up the League as an
instrument of international conciliation, and humanitarian sympathies have
played a part in deciding the character
and extent of responsibility the
League’s organs were to accept’: Holborn, ‘The League of
Nations and the Refugee
Problem’ (n
) 124. See also Natasha Saunders,
‘Paradigm Shift or Business as Usual? An Historical Reappraisal of the
to Securitisation of Refugee Protection’ (2014) 33(3)
Refugee Survey Quarterly
Hathaway, ‘A
Reconsideration of the Underlying Premise of Refugee Law’ (n
) 153; Maja Janmyr, ‘The 1951
Refugee Convention and Non-Signatory States: Charting a Research Agenda’
(2021) 33(2)
International Journal of Refugee Law
Bradley et al (n
) 172; Saunders (n
Chimni, ‘The
Geopolitics of Refugee Studies’ (n
Barbara Harrell-Bond,
Refugees and the International System: The Evolution of Solutions
(Report, June 1995) 5. A prominent example of the en masse recognition of
refugees during the Cold War occurred with the admission
of Hungarian refugees
fleeing the revolution of 1956: Joel Boutroue et al,
The State of the
World’s Refugees, 2000: Fifty Years of Humanitarian Action
University Press, 2000) 29–31; Greg Burgess,
Refugees and the Promise
of Asylum in Postwar France, 1945–1995
(Palgrave Macmillan, 2019) 168.
Greg Burgess noted that the legal flexibility shown to accommodate Hungarian
refugees within the
definition of a refugee under the
1951 Refugee
was a demonstration of ‘just how significant the Hungarian
refugees had become to Cold War politics’: at 169.
Julie Mertus, ‘The
State and the Post-Cold War Refugee Regime: New Models, New Questions’
(1998) 20(1)
Michigan Journal of International Law
Tendayi Achiume,
‘Race, Refugees, and International Law’ in Cathryn Costello,
Michelle Foster and Jane McAdam (eds),
The Oxford Handbook of International
Refugee Law
(Oxford University Press, 2021) 43, 56–9.
We have elsewhere
outlined the impacts of colonial domination in respect of migration and forced
displacement: Woldemariam, Maguire
and von Meding (n
) 250, 263–8.
Jonathan Crush and Abel
Chikanda, ‘Forced Migration in Southern Africa’ in Elena
Fiddian-Qasmiyeh et al (eds),
The Oxford Handbook of Refugee and Forced
Migration Studies
(Oxford University Press, 2014) 554, 556–60. Recent
contributions engaging with the impact of colonialism on forced displacement
be found in Martin Lemberg-Pedersen et al (eds),
Postcoloniality and Forced
Migration: Mobility, Control, Agency
(Bristol University Press, 2022).
Astri Suhrke, ‘A
Crisis Diminished: Refugees in the Developing World’ (n
) 218; Jay Ramasubramanyam,
‘Subcontinental Defiance to the Global Refugee Regime: Global Leadership
or Regional Exceptionalism?’
Asian Yearbook of International
, 71; Claire Eldridge, Christoph Kalter and Becky Taylor,
‘Migrations of Decolonization, Welfare, and the Unevenness of Citizenship
in the UK, France and Portugal’ (2023) 259(1)
Past and Present
OAU Refugee
Janmyr (n 140) 194.
Skran, for example,
highlights that ‘[t]he major actors in the international refugee regime
did not directly try to eliminate
war, one of the most obvious causes of refugee
movements. Instead, they left this task to the League of Nations as a
Refugees in Inter-War Europe
) 228. Skran further highlights the
absence of provisions to protect human rights abuses perpetrated by governments
and the sentiment
among governments that ‘a government’s treatment
of its own people was essentially a domestic concern and not an issue
international community’: at 228.
Reminiscing on the
little impact that the Évian Conference, convened to assist Jewish
refugees from Germany, has had in bringing
relief to Jewish refugees, Pertti
Ahonen quotes Israel’s Yad Vashem memorial: ‘At the conference, the
world’s democracies
made it clear that they were willing to do next to
nothing for the Jew of Europe... The world’s doors, closed at Evian,
shut throughout World War II’: Pertti Ahonen, ‘Europe and
Refugees: 1938 and 2015–16’ (2018) 52(2–3)
Patterns of
For example, the League
of Nations ‘distance[d] itself from the [High Commissioner for Refugees
(Jewish and Others) Coming
from Germany]’: Skran,
Refugees in Inter-War
Refugees in
Inter-War Europe
Alessandra Roversi, ‘The Evolution of the Refugee Regime and Institutional
Responses: Legacies from the Nansen Period’
(2003) 22(1)
Refugee Survey
The first author’s
PhD thesis provides a detailed analysis on the internalist bias of explanations
of the causes of forced
displacement in the interwar period and how that
exonerated from scrutiny the broader regional forces that played a role in
those displacements: Samuel Berhanu Woldemariam, ‘Forced Human
Displacement, the State and International Law: A Critical Look
South’ (PhD Thesis, University of Newcastle, 2021).
The UN Commission on
Human Rights commissioned the study entitled ‘Human Rights and Mass
Exoduses’ under the leadership
of Sadruddin Aga Khan:
Human Rights and
Mass Exoduses: Report of the Secretary-General
sess, Agenda
Item 119(b), UN Doc A/58/186 (25 July 2003).
The UN General Assembly
commissioned another study that established a ‘Group of Governmental
Experts on International Cooperation
to Avert New Flows of Refugees’:
International Cooperation to Avert New Flows of Refugees
, GA Res 37/121,
plen mtg, UN Doc A/Res/37/121 (16
December 1982).
For a detailed take on
the failures of the two initiatives, see David A Martin, ‘Large-Scale
Migrations of Asylum Seekers’
American Journal of
International Law
The UN Commission on
Human Rights study on
Human Rights and Mass Exoduses
and the UN General
Assembly study on
International Cooperation to Avert New Flows of
are themselves examples of state-led initiatives on causes and
prevention, the first being proposed by Canada and the latter by Germany:
See generally Shacknove
); Cathryn Costello,
‘Overcoming Refugee Containment and Crisis’
(2020) 21(1)
Law Journal
Chimni, ‘The
Geopolitics of Refugee Studies’ (n
) 351, 360.
Skran, ‘Profiles
of the First Two High Commissioners’ (n
) 283. Skran highlights Nansen’s
insistence on neutrality in undertaking his work in the midst of politically
contested refugee
movements involving Russian and Bulgarian refugees and the
Greco-Turkish population exchange: at 286.
For the various nuances
of what neutrality entails, see David Forsythe, ‘UNHCR’s Mandate:
The Politics of Being Non-Political’
(Working Paper No 33, UNHCR, March
Statute of the Office
of the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees
Refugees in
Inter-War Europe
Skran notes how Nansen
‘used his status as a citizen from a neutral country to appeal for
humanitarian causes’ and how
‘[h]e addressed all his appeals on
purely humanitarian grounds’ directing the League to involve itself in the
dimensions of conflicts giving rise to displacement: Skran,
‘Profiles of the First Two High Commissioners’ (n
) 280–1, 294.
Harrell-Bond (n
For a brief review of
the political calculations in the development of the refugee regime, see
generally Guy S Goodwin-Gill, ‘The
Politics of Refugee Protection’
(2008) 27(1)
Refugee Survey Quarterly
8. Referring to the post-1990s
restrictive European Union policies on asylum, Morten Kjærum writes that
‘the state interest
policy is dominant in comparison with human rights
protection’: Morten Kjærum, ‘Refugee Protection between State
Interests and Human Rights: Where Is Europe Heading?’
(2002) 24(2)
Human Rights Quarterly
Skran also noted the
tension that existed between states and refugee organisations in the context of
the interwar refugee work. ‘On
the one hand, governments created and
financed the High Commission and expected it to serve their interests. On the
other, the High
Commission had the humanitarian responsibility to assist
refugees and serve as their advocate in a world of states’: Skran,
‘Profiles of The First Two High Commissioners’ (n 24) 278.
Loescher (n
See generally BS Chimni,
‘Globalisation, Humanitarianism and the Erosion of Refugee
Protection’ (Working Paper No 3,
Refugee Studies Centre, February
Noting the post-Cold War
shift in the UNHCR’s humanitarian engagement, Tor Krever argued ‘the
use of a humanitarian discourse
masks what is fundamentally a shift to policies
of containment — and the pursuit of state, not refugee, interests —
have undermined UNHCR’s protection mandate’: Tor Krever,
‘“Mopping-Up”: UNHCR, Neutrality and Non-Refoulement
(2011) 10(3)
Chinese Journal of International Law
Nasia Anam,
‘Encampment as Colonization: Theorizing the Representation of Refugee
Spaces’ (2020) 50(3)
Journal of Narrative Theory
405, 406. Scholars
have also argued that encampment of refugees results from the absence of a
responsibility-sharing mechanism and
leads to it ‘either [being] coercive
for the hosting states or [undermining] the overall system of protection’:
and Owen (n
Loescher (n
United Nations High
Commissioner for Refugees,
Global Trends: Forced Displacement in 2022
(Report, 14 June 2023) 2.
Exploring the suggested
solutions to bridge the gap in responsibility-sharing is beyond the scope of
this paper. For literature on
this point see, eg, Aleinikoff and Owen (n
); Gibney (n
). Gibney calls for a
responsibility-sharing arrangement that is based on the ‘integrative
capacity’ of states and that
shows due consideration for the interests of
refugees: Gibney (n
Woldemariam, Maguire and
von Meding (n
Sadruddin Aga Khan,
Special Rapporteur,
Question of the Violation of Human Rights and Fundamental
Freedoms in Any Part of the World, with Particular Reference to Colonial
Other Dependent Countries and Territories: Study on Human Rights and Mass
sess, Agenda Item 12(b), UN Doc E/CN.4/1503 (31
December 1981).
International
Co-operation to Avert New Flows of Refugees
, GA Res 35/124, 92
mtg, UN Doc A/RES/35/124 (11 December 1980).
International
Co-operation to Avert New Flows of Refugees: Report of the
Secretary-General
sess, Agenda Item 66, UN Doc A/36/582 (23
October 1981) 18–27.
Ibid 6. The statement
was part of the response of the Australian Government to the UN
Secretary-General.
Stephen McCloskey,
‘The War in Ukraine Has Revealed a Hierarchy of Victims’ [2022] (34)
Policy and Practice: A Development Education Review
138, 141; Rachael
Reilly and Michael Flynn, ‘The Ukraine Crisis Double Standards: Has
Europe’s Response to Refugees Changed?’
Global Detention
(Working Paper, 2 March 2022) 1–2 <
https://www.globaldetentionproject.org/the-ukraine-crisis-double-standards-has-europes-response-to-refugees-changed
archived at <
https://perma.cc/USS5-9ZXB
Ramasubramanyam, ‘Some Refugees are Welcome, Others Not So Much:
Revisiting the “Myth of Difference”’,
Völkerrechtsblog
(Blog Post, 28 April 2022).
United Kingdom,
Parliamentary Debates
, House of Commons, 10 March 2022, vol 710, col
467, 470 (Priti Patel, Home Secretary).
‘First Migrants
Set for Rwanda to Be Given Final Notice’,
UK Government
1 June 2022) <
https://www.gov.uk/government/news/first-migrants-set-for-rwanda-to-be-given-final-notice
archived at <
https://perma.cc/KA3P-RPEU
Chimni, ‘The
Geopolitics of Refugee Studies’ (n
In his examination of
Global Compact on Refugees
, Chimni has for example highlighted the
failure to reflect on the ‘responsibility of third States, in particular
Western States,
for recent outflows of refugees linked to their acts of
intervention’: BS Chimni, ‘Global Compact on Refugees: One Step
Forward, Two Steps Back’
(2018) 30(4)
International Journal of Refugee
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (1.5 MB)
PDF format (754 KB)
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter