URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/journals/SydLawRw/2024/24.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 15:38:40
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Hynard, Emerson; Slobedman, Ilana --- "Intermediate Appellate Courts and the Doctrine of Precedent: Lendlease Corporation Ltd v Pallas" [2024] SydLawRw 24; (2024) 46(4) Sydney Law Review 483
I Introduction
II Diverging Interpretations
III A Single Common Law and the ‘Plainly Wrong’ Rule
IV Two Propositions
A Approaches Taken to Conflicting IAC Authorities
B The Principled Approach
V Conclusion
Before the High Court
Intermediate Appellate Courts and the Doctrine of Precedent:
Corporation Ltd v Pallas
The High Court of Australia appeal in
Lendlease Corporation Ltd v
raises a novel question of precedent: what approach should an
intermediate appellate court (‘IAC’) take when faced with
IAC authorities? The cases reveal that different approaches have been adopted:
deferring to the home jurisdiction, favouring
the most recent decision, and
approaching the issue afresh. The principled answer to this question must be
informed by the modern
concept of a single Australian common law and the
corollary rule that an IAC should not depart from a decision of another IAC on
an issue of national operation unless convinced that the earlier decision is
‘plainly wrong’. It is argued that if Court
B has found a decision
of Court A to be plainly wrong, should the issue come before Court A again for
determination, it is not open
for Court A to defer to its previous decision or
consider the matter afresh. In an integrated judicial system of equals working
to achieve a common goal, consistency demands that Court A give
heightened deference to the decision of Court B.
Introduction
Lendlease Corporation Ltd v
the High Court will
consider conflicting interpretations of a statutory provision reached by two
intermediate appellate courts (‘IACs’).
Our focus is not on the
construction of that provision, but rather a novel question of precedent that
arises on the pending appeal.
It is now orthodox that an IAC ‘should [not]
depart from a decision of another intermediate appellate court’ when
interpreting
uniform national legislation, Commonwealth legislation, or the
common law of Australia, unless ‘convinced that the interpretation
But beneath this rule lies a host of narrower, unanswered questions, including
that raised by the appeal: what approach should an
IAC take when faced with
competing IAC authorities?
Notwithstanding this is a question of general importance to the role of IACs
in a single federal polity, it is ‘not an issue
on which the parties or
contradictor [are] joined’ and the parties ‘[do] not have any
particular interest’ in the
It has therefore been the
subject of minimal attention in the written submissions filed by the
The purpose of this
column is to fill that lacuna. As a necessary first step, Part II traces the
emergence of the two competing lines
of authority. Part III articulates the
rationale for the ‘plainly wrong’ rule as tempering the interests of
consistency
and correctness. Part IV then interrogates the approach taken by the
New South Wales Court of Appeal, arguing that the principled
approach would have
been to give heightened deference to the decision of the Full Federal Court of
Australia. Part V concludes.
Diverging Interpretations
The constructional question before the High Court concerns
Civil Procedure Act 2005
Federal Court of
Australia Act 1976
(Cth), both of which state that a ‘Court may, at
any stage, order that notice of any matter be given to a group member or group
members’. The issue on appeal is whether these provisions authorise the
issuance of a notice foreshadowing that upon settlement,
group members who
neither registered nor opted out by a specified date will not be able to share
in the settlement, but will nevertheless
be bound by it.
The New South Wales Court of Appeal answered this question in the negative in
Wigmans v AMP
by the High Court’s reasoning in
Two years later, in
Parkin v Boral
, the Full Federal Court reached the
conclusion.
In doing so, Murphy and Lee JJ noted as ‘trite, but necessary, to
stress’ that the Court should not depart from
considered it to be plainly
Their Honours stated: ‘As another intermediate appellate court within an
integrated national legal system, we should be slow
to conclude that a
considered judgment of another intermediate court is “plainly wrong”
Following an
analysis of the relevant statutory provisions and the reasoning of the New South
Wales Court of Appeal in
, their Honours were ultimately
‘compelled’ to the conclusion that
was plainly wrong
and should not be followed.11F
Pallas v Lendlease Corporation
the New South Wales Court of Appeal sat an enlarged Bench to revisit the
correctness of the decision in
Bell CJ (with whom
Gleeson, Leeming and Stern JJA agreed) stated:
The starting point of the analysis is not whether s 175(5) of the [
Procedure Act 2005
] confers power on this court to include a notification of
the kind sought to be included in the opt out and registration notice that
parties seek to be issued in the present case. It is whether this court’s
recent unanimous decision in
(which both parties accepted
compelled a negative answer to that question) is plainly wrong and should not be
Ultimately,
the Chief Justice accepted that, while opinions could differ on the question,
was not plainly wrong, the reasoning in
sufficiently justify the conclusion that
was plainly wrong, and
was correct.14F
Notably, and without providing any authority or
justification, Bell CJ also observed:
One matter left unresolved on the authorities concerns what a court is to do in
circumstances where neither of two competing interpretations
can be said to meet
the onerous threshold of being plainly wrong. Where one of those decisions is
that of the same court which has
previously expressed a view on the matter, that
court should adhere to its previously expressed
Writing separately, Ward P was not convinced that either
was plainly wrong. Had the President been
was plainly wrong, her Honour ‘would have
concluded that there was compelling reason (namely, for uniformity in this area)
to depart from [
], having regard to the different conclusion
reached [in
Honour agreed with Bell CJ that when faced with this ‘dilemma’, the
Court ought to defer to its own previous
decision.17F
Accordingly, the
New South Wales Court of Appeal followed
The question to which the pending appeal gives rise is whether this mode of
reasoning was correct.
A Single Common Law and the ‘Plainly
Wrong’ Rule
Fundamental to this issue is the concept of a single common law of Australia.
This concept, in its current form, is relatively
It was preceded by a more expansive pursuit: pan-Commonwealth
uniformity.
While in theory pan-Commonwealth uniformity encompassed intra-Australian
uniformity, the reality was more
nuanced.20F
English–Australian deference was not reciprocal and Australian courts were
often forced to choose between ‘imperial deference
or intra-Australian
camaraderie’.21F
while some proposed a precedential obligation between coordinate Australian
courts stretching beyond mere
in the first half of the 20
century, no duty in this regard was
recognised.23F
As Chief Justice
Barwick observed extra-judicially in 1970, notwithstanding ‘some degree of
comity’ that existed between
the courts of the colonies and then the
states, ‘the decisions of the courts of one colony or State did not and do
the courts of
another’.24F
It was only
when ties with the motherland started to loosen that greater bonds between IACs
began to be forged.25F
Several decades on, it is now accepted that there is one common law of
Australia. A
‘consequence’
‘corollary’
thereof is that, as stated above, an IAC should not depart from a decision of
another IAC on the interpretation of uniform legislation,
Commonwealth
legislation, or the common law, unless convinced that interpretation is plainly
wrong. This is for two interlocking
reasons. The
is that the High
Court does not need to pronounce on an issue before it can be said that the
common law of Australia
Rather, there is
always a uniform rule throughout the country although, like
Schrödinger’s cat, its true form might not
finally be revealed until
the High Court opines.29F
principled development of the common law is thus a collective duty of all courts
of Australia.30F
reason is the importance of consistency in the development and application
of the law. The interests of stability, respect, certainty,
confidence in the integrated judicial system require that courts of a certain
level apply laws in a uniform
In a single federation where there are ten IACs and many potential voices,
the plainly wrong rule exists as a principle of restraint
which promotes
consistency and coherence in Australia’s single common
This interest in
consistency is more onerous than
As Black CJ stated in
S v Boulton
, ‘comity’, suggesting as it does a basis in
goodwill and courtesy, does not ‘reflect sufficiently the approach
should be taken when a point of common law comes to be considered by one of
Australia’s
[IACs]’.34F
The obligation
is a heightened one of ‘duty’ to avoid ‘an undesirable
disconformity’ between the views of
two different courts on a common
As Chief Justice
Gageler has written, extra-judicially:
Comity conveys a mutuality of respect among equals. What comity does not quite
convey is the critical contemporary notion of equals
within the one system of
law working together in a co-ordinated fashion to achieve a common
The duty imposed upon IACs is not, however, unfettered.
Flexibility is provided to depart from a decision where it meets the threshold
of being ‘plainly wrong or, to use a different expression, [where there
is] a compelling reason to do
What is meant by
the term ‘plainly wrong’ has been the subject of ‘rich and
nuanced analysis’.38F
Bell CJ noted in
, while the disjunctive is important, these are
really ‘two sides’ of the same coin: a compelling reason to depart
an earlier decision is that the judgment is clearly demonstrated to be
erroneous; equally, a strong conviction that the earlier judgement
is erroneous
will often provide a compelling reason to depart from
It would be overly
simplistic to impose a checklist criterion to the level of persuasion
At bottom, the essential question is whether, in all the circumstances, the
correctness
sufficiently outweighs the pursuit of
consistency
and its associated
Two Propositions
The New South Wales Court of Appeal’s reasoning in
to strike a different balance. It can be encapsulated by two sequential
propositions:
Proposition 1
: If Court B finds a decision of Court A to be
plainly wrong, should the issue come before Court A
determination the ‘starting point’ is for Court A to ask whether its
original decision is plainly
Proposition 2
: If Court A is not convinced its earlier
decision is plainly wrong, or that the decision of Court B is plainly wrong, it
is appropriate
for Court A to ‘adhere to its previously expressed
Proposition 1 is unsupported at a level of principle and authority. The
better view is that when Court B has declared the decision
of Court A to be
plainly wrong, Court A must apply the same plainly wrong threshold to Court
B’s decision if it is to depart
from it. On this reasoning, Proposition 2
falls away. To make good this argument, it is convenient to trace the
authorities dealing
with conflicting decisions generally, before turning to
examine the principled approach.
Approaches Taken to Conflicting IAC
Authorities
No doubt a product of their historical context, earlier decisions exhibit
deference to the home IAC in circumstances of conflict.
For example, in the 1967
decision of
Australian appellate court was confronted with apparently conflicting decisions
of the English Court of Criminal Appeal and
one of its previous decisions on the
issue of whether multiple convictions in one day constituted separate
‘occasions’.
Hogarth J was ultimately not satisfied that the
decisions were conflicting but noted that, if they were, the relevant
authorities
should be considered and, if doubt remained, ‘the Court should
adhere to its previous decision’, rationalising that a
dissatisfied party
could appeal.45F
The more recent decisions can be split into two categories.
The first category of case exhibits a preference for the most recent
authority, particularly where an earlier authority has been found
to be plainly
the New South
Wales Court of Appeal considered conflicting decisions of the Queensland and
Victorian appellate courts on an issue
concerning the
Corporations Law
The Victorian appellate court had declared the Queensland decision to be plainly
wrong. In resolving this conflict, the New South
Wales Court of Appeal followed
the Victorian decision as the most recent IAC decision on
Sheller JA stated that
‘[c]ertainty in the law’ requires
that only in an extreme case would an intermediate appellate court or a judge of
first instance not follow the latest decision by
an intermediate appellate court
if, in that latest decision, the arguments have been fully reviewed and a
conclusion reached that
an earlier decision of another intermediate appellate
court was plainly
Patrick Stevedores
, the Victorian Court of Appeal faced conflicting
decisions of the Full Court of the Supreme Court of Victoria and the Full
Court on an issue concerning the principles of procedural
fairness.49F
The Full Federal
Court had departed from the earlier Victorian decision, stating that it no
longer reflected a correct statement
of law. The Full Federal Court decision had
been followed, in preference to the Victorian decision, in other states such as
Australia. The Court determined that the circumstances before it were
ultimately distinguishable from that raised in the conflicting
However, had the cases
been directly on point, the Court found that it was ‘not bound to follow
any one of those
decisions’.51F
position was contrasted to a circumstance where, post
Farah Constructions v
, a later IAC decision finds an earlier IAC decision to be plainly
wrong. In that situation, the Court concluded that it ‘might
be bound to
follow the later decision unless [it] took the view that the later decision was
wrong”’.52F
The second category of case includes those that consider the relevant issue
Joyce v Grimshaw
, the Full Federal Court was confronted with
conflicting decisions of its own Court and a Queensland appellate court on the
interpretation
of a provision of the
Crimes Act 1914
The Court stated:
There is obviously a degree of tension, and potential conflict, between the need
for there to be comity between decisions of the
Full Court of this Court and
other intermediate State appellate courts, and the need for there to be comity
as between differently
constituted Full Courts of this
reconciling this conflict, the Full Court interpreted the provision in the
context of its history and background, and then assessed
the weight of
authorities.55F
ultimately favoured the interpretation previously reached by a differently
constituted Full Court.
South Wales Court of Criminal Appeal faced a situation like that hypothesised in
Patrick Stevedores
, with a later Victorian decision finding an earlier
New South Wales decision to be plainly wrong (in this case, on the approach to
prejudicial evidence).
However, Basten JA considered that the approach
put forward in
Patrick Stevedores
should not be followed because (1) it
implies that
is the final statement of the High Court on the
doctrine of precedent; and
(2) it is not conducive to the orderly administration of justice for IACs to
routinely characterise other IAC judgments as plainly
Uncertain though the state of current authority is, the course this court should
take in all the circumstances is to determine for
itself the correct approach to
the statutory provision, giving proper consideration to the reasoning and
conclusions of earlier authorities,
both in this court and in the Victorian
R v Kinghorn
, the New South Wales Court of Criminal Appeal was presented
with conflicting approaches to an issue under taxation legislation of
Queensland counterpart on the one hand, and an earlier decision of its own Court
(allied with its Western Australia counterpart)
on the other. Notably, no
reference had been made in the Queensland decision to the earlier New South
Wales and Western Australian
decisions. The Court found that it was ‘not
constrained by the principles laid down in
’ and proceeded to
resolve the issue by construing the legislation itself with the benefit of the
With these foundations laid, it is convenient to examine the principled
approach to the question raised on this High Court appeal.
The Principled
An IAC should depart from its own previous decision ‘cautiously and
only when compelled to the conclusion that the earlier decision
Much like the
plainly wrong rule governing inter-hierarchical relations, this reflects the
need for ‘restraint in departing
from previous decisions in order to
foster stability and predictability in the
It follows that
absent a decision of Court B, Proposition 1 reflects the correct starting
point for Court A.
But how does this principle of
-hierarchical deference interact
with that of
-hierarchical deference outlined above? The former
cannot be viewed in isolation from the latter. As the New South Wales Court of
Appeal stated in
Gett v Tabet
, in discussing the prevailing view that
whether an IAC should depart from one of its previous decisions is a matter of
practice for
each IAC to determine itself:
The constitutional importance of the doctrine of precedent cannot be entirely at
large within a national integrated legal system
to the extent that each
intermediate appellate court is entitled to determine for itself its own
practice with respect to following
earlier decisions. That is particularly so
... where ... intermediate appellate courts are required to take into account,
some circumstances follow, decisions of courts of coordinate
constraints on the principles of intra-hierarchical deference are important. As
established in
above, each IAC operates as part of a unified judicial
hierarchy with the High Court at its apex. In modern times, and particularly
respect of issues of national operation, that is a system in which IACs exist as
working together to achieve a
common goal
: the articulation
of Australia’s single common law. Taken to its logical end point, this
means that institutional distinctiveness
at the IAC level must be symbolic only.
Beyond historical custom, an IAC has no principled reason to treat an
-hierarchical IAC decision any differently to an
-hierarchical IAC decision. Of course, institutional distinctiveness
remains relevant to other parts of the precedential equation:
for example, in
accordance with ordinary rules of precedent in a hierarchical system, trial
judges remain bound to follow their home
IAC in the event of conflicting IAC
decisions.63F
However, at the
IAC level, a single common law dictates that the pursuit of
-hierarchical consistency is but one component of, and must necessarily
yield to, the pursuit of
-hierarchical consistency.
Once the above is appreciated, Proposition 1 cannot stand.
Where one IAC has declared the decision of another IAC to be plainly wrong,
as the Court in
did the decision in
, there is no
inconsistency in the law. After full consideration of the legal issue and Court
A’s earlier decision on that legal
issue, Court B has, in accordance with
the plainly wrong threshold, decided to depart from it. The palimpsest of the
single common
law has altered. The Court in
therefore erred in
asking itself whether
was plainly wrong. It would also have erred
if it purported to consider the matter afresh without giving heightened
deference to
the decision in
In a national
judicial system of equals working together in a coordinated fashion to achieve a
common goal, the New South Wales Court
of Appeal owed a duty to follow
unless it was itself convinced that the Full Court in
was plainly
This is consistent
with the reasoning in
Re J & E Holdings
Patrick Stevedores
. Basten JA’s
criticisms of this approach in
are uncompelling. To the extent it
could be said that at the time of that decision the precedential rules between
IACs were still
in a state of flux, the position is now relatively
And while it may be undesirable for courts to declare others plainly wrong, this
is a necessary consequence of a unified system in
which the interests of
consistency and correctness are to be balanced. As is explained below, this
latter issue can at least in part
be alleviated by a shift in the nomenclature
To state the position another way: the correct starting point is for Court A
to recognise that the decision of Court B reflects the
common law of Australia.
True it is that Court A may, as in
, disagree with whether the
threshold has been met to justify the conclusion reached by Court B to depart
from the original decision
of Court A. But if Court B has fully considered the
decision of Court A and applied the correct standard of departure (as the Full
Court did in
), Court A can only interrogate the reasoning of Court
B to assess whether Court B’s decision is plainly wrong,
assess whether Court B’s treatment of Court A’s previous decision
was persuasive enough to justify departure. To accept
the alternative would
undermine the premise of a requirement of heightened deference; it would mean
that an IAC could always second-guess
another IAC’s ‘plainly
wrong’ finding, generating a similar potential for inconsistency as would
pertain if the
plainly wrong rule did not exist. Of course, if Court B
overlooked a critical issue (which may, but need not, have featured in Court
A’s original decision), this may provide a ‘compelling reason’
for Court A to depart from Court B’s decision,
but one would think that
when an issue is being considered for a third time, even greater restraint is to
be exercised.67F
The distinction
we have drawn here is subtle but important. Proper framing of the inquiry
promotes convergence to a single answer,
rather than divergence to potentially
conflicting answers.
Ultimately, Proposition 1 insists upon an anachronism of a colonial epoch
where IACs viewed comity as their only connecting force.
That approach does not
find favour in the modern authorities or at a level of principle. If
Proposition 1 is incorrect, Proposition
2 falls away. There is no need to
reconcile two
plainly wrong decisions. That logic would lead to an
equally erroneous end point: Court A is left promoting
consistency
by searching for
correctness.
In reaching this conclusion, one cannot be critical of the approach taken by
the New South Wales Court of Appeal. There is an innate
perplexity in
reconciling the concept of a single common law with the existence of distinct
judicial hierarchies and the historical
context in which those hierarchies have
evolved from independent colonies to a Commonwealth of common enterprise. There
inherent ‘awkwardness’ in the practice of an IAC
declaring the decisions of another IAC to be plainly wrong, which is
‘likely to appear as a gratuitous insult when applied to another
This appeal
gives the High Court the opportunity to address both issues. As to the former,
it is a matter of clarifying that IACs
exist as equals within one system of law
working together in a coordinated fashion to achieve a common goal. As to the
is making clear that
‘pejorative’69F
phrases such as ‘plainly wrong’ are not productive of that common
goal and should be avoided; the focus instead should
be directed to the
‘quality and cogency of the case made out for departure from [an] earlier
decision’.70F
The interaction between IACs in Australia’s integrated judicial
hierarchy has changed significantly since Federation. We have
argued that the
modern concept of a single common law of Australia and the corollary rules of
heightened deference that govern IAC
relations mean that where an IAC is
considering an issue of national operation, institutional distinctiveness is
symbolic only. It
follows that the New South Wales Court of Appeal in
erred in considering for itself whether it should depart from its
earlier decision in
. It ought to have given heightened deference
to the more recent decision of the Full Federal Court in
it was convinced that it should depart from that decision.
Please cite this column as:
Emerson Hynard and Ilana Slobedman, ‘Intermediate Appellate Courts and
the Doctrine of Precedent:
Lendlease Corporation Ltd v Pallas
[2024] SydLawRw 24
(2024) 46(4)
Sydney Law Review
DOI: https://doi.org/10.30722/slr.20274
This work is licensed via CC BY-ND 4.0
https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nd/4.0. Unmodified content is free to
use with proper
attribution.
* LLB (Hons I, Medal)
, BCL (Dist)
; Tutor, University
of Sydney Law School, New South Wales, Australia. Email:
emerson.hynard@sydney.edu.au; ORCID iD:
https://orcid.org/‌0000-0002-‌2588-6501.
† LLB (Hons) Candidate
. We are grateful to Charlie Ward and
the anonymous reviewer for their helpful comments on a draft of this column. All
views are our own.
Lendlease Corporation Ltd v
, High Court of Australia, Case No S108/2024.
Hill v Zuda Pty Ltd
[2022] HCA 21
(2022) 275 CLR 24
, 34–5 [25] (Kiefel CJ, Gageler, Keane, Gordon, Edelman,
Steward and Gleeson JJ) (‘
Constructions Pty Ltd v Say-Dee Pty Ltd
(2007) 230 CLR 89
, 151–2 [135]
(Gleeson CJ, Gummow, Callinan, Heydon and Crennan JJ)
CAL No 14 Pty Ltd v Motor Accidents
Insurance Board
(2009) 239 CLR 390
, 411–12 [49]–[50] (Gummow,
Heydon and Crennan JJ, Hayne J agreeing) (‘
Australian Securities Commission v Marlborough Gold Mines Ltd
[1993] HCA 15
, 492 (Mason CJ, Brennan, Dawson, Toohey and Gaudron JJ).
Lendlease Corporation Ltd,
‘Application for Special Leave to Appeal’, Special Leave Application
Lendlease Corporation Ltd v Pallas
, Case No S59/2024,
Lendlease Corporation Ltd,
‘Appellants’ Submissions’, Submission in
Corporation Ltd v Pallas
, Case No S108/2024, 12 September 2024,
[32]–[35], [67]–[69]; Contradictor, ‘Contradictor’s
Submissions’,
Submission in
Lendlease Corporation Ltd v Pallas
Case No S108/2024, 10 October 2024, [74]–[81]; Lendlease Corporation Ltd,
‘Appellants’ Reply’, Submission
Lendlease Corporation
Ltd v Pallas
, Case No S108/2024, 24 October 2024, [17]. The
respondents’ submissions do not address this issue.
Wigmans v AMP Ltd
[2020] NSWCA 104
102 NSWLR 199.
BMW Australia Ltd v
[2019] HCA 45
(2019) 269 CLR 574
Parkin v Boral Ltd
[2022] FCAFC 47
(2022) 291 FCR 116
(Murphy and Lee JJ, Beach J
Ibid 145 [109] (Murphy and
Lee JJ, Beach J agreeing) (citations omitted). Although not uniform legislation,
it was said that the
provisions ‘are in all but identical terms’,
589 [5] (Kiefel CJ, Bell and Keane JJ). On the application of the
‘plainly wrong’ rule to non-uniform statutes, see
) 145 [109]–[110] (Murphy and Lee
JJ, Beach J agreeing).
Pallas v Lendlease
Corporation Ltd
[2024] NSWCA 83
(2024) 114 NSWLR 81
107 [94], 112 [119] (Bell CJ, Gleeson, Leeming and Stern JJA agreeing).
Ibid 90 [23] (Bell CJ,
Gleeson, Leeming and Stern JJA agreeing).
Ibid 113 [127] (Ward P).
Lange v Australian
Broadcasting Corporation
[1997] HCA 25
(1997) 189 CLR 520
, 563–4 (Brennan CJ,
Dawson, Toohey, Gaudron, McHugh, Gummow and Kirby JJ);
Lipohar v The
[1999] HCA 65
(1999) 200 CLR 485
, 505–6 [44]–[45], 507 [50] (Gaudron,
Gummow and Hayne JJ) (‘
Antonia Glover,
‘What’s Plainly Wrong in Australian Law? An Empirical Analysis of
the Rule in
[2020] UNSWLawJl 31
(2020) 43(3)
UNSW Law Journal
‘Comity’ is used
in this sense to refer to the practice of respect, courtesy and civility: see
(2013) 84 NSWLR 363, 373 [34] (Basten JA)
Sir Garfield Barwick,
‘Precedent in the Southern Hemisphere’
(1970) 5(1)
, 18. See also AR Blackshield, ‘Precedent in South Australia:
The Hierarchic and the Heuristic’
[1980] AdelLawRw 7
(1981) 7(1)
Adelaide Law Review
The reasons for the shift
were gradual and have been canvassed elsewhere: see, eg, Glover (n
Mark Leeming,
Common Law,
Equity and Statute: A Complex Entangled System
(Federation Press, 2023) ch
Construction, Forestry,
Maritime, Mining and Energy Union v Personnel Contracting Pty Ltd
[2020] FCAFC 122
, 667–8 [125] (Lee J, Allsop CJ and Jagot J agreeing)
Personnel Contracting
) 506 [46] (Gaudron, Gummow and Hayne
JJ). Cf Robert Stevens, ‘Review Essay: Sorting Sources’
[2023] SydLawRw 23
(2023) 45(4)
Sydney Law Review
Miller v Miller
[2011] HCA 9
(2011) 242 CLR 446
, 486 [120] (Heydon J).
Gett v Tabet
[2009] NSWCA 76
109 NSWLR 1
, 13 [286] (Allsop P, Beazley and Basten JJA)
) 35 [26] (Kiefel CJ, Gageler, Keane,
Gordon, Edelman, Steward and Gleeson JJ).
Hasler v Singtel Optus
[2014] NSWCA 266
(2014) 87 NSWLR 609
, 631 [101] (Leeming JA, Gleeson and
Barrett JJA agreeing).
S v Boulton
[2006] FCAFC 99
151 FCR 364
, 370 [26] (Black CJ).
) 412–13 [51] (Gummow, Heydon and
Crennan JJ, Hayne J agreeing).
Justice Stephen Gageler,
‘Integrating the Australian Judicial System’
(2023) 15(1)
Judicial Review
) 34–5 [25] (Kiefel CJ, Gageler,
Keane, Gordon, Edelman, Steward and Gleeson JJ), citing
) 151–2 [135] (Kiefel CJ, Gageler,
Keane, Gordon, Edelman, Steward and Gleeson JJ) and
RJE v Department of
[2008] VSCA 265
(2008) 21 VR 526
, 554 [104] (Nettle JA).
) 90 [23] (Bell CJ, Gleeson, Leeming and
Stern JJA agreeing).
One example of a factor from
the relevant cases is the existence of an immediately apparent error that was
not merely a difference
in choice of approach:
) 15 [294] (Allsop P, Beazley and
Basten JJA). Another is whether the principle is longstanding and has been
‘worked through
in a series of cases’:
[2022] NSWCCA 75
(2022) 108 NSWLR 17
, 35 [76] (Bell CJ, Gleeson JA, Harrison, Adamson
and Dhanji JJ agreeing) (‘
Personnel Contracting
) 644 [38] (Allsop CJ,
Jagot J agreeing).
As has been said, the rule
reflects a ‘compromise between the desirability of achieving uniformity
and the undesirability of
repeating gross error’:
) 35 [75] (Bell CJ, Gleeson JA,
Harrison, Adamson and Dhanji JJ agreeing), quoting Justice JD Heydon, ‘How
Far Can Trial Courts
and Intermediate Appellate Courts Develop the Law?’
(2009) 9(1)
Oxford University Commonwealth Law Journal
See above n
and accompanying text.
See above n
and accompanying text.
[1967] SASR
Ibid 202 (Hogarth J,
Mitchell J agreeing).
Re J & E Holdings Pty
(1995) 36 NSWLR 541.
Ibid 551 (Sheller JA,
Priestley and Powell JJA agreeing).
Ibid. This was quoted with
apparent approval in
David Grant & Co Pty Ltd v Westpac Banking
Corporation
(1995) 184 CLR 265
, 272 (Gummow J, Brennan CJ, Dawson, Gaudron
and McHugh JJ agreeing). See also
Spicer Thoroughbreds Pty Ltd v Stewart
[2023] NSWCA 82
, [56] (Leeming JA, Mitchelmore JA and Griffiths AJA agreeing);
Trans Pacific Investment Corporation Pty Ltd v Rusty Rees Pty Ltd
[1995] FCA 1223
, 214 (Black CJ, Davies and Beaumont JJ).
DPP (Vic) v Patrick
Stevedores Holdings Pty Ltd
[2012] VSCA 300
(2012) 41 VR 81.
Ibid 107 [118] (Maxwell P,
Weinberg JA and Ferguson AJA).
Ibid 109 [128] (Maxwell P,
Weinberg JA and Ferguson AJA).
Joyce v Grimshaw
[2001] FCA 52
(2001) 105 FCR 232.
Ibid 241 [47] (Miles,
Mathews and Weinberg JJ).
Ibid 241 [48] (Miles,
Mathews and Weinberg JJ).
Ibid 374 [38] (Basten JA,
Hoeben CJ at CL agreeing).
Ibid 375 [40] (Hoeben CJ at
CL and Simpson J agreeing). Further examples of courts considering a matter
afresh where an earlier IAC
decision has been deemed plainly wrong by a later
IAC decision
Xiao v The Queen
[2018] NSWCCA 4
, 51 [278] (Bathurst CJ, Beazley P, Hoeben CJ at CL, McCallum and
Bellew JJ) (‘
[1997] SASC 6053
(1997) 68 SASR 156
161–4 (Doyle CJ), 164 (Bollen J), 165 (Perry J), 165–6 (Duggan
J), 166–8 (Debelle J) (‘
’). See also
Construction, Forestry, Mining and Energy Union v Australian Building and
Construction Commissioner
[2018] FCAFC 4
(2018) 259 FCR 20
, 41 [62]–[65] (Bromwich J,
Kenny and Tracey JJ agreeing);
Rail Services Australia v Dimovski
[2004] NSWCA 267
, 665 [84] (Young CJ in Eq, Hodgson JA agreeing).
R v Kinghorn
[2021] NSWCCA 313
106 NSWLR 322
, 351–4 [113]–[132] (Bathurst CJ and Payne JA, Bell P,
Ward CJ in Eq and Bellew J agreeing) (‘
Further examples of courts considering a matter afresh where a later IAC
decision did not find the earlier IAC decision
to be plainly wrong include:
HBSY Pty Ltd v Lewis
[2023] FCAFC 109
(2023) 298 FCR 303
, 317 [52]–[54] (Markovic,
Downes and Kennett JJ) (‘
Obeid v Lockley
[2018] NSWCA 71
(2018) 98 NSWLR 258
, 297 [170] (Bathurst CJ, Beazley P and Leeming JA
agreeing) (‘
Nguyen v Nguyen
(1990) 169 CLR 245
, 269 (Dawson, Toohey and McHugh JJ, Brennan and Deane JJ
) 12 [286] (Allsop P, Beazley JA, Basten
Ibid 10 [278] (Allsop P,
Beazley and Basten JJA). See also Gageler (n
Lo Pilato v Kamy
Saeedi Lawyers Pty Ltd
[2017] FCA 34
(2017) 249 FCR 69
, 114 [234] (Katzmann J);
Fairfax Media Publications Pty Ltd [No 6]
[2017] NSWSC 230
(Beech-Jones J). Only in one case did a trial Judge conclude that he was bound
to follow the ‘common law of Australia’
over a binding decision of
the home Court of Appeal:
Re Amerind Pty Ltd (in liq)
[2017] VSC 127
(2017) 320 FLR 118
182–9 [334]–[372] (Robson J). This approach was rejected on
Commonwealth v Byrnes
[2018] VSCA 41
(2018) 54 VR 230
, 291 [286] (Ferguson CJ,
Whelan, Kyrou, McLeish, Dodds-Streeton JJA).
). The position might be different if
the second decision had not considered the first decision or had applied the
incorrect threshold
to justify departure from that decision: see
It might be said that Bell
CJ’s conclusion in
) at 112 [119] that ‘far from
being “plainly wrong”,
is correct’ represents
an implicit finding on the part of the New South Wales Court of Appeal that
was plainly wrong. This is to be doubted: a finding that
is ‘correct’ does not necessarily equate to finding that
‘plainly wrong’. Nor should the latter finding too readily be
implied, given that it alters the landscape of Australia’s
single common
law and creates a new point of departure for all IACs across the country.
) 375 [39] Basten JA was referring to
the statement of McHugh J in
Marshall v Director-General, Department of
[2001] HCA 37
(2001) 205 CLR 603
, 632–3 [62] that a court in one
‘in respect
of similar or even identical legislation’ as
‘[t]he duty of courts, when construing legislation, is to give effect to
the purpose of the legislation’. Once the rationale for the plainly wrong
rule is appreciated, the reasoning in
is sound. In respect of
non-uniform statutes, the existence of a single common law does not demand a
consistent outcome. Of course,
it is logical and desirable that similar and
identical statutes are to be interpreted consistently, but at a level of
this is not a ‘corollary’ of the single Australian common
Minister of Pensions
[1948] 2 KB 153
, 155 (Denning J);
Colchester Estates (Cardiff) v
Carlton Industries plc
[1986] Ch 80
, 85 (Nourse J);
Willers v Joyce [No
[2018] AC 843
, 852 [9] (Lord Neuberger for the Court). Any contention
that this affords an ‘advantage’ to the second court confronted
the relevant issue should be rejected. IACs are not competitive entities but
equals in the pursuit of a common enterprise.
) 373 [34] (Basten JA).
Secretary, Department of
Justice and Regulation (Vic) v Fletcher
[2017] VSCA 44
(Maxwell P, Redlich and Beach JJA).
) 116 [140] (Leeming JA).
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (159 KB)
PDF format (408 KB)
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter