URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/journals/AULegHist/2008/1.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 14:36:06
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Banks, Cate --- "Lost in Translation: A History of Moral Rights in Australian Law 1928-2000 (Part Two)" [2008] AULegHist 1; (2008) 12(1) Legal History 99
Lost in Translation: A History of Moral Rights in Australian Law 1928-2000 (Part Two)
Lost in Translation: A History of Moral Rights in
Australian Law 1928-2000 (Part Two)
This is Part Two of an article tracing the complex history of moral rights in
Australia which culminated in the Copyright Amendment
(Moral Rights) Act in
2000. Part One of this article outlined a genealogy of the moral rights
discourse demonstrating how the recent
legislation evolved historically through
two distinct periods: 1928–1989 and 1990–2000. This part will expand
history of the moral rights trajectory in Australian law and will reveal
that the historical discourse about moral rights was dominated
by the emergence
of three dominant themes; foreignness, international obligation and economic
impact which fundamentally shaped how
moral rights eventually appeared in their
legislative manifestation. How these themes emerged and impacted on the
imagining and subsequent
construction of moral rights will be discussed in more
I Introduction
This second Part of the article explores three themes of the moral rights
debate in Australia: foreignness, international obligation,
and economic impact.
Reconceptualising the moral rights discourse in this way helps to explain why
the debates about moral rights
took their particular course. Although there was
some overlap between the themes temporally, at any given time one theme was
dominant. In Section One, the theme of
foreignness
is revealed as
the dominant discourse between 1928 until the 1980s. Section Two discusses how
the theme of
international obligation
became the focus of discourse in
the early 1980s. Section Three considers the
economic impact
rights, which overwhelmed the debate in the mid-1990s, and coincided with the
second era (1990–2000), where the question
shifted to the form
moral rights should take.
Foreignness
As discussed in Part One of this article, at the Rome conference in 1928, the
common law countries, in particular Australia, Great
Britain and New Zealand,
reacted violently to the suggestion that moral rights be included in the Berne
Convention, because they
believed it to be a foreign concept unknown to common
The Australian delegate, Sir William Harrison Moore, was instrumental in
achieving the compromise required to include
Article 6 bis
at the Berne
Convention. Sir William believed it would be difficult to adapt the current
legislation to the abstract right, such
as it appeared in the proposal under
consideration by the Conference.
addition to this, Sir William raised what he saw as a constitutional problem:
while the Federal Government had jurisdiction over
legislating for an
author’s right, it was considered a material right and not a personal
Article 6 bis
had been finalised, it was no longer
‘foreign’ to common law countries, given their influence on its
final content and
form. For example, the sub-committee agreed to adopt the
terminology of
rather than
spiritual interest
because the common law delegates felt that the latter
term was ‘too vague and incapable of conveying any clear meaning in
In so doing,
Article 6 bis
took on the language of the common law such as defamation
which was more familiar to the common law delegates. However, the question
remained as to whether Australia would actually provide explicit protection for
moral rights given that it was not mandatory, and
that they were still seen as
foreign, regardless of common law influence.
Sir William made it very clear that some effort was needed to make moral
rights ‘fit’ Australian jurisprudence, but he
also made it clear
that he believed they did not require legislative reform under the copyright
power of the Federal
Government:
The right to claim authorship and the right of protection against any use of the
work which impairs the honour and reputation of
the author are already probably
the subject of adequate protection in English and Australian law, though under
the rules of the common
law and equity, and therefore in Australia under the
laws of the States, rather than as matter of copyright that these interests
In justifying his position, he concluded that he had ‘clear
acknowledgment by the non-common law countries that it was sufficient
rights to be protected under legal categories other than
In the years following the signing of the Convention, there was little
discussion about moral rights in a domestic sense until it
was raised again as
an issue in the 1959 Spicer Committee Report. In its report, the Spicer
Committee spent very little time considering
moral rights, but reference to the
foreignness of the concept was clear. The Committee called the section
, signifying its difference from other common law conceptions:
‘We have received representations regarding what is called on
Continent “the moral right” of the
The Committee relied
very heavily on the 1956 review of copyright law in the United Kingdom known as
the Gregory Report, consistent
with the desire to remain a ‘loyal’
subject of Britain.
However, Australia had shed the last official imperial barrier in 1931 after
The State of Westminster
(UK) was passed, which meant that Australia was
essentially an independent legal community within the British
and the Commonwealth
Parliament was at liberty to make its own laws. Nevertheless, the obligations
and loyalty to Britain remained
an important influence on the Spicer Committee
deliberations:
Australian law of copyright, had in substance been the same as that in the
United Kingdom... British and Australian authors should
have the benefit of
similar laws and that by having a similar law to that of the United Kingdom,
Australia would obtain the benefit
of English judicial
The Gregory Committee made its position very clear on the foreignness of the
We have headed this part of our report ‘droit moral’ which we
believe to be a term unknown to our jurisprudence but is
none the less a
convenient phrase to describe certain questions which arise out of copyright
protection.
It is not surprising that while there was no explicit rejection of the notion
of moral rights based on foreignness, the general tenet
of the Spicer Report,
the explicit reliance on the Gregory Report material, and the focus on the
question of fitting within the common
law paradigm confirmed that foreignness
was still an issue.
The dominance of foreignness as the focal point for moral rights discourse
started to wane after the release of the
by the Whitford Committee in the United Kingdom in
The Whitford Committee
had not only come to the opposite conclusion of the Gregory Committee about the
introduction of moral rights,
but also found that there was strong evidence to
suggest that English law did not do enough to meet the international obligations
Article 6 bis
. The Whitford Committee recommended the
introduction of a regime of moral rights modelled on the provisions contained in
the Netherlands
This was, in effect, a small step away from the long-held view that civil law
was foreign and that common law principles were the
only paradigm.
Following the Whitford Committee Report in 1977, fixation upon the
foreignness of moral rights abated, and the focal point of the
discourse began
to shift to the question of international obligation. Likewise, the focus in
Australia was slowly shifting away from
the concerns about the foreignness of
moral rights to debates about whether Australia was fulfilling its obligations
to the international
convention. At the 1979 Symposium on Moral Rights, the
issue of foreignness was raised as a way of positively illustrating how moral
rights had achieved a significant history in civil law countries rather than
ameliorating concerns about
difference.
Likewise, in 1983 the Martin and Bick
commissioned by the
Australia Council did not acknowledge the concerns about the foreignness of
moral rights, as ‘moral rights
[had] a certain universal
In any event,
Martin and Bick were keen to highlight that in other jurisdictions, moral rights
had been tailored to suit the individual
needs of each country, and that the
same approach should be taken in
It was in the late 1980s, during the Copyright Law Review Committee process,
that the foreignness of moral rights made a resurgence
in official government
debates. Despite the enactment of the
Australia Acts
1986, newfound
independence, and the opportunity to open Australian law to a world of legal
concepts, Australia continued to maintain
deference to English law and
Even though the
British Government was preparing to legislate on the issue of moral
they had rejected the
recommendations of the Whitford Committee to adopt the Netherlands model, and
Australia seemed keen to follow
The 1988 Copyright Law Review Committee report stated that, ‘the only
basis on which the majority could be persuaded that legislation
protection of moral rights should be enacted would be that Australia’s
continuing membership of the Berne Convention
However, the
issue of foreignness very much dominated the majority members’ decision to
reject moral rights:
The majority considers that proponents have underestimated the
‘foreignness’
of the moral rights concept to those used to a
common law system... Laws which impose limitations on a person’s use of
her personal tangible property that are based upon another
individual’s perception of interest in that property
are alien to our
legal system
Only one submission to the Copyright Law Review Committee rejected moral
rights on the basis of their foreignness, that of Tony Short,
Senior Lecturer in
Law, South Australian Institute of Technology, who said,
As a common lawyer I reject the notion of Moral Rights legislation based on
Civil Law as alien to our whole concept of law. It is
a concept which is totally
at variants with the concepts of Australian Common Law and Equity
However, minority members also subscribed to the notion of foreignness:
‘Moral rights are a civil law concept well understood
and entrenched in
the legal systems of most civil law
countries.’
minority view acquiesced that the foreignness of moral rights may be a dilemma,
there was a genuine attempt to foil the
perception that the alien nature of
moral rights was an impossible obstacle:
Moral rights should not be thought of as always having belonged easily to
European notions of law. Before moral rights were integrated
into European law
they were considered totally antithetical to the buyers’ rights as
Minority members were frank in expressing their concerns that the alien
nature of moral rights meant that they sat uncomfortably with
provisions of the
, and that in practice there may have been difficulties of
comprehension.
While it was
obvious that the minority supported the introduction of moral rights, their
focus on the foreignness of the concept
did little to dispel the long-held
belief that moral rights were inherently foreign to common
It was a curious fixation
given that at first, the minority acknowledged that common law countries such as
Canada and the United
Kingdom were ‘embrace(ing) the concept that law
protecting the copyright of authors will not be complete unless it confers
rights which protect not only the authors’ economic interests, but also
confers rights which recognise and preserve his or
personality,’
they were also preoccupied with moral rights being an international
obligation.
Paradoxically, the
use of the right of integrity unanimously conferred legitimacy to what was
essentially derived from French law,
rather than sourced in international law or
other common law countries.
Academic criticism of the way the government was managing the issue of moral
rights began in the late 1980s. David Vaver, in a critique
of the Copyright Law
Review Committee report, expressed his belief that the majority’s view on
foreignness was ‘nothing
astonishing.’
criticism was fourfold. First, given that Sir William Harrison Moore had been
instrumental in the redrafting of
Article 6 bis
in 1928, and there had
been no repudiation by common law countries at subsequent Berne conferences,
moral rights were not alien or
foreign to common law systems. Second, given that
government representatives had repeatedly argued that legislative protection was
unnecessary because moral rights were already protected by existing common law
principles, the argument that moral rights were alien
fallacious.
Third, Vaver argued
that copyright itself was alien to the common law system because ‘it
needed legislation to set [it] up...since
it was settled long ago that copyright
in published works did not exist at common
Vaver suggested that
the majority failed to consider the mechanisms which recognised moral rights as
part of the law of the land.
Finally, Vaver provided numerous examples of how other common law countries such
as Canada, the United States and the United Kingdom
had successfully legislated
to protect moral rights.
Vaver, the use of foreignness as a basis upon which to deny moral rights was
spurious and weak: ‘In truth, in the sense
that the majority seems to use
the term “alien” or “foreign”, moral rights are foreign
to any legal system.’
Even without Vaver’s criticism, it is surprising that the issue of
foreignness was actually revisited at all in the 1988 Report.
overhaul of the copyright system, the British Government introduced the
1988 (UK), introducing moral rights
protection into British law. This introduction came following the 1977 report of
the Whitford
Committee, which recommended that moral rights should be afforded
more protection under British law, based largely on the international
obligations created by the Berne
Convention.
Given Australia’s loyalty to Britain, it was strange that foreignness
arose as an issue for the entire Committee. But as there
has never been an open
debate about whether or not moral rights were actually foreign, and given
Australia’s involvement in
the drafting of
Article 6 bis
, it was an
easy argument to make given the origins. However pedestrian the argument seems
now, particularly in light of Vaver’s
refutation, it is my contention that
the focus on the foreign nature of moral rights dominated the discourse and
acted as a barrier
to the inclusion of moral rights in Australian jurisprudence
for more than 60 years.
Despite the Copyright Law Review Committee’s emphasis on the
foreignness of moral rights, the arguments based solely on foreignness
disappeared from moral rights debates after 1988. While some academic
commentators bought into the foreignness debate on
occasions, it was not used as
the focus for discussion in any official sense after the 1988 Copyright Law
Review Committee Report.
This coincided with the introduction of moral rights
1988, and essentially
heralds the beginning of the end of moral rights as foreign to Australian
However, some academic commentators continued to contest the introduction of
moral rights on the basis of foreignness. At the 1989
seminar at Griffith
University, Jon Baumgarten, an American intellectual property lawyer, used this
as an argument in his strident
anti-moral rights paper:
The moral rights doctrine is at least in tension, if not in conflict, with the
essential values of our system. Whatever may be the
route of continental
droit d’auteur
, the Anglo-American
intellectual property system is designed to encourage aesthetic innovation and
promote dissemination of creative
works. It complements the principles of free
literary and artistic
expression.
The premise of Baumgarten’s argument was that moral rights are not
capable of transplantation into a common law copyright system
‘their development is rooted in a continental view of authors and their
creation that is fundamentally at odds with
the purpose of the United States
it was the perceived economic impact of moral rights that concerned Baumgarten,
he based his argument on the perception that
as moral rights belonged to civil
law countries they were foreign to common law countries.
In a quest to present moral rights in a positive light, Ginsburg alluded to
the issue of common law fit when she argued that ‘an
effort should be made
to understand moral rights on our copyright
This way of
conceptualising moral rights was also adopted by Dworkin, who attempted to
absolve the parochial common law way of thinking
as a fault of misconception
rather than viewing moral rights as an alien philosophical
The use of the
foreignness of moral rights as the basis of an argument became less prevalent as
commentators took up a normative
position, arguing that Australia was in breach
of international obligations because of the failure to enact specific
legislation
to protect moral
The debate then quickly
shifted into a discourse on international obligation.
International Obligation
While the question of international obligation had persisted in the
background of moral rights discourse since 1928, it was not until
the late 1970s
that commentators started writing normatively about the international
obligations created by the Berne Convention.
Discourse then became preoccupied
with fulfilling international obligation by enacting legislation. This focus
perpetuated the first
era of moral rights (1928–1989) when
discussions were firmly based around the question of
moral rights
should be introduced at all. However, international obligations had considerable
influence on the shape of moral rights,
particularly in the scope and range of
rights included in the final legislation. The Berne Convention limited moral
rights to the
right of attribution and the right of integrity, and the
Australian government chose to limit the rights to precisely those, rather
consider the introduction of other moral rights of withdrawal and divulgation.
It is my contention that the fixation with international
obligation sidelined
debates about a germane moral rights regime, which may have responded more
appropriately to the nuances of Australian
artistic and literary life than the
current regime, particularly in relation to Indigenous artists.
The focus on international obligation began as a justification of tacit
protection. The first defense for international obligation
came in the 1928
Report by Sir William Harrison Moore, who, in his address to Parliament,
attempted to explain his predicament with
the original proposal for
Even where the particular interests to be protected were specified, the
enumeration was in so abstract a form as to present to us
difficulties in seeing
what legislation would be necessary to satisfy the obligation undertaken, and as
according to our practice
a convention is not ratified until our Government is
satisfied that the law provides for carrying out the international obligation,
the effect of any such articles in the Convention would have seriously
embarrassed ratification by countries within the
Meanwhile, the Spicer Committee determination contained only indirect
reference to international law. For example, the Spicer Report
Committee’s
recommendations stated:
We do not consider that any further protection for artists should be provided
for, even if the Commonwealth had the necessary constitutional
power. The artist
is free to protect himself by inserting terms in his contract of
The statement ‘further protection’ indicated that the Committee
was concerned about the obligations created by the Berne
Convention, enunciated
again when the Committee recommended that Australia accede to the Brussels Act
of the Berne Convention, and
also become a member of the Universal Copyright
Convention.
It is not surprising that the notion of international obligation started to
dominate debates after this time. Australia had allowed
what has been described
as an ‘embarrassing
in its adoption
of relevant international copyright protocols until the late 1960s. Up until
this time, it had been possible for
Australia to comply with international
obligations created at home without any further legislative changes:
Article 6 bis
contains no specific reference to it, it has been
accepted from the start that Union countries are not obliged to protect moral
as part of their copyright laws. This was the historic compromise which
enabled the inclusion of moral rights in the first place
in Rome in 1928, and
was confirmed at the time of the Stockholm Conference in the general report of
the Main Committee
Even though ‘extensive amendments to domestic law were required in
order to accede to the Brussels
it took another 20
years before those changes were incorporated into the
The focus on international obligation intensified once the
was enacted, as the ‘first full exercise of the Commonwealth
Parliament’s power to legislate with respect to
According to
Ricketson, ‘a good indication of a country’s independent status in
the world is often to be found in the
state of its international
obligations,’
Australia now had ‘a truly Indigenous legislative product in the prolixity
and complexity of its
which fulfilled
most of the obligations imposed by the Brussels Act, Australia was finally
reaching maturity.
However, in 1979, at the National Symposium on Moral Rights, Peter Banki said
that he believed Australia was in breach of its international
convention by not
legislatively recognising the moral rights mentioned in
This assertion was
implicitly taken up in the 1983 Martin and Bick Report, which supported the view
that the international convention
should cast the moral rights mould for
Australian law:
The Berne Convention seeks to protect two rights: The right of authorship and
the right of integrity. For both practical and legal
reasons, this represents,
in our view, not only the minimum obligatory protection for Australia, but also
the full scope that moral
rights legislation will
The theme of international obligation continued throughout the 1980s and made
an appearance in the 1988 Copyright Law Review Committee
Report. Despite
suggesting that a valid basis for introducing moral rights was Australia’s
obligations as a signatory to the
Convention,
the majority decided
that as there had been ‘no criticism at an international level of
Australia’s present
moral rights
should not be introduced. In contrast to this, the minority view was that
‘legislation [was] necessary in order
to give effect to Australia’s
treaty obligations.’
any event, both the majority and the minority agreed that any discussions about
moral rights should be limited to the two rights
, the right of integrity and the right of attribution.
The 1988 Copyright Law Review Committee decision was widely criticised, and
Australian critics started to focus on whether or not
Australia was in breach of
its international obligations. Ardent critics of Australia’s position were
two eminent intellectual
property scholars, Professor Sam Ricketson and
Professor James Crawford. Ricketson criticised Australia’s tardiness on
implementing moral rights legislation to comply with Berne, premised on
two bases. First, he argued that traditionally non-proprietary
and non-economic
rights were not protected by copyright
thus moral rights would be
an aberration to a common law way of thinking. Second, he argued that moral
rights had always been seen
to be adequately protected under existing domestic
Ricketson essentially
argued that moral rights were not adequately protected under Australian law, and
that Australia had an international
obligation to protect moral
Similarly, Crawford also
argued that it was ‘mandatory’ for Australia, as a party to Berne,
to implement
These arguments prompted a run of works which relied on the normative
position taken by Ricketson and Crawford on fulfilling international
obligations.
However, when moral
rights were finally placed on the agenda for legislative reform, very few
authors proposed broadening the scope
Some authors, such as
Abrahams and Blain, challenged the assumption, albeit briefly, that
Commentary of this nature never developed into cogent debate, and became
overwhelmed by arguments which were economic in nature. Discourse
focus more upon the economic impact of a moral rights regime in more detail, and
there was a definite shift into the second
era of moral rights thinking
(1990–2000), where there was a move away from the question of
moral rights should be introduced, to a question of
they should take.
Economic Impact
The focus on economic impact is related to the assumption that the
introduction of a moral rights regime would be contained within
, which predominantly addresses economic
‘commodification of the copyright interest in works protected by copyright
has been one of the foundations of the power
of the media and entertainment
both of which are
prominent in the moral rights discourse.
While the theme of international obligation had a fundamental impact upon the
scope of the debate about which moral rights should
be introduced, this line of
debate impacted most notably upon the outcome of the regime, particularly in
weakening the position of
the author or artist holding the moral rights. As
debates were dominated by very powerful stakeholders, including the film and
industries,
deliberations about significant and critical nuances in the proposed moral
rights regime were sidelined because of an almost hysterical
fear that moral
rights would hijack the artistic, literary and cinematographic
Concern about the economic impact of moral rights started as early as the
1928 Rome Conference. Delegates reassured their respective
governments that,
despite the changes at an international level, the status quo could be
maintained on the domestic front, particularly
in relation to contract and
economic impact in his
Parliament.
However, as the
focus was on the foreignness of moral rights, and later on the international
obligations created by
Article 6 bis
, concern about the economic impact
of moral rights was only peripheral at this time.
In 1959, the Spicer Committee expressed no real concern about their economic
impact, but in rejecting moral rights on the basis that
they were already
adequately protected, they demonstrated their belief in the sanctity of
commercial relationships such as contracts,
placing economic issues central to
their considerations:
We do not consider that any further protection for artists should be provided
for, even if the Commonwealth had the necessary constitutional
power. The artist
is free to protect himself by inserting terms in his contract of sale. Also, as
the matters raised primarily concern
the reputation of the artist, we consider
that the actions for defamation is more appropriate than any statutory cause of
which might be enacted in a
This approach was consistent with the decision made by the influential
Gregory Committee in the United Kingdom, a few years prior
to the Spicer
In 1977, the Whitford
Committee also acknowledged the economic impact of moral rights, expressing
concern that the introduction of
a long-term right of integrity might create
economic complications for artists such as film-makers, particularly by the
authors. Secondly, in situations where there are multiple authors, for
example design teams, it may be difficult to acknowledge
authorship.
It was at this stage
that the Committee proposed alternatives for opting out of the rigidity of
absolute protection by suggesting
that in some instances artists may waive their
moral rights, and if not, some acts may be reasonable under the circumstances.
of these suggestions are now contained in Australian legislation.
At the 1979
National Symposium on Moral Rights
, the economic concerns
of a moral rights regime featured prominently in the debate. Discussion focused
on the bargaining power of
stakeholders in the arts industry, such as film
companies, actors and artists. Some participants, such as Peter Martin, then a
Commissioner of the Australian Film Commission, argued that moral
rights would aid in ‘strengthening the contractual bargaining
position of
Indeed, artists
like Robyn Archer explained their precarious position: ‘The whole thing is
based on subservience... if you
fight, you are considered a troublemaker and
your artistic life is at great
There was also an identified need to consolidate what moral rights were
actually about, because the system at that time was too unwieldy
unpredictable.
Attempts were
therefore made to ameliorate the concern raised by opponents of moral
I don’t believe that the acceptance of moral rights in countries like
France has stopped them from producing great films. I
don’t think that, in
reality, they have any greater difficulty making films than we
While the Symposium was considered a success in generating public debate
the debates were often
sidetracked.
For example,
sculptor Michael Meszaros suggested that economic imperatives were dominating
the debates:
I think we should try, theoretically at least, to divorce considerations of
money from principles. Everywhere we look, the problem
of money come [sic] up:
compensation, redresses, injunctions – everything is decided in terms of
money. But money will only
confuse those basic
principles.
In the 1983 Martin and Bick Report, the question of economic impact remained
in the background. However, the authors of the Report
did acknowledge that there
was a problem with relying upon existing laws to protect creators from
inappropriate behaviour by users
because of the inequality of bargaining power
between creators and users of the
The Report presented an
even and open discussion about the pros and cons of a moral rights regime, and
concluded that the rights
of authorship and integrity should be introduced in
legislation to protect artists’ moral rights in Australia, and that moral
rights legislation should form a discrete statute rather than part of the
The recommendation that moral rights legislation should form a discrete
statute demonstrated the Report’s concern that the public
did not trust
the moral rights regime’s association with the economic right of
In fact, Martin and
Bick devoted a great deal of discussion to the importance of community education
to dispel concerns about the economic impact in
the artistic, literary and musical
However, the concern
investigations, and concerns about economic
impact began to take centre
At the Australia Council seminar series in 1984, concerns about the economic
impact of moral rights continued to be aired, including
the issue of waiver. It
was during this time that the economic impact of moral rights became more
important as it appeared that moral
rights were on the agenda. However, it was
the 1988 Copyright Law Review Committee Report that really brought the debates
economic impact of moral rights into the public domain, and this theme
dominated the concerns of both the majority and minority committees.
decision by the minority committee to recommend that a moral rights regime
should be included in the
encapsulated the direction the
debates would take. There was a great deal of discussion about the economic
impact in submissions made
organisations were concerned about the effect that moral rights would have on
the way businesses or industries
Other organisations
couched the issue in terms of the benefit for the artist:
It may be to a creator’s economic advantage to have his or her work
attributed and protected from distortion or mutilation.
To be specific, the
rights of attribution and integrity could enhance the creator’s reputation
and thus work to his or her
economic advantage. Infringement of the rights could
have the opposite
There was a good deal of support for the waiver of moral
Some organisations were
concerned about the inequality of bargaining power that waiver clauses would
perpetuate,
while others
expressed a general concern about waiver but did not
There was also a
great deal of support for an education campaign to provide further information
and opportunity for debate about
One submission raised
concerns that any proposed moral rights legislation would meet with fierce
resistance from powerful stakeholders
such as the film industry, publishers and
record companies, because of the ‘deep-rooted commercial interests that
are seemingly
threatened by moral rights
legislation.’
The Committee majority relied upon the argument about the power of the artist
to contractually protect their
However, this
argument was heavily criticised on the basis that it was ‘unrealistic
owing to the limited bargaining position
of artists, especially when they are
not well known or partially
successful.’
This argument
side for much of the debate.
While delivering a scathing criticism of the decision of the Copyright Law
Review Committee, commentator David Vaver provided insight
into how he
conceptualised moral rights regimes as economic. Vaver believed that
conceptualising moral rights from an economic perspective
plausible than those dealing with the metaphysical or idealistic notions of
artists and art.’
believed that the public has a right to know the veracity of the authorship of a
work and to receive the work in the intended
form, therefore moral rights were
akin to trademarks. This argument suggested that a failure to protect consumers
on this basis may
facilitate a market which misleads the art
The corollary of this
is that the artist yields an economic benefit as well, by ‘gaining the due
reward the market is willing
to confer on his or her
recognised that moral rights may be used as a bargaining chip, particularly in
those relationships where there is unequal
bargaining power between an artist
and commercial dealer.
Meanwhile, many opponents of moral rights presented similar arguments to that
of Jon Baumgarten, who argued that moral rights have
a deleterious economic
impact, because they are antithetical to the ethos of copyright regimes such as
Australia’s.
suggested that the economic debate had been about copyright industries rather
than moral rights,
and in many
senses his argument is correct. Given the Government’s reluctance to move
on the issue of moral rights, priorities
were placed in areas where change was
likely to happen quickly. However, the issue of economic impact became the focus
of the moral
rights debate, and this obscured many other discussions necessary
to accomplish a regime that would successfully address the specific
circumstances.
It was at the 1989 seminar held at Griffith University on
Pecuniary Rights
that Baumgarten made his message clear – the foreign
notion of moral rights did not fit within the Anglo economic paradigm
It has been repeatedly suggested that the existence of successful copyright
industries with strong moral rights traditions proves
that moral rights are
substantially benign... I would suggest, on the contrary, that the application
of moral rights law abroad appears
much more random and hence unpredictable than
benign, and that the devices used in foreign countries to moderate the extent to
moral rights can interrupt, delay or prevent creative and entrepreneurial
endeavour simply cannot be reliably exported to the United
States. Whether they
can be exported to Australia is a matter I will leave for you to
This was a long-held position of Baumgarten, who was vehemently opposed to
the moral rights regime in the United States on the basis
of the economic impact
on the information and entertainment
In particular, he
argued that moral rights stifled creativity and the dissemination of creative
works, the very bases upon which
he believed the Anglo-American copyright system
commentators emphasised the differences between pure economic regimes such as
their voices were overwhelmed in the
cacophony of discussion about the economic impact of moral rights, and the issue
dominated almost
all of the debates after the draft Bill was introduced, and
continued to dominate moral rights discourse
post-legislation.
Once the government announced its intention to introduce moral rights in
1994, film organisations started intense lobbying about the
economic impact of
moral rights on the film
This anti-moral
rights campaign was challenged by intellectual property lawyer Michael Frankel,
who attempted to refute the belief
that moral rights would bring the film
industry to a grinding halt.
Frankel attempted to outline the international experience with moral rights,
demonstrating how those moral rights regimes operated
effectively, and the legal
and financial complexities of making a film. In doing so, he reiterated the
sources of power within the
industry itself, particularly in relation to
bargaining power:
moral rights [would] not change the fundamental economic relationships between
the parties. Moral rights [would], however, cause
people to focus more carefully
on how they enter into relationships by setting the limits of interference by
one party to
While most of the debates following the 1994 Discussion Paper were on the
economic impact of moral rights, these debates differed
on the meaning of
Many of the
discussions centred around the positive and negative aspects of
and this inevitably
lead to discussions about who really held the bargaining power in commercial
relationships.
One argument
that kept re-emerging was that the ulterior motive of moral rights’
proponents was to shift the balance of bargaining
power from the users of the
materials to the artists and
This issue had been
raised in the 1988 Copyright Law Review Committee report and confirmed by Brett
Cottle, who had formed part of
the majority in his contribution to the 1989
Griffith University seminar:
‘Would you mind if someone fooled around with your best work for a hundred
thousand dollars?’ If they are honest they
will usually answer: ‘No,
I would not mind, everything has its price’... That to me places a further
question mark on
the philosophical basis said to underpin the rights in
The lack of submissions from artists and authors precipitated Cottle to
believe that the economic impact of moral rights outweighed
the community need,
and that any issues raised before the Committee could have been dealt with by
contract law.
argued that even if the bargaining power of the creator was strengthened as an
incidental consequence of the moral rights
regime, this had negative effects and
did not outweigh the economic problems it
In June 1997, the Coalition Government introduced the
. The moral rights provisions were sent to the Senate Legal and
Constitutional Legislation Committee for further inquiry, particularly
detailed application of the proposed moral rights legislation, and who should be
entitled to moral rights in relation to cinematograph
The Committee invited
stakeholders, including relevant arts organisations, film industry bodies, and
government departments, to make
submissions. Given the amount of interest in the
lead up to the Bill, it was not surprising that there was a large number of
submissions,
and given the type of interest registered prior to the Bill, that
those submissions were predominantly about the economic impact
While the submissions varied in substance, they commonly held concerns about
the economic impact of moral rights. The concerns that
elicited the majority of
responses were on the application of waiver and consent provisions, the question
of retrospectivity and
the duration of moral rights, and the question of who
should be deemed the author of a film for the purposes of the Act. The majority
of the submissions entering the debate about
the subject
were concerned
film industry, rather than redefining
the notion of authorship for the purposes
of moral rights legislation. For example, the Australian Children’s
Television Foundation
raised the following concerns:
The potential detrimental impact of aspects of this legislation on the capacity
of independent producers of film and television to
finance projects,
successfully produce them, and subsequently manage their release on the national
and international market should
underestimated.
Specific concerns were also raised by organisations such as the Screen
Producers Association of Australia, who expressed opposition
to the introduction
of moral rights for cinematograph film, while recognising ‘the
inevitability of moral rights amendments,’
and concerned that any
legislation be ‘practicable and
This desire
for a workable scheme came hand in hand with the proposal of waiver provisions,
which proved hugely controversial. In
order to mitigate some of the anxiety
associated with the waiver provisions, the Government representative, Chris
Cresswell, explained
The provisions on waiver are a compromise...between...on the one hand,
individual creators, notably the screenwriters and others
of a like mind who are
opposed to any statutory provision for waiver and, on the other hand, the
producers, the large-scale users
of copyright who want very extensive waiver
provisions. The government... decided that a fair compromise was to make some
provision for waiver. But, in deference to the individual creators so
that they were not too easily able to be overborne, as it were,
contracts with producer organisations, the decision was taken not to make the
statutory waiver extend to unspecified future
Support for the waiver provisions came from a variety of sources, all of whom
focused upon the importance of waiver to ameliorate
the economic impact of the
proposed moral rights regime on their respective industries. For example, the
submission of the Federation
of Australian Commercial Television Stations stated
that a regime without waiver provisions ‘potentially threaten[ed] the
final control of the producer over the film and the ability of the
producer to deliver the film on time and within
A number of
organisations also raised concerns about the use of waiver provisions with
In the submission
of the Screen Producers Association of Australia, proposed section 195AZG was
criticised because it would mean
that an employee would retain moral rights in
respect of future works. This was, according to SPAA, ‘a departure from
employment and copyright norms, and adds to the uncertainty associated
with the moral rights
Similarly, the Australian Broadcasting Corporation did not agree that moral
rights should be vested in the employee when the economic
rights in a copyright
work would vest with the employer, believing that employees ‘should not be
in a position to prevent an
employer from fully exploiting material, the
issues, with the use of waiver provisions in the course of employment, were also
raised by the NSW Bar
Association.
There was also a certain amount of concern expressed by film, television and
advertising organisations that the waiver provisions
needed to be amended to
minimise uncertainty within the industries, and to reduce the risk of an
administratively and financially
burdensome regime. There were two main
concerns. Firstly, that the proposed section 195AZG(2) provided that waivers may
only be given
in relation to existing works and not in advance of the work being
Secondly, the
proposed section 195AZG(3) allowed an employee to waive moral rights in advance
in respect of works to be created in
the course of employment. This, of course,
would have been of minimal assistance to a freelance author.
The Federation of Australian Commercial Television Stations cautioned that
broadcasters and film producers needed reassurance that
they would be able to
obtain a waiver of moral rights for future works from creative contributors to
film-making engaged under contracts
of service, particularly for feature films
and television drama programs
the submission of the Screen Producers Associations of Australia suggested that
the proposed waiver provisions did not
appreciate the nature of employment
contracts in the film and television
industries.
The concern was
that to ensure continued financing, the industries needed to be able to instil
confidence in investors about the
environment in which they were investing.
In a similar argument, organisations such as advertising agencies argued that
the waiver provisions in the proposed form would be
administratively burdensome,
and disadvantage the advertising industry. In contrast, opponents of the moral
rights regime, such as
film and television organisations, were generally
supportive of a moral rights regime – but not for their industries. For
the submission of the Advertising Federation of Australia started a
debate about distinguishing between ‘pure art’ on
the one hand, and
‘commercial art’ used in advertising on the other. The AFA argued
that in the case of ‘pure art’
moral rights should apply, because
the work was worthy of protection, but in the case of ‘commercial
art’ the waiver
provisions included in the Bill would create substantial
difficulties in the advertising industry, including an ‘enormous burden
additional and unnecessary paperwork and costs, and the potential for
freelancers to hold their advertising agency employers to
ransom, by asserting
their moral rights on a minor issue, after the work is
completed.’
The concern of the AFA was that the proposed section 195AZG(2) would make
universal practice in the advertising industry impossible.
They would have to
change their way of doing things from commissioning a work and doing what they
wanted, to separately and subsequently,
once the work was in existence, entering
into further agreements in relation to moral rights, should that be necessary,
and creating
‘uncertainty.’ This view was supported by the
submission of the Australian Association of National Advertisers:
AANA submits that the moral rights provisions of the Copyright Amendment Bill
1997 will significantly restrict the rights of advertisers
to use advertisements
in which they own intellectual property rights. This restriction is unacceptable
in the context of a commercial
transaction between business people for purchase
of an advertisement and related services. AANA further submits that attribution
of authorship of advertisements in many instances would be prohibitively
expensive and would not be practical.
The distinction
between moral rights for creators of pure art and works of a commercial nature
such as advertisements was refuted
by the Australian Copyright Council, who
maintained that there was no need for a special exclusion for advertising
material. In addition,
the ACC explained that it would be difficult to bring a
successful action for infringement of moral rights in a
‘non-artistic’
commercial work, especially in those circumstances
where the work had been created to a client’s
specifications.
The Committee
sought advice from the Attorney-General’s Department on the
appropriateness of making the distinction between
pure art and commercial art.
Helen Daniels from the A-G’s Department stated that,
normally does not make any distinctions in relation to
aesthetic quality of a work. The level of protection is the same whether the
work is mundane, or a work of high art. The decision was made fairly early on
that there would be no exceptions for the computer
industry, the advertising
industry, and publishers, because if you exempt one industry, then you have to
look at others, as
In the end, the Committee decided that it would be inappropriate to make a
distinction between pure art and commercial art.
Meanwhile, many organisations supported the deletion of the waiver provisions
altogether, for the reason that,
no sooner have rights been bestowed, authors will be under immediate pressure to
relinquish them. The imbalance of power in the relationship
between the people
seeking the waiver provision and the people required to give it, in order to
secure a job needs to be taken into
Many of the arguments revolved around a concern about the unequal bargaining
power between the creators of works and the economic
agents, summarised by the
Australian Copyright Council as follows:
We are concerned that it will become standard practice in some industries to
require creators to give up the rights that Parliament
has given them, thus
defeating the purpose of the legislation. Creators are generally in an inferior
bargaining position, and would
thus be unable to resist the adoption of such
standard practice...we have seen a number of contracts in which the author is
to waive moral rights, in anticipation of the
amendments.
The Australian Writers Guild also agreed that the waiver provisions
effectively relinquished a creator’s rights for the future,
and would have
the effect of nullifying legislation intended to protect the rights of artists.
This, they believed, would perpetuate
the weak bargaining position of the
creative principals of the film against the financial backers, because the
former would be forced
to waive their rights. The Guild also rejected the
proposition that waiver provisions were essential to ensure the continued
of cultural
industries.
Many opponents of
the waiver provisions also considered it redundant, given that a consent
provision had been included in the Bill.
The Australian Copyright Council argued that the waiver provisions should be
deleted, as the provisions relating to consent would
provide an adequate
The Australian
Writers Guild supported this, as did Warwick Rothnie, Partner from Mallesons
Stephen Jaques, who advised the Committee
that there was no legal, philosophical
or other theoretical distinction between ‘consent’ and
‘waiver.’ He
argued that using the word ‘waiver’ was
merely legal jargon for the word ‘consent,’ and said that retaining
both terms would inevitably lead to ‘confusion, uncertainty and much
greater legal expense.’ He therefore believed that
proposed section 195AZG
should be deleted from the
However, despite
pressure from a number of film, television and advertising organisations who
maintained that proposed section 195AZG(2)
should be deleted, thereby allowing
an author to waive moral rights in respect of future
the Committee chose
the alternative view.
In making their decision, the Committee recommended that proposed section
195AZG(2) be amended to provide that a waiver may relate
to a specific work, or
to works of a specified description that were in existence, in progress, or
minority report of Senators Nick Bolkus, Jim
contradicted the
Committee’s recommendations about waiver:
The Labor Members and the Australian Democrat Member of the Committee oppose the
provisions of the Bill which would allow the waiver
of or consent by authors or
makers to future acts which may be inconsistent with their moral rights. The
inclusion of such waiver
or consent schemes would effectively allow the
economically dominant partner in the creative process, principally but not
exclusively
the producer, to force directors and/or screenwriters to sign away
their moral rights in a
minority wished to delete the waiver provisions from the Bill. In their place,
the minority recommended, ‘that a consent
regime be inserted into the Bill
which would authorise future acts in relation to a work which were not
inconsistent with the moral
rights of the artist or
Concern about the retrospectivity of the Act was also raised with the
Committee, primarily because under the proposed sections 238(2)
and 195AZL,
moral rights would apply to an act of non-attribution, false attribution and
distortion that occurred
Part IX had come into force, even if the
relevant works were created beforehand. There were also certain obligations to
remove misleading
material if there was an act of false attribution prior to
Part IX coming into force.
These concerns were purely economic. The submission by the Screen Producers
Association stated:
The application of moral rights to works already in existence at the time of the
legislation is passed will certainly create additional
costs for producers and
potentially affect the value of these works. The cost will come from the need to
obtain waiver or consents
to acts...prior to the commencement of the
legislation. The impact on value will arise if waivers or consents cannot be
or there is uncertainty about whether they have been
concerns were also raised by the Australian Association of National
Advertisers.
Chris Cresswell
attempted to alleviate this concern by saying;
The legislation is not retrospective in that it does not attach liability to
something done now which is not at present liable. If
the legislation were truly
retrospective, it would attach liability to something which, when it was done,
did not attract liability.
This legislation will only attach liability to acts
done after the legislation commences... As a general proposition I think they
[some witnesses] are concerned that they may have made a commercial undertaking
with respect to a work now, in September 1997, when
there are no moral rights.
They are concerned that, because the moral rights regime will apply to existing
works when the legislation
comes into operation, this will upset the basis on
which they went into the contractual arrangements in 1997. Our response to that
would be that that applies to a whole range of activities that might be affected
by government legislation which attaches new rights
or liabilities to
undertakings in the future. But this legislation will not make illegal, or
infringing, actions that are being taken
now before the legislation comes into
Consequently,
the Committee recommended that Schedule 1 of the Bill would not apply to
cinematographic films made before the introduction
of legislation, or to
literary, dramatic, musical or artistic works created by authors who died before
the introduction of the rights.
Concerns were also raised about the duration of moral rights, because under
the Bill, the proposed moral rights would endure for the
which would have an
economic impact. This meant the life of the creator plus 50 years, or in the
case of films, 50 years.
an attempt to restrict the application of the right of integrity, the Screen
Producers Association of Australia submitted that
it should cease on the death
of the author or maker. The argument was that this would keep it in line with
defamation actions, which
also ceased to be enforceable upon death, and are
similarly concerned with honour and reputation. However, the SPAA submitted that
the right of attribution should continue after the death of the author for the
remainder of the term of copyright in the relevant
Nevertheless, the
Committee, harking back to old arguments, left the provisions of the Bill as
they were, believing them to be consistent
with Australia’s obligations
under the Berne Convention.
Both creator and producer stakeholders continued intense lobbying of the
government after the Senate Committee’s Report had
been handed down, and
in July 1998 the government removed Schedule 1 of the Bill to allow for further
consultation between the government
stakeholders.
The issue of
waiver remained a primary point of contention, but some unanimity was reached in
August 1998. This occurred as a result
of a consultative forum organised by the
Attorney-General’s Department, and the Department of Communications,
Information Technology
and the Arts. During that forum, the Australian Writers
Guild offered a co-authorship agreement in return for the removal of waiver
provisions in the legislation, which allowed collaborators on film or television
productions to agree to limit their moral rights.
At the end of the consultative
forum, a working party was initiated that heralded the beginning of more
cohesive negotiations over
subsequent months between film and television
industry groups.
was now formally focused on the economic aspect of moral rights, and there was
little, if any, discussion about any other
aspect of the moral rights regime,
despite the Janke’s Report on Indigenous Intellectual Property being
released in the meantime.
During the negotiation periods, most of the discourse remained focused upon
the economic impact of moral
although some
commentators issued a reminder that moral rights were distinct from economic
Support for the
waiver provisions continued as a practical and realistic way of making the
system work, but some commentators chose
to challenge the waiver provisions as
unfair because of the unequal bargaining power of
stakeholders.
contrary to some views that the introduction of a moral rights regime would
actually enhance the economic position of creators,
because they could be used
as a bargaining chip.
the end, the matter was settled by industry participants, and in March 1999 the
working party presented the negotiated proposal
on waiver to the
Attorney-General.
proposal effectively meant that the waiver provisions were removed from the
legislation, and co-authorship agreements were introduced.
The effect of the
agreements was essentially a covenant between the authors of a film to not
exercise their moral rights without
the consent of the other
the perception being
that the economic concerns about the instability of the regime had been
ameliorated by such a covenant.
As a result of the discussions and proposals, the
(Moral Rights) Bill
1999 (Cth) was introduced into the House of
Representatives on 8 December 1999 by Attorney-General Darryl Williams. In doing
he acknowledged that it was unlikely that the floodgates to litigation would
be opened, negating industry panic about the economic
Experience in other countries suggests – and the government envisages
– that enforcement of moral rights through the
courts will be an
exceptional occurrence. We believe that the main impact of the new legislation
will be to build upon existing good
industry practice and, where necessary, to
raise awareness in an educative way of the need to respect the creativity of
authors and
discussed earlier, the Bill was passed on the same day it was debated, becoming
, which received Royal
Assent on 21 December and came into operation on that day.
The three themes of foreignness, international obligations and economic
impact evolved historically in the moral rights discourse.
While at times there
has been some overlap between the themes, one of the themes has tended to be
dominant at one time or another.
The dominance of the particular themes has
created two very distinct periods of debate. The first era, from
1928–1989, revolved
around the question of
Australia should
introduce moral rights. During this time, from 1928 to the early 1970s, the
theme of foreignness dominated the debates,
and while still present, started to
cede prominence to the second theme of international obligations. This second
theme increased
momentum, eventually becoming the focus of the discourse from
the early 1980s. In the late 1980s, a new set of debates emerged about
practical implications of moral rights, which firmly focused upon their economic
impact. It was during this time, in the second
era from 1990–2000, that
the question shifted to the
form that moral rights should take
much attention focused on the three dominant themes, it is my contention that
the fulcrum of a moral rights action,
the subject
(the author) and
(the work) was, to a great extent sidelined and as a result came to
be imagined and constructed in a narrow and limited
In providing a thematic
account of the moral rights discourse, it is possible to have a better
understanding about why the debates
took their particular course and in
particular how the original legislation failed to take into account the needs of
many creators
but in particular, Indigenous creators and their
communities.
Reconceptualising the story of moral rights in Australia as the product of a
specific discourse makes the resulting paradigm more
understandable. As Gaddis
suggests, the past is “no sure guide to predicting the
but history is
a signpost, and this history of moral rights is a signpost about the benefits of
reflecting on how law and legal concepts
are derived, imagined and constructed
and what significance that has for the social, cultural and legal context in
which that process
takes place; “the image that the law has of its past
plays an important role in shaping its present and its
LLB (Hons), B. Com, PhD
Research Consultant, former Research Fellow, Socio Legal Research Centre,
Griffith Law School. This work
forms part of a larger research project. The
author would like to acknowledge the earlier assistance of Professor Brad
Sherman and
Mr Shaun McVeigh
in a former version of this
Because it did not sit
comfortably with common law contract and equity.
William Harrison Moore,
Report of the Australian Delegate to the Parliament of the Commonwealth of
Australia on the International Copyright Conference
(1928) Command 31
Canberra at 6.
Sam Ricketson, ‘Moral
Rights and the Droit de Suite: International Conditions and the Australian
Obligations’ (1990)
Entertainment Law Review
Harrison Moore above n 2,
Ricketson, above n 4, 79.
Commonwealth of Australia,
Report of the Committee Appointed by the Attorney-General of the Commonwealth
to Consider what Alterations are Desirable in The Copyright
Commonwealth
, (1959) at para 487, page 90.
Bruce Kercher,
(1995), 175.
First Meeting of the
10am, 8 October 1958
, 1–3, NAA: A432/80, 58/2338 at 1. Note also that
‘all members of the committee were of the view that, in hearing oral
representations, the Committee should not, as a general rule, sit in public.
However, it was recognised that public controversy about
particular matters
might justify public sittings’ at 2.
Board of Trade, Copyright
Report of the Copyright Committee,
(1952) HMSO: Cmd.8662, para
J.A Spicer, A. Dean, G.A
Ferguson, P. Jones, A.J. Moir, and L.R. Zines, (1959).
Meeting of the
Melbourne at 10.30am on 16th June, 1959
, NAA: A432/80, 59/2019.
Department of Trade,
Committee on Copyright and Designs
Committee to consider the law of copyright and designs
(1977) HMSO: Cmnd.
6732, paras 51–57. Hereafter referred to as the Whitford Committee
In particular at 25
Netherlands Copyright Act
Peter Banki, 'Moral Rights
– An Author’s First Responsibility' (1979) in Australia Council,
National Symposium on Moral Rights
Sylvia Martin and Paul
Moral Rights for Artists: A Report Prepared for the Australia Council
Ibid, 12 and 51.
Kercher, above n 9,
Reform of the law
relating to copyright, designs and performers’ protection: a consultative
HMSO: Cmnd. 8302, Chapter 18 (known as the 1981 Green Paper), Her
Majesty’s Government (1983)
Intellectual property rights and
innovation,
(Green Paper), HMSO: Cmnd.9117 and Department of Trade and
Industry (1986)
Intellectual property and innovation,
(White Paper),
HMSO: Cmnd.9712.
Report on Moral Right,
(1988), 11.
Individual (1984).
Submission to Copyright Law Review Committee on Moral Rights, July 1984
BAD 85/318.
above n 21, 39.
Ibid, 50, 52–53.
Ibid, 50–54.
See Adolf Dietz, ‘The
Artist’s Right of Integrity under Copyright Law – A Comparative
Approach’ (1994) 25
International Review of Industrial Property and
David Vaver,
‘Authors' moral rights and the Copyright Law Review Committee's Report:
w(h)ither such rights now?’
[1988] MonashULawRw 11
Monash University Law Review
Ibid, 291–293.
Ibid, 292–293.
Department of Trade
Committee on Copyright and Designs, C
opyright and designs law: report of the
Committee to consider the law of copyright and designs
; (1977) HMSO: Cmnd.
6732; see also Her Majesty’s Government (1983)
Intellectual property
rights and innovation
(Green Paper), HMSO: Cmnd.9117.
Jon Baumgarten, ‘On
the case against moral rights,’ (1992) In
Moral Rights Protection in a
Peter Anderson and David Saunders (eds) 87, 91.
Jon Baumgarten, Robert
Gorman and Christopher Meyer, ‘Preserving the genius of the system,’
(1990) 8(3)
Jane Ginsburg, ‘Moral
Rights in a Common Law System,’ (1992) In
Moral Rights Protection in a
in Peter Anderson and David Saunders(eds) 13–50,
Gerald Dworkin,
‘Moral rights and the common law countries’
(1994) 5(1)
Intellectual Property Journal
It was mentioned rather
than focused on see Elizabeth Adeney, ‘The moral right of integrity of
authorship: a comparative view
of Australia’s proposals to date,’
Australian Intellectual Property Journal
Harrison Moore, above n 2,
Commonwealth of Australia,
above n 8, 90.
Ibid, paras 29–52,
Statement by the Attorney-General, The Honourable B. M. Snedden,
Confidential Cabinet
Submission Revision of Copyright Law,
, NAA: A432, 1958/2370 PT 1.
‘Australia-Embarrassing Interlude’
Bulletin of
the Copyright Society of the USA
Ricketson, above n 4,
The Act came into operation
on 1 May 1969. Sam Ricketson (ed.)
Australia and International Copyright
(1989a); Sam Ricketson ‘Australia and International
The Emergence of Australian Law
Manfred Ellinghaus, Adrian Bradbook. and A.J. Duggan (eds) 144, 170. The Act
came into operation on 1 May 1969.
Sam Ricketson, (1989a)
above n 48, 171.
Australia Council,
National Symposium on Moral Rights 29
30 November
Report on Proceedings, 16.
Martin and Bick, above n
See discussion of this ibid
Committee, above n 21, 11.
Ibid at 35.
Sam Ricketson, ‘Is
Australia in breach of its international obligations with respect to the
protection of moral rights?’
[1990] MelbULawRw 5
Melbourne University Law
; Ricketson, above n 4, 78.
The position of the
majority in 1988.
Ricketson, above n 4.
And in doing so refers to
article 11 bis(2) to verify his assertion of the obligatory nature of the
See Michael Weir, 'The
Story of Moral Rights or the Moral to the Story?' (1992) 3
Intellectual Property Law Journal
232; See also Elizabeth Adeney,
‘Moral Right/Statutory Licence: The Notion of Debasement in Australian
Australian Intellectual Property Journal,
For example, authors such
as Weir assumed it was just so – see Moana Weir, ‘The
Parodist’s Nirvana: Droit Moral
and Comparative Copyright Law: Part
Two’ (1994) 6
Arts and Entertainment Law Review
81, Moana Weir,
‘The Parodist’s Nirvana: Droit Moral and Comparative Copyright Law:
Part One’ (1994) 4
Arts and Entertainment Law Review
` In fact, all Abrahams says
is ‘However, it is submitted that
Article 6 bis
itself is not
adequate’ – Damian Abrahams, ‘Moral rights: the UK model for
Australia?’ (1994) 2
Arts and Entertainment Law Review
21. See also
Georgia Blain, ‘Government’s moral rights proposals’ (1994) 12
This also helps to explain
why debates about
the subject
were sidelined.
Fiona Macmillan,
‘Copyright and Culture: A Perspective on Corporate Power’ (1998) 3
Media and Arts Law Review
7, 81 for the US context, see Baumgarten,
Gorman and Meyer,above n 39.
The power exercised by
media and entertainment conglomerates is discussed in the article by Macmillan,
above n 69; Delia Browne,
‘Desperately seeking ‘moral
rights’: where are they?’ (1999) 4
Media and Arts Law Review
105, 105–107.
This observation that
debates have been obscured by these arguments was mentioned by Gettens, but as
yet, no other authors have
discussed this in any detail – see Karen
Gettens, ‘New Australian Copyright Laws’ (1998) 9
Entertainment
Harrison Moore, above n 2,
Commonwealth of Australia,
above n 8, 90, paras 487–490.
Board of Trade, above n 11,
paras 219–226.
See Dworkin, above n 41,
See discussion by Richard
Meale in Australia Council
National Symposium on Moral Rights 29-30
(1979) Report on Proceedings 72–74.
Australia Council, above n
52, 64. See also Nathan Waks, Musician, 69, Tom Keneally, author, 70, Alan
Horton, Librarian, 71–73,
David Catterns, McCullough, 85, 95, Conygham,
Waks, ibid, 93.
Alan Horton, University
Librarian, University of New South Wales,ibid, 71.
Michael Meszaros, ibid,
Martin and Bick, above n
See discussion at ibid,
Ibid, 106–114.
City Council (1985).
Submission on Moral Rights to Copyright Law Review Committee, September
NAA: 85/12693, Organisation (1985).
Submission on Moral Rights to Copyright
Law Review Committee, October 1985
, NAA: 85/12693. Organisation (1985).
Submission on Moral Rights to Copyright Law Review Committee, December
85/12693. City Council (1985).
Submission on Moral Rights to Copyright Law
Review Committee, December
, NAA: 85/12693, Newspaper Organisation (1986).
Submission to the Copyright Law Review Committee on Moral Rights
BAD85/15221,
Submission to Copyright Law Review Committee on Moral Rights,
Government Organisation
Submission to the Copyright Law Review Committee Report on Moral
, NAA: B85/12963, City Council (1986).
Submission on Moral Rights
to Copyright Law Review Committee, January
, 85/12693,
Submission to the
Letter to Secretary of
, NAA: BAD85/318, Organisation
Submission to the Copyright Law Review Committee on Moral Rights
NAA: BAD95/318.
Organisation (1985).
Submission on Moral Rights to Copyright Law Review Committee January
, NAA: B85/4650.
State Government (1985).
Submission to Copyright Law Review Committee, April 1985
, NAA: B85/4650,
Organisation (1985).
Submission to the Copyright Law Review Committee Report
on Moral Rights
, NAA: BAD 85/4650, Clark, J. F., Head, School of Teacher
Education, Government Organisation (1985).
Submission to the Copyright Law
Review Committee Report on Moral Rights
, NAA: BAD85/12693, Organisation
Submission to the Copyright Law Review Committee on Moral Rights
NAA: B84/9524.
Submission on Moral
Rights to Copyright Law Review Committee January 1985
on Moral Rights to Copyright Law Review Committee January 1985
, at 6, State
Government (1985).
Submission on Moral Rights to Copyright Law Review
Committee, December 1985
, NAA: 85/12693, State Government (1985).
Submission on Moral Rights to Copyright Law Review Committee, December 1985
NAA: 85/12693,
Submission to the Copyright Law Review Committee on Moral
Library Organisation
Submission on Moral Rights to Copyright Law Review Committee,
November 1984
, NAA: B84/19524.
Submission on Moral
Rights to Copyright Law Review Committee January 1985
, at 10–11.
Organisation (1985).
Submission to the Copyright Law Review Committee Report
on Moral Rights
, NAA: B85/15221.
Organisation (1985).
Submission to the Copyright Law Review Committee Report on Moral Rights
NAA: BAD85/318 at 6.
Committee, above n 21, 34.
Vaver, above n 35, 237.
‘Moral rights
– The new era’ (1993)
Australian Intellectual Property Law
Vaver, above n 31,287.
Not as strident as
Baumgarten but nevertheless critical on this basis is Brett Cottle, ‘The
Problems of Legislating to Protect
Moral Rights,’ (1992) In
Rights Protection in a Copyright System
Peter Anderson and David Saunders
Peter Banki, ‘The
Moral Rights Debate in Australia’ (1992) In
Moral Rights Protection in
a Copyright System
Peter Anderson and David Saunders (eds), 1,
Baumgarten, above n 38, 96.
Baumgarten, Gorman and
Meyer, above n 39.
Baumgarten, above n 38,
Some articles, such as
the one by Moana Weir on parody, implicitly refute the arguments about the
economic impact of moral rights
by distinguishing it from copyright for the
purposes of discussion. Moana Weir, ‘Making sense of copyright law
relating to
parody: a moral rights perspective’
[1992] MonashULawRw 9
University Law Review
; See also discussion by David Tan, ‘Seeing
red over Stravinsky’s Firebird’ (1996) 7
Australian Intellectual
Property Journal
63; Kate Paras, ‘Is Australia on the road to formally
recognising moral rights, or is this one international obligation which
never be formally implemented?’ (1997) 2 Media and Arts Law Review 1,16;
I.F Sheppard, ‘Moral Rights’ (1994)
Arts and Enterainment Law
This was flagged in the
Attorney-General’s Department,
Proposed Moral Rights Legislation for
Discussion Paper,
Michael Frankel,
‘Moral rights and the Australian Film Industry’ (1994) 4
Entertainment Law Review
For example, Dworkin,
above n 41, 33–34. Also discussed in Michael Blakeney and Fiona Macmillan,
‘Journalistic parody
and moral rights under Australian copyright
Media and Arts Law Review
; Matthew Alderson,
‘Moral Rights in Film – Towards a Director’s Copyright?’
Media and Arts Law Review
; Carolyn Jones, ‘Principles
versus practicalities: should moral rights be subject to waiver?’ (1995) 4
Arts and Entertainment Law Review
This debate really
started with Vaver’s article in 1988 above note 31; Peter Anderson,
‘Copyright and moral rights:
finding the ‘write’
balance’ (1994) 6
Arts and Entertainment Law Review
Anderson, ‘Artists’ rights and the exploitation of creativity: the
introduction of moral rights protection
for authors and artists - moral rights
legislation: approaches to protecting creators’ rights’ (1993) 3
Arts and Entertainment Law Review
See discussion of this
in Jones, above n 104. Also see discussion by Michelle Cooper, ‘Moral
rights and the Australian Film
and Television Industries’ (1997) 15
See for example Jones,
above n 104.
Brett Cottle, above n
The other issue for
discussion was the proposed amendments to s.35(4) of the Act relating to
employed journalists’ copyright
Eric Abetz, Preface to Senate Legal and
Constitutional Legislation Committee, Consideration of Legislation Referred to
the Committee,
Ian Oi and Karen
Gettens, ‘Potential problems with the Copyright Amendment (Moral Rights)
Bill 1999’(2000) 12
Australian Intellectual Property Law Bulletin
The Australian
Children’s Television Foundation,
Submission to Senate and
Constitutional Legislation Committee
, (1997) Submission No 27.
Screen Producers
Association of Australia,
Submission to Senate and Constitutional Legislation
, (1997a) Submission No 49 at 1.
Constitutional Legislation Committee: Copyright Amendment Committee
Hansard, Tuesday 2 September 1997, 152–3.
Federation of Australian
Commercial Television Stations,
Submission to Senate and Constitutional
Legislation Committee
(1997) Submission No 28, 1, 3.
The NSW Bar Association,
Submission to Senate and Constitutional Legislation Committee
Submission No 50, 2, 3.
Screen Producers
Association of Australia, above n 114, 2.
Australian Broadcasting
Corporation,
Submission to Senate and Constitutional Legislation
(1997) Submission No 87, 1.
The NSW Bar Association,
above n 117.
Federation of Australian
Commercial Television Stations, above n 116
Screen Producers
Association of Australia, above n 114, 2.
Advertising Federation
of Australia Limited,
Submission to Senate and Constitutional Legislation
, (1997) Submission No 4 5,3.
Australian Association
of National Advertisers,
Submission to Senate and Constitutional Legislation
(1997) Submission 64, 2.
Australian Copyright
Council (1997b).
Submission to Senate and Constitutional Legislation
, (1997) Submission No 38A, 1–2.
Evidence above
Australian Film
Television and Radio School
Submission to Senate and Constitutional
Legislation Committee
, (1997) Submission No 46.
Australian Copyright
Council, above n 126, 4–5.
Australian Writers
Submission to Senate and Constitutional Legislation Committee
(1997) Submission 9,
In proposed section
Warwick Rothnie
Submission to Senate and Constitutional Legislation Committee
Submission No 70, 5–6.
Advertising Federation
of Australia Limited, above n 124, 6.
Senate Legal and
Constitutional Committee,
Consideration of Legislation Referred to the
Australian Labor
Nick Bolkus, John
McKiernan and Lynn Allison. (1997) ‘Minority Report,’ In
Legal and Constitutional Committee
above n 134, 81 at 84.
Ibid, see recommendation
Proposed sections 195AC
(b) and (c), 195AD(2)(b) and (c) and 238(1) of the Bill.
Screen Producers
Association of Australia, above n 114, 1.
Australian Association
of National Advertisers, above n 125, 4.
Constitutional Legislation Committee: Copyright Amendment Committee
Proposed section 195AL
of the Bill.
Sections 33, 34, and
ss.93 to 96 of the Copyright Act.
Screen Producers
Association of Australia, above n 114, 2.
Australian Copyright
Moral Rights Bill
A Practical Guide,
B114v1, June.
See Ibid at 14. The
working party consisted of film and television industry interests, creators,
producers and broadcasters.
Gerhard Pfennig,
‘The resale right of artists (droit de suite)’ (1997) XXXI
20; Browne above n 66.
Cooper, above n 106;
Cecilia O’Brien, ‘Protecting Secret-Sacred Designs –
Indigenous Culture and Intellectual
Property Law’
Arts Law Review
Simon Lake, ‘Moral
rights: beware the waiver mongers’ (1997) 16
Communications Law
See also discussion of
this in the US context in Henry Hansmann and Marina Santilli,
‘Authors’ and artists’ moral
rights: a comparative legal and
economic analysis’
The Journal of Legal Studies
Duncan Kerr,
‘Copyright Law Reform: “Caught in the Net”’ (2000) 18
See Australian Copyright
Council, above n 146, 14.
Williams. Second Reading Speech, 8 December 1999, 13027.
I explore this in more
detail in Cate Banks
Lost in Translation: A History of Moral Rights in
Australian Law
, (2004) PHD Thesis, Unpublished, Griffith University,
Chapters 6 ‘The Subject’ and Chapter 7 ‘The Object’.
See discussion of this
in Cate Banks, ‘The More things change, the more they stay the same’
[2000] GriffLawRw 22
(2000) 9(2)
Griffith Law Review
; also Banks, above n 155, Chapter 4,
‘Beyond a Faint Recognition’. My application of the moral rights
regime to the case
study of Indigenous creators yielded two results. The first
was a direct challenge to those assumptions that the new legislative
would ameliorate some of the inadequacies of the preceding legal system. I
concluded that as the regime relied on a narrow
view of what Australian moral
rights might mean, and is the product of a particular discourse, it was unable
to service the needs
and goals of the Australian Indigenous communities. The
second provided a reason to delve even further into the historical discourse,
understand why specific detailed discussions about moral rights were sidelined
during the years of debates leading up to the legislation,
particularly
discussions about
the subject
of moral rights.
Darryl Williams Second
Reading Speech, 8 December 1999, at 13027.
Brad Sherman and Lionel
The Making of Modern Intellectual Property Law
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (503 KB)
PDF format (1e+03 KB)
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter