URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/journals/AUIndigLawRpr/2006/91.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 14:27:13
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
de Bres , Joris; Noonan, Rosslyn --- "Address at Human Rights Commission Symposia on Indigenous Rights to Mark the International Day of the World's Indigenous Peoples" [2006] AUIndigLawRpr 91; (2006) 10(4) Australian Indigenous Law Reporter 109
Address at Human Rights Commission Symposia on Indigenous Rights to mark the International Day of the World’s Indigenous Peoples
- Respecting and Valuing Indigenous Rights
Address at Human Rights Commission Symposia on
Indigenous Rights to mark the International Day of the World’s Indigenous
- Respecting and Valuing Indigenous Rights
Joris de Bres, Race Relations Commissioner and Rosslyn Noonan, Chief
Commissioner
Wellington and Auckland, New Zealand
9 August 2006
It is becoming something of a tradition for the Human Rights Commission to
mark the International Day of the World’s Indigenous
Peoples in some way
every year. This year we are holding symposia in Auckland, Wellington and
Christchurch with a variety of speakers
to promote discussion on the issue of
indigenous rights. The day itself is a reminder that in many parts of the world
the languages,
cultures, lands, health, wellbeing and even the very survival of
indigenous peoples remain under serious and sometimes critical threat.
Given the international focus of the day, it is appropriate to begin by
celebrating the recent election of the paramount chief of
Ngati Tuwharetoa, Tumu
Te Heuheu, to the chair of UNESCO’s World Heritage Committee. All New
Zealanders share in this honour,
and take pride in the contribution that he has
already made and will continue to make to the conservation of world heritage. It
particularly fitting that the first indigenous leader to hold this position
should be a direct descendant and successor to Te Heuheu
Tukino IV, whose gift
of land in 1887 to the people of New Zealand formed the nucleus of not only our
first National Park, but also
of the world’s first dual natural and
cultural World Heritage Area. In the words of Tawhiao, ‘Ko Tongariro te
ko Taupo te moana, ko Te Heuheu te tangata: Tongariro is the mountain,
Taupo is the lake, Te Heuheu is the man’.
The Human Rights Commission conducted an extensive review of
Human Rights
in New Zealand Today: Nga Tika Tangata o te Motu
two years ago, in which the
recognition of indigenous rights was highlighted as a key issue. The subsequent
New Zealand Action Plan for Human Rights: Mana ki te Tangata
this concern with a specific outcome that ‘
the particular rights of
Maori as the indigenous people of New Zealand are respected and valued alongside
the rights of all New Zealanders.’
The Action Plan explained that:
‘The recognition of indigenous rights has been the subject of considerable
public debate both in New Zealand and internationally.
There is developing
jurisprudence both in New Zealand and in other countries in relation to self
determination, customary rights,
culture, language and the relationship between
individual and collective rights.
‘The Human Rights Commission’s programme of community dialogue on
human rights and the Treaty of Waitangi has indicated
the need for continued
discussion of these issues, and of how the Treaty of Waitangi encompasses both
the indigenous rights of Maori
and the rights of all New Zealanders. Three
particular challenges were identified:
To recognise and respect the customary rights of tangata whenua in a way
that is fair to all citizens and values the contribution
that tikanga Maori
makes to the New Zealand identity
To ensure the rights of Maori to live as Maori and also to participate fully
in New Zealand society and
To affirm for all New Zealanders the right to belong.’
Action Plan identified two priorities for action:
To promote public understanding of the rights of indigenous peoples and
extend community dialogue on human rights and the Treaty of
Waitangi; and
To contribute actively, with the participation of Maori, to the development
of international human rights law relating to the rights
of indigenous people.
The Commission has itself actively been pursuing the first priority
through a programme of symposia and community dialogues about
human rights and
the Treaty of Waitangi, which has involved over 17,000 New Zealanders in the
past three years. Our recent Statement
of Intent for 2006–07 commits us to
a continuing programme of work to achieve:
Increased public understanding of the human rights dimensions of the Treaty
of Waitangi;
Increased public use of reo Maori, and increased opportunities for all New
Zealanders to learn it; and
Increased public understanding and recognition of the rights of indigenous
The second Action Plan priority, relating to New
Zealand’s contribution to the development of international law about the
of indigenous peoples, has received something of a setback, as a result
of New Zealand’s opposition to the adoption of the
draft Declaration on
the Rights of Indigenous Peoples. The draft declaration was approved by a
majority vote of the United Nations
Human Rights Council in June and is due to
be considered by the General Assembly in September. New Zealand has indicated
will vote against its adoption. It will do so primarily because it is
not satisfied that there are appropriate limitations on the
definition of
self-determination
(to exclude secession), of
free prior and informed
(on the grounds that this goes beyond a requirement for consultation
in good faith and might constitute a right of veto), of the
right of indigenous
peoples to the lands, territories and resources they have traditionally owned or
occupied (which may in effect
require the recognition of indigenous rights to
lands which are lawfully owned by others) and of
collective rights
they might prevail over the individual rights of a member of an indigenous
It is a matter of regret that these sticking points, relating to very few,
albeit very important, articles in the draft declaration,
have become an
obstacle to New Zealand supporting the adoption of the declaration. Overall, in
its 48 articles, the declaration is
the most comprehensive international
statement to date of the rights of indigenous peoples and will do a great deal
to clarify what
these rights entail. New Zealand has no problem with the vast
majority of the provisions.
Whatever the outcome at the United Nations, however, there is a need to
continue to explore how indigenous rights can best be realised
and protected
within New Zealand. We have in recent times experienced sharp divisions over
such issues as the ownership of the foreshore
and seabed, the future of Maori
seats in Parliament, and the place of the Treaty in legislation, to mention only
a few. Underlying
many of these divisions have been different views about
collective versus individual rights, and indigenous versus general rights.
We have come under international scrutiny by the United Nations Committee on
the Elimination of Racial Discrimination and the United
Nations Special
Rapporteur on the Rights of Indigenous Peoples. This year we will also have to
account to the Committee on the Elimination
of Racial Discrimination for our
implementation of the Convention on the Elimination of Racial Discrimination in
general. We can
therefore expect further international scrutiny and comment on
our performance on indigenous issues in the coming year. New Zealand’s
opposition to the draft declaration has itself attracted some negative comment
internationally.
What it cannot achieve, however, and what is most needed now within New
Zealand, is a further examination of how the actual
relationship
the Crown and Maori, which has been through some bruising moments of late, can
be strengthened to reflect a genuine Treaty
partnership, accepted by the Crown,
Maori and the general public. This may involve enhanced constitutional or
legislative provisions,
the implementation of Crown-Maori relationship
instruments currently under discussion, or less structured forums such as hui
(summits on specific topics like economic development and education) and
paepae rangatira (meetings of Crown and Maori leaders),
where both parties have
the confidence that they can discuss, if not necessarily resolve, issues on an
equal footing. It is most
likely to be a combination of a whole range of
approaches nationally and locally and in different sectors within an overall
relationship
framework. It will require both the Crown and Maori to identify
appropriate, workable and accountable points of engagement.
There has been some reference by Maori in our symposia to the importance of
further discussion about the nature of rangatiratanga:
involving both rights and
responsibilities. It has been suggested that a contemporary understanding of
rangatiratanga or leadership
offers a key not only to strengthening traditional
institutions such as whanau, hapu, iwi, roopu Maori, marae and kura Maori, but
also thereby to realising important rights and responsibilities such as reo,
matauranga, waiora, manaakitanga, kaitiakitanga, whanaungatanga,
wairuatanga,
tikanga and whenua, for the benefit of both tangata whenua and all New
Zealanders.
The United Nations declared a decade of the world’s indigenous peoples
from 1995-2004. A key project to mark the decade within
New Zealand was Maori
Language Year 1995 on the theme of
He Taonga Te Reo
A Celebratrion of
the Maori Language.
Initiatives that year included a national survey on the
status of the Maori language and the development of a Maori Language Strategy.
The National Government’s commitment at the time, as articulated by the
Minister of Maori Affairs, Hon John Luxton, was as
The Government recognises the importance of Maori language and culture and is
committed to the revitalisation of te reo Maori. It
was decided by the
Government to initiate He Taonga Te Reo 1995, A Celebration of the Maori
Language. This theme was chosen because
it reflected the important relationship
between language and culture and was also a response by New Zealand to the first
the United Nations International Decade of the World’s Indigenous
People. This decade recognises the value and diversity of
the cultures of the
world’s indigenous people and the opportunity to promote an increased
awareness of the interests of indigenous
Initiatives that year included a national survey on the status of the Maori
language and the initial development of a Maori Language
Strategy. These
initiatives have continued through to the present day, with regular surveys of
the state of the language and a current
Maori Language Strategy. This has
resulted in significant further progress in the regeneration of reo Maori
through both community
initiatives and government support, including the
establishment of Maori Television. Next year will see the introduction of the
ever Maori Language curriculum for mainstream schools, and the first ever
comprehensive Dictionary of the Maori Language in Maori.
The decline in Maori
language usage appears to have been turned around, and general public attitudes
to the language have become
significantly more positive.
Last year, the United Nations declared 2005-2014 as a second international
decade of the world’s indigenous peoples, both to
complete the Declaration
on the Rights of Indigenous Peoples and to focus further on ‘the solution
of problems faced by indigenous
people in such areas as culture, education,
health, human rights, the environment and social and economic
development.’
It would be good to carry through the focus on reo Maori as a strategic
outcome for the second decade of the world’s indigenous
peoples. It would
be even better if alongside this there was a new strategic commitment by
government and community specifically
for the second decade. This could be to
develop and implement an agreed relationship framework between the Crown and
Maori that reflects
the Treaty of Waitangi and creates the foundation for
‘the particular rights of Maori as the indigenous people of New Zealand
be respected and valued alongside the rights of all New Zealanders.’
Differences of opinion internationally over a few articles
in the draft
declaration should not distract us from the need to make a practical and
significant contribution within New Zealand
to the second decade of the
world’s indigenous peoples, as we did to the first.
The full text of this speech is available online at the website of the
New Zealand Human Rights commission:
http://www.hrc.co.nz/home/
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (26.9 KB)
PDF format (513 KB)
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter