URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/journals/MarStudies/2008/15.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 15:16:34
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Cordner, Lee --- "Globalisation, geography and governance: Why the maritime case is vital to defending Australia's interests" [2008] MarStudies 15; (2008) 160 Maritime Studies 1
Globalisation, geography and governance:Why the maritime case is vital todefending Australia’s interests
Central themes and key findings
Introduction
Managing strategic risks
Summary deductions
Understanding the strategic context
Geography and governance
Summary deductions
Economy and trade
Energy security
Food security
Ensuring trade flows and maritime domain security
Summary deductions
Changing power dynamics
Summary deductions
Strategic choices for Australia’s future
Summary deductions
Conclusions
Globalisation, geography
and governance: Why the maritime case is vital to defending
Australia’s interests
Lee Cordner
This paper presents the findings from a review of Australia’s national
security by Fellows of the Australian National Centre
for Ocean Resources and
Security (ANCORS). The review aimed to inform the 2008
Defence White
and concurrent Australian security policy development processes,
including the
The outcomes are intended for consideration by members of the National
Security Committee of Cabinet and their senior advisers, and
to inform the
broader Australian public.
In the changing global and regional security environment, Australia needs to
carefully assess the strategic position it seeks to establish
and build into the
future. Australia is a significant maritime nation. Australia’s national
interests have far-reaching maritime
congruence; national security and maritime
security are extensively concordant. Despite the nature of Australia’s
and evolving geo-strategic, economic and international political
context, the importance of the oceans and maritime security is not
necessarily
in the consciousness of the Australian public or fully comprehended in
Australian policy circles. This is due to a strategic
culture in which the land,
not the sea, has been the dominant feature, combined with the lack of a national
maritime tradition.
Central themes and key findings
The central themes and key findings of the review are outlined below.
➢ A long-term and
systemic view of Australia’s national security challenges and requirements
is necessary. Making significant
defence and other national security capability
adjustments takes considerable time and resources. Balancing the focus between
political and operational security imperatives with the need to
maintain a long-term strategic view is essential and challenging.
➢ Strategic risk management processes should be followed to identify
national security risk treatment options to define capability
requirements for
defending Australia and its interests in a strategic climate of change and
uncertainty. The national security strategy
for Australia must provide for the
defence of core national interests and seek to shape a favourable strategic
environment for the
➢ Creating a strategic decision making culture at the highest levels
of government and the national security bureaucracy that
can deal with current
security issues and take the long view is crucial. National leaders must be able
to operate effectively and
decisively in a dynamic, evolving context of
uncertainty and incomplete knowledge.
➢ A central and enduring feature of the Asia Pacific region is its
vast maritime geography. Regional interests converge in
the maritime domain,
which brings rights and responsibilities, challenges and opportunities, and
potential security concerns that
must be managed.
➢ Shared maritime interests present obvious areas of convergence
around which the concept of a regional community of nations
could be further
➢ Global and regional economies are heavily reliant upon maritime
trade. Maritime trade is profoundly integral to economic
development and
national survival in the Asia Pacific region, and its importance is growing. The
world merchant fleet is expanding
and modernising largely to meet rapidly
growing demand created by emerging Asia Pacific nations.
➢ Freedom of navigation and maritime domain security are of paramount
importance. Access to straits used for international
navigation and archipelagic
sea lanes that provide passage through the South-east Asian archipelago is
central to regional economic
security. For Australia, contributing to ensuring
the flow of maritime trade and ensuring maritime security presents the
convergence
of the enduring realities of strategic geography and national
economic well being.
➢ Australia’s vast and diverse maritime geography offers a
strategic depth advantage available to few nations on earth
and this must be
fully exploited. Australia’s national security strategy and policies must
have a predominantly maritime focus.
They should provide for the defence of
sovereign territory and jurisdictional rights, a capacity to protect wider
national interests,
and an ability to contribute to shaping the regional
strategic environment.
➢ The Australian Defence Force (ADF) must be capable of effectively
operating throughout the national and regional maritime
domain. The ADF must be
designed to operate over vast distances and remain on station for extended
periods. Forces must be highly
combat capable, versatile, flexible, robust,
sustainable and interoperable with regional and extra regional forces. Readiness
current operations must be balanced with preparing for future security
challenges. Understanding the maritime environment is essential
military operations in Australia’s region, and there are current
shortcomings.
➢ Determining levels of defence expenditure is a key consideration for
government. Difficult judgments are required on the
adequacy of security risk
mitigation in a dynamic strategic context that includes significant growth and
modernisation of regional
naval capabilities. Near simultaneous obsolescence of
several major defence capabilities in future years intensifies resource
➢ Technology and people are major cost drivers and key considerations
in the Australian context. Effective use of scarce national
human resources is
the paramount issue given the scale and scope of the strategic challenge.
➢ Governments are presented with the choice of increasing the
proportion of national resources allocated to defence or accepting
higher levels
of national security risk. Both options present short-term political risks.
However, adopting the latter option would
present the greatest risk for the
nation and its future. Government failure to address major national security
risks would be at
odds with the fundamental obligation to provide for security
with which it is entrusted by the Australian people.
Introduction
The global and Asia Pacific regional security environment is dynamic, complex
and evolving. The globalised world operates increasingly
as an integrated
system, comprising many players at multiple levels within which nations strive
to protect their interests. The oceans
are a central common area of interest
within this system, covering 70 per cent of the earth’s surface. Maritime
trade provides
the essential commercial sinews of the global economic
exploitation of ocean resource is expanding, and the seas hold the key to
the world’s environmental health.
The maritime agendas are also central to Australia’s national interests
due to strategic geography and place as a developed
Effective management of the
oceans presents opportunities and challenges for Australia’s future well
being. The oceans also
offer solutions for the security of the region and
trading partners. For Australia, whole of nation and whole of government
in collaboration with regional partners and global allies is required
to protect common interests in the maritime domains. All the
elements of
Australia’s national
need to be effectively harnessed.
Key questions to be addressed include: Which aspects of Australia’s
security circumstances are enduring and which are evolving;
and where is this
transformation heading? How can strategic risks be mitigated? How can Australia
influence and shape a favourable
strategic environment? What are
Australia’s strategic choices, options and opportunities? Which security
obligations are critical
to national survival or mandatory to continued national
success as a developed nation, and how can they be met? Which security choices
are discretionary? How can the temporal challenges of Australia’s national
security demands be balanced; specifically the need
to manage current
operational imperatives in a turbulent world versus longer term requirements to
protect national interests and
promote national well-being? The architects of
Defence White Paper
and other strategic policy documents and
statements must endeavour to answer these critical questions.
Sophisticated approaches are needed for defending Australia’s national
interests in order to address multi-faceted security
issues. Current strategic
realities and future possibilities must be considered and predicted. A
comprehensive national security
strategy needs to extend beyond defending the
continent against the unlikely prospect of direct attack or invasion. Australia
to be capable of asserting national control in the immediate strategic
environment to support national interests and objectives.
Contributing to
shaping a favourable wider regional strategic environment is also important.
This paper explores Australia’s security needs with an emphasis upon
the maritime dimensions and managing risks, which provide
the keys to defining
requirements for the defence of Australia’s vital national interests.
Summary deductions aimed at informing
the 2008 Australian
Defence White
and other national security policy development processes are included
for each section.
Managing strategic risks
The most important role and greatest challenge of government is to provide
for the security of the nation. This requires comprehension
of the risks to
national security and effectively dealing with them. Difficult compromises in
the application of resources will be
involved. Importantly, there must be a
capacity to hedge against miscalculation and
The implications of
strategic continuities and potential discontinuities must be recognised,
understood and addressed where possible.
The track record of nation-states and
the world in effectively achieving this has not been encouraging.
The capacity of a middle power to control the course of world or regional
events is limited. The Australian approach to national security
will be, by
necessity, more reactive than proactive, except perhaps in the Southwest
Pacific, where Australia is the dominant power.
Effort must be applied to
shaping the strategic environment, often in collaboration with others. The
national security strategy should
be built upon the application of risk
management processes
on a grand strategic scale as part of a continuous process of review and
adjustment. This involves identifying and assessing security
vulnerabilities, understanding strategic challenges and opportunities,
identifying strategic options and choices and importantly,
understanding where
options are constrained. Risk treatment approaches need to be devised that will
present a cost effective range
of options, in a context of change and
uncertainty, when failure may bring dire consequences for Australia.
While strategic discontinuities may seem to emerge without warning they are
rarely completely unpredictable. Realistic, insightful
and perceptive analyses
based upon sound and timely knowledge are vital; knowing oneself and
understanding the evolving strategic
context is fundamental to success. Creating
a decision-making culture at the highest levels of government and the national
bureaucracy
that is receptive to the products of such analyses is a key factor.
The ability to act decisively and intelligently upon often incomplete
information when the consequences cannot be fully predicted is essential.
Balancing the inevitable and completely understandable focus upon immediate
political and operational security imperatives with the
need to maintain a
long-term strategic view is critical. In the current global geo-strategic
context some western powers, including
Australia, are vulnerable to becoming
overly fixated with the here and now. Nations variously engaged in prosecuting
on Terror’, an amorphous, irregular conflict with boundless
requirements for Special Forces and operations, can be hard-pressed
serious attention and resources to preparing for vaguely defined future
conflicts, and for fuzzy, psychological-based strategic
concepts like
‘deterrence’. Meanwhile, those nations less directly involved are
quietly positioning and seeking to influence
a changing strategic landscape in
their favour.
This circumstance
presents risks that must be recognised and managed.
Assembling and maintaining the range of national security capabilities
necessary to provide an acceptable level of national security
risk mitigation
options requires persistence, imagination and experience. A total security
system approach is necessary that takes
account of the interacting dynamics of
software, hardware, human contributions and external factors. The flexibility to
hedge against
uncertainty and knowledge gaps along with the versatility to
re-role capabilities is required.
Within this context, effecting major changes to Defence force structure, both
equipment and personnel, takes many years and significant
investment. Typically,
a 10-20 year time horizon is needed. As recent events have shown, the ADF needs
to be combat capable, highly
professional and ready to deal with a broad range
of contingencies at short notice.
Summary deductions
Strategic risk management processes need to be followed in order to identify
national security risk treatment options that will define
the capability
requirements for defending Australia and its interests in a strategic climate of
change and uncertainty. The national
security strategy must provide for the
defence of core national interests and seek to shape a favourable strategic
environment.
Balancing the focus upon immediate political and operational security
imperatives with the need to maintain a long-term strategic
view is essential
and challenging. A long-term and systemic view of Australia’s national
security challenges and requirements
is necessary, recognising that making
significant defence capability adjustments takes considerable time and
resources. Creating
a strategic decision making culture that can deal with a
dynamic, evolving context of uncertainty and incomplete knowledge is vital.
The ADF needs to be combat capable, versatile, flexible and ready.
Understanding the strategic context
Geography and governance
Although technological advances have vastly increased global connectivity,
geography continues to be a defining and enduring reality
in international
affairs, and remains particularly relevant to security. The world community
shares common vital interests in protecting
maritime commerce and maintaining
access to and viability of the oceans’ resources and environmental
systems. The United Nations
administered law of the
is the central international
governance regime in the maritime domain. It enables nation-states to claim
seas, significant exclusive economic zones (EEZ)
and extended continental shelves thus extending national jurisdictions well
national shores. Vast areas of the world’s oceans remain high seas
and represent the last vestiges of the global commons. The
law of the sea and
related regimes define the rights of nation-states and common and shared
responsibilities to ensure freedom of
access, use and care of the world’s
oceans. These relatively new rights and responsibilities raise substantial
strategic and
trans-boundary maritime issues that need to be understood and
acted upon.
Commonly held maritime interests are of vital importance in the Asia-Pacific
region, particularly the Indian, Southern and Pacific
Oceans region. There are
substantial and complex trans-boundary maritime interests that link Australia to
the African and Antarctic
Continents, South Asia, North and East Asia,
archipelagic Southeast Asia, the island-states of the South Pacific and beyond
Americas. Vast ocean distances, accessibility by sea to many regional
countries and the challenges of a largely maritime environment
have profound
implications for regional and national security. The expansion and modernisation
of maritime capable forces in China,
India and Japan along with a number of
medium and smaller states is strong evidence that the importance of maritime
domain security
is understood by many regional powers.
Many regional powers share maritime borders and many boundary delimitations
in East and Southeast Asian waters are yet to be agreed
While this presents
sources of potential state on state friction, the implications of which can
raise significant security concerns,
the extent of common interests are
compelling and generally the mutual benefits of cooperation are being pursued.
For example, the
many overlapping claimants to the South China Sea are largely
seeking accommodation rather than confrontation; China and Japan are
cooperative approaches to exploiting potentially hydrocarbon rich areas in
overlapping claims in the East China Sea. There
are also many instances of
cooperative arrangements in place or under consideration for managing the
exploitation of regional fish
stocks. The region’s dominant maritime
geography presents the most obvious area of shared interests that could form the
around which a regional community of nations approach could be built.
Within this regional context, Australia has a vast maritime geographic
responsibility. Australia’s coastline length is almost
and there are significant, diverse and distant offshore island
territories.
Australia claims
which is greater in area
than the continental
The EEZ figure excludes waters off the Australian Antarctic Territories
(AAT). Were these to be included, the area would be around
twice the continental
landmass and by far the largest EEZ in the world. Additionally, in April 2008
the United Nations Commission
on the Limits of the Continental Shelf confirmed
Australia’s jurisdiction over 2.55 million km
of extended
continental shelf seabed beyond 200 nautical miles from the coast; an area
equivalent to around one third of the Australian
continental land
Further, Australia has responsibility for one of the largest Search and
Rescue Regions in the world, which exceeds one-tenth of the
Military operations at sea require access to high quality hydrography,
oceanography, meteorology and marine sciences analyses. Environmental
will often provide the operational edge necessary to prevail, particularly in
submarine operations, naval surface and air
operations, and amphibious
operations directed ashore. Australia is poorly served in this area. Only one
oceanographic vessel is
and its marine science capability is small in relation to the extent and
importance of the marine domain. Australia must improve
maritime environmental
support capabilities to meet defence and civil maritime requirements.
Geography dictates that Australia’s defence will predominantly rely on
a capacity to effectively control and use the maritime
domain. Australia’s
maritime geography affords strategic depth available to few other nations on
earth. This must be fully
exploited to elicit the strategic advantage it
presents. Security forces must have the capability to operate over vast maritime
and remain on station for extended periods. Such forces must be
capable of operating in a great variety of climatic and oceanic conditions.
These range from the Southern Ocean that experiences the most severe weather and
seas on the planet, through the temperate zones
to tropical and equatorial
regions, and the vast Pacific and Indian Oceans.
There must also be capacities to cooperate with intra and extra regional
forces, for example, United States (US) forces, for the mutually
protection of the region’s maritime domains and interests. Robustness,
endurance, extended range of operations and
sustainability must be key features
of security capabilities, including the ADF, designed to defend
Australia’s interests in
a vast and complex maritime environment.
Summary deductions
A central and enduring feature of the Asia Pacific region to which Australia
belongs is its vast maritime geography. Regional interests
significantly
converge in the maritime domain, which brings rights and responsibilities,
challenges and opportunities, and potential
security concerns that must be
managed. Shared maritime interests present an obvious area of convergence around
which a regional
community of nations can be further developed.
Australia’s maritime geography is vast and diverse. Geography offers
the advantage of strategic depth that must be fully exploited.
It is essential
to military operations that there is a high quality understanding of the
maritime environment. This requires comprehensive
hydrographical, oceanographic,
meteorological and marine science capabilities; and these are currently
Australia’s security capabilities, including the ADF, must be designed
to operate across the national and regional maritime
domains. The ADF must be
able to cover vast distances and remain on station for extended periods. Forces
must be robust, sustainable
and interoperable with regional and extra regional
maritime forces.
Economy and trade
Global sea-borne trade has quadrupled since the 1960s, currently comprises
more than 90 per cent of all global trade and the proportion
increasing.
The booming economies in East and South Asia represent a major part of this
increase. They are heavily reliant upon imported bulk
raw materials including
energy (oil, gas and coal) and export of finished goods. The volume of world
merchandising trade in 2006
increased by eight per cent (double the growth of
the world economy) with world seaborne trade (goods loaded) reaching 7.4 billion
The world merchant fleet expanded by 8.6 per cent during 2006. There are now
more than 40,000 ships moving around the global maritime
trade network with more
than half operating in the Asia Pacific region. Greece, Japan, Germany and China
along with several other
nations are pursuing significant expansions and
renewals of their merchant fleets. Orders for new ships are increasing at a
rate with large increases in future tonnage
Australia’s economy is also profoundly dependent upon seaborne trade
comprising 99.9 per cent of trade by volume and more than
75 per cent by
Australian exports by volume comprise more than 10 per cent of the world
total. However, the Australian owned merchant fleet represents
only 0.29 per
cent of the world total dead weight
In 2006, dry bulk
cargoes comprised more than 60 per cent of global shipments with Australia
providing 13.3 per cent of the total
Australia’s
exports of bulk goods are forecast to double over the next 10-15
Australia’s economy
relies heavily upon merchant shipping almost entirely owned and operated by
overseas interests. When combined
with the regional economic reliance upon
maritime trade, the need is underlined for Australia to be proactively involved
in contributing
to regional as well as national maritime security by ensuring
the uninterrupted transit of shipping.
The dominance of the sea for delivering trade ‘just in time’ is
predicted to endure globally and is an essential economic
factor in the Asia
Pacific region. Global systemic connectivity and inter-reliance has changed the
emphasis on protecting maritime
trade from an individual national issue to
protecting the maritime trade network as a
The global maritime
trading system is closely intertwined and relatively minor and local crises
between states may have significant
implications for states not directly
The maritime trading system has withstood minor disruption in recent times.
However, the longer-term closure of straits used for international
and choke points, for example, the Suez Canal or the archipelagic sea lanes and
routes normally used for international
navigation through the Indonesian
Archipelago
would significantly add to cargo transit times and raises serious questions
to cope without
imposing severe economic consequences. This is of particular relevance to
Australia as a trading nation almost totally
reliant upon the sea for the
conduct trade with trading partners who are similarly reliant upon the sea.
Energy security
Energy security is an issue of great importance globally and regionally, and
requires special mention in this analysis. Energy security
is heavily reliant
upon maritime trade, and increasingly on access to offshore oil and gas. World
energy consumption is forecast
to increase by more than two thirds over the
three decades to 2030, with oil remaining the dominant energy source. Asia,
particularly
China and India, accounts for almost half of the projected increase
in world oil demand.
World natural gas consumption is projected to grow at 2.0 per cent per
annum, almost doubling by 2030, accounting for approximately
one quarter of
world energy consumption and will approach coal as the world’s second most
important energy source.
The offshore oil and gas industry has also become increasingly important. The
exploitation of oil and gas offshore has increased in
priority as onshore
resources have become harder to obtain, the onshore security environment has
become more challenging, and as
technological advances make offshore extraction
technically feasible and economically viable. The offshore oil and gas industry,
with its vast investment in large fixed and floating platforms and vessels, in
locations extending to the edge of continental shelves
and beyond, presents a
range of unique factors for international and national security regulation and
enforcement.
There are reported to be significant reserves of oil and much larger natural
gas reserves in the South and East China Seas, although
official estimates vary
widely. Market analysts predict a 60 per cent increase in Asia offshore oil and
gas activity during the period
2008-12 over the previous five years. There are
2,746 development wells and 432 new fixed platform installations contracted and
increased emphasis on floating
production.
World liquid natural gas (LNG) shipments grew 11.6 per cent in 2006.
Australia is ranked as the fifth largest LNG exporter and predicted
world’s third largest exporter by
Importantly for this analysis, Australia is a net importer of oil products
being heavily reliant upon imported refined products with
very small domestic
reserves, producing primarily light sweet crude.
Energy security is vital to the world economy and of paramount importance in
the Asia Pacific region. Maintaining the flow of oil
from the Middle East is
particularly important to Australia’s major trading partners, the growing
north Asian economies and
the US. Australia’s national interests are both
directly and indirectly affected.
Australia’s commitment to world order and economic stability, the rule
of law, support for international efforts to control
the proliferation of
weapons of mass destruction, the US-led ‘War on Terror’, and support
for global and regional energy
security has been exemplified by the involvement
of the Royal Australian Navy (RAN) in the Middle East for the past 18
Importantly, through the ongoing commitment of naval forces to the Persian
Gulf Australia continues to make a significant contribution
to protecting the
flow of oil from Iraq. Income from oil provides 90 per cent of Iraq’s
foreign exchange. The strategic and
economic importance of Iraqi oil terminals
in the northern Gulf is clear. Oil income is vital to progressing Iraq’s
and prospects for
improvement.
Food security
Maritime trade flows are also vital to global and regional food security as
they facilitate the transfer of bulk cargoes like grains
and livestock, both
important exports for Australia. The importance of fisheries is also set to
increase markedly in the Asia Pacific
region due to population increases and
economic growth in China, India and other Asian countries.
Global and regional fish stocks are under significant stress with
conservative estimates indicating 87 per cent of marine fish stocks
in crisis or
fully exploited.
The incidence of Illegal, Unreported and Unregulated fishing is predicted to
increase markedly as fish stocks in the East and South
China Seas are exhausted
and fishers are forced to move in to deeper and more distant ocean areas.
Australian fisheries protection
operations will need to expand and intensify to
cover areas managed by regional fisheries management organisations (RFMOs) in
Australia participates. RFMOs are likely to expand to include more than 50
per cent of Southern Hemisphere ocean areas with Australia,
South Africa and New
Zealand looked to for leadership in policing and management.
The range and complexity of fisheries security tasks will increase greatly.
The implications
of effective fisheries management, including enforcement of conservation and
management measures will be vital not only for food security
but also for the
very survival of some smaller Pacific Island Countries whose economies are
heavily reliant upon migratory fish stocks.
Maritime environmental security issues also have food security implications
and much broader and potentially dire consequences if
not effectively managed.
The advent of measures to conserve marine biodiversity such as marine protected
areas and other environmentally
related initiatives are receiving increased
emphasis and add to the maritime security tasks.
Ensuring trade flows and maritime domain
Given the importance of maritime trade and energy and food security, it is
central to exporting and importing nations that necessary
measures are taken to
ensure freedom of navigation. The unimpeded flow of shipping and therefore trade
is vital. Security of the
maritime domain is underlined by the increasing
emphasis on offshore oil and gas, fishing and marine environmental management.
thriving economies in the Asia Pacific region are heavily dependent upon
maritime trade and the maritime domains. This dependence
will increase markedly
into the future.
While the security focus is currently on the Middle East as the starting
place for much of the world’s oil highway, Australia
and its international
partners must continue to demonstrate capability and commitment to ensure the
flow of shipping along the entire
global and regional sea lanes, including
through critical maritime choke points. For example, access to the archipelagic
and routes normally used for international navigation through the
Indonesian archipelago is important to Australia and its trading
Attempts to close these routes or impede navigation would become a significant
security problem to be dealt with collectively
or by individual nations, whether
the closure is generated by state on state or wider regional conflict, maritime
terrorism or piracy,
or a regional state seeking to exercise arguable
For Australia, reliance upon maritime trade and the responsibility for a vast
maritime domain present the convergence of the enduring
realities of strategic
geography and economic and environmental well being. Australia’s capable
warships are employed contributing
to the classic maritime mission of ensuring
the flow of vital international trade. This requirement, like the requirement to
will endure and increase. Similarly, the requirement to assert effective
control over Australia’s vast maritime domain and
to assist regional
neighbours with controlling their domains will expand.
Summary deductions
Global and regional economies are heavily reliant upon maritime trade, the
importance of which is rapidly increasing in the Asia Pacific
region. The
world’s merchant fleet is growing and modernising while Australia’s
merchant fleet remains comparatively
negligible. Australia’s economy is
profoundly dependent upon maritime trade. It represents more than 10 per cent of
total volume and is carried almost entirely in foreign flagged and
owned vessels. This fact underscores the need for Australia to
be proactively
involved in contributing to maritime security by ensuring that shipping can move
freely along the sea lanes.
Global and regional energy security is vital and largely dependent upon
seaborne trade. With capable naval forces, Australia continues
important contribution to supporting world energy security. Regional food
security is also heavily dependent upon maritime
trade. Fisheries and maritime
environmental security are increasingly important considerations that will
require the application
of maritime security resources.
Freedom of navigation and maritime domain security are of paramount
importance in the Asia Pacific region where thriving economies
are heavily and
increasingly dependent upon the sea. Access to straits used for international
navigation and sea lanes for guaranteed
passage through regional archipelagos is
important. For Australia, ensuring the flow of maritime trade and the security
of our vast
maritime domain presents the convergence of the enduring realities
of strategic geography and economic and environmental well being;
vital to the
national interest. Maintenance of the free flow of trade may involve the
formation of ad-hoc security arrangements where
both suppliers and customers
share a common need for protecting just-in-time logistic continuity.
Changing power dynamics
The US continues to be the largest economy in the world, has by far the
strongest military capabilities and therefore remains the
dominant global power.
However, the relative strength of the US in comparison to other nations is
declining, as is the US ability
to influence the course of world events. The
change has been magnified by domestically unpopular US military commitments in
and Afghanistan impacting US capacity and probably political appetite to
engage militarily elsewhere. The US intent to pursue a pre-emptive
has also been dampened; and the overall US strategic position has been
worsened by an economy in danger of
Concomitantly, China, India and some other Asian nations are experiencing
unprecedented economic growth and are pursuing an aggressive
path of qualitative
military improvements, with particular emphasis upon maritime capabilities.
For more than 50 years the cornerstone of Australia’s national security
has been the Security Treaty between Australia, New
Zealand and the United
States of America [ANZUS
Australia’s
national security has been underwritten by the Treaty and successive Australian
governments have been able to justify
conservative defence spending because of
perceived security risk mitigation provided by the ANZUS ‘insurance
Alliance arrangements afford benefits and also bring obligations
and commitments between the parties involved. The significance of
particularly important between countries with large power disparities, like
Australia and the US. Although Australia and
the US share many common values,
their interests, or at least the priority given to various interests, will not
always coincide.
As Australia pursues a more independent course, including closer engagement
with regional powers, the possibility of divergence from
the US on some issues
is likely to increase. The threshold for triggering a supportive treaty response
is uncertain and a response
cannot be guaranteed. The capacity of the parties to
respond and wider security commitments, priorities and interests at a particular
time will be significant determinants to decisions to invoke treaty responses or
not, including the level of response.
The ANZUS Treaty has been formally invoked on one occasion; by Australia in
support of the US after the September 11, 2001
Importantly, the Treaty has provided an umbrella under which defence
cooperation between Australia and the US has flourished, including
Australian access to US technology and intelligence.
US military support short of invoking the Treaty has been sought by
Australia. For example, during the Australian-led, United Nations
intervention in East Timor in 1999, the US Navy provided an Aegis cruiser for
air defence.
This contribution was extremely valuable during the early stages of the
landing of Australian ground forces because it provided critical
risk assurance
against any likelihood of air attack. This was particularly significant as the
RAN did not have adequate air defence
capabilities to cover amphibious and air
transport activities in the operational area. Although a relatively low
intensity conflict,
the East Timor campaign was a close-run military endeavour
that stretched the capacity of the ADF. Capability deficiencies were highlighted
including the lack of fully deployable maritime air defence capabilities
essential to enable independent offshore operations in a
predominantly maritime
region, even when the operational area was in relatively close proximity to
Australian mainland air bases
at Darwin and Katherine.
The strategic risk implications of changing regional and great power dynamics
need to be carefully considered from Australia’s
perspective as a regional
middle power. Australia remains a close ally of the US. Australia is also
increasingly engaged economically,
politically and militarily in the region,
particularly with Japan, China, India, Southeast Asian and the Pacific Island
Australia’s future security and prosperity and that of the Asia
Pacific region are inescapably concordant.
Due to evolving regional power dynamics and the uncertainties of invoking
alliance obligations, Australian governments may increasingly
seek security
options to support independent policy objectives in the future. A considerable
spectrum of military commitments could
be envisaged. These could include
defending against attacks on Australia and its direct interests and controlling
Australia’s
vast maritime interests in the immediate region. Wider
involvement could include contributing to regional maritime coalitions in
range of conflict scenarios (including the potential for high intensity
conflict), contributing to the freedom of maritime navigation,
responding to
natural disasters and humanitarian crises, assisting with the rescue of failed
states, and contributing to shaping
the regional strategic environment.
Australian governments may require the ability to project military power
across the seas, exercise control over areas of national
or regional sea space
and proximate land areas, and prevent or disrupt the activities of opponents in
various scenarios. Force packages
need to be tailored for each operational
mission. They would draw upon long range, deployable and sustainable sea, air
and land capabilities,
able to operate autonomously or as part of international
coalitions, US-led or otherwise.
Summary deductions
The US continues to be the dominant global economic and military power.
However, the relative power balance is changing. US power
is declining in
relative terms as regional powers, like China and India, emerge. The ANZUS
Treaty continues to be vital to Australia’s
national security interests.
Australia’s expanding political, economic and military engagement in the
Asia Pacific region combined
with changing regional power dynamics and US global
commitments elsewhere require Australia to pursue a more independent course.
Evolving strategic circumstances compel Australia to hedge against the strategic
implications of changing regional power balances.
A range of capable military forces will provide significant defence utility
for asserting control over Australia’s immediate
and wider national
interests, and to support aspirations and obligations as a regional power.
Maritime capabilities offer cost effective
options for Government at acceptable
levels of risk. They enable military presence to be selectively asserted across
Australia’s
geographic areas of highest security interest thus
demonstrating Australia’s commitment to the preservation of a benign
environment.
Strategic choices for Australia’s
Australia’s strategic thinking has evolved and matured considerably
over the past 30 years. The 1986 recommendation that Australia’s
be based largely on a strategy of denying a potential invading force access to
the mainland
is now recognised
as too narrow and too risky. Such a strategy is far too limiting for a
developed, middle power engaged in a globalised
world that aspires to be a
significant regional power. Successive governments have recognised that
Australia’s national interests
extend well beyond immediate sovereign
territory. Contemporary Australian governments would be unlikely to support a
core national
security strategy that essentially entails ‘pulling up the
drawbridge and defending the northern moat’ while the nation
reverts to a
subsistence existence for survival. This would be perceived domestically and
internationally as weak and displaying
a gross lack of comprehension of
strategic realities.
Australia must be able to deal effectively with security threats to its
national interests. Strategic vulnerabilities need to be identified
protected and strategic strengths enhanced. Security risk management processes
need to recognise the integrated nature of global
and regional systems.
Australia can choose to be strategically passive or proactive. Successive
Australian governments have sought
to be proactive in contributing to shaping a
positive strategic environment. Much of the shaping objective is pursued through
application of soft power means like diplomacy, economic, intellectual and
social engagement.
A central consideration for all regional participants is the provision of a
secure environment to enable economic and social development
to flourish.
Australia’s national defence strategy must have a predominantly
maritime flavour. Australia needs the capacity to control its
sovereign maritime
domain and interests, and to contribute to the security of regional maritime
domains and interests. This includes
military capabilities able to deter and
project power into and across the seas and if necessary, on to the shore for
medium level
combative and peaceful purposes.
Strategic choices are heavily affected by the willingness and economic
capacity to allocate national resources to security. In recent
years Australia
has committed approximately 1.9 per cent of Gross Domestic Product to defence.
Governments have increased defence
expenditure consistent with economic
The extent of
Australia’s security challenges, small population and competing demands
upon a small workforce are significant
considerations in determining whether
this level of defence expenditure is adequate. The availability of skilled and
motivated people
is a major determining factor for Australia’s approach to
providing national security.
High-technology and multi-role solutions that make optimum use of scant
people resources are essential considerations. This is necessary
to produce the
capacity, flexibility and versatility to conduct sustainable military operations
over large distances in a maritime
environment. Options exist to take advantage
of Australia’s access to some unique aspects of US and other
advanced technologies that will continue to give a qualitative
capability advantage. Options also exist for self-interested approaches
investment in and advancement of innovative niche security related industries
within Australia. Getting the people technology
mix right for Australia’s
circumstances presents challenges. Technological-based solutions to national
security will come at
Whether current levels of defence expenditure will provide an adequate level
of security risk mitigation in a strategic context of
dynamism and uncertainty
must be a vital consideration for government. Several defence capabilities will
reach obsolescence almost
simultaneously in the coming years including naval
surface forces and submarines along with some air, land and important
information
support capabilities. Combined with rising technology and people
costs, governments are faced with stark choices of either increasing
proportion of national resources allocated to defence or accepting higher levels
of national security risk. Both options present
short-term political risks for
government, however adopting the second option would present the greatest
security risk for the nation
and its future.
Summary deductions
Australia’s national defence strategy must have a significant maritime
flavour. It should provide for the defence of sovereign
territory and
ability to contribute to shaping the regional
strategic environment.
Determining the levels of defence expenditure necessary to provide for
Australia’s national security is a key consideration
for government. It
requires difficult judgments on what represents an adequate level of security
risk mitigation in a strategic context
of dynamism and uncertainty. Near
simultaneous obsolescence of several significant defence capabilities in future
years exacerbate
resource allocation pressures.
Technology and people costs are key drivers. In the Australian context,
highly capable, versatile and flexible forces able to support
operations over great distances in a largely maritime environment are essential.
High-technology and multi-role solutions
that make optimum use of scant people
resources must be key considerations. Access to unique advanced technologies
from the US and
elsewhere will continue to give a qualitative capability
advantage along with investment in innovative niche security systems within
Governments are faced with
the difficult choice of increasing the proportion of national resources
allocated to defence or accepting
higher levels of national security risk. Both
options present short-term political risks. However, adopting the second option
present the greatest risk for the nation and its future. Government
acceptance of potentially major national security risk failure
unconscionable.
Conclusions
Understanding Australia’s national security challenges requires
balancing the focus on immediate political and operational security
imperatives
with the need to maintain a long-term strategic view. Strategic risk management
processes offer a well-tried methodology
for identifying national security risk
treatment options. These will define the capability requirements for defending
Australia and
its interests in a strategic climate of change, uncertainty and
incomplete knowledge. The national security strategy for Australia
must provide
for the defence of core national interests and also seek to shape a favourable
strategic environment for the future.
For Australia, contributing to ensuring the flow of maritime trade and
ensuring security of the vast maritime domain presents the
convergence of the
enduring realities of strategic geography and national economic well being.
Australia’s geography offers
a strategic depth advantage available to few
nations on earth, and this must be fully exploited. It is clear that
Australia’s
national security strategy and policies must have a
predominantly maritime focus. They should support effective national governance
requirements by providing for the defence of sovereign territory and enforcement
of jurisdictional rights. There also need to be
a capacity to protect wider
national interests, and an ability to contribute to shaping the regional
strategic environment, itself
largely maritime.
The ADF must be capable of effectively operating throughout the national and
regional maritime domain. Forces must be highly combat
capable, versatile,
flexible, robust, sustainable and interoperable with regional and extra regional
forces. Readiness for current
operations must be balanced with a clear eye on
preparing for future security challenges.
Determining adequate levels of defence expenditure requires difficult
judgments on what represents adequate levels of security risk
mitigation. A
major contextual issue that must be considered is the significant growth and
modernisation of regional naval capabilities.
Near simultaneous obsolescence of
several significant Australian defence capabilities in future years intensifies
resource allocation
pressures. Technology and people are major cost drivers.
Both are key considerations in the Australian context, with effective
utilisation
of scarce national human resources the paramount issue.
Governments can either increase the proportion of national resources
allocated to defence or accept higher levels of national security
risk. There
are political and strategic risk calculations to be carefully considered.
Government failure to address major national
security risks would be at odds
with the fundamental obligation to provide for security with which it is
entrusted by the Australian
The evolving realities of globalisation and governance combined with
Australia’s enduring geography dictate that the maritime
case is vital to
defending Australia’s interests. This imperative must be given
appropriately significant weight in developing
Australia’s national
security policies and strategies.
Contributions to the ANCORS Workshop and to this paper by the following
ANCORS Fellows are gratefully acknowledged: Rear Admiral Brian
Adams, Professor
Sam Bateman, Professor Richard Kenchington, Commodore Jack McCaffrie, Dr Chris
Rahman, Vice Admiral Chris Ritchie,
Vice Admiral David Shackleton, Dr Clive
Schofield, Professor Martin Tsamenyi and Dr Robin Warner.
Lee Cordner is a Principal
Research Fellow at the Australian National Centre for Ocean Resources and
Security (ANCORS), University
of Wollongong. He was formerly Managing Director
of Future Directions International Pty Ltd
and a naval officer for 33
years; he retired in the rank of Commodore. Email:
lcordner@uow.edu.au
Fitzgibbon, J. The Hon.
Minister for Defence, Media Release
New Defence White
, Min 10/08, 22 February 2008, Department of Defence website
http://www.minister.defence.gov.au/Fitzgibbontpl.cfm?CurrentId=7444
at viewed 14 August 2008.
This review was led by Mr Ric
Smith AO PSM, former Secretary for the Department of Defence. He was directed to
report to government
by 30 June 2008. The outcomes of the review remain to be
announced. Prime Minister of Australia, Media Release
Security Review
, 22 February 2008, Department of Defence website
http://www.pm.gov.au/media/ release/2008/media_release_0084.cfm
at 11 August 2008.
Michael Evans, ‘Strategic
culture and the Australian way of warfare: perspectives’ in David Stevens
and John Reeve (eds),
Southern Trident: Strategy, history and the rise of
Australian Naval Power
(2001) 92-95.
World maritime trade is
expanding in all sectors. See UNCTAD
Review of Maritime Transport 2007
Report by the United Nations Conference on Trade and Development UNCTAD, United
Nations New York and Geneva, 2007. UNCTAD website
http://www. unctad.org/en/docs/rmt2007_en.pdf
at 14 August 2008.
Ibid, 5 and Table 4. In 2006,
dry bulk cargoes comprised more than 60 per cent of global shipments with
Australia providing 13.3
per cent of the total goods loaded.
The elements of national power
typically include economic, military, diplomatic and information. To this can be
added social, natural
resources, human resources, intellectual capacity,
industrial capacity, national culture and national morale. Concepts like
power’ and soft power’ are sometimes encompassed and
increasingly concepts like ‘knowledge power’ are included.
International Politics on the World Stage
1993), 226-256. For a typical national military view of the elements (sometimes
called instruments) of national power see US
Joint Publication 1,
for the Armed Forces of the United States
, 14 May 2007. Defense Technical
Information Center website
http://www.dtic.mil/doctrine/jel/new_pubs/jp1.pdf
at 14 August 2008.
Kennedy, P.
Grand Strategies
in War and Peace
(1991), 6 and 184.
Generic risk management
processes as outlined here are defined in
AS/NZS 4360:2004 Risk
AS/NZS HB 436:2004 (Guidelines to AS/NZS 4360:2004) Risk
Management Guidelines Companion
. Standards website
http://www.standards.com.au
at 14 August 2008.
Nations like China and India
fit this description in the Asia Pacific region.
Convention on the Law of
, opened for signature 10 December
1982, 1833 UNTS 396
, (entered into
force 16 November 1994).
See Park Hee Kwon,
Law of the Sea and Northeast Asia: A Challenge for Cooperation
122-123 for a summary of maritime boundary delimitation challenges in the East
China Sea. Similar challenges exist in the
South China Sea, with many claims to
be resolved.
The total estimated length
of the Australian coastline is 59,736 km (35,877 km mainland and 23,859 km
islands). Geoscience Australia
http://www.ga. gov.au/education/facts/dimensions/coastlin.htm
at 14 August 2008.
Offshore island territories
include Christmas and Cocos Islands; the islands of the Torres Strait and the
Great Barrier Reef; Heard,
McDonald and Macquarie Islands; and Lord Howe and
Norfolk Islands.
Australia has the
largest Exclusive Economic Zone (EEZ) in the world after the US
and France.
The Australian EEZ is
8,148,250 km
which is greater in area than the Australian landmass
of 7,692,724 km
. Geoscience Australia <
http://www.ga.gov.au/
education/facts/dimensions/oceans.jsp
http://www.
ga.gov.au/education/facts/dimensions/areadime.htm
> at 11 August 2008.
Ferguson, M. The Hon MP,
Minister for Resources, Energy and Tourism, Media Release,
UN Confirms
Australia’s Rights Over Extra 2.5 Million Square Kilometres Of Seabed
21 April 2008. Resources Energy and Tourism website
http://minister.ret. gov.au/TheHonMartinFergusonMP/Pages/UNCONFIRMSAUSTRALIA ’ SRIGHTSOVEREXTRA.aspx
at 14 August 2008.
The Australian Search and
Rescue Region is 52.8 million km
in area. It extends into the Indian
Ocean, west and north to maritime boundaries with Sri Lanka, Indonesia and Papua
New Guinea,
east to maritime boundaries with the Solomon Islands and Fiji, and
south to Antarctica, Australian Maritime Safety Authority website
http://www.amsa.gov.au/ search_and_rescue/Australian_Search_and_Rescue_fact_sheet.asp
http://www.amsa.gov.au/ search _and_rescue/Search_and_Rescue_in_Australia/Arrangements_in_Australia.asp
at 14 August 2008.
, owned and managed by Commonwealth Scientific and Industrial
Research Organisation (CSIRO), is Australia’s only national facility
available to marine scientists to explore and study Australia’s oceans. It
enables oceanographic, geo-science, fisheries and
ecosystem research, CSIRO
http://www.marine.csiro.au/nationalfacility/
features/vessel.htm
at 14 August 2008.
Institute of Shipping
Economics and Logistics (ISL) (2008) 52
Shipping and Statistics and Market
Review: World shipbuilding and shipbuilders
7. Seabase website
http://www.seabase.isl.org/index.php? module = Pagesetter & func=viewpub & tid=1 & pid=1
at 14 August 2008.
UNCTAD above n 4, x-xi.
At 1 July 2007, 7,433 ships
totalling 415.8 million dead weight tons (dwt) were on order with South Korea,
China and Japan the leading
shipbuilding countries comprising 81.7 per cent of
the world order book. Institute of Shipping Economics and Logistics (ISL)
Shipping and Statistics and Market Review: World shipbuilding and
shipbuilders
51 (2007) 9/10, 6-12. Seabase website
http://www.seabase.isl.org/index. php?module=Pagesetter & func=viewpub & tid=1 & pid =1
at 14 August 2008.
In the year ending 2007 this
amounted to more than 669 million tonnes of exports by sea, worth $A141 billion,
and over 80 million
tonnes of imports by sea, worth more than $A138 billion.
Australia’s
International Cargo Statistics
http://www.btre.gov.au/ Info.aspx?NodeId=85
at 14 August 2008.
UNCTAD above n 4, 31-34 and
Ibid, 15-19 and Table 7.
Australia ranked as the largest exporter in the world of iron ore (37.7 per cent
of the world total) and
coal (32.3 per cent of the world total), and the third
largest exporter of grain (9.5 per cent of the world total).
Meyrick Consulting Group Pty
Ltd, International and Domestic Shipping and Ports Study (2007), 6-8.
Lee Willett,
Defence and Security Policy: The Maritime Contribution
Occasional Paper, Royal United Services Institute for Defence and Security
Studies, 4.
Vijay Sakhuja,
‘Malacca: Who’s to pay for smooth sailing?’
May 2007. Traffic density is projected to increase from
94,000 ships in 2004 to 141,000 in 2020 Asia Times Online
http://www.atimes.com/atimes/Southeast_Asia/IE16Ae01.html
at 14 August 2008.
United States Government,
Energy Information Administration,
International Energy Outlook 2006
(2006) Office of Integrated Analysis and Forecasting, U.S. Department of Energy,
1, 25 and 37. Energy Information Administration
http://www.eia. doe.gov/oiaf/ieo/index.html
at 14 August 2008. IEO projections are for overall energy consumption to
increase by 71 per cent between 2003 and 2030, with
oil demand increasing 47 per
cent and non-Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development Asia,
including China and India
accounting for 43 per cent of the increase. The
natural gas share of total world energy consumption is forecast to increase from
24 per cent in 2003 to 26 per cent in 2030.
International Energy Agency,
World Energy Outlook 2006
, 66-68. International Energy Agency website,
http://www.iea.org/textbase/nppdf/free/2006/weo2006.pdf
at 14 August 2008.
Infield Energy Data
available at
http://www.infield.com/
at 14 August 2008.
Australia’s LNG
exports are worth $A7 billion, increasing to $A10 billion per annum. Australian
Government, Department of Resources,
Energy and Tourism,
Energy in Australia
, 32-33. Resources, Energy and Tourism website
http://www.ret.gov.au/ energy/Documents/facts%20statistics%20publications/energy_in_aus_2008.pdf
at 14 August 2008.
The 40th separate deployment
of RAN surface forces to the international coalition in the Persian Gulf area
commenced in April 2008.
The nature of the mission has varied over the years.
The Navy’s capable warships and well trained personnel have exhibited
degrees of versatility, flexibility and professionalism in dealing with evolving
Middle East security tasks. Tasks have included
enforcing United Nations trade
sanctions through the imposition of maritime blockade and participation in naval
strike and air defence
forces during the two Gulf Wars. Sea Power Centre –
Australia, Department of Defence,
Offshore and Out of Sight: The RAN in the
North Arabian Gulf
, Semaphore Issue 06, June 2008. Department of Defence
http://www.navy.gov.au/spc/semaphore/2008_6.pdf
at 14 August 2008.
Conservative estimates of
the global fishing situation in 2007 are summarised as follows: seven of the top
10 marine fish (30 per
cent of all marine production) are fully or
over-exploited; 25 per cent of stocks are in crisis; 52 per cent of stocks are
exploited (fished at their maximum biological productivity level); 21 per cent moderately exploited (modest increase in fishing possible);
per cent of stocks are underexploited. Food and Agriculture Organization (FAO)
of the United Nations, Fisheries and Aquaculture
Department, Rome 2007,
State of World Fisheries and Aquaculture 2006
. FAO website
http://www.fao.org/docrep/009/A0699e/A0699e00. htm
at 14 August 2008.
George W Bush, President of
the United States of America, ‘Prevent Our Enemies from Threatening Us,
Our Allies, and Our Friends
with Weapons of Mass Destruction’, White House
http://www. whitehouse.gov/nsc/nss5.html
at 15 August 2008.
‘United States
Economy’, The New York Times, 14 August 2008. In 2007, the American
economy began to slow significantly,
mostly because of a real-estate slump and
related financial problems. Many economists believe that the economy entered a
at the end of 2007 or early in 2008. New York Times website
http://topics.nytimes.com/top/ reference/timestopics/subjects/u/united_states_economy/index.html
at 15 August 2008.
Security Treaty between
Australia, New Zealand and the United States of America [ANZUS], opened for
signature 1 September 1951, enter
treaty citation here , entered into force 29
April 1952.
Howard, J.W. The Hon, Prime
Minister of Australia, ‘Aust to invoke ANZUS treaty’, 14 September
2001. Encyclopaedia website
http://www.encyclopedia.com/ doc/1P1-46919326.html
at 15 August 2008.
Adam Cobb, ‘East Timor
and Australia’s Security Role: Issues and Scenarios’, Current Issues
Brief 3 (1999-2000),
Foreign Affairs, Defence and Trade Group, Parliament of
Australia, Department of the Parliamentary Library, 21 September 1999. The
Aegis-class cruiser USS
was available to provide air defence
cover. Australian Parliament House website
http://www.aph.gov.au/library/pubs/CIB/1999-2000/ 2000cib03.htm
at 15 August 2008.
Australia’s Defence Capabilities: Report to the Minister for Defence
(1986) 2-6. In 1986, Dr Dibb suggested that the importance of trade to the
Australian economy was over emphasised and that Australia
could ‘become
highly self-sufficient in basic commodities’. Further, it was recommended
that Australia’s defence
should be based upon a “strategy of
denial” where the aim was to be capable of ‘denying the sea and air
an adversary, thus preventing any successful landing of significant
forces on Australian soil’.
Joseph S Nye Jr.,
‘The Benefits of Soft Power’ (2004) Spring
Compass: A Journal of
Harvard Business School Website
http://hbswk.hbs.edu/ archive/4290.html
at 15 August 2008.
Australia Government,
Defence 2000: Our Future Defence Force
(2000) 117-118. In the 2000
Defence White Paper the government committed to ‘the same proportion of
GDP on defence as we are
today. That remains 1.9 per cent.’ There was also
an ongoing commitment for defence expenditure to ‘grow by an average
the Rudd government has indicated a similar commitment.
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
No downloadable files available
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter