URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/journals/JCULawRw/2023/4.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 15:06:42
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Harris, Bede --- "The Sports Grants Scandal: Constitutional Protection of Socioeconomic Rights as a Remedy for Porkbarrelling" [2023] JCULawRw 4; (2023) 29 James Cook University Law Review 43
The Sports Grants Scandal:
Constitutional Protection of Socioeconomic Rights as a Remedy for
Pork-Barrelling
Bede Harris
Pork-barrelling, defined as the allocation of public resources for the
purpose of securing political advantage, is rampant in Australia.
Inquiries by
the Australian National Audit Office have revealed that funds from numerous
grants programmes have been abused in this
way. The most prominent recent
occurrence was the scandal that occurred following the revelation that the
Coalition government led
by Prime Minister Scott Morrison had engaged in blatant
pork-barrelling in the allocation of funds from the Community Sports
Infrastructure
Grant programme. This article discusses the phenomenon of
pork-barrelling in Australia and the inadequacy of legal remedies to prevent
It then examines how constitutional protection of socioeconomic rights could
provide an avenue for the suppression of pork-barrelling
by showing how courts
in South Africa have interpreted socioeconomic rights provisions in that
country’s Constitution in such
a way as to require that government funding
spent in fulfilment of socioeconomic programmes be allocated in accordance with
of reasonableness. The courts have also created novel remedies which
require the executive to revise the way in which it distributes
funds within
programmes in cases where the standard has been breached. If socioeconomic
rights were protected in the Commonwealth
Constitution
, and grant applications
which had been denied funding as a result of pork-barrelling but which would
have been successful had the
criterion of reasonableness been complied with,
courts could mandate that the state adjust its distribution of funds so as to
that all applications that met objective criteria were funded. The
availability of this remedy would constitute a powerful disincentive
governments using public funds for political purposes.
I Introduction
In the months before the 2019 federal election, the government of then Prime
Minister Scott Morrison faced public criticism over the
manner in which funds
had been allocated to sporting bodies that had applied for grants under the
Community Sport Infrastructure
Grant (CSIG) programme. The controversy, which
came to be referred to as the sports grants scandal, was not the first instance
Australian governments had engaged in pork-barrelling – that is, the
allocation of allocated funds in accordance with party-political
instead of on the basis of objective criteria such as community benefit and
value for money. However, the factors that
set this instance apart from others
was its temporal proximity to an election and the brazenness with which it was
discusses the concept of pork-barrelling and its incidence in
relates the history of the sports grants scandal as a
particular example of pork-barrelling, including both the manner in which grants
were allocated and the findings of inquiries by the Australian National Audit
Office, by the Office of Prime Minister and Cabinet
and by the Senate Select
Committee on Administration of Sports Grants.
discusses what remedies
are currently available in cases of pork-barrelling, their scope and their
limitations.
examines the concept of socioeconomic rights and the support
for their protection voiced in submissions to the National Human Rights
Consultation in 2008. This part also examines way in which socioeconomic rights
are upheld under the South African
Constitution
, and the remedies developed by
the courts to ensure that the state acts reasonably in distributing funding
allocated to programmes
falling within the ambit of socioeconomic rights. In
the discussion reverts to Australia and explains how judicial review
under a bill of rights in which socioeconomic rights were protected
provide a mechanism for the suppression of pork-barrelling by providing a remedy
for unsuccessful applicants who could demonstrate
that while they met the
threshold of eligibility for funding, their applications were unsuccessful
because funds had been awarded
other than in accordance with rational criteria.
The article concludes in
by arguing that constitutional recognition of
socioeconomic rights would provide a mechanism whereby executive decisions on
the allocation
of funds could be reviewed on the basis of reasonableness.
II What is Pork-Barrelling?
The term ‘pork-barrelling’ originated in the United States in the
1860s as a metaphor for the distribution of largesse
to voters, and is now used
to refer to the allocation of public funds in order to further partisan
political interests rather than
for the benefit of the public as a
Although promises made
during election campaigns to spend money on projects in particular electorates
are commonly referred to as
pork-barrelling, it is important to distinguish
to spend money in a manner designed to secure political
advantage from the
of doing so in contravention of the obligation
resting on a government to act for the benefit of the public as a whole.
Pork-barrelling is a common phenomenon of both Commonwealth and state
politics. Recent examples include the allocation of grants under
Commonwealth Government’s Urban Congestion
the Safer Communities
the Building Better Regions
and the Community Health and
Hospitals programme,
which were the
subject of adverse reports by the Australian National Audit Office.
The most notorious recent example of pork-barrelling took place in relation
to the allocation of grants under the Community Sport
Infrastructure Grant
(‘CSIG’) programme in the months leading to the 2019 federal
election. This article is confined
to a discussion of that programme, although
the conclusions drawn are applicable to any incidence of pork-barrelling.
III A History of the Sports Grants Scandal
Origins of the Controversy
The CSIG programme was one of three grants programmes that the Commonwealth
government established for the purpose of fostering community
participation in
sport. The government provided a total of $102.5 million to the programme,
allocated in three application rounds
between 2018 and 2020. Of this, $100
million was
The programme was administered by the Australian Sports Commission
(‘ASC’), which was usually (albeit informally) referred
the relevant period as ‘Sport Australia,’ which is how it is
referred to in this article. The ASC is a corporate
entity charged with the task
of receiving applications from community sports groups and recommending which of
them should receive
a grant. Its activities are regulated by the
Sports Commission Act 1989
Controversy over the way in which grants were allocated was sparked by press
reports in February 2019 containing a photograph of Georgina
Downer, a Liberal
candidate in the election due to be held in May 2019, presenting a mock cheque
bearing her name and the Liberal
party logo to a community sports organisation
that had been awarded a grant and which was located in the electorate for which
was standing. The picture was widely interpreted as conveying the meaning
that Downer – and by extension the governing Liberal
party – were
claiming credit for the fact that the sports organisation had succeeded in
obtaining the grant. The opposition
Labor party asked the Australian National
Audit Office (‘ANAO’) to investigate how the grants programme was
being administered.
The Report by the Australian National Audit
The ANAO presented its report to Parliament in January 2020. The report
stated that in the first round of funding, Sport Australia
had made grant
recommendations consistent with the criteria against which CSIG applications
were to be ranked, but that a parallel
process had been conducted by the
Minister for Sport, Bridget McKenzie, under which she had over-ridden the
merit-based assessments
by Sport Australia and had instead ordered that grants
be awarded in accordance with assessments conducted by her office. These
assessments
were unsupported by any published criteria. In the case of the
second and third rounds, Sport Australia played no role at all in
determining
which applications should be
The report also stated that
there was no evident legal authority that justified McKenzie’s
intervention in the process.
The report contained an analysis of grants that were awarded over all three
stages which the ANAO said was indicative of a ‘distribution
arising from the fact
that the Minister’s office had awarded grants by applying political
considerations.
revelation was that in assessing applications her office had used a spreadsheet
in which applications were colour-coded
in such a way as to identify which party
held the electorate from which each application
The spreadsheet was
subsequently amended so indicate those seats which were marginal or which the
Coalition has targeted to win in
Bias was also starkly revealed by the figures: In the first round, 41% of the
$28.7 million awarded went to 47 marginal seats or seats
being targeted by the
government, which meant that, on average, each of these seats received $610 000.
By contrast, the remaining
59% of funds was distributed among the other 103
non-marginal seats, giving an average of $164 000 per seat. Furthermore, taking
all three rounds into consideration, 61% of grants were awarded to 417 projects
which fell below the threshold set by Sport Australia
as being deserving of
Conversely, 125
projects whose score exceeded the threshold received no
An analysis by Leigh
and McAllister revealed that on average a marginal electorate was likely to
receive $244 900 more in funding
than a very safe
electorate.
In other words,
funds were allocated to projects that were, on an objective basis, not deserving
of funding, but which were located
in seats that the government needed either to
retain or win in order to stay in office, whereas funds were denied to other
which would have been funded had money been allocated on the basis of
merit but which were not located in politically important
electorates.
The Report by the Department of Prime Minister and
Prime Minister Scott Morrison refused to accept the conclusions reached by
the ANAO and commissioned an internal review by Phil Gaetjens,
secretary to the
Department of Prime Minister and Cabinet (‘DPMC’), to investigate
whether McKenzie had breached ministerial
standards. Significantly, Gaetjens was
not asked to determine whether McKenzie had had legal authority to intervene in
the administration
of the programme or to investigate the process by which she
had made decisions. Gaetjens’ appointment was criticised on the
his obvious lack of independence given his position in the
A number of revelations
additional to what had been discovered in the ANAO report emerged in the press
prior to the end of the Gaetjens
investigation. These included that McKenzie had
approved grant applications that had been lodged after the closing date for
applications
and that among the
grants awarded was one to a shooting club of which she herself was a
Gaetjens presented his report in February 2020. The government published a
summary of the report while refusing to release the report
itself. The summary
stated that McKenzie had not breached ministerial standards of fairness in her
distribution of grants but had
done so in relation to her having a conflict of
interest in so far as approval of the grant to the shooting club was
Gaetjens stated that
there were shortcomings in the process by which the CSIG had been administered
and expressed concern at the
divergence between the recommendations by Sport
Australia and the Minister’s decisions, but said that there was no
that grants were awarded on a political
only that it was not
evident as to why McKenzie had departed from the recommendations. Gaetjens
accepted at face value McKenzie’s
evidence that she had not seen the
colour-coded spreadsheet that had been sent to her office.
McKenzie subsequently resigned, Morrison announcing that this was because of
her approval of the grant to the shooting club, not her
administration of the
CSIG as a whole.
Morrison and
did not explain the contradictions between Gaetjens’ findings and those of
the ANAO. McKenzie’s resignation
over the shooting club grant was widely
seen as a tactic designed to divert attention from the far greater problem of
the corruption
inherent in the way in which the entire programme had been
administered.
The Report of the Senate Select Committee on the
Administration of Sports Grants
In February 2020 the Senate appointed a Select Committee on the
Administration of Sports Grants to investigate the way in which the
had been run. The Committee tabled its report in March 2021. The
Committee’s inquiries were hampered by refusals
by Sport Australia and by
government ministers to provide various documents requested by the
The level of non-co-operation was evidenced by the fact that in an Appendix to
its report, the Committee identified 20 documents
to which it had been denied
These included legal
advice which Sport Australia and various government ministers said they had
obtained during the consideration
of grant applications, as well as a full list
of grant applications of which the Committee had been provided with only
or redacted versions.
The report stated that it had received evidence that there was nothing in the
Australian Sports Commission Act 1989
(Cth) which authorised the Minister
to make grants decisions.
Committee accepted the evidence of political bias that had been identified by
It also found that not
only the Minister for Sport but also the Prime Minister had been involved in the
determination of grant
applications
despite the matter
obviously not falling within the Prime Minister’s portfolio. The report
stated that in the runup to the
2019 election, the involvement of the Prime
Minister’s office in directing grants to marginal or contestable
electorates was
evidenced by the fact that his office requested that the
announcement of grants be co-ordinated with the government’s campaign
headquarters.
As the ANAO had
done, the Committee drew attention to the fact that the original version of the
grant applications had been amended
so as to indicate which seats were either
marginal or were ones which the Coalition had targeted to
The Committee also learned that Sport Australia had received a final list of
approved projects from McKenzie’s office after
the calling of the 2019
general election – that is, after the government entered caretaker mode
under which convention prohibits
governments from making major policy decisions
or decisions which are likely to be
contentious.
In its summation of its findings relating to political bias, the Committee
stated that:
The evidence examined by the committee clearly shows that the minister
deviated from the merit-based assessment process adopted by
Australia’s program administrators and assessment panel. Given the
minister has not been able to provide any credible
or documented rationale for
her decision making the committee can only conclude that she applied
considerations that were politically
motivated and inconsistent with the
published guidelines.
Whilst the committee has been denied access to the unredacted versions of the
colour-coded spreadsheets prepared by the minister’s
office, enough
evidence is available to assert that the colour-coded spreadsheets were
developed using vastly different assessment
criteria than those published in the
guidelines. The committee is of the view that the parallel assessment undertaken
by the minister’s
office drew upon considerations of electorate status,
and whether a project was in a marginal or targeted seat for the Liberal and
National party election campaigns. In other words, the CSIG program was turned
into a $100 million pre-election slush fund.
The Committee further held that the evidence showed that the Prime Minister
and his office were intimately involved in and aware of
decision-making and that
many deserving applications failed because the applicants were not located in
marginal or targeted
electorates.
Attitudes and Responses to Pork-Barrelling
As we have seen, evidence presented to the ANAO and the Senate Select
Committee revealed a high level of sophistication in the execution
strategy of using public money for partisan benefit – not to mention the
allocation of significant time and resources
by the offices of both the Minister
for Sport and the Prime Minister that should instead have been devoted to
serving the interests
of the public. Yet there were still voices that sought to
justify the practice. Even after being confronted with the ANAO report,
Minister Scott Morrison proclaimed that no pork-barrelling had taken
– which serves only
to highlight the flagrancy in which pork-barrelling is engaged.
Of particular note in relation to pork-barrelling was the conduct of National
Party MP Barnaby Joyce who, when serving as Minister
for Agriculture, ordered
the relocation of the Australian Pesticides and Veterinary Medicines Authority
(‘APVMA’) from
Canberra to his own electorate – a decision
that was found to be unjustifiable when subject to a cost-benefit analysis which
the government subsequently resisted
Joyce’s attitude towards pork-barrelling was shown by his statement
that if a federal anti-corruption commission was established,
inquiries into the
manner in which government grants were allocated should be excluded from its
ambit of operation.
justification for this was that the disadvantage in accessing services
experienced by people living in regional and remote areas
justified the
disproportionate allocation of funding to them – an argument which ignores
the fact that the criteria used in
recommending grants distributions already
take into account disadvantage deriving from remoteness. Indeed, in the case of
itself, the programme guidelines expressly mentioned the inadequacy of
sporting facilities in regional areas as a matter to be remedied
through the
programme, and nominated educational institutions in remote areas as being a
specific category of organisations eligible
to apply for
Furthermore, despite
Joyce’s arguments about the needs of non-metropolitan areas, the ANAO
found that in the case of funds
allocated to Building Better Regions Fund by the
government for the purpose of improving regional infrastructure, not only was
a bias in favour of government-held seats but 55% of the money was
distributed to projects in major cities, while only 4% was distributed
parts of the country.
Dale suggests that pork-barrelling is so pervasive that it is now seen as a
normal part of politics in
This is most starkly
illustrated in the case of New South Wales Premier, Gladys Berejiklian, who was
investigated by the state Independent
Commission Against Corruption
(‘ICAC’) following allegations that she had allocated grants to
projects in an electorate
held by an MP with whom she was engaging in an
undisclosed relationship. Her response to this was, ‘I don’t think
would be a surprise to anybody that we throw money at seats to keep them ...
At the end of the day, whether we like it or not, that’s
democracy.’
Berejiklian resigned when it became apparent that the evidence against her
was overwhelming, ultimately leading ICAC to find that
she had engaged in
serious corrupt conduct.
Alarmingly, Scott Morrison, who was Prime Minister at the time of the
investigation, defended Berejiklian and condemned the Commission’s
investigation,
successor as leader of the Liberal Party declared that Berejiklian was ‘a
wonderful person’ and ‘not
a corrupt person’ after the ICAC
report was published.
The deadening of public sensitivity to pork-barrelling poses the danger that
its acceptance as a day-to-day part of political practice
will ultimately lead
to a belief that it is morally acceptable – in other words, that what is
normalised becomes licensed.
This in turn erodes public trust in government and
an expectation that governments will act in their own political interests rather
than those of the public they
An example this is the
fact that, given the wasted effort involved in developing grant applications
which meet the objective threshold
for success but which are denied because
giving them confers no advantage on the
government,
some potential
grants applicants located in safe electorates take the view there is no point
expending time and energy in applying
for grants because a negative outcome is
all but guaranteed.
What arguments by Joyce and others amount to is, in essence, the assertion of
a right to be corrupt. Corruption in relation to sports
may do no harm other
than to induce a sense of injustice in the minds of the unsuccessful applicants,
but what if, for example, the
same thinking was adopted in relation to funding
for kidney dialysis (an example which, as we shall see in
subject of a case brought in vindication of the right to access health care in
South Africa)? What if access to that service
was determined not on the basis of
medical priorities but rather in accordance with which electorates potential
recipients lived
in? How would unsuccessful patients and their families feel in
such circumstances?
After the election of the Labor government the Joint Committee on Public
Accounts and Audit conducted an inquiry into a range of grants
administered by the previous government. The committee found that the award of
grants on a political basis was evident
in the case of all of the programmes,
but was particularly egregious in the case of the Urban Congestion Fund and the
Regional Grants
Fund, leading committee chair, Labor MP James Hill, to
characterise the conduct of the previous government as ‘rorting on an
industrial scale’
committee made a range of recommendations relating to how the award of grants
should be administered, including the amendment
of the Commonwealth Grants Rules
and Guidelines (discussed in Part IV below) so as to impose an obligation on
decision-makers to
adhere to the guidelines, to provide that a competitive
merits-based approach be the default for the award of grants and to require
where a minister departed from an award recommendation by public servants or
other agencies, the reason for that departure be
The new government also passed the
Anti-Corruption Commission Act 2022
(Cth). The National Anti-Corruption
Commission (‘NACC’) is empowered to investigate corrupt conduct that
is referred to
it by any person,
provided that the alleged conduct passes the threshold of amounting to
corruption that is ‘serious or
The Commission
is empowered to hold hearings,
to summons people
and to order
the production of documents.
After concluding an investigation the Commission must table its report in
Parliament.
It would be expected
that, if a report discloses possible criminal conduct, the government would
refer the matter to law-enforcement
‘Corrupt conduct’ is defined in
of the Act as including
conduct adversely affecting the honest or impartial exercise of public power,
breach of public trust or abuse
of office. When the legislation was at Bill
stage, Attorney-General Mark Dreyfus stated that the NACC would have the power
to investigate
pork-barrelling.
On the face of it, pork-barrelling would fall within
, as it breaches the
requirement of impartiality and involves both a breach of public trust and abuse
However, both Labor and the Coalition united to defeat an amendment proposed
by an independent MP that would have expressly stated
that pork-barrelling lay
within the Commission’s jurisdiction, the Attorney-General arguing that it
was already captured within
the concept of breach of public trust and could be
investigated if it met the threshold of being ‘serious or
pork-barrelling was one of the issues that led to the establishment of the NACC,
it would have been preferable had the
Act made specific reference to it. How the
Commission interprets the Act, and in particular the ‘serious or
requirement, will be determine whether the Commission is capable
of suppressing pork-barrelling.
IV Legal Remedies
A number of academic writers have explored the question of what legal
remedies are available where ministers have allocated public
funds on the basis
of political advantage rather than merit. In contrast to the states where there
have been successful prosecutions
for political
corruption,
the fact that at
Commonwealth level pork-barrelling has thus far been attended by no legal
consequences for its perpetrators points
to the inadequacy of such legal
remedies as currently exist.
Administrative Law
It might be thought that administrative law review would provide an obvious
avenue for redress where pork-barrelling has resulted
in meritorious grants
applications failing while less meritorious applications have succeeded. Several
grounds for review provided
Administrative Decisions (Judicial
Review) Act 1977
(Cth) are relevant to pork-barrelling.
Section 5(1)(e)
of the Act provides that a person may apply for review of a
decision on the ground that the making of the decision amounted to an
exercise of the power conferred by the enactment in pursuance of which it was
purportedly made.
Section 5(2)
then lists circumstances in which an improper
exercise of power will be considered to have taken place, including the taking
account of an irrelevant consideration
(s 5(2)(a))
, exercise of a power for
purposes other than those for which it is conferred
(s 5(2)(c))
, exercise of a
power which is so unreasonable that no reasonable person could have exercised
the power in that way
(s 5(2)(g))
and exercise of a power in any other way that
constitutes an abuse of the power
(s 5(2)(j)).
In addition to review on the
grounds of improper exercise of power,
states that a decision may be
challenged on the grounds that natural justice was denied, which would include
review on grounds of
On the face of it, these grounds for review offer scope for a court to
overturn decisions in which applicants were denied grants as
a result of
pork-barrelling. Since the essence of pork-barrelling is the taking of political
factors into consideration when making
decisions pertaining to the allocation of
public resources, and since political factors are self-evidently an irrelevant
consideration,
a person who had been unsuccessful in obtaining a grant despite
having met eligibility criteria could argue that the rejection of
application was unlawful under
and could also argue that the award of
grants for political purposes rather than for the purposes for which the grants
was established was unlawful under
and constituted an abuse
of the power under
It could also be argued that such a decision was
challengeable on grounds of unreasonableness under
because it departed
from the criteria against which applications were assessed. Finally, it could be
argued that such a decision
involved a breach of natural justice and so is
reviewable under
in that it was made as part of a scheme biased in
favour of projects in electorates held by the government or marginal electorates
that it hoped to win.
Assuming that a person seeking judicial review could prove that their
application was ranked above the threshold objectively set in
light of the
programme criteria but was denied funding, what would be the likelihood of
success? Although in light of the foregoing
paragraphs one might think that an
application for review would be successful, Ng points out that a court is likely
to see the award
of a grant as a policy decision by the executive and thus not
something in which it is appropriate for the judiciary to intervene.
consequence of this is that, so long as the decision was lawful in the narrow
sense, the decision-maker had authority to make
it, and so it will not be
disturbed by a court. As Ng
[J]udicial review applications do not enable challenges solely on the basis
of pork barrelling, that is, the biased apportionment
of grant money to marginal
electorates, as courts do not tend to question the merits of government
decision-making on public policy
matters. This is because the merits of
decisions are seen to be the province of the executive and legislature, while
the judiciary
is confined to the legality of decisions...Therefore, there is no
scope for courts to intervene in decisions to allocate grants on
basis, as this would be an intrusion into the policy decisions of Ministers.
Further, it is also not possible for judicial
review on the ground of bias
levied against the Minister seeking to allocate funding disproportionately to
government-held or marginal
electorates, as that would be seen to be a policy
decision. At any rate, the bias rule in administrative law is set at a lower bar
for Ministers compared to judges, and courts are less willing to impute a
perception of bias on Ministers as decision-makers Thus,
courts would tend not
to question a decision by a Minister to allocate grant funding to one particular
constituency and not another,
as this would be seen to be a policy decision
outside the remit of the courts.
In similar vein, Connolly takes the view that administrative law is unlikely
to assist a disappointed applicant because courts are
reluctant to interfere in
governmental decisions relating to the allocation of
Cane and McDonald
argue that courts are ill-equipped to determine polycentric
of which the
allocation of grants, which requires consideration of multiple applications
against multiple criteria, is an example.
A further shortcoming in relation to administrative law is that, even if a
litigant was successful in proving that the rejection of
a grant application was
unlawful, the only remedy that a court would be able to give would be an order
requiring the decision-maker
to reconsider the application – it would not
be able to order that the grant be
The only case in which the CSIG programme was challenged on administrative
law grounds was brought by the Beechworth Lawn Tennis Club
which had been denied
funding even though its merit-based score exceeded the threshold set by Sport
Australia. The challenge was
based on the arguments that the Minister had lacked
legal authority to intervene in the determination of grants and that Sport
had acted under direction in awarding grants in accordance with the
Minister’s instructions. However, the challenge was withdrawn
club was granted alternative funding by the Victorian government. This was
unfortunate in that it left undetermined whether
the process used by the
government had been unlawful.
The case is nevertheless instructive in that the plaintiff’s arguments,
being based on the grounds of absence of legal authority
and action under
dictation, were specific to the facts of the case which, it will be recalled,
involved Sport Australia acting awarding
grants at the behest of the minister.
Those grounds will be unavailable in usual cases where the decision-maker is
authorised to
make decisions and takes those decisions themselves. The fact that
the plaintiff’s challenge in the tennis club cases did not
include the
grounds of bias or the taking into account of irrelevant considerations suggests
that the plaintiff’s legal representatives,
like the academic authorities
discussed above, took the view that judicial review would not be granted on
those grounds. This appears
to confirm that administrative law does not provide
as promising an avenue for remedying pork-barrelling as might have been thought.
The Offence of Misconduct in Office
The common law has long recognised the offence of misconduct in
The elements of the
offence as stated in
are that the
offence is committed when a person who holds public office wilfully misconducts
himself without reasonable excuse and
to a degree of sufficient seriousness to
warrant criminal punishment.
breadth with which these elements are stated means that range of factual
circumstances in which the offence can be manifested
is not closed. An offence
can manifest itself in a variety of ways, including fraud in office, wilful
neglect of duty, wilful misuse
of official power (where an official uses
official power in order to achieve an unauthorised
objective).
Of particular
relevance to pork-barrelling are cases where the office-holder acts from the
improper motive of gaining an advantage
for themselves or a third party or
causing harm to others or to the public
As examples of what could constitute wilful misuse of official power, Hall
cites an official displaying favouritism in the award of
benefits or acting so
as unlawfully to disadvantage a person. Misconduct in office would occur where a
person uses his or her position
in order to achieve a personal advantage for him
or her-self or for a third party or in such a way as to subvert the public
These types of conduct
are inherent in pork-barrelling: The allocation of grants on a political basis
amounts to favouritism to governing-party
candidates in electorates that the
government holds or hopes to win. The award of grants other than in accordance
with merit causes
disadvantage to grant applicants who would have been
successful had grants been awarded on the basis of merit. The award of grants
for political reasons self-evidently amounts to conduct designed to achieve an
advantage for government candidates and is also contrary
to public benefit,
objectively determined.
At Commonwealth level, the common law offence has been superseded by s
142.2(1) of the
Criminal Code Act 1995
which prohibits the exercise of power with the intention of dishonestly
obtaining a benefit for himself or herself or another
person or of causing
detriment to another person. The key hurdle that must be overcome in securing a
conviction is proof that the
accused exercised their power with the intention of
achieving one of these improper
In the case of the
Criminal Code Act 1995
(Cth) this element is captured by the requirements
of intent and dishonesty contained in s 142.2(1)(b).
The issue of dishonest motive can be problematic. It was addressed in
Porter v Magill
decision of the House of Lords in which Lord Bingham of Cornhill held that
whereas it was legitimate for politicians to exercise
public powers with the
intention of earning voter support, that was subject to the condition that the
powers were exercised for the
purpose for which they had been
Thus he stated
[P]ublic powers are conferred as if upon trust that those who exercise powers
in a manner inconsistent with the public purpose for
which the powers were
conferred betray that trust and so misconduct themselves. This is an old and
very important principle ...
Similarly, Lord Scott of Foscote
So, too, would be any misuse of municipal powers, intended for use in the
general public interest but used instead for party political
advantage. Who can
doubt that the selective use of municipal powers in order to obtain party
political advantage represents political
corruption? Political corruption, if
unchecked, engenders cynicism about elections, about politicians and their
motives and damages
the reputation of democratic government.
It may of course be that a politician takes decisions for mixed motives, some
legitimate, others not. In
the New South Wales
Court of Criminal Appeal applied what might be called a ‘but for’
test, holding that in such circumstances
an accused can be convicted only if the
prosecution proves that had the impermissible purpose not existed, the conduct
have been engaged in.
In the case of the CSIG programme, it would seem that a prosecution for
misconduct in office would have stood a reasonable chance
of success, as
evidence in the form of the colour-coded spreadsheet clearly indicated that
power had been exercised for an improper
purpose. Despite this no action was
taken. In other cases, where such clear evidence of improper purpose as was
provided by the spreadsheets
does not exist, a successful prosecution, requiring
as it does proof on the criminal standard, would be even more difficult to
Unless there is a change in authority on the part of investigators and
prosecutors at Commonwealth level, it seems unlikely that
prosecutions for
misconduct in office will be used as a tool for the suppression of
pork-barrelling.
Financial Control Legislation
Lastly, some mention must be made, even if to highlight their limited
usefulness, of the controls over ministerial decision-making
contained in two
pieces of legislation – the
Public Governance, Performance and
Accountability Act 2013
(Cth) (the ‘PGPA Act’), and the
Commonwealth Grants Rules and Guidelines 2017
‘CGRGs’) which were issued under the PGPA Act.
Section 71 of the PGPA Act prohibits a minister from making an expenditure
unless they are satisfied that the expenditure would constitute
a proper use of
public moneys. Section 8 of the Act defines ‘proper’ as
‘efficient, effective, economical and ethical.’
It is difficult to
see how the allocation of grants on the basis of perceived political advantage
rather than objective merit could
be seen as satisfying this requirement.
Section 69 of the Act imposes liability on a minister to compensate the
Commonwealth for
loss it has suffered due to the minister’s misconduct or
because of their serious or deliberate disregard of reasonable standards
care. The allocation of grants on a political basis certainly amounts to
misconduct. Whether the Commonwealth could be said to
have suffered a loss would
depend on what findings the courts had reached on the lawfulness of the grants
As discussed above, even if an unsuccessful applicant, or class of
applicants, had successfully brought an action for judicial review,
that a court would grant would be for the Commonwealth to reconsider those
unsuccessful applications. It could not declare
the entire process unlawful or
invalidate all grants and compel those applicants who had been awarded grants,
even though their applications
had fallen below the threshold of merit, to
return the grants (which they may in the interim have spent). Could it then be
the Commonwealth had suffered a loss if it then had to pay grants to
the unsuccessful but deserving applicants while not being able
to recover from
the successful underserving ones? Such an argument could be made, but its
success is uncertain. Furthermore, the
amounts of money involved would be beyond
the resources of the malfeasant minister to pay. It therefore seems that s 69
provide a realistic deterrence. The only provision that would do so
would be if the Act imposed a criminal penalty for expenditures
in breach of s
71, but unfortunately such a sanction is absent from the Act.
The same is true of the CGRGs, issued under s 105C(1) of the PGPA Act.
Paragraph 2.1 of the guidelines states that their purpose is
to promote proper
use of public resources. Paragraphs 11.5 and 13.10 state that grants should be
allocated on the basis of a competitive,
merit-based processes based on defined
criteria, and that where such a process is not used the reasons therefor should
be documented.
Paragraphs 4.5 and 4.10(b) require that a person who approves
grants must record in writing the basis for the approval relative to
criteria and whether the grant satisfies the requirement of value for money. As
in the case of the PGPA Act it is clear
that the allocation of money for
partisan reasons would not satisfy the guidelines but the guidelines prescribe
no penalty for non-compliance.
It is thus evident that, because of a lack of enforcement mechanisms,
financial control legislation provides no impediment to pork-barrelling,
the obvious incompatibility between pork-barrelling and the principles the
legislation contains.
V Socioeconomic Rights and Their Enforcement
Generations of Rights
Before discussing the relevance to pork-barrelling of the constitutional
protection of socioeconomic rights, it is necessary to examine
the distinction
drawn between first, second and third generation rights so as to understand the
way in which judicial review operates
in respect of each of
First generation rights, commonly referred to as civil and political rights,
were the earliest type of right accorded constitutional
protection. They were
acknowledged in the 18
century in documents, such as the Bill of
Rights in the United States and in the Declaration of the Rights of Man and of
the Citizen
promulgated during the French Revolution. In modern times they are
reflected in the
International Covenant on the Protection of Civil and
Political Rights
include such traditional rights as the right to life, freedom of the person, the
right to equality, the right to a fair trial,
the right not to be subject to
inhumane treatment, the right to vote, the right to privacy, freedom of
religion, freedom of movement
and freedom of expression. Such rights were said
to impose essentially negative obligations on the state, in the sense that
for them can be achieved by the state refraining from interfering with a
person’s personal liberty, exercise of religion, free
. Although that may be true as a general statement, it cannot be taken
as absolute, because sometimes first generation rights do impose
obligations on the state. For example, to be effective, the right to a fair
trial requires that the state pay for legal
representation for those who cannot
afford it, while the right not to be subject to inhuman treatment requires that
the state allocate
sufficient resources to ensure minimum standards of care of
Second generation rights, commonly referred to as socioeconomic rights, were
included in international human rights documents –
most importantly in the
International Covenant on Economic, Social and
Cultural Rights
the 1960s at the instance of socialist and third-world countries, although they
had been presaged by Franklin Roosevelt
in his inclusion of ‘freedom from
want’ in his formulation of fundamental rights in his State of the Union
reference to the need for a ‘second bill of rights,’ protecting
socioeconomic rights, in 1944.
The principle underlying socioeconomic rights is that full respect for human
dignity requires more than the protection of civil and
political rights and must
include the protection of rights to material wellbeing, such as rights to
health, housing, education and
welfare, without which the freedom to exercise
first generation rights is illusory.
Third generation rights, often referred to as communal rights, received
recognition in the second half of the 20
century. They include
rights such as to a clean environment, to the preservation of cultural heritage
and the rights of Indigenous
people to self-determination. The feature which
distinguishes them from first and second generation rights is that, in general,
protect the distinct communal interests of groups rather than individuals,
although of course they also benefit the individuals which
make up the groups.
The National Human Rights Consultation’s
Consideration of Socioeconomic Rights
In 2008 the Rudd government established the National Human Rights
Consultation (‘NHRC’) to hold public consultations on
the protection
of human rights in Australia.
The terms of reference included a restriction that options canvassed by the
committee ‘should preserve the sovereignty of the
Parliament’
– in other words, should not suggest the inclusion in the Commonwealth
Constitution
of new rights which would restrict the legislative power of
parliament. Anyone reading this clause – and in particular the
‘preserve’ – without the benefit of knowing the
Constitution
would assume that the courts currently do not have the power to invalidate laws
enacted by parliament and that therefore a recommendation
to give them such a
power would have amounted to a departure from current constitutional
arrangements. Yet the courts have had that
power since the
Constitution
into force. The mandate given to the NHRC was therefore misleading because it
suggested that the relationship between parliament
and the courts was different
from what it is in fact.
Hobbled as it was by its terms of reference, the NHRC ultimately recommended
that the Commonwealth enact a Human Rights Act that would
be similar to the type
used in the ACT
which list certain
rights and require the courts to interpret legislation with those rights where
that is possible – although
the power of the courts in cases where
legislation cannot be interpreted consistently with the Act is confined to
issuing a declaration
of incompatibility.
However the government decided not to adopt even this limited recommendation,
and instead enacted the
Human Rights (Parliamentary Scrutiny) Act 2011
(Cth) which requires only that a Parliamentary Joint Committee on Human Rights
examine legislation and report to both houses of Parliament
on the compatibility
of the legislation with the international human rights documents Australia has
ratified, and that anyone introducing
Acts to parliament or promulgating
delegated legislation must similarly report to Parliament on its compatibility
with those documents.
The Act expressly states that a finding of incompatibility
does not affect the validity of the legislation concerned.
Although the Consultation represented a missed opportunity to confer
constitutional protection on human rights, the responses it obtained
members of the public are useful in that they indicate which matters pertaining
to human rights were of particular concern to
them. Of specific relevance to
this article is the fact that although protection of second generation rights is
usually seen as more
radical than protection of civil and political rights, and
might therefore be thought to have been unlikely to be favoured by respondents
given the conservatism if Australian voters, a significant number of respondents
to the Consultation expressed support for the inclusion
of socioeconomic rights
if human rights were given statutory
protection.
For example, one submission argued that such rights ‘protect the basic
living conditions that are necessary in order for human
beings to live a life of
dignity and freedom,’
while another argued that socioeconomic rights ‘are the human rights that
often have the greatest relevance and meaning for
the community, particularly
those most disadvantaged.’
The Law Council of Australia submitted
Some of the most disturbing incidences of rights violations in Australia,
such as the comparatively low life expectancy of Indigenous
Australians and the
growing homelessness epidemic, concern the denial of economic, social or
cultural rights.
The results of a public survey commissioned by the Consultation showed that,
taking the range of rights that might be protected, Australians
tended to give
priority to what were referred to as ‘survival’ rights. Their survey
indicated that 96% of respondents
considered the right to food, water and
clothing an important or very important right, while 95% of respondents though
the same in
relation to health
In light of this, it was unsurprising that the Consultation report found that
the protection of socioeconomic rights was important
to the community because
the extent to which they are realised has a major impact on people’s
everyday lives.
It follows from
this that if Australia was ever to have a bill of rights, socioeconomic rights
would be as important an inclusion
as civil and political rights.
Interpretation of Socioeconomic Rights Provisions –
The Example of South Africa
The Bill of Rights contained in the South African
Constitution
range of second
generation rights, and
cases interpreting the provisions containing these rights thus assist in
understanding their effect.
In contrast to some (but not all) first generation rights, protection of
second and third generation rights casts a positive obligation
on the state to
provide housing, education, water
. But this means that their
realisation is contingent on the state’s resources, which themselves
depend on the economic condition
of the country from time to time, on the
diverse demands on government expenditure and on changing spending priorities
and how these
should be prioritised.
In the case of the South African
Constitution
, this reality is recognised by
the fact that the obligations cast on the state by the socioeconomic rights
provisions require that
the state should ‘take reasonable legislative and
other measures, within its available resources, to achieve the progressive
realisation’ of such rights. The effect of this is that these provisions
do not confer an absolute right to the goods they
guarantee, but rather a right
relative to available resources.
In bringing a case in which a plaintiff alleges that the state has failed to
discharge a positive duty resting on it by virtue of
a socioeconomic right, the
plaintiff bears the onus of making a
prima facie
case that the right has
been infringed – in other words, of adducing evidence that the steps that
the state has taken are unreasonable.
The onus then shifts to the state to rebut
that claim and to prove that the steps it has taken are
reasonable.
A mere assertion by
the state that it lacks funds is insufficient to discharge this
– the state must
present budgetary evidence to show that such funds as have been allocated to a
programme have been spent in
such a way as to be consistent with the relevant
socioeconomic right, and that even having done so, it is unable to satisfy the
made against it in the instant case.
In deciding such cases, courts are mindful of the need to respect separation
of powers while still discharging their responsibility
to enforce the
Constitution
This means that
the role of the courts is not to direct parliament which funds government or the
executive which administers those
funds as to how the budget should be drafted.
Rather the role of the courts is to ensure that such funding as is allocated to
relating to matters covered by the socioeconomic rights provisions is
spent in a manner that is reasonable in light of the obligations
of the state to
fulfil those rights.
An explanation of the way in which the test of reasonableness is interpreted
by the courts is provided by the seminal case of
Government of the Republic
of South Africa v Grootboom,
which concerned a claim to housing by people living under plastic sheeting in a
field, who said that the failure of the state to
provide them with shelter
amounted to a breach of the right to housing in
The Court held that the
constitutional requirement to take ‘reasonable steps’ gave the
government a degree of leeway:
There might be a wide range of possible steps
that could be taken and it was not for the Court to say which of these might be
best. So long as the steps that are taken were reasonable, the
constitutional guarantee will have been complied with.
In determining what constitutes reasonable steps, the Court held that what is
required is that such resources as are available must
be allocated on a rational
basis. In other words, a litigant who challenges the failure of the state to
provide him or her with a
resource will not necessarily succeed in having that
resource allocated to him or her specifically, but will be able to ensure that
such resources as there are will be allocated on in accordance with objective
criteria and taking into account the circumstances
of those having a claim on
the Court found that the fact that the government had
begun implementing a coherent national plan to provide housing amounted to
reasonable steps. However, the evidence also showed that the plan did not make
reasonable provision for the short term needs
of those most desperately in need
of assistance. For this reason, the Court found that the respondent’s
rights had been breached,
and ordered that the state devise, fund, implement and
supervise, a programme to provide measures to assist those in desperate need.
Yacoob J stated:
The precise contours and content of the measures to be adopted are primarily
a matter for the legislature and the executive. They
must, however, ensure that
the measures they adopt are reasonable. In any challenge based on
which it is argued that the state has failed to meet the positive obligations
imposed upon it by
section 26(2)
, the question will be whether the legislative
and other measures taken by the state are reasonable. A court considering
reasonableness
will not enquire whether other more desirable or favourable
measures could have been adopted, or whether public money could have
been better
spent. The question would be whether the measures that have been adopted are
reasonable. It is necessary to recognise
that a wide range of possible measures
could be adopted by the state to meet its obligations. Many of these would meet
the requirement
of reasonableness. Once it is shown that the measures do so,
this requirement is met.
It should be noted that the Court did not make an order that the particular
respondent be provided with immediate relief, rather it
ordered that the state
implement a general plan for the benefit of all similarly situated people, which
would be assessed against
the criterion of reasonableness in the light of
available resources. The Court also stated that there is no minimum core of any
socioeconomic
right that has to be provided by the
– all that is
required is that such resources as it is able to allocate are allocated in
accordance with a rational plan and
on an equitable basis.
case therefore shows that there is no reason to think
that the recognition of socioeconomic rights would lead to judicial
micro-management
of government spending, still less the courts mandating that
the government spends money that it does not have. So long as a government
show that it is acting within the bounds of reasonableness in light of the
resource constraints and the competing demands it
faces, its spending decisions
will not be overturned, nor will particular individuals be able to claim
immediate provision of public
services from the state. Indeed, the satisfaction
of any particular claim might itself cause socioeconomic injustice if there are
other claimants whose needs are even more pressing, to whom the state ought
therefore give preference in the orderly implementation
of its plan.
The reasonableness test has been elucidated in other decisions of the
Constitutional Court. In
Soobramoney v Minister of Health: Kwa-Zulu
the plaintiff
who was unable to access dialysis argued that his right to health care under
had been denied. The Court held that in applying the test of
reasonableness it would inquire whether the state ‘acted in good
allocating resources to the programme and have the beneficiaries of the
programme been selected in a rational
In other words,
where a programme involves the allocation of resources for which there are more
applicants than there are available
funds, reasonableness requires that the
state use criteria which are rationally related to the purpose of the programme
in determining
who should benefit from it. In the instant case the Court held
that allocation to dialysis was determined in accordance with objective
criteria, and that therefore denial of dialysis to the applicant in accordance
with those criteria did not breach
The Constitutional Court has also held that reasonableness may involve the
application of proportionality to the methods used by the
state in protecting
socioeconomic rights. This the courts do by balancing the rights of those
excluded from a programme against those
who are included in it. Thus in
v Minister Social
Development
permanent resident non-citizens of South Africa challenged the denial to them of
social security benefits that were provided
to South African citizens, the Court
held that the denial of rights to indigent permanent residents simply on the
basis of non-citizenship
caused disproportionate harm that outweighed the
benefit of greater availability of resources to serve the needs of citizens if
were provided exclusively to them. It therefore held that the criterion
of reasonableness required the payment of benefits on an
equitable basis to all
who met the threshold of need.
What remedies do courts in South Africa grant when they find that the way in
which the state has allocated funds in fulfilment of
socioeconomic rights fails
the test of reasonableness? South Africa’s Constitution contains
open-ended provisions relating
to remedies.
says simply that a court
must provide ‘appropriate relief’ in cases where rights have been
breached, while s 172 empowers
the courts to make any order that is ‘just
and equitable.’ Courts have interpreted this to mean that they have the
to fashion new remedies in order to give effect to the
Constitution
The most usual remedy that the courts grant in cases where they find that the
state’s allocation of resources fails the test
of reasonableness is to
require the state to devise a new spending plan which will be consistent with
that requirement. To take a
hypothetical example, if a resident of a community
without piped water brought an action to compel the government to provide it in
accordance with
Constitution
, a court could order the government
to reallocate such funding as had been allocated to the provision of water in
such a way as to
be consistent with objective need, which might in turn lead to
state to divert resources that were to be allocated to upgrade infrastructure
community that already had a level of water supply to instead provide a basic
supply to the community that had none.
The essence of the remedy is therefore not that the state can be compelled to
spend money it does not have – all the courts
can do is require that such
money as is allocated under any policy is spent in accordance with rational
criteria directed towards
its realisation on an equitable
Courts cannot engage
in macro level review the state’s budgetary allocation between government
In the words of the
Minister of Health v Treatment Action Campaign (No.
[D]eterminations of reasonableness may in fact have budgetary implications,
but are not in themselves directed at rearranging budgets.
In this way the
judicial, legislative and executive functions achieve appropriate constitutional
So, when a court orders that such funds as are available for a programme be
allocated in accordance with reasonableness, it is up
to the state to determine
how to adjust its budget for that service. Thus, in
Government of the
Republic of South Africa v
the state was
ordered to adjust the distribution of funding that it allocated to various
projects falling under the broad heading
of housing by planning and implementing
measures to provide shelter for people who were in most desperate need. Another
provided by
Khosa v Minister Social
Development,
which the Court ordered that funds available for the payment of social security
benefits be allocated on an equal basis to both
citizens and non-citizens.
As stated above, South Africa’s Constitution gives the courts
flexibility in crafting remedies. This has proved particularly
useful in cases
involving socioeconomic rights, where the courts have developed what is called
the ‘structural’ or ‘supervisory’
interdict to assist in
ensuring that the state complies with court orders requiring it to act
positively in fulfillment of those
rights. The interdict requires the state to
draft a plan outlining the way in which it will remedy the breach of a
socioeconomic
right, which it must then present to the court for approval. The
state may also be ordered to provide periodic reports either to
the court or to
a court-appointed supervisor, detailing progress towards
implementation.
To take some examples, in
v Minister of
ordered the respondent to consult with schools, teachers, parents and students
to formulate a plan that would enable students
to recover educational ground
they had lost because of the non-provision of textbooks, and to report back to
the Court once the plan
had been drafted. A court may also appoint an expert or
panel of experts with knowledge of the particular policy area who, under
supervision of the court, formulates a remedial
Mwelase v Director-General for the Department of Rural Development and
Land Reform
Claims Court appointed a Special Master to be an agent of the Court to aid the
Department in processing land
EN and Others v
Government of RSA and Others (No.
issued a structural interdict requiring the state to provide a plan stating how
it would implement the Court’s order
to provide retroviral treatment to a
number of HIV-positive prisoners after the government had delayed in giving
effect to the order.
Occupiers of 51 Olivia Road v City of
Johannesburg
appellants alleged that their right to housing would be breached by the city
evicting them from sub-standard apartments
without providing alternative
accommodation, the Court required the city to negotiate a plan with the
appellants and to report back
to the Court for its approval. This led the city
to agree to respect the right to housing by making repairs to the apartments so
as to make them habitable until alternative housing could be found. In
Residents of Joe Slovo Community, Western Cape v Thubelisha Homes and
where residents
of an informal settlement were to be relocated so as to enable the construction
of low-cost housing, the Court held
that adequate temporary accommodation, along
with schools and medical facilities, should be established at the relocation
to the eviction taking place, and that 70% of the housing in the new
development should be reserved for the evictees upon their return.
VI Protection of Socioeconomic Rights as a Mechanism for the
Suppression of Pork-Barrelling
Socioeconomic Rights and Pork-Barrelling
Returning to the issue of pork-barrelling in Australia, it is evident that in
addition to being a good in itself, constitutional protection
of socioeconomic
rights could provide a mechanism for suppression of pork-barrelling. Clearly,
given the fact that of 45 attempts
to change the Commonwealth
Constitution
eight have been successful, the inclusion of such rights would be difficult to
achieve. Nevertheless, a demonstration of how
the inclusion of such rights could
serve to suppress pork-barrelling provides an argument additional to those
usually advanced in
support of the constitutional protection of rights.
As the case law from South Africa shows, once such rights are given
constitutional protection, litigants are able to challenge the
manner in which
programmes are administered, including the way in which funds are allocated,
against the standard of reasonableness.
The relevance of this to pork-barrelling
is obvious: Since the essence of pork-barrelling is the allocation of funding on
other than that of objective criteria – in other words, on a basis
that does not meet the standard of reasonableness –
litigants would be
able to challenge fund distributions directed towards political ends.
The extent to which this mechanism would be available would depend on how
broad was the range of socioeconomic rights that were afforded
constitutional
protection. Assuming that commonly protected socioeconomic rights – to
health care, education, shelter and social
support – were included in the
Commonwealth
Constitution
, any programme falling within the ambit of those
rights would be subject to review.
As noted in
, reports by the ANAO have disclosed pork-barrelling in a
wide range of government programmes. Although not all grants programmes
fall within the ambit of a socioeconomic right, many would. A clear example of
this is the Community Health and Hospitals programme,
under which the government
allocated $2 billion (in other words, twenty times the amount of money as it had
under the Community Sports
Infrastructure Grant programme) to specialist health
services (such as cancer treatment), mental health services and the prevention
and management of chronic diseases. The ANAO found that 45% of funds were
allocated to marginal
electorates,
that in the case
of some programmes the government deliberately failed to comply with the
requirement to formulate guidelines for
the award of funds, that even where
guidelines were written they did not comply with the Commonwealth Grant Rules
and Guidelines,
application processes were not consistent with ensuring value for
There is no doubt that
if the right to health was protected by the
Constitution
, these facts would
support a challenge on grounds of failure to act reasonably in the distribution
of funding.
Is there a Socioeconomic Right to Sport?
Turning to the specific issue of funding for sports, are there grounds for
the inclusion of a right to participate in sports among
socioeconomic rights? An
analysis of international human rights documents reveals that the right is
recognised either by implication
or expressly: Article 24 of the
Declaration of Human
states that
everyone has the right to leisure, while art 27 states that everyone has the
right to participate in the cultural life
of the community. Both these
provisions are restated arts 7 and 15 respectively of the
International
Covenant on Economic, Social and Cultural
A broad interpretation of ‘leisure’ and ‘culture’
supports the contention that these provisions impliedly
protect the right to
access sports.
Similarly, art
The United Nations Convention on the Rights of the
recognises the
right of children to engage in recreational activities. More useful is the fact
that express protection is conferred
on the right to sport by the
International Charter of Physical Education,
Physical Activity and
issued by the
United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization, art 1.1 of
which states that ‘Every human being
has a fundamental right to physical
education, physical activity and sport.’ The right to sport is also
protected in national
constitutions, either impliedly as an aspect of the rights
or expressly in
constitutions which impose on the state an obligation to ensure access to sports
facilities, examples being those
Philippines,
These examples support the inclusion of a right to sport in an Australian
bill of rights. The consequence of this would be that the
pork-barrelling that
took place in the administration of the CSIG programme could be challenged on
the grounds that the allocation
of funds in order to achieve political
objectives was inconsistent with the obligation of the state to act reasonably
in the fulfilment
of the right.
Applying the Constitutional
Standard of Reasonableness
As indicated in the analysis of remedies for pork-barrelling in
remedies as might have been thought to provide redress to litigants whose
applications for public grants were denied on political
grounds are of limited
usefulness. Although administrative law appeared to offer the most likely avenue
for redress, closer examination
revealed that an application for judicial review
would be likely to fail, given the reluctance of the courts to engage in review
on the ground of reasonableness of the allocation of public funding among
multiple applicants. An applicant’s claim for review
would, in its
essence, be founded on an argument which required a comparison with other grant
applications, which would require a
court to embark on an analysis of the entire
grants programme.
Furthermore, in the unlikely event that a court did embark upon such an
analysis and found that an application, or a class of applications,
unlawfully rejected, the only remedy it could provide would be to order that the
application(s) be reconsidered. It would
not be able to reassess the entire
programme and order the payment of grants to meritorious applicants.
By contrast, if the
Constitution
protected a socioeconomic right to access to
sports and obligated the state progressively to achieve its realisation, an
action brought
for breach of a socioeconomic right on the ground that an
application for a grant that met the programme’s selection criteria
been denied as a result of pork-barrelling would, as the South African cases
show, not only enable, but would mandate, the courts
to apply the concept of
reasonableness in a very different – and far broader – way than is
the case under administrative
This is because, whereas under administrative law the focus of a
court’s inquiry is the legality (in the narrow sense) of the
decision made
in relation to the particular applicant who is seeking review, the application
of the constitutional standard of reasonableness
as developed in the context of
socioeconomic rights jurisprudence would require a comparative analysis of all
grants awarded in order
to determine whether the way in which the state has
distributed grants met the test of reasonable realisation of the right or rights
that the programme purported to serve.
A comparative analysis of all grants awarded would be essential to the role
of a court of such a case, because it would need to examine
the basis upon which
the entire programme was administered in order to determine whether the award of
grants was decided on the basis
of rational factors such as comparative need and
value for money, or whether it was tainted by irrelevant, and thus irrational,
such as political advantage. In so doing the courts would have reference
to overall programme delivery, not just the merits of an
individual or class of
decisions. This is obviously a very different inquiry from that which courts
embark upon under administrative
law and is the key reason why the
constitutionalisation of socioeconomic rights would offer relief currently not
available under
the law as it stands.
The final question is what remedies should be available to the courts in
cases where a grant was found to have been denied as a consequence
of a failure
of the state to act reasonably? In contrast to review under administrative law,
where the remedy a court could grant
would be limited to referring a decision
that courts
can adopt a far more interventionist approach when determining
remedies for the breach of a constitutional right.
An obvious remedy would be for the courts to order that the executive devise
a plan in terms of which all grant applications are considered
on their merits,
and that applications which would have been successful on those terms be granted
funding – a remedy which
might mean that the state has to adjust its
spending priorities. How that adjustment is achieved is not a matter in which
should become involved - all they would be required and able to do is
to mandate that the state present a plan that satisfies the
constitutional norm
of reasonableness. It would then be up to the state to decide how to adjust its
budget so as to comply with that
The fact that such orders could be granted would have a sobering effect on
governments that might be tempted to use public funds in
pursuit of political
objectives. The knowledge that such conduct would have the consequence of
requiring the state not only to fund
applications unreasonably denied but also
suffer the inconvenience of engaging in budgetary adjustment would provide a
powerful disincentive
to pork-barrelling.
VII Conclusion
The ability of members of the executive to allocate sports grants on a
political basis provides just one example among several of
programmes whose
administration has been tainted by political considerations. Protection of
socioeconomic rights would, depending
on the range of socioeconomic rights
protected, have a profound effect on the behaviour of the executive. Because
decisions on state
expenditure – including the allocation of grants
– would be subject to constitutional review, governments would be forced
to make decisions in accordance with the principle of reasonableness, in marked
contrast to the current position where there is an
incentive for the government
to base its decisions on factors which confer political advantage on it.
Whether Australians will ever enjoy the benefit of being able to hold the
executive to account in this way depends on the broader
question of whether
constitutional protection will ever be afforded to the broad range of rights
such as those protected by the South
Constitution
. But the prospect of
bringing an end to corruption in the allocation of hundreds of millions of
dollars in public funds provides
a heretofore unconsidered argument in favour of
a bill of rights.
, Senior Lecturer in Law, Faculty of Business, Justice and
Behavioural Sciences, Charles Sturt University.
Amy Dale, ‘Pork
Barrelling – past its use-by date? 2012 (76)
Law Society Journal
Australian National Audit
Administration of Commuter Car Park Projects within the Urban
Congestion Fund
(Auditor-General Report No 47, 2020-21).
Australian National Audit
Award of Funding under the Safer Communities Fund
(Auditor-General Report No 16, 2020-21).
Australian National Audit Office,
Funding under the Building Better Regions Fund
(Auditor-General Report No 1,
Australian National Audit
Administration of the Community Health and Hospitals Program
(Auditor-General Report No 21, 2022-23).
Australian National Audit
Award of Funding under the Community Sport Infrastructure Program
(Auditor-General Report No. 23 of 2019-20) 16.
Ibid 52-57.
Andrew Leigh and Ian
McAllister, ‘Political Gold: The Australian Sports Grants Scandal’
Political Studies
Australian National Audit
Office (n 6) 52.
Tony Harris, ‘Remember
sports rorts? Here's why we mustn't forget that shameful episode,’
Sydney Morning Herald
(online, 2 October 2020)
<https://www.smh.com.au/national/remember-sports-rorts-here-s-why-we-mustn-t-forget-that-shameful-episode-20200925-p55z8x.html>.
Andrew Probyn and Jack
Snape, ‘Nationals candidates the big winners in late pre-election sports
grants bonanza,’
(online, 31 January 2020
<https://www.abc.net.au/news/2020-01-31/nationals-big-winners-in-late-sports-grants/11918526>.
Matthew Doran,
‘Bridget McKenzie downplays membership of shooting club given almost
$36,000 in controversial sports grants
22 January 2020)
https://www.abc.net.au/news/2020-01-22/bridget-mckenzie-sports-grants-linked-to-shooting-club/11888402
Senate Select Committee on
the Administration of Sports Grants, Parliament of Australia, Final Report
(March 2021) 4.
Paul Karp, ‘Phil
Gaetjens rejects claim McKenzie's grants program targeted marginal seats,’
The Guardian Australia
(online, 14 February 2020)
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2020/feb/14/phil-gaetjens-rejects-claim-mckenzie-grants-program-targeted-marginal-seats>.
Senate Select Committee on the Administration of
Sports Grants (n 20) 4.
Ibid 125-34.
Ibid 28-9, 41.
Ibid 45-56.
Ibid 48-50.
Andrew Tillett and Tom
McIlroy ‘Why the sports grant scandal won’t go away,’
Australian Financial Review
(online, 3 February 2020)
<https://www.afr.com/politics/federal/sports-grants-scandal-refuses-to-go-away-20200203-p53x5a>.
Anna Vidot, ‘Deputy PM
blocks Labor from accessing the cost-benefit analysis of moving the chemical
regular from Canberra,’
(online, 19 October 2016)
<https://www.abc.net.au/news/rural/2016-10-19/apvma-barnaby-joyce-senate-estimates/7945022>.
Michael Koziol,
‘Nationals MPs rebel over government’s integrity commission
The Sydney Morning Herald
(online, 29 November 2018)
<https://www.smh.com.au/politics/federal/nationals-mps-rebel-over-government-s-integrity-commission-plans-20181129-p50j51.html>.
Australian Government,
Community Sports Infrastructure Program – Program Guidelines
(August 2018) ii, 4
<https://d2n3eh1td3vwdm.cloudfront.net/agendas-minutes/attachments/H.06-Australian-Sports-Commission-Community-Sport-Infrastructure-Grant-Program-19-September-2018.pdf>.
Katina Curtis and Shane
Wright, ‘Collingwood Football Club got ‘regional development’
grant for Melbourne site,’
The Sydney Morning Herald
(online, 19
October 2021)
<.https://www.smh.com.au/politics/federal/more-than-half-the-grants-for-regional-areas-went-to-major-cities-auditor-general-20211019-p591a8.html>.
Dale (n 1) 35.
Christopher Knaus,
‘Gladys Berejiklian says pork barrelling would not ‘be a surprise to
anybody’ – but it’s
not democracy either,’
Guardian Australia
(online, 2 November 2021) <
https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2021/nov/02/gladys-berejiklian-says-pork-barrelling-would-not-be-a-surprise-to-anybody-but-its-not-democracy-either>.
Independent Commission
Against Corruption,
Investigation into the Conduct of the then Member of
Parliament for Wagga Wagga and the Premier and others (Operation Keppel)
June 2023) 13-14.
David Crowe, ‘Morrison
defends Berejiklian, rejects calls for stronger corruption commission,’
Sydney Morning Herald
(online, 25 November 2021) <
https://www.smh.com.au/politics/federal/scott-morrison-defends-gladys-berejiklian-rejects-calls-for-stronger-corruption-commission-20211125-p59c6v.html>.
Sean Kelly,
‘Dutton’s disturbing defence of Berejiklian,’
Morning Herald
(online, 3 July 2023)
<.https://www.smh.com.au/politics/federal/dutton-s-disturbing-defence-of-berejiklian-20230630-p5dkrp.html>.
Danielle Wood, Kate
Griffiths and Anoka Stobart,
New politics – Preventing pork-barrelling
(Grattan Institute, 2022) 9-10.
Senate Select Committee on
the Administration of Sports Grants (n 20) 13-19.
Joint Committee of Public
Accounts and audit, Parliament of Australia,
Report 495: Inquiry into
Commonwealth grants administration
(June 2023) iii.
Ibid xvii-xix.
National Anti-Corruption
Commission Act 2022
Lisa Visentin, ‘New
Attorney-General promises national corruption watchdog will have power to
investigate pork-barrelling’
The Sydney Morning Herald
<https://www.smh.com.au/politics/federal/new-attorney-general-promises-national-corruption-watchdog-will-have-power-to-investigate-pork-barrelling-20220602-p5aqhr.html>.
Phillip Coorey,
‘Anti-corruption commission to cast a wide net: Dreyfus’
Australian Financial Review
(online, 26 September 2022)
<https://www.afr.com/politics/federal/anti-corruption-commission-to-cast-a-wide-net-dreyfus-20220926-p5bkyd>.
See for example the
prosecutions of former New South Wales MP and former Minister Eddie Obeid,
discussed in Anne Twomey, ‘When
is pork-barrelling corruption and what can
be done to avert it?’ (2022) 52
Australian Bar
Review 270, 273-74,
Yee-Fui Ng,
‘Regulating the Rorts: The Legal Governance of Grants Programmes in
Australia (2023) 51
Federal Law Review
Susanna Connolly, ‘The
regulation of pork barrelling in Australia, (2020)
Australasian Parliamentary
Peter Cane and Leighton
Principles of Administrative Law – Legal Regulation of
(Oxford University Press, 2
ed, 2012) 79-81.
Ng (n 56) 223.
R v Bembridge
3 Doug 327;
(1793) 99 ER 679.
[2010] VSCA 106
(2010) 27 VR 310
(Redlich J).
David Lusty, ‘Revival
of the common law offence of misconduct in public office’
Criminal Law Journal
See also Joseph Campbell, ‘Some Legal
Implications of Pork-barrelling’ (2022) 52
Australian Bar Review
Peter Hall,
Investigating
corruption and misconduct in public office: commissions of inquiry: powers and
(Lawbook Company, 2004) 19.
Twomey (n 55) 274.
[2002] 2 AC 357.
Ibid 466 [21] (Lord Bingham
of Cornhill).
Ibid 463-64 [19] (Lord
Bingham of Cornhill).
Ibid 503 [132] (Lord Scott
of Foscote).
[2019] NSWCCA 32
(2019) 99 NSWLR 376
The origin of this taxonomy
of rights can be found in Karel Vašák, ‘Human Rights: A
Thirty-Year Struggle: the sustained
efforts to give force of law to the
Universal Declaration of Human Rights,’ (1977) 30
UNESCO Courier
International Covenant on
Civil and Political Rights
, opened for signature 16 December
1966, 999 UNTS
(entered into force 23 March 1976).
Nicholas Haysom,
‘Constitutionalism, Majoritarian Democracy and Socioeconomic Rights’
South African Journal on Human Rights
International Covenant on
Economic, Social and Cultural Rights
, opened for signature 16 December
(entered into force 3 January 1976).
Johannes Morsink,
Universal Declaration of Human Rights: Origins, Drafting and Intent
University of Pennsylvania Press) 1.
Kurt Keiser, ‘Our
Toxic Bill of Rights’ (2022) 56
Journal of Economic Issues
National Human Rights
Consultation Report
(online, September 2009)
http://apo.org.au/node/19288
Human Rights Act 2004
Charter of Human Rights
and Responsibilities Act 2006
Ibid 78-82.
These are housing
health care, food, water and social security
, the social rights of
and education
These include the right to a
health environment
, the right to language
and the rights of
cultural, religious and linguistic communities
Pierre de Vos et al,
South African Constitutional Law in Context
(Oxford University Press,
City of Johannesburg
Metropolitan Municipality v Blue Moonlight Properties 39 (Pty) Ltd
[2011] ZACC 33
SA 104 (CC)
, [68]-[74] (van der Westhuizen J).
For a masterful discussion
of the interaction between separation of powers and the enforcement of
socioeconomic rights see Marius
Pieterse, ‘Coming to Terms with Judicial
Enforcement of Socioeconomic Rights’
South African Journal on
Human Rights
De Vos et al (n 89)
[2000] ZACC 19
2001 (1) SA 46 (CC).
[41] (Yacoob J).
[32] (Yacoob
[1997] ZACC 17
1998 (1) SA 765 (CC).
[29] (Chaskalson
P). See also the discussion in
Mazibuko v City of Johannesburg
[2009] ZACC 28
[48]-[68] (O’Regan J).
[2004] ZACC 11
2004 (6) SA 505 (CC).
Fose v Minister for
Safety and Security
[1997] ZACC 6
1997 (3) SA 786
, [19] (Ackerman J).
Stuart Wilson and Jacki
Dugard, ‘Constitutional Jurisprudence: The First and second Waves’
in Malcolm Langford (ed)
Socioeconomic rights in South Africa: symbols or
(2014, Cambridge University Press) 35, 50-52.
De Vos et al (n 89) 719.
[2002] ZACC 15
2002 (5) SA 721 (CC)
De Vos et al (n 89)
[2012] ZAGPPHC 114
2013 (2) SA 40 (GNP).
Ropafadzo Maphosa,
‘Are judicial monitoring institutions a legitimate remedy for addressing
systemic socioeconomic rights violations?’
South African
Journal on Human Rights
362, 370-71.
[2016] ZALCC 23
2017 (4) SA 422
The case is discussed in
Gaurav Mukherjee and Juha Tuovinen, ‘Designing remedies for a recalcitrant
administration’ (2020)
South African Journal on Human Rights
386, 388-91.
2006 (6) SA 543 (D).
See the discussion of the
case in Christopher Mbazira, ‘From Ambivalence to Certainty: Norms and
Principles for the Structural
Interdict in Socioeconomic Rights Litigation in
South Africa’
South African Journal on Human Rights
2008 (3) SA 208 (CC).
[2009] ZACC 16
2010 (3) SA 454 (CC).
Australian National Audit
Office (n 5) 97.
Universal Declaration
of Human Rights
, GA Res 217A (III), UN GAOR, UN Doc A 8/10 (10 December
International Covenant
on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights
for signature 16 December
1966, 993 UNTS 3
(entered into force 3 January 1976).
Tony Veal ‘Sport
and human rights: assessing the performance of nation states in assuring the
right to sport participation’
European Journal for Sport and
The United Nations
Convention on the Rights of the Child
, opened for signature on 20 November
1989, 1577 UNTS 3
(entered into force 2 September 1990).
United Nations
Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organisation,
International Charter of
Physical Education, Physical Activity and Sport
Sven Messing et al,
‘Physical activity as a human right? (2021) 23
Health Human Rights
Daniel Ireland-Piper and
Kim Weinart, ‘Is there a ‘Right’ to sport?’ (2014) 21
Sports Law eJournal
Constitution
Republic of the Philippines
(1987) Article I,
and Article XIV, s
Constitution
Republic of Ecuador
(2008) Articles 24, 32, 39; 45, 66(2) and 381.
Constitution
Federal Democratic Republic of Ethiopia
(1995) Article 41,
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (140 KB)
PDF format (470 KB)
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter