URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/journals/UTSLRS/2019/9.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 15:51:21
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Millbank, Jenni --- "Health Practitioner Regulation: Has the National Law Produced National Outcomes in Serious Disciplinary Matters?" [2019] UTSLRS 9; (2019)47(4) Federal Law Review 631
Health Practitioner Regulation: Has the National Law Produced
National Outcomes in Serious Disciplinary Matters?
This is a pre-publication version of an article which will appear in (2019)
Federal Law Review.
Since 2010 a national scheme regulates the
registration, accreditation and discipline of health professionals in Australia
(the National
Law). This research examines disciplinary cases from Tribunals
nationwide to address the question: Has the national regulation of
professionals produced consistency in outcomes in serious cases of professional
misconduct? All publicly available Australian
Tribunal level decisions
concerning complaints of serious misconduct and/or impairment brought against
the five most populous regulated
health professions (nurses and midwives,
doctors, psychologists, pharmacists, and dentists) were analysed for the period
1 July 2010
to 30 June 2017. Each case was coded by reference to a typology of
misconduct, practitioner characteristics, and outcome, allowing
for comparisons
to be drawn both as between the professions and as between jurisdictions. Major
disparities were identified in outcomes
across the professions, with doctors
being subject to less severe outcomes than other professions, in particular in
comparison with
nurses, even when the same main head of misconduct was in issue.
Marked disparities were also identified between outcomes in different
territories, suggesting that the National Law is not being applied in a uniform
manner. This article examines these disparities
and explores possible
contributing factors.
Introduction
Since 2010 a national scheme regulates the
registration, accreditation and discipline of health professionals in Australia
(the National
Law). The scheme began with 10 registered health professions,
expanding to 14 professions in 2012 and then 15 from 1 December 2018.
there is some jurisdictional variation in terms of which agencies undertake
disciplinary investigations, and slight differences
in definitions and
legislative provisions in some States and Territories, the scheme is a national
one which introduced broadly uniform
rules addressing unsatisfactory
performance, unprofessional conduct and misconduct. The scheme regulates over
700,000 health professionals
at the time of writing.
This research evaluates one aspect of the disciplinary process under the
National Law: Tribunal level determinations. Only matters
that are designated as
serious, that is, as involving a prima facie indication of de-registrable
conduct, are referred to the various
State and Territory based Tribunals which
then apply almost identical substantive legislative provisions. There is a
serious gap
in knowledge concerning Tribunal outcomes because, unlike data on
complaints under the National Law, Tribunal data is not collated
in a consistent
manner and is not centralised. There is no publicly accessible data on Tribunal
level cases and outcomes that presents
complaint type, profession, or other
significant factors such as gender or age. In short, the more serious the
matter, the less is
known about types of misconduct and ultimate outcomes
In this study all publicly available Australian Tribunal level decisions
concerning complaints of serious misconduct and/or impairment
brought against
the five most populous regulated health professions (nurses and midwives,
doctors, psychologists, pharmacists, and
dentists) were gathered and analysed
for the seven-year period 1 July 2010 to 30 June 2017, comprising 794 matters in
total. Each
case was coded by reference to a typology of misconduct,
practitioner characteristics, and outcome, allowing for comparisons to be
both as between the professions and as between jurisdictions.
Major disparities were identified in outcomes across the professions, with
doctors being subject to less severe outcomes than other
professions, in
particular in comparison with nurses, even when the same main head of misconduct
was in issue. Marked disparities
were also identified between outcomes in
different states and territories, suggesting that the National Law is not being
in a uniform manner. This article examines these disparities and
explores possible contributing factors.
First, this article outlines the national law and then places an overview of
findings in the context of what is already known from
previous Australian and
New Zealand research on complaint data and disciplinary cases. The sections that
follow explore the novel
findings of the study and discuss possible explanations
for major areas of variation in outcomes discovered.
The National Law
On 1 July 2010 the Australian Health Practitioner
Regulation Agency (AHPRA) was created as a single national oversight agency for
the registration, accreditation and disciplining of health professionals in
This was a vast and complex undertaking, consolidating eight separate regulatory
systems, comprising 74 pieces of legislation, 20
accrediting bodies and between
85 and 97 separate health practitioner registration boards across the
The development of the
National Health Practitioner Regulation Law (the National Law) is a particularly
striking achievement given
the ‘breakneck’ speed with which it was
undertaken.
The report that
recommended the scheme by the Productivity Commission was initiated by the
Commonwealth in mid-2004, released in
and led to a detailed
Intergovernmental Agreement on the scheme that was entered into in March
and implemented nation-wide
through legislative changes in all jurisdictions in 2009 and
The scheme currently
regulates 15 health professions (Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander Health
Practice, Chinese Medicine, Chiropractic,
Dental, Medical, Medical Radiation
Practice, Nursing and Midwifery, Occupational Therapy, Optometry, Osteopathy,
Pharmacy, Physiotherapy,
Podiatry, Psychology and most recently Paramedicine)
comprising over 700,000
registrants.
Prior to the National Law, the state and territory based approach to health
regulation had been marked by inconsistency across and
within different health
professions, with many allied health practitioners not included within state
disciplinary schemes at all,
meaning a significant degree of self-regulation
among numerous conventional and allied health professional groups (sometimes
multiple groups for each profession). Some practitioners, such as Chinese
Medicine, were included within professional health regulation
in some states but
not others. Demands for greater external oversight and procedural fairness
protections meant that specialist tribunals
— with a mix of health
professional, lay and legal membership — were created to address serious
disciplinary breaches;
and these proliferated within a fragmented local and
national frame. So for example, prior to the National Law, a pharmacist who
stole and consumed prescription drugs from his place of work would face
different substantive misconduct provisions and disciplinary
processes in each
state, and these would be different again to the provisions and processes faced
by a nurse who did exactly the
same thing in her workplace.
At the highest level of oversight, the regulation of health practitioners was
plagued by difficulties in workforce mobilisation: on
the one hand capable
professionals were restrained from being able to work nationally, and, on the
other, rogue and incompetent professionals
evaded regulation by shifting across
workforce, which dominated
the Productivity Commission report; while the latter
concern of evasive poorly performing, unethical and unregulated practitioners
dominated media reports and regulator
While all the States and Territories joined the National Law scheme, they did
so with variations. Most significantly, NSW maintained
its own well established
complaint investigation and referral disciplinary system within which to apply
the law. NSW was thus designated
a ‘co-regulatory’ jurisdiction and
Queensland followed this approach in
The National Law objects reflect its genesis, providing a national
registration and accreditation scheme for health practitioners
(and students) in
(a) to provide for the protection of the public by ensuring that only health
practitioners who are suitably trained and qualified
to practise in a competent
and ethical manner are registered; and
(b) to facilitate workforce mobility across Australia by reducing the
administrative burden for health practitioners wishing to move
participating jurisdictions or to practise in more than one participating
(c) to facilitate the provision of high quality education and training of
health practitioners; and
(d) to facilitate the rigorous and responsive assessment of overseas-trained
health practitioners; and
(e) to facilitate access to services provided by health practitioners in
accordance with the public interest; and
(f) to enable the continuous development of a flexible, responsive and
sustainable Australian health workforce and to enable innovation
education of, and service delivery by, health
practitioners.
Possibly because of concern that ‘access to health services’ or
the public interest would be seen as competing with or
overriding safety
considerations,
both NSW and Queensland added a further objects section, section 3A, providing
that the ‘health and safety of the public’
is the ‘paramount
guiding principle’. The ‘protection of the public’ is also
expressed as a ‘primary
consideration’ in balancing the objects of
the scheme under the
Regulatory Principles for the National
The vast majority of formal complaints against health practitioners (which
may be made as mandatory or voluntary ‘notifications’
National Law) are handled within the professional Board system, in which matters
are channelled into health or performance
and conduct ‘pathways’ by
Boards within each profession if found to have some
Practitioners with health
issues are managed by an ‘impaired registrants' panel’ while those
with unsatisfactory professional
performance or illegal, unethical or
unprofessional ‘conduct’ face a ‘performance and professional
panel. Each pathway may entail ‘immediate action’
including the imposition of conditions on a practitioner’s registration
or, if assessed as a serious risk to the public,
suspension.
The most serious
matters, those which are characterised as
prima facie
so significant as
to be likely to lead to deregistration, are referred to a legally-headed
disciplinary tribunal: the only body with
the power to deregister a practitioner
altogether.
Under the National Law unprofessional conduct or unsatisfactory professional
performance (which are combined under the category unsatisfactory
professional
may rise to the higher level of professional misconduct either by reason of
severity of conduct, or repetition, or both. A Board
must refer a matter to the
‘responsible tribunal’ if it reasonably believes that the
practitioner has behaved in a way
that constitutes professional misconduct (or
if the practitioner’s registration was improperly obtained because of
misleading information, or if a panel established by the Board requires
it to do so).
Tribunals are
chaired by a legal member and usually made up of one or two members of the same
profession as the health practitioner
whose behaviour is under review, in
addition to a non-practitioner or ‘community’ member. In NSW,
Victoria, Queensland,
the ACT and NT the responsible Tribunal is currently the
Civil and Administrative Tribunal; in WA it is the State Administrative
and in Tasmania and South Australia it is the Health Practitioners
If unprofessional conduct is proved, a Tribunal may impose conditions or
issue a reprimand or caution or, in certain circumstances,
a fine. Removal from
practice through deregistration or suspension is only available if misconduct is
proved (or if the practitioner
is not competent to practise or is unsuitable or,
by reason of criminal conviction, unfit in the public interest to practise).
some Tribunals use terms such as ‘penalty’ or
‘charge’, the National Law is replete with reference to protecting
the public from harm, and from being placed at risk, Qld and NSW have the
paramount object of safety of the public, and the jurisprudence
from appellate
level courts and the Tribunals themselves stress that orders are not intended to
be punitive, but to protect the
Although the category ‘removal from practice’ is commonly used by
researchers and policymakers, there is a significant
difference in severity
between deregistration and suspension orders. A suspension is finite; it must be
limited in time and when
that time passes, registration is automatically
restored. In contrast, after an order of deregistration the practitioner must
to the Board (or in NSW to the
), sometimes only after
a set period, and satisfy it that they are now fit to
This is a heavy
practical and legal burden, as the passage of time alone does not establish
fitness and the practitioner bears the
onus of proving that they are now safe to
A prohibition order, preventing the practitioner from providing one or more
other health services for a period of time or permanently,
is available only if
the practitioner is removed from
(and in NSW is only
available if the respondent is assessed as posing a substantial risk to the
health of members of the
). Such an order is used
to prevent a practitioner from moving into other forms of unregistered health
practice, and might be imposed
for example, to prevent a drug dependent
practitioner from working as a pharmacy assistant or an osteopath found to have
in sexual misconduct from setting up a massage practice.
Overview of the case set
All publicly available Australian Tribunal level
decisions concerning complaints of serious misconduct and/or impairment brought
the five most populous regulated health professions were gathered from
period 1 July 2010 to 30 June 2017. The period was chosen
to correlate with
advent of the operation of the National Law. The professions were, in order from
most to least populous: nurses
and midwives, doctors, psychologists,
pharmacists, and dentists.
Relevant decisions were identified through a search of all previous and
current Tribunal sets within the AustlII database, augmented
by cases from the
various Tribunal websites. Appeal decisions, reinstatement decisions and
non-disciplinary cases were excluded.
The dataset comprised 794
, of which 35 per cent
(278) were determined in New South Wales (NSW); 20 per cent (159) in Western
Australia (WA), 17 per cent (134)
in Queensland (Qld), 15 per cent (118) in
Victoria, and 8 per cent (66) in South Australia (SA). The over-representation
from WA compared to the more populous states of Victoria and Queensland
reflects differential case release policies in these jurisdictions,
Queensland nor Victoria release all decided cases. Cases determined in the
Australian Capital Territory (ACT), Northern
Territory (NT) and Tasmania
cumulatively amounted to five percent of the dataset overall (accounting for 16,
4 and 18 cases respectively)
accurately reflecting their lower populations.
There were approximately equal numbers of cases found across each of the seven
The coding instrument recorded case and respondent attributes, the type/s of
misconduct alleged, whether proved, and the relevant
disciplinary
Respondent attributes
were: profession; gender; legal representation; and certain identified
‘risk’ factors from previous
studies (over 60 years of
trained outside
engaged in sole or
isolated practice;
criminal proceedings; repeat
The type of allegation was coded building on the ‘typologies of
misconduct’ developed by Katie Elkin and
colleagues.
This utilises five
main categories or heads of misconduct, with subtypes within each, set out in
Table 1 below. Following Elkin et
al, the main head of misconduct was defined as
the behaviour of ‘most concern’ to the Tribunal, ascertained through
reading of the text of the decision. Decisions ranged from 10 to over 100
pages in length, but were generally around 30 pages long.
Elkin et al note that
‘professional misconduct is often multilayered rather than confined to a
single isolated
and this was reflected in the fact that most matters involved multiple
allegations.
Table 1: Misconduct Typologies including
Main Head of Misconduct
Illegal or unethical prescription or provision of drugs
Inappropriate clinical care
Sexual misconduct
2.To others
1.Substance abuse
3.Physical impairment
4.Cognitive
1.Treatment (inappropriate/inadequate)
2.Failure to refer
to a medical practitioner/hospital/ambulance
3.Diagnosis (missed,
delayed, or incorrect)
1.Relationship with patient
2.Inappropriate sexual contact
during treatment
1.Non-sexual misconduct
2.Inappropriate conduct not re
3.Breach of registration
4.Failure to obtain informed
5.Failure to maintain adequate
6.Breach of Privacy
7.Supervision of
8.Criminal Offence
9.Other unethical
Outcomes for proved conduct were coded and categorised for severity.
Removal from practice involved:
deregistration;
suspension;
prohibition
Conditions on practice were:
education/mentoring;
counselling;
supervision;
conditions;
conditions.
Non-restrictive sanctions were:
While deregistration and suspension are mutually exclusive, and
deregistration and conditions are mutually exclusive, other orders
can be made
in combination, for example a period of suspension followed by conditions,
multiple conditions in tandem, or deregistration
and reprimand.
It is important to recall that these cases are the product of three
‘interrelated elements’: the amount of underlying
misconduct in each
profession, the rate at which it is reported, and the rate at which it is
referred on to Tribunals.
study is therefore not on the prevalence of misconduct per se, but rather on
regulatory responses, and in particular, the question
of consistency in outcomes
of the most serious disciplinary matters determined since the advent of the
National Law. With this in
mind, draft findings were sent to the division heads
of the health professional discipline section of each of the eight Tribunals
the study, and comment was invited on the areas of identified inconsistency.
Members from three Tribunals, NSW, ACT and WA, responded.
Those responses are
incorporated in the later discussion.
When taken within the context of AHPRA data on the numbers of registered
practitioners from the five professions over the corresponding
period, doctors were significantly over-represented in the disciplinary cases,
appearing at more than double their proportion
of the practitioner population,
while pharmacists, dentists and psychologists were also over-represented,
appearing at almost double
their proportion of practitioners. In contrast,
nurses and midwives while numerous in raw terms, appeared at half their
practitioners.
The majority of respondents were male (n = 526, 66.2 per cent). This
disproportion however is much starker when national data on the
gender breakdown
of the professions is taken into account, as only the medical profession has
more men than women practising. Based
on AHPRA data over this seven-year period,
men comprised only 23.2 per cent of registered practitioners across these five
professions.
Figure 1 below disaggregates each profession to demonstrate where
gender disproportions appear most starkly in the case set; for
example, female
dental practitioners appear in the misconduct cases at the rate of less than one
quarter their representation in
the profession, while female doctors and
pharmacists appear at the rate of around one third their populations; in
contrast male nurses
appear at four times their rate of the professional
population.
Figure 1. Profession Breakdown by Gender
The most common type of misconduct was inappropriate clinical care (25.7 per
cent), followed by sexual misconduct and illegal/unethical
prescription or
provision of drugs which were equal in number, amounting to 20 per cent of
matters respectively. Impairment was the
least likely to feature as the main
head of complaint, appearing in only 4.8 per cent of matters, reflecting the
likelihood of diversion
of such complaints into ‘health pathways’
(although impairment frequently appeared as a secondary complaint in
prescription
matters). The ‘Other’ head of misconduct was
substantial, comprising 29.7 per cent of cases in which the sub types of
were diverse and not readily categorised.
Figure 2: Main Head of Misconduct
The serious nature of the complaints is demonstrated by the fact that over a
third of matters involved repeat incidents of misconduct,
and nearly a fifth of
decisions referred to associated criminal
proceedings.
Reflecting the fact
that only the most serious matters are subject to a referral to disciplinary
tribunals, the overwhelming majority
of matters, 96.3 per cent (n 765), involved
at least one head of the complaint being proved. Removal from practice was much
likely to occur for sexual misconduct than for inappropriate clinical
Of proven cases, 55.8 per cent (n 427) resulted in the respondent being
removed from practice. Deregistration was ordered in 37.1
per cent of proven
cases (n 284), and suspension in 18.7 per cent (143). Identified discrepancies
in outcome, discussed below, were
much more pronounced in deregistration. A
prohibition order, available only if removal from practice is ordered, occurred
6.3 per cent of proved
Findings of the Present Study in the Context of Previous
Australian and New Zealand Research on Misconduct
Previous Australian research into health
practitioner discipline has focused almost exclusively on doctors, with legal
often focused upon high profile
or specific issues such as
impairment,
or prescribing
with a handful of works on particular medical
specialties.
There is very
little research on the disciplining of the wide range of other health
professionals apart from
In the most significant study undertaken of Tribunal decisions prior to the
National Law, Katie Elkin and colleagues gathered decisions
concerning doctors
from the four most populous States (NSW, Victoria, Queensland and WA), and also
from New Zealand, for the 10 year
period 2000–2009, and analysed outcomes
The major significance of the Elkin study was that it unpacked
‘misconduct’ to ask what actual
of conduct was being
addressed by Tribunals, as opposed to how the conduct is collected in complaint
data, or how it is framed in
the legislation, and how these different kinds of
mconduct were adjudicated in terms of
Elkin et al found that
91 per cent of the respondent doctors were male. The outcome in 43 per cent
cases was ‘removal from
practice’ (comprising deregistration 28 per
cent and suspension 15 per cent ), 37 per cent of matters resulted in
on practice and 19 per cent in non-restrictive
The study found that
sexual misconduct was far more likely to lead to removal from practice than
failures of clinical care,
concluded that conduct which could be characterised as ‘wilful
wrongdoing’ was more likely to lead to removal from
Despite some
differences in methodology,
the wider coverage of other professions in this study, comparisons with the
findings of the Elkin findings are useful in order
to determine whether the
kinds of matters in Tribunals, and outcomes, for doctors have changed following
the National Law.
In New Zealand, a study by Lois Surgenor and colleagues of 288 Tribunal
decisions covering 21 health professions over a ten year period
found that in 33 per cent of cases the outcome was deregistration, 30 per cent
resulted in suspension and 61 per cent resulted in
the imposition of
conditions.
When outcomes for
nurses and doctors were compared, stark differences appeared: although
suspension rates were comparable, doctors
were considerably more likely to have
conditions imposed than nurses (72 per cent versus 59 per cent), while nurses
were almost twice
as likely to be deregistered than doctors (44 per cent versus
23 per cent). However, that study did not categorise the kind of complaint,
instead focused on procedural factors (such as legal representation, the
attendance of the practitioner at the hearing and whether
the practitioner
admitted guilt or not) to explore how these related to outcomes. The study noted
that nurses were significantly
less likely than doctors to have legal
representation or attend the hearing, but offered no other analysis of why these
differed so markedly.
The present study sought to extend comparisons across professions, controlling
for the type of misconduct and the impact of legal
representation on outcomes.
Since the introduction of the National Law there has been a vastly increased
ability to access centralised national complaint data.
Bismark and colleagues
have undertaken a number of retrospective studies of complaint data gathered by
the Australian Health Practitioner
Regulation Agency (AHPRA), and identified
trends and risk factors across and within the regulated health
professions.
In a study of all
notifications made to AHPRA during 2011 and 2012 (excluding NSW due to its
separate processing of complaints) concerning
the original 10 regulated
professions, Spittal et al reported that the notification rate was highest among
doctors and dentists and
lowest among nurses and
They reported that the
likelihood of ‘restrictive action’ (a broad category which includes
voluntary undertakings and
conditions as well as suspension or deregistration)
was higher for cases involving impairment, improper prescribing or use of
medication,
and sexual misconduct compared to cases involving clinical care.
Doctors were less likely to face restrictive action than all of
professions. Male practitioners were more than twice as likely as female
practitioners to be the subject of a notification.
The Bismark studies are an
important point of reference in tracing whether trends in types of misconduct
and severity of outcome
across professions occur throughout the disciplinary
system or are distinctive at Tribunal level.
The findings of the present study were broadly consistent with previous
research on complaint data under the National Law and Tribunal
cases prior to
the National Law in that doctors were over-represented as respondents, nurses
and midwives were underrepresented as
respondents, male practitioners were
greatly over-represented as respondents, failures in clinical care were the
least likely type
of matter to lead to restrictive action, and doctors faced
less severe outcomes than other professions. This is significant in
demonstrating
that differential outcomes between professions under the National
Law are occurring both at the level of Boards, which are dominated
profession, and in external Tribunals which are chaired by a legal or judicial
Findings in the present study concerning doctors alone are also strikingly
consistent with previous research by Elkin et al on outcomes
for doctors
appearing before Tribunals prior to the National
Concerns expressed by
doctors’ groups about the National Law, for example objecting to
investigative processes and publicising
and to the scope of
mandatory notification rules which had previously only applied in
suggest that the National
Law was perceived by some as a more onerous form of regulation of the medical
profession. It is therefore
of interest that, at Tribunal level at least, it has
not produced a significant difference in terms of outcomes for doctors after
seven years of operation.
The distinctive and novel features of the present study involved comparing
outcomes across the most populous professions and across
all the Australian
profession, doctors were less likely than
the other professions to be removed
from practice across the period of the study. There were also significant
differences in outcomes
across the various jurisdictions, with NSW removing
practitioners from practice at a higher rate than all others, while WA,
the ACT and NT had very low removal rates. Variations by profession
and by jurisdiction were both more acute when deregistration
was taken as the
focus. These variations, and possible explanations, are explored below.
Variation in outcomes by profession
A key finding was that
doctors and dentists were less likely to be removed from practice than were
nurses and pharmacists, and psychologists
were more likely than all others to be
Table 2. Outcomes in Proved Matters by Profession
Pharmacists
Psychologists
Overall outcomes
Removed from practice
Deregistration
Prohibition order
Supervision
Restricted Practice
Variance between the professions in outcomes was noticeably more pronounced
when deregistration was the outcome, with both nurses
and psychologists being
deregistered at considerably higher rates than doctors, and dentists also being
deregistered at a rate greater
than doctors despite their overall removal rate
being fairly similar.
Examining removal from practice across the professions by reference to the
for doctors was
consistent, particularly concerning deregistration, and particularly when
doctors and nurses were compared. Within
the main head of inappropriate clinical
care, deregistration rates were: doctors (15.9 per cent), dentists (28.6 per
cent), and nurses
Within the main head of
prescription/provision of drugs, deregistration rates were closer: doctors (30
per cent), nurses (32 per
cent) and pharmacists (37.3 per cent) (with no proven
matters concerning dentists). Within impairment the numbers were small but
difference in deregistration continued: 45.5 per cent of doctors compared to 68
per cent of nurses.
Noting that sexual misconduct had by far the highest rate of removal from
practice it could be regarded as the most ‘serious’
main head within
the Tribunal setting. In Table 3 below, the figures for proved sexual misconduct
are presented (Dentists n 8 and
Pharmacists n 3 are excluded because their
numbers were so small.) In this category nurses were almost twice as likely as
to be deregistered, however there were insufficient numbers to establish
statistical significance.
striking that, while on average deregistration was ordered twice as often as
suspension in proved sexual misconduct matters,
and all professions were more
likely to be deregistered than suspended for sexual misconduct, nurses were
seven times more likely
to be deregistered than suspended in the context of
sexual misconduct.
Table 3: Sexual misconduct outcomes by
Nurses & Midwives
Psychologists
Overall outcomes
Removed from practice
Deregistration
Prohibition order
Following Surgenor et al’s suggestion that the presence of legal
representation may be a factor in less severe
, this study examined
the relationship between legal representation and outcome.
Firstly, it is notable that there was a major differential in legal
representation by profession, presented in figure 3 below, with
Doctors the most
likely to have representation, and Nurses the least
Figure 3: Legal representation by profession
There was also a strong correlation found between the presence of legal
representation at hearing and less severe outcomes. Among
those with no legal
representation there was an overall removal rate among proved matters of 77.7
per cent compared to 52.9 per cent
for those with lawyers. This differential was
again more acute when the outcome was deregistration, with proved matters
deregistration at more than twice the rate for those without lawyers
compared to those who were represented, depicted in figure 4
relatedly 7.1 per cent suspensions for those without lawyers compared to 22.9
per cent of suspensions for those who were
represented).
Figure 4: Deregistration and legal representation
Yet even among those without legal representation, doctors were still removed
from practice at a lower rate (66.7 per cent) compared
to nurses and midwives
(77.6 per cent), dentists (87.5 per cent) and psychologists (100 per cent). The
exception was pharmacists
without lawyers, who had a comparable removal rate to
doctors, at 66.6 per cent.
Commentators such as Paterson, Elkin and Kiel have suggested that regulators
and decision-makers may place undue emphasis on the ‘rehabilitation’
of doctors at the expense of protection of the
Paterson states:
The voice of the doctor, amplified by legal representation, is usually louder
and more articulate than the voice of the patients,
and it often seems that
backing away from strong measures is the ‘safer’ approach.
Furthermore harm to the practitioner,
in the form of suspension, is immediate
and quantifiable, while risk of harm to the public is distant and
Kiel notes that an often unarticulated premise of a rehabilitative focus is
‘that society’s investment in the education
and training of doctors
should not be lost’.
notes UK jurisprudence based on the notion that there is a particular public
interest in rehabilitating medical practitioners
that does not exist for other
professionals whose skills are not unique or are in less
Elkin predicted that
although ‘supply considerations’ appeared in some Australian
Tribunal determinations prior to the
National Law, the National Law
‘granted permission’ to focus on ‘access’ to the special
skill of doctors
(through object (e) ‘to facilitate access to services
provided by health practitioners in accordance with the public interest’).
In her view this approach represents a ‘slippery slope’:
Quite simply: is access to a doctor who represents an elevated risk to the
public preferable to having no doctor at all? ...[E]ven
though there are
concessions made at the point of registration, it is quite another matter to
accept lesser standards once a doctor
...has demonstrated himself or herself to
have fallen short. For this reason, while supply considerations may have
relevance to registration
decisions, we must be wary of taking them into account
in making disciplinary
While a looming crisis in supply of nursing professionals has been identified
for some years,
public interest
considerations of supply appear to be rarely, if ever, argued in relation to
nurses. Recollecting the high removal
rates for sexual misconduct, I analysed
the text of all decisions in the dataset where such misconduct was proved but
the practitioner
removed from practice. While determinations on
the appropriate protective orders were a mix of complex factors, it is notable
the public interest in access to health services was explicitly reasoned
exclusively
in matters involving doctors. For example,
Dr Smith is a highly regarded medical practitioner in the field of paediatric
neurology, in which there is significant demand and
few practitioners. We note
the numerous references provided in this proceeding on his behalf. There is a
public interest in him continuing
to be able to practice, subject to appropriate
conditions.
Relatedly, among practitioners found guilty of sexual misconduct, only
doctors were returned to practice under so-called ‘chaperone’
conditions, which were not applied to any other professional
This analysis suggests
that the lower rates of deregistration of doctors compared to other
practitioners, in particular nurses, found
in this study cannot be explained
objectively by reference to the public interest in access to health services,
but perhaps by a
subjective sense that their skills are of greater value.
When invited to comment on the findings, one Tribunal health division head
suggested that there may be a divergence in practice among
the different
professional Boards, in that some Boards were more likely than others to apply
for and argue for deregistration in
the Tribunal setting. In that
member’s view, the Medical Board was less likely to pursue deregistration
than many of the other
professions, and this prosecutorial position could be
reflected in different patterns of outcome.
Arguably the kind of wide variation in outcomes across professions identified
in this study has no basis in law or explanation consistent
with the objective
of the National Law. These disparities should be explored in further detail to
determine the impact of investigation,
referral and decision-making processes
and cultures, including the role of unconscious bias in such processes.
Variations in outcome by jurisdiction
Another major finding of the study was that there
were significant variations in outcomes across the
For example,
deregistration was ordered in NSW more than five times as often as it was in the
ACT, Tasmania and NT combined, and
around twice as often as in the other states
combined. The greater severity of outcomes in NSW is underscored by its far
higher rate
of prohibition orders (which prevent the practitioner from
undertaking any or all of a broad range of other unregistered health services)
compared to SA and WA; and the fact that other jurisdictions issued
of these types of orders at all over the seven-year period. See Table 4
Table 4. Removal from practice by jurisdiction
ACT, Tas and NT
Removed from practice
Deregistration
Prohibition order
While Queensland had a removal rate comparable to NSW, it was the only major
than deregistration.
It is very hard to explain this degree of variation of outcome under the
National Law. Recollecting that lack of legal representation
was strongly
associated with more severe outcomes, in particular deregistration, data was
disaggregated to examine whether there
was also jurisdictional variation in
legal representation. Rather surprisingly there was considerable variation in
proportions of
legally represented respondents across the states: from a high of
96 per cent in WA to a low of 73 per cent in NSW. The other jurisdictions
clustered closer to the average (83 per cent) with 87 per cent of practitioners
legally represented in Qld and Victoria, and
79 per cent in SA and also in NT,
ACT and Tas combined. However, these variations in legal representation
don’t map neatly
against outcomes, with some of the lowest rates of
deregistration appearing in jurisdictions with low rates of legal representation
(SA, ACT, Tas and NT), and WA and Qld having almost identical rates of
deregistration despite having different levels of legal representation.
had a clear correlation between a high rate of deregistration and low rate of
legal representation.
Recollecting that outcomes were highly variable depending upon the main head
of misconduct, data on type of misconduct was also disaggregated
or unethical prescription or provision of drugs,
inappropriate clinical care and
the other misconduct category was consistent, there were notable variations when
it came to impairment
and sexual misconduct. Of a total of 38 matters concerning
impairment, 28 were determined in NSW and 6 in WA, with two in Qld, one
of the ACT and SA, and none at all in Victoria, Tasmania and the NT, suggesting
that the issue of competence to practise
is more likely to be dealt with at
Tribunal level in NSW and WA compared to the other jurisdictions.
The proportion of sexual misconduct matters was similar in Tribunals of the
most populous states, NSW and Queensland (23 per cent)
and Victoria (29 per
cent) but much lower in the others: making up only 11 per cent of matters in WA,
9 per cent in South Australia
and 13 per cent in ACT, NT and Tasmanian combined.
However, this variation again does not map neatly onto outcomes, as for example
Victoria and South Australia had almost the same rate of deregistration, despite
that fact that Victoria had more than three times
the proportion of sexual
misconduct matters and so could reasonably be expected to have a higher rate of
deregistration. Rather than
solving a question on variation of outcome, this
data provokes more questions – in particular whether there is an
difference across the states in terms of the practice of the National
Boards, and beyond that within the professions themselves,
in terms of whether
and when they refer sexual misconduct matters to Tribunals within disciplinary
Queensland and NSW have unique legislative features in that their versions of
the National Law place protection of the public as a
‘paramount’
objective’. While this could contribute to higher levels of removal from
practice in those two jurisdictions
compared to others, it cannot account for
the differences between them – notably that deregistration is ordered
twice as often
in NSW compared to Queensland; as well as the dramatically
different rates of suspension and prohibition orders when comparing these
The most distinct structural difference between jurisdictions is that NSW and
more recently Queensland are ‘co-regulatory’
under the National Law.
In NSW this means that complaints go first to a state based
‘Council’ (which acts in the same
role as the National Board on
disciplinary issues) and are prosecuted by a stand-alone agency, the Health Care
Complaints Commission
(HCCC). The HCCC pre-dates the National Law and prosecutes
complaints using in house lawyers and private
In Queensland since
2014 there is a stand-alone complaints agency, the Health Ombudsman, but
complaints can still be brought to the
Tribunal by the relevant National Board,
or by the Ombudsman, which acts as the complainant before the
There have been
suggestions that NSW may take a more robust approach to disciplinary matters as
a result of these institutional and
differences.
It remains to be
seen whether the shift to a state-based complaints agency will impact upon
outcomes in Queensland.
In a recent survey study of Tribunal decision-makers and personnel involved
in disciplinary hearings by Chiarella et al there were
75 respondents in all, 38
from NSW and 37 from elsewhere in Australia, and responses were compared from
these two groupings.
respondents were given the same vignette drawn from a UK disciplinary case and
asked whether it raised questions of fitness to
practise. In response to a
question about whether the matter should be referred to a Tribunal (recollecting
that prima facie de-registrable
conduct must be referred under the National Law)
there was divergence across the groups: with 49 per cent of respondents from
NSW stating that it should be referred compared to 63 per cent of those
from NSW. Relatedly, while five respondents from outside
NSW did not view the
case study as raising any fitness to practise issues, only one from NSW came to
that conclusion. However, there
was no clear difference between the groups in
terms of their choice of
The authors concluded
there were no significant differences between [NSW and the other cohort] in
the way decision-makers approached the case. This is a
good result in relation
to minimising variation in decision-making across
The cohort in the Chiarella study was small, addressed only one case study,
and the analysis did not compare views
the other states; it is
hard to know whether its findings can be generalised.
Bismark et al’s work on mandatory notifications (recollecting that
these also are an indicia of seriousness) suggests dramatic
differences in
approach between the culture of health practitioners in relation to regulation
in different jurisdictions. In a retrospective
study of 819 mandatory
notifications from all jurisdictions except NSW made over a 1-year period early
in the National Law (from
November 2011), Bismark found Victoria had a report
rate of less than 20 per 10,000 practitioners, while Queensland had a rate of
and SA over 60.
Similarly, in a 2017 review of the appropriateness of the use of so-called
‘chaperone’ conditions to facilitate the continued
practise of
doctors accused of (and on occasion, conclusively proved to be guilty of) sexual
misconduct, Paterson noted inconsistent
approaches of Medical Board committees
across the states and territories (and even within differently constituted
committees within
a single jurisdiction) in terms of response to serious
allegations.
Paterson suggested that,
This may reflect changing membership of Board committees and differing advice
from AHPRA staff in local office,
possibly influenced by varying signals from
responsible
(emphasis added)
Variation between jurisdictions should not be reduced to understandings of
‘severity’ alone, but rather as the product
of a more complex
interplay of institutional and cultural factors. The present study also found
considerable differences across the
various jurisdictions in non-restrictive
outcomes, particularly the frequency at which fines were ordered, and also in
the incidence
of non-disciplinary orders such as costs.
The National Law introduced fines of up to $30,000 payable to the National
Board as a possible outcome.
rate of fines ordered in proven matters varied from almost none in NSW and
Queensland (1.8 per cent and 1.5 per cent, respectively)
to a quarter of cases
in South Australia and over a third in Western
A low rate of fines
in NSW is explicable by reference to legislative variation, as the NSW law
provides that a fine can only be
ordered if it has not already been imposed by a
court and if the Tribunal is satisfied there is no other order, or combination
orders, that is appropriate in the public
However all other
Costs were awarded against the practitioner in 58.7 per cent of proved cases
overall, yet this varied from a low of 29.7 per cent
of cases in the ACT, NT and
Tasmania combined, to 40 per cent in SA and Victoria, over 70 per cent in NSW
and Queensland, and a high
of 91 per cent in WA. Again this disparity cannot be
explained by reference to legislative provisions, as the National Law provides
discretion to the responsible tribunal to make any order as to costs that it
‘considers appropriate’ and all jurisdictions
Differences in the culture and practice of the various state and territory
Tribunals should not be
underestimated.
It appears that
the WA Tribunal releases decisions involving practitioner undertakings and
agreed conditions that would likely be
finalised at Board level
However such
variation cannot explain the deregistration rate in WA, which is comparable to
SA and Queensland. In a similar vein,
the Victorian, ACT and Queensland
Tribunals commonly accept joint submissions on protective orders by consent
(which the ACT also
encourages by way of ordering mediation between the
parties). Although the Tribunal still has to be satisfied that the orders are
appropriate in the circumstances, it is possible that this practice contributes
to lower deregistration rates in those
(as well as lower
deregistration rates for the professions whose Boards seek lesser
penalties).
While one may not expect absolutely uniform approaches to the National Law
across different state and territory Tribunals, this study
found a number of
areas of inconsistency in outcomes, including the most serious form of outcome
(deregistration and prohibition),
and major disparities in other forms of
outcome, without being able to identify a cogent basis for most of them.
This is not a study of the prevalence or incidence
of kinds of misconduct within the health professions. Rather it is an analysis
of how such conduct appears and is responded to in the principal legal fora in
which it appears — the disciplinary tribunal.
In an independent review of the National Law in 2014, Snowball noted
[A] number of stakeholders raised concerns that the use of jurisdictional
Tribunals may result in different processes, different decisions
or penalties
for the same offence, leading to the possibility of increasing numbers of
appeals and the application of different principles
in considering cases.
However there was little evidence presented to support the
assertions.
This research provides such evidence. Major disparities were identified in
outcomes across the professions, even when matters concerned
the same main head
of misconduct, with doctors consistently facing less severe outcomes, especially
in lower rates of deregistration.
Different levels of legal representation alone
were insufficient to account for these disparities. Nor can the ‘public
in access to health services account for disparate rates of
deregistration. Demonstrated shortages of nurses did not translate into
consideration of this factor for nurses facing removal from practice in a sample
of sexual misconduct cases examined, nor
indeed was it addressed for any
profession other than doctors. There is no legislative justification for such
differential outcomes
between health professions, which must be examined in
future work as a product of cultural and institutional factors that have
a bias in favour of retaining doctors in practice.
Marked differences were also identified in outcomes across the jurisdictions.
Deregistration rates were much lower in ACT, Tas, NT,
somewhat lower than the
overall average in Qld, WA, SA and Vic, and markedly higher in NSW. Prohibition
orders were not utilised
at all in the ACT, Tas, NT, Queensland and Victoria,
were used at a low rate in WA and really only appeared to be a significant
in SA and NSW. In contrast, fines which were barely used elsewhere were
commonly ordered in SA and WA. It also appeared that there
were differential
rates of referral of some kinds of matters to Tribunals, as sexual misconduct
cases appeared in strikingly different
ratios across the states and territories,
with notably lower numbers of such cases in WA, SA, the NT, ACT and Tas compared
more populous states. There is again no explanation to be found in the
legislation for these trends.
The National Law was intended to unify a fragmented and inconsistent health
regulation landscape in Australia. Despite the organisational
engendered by the co-regulatory jurisdictions, the substantive law applied
through the National Law is, with limited and
mostly minor variations, genuinely
national. The first object of that National Law is to provide for the protection
of the public
by ensuring that only competent and ethical health practitioners
are registered to practise. It is a reasonable expectation that
such protection
of the public would be consistently exercised by Tribunals applying the National
Law — yet this study demonstrates
that this is not so. In crude terms, a
nurse is almost twice as likely as a doctor to be deregistered as a consequence
of a disciplinary
determination of a Tribunal, and any health practitioner
appearing before a disciplinary tribunal in NSW is more than twice as likely
be deregistered in NSW compared to the other mainland states.
While some level of variation in local practice is to be expected in any
national regime administered in a devolved set of institutions
such as state
Tribunals, the areas of divergence identified in this study represent
significant and continuing inconsistencies that
lack any comprehensive
explanation. Long term trends showing major and unexplained anomalies should
give cause for concern as to
whether the National Law is a genuinely national
scheme offering reliable and consistent protection to the public in all forms of
health treatment and all locations, as well as parity of treatment between
respondent practitioners.
It is suggested that a number of measures could be explored in order to
better understand the underlying reasons for variation and
to then develop
shared understandings of areas where greater consistency could, and should, be
achieved. Enhanced training and co-ordination
between Tribunals and other
disciplinary agencies including National Boards, Board Committees, NSW Councils,
the Queensland Office
of the Health Ombudsman and
would facilitate these
objectives. Such a process would also assist to develop clearer guidance on, and
better common understanding
of, what conduct should be considered as prima facie
of such seriousness as to require referral to Tribunal level. It is further
suggested that serious consideration could be given to the development of
qualitative ‘sanctions guidance’, such as that
in use in the UK in
medical matters, for use in all
Distinguished Professor
of Law, UTS. This research was funded by the UTS Law Health Justice Research
Centre and UTS PEP scheme. Thanks
to David Carter, Frances Taylor, Mary-Therese
Daniel and Jenny Boland for comments on previous versions of this paper, to
associate Eloise Chandler, Matej Marek for statistical analysis, and to
Cindy Lam, Ruby Wawn and Ellen O’Brien for research
assistance. The author
has been a part time member of the NSW Civil and Administrative Tribunal (NCAT),
Occupational Division, since
2015. This role involves presiding in health
disciplinary matters, including seven cases that ultimately comprised part of
set. To ensure integrity of the coding, the author did not undertake
any coding of those seven cases nor discuss them with research
assistants. The
views expressed in this article are those of the author alone and do not
represent NCAT. NCAT had no role in the
design or conduct of this
For background, see
Ian Freckelton, ‘Regulation of Health Practitioners: National Reform in
Journal of Law and Medicine
comprehensive overview of how the different institutions fit together (including
the ‘co-regulatory’ approach
of NSW to discipline, which has now
extended to Queensland) see Gabrielle Wolf, ‘Regulation of Health
Professionals’
in Anne-Maree Farrell, John Devereux, Isabel Karpin and
Penelope Weller (eds)
Health Law: Frameworks and Context
University Press, 2017) 78.
For background see: COAG Health Council, ‘The Independent Review of the
National Registration and Accreditation Scheme for
Health Professionals’
(Communique, 7 August
See Kerry Breen,
‘National Registration Scheme at 5 Years: Not What It Promised’
Australian Health Review
Australian Government,
Productivity Commission,
Australia’s Health Workforce
Report (2005)
http://www.pc.gov.au/inquiries/completed/health-workforce
Council of Australian
Governments,
Intergovernmental Agreement for a National Registration and
Accreditation Scheme for the Health Professions
http://www.ahpra.gov.au/About-AHPRA/Ministerial-Directives-and-Communiques.aspx
Enacted through:
Health Practitioner Regulation National Law Act
2009 (Qld);
Practitioner Regulation National Law Act
2009 (NSW);
Health Practitioner
Regulation National Law (Vic) Act
2009 (Vic);
Health Practitioner
Regulation National Law (South Australia) Act
Practitioner Regulation National Law (WA) Act
Practitioner Regulation National Law (ACT) Act
2010 (ACT);
Practitioner Regulation National Law (Tasmania) Act
2010 (Tas);
Practitioner Regulation (National Uniform Legislation) Act
http://www.ahpra.gov.au/About-AHPRA/What-We-Do.aspx
infographics explaining the complex inter-relation of national boards with the
Councils and Ombudsmen in co-regulatory
See Freckelton above n
, and more latterly: COAG,
Final Report
National Code of Conduct for Health Care Workers
See Belinda
Bennett et al, ‘Australia’s National Registration and Accreditation
Scheme for Health Practitioners: A National
Approach to Polycentric
Regulation?’
[2018] SydLawRw 7
Sydney Law Review
Practitioner National Law
2009 (Qld) s
See Katie Elkin,
‘Medical Practitioner Regulation: Is It All About Protecting the Public?
Journal of Law Medicine
682, and discussion
https://www.ahpra.gov.au/About-AHPRA/Regulatory-principles.aspx
Principle 3.
detailed discussion of how the pathways for complaints handling occur, before
and after the National Law, see: Claudette Satchell
et al, ‘Approaches to
Management of Complaints and Notifications about Health Practitioners in
Australia’ (2016) 40(3)
Australian Health Review
Practitioner Regulation National Law Act 2009
(Qld) s 156 (a Board
take action if
to protect public health and safety)
Health Practitioner Regulation National Law Act
2009 (NSW) s 150
take action if
appropriate
to protect health and
comparison of the NSW and National provisions see Mary Chiarella et al,
‘Survey of Quasi-Judicial Decision-Makers in
NSW and The National
Registration Scheme for Health Practitioners’
Journal of Law
and Medicine
Practitioner Regulation National Law Act
2009 (Qld) s
Queensland and WA heard health matters within a generalist administrative
tribunal before and after the advent of the National
Law. In the ACT and NT
there was a specialist health practitioner tribunal at the time of the
implementation of the National Law,
but they later shifted to a generalist
tribunal (in 2010 and 2015 respectively). SA and Tasmania introduced a
specialist tribunal
to coincide with the National Law. NSW amalgamated over a
dozen profession-specific tribunals into a generalist tribunal in
Health Care Complaints Commission v Litchfield
(1997) 41 NSWLR 630, 637;
Health Care Complaints Commission
[2014] NSWCA 307
v Health Care Complaints Commission
[2012] NSWCA 171
Craig v Medical
Board of South Australia
[2001] SASC 169
Medical Board of Australia v
[2014] WASAT 137
Medical Board of Australia v Petrovic
Practitioner Regulation National Law (NSW) 2009
See discussion in
Laurie Warfe, ‘Determining the Risk of Recidivism in Previously
De-Registered Health Practitioners’
Journal of Law and
Health Practitioner Regulation Act
2009 (Qld) s
Practitioner Regulation National Law (NSW) 2009
(NSW) s 149C(5),
While nurses and
midwives are actually separate professions, they are regulated by the same Board
and are often addressed together
in research and policy literature and are
grouped together in this analysis for that
The data was
organised per respondent, as opposed to organised by decision per se, so any
procedural, or subsequent decisions flowing
from the same matter was treated in
the dataset as one case. Where on occasion proceedings against two or more
respondents were heard
together, separate entries were made for each respondent
so as to record the complaints made against each professional and final
After the dataset was closed four further decisions were provided by the ACT
Tribunal but were not able to be included in
the analysis. For completeness,
those cases involved two doctors (one of whom relinquished registration
following a prescription
complaint, the other was deregistered following a
finding of sexual misconduct) and two psychologists (one of whom was cautioned
following treating multiple members of the same family, and the other received
conditions following sexual
misconduct).
investigator and research assistants cross-checked coding for consistency at
several junctures throughout the research. The findings
were analysed for
statistical significance using SPSS version 25, and an alpha value of 0.05.
Statistical significance was established
for all key findings reported in this
paper with the exception of the differential rates of deregistration of the
professions in
sexual misconduct matters, which had too few cases to establish
significance. The p value of key findings is noted in footnotes
throughout.
See eg Anna
Ryan, Lay San Too, and Marie Bismark, ‘Complaints about Chiropractors,
Osteopaths, and Physiotherapists: A Retrospective
Cohort Study of Health,
Performance, and Conduct Concerns’ (2018) 26(12)
Chiropractic and
Manual Therapies
Katie Elkin, Matthew Spittal, and David Studdert, ‘Risks of Complaints and
Adverse Disciplinary Findings against International
Medical Graduates in
Victoria and Western Australia’
Medical Journal of
but cf Marie Bismark, Matthew Spittal, and David Studdert,
‘Prevalence and Characteristics of Complaint-Prone Doctors in Private
Practice in Victoria’
Medical Journal of Australia
finding overseas trained doctors had
odds of being
complaint-prone.
Bismark et al, ‘Identification of Doctors at Risk of Recurrent Complaints:
A National Study of Healthcare Complaints
in Australia’ (2013) 22
Quality and Safety
Katie Elkin et al,
‘Doctors Disciplined for Professional Misconduct in Australia and New
Zealand, 2000–2009’
(2011) 194 Medical Journal of Australia
Doctors comprised
39.9 per cent of the misconduct cases, but only 18.4 per cent of membership
across the five registered professions.
Dentists made up 6.5 per cent of the
dataset and 3.8 per cent of the professions; pharmacists 9.4 per cent of the
dataset and 5.2
per cent of the professions, psychologists 9.3 per cent of the
dataset and 5.9 per cent of the professions and nurses and midwives
cent of the dataset but 66.7 per cent of the population of the professions. The
proportion of each of the five professions
in the professional population was
calculated by using data from each financial year 2010-2017, averaged, drawn
from APHRA Annual
Reports. The reports record the numbers of registrants for
each registered profession, with a gender breakdown provided for most
see: AHPRA, Annual Report 2010-11 (2011), Annual Report 2011-2012 (2012), Annual
Report 2012-2013 (2013), Annual Report 2013-4
(2014), Annual Report 2014-2015
(2015), Annual Report 2015-2016 (2016), Annual Report 2016-2017 (2017), all
available at
https://www.ahpra.gov.au/Publications/Annual-reports.aspx
(accessed 22 March
The relationship
between gender and appearance in the misconduct dataset was established as
statistically significant with a p value
270 cases (34 per
cent) and 142 cases (18 per cent),
respectively.
discussion in Jenni Millbank,
Serious misconduct of health
professionals in disciplinary tribunals under the National Law
forthcoming Australian Health Review
finding was made in a study of 371 UK medical disciplinary cases in 2009-2010,
see: Paula Case, ‘The Good, the Bad
and the Dishonest Doctor: the General
Medical Council and the ‘Redemption Model’ of Fitness to
Legal Studies
, and in Elkin’s study
of Australian and New Zealand Tribunal decisions concerning doctors, discussed
Conditions were
imposed on registration in just over half of proven cases (n 395), and the
majority (n 218) involved multiple conditions.
In order of prevalence,
conditions involved education/mentoring (n 237), restricted practice (n 142),
supervision (n 120), counselling
(n 71) and health conditions (n 47). As fines,
cautions and reprimands could be issued in tandem with other orders, they were
as ‘non-restrictive’ only when they were not imposed in
tandem with a restrictive sanction such as deregistration: producing
‘non-restrictive’ reprimand (32.4 per cent), caution (4.8 per cent)
and fine (9.2 per cent).
It is also notable that major legal inquiries into complaint mechanisms are
frequently triggered by media attention concerning a
repeat offender, most
recently Andrew Churchyard and Emil Gayad: see Ron Paterson,
Independent
Review of the Use of Chaperones to Protect Patients in Australia
discussed below at
, Review of Processes Undertaken by the Medical Council of New South
Wales Pursuant to Part 8 of the Health Practitioner Regulation
National Law
(NWS) with respect to Dr Emil Gayed
https://www.mcnsw.org.au/medical-council-releases-final-report-gail-furness-sc-its-processes-respect-dr-emil-gayed
respectively.
Kiel, ‘Regulating Impaired Doctors: A Snapshot from New South Wales’
Journal of Law and Medicine
Mendelson, ‘Disciplinary Proceedings for Inappropriate Prescription of
Opioid Medications by Medical Practitioners in
(2010–2014)’
Journal of Law and Medicine
Danuta Mendelson, ‘Disciplinary Proceedings against Doctors who abuse
Controlled Substances’
Journal of Law and Medicine
Freckelton, above n
1; Eleanor Dawson, ‘Professional Misconduct in Psychiatry: Sexual
Behaviour with Patients: A Report of
recent New South Wales Findings’
Australian and New Zealand Journal of Psychiatry
See, eg, Ryan, San
Too, and Bismark, above n 24; Jenni Millbank et al ‘Complementary Health
Practitioners Disciplined for Misconduct
in Australia 2010–2016’
Journal of Law and Medicine
Elkin et al above n
; Katie Elkin et al, ‘Removal of
Doctors from Practice for Professional Misconduct in Australia and New
Zealand’ (2012)
BMJ Quality and Safety
of Doctors from
See discussion in Elkin et al, ‘Removal of Doctors from Practice’,
above n 38, 1027.
et al, above n
Elkin et al,
‘Removal of Doctors from Practice
A limitation of
the study was that the inclusion of New Zealand (which has had a unitary system
with one Tribunal covering 21 different
health professions since 2004) was not
well explained in terms of whether the cases were genuinely comparable with the
cases. Another limitation was that 138 cases, representing a quarter
of the entire pool of cases gathered, were excluded from analysis
because the
authors classified cases as ‘non-disciplinary’ if the issue was
‘exclusively impairment’. Impairment
may include physical or mental
illness, cognitive decline or injury, substance addition, or a combination,
often contributing to
competence and performance issues, see discussion in Kiel,
. While a finding of
impairment alone cannot lead to removal from practice under the National Law, it
may lead to a related finding
that the professional is not fit to practice, in
which case removal is almost
Lois Surgenor
et al, ‘New Zealand’s Health Practitioners Disciplinary Tribunal: An
Analysis of Decisions 2004–2014’
Journal of Law and
of these orders appear to be in combination: id
The authors note
the theory that ‘low status’ health professions many be punished
more severely, but also suggest that
another explanation could be found in the
kind of misconduct in issue (which was not coded for) — for instance if
been involved in serial misconduct: id 249, 250.
See, eg, Marie Bismark
et al, ‘Identification of doctors at risk of recurrent complaints: a
national study of healthcare complaints
in Australia’ (2013) 22 (7)
Quality and Safety
532; Matthew Spittal et al, ‘Outcomes of
notification to health practitioner boards: a retrospective cohort study’
BMC Medicine
198; Ryan et al, ‘Complaints about
chiropractors, osteopaths, and physiotherapists: a retrospective cohort study of
performance, and conduct concerns’ (2018) 26(12)
Chiropractic
and Manual Therapies
1; Marie Bismark et al, ‘Prevalence and
characteristics of complaint-prone doctors in private practice in
Victoria’ (2012)
Spittal et al,
See Table 2 below
for details of outcomes for doctors, in which the removal from practice rate is
3 per cent higher than in Elkin’s
study, but the deregistration rate is
Australian Medical Association, AMA submission to the Standing Committee on
Community Affairs,
Inquiry into the Complaints Mechanism Administered under
the Health Practitioner Regulation National Law
, February 2017 <
https://ama.com.au/system/tdf/documents/AMA%20Submission%20to%20the%20Senate%20Inquiry%20into%20the%20complaints%20mechanism%20march%202017.pdf?file=1&type=node&id=46478
See, eg, Australian Medical Association, AMA Submission,
, 29 September 2017 <
https://ama.com.au/system/tdf/documents/AMA%20Mandatory%20Reporting%20Submission%20-%202018%20Final%20Submission.pdf?file=1&type=node&id=49613
And see a similar finding following a period of extensive review and reform of
medical disciplinary institutions in the UK: John
Chamberlain,
‘Malpractice, Criminality, and Medical Regulation: Reforming the Role of
the GMC in Fitness to Practise Panels’
Medical Law Review
Statistical
significance between profession and removal from practice was established with a
p value of 0.0001.
three pharmacists had matters proved under this head and five psychologists (no
pharmacists were removed from practice; four
psychologists were
deregistered).
value was 0.2052.
relationship between nursing and deregistration, as opposed to suspension, in
the context of proved sexual misconduct was established
as statistically
significant with a p value of
The relationship between profession and legal representation was tested for
statistical significance, which was established with
a p value of
Statistical
significance of the relationship between deregistration and legal representation
was established with a p value of
See Keil, above n
34, 81. Cf Mendelson, ‘Disciplinary Proceedings for Inappropriate
Prescription’
arguing, based on her analysis of 32 prescription cases concerning doctors
determined in Victorian and NSW Tribunals and Courts
in the first 4 years of the
National Law, that there is an undue focus on
‘deterrence’.
Ron Paterson,
The Good Doctor: What Patients Want
(Auckland University
Press, 2012) 81.
above n 34, 83.
v General Medical Council
[2005] EWHC 2143
[2006] 1 WLR 942
; discussed by Elkin, above n
, 694. See also making available the
‘special skills’ of the doctor as one of the 12 factors considered
regarding orders
in WA jurisprudence:
Medical Board of Australia v
[2015] WASAT 124
and one of five factors considered in NSW:
Health Care Complaints Commission v King
[2013] NSWMT
Elkin, above n
See, eg, Health
Workforce Australia,
Australia’s Future Health Workforce —
, Report (2014); Kathleen Calderwood and Greg Miskelly, ‘NSW
Needs Nurses as 'Catastrophic' Shortage Predicted to Affect Patient
(online), 12 Jan 2018, <
https://www.abc.net.au/news/2018-01-12/nsw-set-for-major-shortage-of-nurses-and-midwives/9321464
Medical Board of Australia v Smith
[2016] VCAT 243
, [27]. See also, eg,
HCCC v Small
[2012] NSWMT 18
See below note
and accompanying
The relationship
between jurisdiction and deregistration was established as statistically
significant with a p value of
See discussion in
Wolf above n
See Office of Health Ombudsman, Queensland:
https://www.oho.qld.gov.au/about-us/office-of-the-health-ombudsman/
(accessed 22 March 2019), see also above n
One division head noted that in that jurisdiction, the National Board briefs
external solicitors to pursue Tribunal complaints and
those solicitors are
sometimes new to the health jurisdiction, compared to NSW where in house lawyers
are, in effect, repeat players
with deep institutional
Chiarella et
al, above n
Both groups had similar
rates of response favouring conditions and reprimands: ibid,
Marie Bismark,
Matthew Spittal, Tessa Plueckhahn, David Studdert, ‘Mandatory Reports of
Concerns About the Health, Performance
and Conduct of Health
Practitioners’
Medical Journal of Australia
Ron Paterson, above
cases in which Tribunals ordered conditions involving ‘chaperones’
following findings of sexual misconduct
against doctors, see eg:
Board of Australia v Veettill
[2015] WASAT 124
Medical Board of
Australia v Blomeley
[2014] QCAT 160
HCCC v Vastrad
[2011] NSWMT 1.
Medical Board of Australia v Young
[2010] VCAT 1542
in which the
doctor was practising under a condition imposed by the Medical Board in 2003
that he not have sex with any patient;
a condition strongly suggestive that such
an event had occurred previously. This condition was subsequently
Practitioner Regulation National Law
Act 2009 (Qld) s
SA was 24.6
per cent, WA was 36.4 per cent. The ACT, NT and Tas combined were 5.4 per
Practitioner Regulation National Law
2009 (NSW) s
Queensland, South Australian and Victorian Tribunals on occasion reduce or
remove entirely periods of suspension based upon a
‘time served’
approach, crediting the period of time passed in which some practitioners had
been unable to practice prior
to the hearing by reason of immediate action taken
at Board level: see e.g.
Medical Board of Australia v Leggett
[2015] QCAT
Medical Board of Australia v Gale
[2015] SAHPT 3
Board of Australia v Huson
[2013] VCAT 145.
While these variations of
practice merit further exploration, they can only explain differences in the
length of suspensions ordered
across jurisdictions (which were not compared in
this research), not differential rates of deregistration. The Queensland
also appears to have unique practices concerning suspension orders; for
some years it ordered suspension and then ‘suspended’
part or all of
that order as long as conditions were complied with: see eg
Medical Board of
Australia v Yasin
[2011] QCAT 300.
This was later determined to be a form of
order not authorised by the National Law: see eg
Psychology Board of
Australia v Cook
[2014] QCAT 162.
This practice would
contribute to both the high number of finalised cases and the low rate of
removal from practice in
See discussion of
the deference of the Tribunal to such ‘suggested determinations’ in
Medical Board of Australia v McGrath
[2014] VCAT 641
Kim Snowball,
Independent Review of the National Registration and Accreditation Scheme for
Health Professions (2014) at 68.
http://www.coaghealthcouncil.gov.au/Publications/Reports/ArtMID/514/ArticleID/68/The-Independent-Review-of-the-National-Registration-and-Accreditation-Scheme-for-health-professionals
The reviewer consulted with the Tribunals and determined that the publication of
decisions, annual meeting of the heads of the jurisdictions,
and internal
training processes comprised ‘adequate processes in place to minimise the
risk of different decisions between
the jurisdictions on the same or similar
matters’: Id at 69.
General Medical
Sanctions Guidance: For Members of Medical Practitioner Tribunals
and for the General Medical Council’s Decision Makers
https://www.mpts-uk.org/-/media/mpts-documents/DC4198_Sanctions_Guidance_Feb_2018_23008260.pdf
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (5.08 MB)
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter