URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/journals/ALRS/2010/5.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 14:13:12
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Greenleaf, G --- "Limitations of Malaysia's data protection Bill" [2010] ALRS 5; (2010) 104 Privacy Laws & Business International Newsletter 1
Limitations of Malaysia’s data protection Bill
, University of New South Wales Faculty of Law
Laws & Business International Newsletter
1, 5-7, April 2010
Personal Data Protection Bill 2009
expected to be enacted by
Malaysia’s Parliament this April will add a distinct new flavour to
Asia’s growing array of
data protection laws. The Bill has been outlined
by Abu Bakar Munir (PLBI Newsletter Issue 102, December 2008, p18). This article
concentrates on the limitations of the Bill that may prove to be impediments to
effective data protection, and on its influences
and novel aspects.
Scope limitations
The Bill applies only to personal data in
‘commercial transactions’ (s2), though they are defined broadly
any matters relating to the supply or exchange of goods or
services’: s4). Credit reporting agencies are exempt and will be
to separate legislation (also expected to be tabled in April). There is the
usual exemption for ‘personal, family and
household affairs’
(s45(1)), but the limitation to ‘commercial transactions’ will also
exclude the non-commercial
affairs of churches, educational institutions and
non-profit organisations. There is no ‘small business exemption’,
in Australia or Japan.
Processing for the purpose of publishing ‘journalistic, literary or
artistic material’ is exempted (except from the Security
Principle), but
only where the data user reasonably believes that (a) the publication would be
in the public interest (taking into
account the ‘special importance of
public interest in freedom of expression’), and (b) compliance with a
particular Principle
or provision is ‘incompatible with the journalistic,
literary or artistic purposes’ (s45(2)(f)). This is not a blanket
‘media exemption’ but a carefully written partial exemption, and one
which will be complex for the media, Commissioner
and courts to apply. It is
important that this Act should not unduly restrict freedom of expression in
There is a very broad exemption for any processing by commercial
organisations ‘for the purpose of discharging regulatory functions’
where application of the Act would be likely to prejudice those functions
(s45(2)(e)), and other broad exemptions for prevention
of physical or mental
harm, for statistical and research uses that do not produce identified outputs,
and in connection with court
processes. These are not blanket exemptions from
all Principles, and typically do not provide exemptions from the Security, Data
Integrity and Retention Principles. In addition, there are lengthy lists of
exemptions from specific Principles, particularly Disclosure.
The largest omission is that the public sector is not covered at all (s3(1)).
Malaysia has no existing protections for personal information
which limit State
abuses of privacy.
This Bill can only be said to cover part of the private sector, and only then
subject to many exceptions, particularly where any State-related
activities are
concerned. Within its scope it may still be valuable, but the narrow scope must
always be kept in mind.
A Commissioner but little independence
Malaysia will have a Personal Data Protection
Commissioner appointed by the Minister (s47), with a normal range of powers. The
Commissioner
will be appointed for up to three years, and may be re-appointed
(s53), but he or she may also be dismissed by the Minister, who
only needs to
‘state the reason’ (s54). The Commissioner’s remuneration and
allowances are also determined by the
Minister (s57). The Commissioner’s
annual report goes to the Minister (s60), with no requirement that it goes the
or be made public. In order to further underline the
Commissioner’s lack of independence, it is explicitly stated that
Commissioner shall be responsible to the Minister’ and
‘the Minister may give the Commissioner directions of a general
consistent with the provisions of the Act’ (s59). However, the
Commissioner is protected against legal actions while
carrying out his or her
duties in good faith (s139).
A Commissioner who is not independent may still be effective, at least while
he or she has a Minister sympathetic to privacy. But
there is no point
pretending that this Commissioner’s office is like that of other Privacy
Commissioners in the Asia-Pacific.
Those in Australia, New Zealand, Canada and
Hong Kong have statutory provisions underwriting their independence which are
here. The international Data Protection Commissioners have established
accreditation requirements which require that a Data Protection
Authority has
‘an appropriate degree of autonomy and independence’. The notes to
that requirement refer to such matters
as ability ‘to operate free from
political or governmental interference’ and ‘removal only for
inability to perform
the office, neglect of duty or serious misconduct’.
The Asia Pacific Privacy Authorities (APPA) meeting requires members to
accredited to the international conference. It would be embarrassing if the
Malaysian Commissioner could not even attend regional
Commissioner’s
meetings as a full member, or global meetings.
Seven Principles and some additional ones
The seven Personal Data Protection Principles in the
Bill’s ss5-12 (General; Notice and Choice; Disclosure; Security;
Data Integrity; and Access) are influenced strongly by the EU data
protection Directive rather than by the OECD Guidelines or APEC
Framework. The
EU-style starting point is that processing of personal data (including
collection) requires consent (s6), subject
to the many exceptions in s40.
The EU Directive’s influence is seen even more clearly in a number of
additional principles (details of which are in Munir’s
article): the right
of data subjects to withdraw consent to processing (s38); a further right to
prevent processing likely to cause
damage or distress (s42), which is
independent of questions of consent; and the right to prevent processing for the
purposes of direct
marketing (s43).
The Principles have possible weakness in the limits on use and disclosure.
Data users must obtain data subject consent to processing
of their data (s6).
They must give ‘written notice’ of the purpose of collection (s7) no
matter how the data is collected.
They need not give it at the point of
collection, if not ‘practicable’, but must give it before use for
related purposes
or disclosure (s7(2)). Data may only be used for purposes
‘directly related’ to the purpose of collection (s6(2)).
Companies can effectively negate the limitation on disclosures to purposes
‘directly related’ to the purpose of collection
(s8(a)) simply by
disclosing ‘the class of third parties’ to whom they may disclose
the data (s7(1)(e) and s8(b)). Is
this a blank cheque for Malaysian companies to
disclose personal data to anyone they choose, provided they make a vague
more complex than that, because the recipient would still
have to have the data
subject’s consent to process the data, or be able to rely on one of the
exceptions allowing processing
The processing of sensitive personal data (which has a broad definition
including allegations of commission of offences) requires
consent’ (which suggests that ‘consent’ by itself includes
implied consent), or for other exceptions
to apply (s40). Among the list of very
broad exceptions are that the use is necessary ‘for the exercise of any
functions conferred
on any person by or under any written law’ or
‘for any other purpose as the Minister thinks fit’. There is also
exception where a person has made public their own sensitive personal data
(s40(2)), which is not an exception for ordinary personal
data. There is a
real danger with this provision that it will be abused by the Malaysian state
(which is in effect exempt from the
legislation) whereas those who attempt to
raise allegations of criminality or discuss other sensitive issues could be
if they fall outside the media exemptions. The provisions are
complex, but the danger is there.
The Security Principle (s9) is weak, in that it only requires data users to
‘take practical steps’, not ‘take reasonable
is often required, but whether this amounts to any real difference remains to be
Extra-territoriality, ‘whitelists’ and due diligence
The Act will have no application to processing
outside Malaysia, with the interesting exception of where data is intended to be
processed in Malaysia (cl 3(2)). Temporary exports of data from Malaysia
for purposes of processing breaching the Act will therefore
be subject to it. It
applies to anyone ‘established in Malaysia’ or who uses equipment in
Personal data may not be transferred outside Malaysia unless the destination
is on a ‘whitelist’ specified by the Minister,
after receiving the
Commissioner’s advice (s129). The Minister can so specify a place if it
has in force a law ‘substantially
similar’ to the Malaysian Act, or
the place ensures ‘an adequate level of protection ... which is at least
to the level of protection’ provided by Malaysia’s Act.
There are exceptions similar to those found in Article 26 of
the EU data
protection Directive, but some which go considerably further than the Directive,
including where ‘the data user
has taken all reasonable precautions and
exercised all due diligence to ensure that the personal data will not in that
place be processed
in a manner which, if that place is Malaysia, would be a
contravention of this Act’ (s129(3)(f)).
Unless the Commissioner takes a strict interpretation of when a data user has
‘taken all reasonable precautions and exercised
all due diligence’,
s129 will involve a front door to data exports (the ‘whitelist’)
which appears to be shut,
while the back door is wide open to transfers to
anywhere, with exporters absolved from any accountability for what goes
Worthless remedies?
Data users who breach one of the Principles commit an
offence carrying substantial fines or even imprisonment (s5(2)). If the
Commissioner,
after investigation, considers that a data user is contravening
the Act or has done so and is likely to continue or repeat doing
so, then the
Commissioner can issue an enforcement notice requiring the contravention to be
remedied (s108). Substantial fines can
result from failure to observe
enforcement notices. There is a right of appeal against issuance of an
enforcement notice to an Appeal
Tribunal (Pt VII). There is no right of appeal
against non-issuance of an enforcement notice, which is unfair to data subjects,
surprising since there is a right of appeal against the Commissioner’s
failure to investigate a complaint (s93).
As with the Hong Kong law, this reliance on enforcement notices has the fatal
flaw that breaches that have caused harm, but are unlikely
to be repeated, fall
outside the scope of the Act. This is coupled with the other fatal flaws that
there is no obvious way by which
complainants may seek compensation for damage:
the Commissioner cannot award damages; data subjects cannot take seek
compensation
in court (which they can in Hong Kong, in theory).
The Commissioner has powers to inspect data user’s systems (s101), but
overall the ‘enforcement pyramid’ in this
Act is completely
deficient. No matter how diligent a privacy Commissioner may be, if they do not
have the necessary enforcement
tools, there are severe limits to what they can
achieve. The Commissioner needs more arrows in the quiver than this Bill
Will there be registration and codes?
Registration of specific classes of data users may be
required by the Minister on the recommendation of the Commissioner (s14). The
Commissioner can also designate a body (such as an industry association) as a
‘data user forum’ (s21), which is then
able to prepare a code of
practice (s23), which the Commissioner may then issue (s24). Data users
belonging to that class must then
comply with this code (s25), with breaches
subject to substantial fines (s29). Whether these procedures see any use remains
seen. While both could be useful, used sparingly, experience in other
A modest step forward for Malaysia
While this Bill has many deficiencies, privacy
legislation even of these modest dimensions will be a step forward for
Malaysians.
In the hands of a Commissioner committed to privacy protection, much
will still be able to be achieved. If the Act is well managed,
politics may deliver further improvements to it in future. For Malaysians to be
able to focus on real issues in data protection
will inevitably increase the
demand for better protection.
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (54.4 KB)
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter