URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/journals/UMonashLRS/2010/11.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 15:42:23
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Taylor, G --- "Federalism in Australia" [2010] UMonashLRS 11
Greg Taylor
Federalism in Australia
This paper was originally published in Volume 4 of
International
Constitutional Law
, pp. 171-179.
six Australian States of today's Australian federation – the
Commonwealth of Australia
, to use its formal
the six Australian colonies founded by the British between 1788 and 1859. As is
well known, all were from the start (or,
in the case of Western Australia,
became) dumping grounds for convicts, replacing the lost American colonies which
had previously
filled that role. There is however one important exception to
this convict heritage, namely South Australia, which began as and remained
colony of free settlers.
Having learnt its lesson in North America in the
late eighteenth century, the Colonial Office of the nineteenth century was only
keen to accede to requests by the colonies for the greatest possible degree
of self-government consistent with their place within
the Empire (which the
colonists themselves hardly wished to question for a variety of reasons ranging
from emotional attachment to
Great Britain to the advantages of Imperial
defence). Five of the Australian colonies received grants of self-government in
Australia had to wait until
because of its
isolation, comparative poverty and the fact that its population remained very
low until discoveries of gold caused
a rapid increase. Coupled with the grants
of self-government in the 1850s were suggestions from Whitehall that the
colonies should
federating,
adolescent colonies were not then in the mood for limiting their freedom within
the Empire by subjecting themselves to an
Australian federation.
until the 1890s that federation of the six colonies was anything more than the
subject of occasional speculation and speechifying.
As the 1890s progressed,
inter-governmental discussions culminated in constitutional conventions which
produced draft constitutions
for the Australian federation. By the standards of
the times, this process was remarkably democratic. Many colonies elected the
representatives
they sent to the constitutional conventions, and in all colonies
the draft constitutions were submitted to referenda of the people
for approval.
The second set of Australia-wide referenda produced a majority of voters in all
colonies for an approved constitutional
text. In most colonies, of course, only
white men could vote, thus limiting the democratic credentials of the Australian
Constitution
by modern standards; but in South Australia women received the vote
in time to vote in both referenda, and Aborigines also had, and
exercised, the vote in the referenda – special arrangements were made
for them to cast their vote in some remote locations,
and in those locations the
poll greatly favoured the proposed
Constitution
Constitution
thus endorsed was sent, accompanied by an Australian
delegation, to the British Parliament, as the only body capable of exercising
legislative power over all Australia. With one small exception the
Constitution
was enacted at
Westminster
approved by the Australian people; the exception increased the powers of the
Judicial Committee of the Privy Council, the highest
Court of appeal for the
colonies, to hear appeals from the Australian Courts, but this jurisdiction has
long since been abolished
legislation
qualification is thus of historical interest only. From the start the
Constitution
provided for disputes about the powers of the federation and the
States to be finally resolved by the local federal supreme Court
it set up, the
High Court of
The federal
Constitution
of the Commonwealth of Australia was proclaimed by
Queen Victoria, in the month before she died, to take effect with the new
on 1 January 1901. The Australian colonies became States of the new
federation, which remained within the Empire (there being no
declaration of
independence associated with the federation). While Australian independence came
gradually with the gradual dissolution
of the British Empire at some time
probably around the Second World
remains a part of the Australian constitutional framework as a reminder of its
origins. The absent Monarch is represented
at federal level by a
Governor-General and in each State by
these officials is in practice selected by the government concerned.
2. THE DISTRIBUTION OF POWERS
When the Canadian colonies federated in the
they did so
in the shadow of the greatest crisis ever to face the American federation. They
were therefore even more than usually
concerned to distinguish Canada from its
giant neighbour and produced a unique scheme for the distribution of powers
between centre
Australian federalists of the 1890s were not subject to such pressures and
faithfully copied the outlines of the American scheme
for the distribution of
powers to the extent that they drew up a set of enumerated powers for the centre
Constitution
and left the undefined residue
with the States under
The paradox that has emerged since is that the
Canadian arrangements, which were meant to produce a strong centre and weak
have succeeded in producing the reverse – a relatively
weak centre and strong provinces; while in Australia the reverse
– a weak centre and strong States – has given way to
the strong centre and weak States much closer to that which the
Canadians had
hoped for in the 1860s but did not get. As will be shown, the Australian
federation is marked in practice by a very
strong legal position of the
federation.
This situation has been reached as a result of two factors. The
first is decisions of the High Court of Australia with which this
section deals.
The second is the federal government's extreme dominance of financial matters,
which is the subject of the next section.
The extra-legal background to all this
is, however, important. Stated briefly, it is the lack of any Quebec in
Australia and the
relative lack of differences among the Australian States. Were
it not for the great distances involved in Australia, it would be
questionable whether the degree of diversity among the Australian States would
justify a federal system at
of the federal
Constitution
sets out forty subject-matters over which the
federation has concurrent legislative
federal legislative powers are rare and consist largely of three items in
, together with
on excise duties which is to be dealt with in
the next section. The concurrent legislative powers in
range from the
trivial if mildly poetic 'lighthouses, lightships, beacons and buoys' of
(vii) to the enormously important areas of trading, financial and
foreign corporations
[xx]) and external (
[xxix]). The residue of powers not allocated to the
federation is, as mentioned, with the States
, the result of which
is that there is in the Australian
Constitution
no list of State powers such as
appears in the Canadian.
In hindsight this lack of specification of State
powers can be seen as the greatest mistake in drafting the
Constitution
the founding fathers.
Until 1920, the High Court of Australia, staffed by
those of the founding fathers who had accepted elevation to its Bench, attempted
to supply this deficiency. In reading the list of federal powers, it was
maintained, it was necessary to have regard to the unstated
but well-known
responsibilities which were intended by the founding fathers to remain with the
States. The list of federal powers
was accordingly read with one
eye on an invisible list of State powers, and federal powers were read
restrictively in order to preserve
those to which the States were
accustomed.
1920, in the celebrated
centralist Judges found themselves for the first time in a majority, and this
doctrine of reserve State powers was forever abandoned.
Henceforth federal
powers were to be given their natural meaning, untrammelled by
assumptions about the powers supposed to be reserved to the States. This view
dispensed with the obvious difficulty of relying on
an unwritten list of
reserved States powers as an aid to interpreting the written list of federal
powers. It also well suited the
formalist and positivist mood of legal thought
of the day. Extra-legal developments were also of importance, however, as one
of the High Court of Australia pointed out in 1971 :
[I]n 1920 the
Constitution
was read in a new light, a light reflected from
events that had, over twenty years, led to a growing realisation that
Australians
were now one people and Australia one country and that national laws
might meet national needs. [...] As I see it the
Engineers' Case
at as an event in legal and constitutional history, was a consequence of
developments that had occurred outside the law Courts
as well as a cause of
further developments
century progressed, technical legal analysis further contributed to the
expansive reading of federal powers. It became established
that a law was to be
classified as within a subject confided to the federal sphere as long as it
directly operated within one of
the subject-areas of
Whether the
law's primary concern was with such a subject or with some other subject was not
relevant and could not nullify federal
power. The opportunities which this opens
for federal power are best illustrated by the example of
Commonwealth
Stated simply, in this case the federal government wished to prohibit sand
mining on an island for environmental reasons. However,
the federal government
has no power over environmental matters. It does however have a power over
foreign trade
[i]), and accordingly it prohibited the export of
any sand mined, thus of course making the mining pointless and achieving the
environmental result. This law was upheld by the High Court of
Australia : the technical legal operation of the law was on a matter
confided to the federal legislature, namely foreign trade, and neither the
motive pursued nor the principal environmental objective
of the law prevented it
from answering the description of a law about foreign trade.
Thus, for a federal law to be valid, the federal Parliament need select only
one part of any process on which federal laws are authorised
legislate on that aspect of the activity. The potential of this method of
interpretation to enhance federal powers was illustrated
most recently by the
Work Choices
achieved the unusual feat of obtaining a majority in both Houses of the federal
Parliament, a conservative government passed
wide-ranging reforms of industrial
relations law. The federal Parliament has a very limited power over industrial
relations in
(xxxv), which is conditioned, among other things,
upon there being a labour dispute 'extending beyond the limits of any one
Bypassing this, the federal Parliament enacted a law on industrial
relations under its power over trading, financial and foreign
corporations
[xx]), which of course form the vast majority of significant
employers in Australia. The law was upheld. It had a direct legal operation
the rights, duties and powers of trading, financial and foreign corporations.
The fact that it might also fairly be described
as a law on industrial relations
and would be outside
(xxxv) in that capacity was simply
irrelevant.
A further accession of federal power has resulted from the decision that the
power over external affairs
[xxix]) entitles the federal
legislature to make laws for implementing any treaty to which Australia is a
party. Indeed, an earlier
Labour government had made laws on industrial
relations under this power, relying on agreements entered into under the aegis
International Labour Organisation, and thus also bypassed the limited
power on industrial relations expressly granted by
The matter has progressed to such an extent that Sir Gerard Brennan, a former
Chief Justice of the High Court of Australia, has been
moved to say recently,
without much exaggeration, that '[t]he only practical limitation on the subjects
of Commonwealth expenditure
and regulation is a political one. The
constitutional division of legislative powers between Commonwealth and States,
though relevant,
has become of secondary
importance.'
is not to say that these limits are of no account. The States are firmly
entrenched in the political mindset of Australian voters,
particularly those in
the smaller outlying States of South Australia, Western Australia and Tasmania;
in those outlying States in
particular, the idea of having everything decided in
Canberra would have very little appeal indeed. An attempt at a full-blown
of everything on the part of the federal government using its full
legal powers is very unlikely to occur, and would be even less
likely to succeed
politically.
Federal dominance has been greatly reinforced by decisions on the sparse
financial provisions of the federal
Constitution
. There are three chief sources
of federal power here : its power over taxation
exclusive nature of its power over duties of customs and excise
its power to make grants of money to the States upon conditions
, the federal power over taxation is – with the
exception of the customs and excise duties mentioned in
concurrent rather than exclusive. It was so operated until the middle of the
Second World War : as today in Canada, there
were both federal and State
income taxes. In 1942, however, with Japanese bombs falling on Darwin and
Japanese submarines in Sydney
Harbour, the federal government decided to
centralise all income taxation of both individuals and companies in its hands.
Parliament pass a series of laws : first, federal income taxation
was raised to a level which engulfed State income taxation; secondly,
prohibited the payment of State income taxes until federal income taxes were
paid; thirdly, it compulsorily acquired the States'
departments of taxation
(using its power of compulsory acquisition under
[xxxi]); and
finally it provided for grants of money under
States – conditional upon their not levying income taxes. In the
First Uniform Taxation
extraordinarily literalist and unimaginative decision which can be attributed
largely to the absence of one of Australia's greatest
Judges (Sir Owen Dixon) on
diplomatic duties in Washington, this scheme was upheld in full. Trying again in
1957 after the return
of Sir Owen Dixon to the Bench and his elevation to Chief
Justice, the precedent set in 1942 was felt too strong to be overruled
significant
The result of this – together, it must be said, with States
governments' reluctance to take on the politically odious task of
re-introducing
State income taxation – is that the most lucrative source of taxation
is wholly in the hands of the federal
government. It has a vast surplus of money
compared to its needs, and fortunately for it there is a ready use that can be
it that further increases its degree of control : it makes grants
to the States under
subject, in many cases, to extraordinarily
detailed conditions about the use to which they might be put. It is currently
that a condition under
need not be authorised by a legislative
power under
other words,
is a free-standing power to make conditions regardless of
whether the federal legislature could pass laws directly imposing the rules
which it attaches to the State grants. Thus, whole fields of legislative
activity, entirely unmentioned in
, have fallen under the federal sway
via conditional grants. These include such significant fields as hospitals,
roads and education
and research at all levels. Another field for federal
expansion is cities : on 27 October 2009, the Prime Minister announced that
the federal government intended 'to take a much greater national responsibility
for improving the long-term planning of our major
of attaching conditions about city planning to money granted to the States for
improving infrastructure in cities.
From the point of view of the States, the
constitutional arrangements and Court decisions have given them insufficient
income to match
responsibilities (including
expensive, labour-intensive items such as schools, hospitals and roads). This
leads them to undue dependence
upon federal grants and to reliance on
out-of-date, inefficient or even socially harmful forms of taxation such as
conservative government in office from 1996 to 2007 did something to ameliorate
this situation, however. It introduced a goods
and services tax, fixed at 10%,
and provided for the money so raised to be granted without conditions to the
States as if it were
reduced the level of "vertical fiscal imbalance", to use the technical term, but
not eliminated it entirely. As a matter
of law, of course, the States are
dependent on the goodwill of the federal legislature for the continuation of
this scheme, as it
rests solely on federal
legislation.
Another way in which State dependence even in this field comes to the fore is
the regular disputes among the States governments about
how much of the revenue
in question should be allocated to each State. The States' complaints and
requests about the formula for
dividing up the money raised by the goods and
services tax among the States must be addressed to the federal government as the
benefactor and sole master in this
Constitution
, which makes excise duties exclusive to
the federal government and thus prohibits the States from raising them. The
difficulty was
long felt in this area that "excise" has no accepted meaning in
the law, nor does the
Constitution
provide a definition of it. The definitional
task was therefore remitted to the High Court of Australia. After decades of
much case law, in 1997
New South Wales
established that an excise was to be seen as 'an inland tax on a step in
production, manufacture, sale or distribution of
goods entering Australia – customs duties – are clearly
denied to the States by another provision in
, which has the obvious
purpose of preventing the balkanisation of the Australian customs regime and
outlawing pre-Federation customs
duties levied among the colonies themselves.)
Thus the taxation of goods is also denied to the States, and this of course is
reason why they were not able to impose a goods and services tax of their
own but had rather to rely upon the federal Parliament
to do it for them and are
dependent on the federal government for a share of revenue produced by the
4. CONCLUSION
One further remarkable feature of the Australian
Constitution
mention, and that is the difficulty of amending it.
As was mentioned above,
Constitution
was originally approved by referenda of the people of the
Australian colonies, as they then were. It was only natural, therefore,
same method should be chosen for amendment.
Section 128
Constitution
requires an amendment to be passed by a referendum. The proposed amendment must
be approved by a majority of the voters but also
– to ensure that the
rights of the smaller States were not trampled upon – a majority of
people in a majority of States.
A majority of six being four, a proposed
amendment thus needs to be endorsed by an overall national majority and by
majorities in
at least four of the States.
The Australian people have been
extraordinarily conservative in approving amendments to their
Constitution
forty-four proposals submitted to the people since 1901, only eight have
succeeded. The last success was in
and the text
Constitution
has remained unaltered since then. Needless to say, defects
in some of the proposals may be to blame for this record. It is not the
that every proposed amendment was without flaws. Nevertheless, the fact remains
that by international standards Australia's
Constitution
extraordinarily stable.
Of the eight changes made, only three have affected
federal powers. In 1929, just in time for the Great Depression,
added to the
Constitution
permitting the federal and State government to make
arrangements for their joint public debt. This has become the basis of an
between all Australian governments about the levels of and procedures
for borrowing to which all are
a limited endorsement was given to the welfare state :
(xxiiiA) was added, giving the federal Parliament power over
various pensions, unemployment benefit, student and family allowances
medical and dental services. In 1967, finally, the federal legislature received
a concurrent power to make laws about Aborigines
[xxvi]), who
had originally been expressly excluded from federal law-making power and thus
included within the realm of the States'
legislative powers alone.
whole, however, the division of power conceived in 1901 has remained untouched
as far as the text is concerned – while
being subject to the great
pro-federal revolution in interpretation beginning with the
in 1920 and continuing to this day. It may well be thought that the
judicial revolution in interpretation could hardly be avoided
given the great
changes in society and communications since the drafting of the
Constitution
the late 1890s. Given that the text was virtually impossible to amend, something
had to give, and that something was the original
States-friendly interpretation
of federal powers. In Australia there was, moreover, no Quebec to put a brake on
this process.
Thus the process for amendment, while appearing impeccably
democratic, has in fact resulted, paradoxically, in a series of silent
amendments to the
Constitution
augmenting federal power that have been made by a
process no more democratic than is involved in the voting among the seven
of the High Court of Australia. In so many respects, the history of the
Constitution
is a study in unintended consequences. But in that it
does not differ from many other human endeavours.
Greg Taylor
LLD, LLM, LLB(Hons), BA(Hons) is Associate Professor at the Monash University
Law School, Melbourne (Australia).
For German speakers, there is a useful
overview of Australian constitutional history in Rabe,
Die föderale
Entwicklung in Australien und Deutschland : ein Rechtsvergleich
Lang, Frankfurt am Main 2008), C II.
In Australia "the Commonwealth" is
frequently used to mean "the federal government". As its use outside Australia
is generally confined
to references to the Commonwealth of Nations, the
association of former parts of the British Empire, I avoid it as confusing in
text. But it will be found in the names of some of the cases cited.
The statutes concerned, such as the
New South Wales
Constitution
1855 (Imp.), are all collected at
http://www.foundingdocs.gov.au/
Western Australia
Constitution
1890 (Imp.), also available at the web site just mentioned.
See for example the entry for Earl Grey
Australian Dictionary of Biography
, available on line at
http://adbonline.anu.edu.au/biogs/A010440b.htm
There is an excellent history of
Aboriginal rights to vote in Australian Electoral Commission,
History of the
Indigenous Vote
(the Commission, Canberra 2006). This publication is
available on line at
http://www.aec.gov.au/pdf/education/resources/history_indigenous_
Commonwealth of Australia
Constitution
Privy Council (Limitation of Appeals)
Privy Council (Appeals from the High Court) Act
1975 (Aust.);
Australia Act
1986 (Imp. & Aust.) s 11.
The principal provision was s 74,
which as a result of the compromise agreed to by the Australian delegates and
the British government
74. No appeal shall be permitted to the Queen in Council from a decision of
the High Court upon any question, howsoever arising, as
to the limits
of the Constitutional powers of the Commonwealth and those of any State
or States, or as to the limits inter se of the Constitutional
powers of any two
or more States, unless the High Court shall certify that the Question is one
which ought to be determined by Her
Majesty in Council.
The High Court may so certify if satisfied that for any special reason the
certificate should be granted, and thereupon an appeal
shall lie to Her Majesty
in Council on the question without further leave.
Except as provided in this section, this
Constitution
shall not impair any
right which the Queen may be pleased to exercise by virtue of Her Royal
prerogative to grant special leave of
appeal from the High Court to Her Majesty
in Council. The Parliament may make laws limiting the matters in which such
leave may be
asked, but proposed laws containing any such limitation shall be
reserved by the Governor-General for Her Majesty's pleasure.
The certificate referred to in the second paragraph has only been granted
once and clearly will never be granted again :
Cook Cruises (No. 2)
[1985] HCA 27
(1985) 159 CLR 461.
Otherwise laws (referred to in
) have been passed under the third paragraph abolishing the right
of appeal to the Privy Council.
Australia's path to independent
nationhood is discussed in Blackshield/Williams,
Australian Constitutional
Law and Theory : Commentary and Materials
ed., Federation, Sydney 2006), ch. 4.
Constitution
(federal Governor-General);
Australia Act
1986 (Imp. & Aust.)
s 7 (1) (the State Governors).
There is an interesting and accessible
account of this in Moore,
1867 : How the Fathers Made a Deal
(McClelland & Stewart, Toronto 1997).
I compare the Canadian and Australian
schemes and their interpretation in
Characterisation in Federations :
Six Countries Compared
(Springer, Heidelberg 2006), chh. 1, 2.
Australian society is now very diverse
as a result of post-War immigration. It is just that the degree and type of
diversity does
not greatly vary within Australia. Australian diversity is rather
uniform across Australia.
The section is too long to be
conveniently set out in full here. It and other relevant provisions may be found
http://www.aph.gov.au/SEnate/general/constitution/
par5cha1.htm
For a summary of this approach, see
the materials collected in Blackshield/Williams,
Australian Constitutional
Law and Theory
, pp. 303-307.
28 CLR 129.
Commonwealth ("Payroll Tax Case")
[1971] HCA 16
(1971) 122 CLR 353
Windeyer J.
[1976] HCA 20
(1976) 136 CLR 1.
[2006] HCA 52
(2006) 229 CLR 1.
Commonwealth
(1996) 187 CLR 416.
Brennan, "The Parameters of
Constitutional Change"
[2009] MonashULawRw 1
(2009) 35 Mon ULR 1
[1942] HCA 14
(1942) 65 CLR 373.
Commonwealth ("Second Uniform Tax Case")
[1957] HCA 54
(1957) 99 CLR 575.
This was the basis of one of the
shortest decisions ever rendered by the Court :
Commonwealth
[1926] HCA 48
(1926) 38 CLR 399
, 406. I see no sign of any retreat from
this view in
Commissioner of Taxation (Commonwealth)
[2009] HCA 23.
http://www.pm.gov.au/node/6282
reported also in "The Australian", 28 October 2009, p. 1.
Williams, "'Come in Spinner' :
Constitution
and the Future of State Government Finances"
[1999] SydLawRw 24
(1999) 21 Syd LR 627.
There is an analysis of this scheme in
Saunders, "Federal Fiscal Reform and the G.S.T."
(2000) 11 PLR 99.
See in particular
A New Tax System
(Goods and Services Tax) Act
Recently, during a dispute about the
carve-up of the G.S.T. revenue, the Treasurer of one State picturesquely
described two other
States as part of an 'axis of evil' :
Hyperlink-Referenz ungültig.
[1997] HCA 34
(1997) 189 CLR 465
The results of all referenda since
Federation are summarised in Blackshield/Williams,
Australian Constitutional
Law and Theory
, pp. 1447-1452.
Financial Agreement Act
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (322 KB)
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter