URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/journals/JCULawRw/2024/10.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 15:06:44
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Mulcahy, Sean; Seear, Kate --- "A Right to Health Services for People Who Use Drugs: Three Queensland Case Studies" [2024] JCULawRw 10; (2024) 30 James Cook University Law Review 165
A Right to Health Services for People Who Use Drugs:
Three Queensland Case Studies
Dr Sean Mulcahy
and Professor Kate Seear
In 2019, Queensland became the first jurisdiction to incorporate a right to
health services in its human rights charter. This article
examines the
implications of the recently introduced right to health services on people who
use drugs through case studies of three
Queensland legislative reforms that have
considered that right. Adopting Russell Solomon’s framework for the
analysis of implementation
of economic, social, and cultural rights, we consider
whether these drug-related legislative reforms have complied with, deliberately
avoided, or retrogressed the right to health services. As a result, we find
that, while there are no signs that the right to health
services is
retrogressing in Queensland post-codification, there are some situations in
which it is being deliberately avoided or
where compliance with the right has
ramifications for other human rights of people who use drugs. This article
provides a significant
account of how a charter-based right to health services
operates in practice (as opposed to on paper) and how this has implications
other jurisdictions considering incorporating this right.
I Introduction
The state of Queensland has recently introduced a right to health services
Human Rights Act
It is the first
(elements of) a right to health services
in health-specific legislation,
Queensland is the first to incorporate it in its human rights
The right to health
services is based on the right to the highest attainable standard of health that
is found in article 12.1 of
International Covenant on Economic, Social
and Cultural Rights
introduction of this right may have implications for a range of health issues in
the state including one of specific interest
to us – drug law reform. Many
advocates argue that the right to health services ‘is likely to include
harm reduction
services and alcohol and other drug treatments’ for people
who use alcohol and illicit drugs.
Others have questioned whether the right to health services will improve access
to pharmaceutical drugs, such as
vaccinations.
This article examines the scope of the right to health services in Queensland
as it applies to drug use. This is part of an ongoing
investigation into what
the second author has described as ‘what happens when human rights are
brought into conversation with
alcohol and other drug “problems” in
the form of “dependence”, “misuse” and
“addiction”’,
as well as drug use more
In this paper, we question
whether the right to health services has made a difference for people who use
drugs or whether its application
has led to problematic approaches to drug use.
We examine this through an analysis of three legislative reforms regarding
which we take to include alcohol, illicit drugs, and pharmaceutical drugs
such as medications and vaccines. In doing so, we adopt
a more expansive concept
of the term ‘people who use
to include not only
those who use alcohol and illicit drugs but also those who use pharmaceutical
drugs. Our usage of the term is
also not limited to the uncontrolled use of
drugs but includes the prescribed use of drugs such as medications and vaccines.
that there is value in analysing different kinds of drugs together as
they raise diverse issues and contexts which the right to health
impacts and operates within, and therefore allows us to more fully understand
where and how the right to health services
has been engaged with
post-codification.
There have been few drug-related laws subject to human rights scrutiny since
the commencement of the
Human Rights Act 2019
, so we focus on three key
legislative reforms that concern drugs: injecting drug use in prisons; real-time
prescription monitoring;
and COVID-19 vaccination. In each case study, we
examine the statement or certificate of human rights compatibility for the
legislation
and any comments from the legislative scrutiny committees on human
rights. The analysis of these legislative reforms is informed
Solomon’s framework of the right to health as complied with, deliberately
avoided, or retrogressed.
conclusion, it is argued that, without appropriate guidance on how it is to be
complied with, a right to health services could
be a problem rather than a
panacea for people who use drugs.
II Background and Theory
In 1976, and following ratification by Australia in the prior year, the
International Covenant on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights
into force. The Covenant includes an obligation for state parties, including
Australia, to recognise ‘the right of
everyone to the enjoyment of the
highest attainable standard of physical and mental
The Queensland
Human Rights Act 2019
is unique in recognising the right to health
services, as the other human rights charters in Australian jurisdictions
(namely, the
Australian Capital Territory and Victoria) do not include it.
However, as the name suggests, it is a limited right to health
not a broader right to health, and consists of two limbs:
• ‘the right to access health services without
discrimination’
• the right to ‘not be refused emergency medical treatment that
is immediately necessary to save the person’s life
or to prevent serious
impairment to the person’
The first limb has a degree of convergence with the right to
particularly the right
to enjoy human rights without
discrimination.
The second limb
is similar to
Constitution
of the Republic of South Africa Act
which has been held to
apply only to medical emergencies (that is, immediate and urgent accidents or
incidents) and not the ongoing
treatment of
This is further
bolstered in the Queensland human rights charter by the inclusion of a
requirement that the emergency medical treatment
be ‘immediately’
necessary. It is also notable that the right to health services generally, and
the second limb particularly,
has often been enforced through the right to life,
suggesting that the two have a degree of
convergence.
In summary, the inclusion of the right to health services in the
Rights Act 2019
1. enables the right to health services to be enforced by the courts in
proceedings under the general administrative law, alongside
other human rights
(though it does not create a head of action for a breach of rights in and of
2. imposes a duty on public authorities to act in accordance with the right
to health services and to consider the right to health
services in making
relevant decisions, alongside other
3. requires public officials and the courts to interpret existing legislation
(primary or subordinate) in accordance with the right
to health services, as
well as other rights, to the extent possible that is consistent with its
4. requires the proponent of any draft legislation introduced into the
parliament to consider and provide a statement setting out
whether the
legislation is compatible with human rights, including the right to health
services where applicable;
5. makes bills subject to review by parliamentary committees as to their
compatibility with human rights, including the right to health
Regarding the first area, in other countries, the right to health services
has contributed to court decisions to increase access to
HIV treatment and
prevention drugs.
The broader
right to health has also been held to require the provision of medicine for the
treatment of other illnesses,
including vaccines.
however, been limited domestic jurisprudence on the
Human Rights Act 2019
generally, and the right to health services specifically, and no cases
concerning drugs.
In part, this
may be because there is no stand-alone head of action for a breach of the Act;
it must be attached to an existing cause
Regarding the second two areas, concerning obligations on public authorities
and interpretation of legislation, the annual reports
on the Act by the
Queensland Human Rights Commission indicate some progress on the implementation
of the right to health services.
For example, the Queensland Human Rights
Commission has noted that the Mental Health Tribunal’s ‘forensic
orders previously
contained a set of standard conditions, such as the
requirement not to drink alcohol or use drugs’, but, as a result of the
Act, ‘the Tribunal is now more inclined to look at whether these
conditions are relevant to the individual’s offending
behaviour and
necessary to ensure their health and public
This suggests
that the Act is making progress on ensuring human rights compliance of and by
public authorities.
In this article, we consider the impact of the right to health services in
the latter two areas, being statements of human rights
compatibility and
parliamentary committee review of legislation. Put simply, these processes
require that draft legislation introduced
into the parliament, first, be
accompanied by a statement of compatibility that considers whether the
legislation is compatible with
human rights including the right to health
services and, second, be subject to review by a parliamentary committee that
Parliamentary human rights scrutiny of legislation is the primary mechanism in
Australia to protect human rights in the law-making
This article stems from
a larger project investigating how these scrutiny processes impact the human
rights of people who use drugs.
To ground our discussion, we examine case studies of three pieces of recent
Queensland legislation on the matter of drugs: injecting
drug use in prisons,
real-time prescription monitoring, and COVID-19 vaccination. The first two are
the only pieces of primary legislation
dealing with drugs that have been subject
to human rights scrutiny. The third is a piece of delegated legislation that
the COVID-19 vaccine and related drugs and has been subject to human
rights scrutiny. It was selected from among other delegated
drugs-related
legislation because of its relevance to debates on the human rights impact and
compatibility of legislative responses
The breadth of the drugs covered – injecting drugs, opioids, and
vaccines – raise diverse issues as do the contexts in
legislation operates – such as prisons, medical clinics, and hospitals. In
our analysis, we consider how the right
to health services has been engaged in
the human rights assessment of this legislation and how that might impact people
who use drugs.
In his review of Australia’s engagement with economic and
social rights, Russell Solomon describes Australia’s engagement
broader right to health as being ‘a mixed picture’ of
‘compliance [...] deliberate avoidance and [...]
retrogression.’
this framework and applying it to the three case studies in this paper, we
consider whether the right to health services
is complied with, deliberately
avoided, or retrogressing in Queensland post-codification.
Solomon further claims that ‘the right to health [...] provides some
normative force to enable people to claim access to health
care services and
resources.’
However, he
notes that two key institutional barriers exist to accessing this right: the
nature of federalism in Australia and the
shared jurisdiction over health policy
between federal and state governments; and Australia’s public health
approach being
based on addressing health problems rather than health
determinants and end point of care rather than preventative health care. It
should also be noted, again, that Queensland is the only state that has codified
the right to health services in its human rights
charter, but that that right is
instead of broader health provision and protection.
In this paper, we explore Solomon’s claim about the ‘normative
of a right in relation to the Queensland case studies and finds
that it has not enabled people who use drugs to claim access to health
resources due to various institutional factors – some of which Solomon has
identified and other novel barriers that
this piece identifies.
III Injecting Drug Use in Prisons
The first bill being examined is the
Corrective Services and Other
Legislation Amendment Bill 2020
. It was introduced on March 17, 2020 and passed
on July 16, 2020. It was intended to respond to risks identified in the Crime
Corruption Commission’s examination of corruption risks in
Queensland’s prisons and to improve operational efficiencies
Queensland Corrective Services (QCS). It included several clauses relevant to
the right to health services, including replacing
the requirement for the Chief
Executive to establish programs or services for the ‘medical’
welfare of prisoners with
a new requirement to establish or facilitate programs
or services to support the health and well-being of
This has been
complemented by a memorandum of understanding between Queensland Health and QCS
that explicitly acknowledges the right
In considering the provision in respect of health programs and services to
prisoners, the Statement of Compatibility accompanying
the Bill noted that the
right to health services was relevant to this provision, but there was no
substantive discussion in the statement
The Bill was then subject
to scrutiny by the Legal Affairs and Community Safety Committee, in which there
was more discussion of
this provision.
In a submission to the Committee, the Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander
Legal Service welcomed the ‘broader legislative
language that provides
that the Chief Executive must establish or facilitate programs or services [...]
to support the health and
wellbeing of
prisoners.’
It argued that
this would lend greater support to recommendations by the State Coroner for a
collaborative and multidisciplinary
approach to intake, health assessment and
mental health assessment, including improved services in relation to alcohol
dependency.
In response to this,
QCS stated:
QCS acknowledges that prisoners and offenders often have poorer health
indicators than the general population, including
disproportionately higher
rates of problematic substance use
, mental health issues and disability
needs. Prisoner and offender access to quality healthcare has implications for
the health of
the wider community and is often linked to increased re-offending
and anti-social behaviour. QCS is actively working with relevant
stakeholders to
improve information-sharing, identification and management of prisoners with
complex needs.
Later that year, in response to a hepatitis C outbreak in Queensland
correctional centres, the Chief Executive of Hepatitis Queensland,
Haynes, argued that the right to health services meant that incarcerated people
who inject drugs should be able to access
to needle and syringe programs (NSP)
that enable them to obtain clean needles just as people in the wider community
can, saying:
People in prisons have a right to equality of health services and that
includes harm reduction measures, health promotion measures
and education, as
well as more traditional medical approaches like testing and treatment of
hepatitis C. Under the Queensland
Human Rights Act
everyone has a right
to health services and we see NSPs as a health
However, the Together Union, which represents correctional officers in
Queensland, argued that NSP in custodial settings presented
an unacceptable risk
to staff. The Union’s Director of Industrial Services, Michael Thomas
Drug use is a health issue. But if you think of the amount of crime that
comes from it, and we’ve got the opportunity in a controlled
environment
to try and end the drug habit and end the health problem, then we should be
doing that – not just condoning the
ongoing use of
Despite prison reforms requiring services to support the health of prisoners,
NSP have not been introduced into Queensland prisons,
potentially in part due to
objections from prison officers and their
This suggests that the
right to health services has not been mobilised to advance important changes in
the provision of health care
for prisoners who use drugs. Moreover, it appears
that the right to health services for prisoners who use drugs is being
deliberately
avoided, to use Solomon’s framing, or – at least
– that there is a lack of recognition of NSP as a preventative
health care
measure that can reduce the incidence of health conditions such as blood-borne
The exception for corrections that exists under the
Human Rights Act
, which enables a corrections officer to act in a way that is not
compatible with certain rights when considering the security, good
management,
safety, and welfare of a prison or prisoners.
does not apply to the right
to health services,
and as such
there is an obligation on prisons to ensure that the right to health services is
realised. Furthermore, the Special Rapporteur
on the right of everyone to the
enjoyment of the highest attainable standard of physical and mental health has
concluded that the
denial of sterile needles and syringes in prisons can
‘perpetuate
discrimination.’
would, as such, breach the first-limb right to access health services without
discrimination under
Human Rights Act 2019
, and suggests
that access to NSP in prisons is required under this provision. However, as
discussed further later,
applies to discrimination based on attributes
Anti-Discrimination Act 1991
. Whilst prisoners who use drugs may
have an ‘impairment’, there is a debate about whether drug use
characterised as an
‘addiction’ is (or should be) an impairment. In
any case, this does not include people who are not impaired by their
In addition, Michael Levy and Daniel Mogg argue that ‘the right to
health provision and health protection cannot be, and in
fact has not been,
effectively negotiated for or by the community’s most disempowered
individuals’, including prisoners
In part, this may be due
to the stigma, shame and criminalisation that attaches to illicit drug use. In
short, stigma, shame, and
criminalisation form institutional barriers to
prisoners who use drugs claiming access to NSP as a health care service or
As Katarina Tomasevski further explains, ‘human rights
principles and standards rarely specify entitlements of prisoners in
care. Most problems related to the health care of prisoners cannot be solved by
conventional human rights practice of identifying
practices that constitute
violations of individual
This also raises
the question of why disempowered individuals, such as prisoners who use drugs,
have to negotiate for the right to
health services and why the onus is placed on
them to enforce this right (including through legal proceedings) when corrective
are prohibited from acting in a way that is not compatible with the
right to health services.
In summary, the lack of an NSP program in Queensland prisons could be
attributable to several factors: a culture of reduced respect
for, understanding
of, and engagement with human rights obligations in QCS; a lack of acceptance of
NSP as a preventative health
care measure; limitations in the
Human Rights
itself; and institutional barriers to prisoners asserting a right
to NSP (and human rights more generally), including stigma, shame,
criminalised status. However, these issues do not only arise in corrections
settings, as the next case study shows.
IV Real-time Prescription Monitoring
Debt Reduction and Savings Bill 2021
included technical and clarifying
amendments to the state’s real-time prescription monitoring
(‘RTPM’) system to
enable its supporting regulations to be drafted
in a clearer and simpler way,
amendments which the Treasurer argued promoted the right to health services. The
Bill was introduced on March 25, 2021 and passed
on May 27, 2021. RTPM had been
legislated in 2019, prior to the commencement of the
Human Rights Act
, so this was the first time that the system was subject to legislative
human rights scrutiny in parliament.
By way of background, the
National Drug Strategy 2017-2026
‘implementation of real-time monitoring of prescription medications so
that prescribers can prevent patients inappropriately
accessing harmful and
substantial quantities of
medications.’
based on increased hospitalisation associated with prescription opioid
Dr Jeannette Young,
former Queensland Chief Health Officer and Deputy Director-General of Queensland
Health, gave evidence to a parliamentary
inquiry about the misuse of
prescription medicines when the RTPM system was first introduced:
Misuse of pharmaceutical opioids is an increasing concern for our community.
Unlike illicit opioid drugs, access to pharmaceutical
opioids is enabled by the
writing of a prescription [...] In Queensland we are seeing an increase in cases
of prescription opioid
related overdoses and deaths, an increase in people on
treatment programs, increased referrals to alcohol and drug treatment services,
and more evidence of these drugs entering into illicit
In the Statement of Compatibility for the Bill, it was argued that the
amendments ‘enabling the supporting regulations [for
the RTPM system] to
be drafted more clearly and simply’ promote the right to health services
by ‘providing more certainty
for practitioners and health consumers about
the use of medicines in health
Whilst there was no
substantive discussion of
, there are two issues with this
First, as the New South Wales Users and AIDS Association argued in a
submission on the New South Welsh RTPM system, there are ‘significant,
well-founded concerns that exercising our human right to appropriate health care
will, with the dramatically increased tendency towards
monitoring, be used to
deny us that right’,
particularly in the context of palliative
The argument here appears
to be that data collected through RTPM schemes will be used to deny regular
users of drugs their ‘right
to appropriate healthcare’ or
discriminate against them, with pain management framed as an exercise of this
right, building
on arguments that ‘a right to pain management may be
implied from the express right to
Naomi Burke-Shyne
et al argue that the right to health encompasses ‘access to
medication’,
monitoring of prescriptions of opioids for pain relief ‘undermine the
right to health, not only by impeding access
to essential controlled medicines,
but because they fly in the face of the notion of health as a fundamental
constituent of human
However, this
relies on the broader right to health rather than the narrower right to health
services (though an argument could be
made that RTPM schemes infringe the
first-limb right to access health services without discrimination under
Human Rights Act 2019
, based on addiction or disability).
Additionally, researchers of prescription opioid dispensing in New South Wales
have argued that
recognition of the right to pain management and treatment has
caused ‘the overall increasing trend in the proportion of citizens
prescription opioid [
] in NSW’, which they argue is itself
‘a major public health problem’ that leads to harms including
substance dependence.
argument here appears to be that prescription monitoring advances health because
it potentially reduces the problematic use of
prescription opioids. This raises
an important issue that while, to use Solomon’s framing, the right to
health may be complied
with ostensibly to reduce the health impacts of
prescription opioid misuse, compliance with the right may impinge other human
Second, and relatedly, health may be used to justify limitations of other
rights. The Bill was subject to scrutiny by the Economics
and Governance
Committee, one of the standing committees of the Queensland Parliament. It found
that the Bill also placed limitations
on the right to privacy under
Human Rights Act 2019
‘by providing for the recording of
personal information in the [monitored medicines] database about instances when
an individual
has been prescribed, dispensed or given a treatment dose of a
monitored medicine.’
However, the Committee concluded that the limitation on the right to privacy was
justified to prevent ‘overdoses and
In earlier legislation introducing the RTPM system, breaches of the right to
and promote the health
of the public and are considered
justification which was accepted by the State Development, Natural Resources and
Agricultural Industry Development Committee
that reviewed the
Similarly, Victorian
legislation was justified on the grounds that it would ‘promote safe
supply, prescription and dispensing
practices [and] reduce harm from monitored
poisons and other high-risk
medication’,
Australian Capital Territory legislation was justified on the grounds that it
‘protects and promotes public health and
In the Australian
Capital Territory, it was argued that:
If related health professionals are unable to access information regarding a
particular patient’s existing use of monitored
medicines or whether an
approval is held by one of the patient’s practitioners, they may prescribe
a high-risk product and
inadvertently increase the risk of misuse, abuse and
diversion of scheduled medicines by such patients. This has the potential to
cause serious harm or death to the individual patient which affects the entire
ACT community and places an increased burden on the
The right to privacy has also been raised in United States case law on
Many of the justifications
for limiting the right to privacy are based on health grounds. However,
Dagnachew Fetene et al have argued
To date, there has been no evidence to demonstrate that appropriate clinical
care automatically follows from use of RTPM systems.
This is an important gap in
our understanding of what the implementation of prescription monitoring achieves
for people who have
been prescribed these pharmaceuticals. Identifying patients
does not ensure they received appropriate medical care they may
This suggests that there is no evidence underpinning the claims that RTPM
systems, without appropriate clinical care, advance the
health of those who are
subject to them. It is also striking that the human rights scrutiny processes in
Queensland did not contemplate
how RTPM might impact the right to health
services for people who use drugs, particularly the first limb right to access
health services
without discrimination. There is evidence from the United States
that RTPM facilitates discrimination against people seeking pain
which, as discussed above,
may be covered by the right to health services. Of course, people seeking pain
care can face discrimination
when accessing pain medication even in the absence
of RTPM (for example, when accessing pain relief at the end of life); however,
RTPM may exacerbate the discrimination experienced.
Furthermore, it is questionable whether people who use drugs, particularly
those who are not impaired by their use of drugs, are protected
discrimination,
and thus have
recourse to the right to access health services without discrimination. This is
because Queenslanders are currently
only protected from discrimination based on
‘impairment’,
may not extend to people who use drugs but do not experience impairment arising
from their use. This could soon be remedied
as the Queensland Human Rights
Commission has recommended that people characterised as experiencing
‘addiction’ be protected
from discrimination under a revised
protected attribute of
disability,
but this would still
only protect people who are ‘addicted’ to drugs – which is a
controversial and contested category
– and not other
people who use drugs.
As such, the legislative framework in Queensland poses an institutional
barrier to people who use drugs claiming equitable access
to health care and
resources, in the form of prescription medication, without discrimination. What
may be argued to be an approach
that upholds a broad right to health by
ostensibly reducing the health impacts of prescription opioid misuse may impinge
other human
rights. In the next section of this paper, we consider this further
by turning from drugs in the form of prescription medication
to vaccines.
V COVID-19 Vaccination
Health (Drugs and Poisons) (COVID-19 Vaccination Services) Amendment
Regulation 2021
concerned Queensland-specific procedures for the COVID-19
vaccine and related drugs (used for the therapeutic treatment of a person
an adverse reaction to the vaccine) to be safely obtained, sold, supplied,
issued, stored and disposed of. The Regulation
commenced on January 29,
Immunisation has been recognised as important to the broader right to health,
particularly ‘for the healthy development of the
In the Human
Rights Certificate for the Regulation, it was argued that ‘the proposed
universal and free availability of the
vaccine to all Queenslanders will be
integral to promoting and facilitating this important human right [to health
services] for everyone
community.’
significant in that it recognises that access to vaccines is
‘integral’ to promoting and fulfilling the right
to health services,
whereas access to prescription medications and NSP was not explicitly recognised
as integral to promoting and
fulfilling this right in the prior two case
However, it was noted that ‘due to the unprecedented nature and scale
of the rollout, it is necessary to prioritise the deployment
‘based on [the Australian Technical Group in Immunisation’s] advice,
the first to be vaccinated will be those
at greatest risk of exposure and the
greatest risk of severe
This prioritised
access to vaccination drugs to frontline workers and those in certain settings,
such as care homes. This was in
Human Rights Act
, which recognises that human rights may be limited. It was argued that
‘prioritising those at greatest risk of being exposed
to COVID-19 or at
greatest risk of severe disease will minimise any potential impact on the
overall health system’,
including by minimising ‘the spread of COVID-19’, particularly in
health care settings.
concluded that ‘the staged nature of the rollout will prioritise those who
have the greatest need and those whose roles
in our community expose them to the
greatest risk [...] On balance, it will promote and facilitate access to health
services for
the community in a way that is consistent with a democratic
The rollout schedule was based on
Australia’s COVID-19 Vaccine
National Roll-Out Strategy
, which identified priority populations for
vaccination and the phases in which vaccines would be provided. While
international human
rights law recognises a right to essential drugs, the
international jurisprudence on vaccine roll-out and prioritisation is scant.
International Covenant on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights
that to achieve the full realisation of the right of everyone to the highest
attainable standard of physical and mental
health, states shall take steps
necessary for ‘the prevention, treatment and control of epidemic, endemic,
occupational and
Manan Daga and
Atul Alexander argue that this, and related international case law, recognise
‘access to vaccination in times
of an epidemic as human
In this regard, the United Nations Special Rapporteur on the right of
everyone to the enjoyment of the highest attainable standard
of physical and
mental health has stated that ‘it is imperative that access to COVID-19
vaccines and treatment is provided
to all without discrimination and prioritised
to those who are most exposed and vulnerable to the risk of COVID-19’
‘frontline health-care
significant statement, as it recognises that prioritisation of vaccines to
at-risk groups will still comply with the right
to health services. The Special
Rapporteur also noted, however, that ‘without broader public health and
human rights inputs,
these developments will fail to reach everyone, and groups
in more vulnerable, remote, disadvantaged or discriminated situations
less likely to receive
Sharifah Sekalala
et al argue that states need to adopt intersectional human rights criteria for
prioritisation of COVID-19 vaccination
that take into account high-risk
occupations and places where one lives alongside other sociodemographic factors,
individual health-related
risk factors, and financial and social effects of
ill-health.
In Australia, there is no case law on the vaccine roll-out, due in part to
issues around justiciability.
such, there is limited recourse under the right to health services for people
who were delayed access to COVID-19 vaccinations
as part of the staggered
roll-out, especially if the complainant cannot establish that they were
discriminated against in accordance
Human Rights Act
. Because it is widely accepted that vaccine prioritisation
(particularly in a public health emergency like COVID-19) is compatible
right to health services, this forms an institutional barrier to those who are
not prioritised, but may be vulnerable, from
claiming access to vaccines as a
health resource.
In conclusion, the Special Rapporteur on the right of everyone to the
enjoyment of the highest attainable standard of physical and
mental health has
argued that ‘the most effective “vaccine” for global health
challenges has been and will always
be the full realisation of all human rights,
including the promotion of physical and mental health through the meaningful
participation
and empowerment of all
This discussion
of Queensland legislation shows how human rights, particularly the right to
health services, have been an effective
normative framework to guide vaccination
roll-out and implementation during the COVID-19 pandemic. In this case, the
Government considered
whether limiting the right to health services through
prioritising access to vaccines was a reasonable and justifiable way to minimise
any potential impact on the health system due to the spread of COVID-19 and
concluded that it was. Nevertheless, this does raise
issues for those who were
not prioritised but in need of access to vaccines because of other
vulnerabilities, raising questions about
whether the human rights framework in
Queensland adequately protects their needs.
VI Conclusion
Throughout this article, we have examined the right to health services in the
Human Rights Act 2019
through three case studies of
drug-related legislation which have engaged that right. As noted at the outset,
the right to health
services is narrow in scope, especially when compared to the
broader right to health under the
International Covenant on Economic, Social
and Cultural Rights
. We can conclude that, so far, the right to health
services has not made a significant difference to human rights scrutiny of
drug-related
legislation as it has only been referred to in a cursory way in
statements of compatibility and scrutiny reports and other rights
tend to take
precedence, such as the right to humane treatment and the right to privacy.
Perhaps this could be because there is limited
jurisprudence on the right to
health services domestically and internationally in comparison to civil and
political rights. In this
respect, it is to be hoped that discussion of the
right to health services in parliamentary human rights scrutiny processes will
grow over time as legislative proponents and scrutiny committees become more
familiar with the right. Further research could attend
to how the right has been
applied to other legislation outside the drugs field.
In short, the right to health services could make a difference to people who
use drugs, but its potential has yet to be realised.
While there are no signs
that the right to health services is retrogressing in Queensland
post-codification, there are some situations
in which it is being deliberately
avoided (in the case of prisoners who use drugs) or where compliance with the
right has ramifications
for other human rights (in the case of RTPM
While the introduction of this right may have contributed to legislative
reforms to require programs and services to support prisoners’
has yet to establish a right to NSP for prisoners who use drugs. This may be in
part due to opposition from prison officers
and their unions. In our earlier
work, the significant role that police officers and their unions play in shaping
responses to motorists
who use drugs was
identified,
but further research
may need to attend to the role of other public service unions in regards to
human rights-based responses to
It is possible that unions,
particularly those covering prisons, may pose a significant institutional
barrier to prisoners claiming
access to health care services and resources,
including in the form of NSP.
Further research might also attend to the impacts of privatisation (particularly
in relation to prison health care) on the right
While the Queensland charter protects the right to access health services
without discrimination, it raises the question, in the context
of prescription
monitoring, of whether people who use drugs, particularly those people who use
drugs but do not experience impairment
(a protected attribute under the
Anti-Discrimination Act 1991
), are protected from discrimination. While
this could soon be remedied as the Queensland Human Rights Commission has
recommended
that people experiencing addiction be protected from discrimination
under a revised protected attribute of
disability,
this would only
protect people who are deemed to be ‘addicted’. Unfortunately, the
Queensland Human Rights Commission
ignored recommendations from alcohol and
other drug as well as HIV community organisations to provide more expansive
protection from
discrimination based on health status. The Queensland Government
should consider the submissions from these organisations when reforming
anti-discrimination law, particularly because of the flow-on effects for the
right to access health services without discrimination
and the fact that the
currently legislative framework may pose an institutional barrier to accessing
this right.
Access to vaccines is recognised as integral to promoting and fulfilling the
right to health services, whereas access to prescription
medications and NSP is
not so explicitly recognised, though questions remain about whether the right to
health services has effectively
guided vaccination roll-out and implementation
during the COVID-19 pandemic in Queensland, noting that the prioritisation of
in and of itself posed an institutional barrier to accessing health
resources in the form of vaccines. It is notable that the Health,
Communities,
Disability Services and Domestic and Family Violence Prevention
Committee’s
Inquiry into the Queensland Government’s Health
Response to COVID-19
did not once mention the right to health services,
including its effect on vaccination policies regarding roll-out and
implementation.
Finally, caution needs to be exercised to ensure that the right to health
services does not lead to punitive responses to people who
use drugs under the
guise of protecting their (right to)
In this regard, the
right to health services needs to be accompanied by guidelines that steer human
rights-based responses to drug
It is also essential that
such guidelines recognise institutional barriers to accessing the right to
health services for people who
use drugs, including stigma, shame,
criminalisation, aversion to human rights-based approaches by workers’
representatives,
restrictive legislative frameworks, and limitations to the
right itself. Without such guidance, the right to health services risks
a problem rather than a panacea for people who use drugs.
Research Officer, Gender, Law and Drugs Program, Australian
Research Centre in Sex, Health and Society, La Trobe
University&#
Australian Research Council Future Fellow, Gender, Law and
Drugs Program, Australian Research Centre in Sex, Health and Society,
We acknowledge the Australian Research Council which provided funding for
this research through its Future Fellowship scheme (grant
FT200100099), with
additional support from La Trobe University.
Human Rights Act 2019
’). For background, see Claire Brolan et
al, ‘A potential
Human Rights Act
in Queensland and inclusion of
the right to health’ (2018) 42(2)
Australian and New Zealand Journal of
Public Health
120; Claire Brolan, ‘Queensland’s new
and the right to access health services’
(2020) 213(4)
Medical Journal of Australia
The term ‘human rights
charter’ is used here to refer to human rights acts or bills.
International Covenant on
Economic, Social and Cultural Rights
, opened for signature December 19,
1966, 933 UNTS 3
(entered into force January 3, 1976), art. 12.1
Queensland Network of Alcohol
and Other Drug Agencies, ‘Introducing the International Guidelines on
Human Rights and Drug Policy
and their intersection with the Queensland
3, 4. See also Paul Gregoire,
‘Lawyers call for drug decriminalisation: An interview with ALHR’s
Kerry Weste’
Sydney Criminal Lawyers
(6 September 2019).
See, e.g., Michelle Gunn and
Fiona McDonald, ‘COVID-19, rationing and the right to health: Can patients
bring legal actions
if they are denied access to care?’
(2021) 214(5)
Medical Journal of Australia
Kate Seear,
Law, Drugs, and
the Making of Addiction: Just Habits
(Routledge, 2020) 33-34.
On the terminological debates
surrounding ‘people who use drugs’, see Miriam Boeri et al,
‘Language preferences
an impact of labels on the lived experience of
people who use heroin’ (forthcoming)
Drugs: Education, Prevention and
Russell Solomon,
Australia’s Engagement with Economic and Social Rights: A Case of
Institutional Avoidance
(Springer, 2021) ch 2.
(n 3), art.
Constitution
Republic of South Africa Act 1996
(South Africa) s 27(3).
Soobramoney v. Minister
for Health (Kwazulu-Natal)
[1997] ZACC 17
[13] (Constitutional Court of
South Africa).
(n 1) s 16. See
also Steven Keener and Javier Vasquez, ‘A life worth living: Enforcement
of the right to health through the
right to life in the Inter-American Court of
Human Rights’
Columbia Human Rights Law Review
606-614, which discusses two cases of the Inter-American Court of Human Right
that interlink the right to life with the right to
health services.
(n 1) s 59.
Ibid s 38, though noting
that the statement is not binding on any court of tribunal per s 38(4).
Minister of Health v
Treatment Action Campaign (No 2)
[2002] ZACC 15 (Constitutional
South Africa) based on
Constitution
of the Republic of South Africa Act 1996
(South Africa) s 27(1)(a), cited in Scott Calnan, ‘Codification and
invocation of the Queensland
Human Rights Act
: Have human rights been
furthered?’
James Cook University Law Review
Interestingly, as Calnan points out, the South African right to health services
is subject to progressive realisation, but
the Queensland right is subject to
immediate enforcement.
Campodonico de Beviacqua,
Ana Carina v. Ministry of Health and Social Welfare – Secretary of Health
Programs and Bank of Antineoplastic
[2000] C.823.XXXV (Constitutional
Court of Argentina). See discussion in Monica Pinto and Martin Segal,
‘Influence of the ICESCR
in Latin America’ in Daniel Moeckli, Helen
Keller and Corina Heri,
The Human Rights Covenants at 50: Their Past, Present
(Oxford University Press, 2018) 163-164.
Viceconte, Mariela
Cecilia v. Ministry of Health and Social Action
[1998] 31.777/96 (Federal
Administrative Court of Appeals of Argentina) (‘
(Constitutional Court of Colombia).
Commissioner of Police
[2022] QDC 70
(1 April 2022) [55]-[59], the Court
held that ‘the failure of police to provide a blood kit’ did not
mean that a person
was ‘refused access to health services of medical
treatment for any life threatening or other impairment’ in accordance
section 37(2) of the
Human Rights Act 2009
Attorney-General for
the State of Queensland v Grant
[2022] QSC 252
(16 December
2022) [178], the Court noted that ‘a question remains’ about whether
Queensland Corrective Service’s
practices and policies in relation to
support for people with serious health conditions, such as the lack of provision
of supported
accommodation, are compatible with
section 37(1)
Rights Act 2019
, but ‘they are questions for another day and another
court.’ See also
Attorney-General for the State of Queensland v Grant
[2022] QSC 180
(31 August 2022) [30]. In
[2022] QCAT 430
October 2022) [6], the Tribunal held that the right to access health services
without discrimination under section 37(1) of the
Health Services Act 2019
‘would be enhanced by the giving of consent’ by the Tribunal to
a sterilisation procedure in a situation where a person
capacity to give her own consent to the proposed procedure.’
Queensland Human Rights
Commission,
Putting People First: The First Annual Report on the Operation of
Queensland’s
Human Rights Act
Julie Debeljak and Laura
Grenfell (eds.),
Law Making and Human Rights
(Lawbook Co, 2020); Adam
Australia’s Human Rights Scrutiny Regime: Democratic
Masterstroke or Mere Window Dressing?
(Melbourne University Press, 2018).
See, for example, Rosalind
Croucher, ‘Whither human rights and freedoms protections in Australia?
Rights and freedoms in the
age of COVID-19’ (Presentation at the Samuel
Griffith Society 32
Conference, Sydney, Australia, 1 May 2022);
Rosalind Croucher, 'Executive discretion in a time of COVID-19 –
Promoting, protecting
and fulfilling human rights in the Contemporary public
health context’ (Presentation at the 11
Austin Asche Oration
in Law and Governance, Darwin, Australia, 17 November 2022); Lorraine Finlay and
Rosalind Croucher, ‘Limiting
Rights and Freedoms in the Name of Public
Health: Ensuring Accountability during the COVID-19 Pandemic Response’ in
Bennett and Ian Freckleton (eds.),
Australian Public Health Law
(Federation Press, 2023).
Russell Solomon,
Australia’s Engagement with Economic and Social Rights: A Case of
Institutional Avoidance
(Springer, 2021) 87.
Corrective Services and
Other Legislation Amendment Bill 2020
(Qld) cl 39.
Queensland Health and
Queensland Corrective Services,
Memorandum of Understanding
(2020) para.
3.7(c): ‘The Parties also recognise the
Human Rights Act 2019
seeks to protect and promote human rights of all individuals in Queensland.
Without limiting other rights, the Parties specifically
acknowledge the right to
health services without discrimination and that a person must not be refused
emergency medical treatment
that is immediately necessary to save the
person’s life or to prevent serious impairment to the person.’
Statement of Compatibility,
Corrective Services and Other Legislation Bill 2020 (Qld) 3.
Aboriginal and Torres Strait
Islander Legal Service, Submission to Legal Affairs and Community Safety
Committee, Parliament of Queensland,
Inquiry into the
Corrective Services and
Other Legislation Amendment Bill 2020
, 20 April 2020, 4.
referencing
Malone, Terrence Michael (2014/4133)
QldCorC (8 May 2019).
Cited in Legal Affairs and
Community Safety Committee (Queensland),
Inquiry into the
Corrective Services
and Other Legislation Amendment Bill 2020
(2020) 31 (emphasis added).
Mark Rigby, ‘Hepatitis
C outbreak ignites debate on needle exchange in Queensland correctional
(23 July 2020).
Michael Levy,
‘Prisoners’ right to health and safety’ in David Brown and
Meredith Wilkie (eds.),
Prisoners as Citizens: Human Rights in Australian
(Annandale: Federation Press, 2002) 250.
(n 1) s 126
Corrective Services Act 2006
There has been some
confusion about this exception, which only applies in certain circumstances to
the right to humane treatment
when deprived of liberty, per
Services Act 2006
See Claire Brolan, Erin Cameron and Grazia
Catalano, ‘Queensland’s new
Human Rights Act
and the right to
access health services’ (2021) 214(8)
Medical Journal of Australia
United Nations Human Rights
Report of the Special Rapporteur on the Right of Everyone to the
Enjoyment of the Highest Attainable Standard of Physical and Mental
UN Doc A/HRC/38/36 (2018) 7.
Michael Levy and Daniel
Mogg, ‘Queensland’s new
Human Rights Act
and the right to
access health services’ (2021) 214(8)
Medical Journal of Australia
Katarina Tomasevski,
Prison Health: International Standards and National Practices in Europe
(Helsinki Institute of Crime Prevention, 1992) xvii.
Debt Reduction and Savings
(Qld) ch 3, amending the
Medicines and Poisons Act 2019
Department of Health
(Australia),
National Drug Strategy 2017-2026
Ibid 33-34.
Cited in Economics and
Governance Committee (Queensland),
Inquiry into the
Debt Reduction and
Savings Bill 2021
Statement of Compatibility,
Debt Reduction and Savings Bill 2021
NSW Users and AIDS
Association, Submission to New South Wales Government,
Regulation to Support
Real-Time Prescription Monitoring (RTPM)
, 15 March 2021, 17-18.
Frank Brennan, Daniel Carr
and Michael Cousins, ‘Pain management: A fundamental human right’
(2017) 105(1)
Anaesthesia and Analgesia
Naomi Burke-Shyne et al,
‘How drug control policy and practice undermine access to controlled
medicines’ (2017) 19(1)
Health and Human Rights Journal
Mofi Islam et al,
‘Prescription opioid dispensing in New South Wales, Australia: Spatial and
temporal variation’ (2018)
BMC Pharmacology and Toxicology
citing Frank Brennan, Daniel Carr and Michael Cousins, ‘Pain management: A
fundamental human right’ (2017) 105(1)
Anaesthesia and Analgesia
Economics and Governance
Committee (Queensland),
Inquiry into the
Debt Reduction and Savings Bill
Explanatory Note,
and Poisons Bill 2019
State Development, Natural
Resources and Agriculture Industry Development Committee (Queensland),
Inquiry into the Medicines Bill 2019
Parliamentary
, Legislative Council, 7 September 2017, 4596 (Philip Dalidakis).
Explanatory Statement,
Medicines, Poisons and Therapeutic Goods Amendment Bill 2018
Jennifer Oliva,
‘Prescription-drug policing: The right to health-information privacy pre-
’ (2020) 69(4)
Duke Law Journal
Christopher Smith, ‘Somebody’s watching me: Protecting patient
Vermont Law
Dagnachew Fetene et al,
‘The impact of Victoria’s real time prescription monitoring system
(SafeScript) in a cohort of
people who inject drugs’ (2021) 214(5)
Medical Journal of Australia
See, e.g., Jennifer Oliva,
‘Dosing discrimination: Regulating PDMP risk scores’ (2022) 110(1)
California Law Review
Queensland Network of
Alcohol and Other Drug Agencies, Submission to Queensland Human Rights
Commission,
Anti-Discrimination Act
, 28 February 2022.
Anti-Discrimination Act
Queensland Human Rights
Commission,
Building Belonging: Review of Queensland’s
Anti-Discrimination Act 1991 (2022) 270-272.
Suzanne Fraser and David
Moore, ‘Introduction: Constructing drugs and addiction’ in
Drug Effect: Health, Crime and Society
(Cambridge University Press, 2011);
Helen Keane,
What’s Wrong with Addiction?
(Melbourne University
Press, 2002); Seear (n 6).
12.2(a) referenced in Mirko Bagaric, ‘Human rights: Life, health and
welfare’ in Michael Kirby (ed.)
Laws of Australia
(Thomson Reuters,
2018) para. 21.7.1400.
Human Rights Certificate,
Health (Drugs and Poisons) (COVID-19 Vaccination Services) Amendment Regulation
Manan Daga and Atul
Alexander, ‘Equitable access to COVID-19 vaccine: Voices from
international human rights law’ (2022)
Asian African Legal
Consultative Organisation Journal of International Law
73, 73 referencing
United Nations Office of the
High Commissioner for Human Rights, ‘Statement by UN human rights experts:
Universal access to
vaccines is essential for prevention and containment of
COVID-19 around the world’ (Statement, 19 November 2020).
Dainius Puras,
Report of the Special Rapporteur on the Right to Everyone to the Enjoyment of
the Highest Standard of Physical and Mental Health
, UN Doc A/75/163 (2020)
Sharifah Sekalala et al,
‘An intersectional human rights approach to prioritising access to
COVID-19 vaccines’ (2021)
BMJ Global Health
referencing Ole
Norheim et al, ‘Guidance on priority setting in health care (GPS-Health):
The inclusion of equity criteria
not captured by cost-effective analysis’
(2014) 12(1)
Cost Effectiveness and Resource Allocation
Vaccination-Risks Network v Secretary, Department of Health
[2022] FCA 320.
The law on vaccine mandates is beyond the scope of this article.
Puras (n 79) 2.
Sean Mulcahy and Kate Seear,
‘Playing to the gallery: The invocation of human rights, legal actors, and
outside audiences in
debates on roadside drug testing in the Australian Capital
Territory’ (2022) 31(2)
Griffith Law Review
Kate Seear, ‘Hepatitis
transmission and prevention: Exploring the role that the law plays in shaping
blood-borne virus epidemics’
(Presentation at the Australian Viral
Hepatitis Conference, Gold Coast, Australia, 30 September 2016).
Mark Stoove et al,
‘Salvaging a prison needle and syringe program trial in Australia requires
leadership and respect for evidence’
(2015) 203(8)
Medical Journal of
See, e.g., Paula
O’Brien, ‘The international right to health: State obligations and
private acts in the health care system’
(2013) 12(1)
Journal of Law and
Queensland Human Rights
Commission,
Building Belonging: Review of Queensland’s
Anti-Discrimination Act 1991 (2022) 270-272.
Health, Communities,
Disability Services and Domestic and Family Violence Prevention Committee
(Queensland),
Interim Report: Inquiry into the Queensland Government’s
Health Response to COVID-19
Seear (n 6).
International Centre on
Human Rights and Drug Policy et al,
International Guidelines on Human Rights
and Drug Policy
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (109 KB)
PDF format (474 KB)
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter