URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/journals/LegEdDig/2013/42.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 15:13:51
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Falkoff, M --- "Using fiction workshop techniques in first-year legal writing classes" [2013] LegEdDig 42; (2013) 21(3) Legal Education Digest 37
Using fiction workshop techniques in first-year legal writing classes
Using fiction workshop techniques in first-year legal
writing classes
Journal of Legal Education
, Vol 62, Vol 2, 2012-2013, pp 323-335
The ability to critique one’s own work is invaluable to writers in
every field, but teaching students how to critique their
work and the work of
others is one of the most difficult lessons to impart.
A helpful discussion of the structure of a typical workshop appears in Frank
Conroy’s essay “The Writers’ Workshop”.
Fiction-writing workshops tend to take a similar form, no matter where and in
what context one studies. A standard course runs for
a semester and permits no
more students than there are weeks in the class. A typical workshop will thus
enrol 12 to 15 students,
each of whom is required to submit two stories for the
class to review over the course of the semester. When a student puts up a
for workshop, she basically cedes control of the document for that week, and the
class discusses that story, pretending that
she, the writer, is not there.
Students are to address their comments to the room rather than to the writer,
‘whose presence... is superfluous’. The
focus is on the text:
‘what the text really is rather than what the author might have wanted it
to be or thought that it was’.
As Conroy points out, language cannot do the work of showing a reader what
the author meant by a phrase such as
yellow pencil
; the reader has to add
in the colour himself. The reader has to hear the tone of dialogue, to interpret
metaphor, to ‘pour
energy’ into the text. A reader has to serve as a
sort of ‘co-creator’ of the narrative, based on what the writer
included in the text: the writer implies, and the reader infers.
Conroy then talks about writing that falls on different ends of what he
refers to as ‘the reader- writer curve’. Good
fiction writing (and,
indeed, most high quality writing, academic writing included) occupies the zone
in the middle, where the writer
can imply things without having to spell them
all out, safe in the knowledge that the reader will do the work of drawing the
inferences.
Not all writing exists in that space, though. On one end of the curve, the
writer’s end, is writing that is internal, private,
or overly difficult
– writing that is not meant for other readers (journal entries), writing
that is impossible for readers
to interpret without assistance (encrypted text),
or writing that is intentionally obfuscatory (specialised lingo designed to
entry into a particular area of inquiry, such as how some might describe
legalese). On the other end of the curve, the reader’s
end, is writing
that requires little effort from the reader in order for it to be fully and
completely understood, writing designed
for those who might have difficulty
understanding more sophisticated work (children’s literature), writing
intended to appeal
to the broadest possible audience (wire service articles),
and writing meant to serve an educational or functional purpose (instruction
The utility of the curve, aside from its inherent logic, is that it provides
a ready shorthand for discussing potential failings of
a written work. If many
class members are flummoxed by confusing elements in a story, they can describe
it as too internal, as falling
too far on the writer’s end of the curve.
If a story’s elements seem overwritten or too obvious, it lacks subtlety
falls too far on the reader’s end. The class members’ ability to
rely on this shared vocabulary allows for critiques
to move more quickly into
substance and detail; the task of communicating reader concerns becomes much
simpler when everyone in the
room shares a certain understanding about the
nature of a particular critique. This shared vocabulary is one of the primary
the workshop structure is a particularly effective mechanism for
delivering and receiving criticism.
The initial difficulty for many students is that collegiate essays, whether
in the humanities or other fields, are pitched toward
faculty members and
graduate teaching assistants who are well versed in the materials at hand.
Students become accustomed to assuming
a certain level of comfort with the
subject matter on the part of their readers, which is just another way of saying
that both students
and faculty, at the undergraduate level, expect writing to be
pitched in the centre range of the reader-writer curve.
Legal writing instructors are used to thinking about legal writing as
reader-centric; we may not initially realise how jarring that
can be to students
who have acclimated themselves to writing for audiences knowledgeable in their
fields of interest. The approaches
we suggest to them may often seem simplistic
if not and pedantic, and students may be loath to believe that good legal
writing might
bear more resemblance to reader-centric documents, like
instruction manuals or geometric proofs, than to documents focused more in
centre of the reader-writer curve that they have spent years learning how to
Giving students a vocabulary for talking about different kinds of writing,
and the multiple goals of different kinds of writing, can
serve to soften the
sense of betrayal students might feel when introduced to legal writing and the
ways in which it is distinct from
writing they have done before. I tend not to
use the formal reader-writer curve discussion in legal writing classes,
introducing
it instead to individual students where it seems appropriate, but we
discuss audience extensively over the course of any given semester,
and the more
specific a sense of audience the students have, the easier it is for them to
pitch their writing accordingly.
Toward that end, I have appropriated a number of techniques, cobbled together
from various sources, to help students find and use
that vocabulary. Instead of
handing out an essay on the first day of class, as Conroy did, I hand out a memo
before the first assignment
is due, identifying the types of problems that tend
to come up in student writing and which uses the same words I plan to use when
critiquing student papers. In particular, I describe certain types of writing
issues that come up frequently, such as the use of
passive constructions;
subject/pronoun and subject/verb agreement problems; overuse of font or language
for emphasis; and use of
language that is overly confusing, formal or
colloquial. I also include some specific information about each particular
and its focus so that students are not tempted to discuss more than
what is at issue in each given piece of writing. The combination
of the class
discussions and the memo is often enough to give students a sense of what our
shared classroom vocabulary will be. I
also distribute a handout describing what
the workshop process is like.
Once the students are familiar with my vocabulary and the workshop process,
we can begin. Running a proper workshop during a first-year
legal writing class
is difficult, if not impossible; part of the point of a class solely devoted to
workshopping student writing
is that it provides every student the opportunity
to submit pieces for workshop, at least once a semester if not two or three
I struggled with how to deal with this when I decided to incorporate a
workshop into my class; I did not want to lose the benefit
of a group discussion
of a single piece of work, but it seemed unfair to allow a limited number of
students the benefit of being
on the receiving end of a critique.
Since I have always felt that workshops are more useful for those providing
the critique than for those receiving it, despite the
attention lavished on
any particular piece of writing, it was more important to me that the class
as a whole be able to workshop
something together than that individual students
receive workshops themselves. In addition, I was concerned about student
perceptions
that having access to one person’s writing might provide an
undue benefit either for those in the class who are struggling
(and who can crib
from the workshopped paper) or for the person receiving feedback. Finally, I did
not want to be too directive in
how the workshop was run; I wanted students to
take the primary role in discussing the piece before them, and I wanted to
as hands-off as possible.
I resolved these various concerns by proceeding as follows. First, I include
a statement in my syllabus indicating that I reserve
the right to use student
drafts in other classes but that they will remain anonymous. I teach two
sections of legal writing each
semester, so my next step is to choose a paper
from each class to use in the other class – that way, the paper students
workshopping is not the work of someone in the section, and the person being
workshopped is not aware of it. Prior to the workshop
itself, I describe the
paper we are critiquing as one that I wrote. They are aware that it is actually
the paper of someone from
the other section, but the fiction under which we
operate is that I am the one whose work is being workshopped, which has the
benefit of requiring that I refrain from speaking and that one of them run
the class. This, in turn, encourages participation, since
the students do not
like to leave the volunteer workshop leader to do all the work. I explain that
the students will have about 15
minutes to read and make notes on the paper,
after which the workshop leader will guide them through a discussion, moving
by section and from big-picture commentary to nit-picking detail. I
recommend that they start by talking about what in the paper
is working, so the
writer knows what analysis or argument is speaking to the readers; then they can
move on to talk about what needs
work. I remind them that criticism that is not
constructive does not assist writers in making changes, so every comment should
framed in terms of what the writer might do to improve. After the students
have finished reading the paper, I select someone to run
the workshop.
At this point, I invite the workshop leader to take over in the front of the
room, and I take the workshop leader’s seat. I
then shut up until there
are only about ten minutes left in the class, and I focus on listening to the
critique. Invariably I find
myself taking notes on my copy of the paper as if it
were my own, and I have to remind myself to asterisk the comments that are worth
discussing briefly at the end of class, when I take over for a few minutes
before setting the students free for the day.
The first thing I always notice is how very critical the students are no
matter how strongly I advocate in favour of starting with
what is working, the
students invariably all but ignore this directive and launch right into the
negatives, only remembering midway
through to comment on something they did not
find totally offensive to their sensibilities.
The next thing the workshops share is their focus on substance, which always
pleases me. It would be very easy for the students to
start and end by
identifying language and grammar problems, but the students are rigorous in
their attention to the goals of the
paper, the analysis or arguments the memo or
brief seeks to present. They do discuss language and grammar, citation and
mainly with respect to how those aspects of writing affect the
ultimate task of the paper – to convince readers that the substance
analysis or argument is correct. Their focus tends to be on the structural
elements that we have gone over in class: the importance
of always identifying
the issues clearly, discussing the law in detail before engaging in analysis or
argument so as to avoid appearing
defensive, drawing analogies from case facts
where appropriate and reasoning directly from the law where it is not, and
definitively enough to give readers a clear sense of what the likely
outcome is or should be.
I am frequently amused by the shift that happens between the first workshop
and the second, which is less a function of familiarity
with the format and more
a function of the students having received my comments and attended a one-on-one
conference where we discussed
their papers in detail. While the first workshop
contains occasional reference to the terminology I provided in the memo I handed
out before their assignment was due, the second workshop replicates the form and
content of my critiques to the point of near mimicry.
They have now had the
opportunity to see how I use my classroom vocabulary in the abstract (in the
common problems memo), to see
how I use it with respect to them (in their
individualised feedback), and to hear how it sounds when I talk about their
conference). The combination of these things seems to be enough to
allow them to feel comfortable talking about these issues as I
do, using shared
terminology that everyone in class understands.
Another added benefit of the first workshop is that it allows students to
anticipate my comments. I tend to be somewhat over inclusive
in-line critiques of ungraded first drafts in order to encourage students
to make their peace with a multi-stage
drafting process. I want them to
understand that the first draft will never be good enough to submit, no matter
how far into one’s
writing career one is. Having a workshop before the
comments come back helps to provide some context, and frequently they will
to me that they were unsurprised by the critique after discussing the
workshop draft, since looking at someone else’s work
gave them a better
sense of what was missing in their own.
This highlights what I consider the primary benefit of workshop: it assists
students in learning how to self-critique. Teaching students
how to view their
own work with a critical eye is one of the most difficult tasks of writing
instructors, especially since students
can be resistant to the revision process.
As in any field, it is much easier to see others’ flaws than it is to see
own, but pointing out those flaws provides a structure and an
approach for going back and looking at one’s own work
I end the workshop by first leading the class in a round of applause for the
workshop leader and then making sure I emphasise how
impressed I am with the
depth and quality of the student critique, which is almost always the case. For
I then go over some of the comments students made in
order to reinforce the stronger points and clarify areas of contention which
usually focused on minor issues like citation or grammar, so misstatements or
misunderstandings are easy to clarify.
This modified class structure provides students with as many of the benefits
of the workshop environment as we can manage, given the
time and subject matter
constraints of the first-year of law school. However, there are other approaches
that might be equally effective
in achieving some or all of the goals of a
workshop depending on the size of the class and the inclination of the
individual faculty
members, including workshopping excerpts of different papers
for purposes of comparison, or allocating extra time so that all students
workshop small pieces of their assignments in order to have the experience of
being both the critic and the subject of the critique.
The various methods of structuring peer review in the legal writing classroom
have been discussed extensively by others, so a comparison
of workshop and peer
review shows how they differ and where they overlap. The two techniques are
complementary, not contradictory,
and instructors can use them in conjunction
with each other or separately, as they choose.
Peer review, as utilised in legal writing classes, involves students breaking
into small groups and exchanging written work product
for critique. The goal of
peer review is generally to allow students to see how other students view their
work product, in an environment
self-contained enough to avoid overwhelming
the student with feedback. The process of learning how to engage in peer
critique is
in some aspects a by-product of the desire to get to the ultimate
goal of seeing how one’s work is received by others. Though
always be the intention of the instructor, peer review seems, for students, to
focus on outcome (the critique) over process
(learning how to critique).
Peer review thus can serve as a logical next step for a class that starts
with a workshop, in that it can utilise the shared vocabulary
students develop
and allow them to apply that vocabulary to individual papers in a manner that
would normally be time prohibitive.
Permitting some sharing of work product also
allows students to start developing a writing process that takes the opinions of
colleagues into account, which is more how practising attorneys write.
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (670 KB)
PDF format (3.18 MB)
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter