URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/journals/PrecedentAULA/2024/13.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 15:30:06
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Ternes, Ray --- "Demystifying the Comcare System: A Practical Guide to Commonwealth Workers' Compensation" [2024] PrecedentAULA 13; (2024) 181 Precedent 4
Demystifying the Comcare system:
A practical guide to Commonwealth workers’ compensation
By Ray Ternes
My thesis is that the Commonwealth workers’ compensation jurisdiction
is a lively, engaging and comprehensible area in which
to practice. This article
aims to assist lawyers to practice in this area at the Administrative Appeals
Tribunal (the Tribunal),
and any subsequent iteration of this body. Noting that
legislation will soon come before Federal Parliament to abolish the Tribunal
create the Administrative Review Tribunal, it is an ideal time to commence or
resume practice in this area.
This jurisdiction is colloquially known as ‘Comcare’. The
governing legislation is the
Safety, Rehabilitation and Compensation Act
(Cth) (the Act). Because this article is intended as a practical guide,
it will set out the most common disputes at the Tribunal,
before moving on to
more technical aspects of the jurisdiction.
The type of dispute can readily be ascertained from the Tribunal documents
(T-Documents).
Early in the
T-Documents will be found a ‘
statement’, which succinctly
sets out the nature of the decisions made, including the ‘reviewable
decision’ which
is being considered by the Tribunal. Many clients will,
however, seek legal advice before Tribunal proceedings are
You will need to pay close
attention to the determination, and the reviewable decision (if one has been
made) to work out the ambit
LIABILITY DISPUTES
Introduction
A denial under
of the Act is a denial of initial liability. It is the
gateway to access the benefits in the Act such as medical expenses, incapacity
payments and permanent impairment compensation.
liability disputes are often, therefore, fought with some gusto by
respondents.
‘Injury’ is defined in
of the Act. ‘Injury’ in
the Act is not used in the sense of workplace accident, or in a global sense to
describe the
general condition of the employee following an incident. It is
expressed in terms of the resultant effect of an incident or ailment
employee’s body:
Frank injuries and diseases will be considered separately, before turning to
some exclusionary provisions.
Frank injuries
An employee will succeed under sub-s5A(1)(b) of the Act if they have:
1. an injury
2. which was suffered:
a) arising out of, or
b) in the course of employment.
The test for whether a person has suffered an injury within the meaning of
sub-s5A(1)(b) of the Act is whether there has been distinct
physiological
‘Suddenness’ is
a helpful but not critical factor.
Thus, all of the following have been found to be injuries:
1. A broken limb.
2. The breaking of an
3. The detachment of a piece of the lining of an
4. The rupture of an arterial
5. A lesion to the brain.
Military Rehabilitation and Compensation Commission v
various symptoms described by the worker, such as swelling of the tongue,
dizziness, nausea and diarrhoea – broadly labelled
vertigo (there was no
medical explanation for the ‘illness’) – were found by the
Tribunal not to constitute an
‘injury’. This was ultimately upheld
by the High Court.
The High Court in
stated that for there to be an injury,
‘there must be more than an assertion by an employee that he or she feels
Arising out of or in the course of employment
The statutory test for injury is not satisfied by merely the occurrence of
physiological change. The physiological change must be
causally or temporally
connected to employment.
‘Arising out of employment’ is a causal test. Whether the injury
arises out of employment depends on the nature of the
employment, the
circumstances of employment, and what the person is required or expected to do
to carry out their duties.
‘In the course of employment’ is a temporal test. Whether the
injury occurs in the course of employment turns on whether
the person was doing
something they were reasonably required, expected or authorised to do in order
to carry out their duties.
Things incidental to employment generally fall within the course of employment:
Henderson v Commissioner of Railways
Where there is an interval or an interlude between periods of work in an
overall period of employment, the High Court decision in
notorious because the worker suffered an injury while having sex in a motel on a
work trip. The High Court, in deciding that
her injury was not compensable, held
that there is a two-step process to determine whether interlude injuries are in
the course of
employment:
1. Was the injury sustained by reference to an activity that the employee was
undertaking, or was the injury sustained because of
being at a certain
2. Secondly:
a) If by activity, was the employee encouraged or induced by the employer to
undertake that activity?
b) If by place, was the employee encouraged or induced by the employer to be
at that particular place?
A disease is an ailment or aggravation of an ailment that was contributed to,
to a significant degree, by the worker’s employment
The significant contribution test
The test for the connection between the condition and employment is set out
in s5B of the Act: it is a question of whether employment
contributed, to a
significant degree, to the onset of the condition. A ‘significant
degree’ is a degree that is substantially
more than material: s5B(3) of
The test is an evaluative exercise:
factors in s5B(2) of the Act should be taken into account. The change in the Act
in 2007 from the ‘material contribution’
test to the ‘to a
significant degree’ test strengthens the connection between employment and
the condition required to
satisfy the test:
There is a helpful
description of what the significant contribution test means in practice in
and Comcare
When it comes to causation of psychiatric injury, a worker’s perception
of events need not be reasonable, but must be anchored
in reality:
Aggravations
‘Aggravation’ includes acceleration or recurrence (s4(1)), and
also ‘exacerbation’:
Huynh and Australian Postal
Corporation
The law regarding ‘aggravation’ is summarised in
In short, a
worsening of a pre-existing disease constitutes an ‘aggravation’ and
is compensable if employment contributed,
to a significant degree, to the
aggravation. This could be merely an increase in symptoms rendering the worker
incapacitated.
Evidence of pathological change, or change to the underlying condition, is
necessary for an applicant to succeed with respect to
aggravation.
A pre-existing degenerative asymptomatic condition rendered symptomatic by
employment is typically compensable as an aggravation.
Psychological conditions
There are generally three issues in claims for psychological conditions:
1. Did the employee suffer from a psychological
2. Was the condition contributed to, to a significant degree, by the
employee’s employment?
3. Is liability otherwise excluded by operation of the ‘reasonable
administrative action’ provision?
Psychological conditions are almost always treated in the
‘disease’ category, rather than the frank injury category. The
for an ‘ailment’ when dealing with a claimed psychiatric condition
is whether there is a condition outside the boundaries
of normal mental
functioning and behaviour:
The test is not
whether there is identifiable physiological change:
Exclusionary provisions
Reasonable administrative action
There is no onus of proof in the Tribunal; it is a matter of what the
Tribunal is satisfied of. Nevertheless, practically speaking,
for the exclusion
to apply, respondents have the responsibility of satisfying the Tribunal of all
of the following matters:
1. That the action was
administrative
2. That the condition was
as a result
of the action.
3. That the action was
in respect of
employment.
4. That the action was
5. That the action was taken
The leading decision as to what actions fall within the ambit of
‘administrative action’ is the Full Federal Court decision
Commonwealth Bank of Australia v
The Court drew a
distinction between ‘operational’ and ‘administrative’
action, in the sense that ‘operational’
referred to the activities
or business of the institution or enterprise in which the employee is employed,
and was not caught by
the exclusionary
‘Administrative action’ must entail more than the regulation of
the normal incidences of a person’s employment:
The test is whether, but for the taking of the action, the worker would not
have suffered the disease:
‘In respect of employment’ suggests that the Parliament intended
that the exclusory action be specific administrative
action directed to the
person’s employment itself, as opposed to action forming part of
the everyday duties or tasks that the employee performed in his or her
employment or job:
It flows from the statutory language that both the action and the
implementation of the action must be reasonable.
Comcare v Martinez (No
is the leading decision
on the question of reasonableness.
Date of injury
The date of injury is usually important in ‘disease’ cases and
takes on particular significance in claims for psychological
conditions. This is
because if the condition is sustained before an administrative action is taken,
logically, the condition was
not caused by the administrative action.
Section 7(4) of the Act defines the date of injury, and it is noted that a
condition may be sustained before a person presents for
medical treatment. Thus,
the reference to ‘impairment’ in sub-s 7(4)(b) may be helpful for
Other exclusionary provisions
Written notice of injury
Section 53 of the Act provides, broadly speaking, that an employee does not
receive compensation unless they give written notice of
the injury as soon as
practicable after becoming aware of the
However, various
exceptions make this a difficult exclusion for respondents to rely on –
the exclusion does not apply if the
failure to give notice was due to ignorance
or another reasonable cause, nor if there is no prejudice.
The applicable law concerning s53 is set out in
Hurley and Australian
Capital Territory
Wilful and false prior statement
Section 7(7) of the Act essentially disentitles workers to compensation for
diseases if they have previously lied about not having
that disease (for
example, in a pre-employment questionnaire).
Thus, the Tribunal must be satisfied of the following elements for s7(7) to
1. That the employee made a representation that he or she did not suffer or
had not previously suffered from that disease.
2. The representation must be false.
3. The representation must be
4. The representation must be made for purposes connected with his or her
employment or proposed employment.
The ‘practical onus’ is on respondents to satisfy the Tribunal
that each of these elements is
and is therefore not easily
successful. For the exclusionary provision to apply, the Tribunal must be
satisfied that the representation
was made by the worker without any belief that
it was true.
‘NO PRESENT LIABILITY’ DECISIONS UNDER SECTIONS 16/19
Introduction
Most work injuries and diseases resolve relatively quickly. This may be part
of the rationale in Victorian state workers’ compensation
law for a step
down in payments after 13 weeks.
This is one area where Commonwealth workers’ compensation is relatively
generous: payments step down (to 75% if the employee
is not working) after 45
weeks. To encourage a return to work, the Act provides for higher percentages of
normal weekly earnings
to be paid when a claimant has returned to part-time
work: s19(3).
However, the Comcare system has disparagingly been referred to in the past as
‘the drip’ because it is difficult to ‘turn
tap’. This is a consequence of Comcare jurisprudence that once liability
has been accepted under s14 of the Act, it
cannot be undone at a later point,
except by way of reviewable decision of the initial
determination.
Further, it has long been held that Comcare/licensees cannot determine
matters into the future.
has led to Comcare and licensees making decisions that there is ‘no
present liability’ under ss 16 and/or 19, in
an attempt to close off
claims. These applications at the Tribunal tend to be fact-heavy and law light.
Close scrutiny of clinical
records is required.
Generally, doctors are called to give evidence, and cross-examination can
sometimes reveal ‘experts’ whose reports and
opinions are less than
cogent/persuasive.
more common in these decisions than to have an independent doctor report that
the effects of the underlying degenerative
condition have overtaken an injury. A
countervailing expert will often prevail, if the clinical records support the
worker and the
worker presents well in the witness box.
Sometimes respondents make the decision, particularly with respect to
diseases, that employment is no longer significantly contributing
condition, and that there is therefore no present liability under ss 16 and 19
of the Act. Support for this idea comes from
the Federal Court decision in
Prain v Comcare
However, the law has been clarified more recently in
Woodhouse v
and the question is
rather whether the causal nexus between employment and the suffering of the
disease continues unbroken.
PERMANENT IMPAIRMENT DECISIONS
Permanent impairment under the Act is, admittedly, a technical and sometimes
difficult area. Before compensation can be awarded, an
impairment must be
permanent within the meaning of s4(1) – likely to continue indefinitely
– and s24(2). The most common
issue in this respect is whether the
employee has undertaken all reasonable rehabilitative treatment for the
impairment.
As a general rule, employees need to achieve a 10% whole person impairment as
assessed by the Comcare
Guide to the Assessment of the Degree of Permanent
, Edition 3.0. The 10% threshold applies to each separate injury:
. For example, a person with an 8% WPI of the lower back and a
secondary psychological condition of 5% WPI will receive $0 for permanent
impairment.
In the case of aggravations, generally speaking, an apportionment will not be
made between the pre-existing condition and the
aggravation.
The exception is
where an assessment of permanent impairment has been, or can be, readily
undertaken of the pre-existing condition.
Both the degree of impairment and the non-economic loss scores can be
A WORD ABOUT JURISDICTION
As a creature of statute, the Tribunal has only the powers granted by
Parliament. When it reviews a decision, its jurisdiction is
limited by what was
before the decision maker. It is commonly said that the Tribunal ‘stands
in the shoes of the decision-maker’.
The Full Court in
described the Act as
establishing a ‘three tiered decision-making process’. The sequence
can be described as follows,
with the three tiers identified in bold:
Determination
Reviewable decision
Tribunal review
The powers of the person making the determination are activated by the making
of a claim for compensation which complies with s54
of the Act. Notice of an
injury must also be given under s53 of the
A claim must properly and adequately inform Comcare, so that Comcare can
determine the claim.
example, in
the Full Federal
Court upheld a Tribunal decision which found that it did not have the
conditions’ claim, when the
claim made was for injury on a specific date.
OTHER DISPUTES
Because of the jurisdiction of the Tribunal as outlined above, and the
absence of a medical panel in this area, all sorts of unusual
matters come
before the Tribunal.
For example:
the Federal Court
affirmed the Tribunal’s decision to deny liability under s16 of the Act
for breast reduction surgery in relation
to a neck injury.
the Tribunal found
that the respondent was liable to pay compensation for a pair of Brooks Dyad
Walker shoes under s16 of the Act,
but not a pair of thongs.
Davis and Australian Postal
Corporation
the Tribunal
overturned the respondent’s decision to reduce Mr Davis’ incapacity
payments. Australia Post’s decision
essentially prematurely terminated his
incapacity payments on the basis that he was deemed to have received a lump sum
from his superannuation
fund (and thus s21 of the Act was activated).
OTHER STATUTORY BENEFITS AVAILABLE UNDER THE ACT
Household help and gardening services, as well as attendant care services,
are available under s29 of the Act. Section 39 allows Comcare
compensation for alterations to an employee’s place of work or residence,
or modifications to vehicles, and compensation
for aids and appliances.
Reasonableness is the governing principle under ss 29 and 39 of the Act
(although various caps also apply).
These cases rarely run to completion (except
with self-represented litigants), because of the small quantum.
An unusual case was
Commonwealth
in which the
Federal Court overturned a Tribunal decision, the Tribunal having denied
liability for a proposed swimming pool for
that the pool was capable of being an ‘aid’, and remitted the matter
to the Tribunal
for reconsideration.
COMMON LAW AND THE ACT
Part IV of the Act (ss 42 to 52A) significantly limits employees’
common law rights.
No damages can be recovered by employees from their employers for economic
loss. The only aspect of the common law that remains for
employees as against
employers is for pain and suffering damages, which are capped at $110,000.
To sue for non-economic loss, an employee must first make an election under
s45 of the Act. Elections are irrevocable.
However, common law rights remain virtually intact as against third parties.
Thus, where a third party is at fault, a common law claim
considered.
There is also the capacity for Comcare to ‘step in’ and take over
common law proceedings on behalf of employees: s50.
SETTLEMENTS AND COSTS
Parties can settle the dispute at any time before the Tribunal’s
Applicants can withdraw proceedings at any time as of right: s42A(1A) of the
Administrative Appeals Tribunal Act 1975
Respondents are often reluctant to accept liability under
because of the perceived difficulty of closing claims. Licensees are often more
willing to consider settlement of these
Under no circumstances can a worker be ordered to pay the insurer’s
legal costs. That is so because, as a creature of statute,
the Tribunal has only
the powers granted it by legislation, and there is no legislative provision
permitting costs against workers.
When a worker succeeds in achieving a decision from the Tribunal that is more
favourable than the reviewable decision, the Tribunal
will ordinarily award
legal costs and disbursements in favour of the worker under
If professional costs are taxed, the Tribunal will allow 75% of the Federal
Court scale for non-discretionary
It is important to note that the Tribunal has no power to award legal costs
incurred prior to the filing of the application for review
with the Tribunal.
Therefore, when requesting a reconsideration of a determination, it is not
recommended to incur significant legal
costs, such as by way of independent
medical examinations or the like.
This is a lively and engaging area in which to practice. Many cases run to
completion, due in no small part to the costs settings
referred to above. The
key resource in this area is Peter Sutherland and Allan Anforth’s
Safety, Rehabilitation and Compensation Act 1988
In my experience, Tribunal members and conference registrars encourage
practitioners familiar or unfamiliar with the jurisdiction,
largely because
representation is preferred to self-representation (which is common in the
Tribunal). While the new federal administrative
review body will undoubtedly
bring change, it is anticipated that this jurisdiction will continue to be
stimulating.
works as a barrister in Victoria and interstate, and has
practised in the area of Commonwealth workers’ compensation for more
15 years. He also regularly appears in other personal injury matters,
particularly institutional abuse cases. EMAIL ray.ternes@vicbar.com.au.
Produced by respondents in
compliance with
Administrative Appeals Tribunal Act 1975
(Cth). Sometimes also referred to as ‘
documents’.
There are just 30 days within
receipt of a determination to request a reconsideration and just 60 to appeal to
the Tribunal after
receipt of a reviewable decision. While extensions of time
can be obtained, they should not be relied upon.
And sometimes decision-makers
get confused about their power to make determinations and/or reviewable
DSLB v Comcare
[2023] FCA 1222.
[2006] HCA 47
(2006) 226 CLR 535
Military Rehabilitation and Compensation
Commission v May
(2016) 257 CLR 486
[2016] HCA 19
Hume Steel Ltd v Peart
[1947] HCA 34.
Zickar v MGH Plastic
Industries Pty Ltd
(1996) 187 CLR 310.
Kennedy Cleaning Services
Pty Ltd v Petkoska
[2000] HCA 45
(2000) 200 CLR 286.
, above note 5.
Roncevich v Repatriation
[2005] HCA 40
(2005) 222 CLR 115
Humphrey Earl Ltd v
[1951] HCA 75
(1951) 84 CLR 126.
[1937] HCA 67
(1937) 58 CLR 281
[2013] HCA 41
(2013) 250 CLR 246.
O’Loughlin v Linfox
Australia Ltd and Anor
[2015] FCA 1000
(2015) 235 FCR 164.
[2015] FCA 1502
(2015) 238 FCR 187
[2011] AATA 934
[2002] FCA 1464
(2002) 72 ALD 795
[2015] AATA 235
Ibid [38]–[50].
Noting that, strictly
speaking, a DSM-V diagnosis is not required to satisfy the test:
[1996] FCA 1587
(1996) 69 FCR 439
[2022] FCAFC 42
[104]–[105].
Deputy President Humphries in
Harrison and Comcare
[2017] AATA 1120, [8].
[2012] FCAFC 21
[2016] FCA 737
[2016] HCA 43
(2016) 339 ALR 1
). See also
Lim v Comcare
[2017] FCAFC 64.
, above note 28,
[2013] FCA 439
(2013) 212 FCR 272
). See [83] for a description of reasonableness.
In the language of the
provision, ‘this Act does not apply’.
[2019] AATA 2450
, a decision of Deputy President Sosso at [92]–[101] and
[137]–[149].
Fiddian and Comcare
[2019] AATA 10
Australian Postal
Corporation v Oudyn
[2003] FCA 318.
It is still possible to make an
argument, in a
‘no present liability’ dispute that liability
should not have been accepted under
in the first case. This is because the
Act has been held to be a flexible and evolving decision-making scheme:
Telstra Corporation Ltd v Hannaford
(2006) 151 FCR 253.
Australian Postal
Corporation v Mowbray
[2003] FCA 1258.
See for example remarks by
the Tribunal about a doctor relied on by Comcare in
Cashin and Comcare
[2018] AATA 3519
, [30] and [33].
[2017] FCAFC 143
[2021] FCAFC 95
Comcare v Amorebieta
[1996] FCA 1438
Martin v Australian Postal Corporation
[1999] FCA 655
Jordan v Australian Postal Corporation
[2007] FCA 2028.
[1999] FCA 753
(1999) 56 ALD 84
[2006] FCA 1829
(2006) 93 ALD 147
for principles relating to
Comcare v Muir
[2016] FCA 346
150 ALD 321
(2012) 58 AAR 152
[2016] FCA 1521
[2019] AATA 3499
[2022] AATA 4348
[1990] FCA 123
(1990) 95 ALR 172
Administrative Appeals
Tribunal, Practice Direction,
Taxation of Costs,
30 June 2015.
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (91.7 KB)
PDF format (697 KB)
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter