URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/journals/CICrimJust/2017/22.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 14:49:58
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Moir, Emily; Blundell, Barbara; Clare, Joseph; Clare, Michael --- "Best Practice for Estimating Elder Abuse Prevalence in Australia: Moving Towards the Dynamic Concept of 'Adults at Risk' and Away from Arbitrary Age Cut-Offs" [2017] CICrimJust 22; (2017) 29(2) Current Issues in Criminal Justice 181
Contemporary Comment
Best Practice for Estimating Elder Abuse Prevalence in Australia:
Moving towards the Dynamic Concept of ‘Adults at Risk’
and away from
Arbitrary Age Cut-Offs
Emily Moir,
and Michael
In June 2017, the Australian Law Reform Commission (‘ALRC’)
released the
Inquiry on Protecting the Rights of Older Australians from
. A national elder abuse prevalence study was a key recommendation to:
(1) measure the extent of this problem within Australia; (2)
availability and demand for resources, and responses delivered by statutory
authorities and organisations; and (3) evaluate
the effectiveness of services
designed to prevent elder abuse (ALRC 2017). In the past, elder abuse prevalence
research has relied
on age ‘cut-offs’ to determine the older
population and what proportion of this population has experienced abuse. This
comment questions the validity of using static age ‘cut-offs’ in
measuring elder abuse and suggests a move forward to
dynamic measures of risk
for adults in prevalence studies.
elder abuse – older people – age –
prevalence – adults at risk – policy – Australia
Introduction
The abuse and mistreatment of older people has been brought to the forefront
of Australian social policy recently, with the Australia
Law Reform Commission
(‘ALRC’) releasing the
Inquiry on Protecting the Rights of Older
Australians from Abuse
in June 2017 (ALRC 2017). Further, various state
governments have extended their focus on elder abuse through creating and
interagency policies, undertaking prevalence studies, and developing
specific elder abuse prevention services and hotlines (see Kaspiew,
Rhoades 2016). With an ageing population, such government action is promising,
as elder abuse is foreseen to become
a bigger problem. Numerous state and
federal reports have recommended a national prevalence study of elder abuse
(ALRC 2017; New
South Wales Legislative Council 2016; The Special Taskforce on
Domestic and Family Violence in Queensland 2015). One critical issue
measuring elder abuse prevalence is the age used to define ‘older’
(Clare, Blundell & Clare 2011; Kaspiew et al.
2016). This comment argues
that studies investigating elder abuse prevalence should move from criterion
based on age towards ‘at-risk’
characteristics. The use of existing
frameworks from the United Kingdom (‘UK’) could be adopted in
Australia to assess
the extent of those living in the population with dynamic
risk factors who are victims of abuse. Such a framework could meet the
recommendation to undertake a national prevalence study and help develop
appropriate policy and prevention responses, as well as
encompassing a broader
group of vulnerable adults rather than just the ‘aged’.
Defining ‘elder abuse’
Definitions of elder abuse vary; however, the Australian Network for the
Prevention of Elder Abuse (1999) defines it as ‘any
act occurring within a
relationship where there is an implication of trust, which results in harm to an
older person. Abuse may be
physical, sexual, financial, psychological, social,
and/or neglect’. There is significant debate about how elder abuse should
be defined and what it encompasses. Contested issues include: (1) how elder
abuse falls within a domestic/family violence or criminal
offence framework; (2)
what age should be used to define ‘older’; and (3) how types of
abuse should be defined, that
is, what behaviours constitute physical or verbal
abuse and so on (Brammer & Biggs 1998; Goergen & Beaulieu 2013). There
are no clear-cut answers, but we argue that a distinct classification of elder
abuse may be questioned, as types of abuse that are
encompassed within this
framework are often crimes in their own right (for example, fraud, assault)
(Sacco 1993).
As victimisation can occur at any time over the life course, it is argued
there is no benefit reconceptualising domestic/family violence
or other crimes
1993; Goergen & Beaulieu 2013).
Although the term ‘elder abuse’
may be useful for service delivery and specific action-based policy, our
position asserts
that specifying and measuring this as a distinct problem is not
required. This argument mirrors recent developments in UK social
policy, where
the focus has shifted from ‘elder’ to ‘at-risk adults’
(Office of the Public Guardian 2015).
While these debates are ongoing, the
critical element of focus in this comment is how age in elder abuse in research
is, and should
be, defined, particularly in the context of conducting a national
prevalence study for Australia.
Measuring elder abuse
It is widely acknowledged that Australia has an ageing population (Australian
Institute of Health and Welfare (‘AIHW’)
2017). Between 1996 and
2016, the proportion of older Australians (classified as those 65 and above)
increased from 12 per cent to
approximately 15 per cent (Australian Bureau
of Statistics (‘ABS’) 2016). The proportion of those aged 85 and
older doubled
to 2 per cent within the same time frame, while the proportion of
those aged 15–64 decreased approximately 1 per cent. The
median age has
increased by almost a decade, from 28.5 years in 1964 to 37.3 years in 2014
(AIHW 2017). Such trends are predicted
to continue based on improved life
expectancy and a lower fertility rate since the 1960s (ABS 2016).
Estimating the exact number of elder abuse victims is difficult for a number
of reasons. Conceptualising who is ‘older’
and what constitutes
‘abuse’ are both problematic, and due to the trust relationship
between victim and perpetrator,
it is generally accepted that elder abuse is
under-reported (Pillemer & Finkelhor 1988). However, recent systematic
elder abuse research offer some insight into its prevalence. Pillemer
et al. (2016) conducted a scoping review of 20 international
studies examining
elder abuse prevalence and risk factors. Across all studies and all types of
abuse, elder abuse was estimated to
affect, on average, 14.3 per cent of
older adults (with a range of 2.2–36.2 per cent). In another review, vast
differences
emerged, with prevalence estimates ranging from 0.5–44.6 per
cent (Sooryanarayana, Choo & Hairi 2013). In Australia information
abuse prevalence is limited (ALRC 2017). However, current knowledge suggests
prevalence estimates vary by abuse type, with
psychological abuse and financial
abuse most commonly reported (see Clare et al. 2011; Kaspiew et al. 2016).
Prevalence estimates
around the country suggest that elder abuse affects 0.6 per
cent of Western Australians over the age of 60 (Boldy et al. 2005) and
1.2% and 5.4% of those aged 65 and above on the Central Coast (Kurrle et al.
1997; Livermore, Bunt & Biscan 2001). To
ensure appropriate responses and
interventions occur, accurate and consistent parameters must be established to
enable valid and
reliable measurements.
Age ‘cut-offs’
Definitions and measurements of elder abuse are varied and inconsistent,
resulting in large discrepancies in the prevalence globally
(Dixon et al. 2009;
Pillemer 2016). The majority of elder abuse prevalence studies have used age
cut-offs of either 60 or 65 (see
Cooper, Selwood & Livingston 2008; De
Donder et al. 2011; Pillemer et al. 2016; Sooryanarayana et al. 2013 for reviews
abuse prevalence research and measurements), with others using age
cut-offs of 55 and above (Pittaway & Westhues 1994), 57 and
above (Laumann,
Leitsch & Waite 2008), 70 and above (Lowenstein et al. 2009), and 75 and
above (Garre-Olmo et al. 2009). Limited
research into elder abuse in nursing
(Fulmer et al. 2000;
Goergen 2001).
Age cut-offs are problematic in this field of research, and there is no
common law definition of ‘elderly’ (Office of
the Public Advocate
and Queensland Law Society 2010). Current ways to operationalise
‘older’ in Australia include (ALRC
2013; Clare et al. 2011):
• mature aged worker (45)
• access to senior’s insurance (50)
• access to superannuation (60)
• access to a Senior’s Card (60 or 65)
• age of retirement (60 or 65)
• access to a government pension (65)
• access to aged care services (70).
Importantly for the Australian context, Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander
peoples have significantly lower life expectancies —
45–50 years old
is generally used to classify ‘older’ Indigenous Australians (Clare
et al. 2011). Overall, 65 is
the most commonly used age for status as
‘older’ by the ABS, as this is the age where pensions can be
accessed (Kaspiew
et al. 2016).
Accepted operational definitions and measurements in elder abuse research are
required to better understand and respond to this problem
(National Research
Council 2003). Age cut-offs used to define ‘elder’ are arbitrary,
creating problems in measuring the
prevalence of this issue (Dixon et al. 2009).
As the National Research Council (2003) argues, categorising ‘elder’
65 would be both over-inclusive and under-inclusive—many people over 65
are not vulnerable, and many under 65 are, due to physical
and intellectual
disabilities, degenerative disease, and early onset dementia. During the
reporting year of 2014–15, the Elder
Abuse Prevention Unit (2015) in
Queensland received reports of victims in their 40s, 50s and early 60s that
would not be captured
if 65 was used as an age cut-off for elder abuse. While
age can be correlated with increased frailty and dependence on others, age
not the only determinant of risk of abuse (Goergen & Beaulieu 2013).
Further, Harbison et al. (2012) acknowledge that the
term ‘elder
abuse’ was created in an era where older people were recognised as a
homogenous group characterised by decreased
capacity and labour market
exclusion. This is no longer the case, with increased diversity apparent in
older populations (Goergen
& Beaulieu 2013). The application of a uniform
static criterion (such as age) to a heterogeneous population has been questioned
in its sufficiency to accurately capture potential victims of abuse. Work on
redefining elder abuse has suggested a framework around
be more applicable.
‘Adult at risk’
It has been proposed that risk should be the determinative concept for elder
abuse, rather than age (National Research Council 2003).
The term ‘adult
at risk’ was introduced in the UK’s
Care Act 2014
is used in its latest Safeguarding Policy (Office of the Public Guardian 2015).
The ALRC (2017) report discusses the possibility
of broadening
conceptualisations of abuse from an age range to a focus on frailty,
vulnerability, and diminished capacity. Specific
definitions around who should
be considered at ‘at risk’ adult need to be developed for Australia
(Clare et al. 2011),
which can then be used to determine the prevalence of this
defines those to
safeguard from risk as adults who: have need for care and support; are
experiencing, or are at risk of, abuse or
neglect; and, as a consequence of the
needs for care and support, are unable to protect themselves against actual
abuse or neglect
or the risk of it. As there are overlaps between elder abuse
and other areas of abuse (such as people with disabilities), broadening
focus from those over a certain age to those at risk may be beneficial, as this
can target the abuse of younger and older adults
together. Importantly, unlike
the static nature of age cut-offs, the concept of ‘risk’ should be
considered dynamic and
multi-dimensional, taking into consideration both
internal and external risk factors (Goergen & Beaulieu 2013). Consistent
factors for elder abuse are presented in Table 1, and categorised by
victim, perpetrator and contextual characteristics.
Table 1: Risk factors for elder abuse
Perpetrators
Cognitive impairments and developmental disabilities
Poor physical health and disability
Mental illness or psychological problems
Disadvantage and low income
Dependency (social, emotional, physical)
Ethnic minority
Caregiver burden and stress
Caregiver mental illness or psychological problems
Substance abuse
Financial difficulties and dependency
Lack of experience and support
Past abuse and history of family violence
Crowded and shared living arrangements
Low social support and social isolation
Poor family relationships
Sources: National Research Council 2003; Payne 2005; Pillemer et al.
The National Disability Services (‘NDS’) (2016) in Australia
developed a checklist to quantify and operationalise ‘at
adults for disability service providers and organisations. Such a checklist
could be adapted for research to identify
at-risk adults and capture the number
of them who have experienced, or are experiencing, forms of abuse. In its
Vulnerability Indicator
Guide, the NDS defines four types of vulnerability: (1)
decision-making; (2) financial; (3) social; and (4) health and wellbeing.
However, to ignore age completely in this line of research would be a mistake
(Goergen & Beaulieu 2013); therefore, we have adapted
this checklist to
include age ‘sub-groups’ from gerontology literature, as it is
accepted that as age increases, frailty
and dependency increase (Hughes &
Heycox 2010). Generally, physical deterioration and increasing dependence on
others for care
and support begins between 75–84 years old, with those
aged 85 plus having a greater likelihood of physical and decision-making
impairments and dependence. For each type of vulnerability, scores range from
0–4 and each type of vulnerability is scored
out of 24, as shown in Table
2. Vulnerability is then categorised as below:
• not vulnerable: 0–4
• low vulnerability: 4–9
• moderate vulnerability: 9–16
• high vulnerability: 16–24.
Indicators of age have been added, with vulnerability risk increasing with
age. This checklist presents age as only one indicator
of vulnerability to
abuse, intermixed with a variety of psychosocial and physical factors. However,
we acknowledge limitations exist
with this approach.
Attempts to target
and research at-risk populations are challenging, particularly for those in the
oldest age sub-group who are at
highest risk of cognitive impairments and
dependence on others. Further, in extreme circumstances of control and abuse,
at-risk adults
may be unreachable (Sacco 1990). And, of course, this approach
would not be exempt from limitations of prevalence studies in general.
terminology of ‘at-risk adults’ has also been critiqued. As
Sherwood-Johnson (2013) argues, unhelpful assumptions
those with disabilities can still be made, with policy surrounding this group of
citizens tending to be more
paternalistic than other policies targeted towards
other vulnerable groups, such as domestic violence victims.
Table 2: The National Disability Services Vulnerability Indicator Guide
adapted from National Disability Services (2016)
Decision-making vulnerability
Has the person had limited education?
Has the person had experience in making-decisions in their life?
Can the person access information they need independently?
Can the person make sense of and interpret information independently?
Can the person manage or resolve problems?
Does the person require specific accommodations when making
Score out of 24
Financial vulnerability
Does the person have a regular, stable job?
Do they earn an income?
Are they in receipt of a Pension or Welfare payment?
Can the person afford to pay for the things they need (eg food,
rent/mortgage, bills, incidentals)?
Does the person have control over their finances?
Have they demonstrated the ability to purchase major items, get quotes for
goods and services, or negotiate prices?
Score out of 24
Social vulnerability
Does the person have people they can call on for help if needed?
Do they have regular contact with family and friends (ie do they have
unpaid relationships)?
The person’s main contacts are paid supports
Is the person regularly involved in and part of activities or interested in
the community (eg recreation, social and/or work)?
Is the person accepted by others?
Is the person put at risk by those in their social networks (eg involving
the person in poor decisions and high-risk behaviours?)
Score out of 24
Health and wellbeing vulnerability
Does the person have a persistent and chronic illness?
Does the person have a diagnosed mental illness?
Does the person have physical and medical needs that require continuous
Does the person use high cost equipment or medication?
Are there concerns about drug and alcohol use?
Does the person need assistance to make medical decisions?
Score out of 24
Age sub-group
Vulnerability risk
‘Older adult’: <65 years old
‘Young old’: 65–74 years old
‘Middle old’: 75–84 years old
‘Old-old’: 85+ years old
Moving forward
The ALRC (2017, p. 93) states that ‘there should be a national
prevalence study of elder abuse to build the evidence base to
inform policy
responses’. While data from prior elder abuse studies have served as a
good starting point, such data lacks national
generalisability and is likely an
underrepresentation of the true extent of the problem (National Ageing Research
Insitute and Australian
Association of Gentrology 2016).
The need for a national prevalence study is apparent. However, prevalence
studies are expensive and time consuming, and data collected
are influenced by
the methodology.
A submission cited in the ALRC (2017) report stated that a prevalence study
should utilise existing organisations, such as the Australian
Statistics (‘ABS’). We assert that the ABS is best placed to conduct
a national prevalence study of at-risk
adults, which could be linked to its
national annual Crime Victimisation Survey (a section of the Multipurpose
Household Survey designed
to provide statistics on a small number of topics).
This approach would be cost effective and timely and, as the ABS already
surveys on sensitive issues including personal safety, the items
focused on risk provided in this commentary could be added to determine
extent and types of victimisation that are occurring within this population. To
our knowledge, no elder abuse prevalence studies
using ‘adult at
risk’ criteria, rather than age, have been conducted. Such data would be
beneficial in informing the
need for services and development of appropriate
responses in Australia.
There are calls for a national elder abuse prevalence study to be conducted
in Australia to provide an evidence base to anchor the
development and provision
of adequate support, resources and future planning to address this problem (ALRC
2017). In order to do
this, the contested conceptualisation of
‘older’ must be addressed. Due to the static nature of age
in defining the problem, this comment has argued that
research into elder abuse should move forward to encompass dynamic measures
risk, and that distinct categorisations that remove elder abuse from other crime
an index of vulnerability for
adults which could be adapted by the ABS to uncover the proportion of the
Australian population at
risk for abuse and the extent in which this population
is victimised. Overall, it is proposed that the ABS is best placed to conduct
affordable and effective national prevalence study of elder abuse victimisation
in Australia.
Legislation
The Care Act 2014
Australian Bureau of Statistics 2016,
3101.0 — Australian
Demographic Statistics, Jun 2016
, ABS, viewed 5 December 2017,
http://www.abs.gov.au/ausstats/abs@.nsf/products/1CD2B1952AFC5E7
ACA257298000F2E76?OpenDocument.
Australian Institute of Health and Welfare (AIHW) 2017,
AIHW, viewed 5 December 2017,
https://www.aihw.gov.au/reports-statistics/population-groups/older-people/overview.
Australian Law Reform Commission (ALRC) 2013,
Access all ages —
older workers and Commonwealth laws
, Australian Law Reform Commission.
Australian Law Reform Commission (ALRC) 2017,
Elder abuse: a national
legal response
, Australian Law Reform Commission.
Australian Network for the Prevention of Elder Abuse 1999,
network for the prevention of elder abuse working definition
December 2017, http://www.eapu.com.au/anpea.
Boldy, D, Horner, B, Crouchley, K, Davey, M & Boylen, S 2005,
‘Addressing elder abuse: Western Australian case study’,
Australasian Journal on Ageing
, vol. 24, no. 1, pp. 3–8.
Brammer, A & Biggs, S 1998, ‘Defining elder abuse’,
Journal of Social Welfare and Family Law
20, no. 3, pp.
Clare, M, Blundell, B & Clare, J 2011,
Examination of the extent of
elder abuse in Western Australia: a qualitative and quantitative
investigation of existing agency policy,
service responses and recorded
, Advocare.
Cooper, C, Selwood, A & Livingston, G 2008, ‘The prevalence of
elder abuse and neglect: a systematic review’,
Age and Ageing
37, no. 2, pp. 151–60.
De Donder, L, Luoma, M.-L, Penhale, B, Lang, G, Santos, AJ, Tamutiene, I,
Koivusilta, M, Schopf, A, Ferreira Alves, J, Reingarde,
J, Perttu, S, Savola & T, Verté, D (2011) ‘European
map of prevalence rates of elder abuse and its impact for future
European Journal of Ageing
, vol. 8, no. 2,
pp. 129–43.
Dixon, J, Manthorpe, J, Biggs, S, Mowlam, A, Tennant, R, Tinker, A &
McCreadie, C 2009, ‘Defining elder mistreatment: reflections
on the United
Kingdom study of abuse and neglect of older people’,
, vol. 30, no. 3, pp. 403–20.
Elder Abuse Prevention Unit 2015,
Year in review 2015
, Uniting Care
Fulmer, T, Ramirez, M, Fairchild, S, Holmes, D, Koren, M & Teresi, J
2000, ‘Prevalence of elder mistreatment as reported
by social workers in a
probability sample of adult day health care clients’,
Journal of Elder
Abuse & Neglect
, vol. 11, no. 3, pp. 25–36.
Garre-Olmo, J, Planas-Pujol, X, López-Pousa, S, Juvinyà, D,
Vilà, A & Vilalta-Franch, J 2009, ‘Prevalence
and risk factors
of suspected elder abuse subtypes in people aged 75 and older’,
of the American Geriatrics Society
, vol. 57, no. 5, pp. 815–22.
Goergen, T 2001, ‘Stress, conflict, elder abuse and neglect in german
nursing homes: a pilot study among professional caregivers’,
Elder Abuse & Neglect
, vol. 13, no. 1, pp. 1–26.
Goergen, T & Beaulieu, M 2013, ‘Critical concepts in elder abuse
International Psychogeriatrics
, vol. 25, no. 8, pp.
Harbison, J, Coughlan, S, Beaulieu, M, Karabanow, J, VanderPlaat, M,
Wildeman, S & Wexler, E 2012, ‘Understanding “elder
neglect”: a critique of assumptions underpinning responses to the
mistreatment and neglect of older people’,
Journal of Elder Abuse &
24, no. 2, pp. 88–103.
Hughes, M & Heycox, K 2010,
Older people, ageing and social work
Allen and Unwin, Sydney, NSW.
Kaspiew, R, Carson, R & Rhoades, H 2016,
Elder abuse: understanding
issues, frameworks and responses
, Australian Institute of Family Studies,
Melbourne, Vic.
Kurrle, SE, Sadler, PM & Cameron, ID 1992, ‘Patterns of elder
Medical Journal of Australia
, vol. 157, no. 10, pp.
Kurrle, SE, Sadler, PM, Lockwood, K & Cameron, ID 1997, ‘Elder
abuse: prevalence, intervention and outcomes in patients
referred to four aged
care assessment teams’,
Medical Journal of Australia
, vol. 166, no.
3, pp. 119–22.
Laumann, EO, Leitsch, SA & Waite, LJ 2008, ‘Elder mistreatment in
the United States: prevalence estimates from a nationally
representative
The Journals of Gerontology Series B Psychological Sciences and
Social Sciences
, vol. 63, no. 4, pp. 248–54.
Livermore, P, Bunt, R & Biscan, K 2001, ‘Elder abuse among clients
and carers referred to the Central Coast ACAT: a descriptive
Australasian Journal on Ageing
, vol. 20, no. 1, pp. 41–7.
Lowenstein, A, Eisikovits, Z, Band-Winterstein, T & Enosh, G 2009,
‘Is elder abuse and neglect a social phenomenon? Data
from the first
national prevalence survey in Israel’,
Journal of Elder Abuse &
, vol. 21, no. 3, pp. 253–77.
National Ageing Research Institute and Australian Association of Gentrology
2016, Submission no. 65 to the Australian Law Reform Commission
Protecting the Rights of Older Australians from Abuse, 17 August 2016, viewed 5
December 2017, https://www.alrc.gov.au/sites/default/files/subs/65._
national_ageing_research_institute_and_australian_association_of_gerontology.docx.
National Disability Services 2016,
Safeguarding vulnerable people:
workbook and resources,
National Disability Services Western Australia
National Research Council 2003,
Elder Mistreatment: Abuse, Neglect, and
Exploitation in an Aging America
, The National Academies Press, Washington,
New South Wales Legislative Council 2016,
Elder abuse in New South Wales,
General Purpose Standing Comittee No. 2.
Office of the Public Advocate and Queensland Law Society 2010,
abuse: how well does the law in Queensland cope
?, Queensland Government,
viewed 5 December 2017, http://www.justice.qld.gov.
au/__data/assets/pdf_file/0007/54691/elder-abuse_issues-paper.pdf.
Office of the Public Guardian 2015,
OPG safeguarding policy
December 2017,
https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/safeguarding-policy-protecting-vulnerable-adults/sd8-opgs-safeguarding-policy.
Payne, BK 2005,
Crime and elder abuse: an integrated perspective
edn, Charles C Thomas Publisher, Springfield, IL.
Pillemer, K, Burnes, D, Riffin, C & Lachs, M 2016, ‘Elder abuse:
global situation, risk factors and prevention strategies’,
Gerontologist
, vol. 56, no. 12, pp. 194–205.
Pillemer, K & Finkelhor, D 1988, ‘The prevalence of elder abuse: a
random sample survey’,
The Gerontologist
, vol. 28, no. 1, pp. 51–7.
Pittaway, ED & Westhues, A 1994, ‘The Prevalence of elder abuse and
neglect of older adults who access health and social
services in London,
Ontario, Canada’,
Journal of Elder Abuse & Neglect
vol. 5, no. 4, pp. 77–94.
Sacco, VF 1993, ‘Conceptualizing elder abuse: implications for research
and theory’ in W Bilsky, W Pfeiffer & P Wetzels
of Crime and Criminal Victimisation
, Ferdinand Enke, Stuttgart.
Sherwood-Johnson, F 2013, ‘Constructions of “vulnerability”
in comparative perspective: Scottish protection policies
and the trouble with
“adults at risk”’,
Disability & Society
no. 7, pp. 908–21.
Sooryanarayana, R, Choo, W & Hairi, NN 2013, ‘A review on the
prevalence and measurement of elder abuse in the community’,
Violence, & Abuse
, vol. 14, no. 4, pp. 316–25.
Special Taskforce on Domestic and Family Violence in Queensland 2015,
now, not ever: putting an end to domestic and family violence in Queensland
Queensland Government, viewed 5 December 2017,
https://www.communities.qld.gov.au/resources/gateway/campaigns/end-violence/about/special-taskforce/dfv-report-vol-one.pdf.
Criminology Lecturer, Griffith
Criminology Institute, Griffith University, 176 Messines Ridge Road, Mount
Gravatt Qld 4122, Australia.
Email: e.moir@griffith.edu.au.
Social Work Lecturer,
School of Occupational Therapy and Social Work, Curtin University, Kent Street,
Bentley WA 6102, Australia.
Email: barbara.blundell@curtin.edu.au.
Criminology Senior
Lecturer, School of Law, University of Western Australia, 35 Stirling Highway,
Crawley WA 6009, Australia. Email:
joe.clare@uwa.edu.au.
Adjunct Senior Research
Fellow, School of Population and Global Health, University of Western Australia,
35 Stirling Highway, Crawley
WA 6009, Australia. Email:
mike.clare@uwa.edu.au.
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (497 KB)
PDF format (670 KB)
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter