URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/journals/MqLawJl/2018/3.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 15:21:25
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Bedson, Lois; Chesterman, John; Woods, Michael --- "The Prevalence of Elder Abuse among Adult Guardianship Clients" [2018] MqLawJl 3; (2018) 18 Macquarie Law Journal 15
THE PREVALENCE OF ELDER ABUSE AMONG ADULT GUARDIANSHIP CLIENTS
I INTRODUCTION
II LANGUAGE
III GUARDIANSHIP AND ELDER ABUSE
A The Present Relationship
B Is Guardianship Overused?
C Should Guardianship Even be Used at All?
D The Current Context: Moving towards Compliance with the CRPD
IV RESEARCH ON ELDER ABUSE PREVALENCE IN AUSTRALIA
A General Community
B People with Cognitive Impairment
V NEW RESEARCH ON ELDER ABUSE PREVALENCE AMONG VICTORIA’S PUBLIC GUARDIANSHIP CLIENTS
A Research Methods
1 Definition of Elder Abuse
2 First Data Set
3 Second Data Set
4 Abuse Time-Frame
B Findings and Discussion
1 Prevalence Rates
2 Forms of Elder Abuse
(a) Individuals Experience Multiple Forms of Elder Abuse
(b) Prevalence of Different Forms of Abuse
3 Elder Abuse Victims’ Experience of Abuse
4 Likelihood of Substantiation
5 Disability and Elder Abuse
6 Age and Elder Abuse
7 Perpetrators of Elder Abuse
C Limitations
VI CONCLUSION
THE PREVALENCE OF ELDER ABUSE AMONG ADULT GUARDIANSHIP
LOIS BEDSON,* JOHN CHESTERMAN** AND MICHAEL WOODS***
In this article, a picture of elder abuse among Victorian guardianship
clients is presented using data from two time periods (2013-14
and 2016-17). The
first data set is drawn from a case file review of clients of the Office of the
Public Advocate undertaken by a
researcher, and the second data set is from data
entered into mandatory abuse fields by victims’ guardians. The second data
set finds elder abuse at higher rates overall, which is likely explained by the
additional knowledge guardians would have about the
persons that the researcher
would not. Research found elder abuse prevalence rates among guardianship
clients of 13 per cent in 2013-14
and 21 per cent in 2016-17. It also found that
women experienced elder abuse at higher rates than men and that clients with
or intellectual disability were more likely to have experienced elder
abuse than those with other disability types. This new research
people with cognitive impairment who are usually left out of national elder
abuse prevalence studies, and provides evidence
elder abuse in this cohort that is otherwise absent. The high rates of elder
abuse found in the research
presented here attest to the significant, and
perhaps over-utilised, role that adult guardianship plays in present-day elder
response strategies.
I INTRODUCTION
Elder abuse is now widely recognised as a social problem in Australia, and,
unless effective preventative measures are put in place,
one that is anticipated
to grow with our aging population. With this in mind, the question of how to
prevent and how to respond to
situations of elder abuse has been seriously
engaged at both state and national levels. For example, the Victorian Royal
into Family Violence in 2016 reported on the needs and experiences of
older people.
Furthermore, in
February 2016, the (now former) Attorney-General of Australia, Senator the Hon
George Brandis QC, asked the Australian
Law Reform Commission (ALRC) to conduct
an inquiry into protecting the rights of older Australians from
The ALRC released its final
report in June 2017.
Through this engagement, it has become widely accepted that there is a lack
of information on the prevalence of elder abuse in Australia.
The Australian
Institute of Family Studies’ (AIFS) report
Elder Abuse: Understanding
Issues, Frameworks and Responses
‘establishe[d] that there is very
limited evidence in Australia that would support an understanding of the
prevalence of elder
Recognising this lack of evidence as a serious challenge to the development of
evidence-based policy and program responses, one of
the ALRC’s 43
recommendations was that ‘[t]here should be a national prevalence study of
elder abuse to build the evidence
Following the release of the ALRC report, the Australian Government committed
to funding a national prevalence study. In late 2017,
work on establishing the
parameters of the study commenced, and Phase One of the research program is
currently underway. It is designed
to prepare the ground for the national
prevalence study by developing a definition of elder abuse to apply in future
research and
instruments needed to assess
prevalence.
While a national prevalence study will provide a crucial baseline for those
seeking to prevent and respond to elder abuse, it is anticipated
results of this study (like the vast majority of national prevalence studies
that came before it) will exclude the experiences
of people with cognitive
impairment. Most national prevalence studies look at elder abuse among community
dwelling elders with the
capacity to respond to telephone
interviews,
missing the experiences
of older people living in aged care or with significant dementia or other forms
of cognitive impairment.
It is likely that this research method dominates the
field because it is cheaper to implement. To date, only one national elder abuse
prevalence study has included older people with cognitive
impairment.
The proportion of older people who suffer from cognitive impairment –
almost one in ten – combined with the positive correlation
cognitive impairment and risk of elder abuse suggests that almost all national
prevalence studies undertaken to date underrepresent
the rate of elder abuse in
many countries.
As the Office of
the Public Advocate (OPA) submitted in their report for the Australian
Guardianship and Administration Council,
only by being inclusive of the
experiences of people with cognitive impairment will it be possible to measure
the full extent of
elder abuse in the Australian
The OPA shared this
report with the Australian Institute of Family Studies to help inform their work
in developing the parameters
for the Australian national prevalence study. The
study we present here, based on research into the experiences of elder abuse
the OPA’s guardianship clients, seeks to share information about
this ‘hard to reach’ cohort to help fill this
research gap.
The high rates of elder abuse found in this Victorian cohort are
attributable, at least in part, to the fact that guardianship is
a protective
reasons for a guardianship application
to be made. These fulfil Victoria’s
legislative requirements that a ‘need for a guardian’ (in these
cases the need
for guardian decisions that provide protection from abuse) be
demonstrated in concert with the other two key requirements: that the
a ‘disability’ and ‘is unable by reason of the disability to
make reasonable judgments in respect of
all or any of the matters relating to
her or his person or
circumstances’.
However, a concern exists that the high rates of elder abuse in this cohort
may be partially attributable to overuse of guardianship
as a health and
community service sector response to elder abuse. Two developments – law
reform in the guardianship realm away
from ‘best interests’
decision-making towards substituted judgement (which prioritises the will and
preferences of the
person under guardianship) and the proposed development of
‘at-risk adult’ protection agencies across Australia –
work together to address these
II LANGUAGE
In this paper, for brevity, the term ‘guardianship clients’ will
be used to refer to people who have been made subject
to a guardianship order by
the Victorian Civil and Administrative Tribunal (or the relevant court or
tribunal in other states and
territories). The Public Advocate, Victoria's
guardian of last resort, was appointed as guardian to each of the
‘guardianship
clients’ referred to in the research data presented
below. The Public Advocate then delegated the appointments to guardians
by the Office of the Public Advocate.
For shorthand, this paper will also use the term ‘elder abuse
victim’ to refer to people identified by the researcher
as experiencing
elder abuse. This does not imply that the persons themselves identify with this
term. It also uses the term ‘elder
abuse’ to encompass both abusive
actions and neglectful inaction, irrespective of the intentions of the
perpetrator.
III GUARDIANSHIP AND ELDER ABUSE
The Present Relationship
In Australia, the appointment of an administrator or adult guardian is a
well-known, and commonly employed, response to elder abuse
in situations where
the victim has significant cognitive impairment. This involves ‘the
removal of decision-making authority
from the victim and the appointment of a
substitute decision maker’
for financial or lifestyle decisions. These processes occur in line with state
and territory legal frameworks that govern guardianship
administration.
Guardianship is
a protective jurisdiction so that, when elder abuse is suspected, the
appointment of a substitute decision maker
is often intended to protect the
person from further financial exploitation and physical, psychological or other
As the research data presented below demonstrates, there is a strong
relationship between experiences of elder abuse and guardianship.
Australia’s intellectual and practical engagement with the United
Convention on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities
has raised questions about the place of
substitute decision-making regimes, such as guardianship, in our legislation.
These questions
involve asking: ‘is guardianship overused?’ and
‘should it even be used at all, even in circumstances involving
Is Guardianship Overused?
While responses that effectively prevent further harm and abuse are certainly
required, Chesterman highlights the important concern
that guardianship is being
used as an almost ‘default’ response to elder
The most important of his
concerns is that invoking the protections of guardianship impinges on the rights
of an older person’s
ability to make their own decisions and, potentially,
their ability to drive the responses to abuse that they would most appreciate.
Chesterman argues that Australia’s state and territory ‘response
strategies could be improved by prioritising what service
responses, if any, the
person wants, even when the person has significant cognitive
impairment’,
deferring so readily to guardianship and administration as solutions. This
thinking aligns with the
’s aim to overcome systemic barriers
to access to justice for people with
disability,
and improving their
equal recognition before the law by providing necessary supports for them to
enact decisions based on their will
preferences.
Solving the problems Chesterman identifies would require a two-pronged
approach to guardianship law reform. Firstly, to bring laws
into alignment with
. Secondly, to develop services to reduce the need for the health
and community sector to rely on guardianship proceedings to respond
to suspected
elder abuse.
Should Guardianship Even be Used at All?
The place of guardianship in Australia’s future has been a much-debated
topic since the release of the
, with some suggesting art 12
necessitates the abolition of all substitute decision-making
arrangements.
However, the ALRC
has convincingly argued that this is not the
confirming the ongoing
relevance of the ‘crucial [protective] role’ played by the guardian
of last resort as a necessary
human rights backstop, albeit in a more limited
set of circumstances.
The ALRC argued that bringing Australia’s decision-making frameworks
into alignment with art 12, which has happened to varying
extents in different
surrounding the
appointment of another to act in a person’s stead and also upon the
by which the person is to
This includes
consideration of the extent to which they promote the will and preferences of
the person and enable them to be supported.
The Current Context: Moving towards Compliance with
Australia ratified the
in July 2008. The
the potential to profoundly change how law conceptualises and responds to
disability’
as it clearly
shifts away from a medical model of disability towards a social model, seeking
reasonable accommodations by state parties
to overcome systemic barriers to
equality. Indeed
[t]he decade since the CRPD entered into force has witnessed a variety of law
and policy reform activity ... in response to a growing
awareness of barriers to
equal justice and other legal issues confronting people with disability ...
Since ratification of the CRPD
... a number of jurisdictions have completed ...
reviews of their guardianship laws. [In the realm of guardianship,] [t]he
inquiries, proposals and measures have ... been intended to give
effect to the CRPD’s
principles.
Law reform bodies in Queensland, Victoria, the Australian Capital Territory,
New South Wales and Tasmania reviewed their guardianship
and produced
recommendations (draft proposals in NSW and Tasmania) for change in 2010, 2012,
2016, November 2017 and December 2017
respectively.
All of the reviews
recommended the removal of ‘best interests’ style principles from
their laws in order to promote the
person’s human rights (including the
importance of supporting and considering their will and preferences) and better
Victoria is currently the closest of these jurisdictions to achieving this
Guardianship and Administration Bill 2018
was introduced to the
Victorian Parliament in March
The Bill does not contain
any reference to ‘best interests’ style decision making. Rather, the
primary object of the
Bill ‘is to protect and promote the human rights and
dignity of persons with a disability by having regard to the
Convention on
the Rights of Persons with Disabilities
, recognising the need to support
persons with a disability to make, participate in and implement decisions that
affect their lives’.
Bill states that ‘the will and preferences of a person with a disability
should direct, as far as practicable, decisions
made for that
By moving away from ‘best interests’ style considerations in the
appointment of a guardian by the relevant court or tribunal
and the practice of
guardianship,
Chesterman’s
concerns about the potential for overuse of guardianship will be at least partly
addressed – as guardianship
appointment and practice will be less weighted
towards what society might think of as a ‘good outcome’ for the
and more considerate of the person’s own rights, will and
preferences.
Another way in which Australia could provide better support to people with a
disability, in the context of elder abuse, is by enacting
the adult safeguarding
legislation and funding adult safeguarding agencies as was proposed in the
ALRC’s elder abuse inquiry.
The ALRC’s report identified that
‘[n]o government agency ... has the clear statutory role of safeguarding
and supporting
adults who, despite having full decision-making ability, are
nevertheless at risk of
To address this
gap, they recommended that ‘[a]dult safeguarding laws be enacted in each
state and territory ... [which] give
adult safeguarding agencies the role of
safeguarding and supporting “at-risk
would safeguard and support a larger cohort than those covered by state and
territory guardianship legislation, by including
people across the spectrum of
decision-making abilities who find themselves at risk of abuse or neglect. In
discussing who should
hold these new responsibilities, the ALRC stated that
‘[e]xisting public advocates and public guardians have expertise in
to abuse, and may be appropriate for this broader safeguarding
function ... [h]owever, some states or territories may prefer to give
to another existing body or to create a new statutory
Therefore, the future may see an expansion of public guardians’
responsibilities in some states and territories, as well as
continuing to offer
protection and support to older people with limited decision-making ability that
are experiencing or are at immediate
risk of abuse, in alignment with the
. The ALRC’s proposed adult safeguarding agencies would give
services an alternative response pathway to guardianship in suspected
abuse cases involving people with cognitive impairment. These changes, alongside
the type of service response improvements
proposed by Chesterman (which will be
supported by funding to statutory adult safeguarding agencies), would reduce the
of guardianship being overused, or taking away more rights than it
The research presented below could valuably be repeated, following these
changes, to assess the impact of these policies on the prevalence
rates of elder
abuse among guardianship clients. For example, how effective have the alternate
service pathways been on reducing
the use of guardianship as an elder abuse
response strategy?
IV RESEARCH ON ELDER ABUSE PREVALENCE IN
General Community
As discussed above, Australian research to date has provided very limited
evidence about the prevalence and incidence of elder abuse.
Two population-based
studies looked at women’s health outcomes and women’s personal
safety (with a focus on sexual assault
and intimate partner violence), but were
limited in the extent to which they aligned with definitions of elder
Another set of studies
involved the analysis of data from calls to elder abuse helplines. These studies
shed light on the set of
circumstances when ‘elder abuse is known or
suspected and a person concerned has decided to seek
In two of these
three studies, the reporter of the abuse was either the victim or an interested
party. One study looked solely at
case file data based on direct reports from
victims of elder abuse.
While direct reports provide more reliable data than reports from interested
parties (as they do not involve subjective judgements
experience), studies that limit themselves to direct reports by victims provide
a narrower view of the scope
of elder abuse in Australia than they could
otherwise. This is because they do not capture information about abuse
experienced by
people with significant cognitive impairment.
In 2017, State Trustees Limited funded a market research company to undertake
a small study involving telephone interviews with 820
people over 60 years old.
The study collected information on whether or not the people had experienced
financial elder abuse themselves
(seven per cent of women and one per cent of
men) and whether or not they knew of someone who had been
mistreated.
People with Cognitive Impairment
Without the benefit of results from a population-based prevalence study that
includes the experiences of people with cognitive
impairment,
one set of data that
could provide insight into elder abuse among this cohort are the case files of
people subject to adult guardianship
or administration orders. Of course, people
under guardianship or administration orders are a much narrower group than
people with
cognitive impairment (which includes an estimated 8.8 per cent of
all Australians over 65 years old who suffer from
as not everyone with
cognitive impairment requires a substitute decision-maker or meets the legal
requirements for guardianship.
However, as mentioned above, this intervention is a relatively common systemic
response to situations where elder abuse is suspected
or known, and the person
lacks decision-making abilities in the relevant area (for example, to make a
decision about where and with
whom they should live). As such, examination of
this data is potentially fruitful.
State Trustees Limited funded Monash University to undertake the
‘Protecting Elders Assets Study’ from 2009–2011.
included the 2010 report
Prevalence of Financial Elder Abuse in
and looked at
de-identified case file data from sources which included the Office of the
Public Advocate, Victoria’s guardian
of last resort and State Trustees
Limited, Victoria’s administrator of last resort. Referring to its
analysis of data from
the Office of the Public Advocate, the report found:
This data gives ... insight into the [demographic characteristics] ... that
underlie the vulnerability to financial abuse for these
clients. A majority of
clients were women, the mean age was 80 years, and 12 per cent were in their
nineties. Clients were most likely
to be vulnerable to financial
‘exploitation’ because of a diagnosis of dementia, with three
quarters of women and nearly
60 per cent of men having this diagnosis. Men were
more likely than women to be vulnerable because of physical disability or
Because this study concerned population-wide prevalence of financial abuse,
it did not report on prevalence or incidence rates of
elder abuse among people
under administration or guardianship.
V NEW RESEARCH ON ELDER ABUSE PREVALENCE AMONG
VICTORIA’S PUBLIC GUARDIANSHIP CLIENTS
The research findings presented here draw from two separate data sets that
both consider the question of elder abuse prevalence among
guardianship clients
of Victoria’s Office of the Public Advocate. The first data set is drawn
from the first study to consider
the prevalence of elder abuse among
guardianship clients.
research examined Victorian guardianship case files for clients received by the
OPA in the 2013-14 financial year, for evidence
that the person had experienced
elder abuse. The second data set, which was also derived from OPA guardianship
matters over a one
year period (2016-17), used a different data collection
method to identify which matters involved elder abuse.
The original research project, which generated the first data set, was
commenced by OPA in 2015. The central questions it sought to
answer were:
• What was the incidence of elder abuse among our guardianship
• What were their circumstances?
• How did OPA help protect them from the abuse?
In late 2015, in response to this initial project, mandatory fields were
added to OPA’s information management system to capture
information about
violence, abuse and neglect in all open
Information inputted into
those fields was used to create the second data set referred to in this paper.
This provides a point of
comparison to the first data set, as well as providing
additional information about the prevalence of elder abuse among guardianship
Alongside the organisational benefit to OPA of gaining a greater
understanding of guardianship clients’ experiences of elder
broader purpose of the research presented here is to:
• contribute quantitative evidence that sheds light on the prevalence
of elder abuse among people under guardianship; and
• highlight the importance of capturing the experiences of people with
cognitive impairment in future national elder abuse prevalence
Research Methods
Definition of Elder Abuse
For the purposes of this study, elder abuse was defined as ‘a single or
repeated act, or lack of appropriate action, occurring
within any relationship
where there is an expectation of trust which causes harm or distress to an older
research, an ‘older person’ was defined as a person that was aged 65
or over at the time their matter was received
First Data Set
The first study considered all guardianship matters that were received by OPA
in 2013-14, with the goal of identifying people that
came under OPA
guardianship, and had experienced elder abuse. The researchers identified 388
guardianship clients that were 65 years
or older at the time their matter was
Key information about
these 388 guardianship clients, such as demographics, information about their
guardianship order, and a free
text summary of the matter with relevant
presenting issues for consideration (written by the guardian), was extracted
case management system. The free text summary was searched for
references to elder abuse (any reference to violence, abuse or neglect
suspicions of same). This method returned 59 potential guardianship clients that
may have experienced elder abuse. The full paper
files and electronic records of
the matters identified using this method were then closely reviewed by the
researcher.
Evidence or suspicions of abuse were documented in the files in various ways.
For example, guardians recording information provided
in conversation by
community service providers or accusations by family members, paperwork from
guardianship application processes,
and letters from clinicians or community
service providers (often provided as evidence in guardianship hearings). By
files for references to different types of abuse (including
neglect), the researcher determined that there were 51 people who had,
balance of probability, experienced elder abuse.
Most of those excluded for the final stage were identified as people at the
centre of a family conflict situation that involved multiple
accusations of
abuse levelled by different parties at each other. In these situations, and
other situations where accusations of
abuse made by family lacked independent
support, the deciding factor in whether they were included in the sample was
whether the
appointed guardian believed the accusations to be plausible.
There was one clear exception to this pattern of abuse accusations that
lacked corroboration. One of the 59 people identified in the
initial filtering
process was excluded from the sample on the grounds that, while they had
experienced abuse,
the abuse had
not occurred in a relationship of trust and did not satisfy the definition of
‘elder abuse’.
For the 51 elder abuse victims identified of the 388 people in the sample,
additional information was collected about the type or
experienced and the characteristics of the perpetrator. Basic quantitative
analysis was also undertaken on the full
range of variables available. The small
sample size meant most relationships between variables lacked statistical
significance, but
nevertheless indicate elder abuse prevalence and the
demographic profile of this cohort.
Second Data Set
The second data set comprises individuals who were subject to guardianship
orders and who had at least one of these matters closed
(including instances
where an OPA guardian is reappointed under a new order) in the 2016-17 financial
year. The study used closed,
rather than open, cases to guarantee the mandatory
abuse fields had been completed. This ensured that the most complete and
estimates of elder abuse were obtained. To be included in this data
set, the individuals also needed to meet the age selection criterion,
to be 65 years or older on the day the matter was received. This resulted in a
data set of 487 people.
To identify which of those people had likely experienced violence, abuse or
neglect, information from the new mandatory abuse fields
was used. These fields
are completed by the person’s guardian, either during the course of the
matter, or at the point of closing
the file. The two fields collect information
the abuse identified has been substantiated.
The design of the fields reflects the difficulties of collecting information
with cognitive
impairment, particularly with the additional challenge of elder abuse victims
not wanting to disclose abuse perpetrated
by their loved ones. Hence, the abuse
and neglect fields are designed to capture violence, abuse and neglect that the
guardian, either ‘reasonably suspects’ has occurred,
or believes ‘on balance of probability’ has
In this paper, abuse of guardianship clients that is ‘reasonably
suspected’ will be referred to as ‘abuse not substantiated’
and the abuse for which there is strong evidence will be referred to
‘abuse substantiated’. When the two abuse cohorts
are combined in
the findings they will be referred to as ‘abuse victims’. While it
is possible that a guardian’s
‘reasonable suspicion’ might be
incorrect, and individuals may have been incorrectly identified in this sample
victims’, it is contended that the ‘reasonable
suspicion of abuse’ of a guardian, with access to the professional
expertise of the person’s health and community service workers, is an
appropriate method of measuring abuse prevalence.
Demographic data and information entered into the mandatory abuse and neglect
fields were extracted from OPA’s case management
system in accordance with
the selection criteria described above. Note that the case management data
fields do not clearly identify
the perpetrators of the abuse. Hence, there is no
straightforward way of ensuring these abuse instances occurred in ‘a
relationship
where there is an expectation of trust’ in accordance with
the definition of ‘elder abuse’. For the purposes of
this paper, we
rely on evidence from the first data set, in which 51 out of 52 older
guardianship clients identified as experiencing
abuse were determined to be
experiencing ‘elder abuse’. Therefore, it is reasonable to assert
that most, if not all,
of the 102 abuse victims identified in the second data
set are also ‘elder abuse’ victims. This paper proceeds on the
assumption that identifying this cohort as 'elder abuse victims' will not
significantly skew the analysis that follows.
Abuse Time-Frame
For the purposes of this study, no selection criteria were placed on the
time-frame for the identified elder abuse. This is because
of the difficulty in
establishing exactly when and where the abuse occurred when it is not directly
observed or involves victims
with cognitive impairment. Hence, the elder abuse
reported here includes victims that experienced abuse at some point in the past,
as well as victims of ongoing abuse.
Findings and Discussion
Prevalence Rates
In 2013-14 (the first data set), 13 per cent of OPA’s older
guardianship clients had experienced elder
Looking at prevalence
rates by gender shows that 17 per cent of women in this cohort had experienced
elder abuse, compared with eight
per cent of men.
Data from 2016-17 (the second data set) showed that elder abuse was
substantiated for 13 per cent of guardianship clients. It also
revealed that a
further eight per cent of this cohort experienced elder abuse that was not
substantiated. In total, the data suggested
that elder abuse had impacted the
lives of 21 per cent of guardianship clients (see Table 1 below).
Table 1. Prevalence of elder abuse among guardianship clients
Substantiated
Not substantiated
Total identified
The recent data also suggested that gender played a role in how likely people
were to have experienced violence, abuse or neglect.
Women were more likely than
men to have experienced elder abuse (24 per cent compared to 17 per cent).
Forms of Elder Abuse
Based loosely on the types of violence and abuse referred to in the
Violence Protection Act 2008
and tailored to
OPA’s client group, the categories used in this paper are: physical abuse,
psychological or emotional abuse
(including social isolation), financial abuse,
sexual abuse, impairment related abuse, other violence and abuse, and neglect
acts of omission.
(a) Individuals Experience Multiple Forms of Elder
In 2013-14, information gleaned from the case files suggested that 71 per
cent of elder abuse victims had experienced more than one
form of abuse. Again,
this rate was higher for women (76 per cent). The second data set showed
comparatively low rates of multiple
forms of abuse recorded against victims (33
per cent). This discrepancy is likely attributable to the differences in the way
information was collected, and not representative of a real shift. In
creating the first data set, the researcher combed the case
files, searching for
references to elder abuse, and documented all that came up. For the second data
set, guardians completed two
mandatory fields relating to abuse, and could not
close the file without doing so. As a hurdle on the way to closing a matter,
guardians were less likely to record every form of abuse that had
affected that person, especially if the abuse was not continuing
or central to
the reason that the guardianship order was required.
It is plausible that the overall elder abuse prevalence rates derived from
the second data collection method are more accurate (given
the guardian’s
in-depth knowledge of the person’s circumstances) but provide less nuanced
reporting on abuse types. Whether
the results from the first or second data set
are more representative of the population, or the truth lies somewhere in the
this data suggests that at least one third of elder abuse victims under
guardianship have experienced multiple forms of abuse that
would likely have
involved multiple instances of abusive acts or neglectful inactions.
(b) Prevalence of Different Forms of Abuse
The two data collection periods and methods generated somewhat different
prevalence rates across the different types of elder abuse
(see Table 2 below).
The fact that the second data set contained, on average, fewer forms of abuse
per elder abuse victim would have
influenced the proportions reported below, and
this could partly explain the lower rates seen in the second period. However, it
explain the higher prevalence rates apparent in the areas of financial
abuse, neglect and impairment related abuse in the second
Table 2. Prevalence of each abuse type among older guardianship
Financial abuse
Psychological and emotional abuse
Physical abuse
Neglect and acts of omission
Other abuse
Sexual abuse
Impairment related abuse
The elder abuse experiences of the OPA’s guardianship clients with high
rates of financial abuse is broadly aligned with much
of the elder abuse
literature, which recognises financial abuse as one of the most common forms of
elder abuse in the general
The 2016-17 data
shows that ten per cent of all older guardianship clients experienced, or were
suspected to have experienced, financial
Psychological and emotional abuse and physical abuse were reported at
relatively high rates in both periods. Interestingly, the rates
reported in this
cohort were not quite as high as the Australian Longitudinal Study of
Women’s Health, which found that just
under eight per cent of Australian
women over 70 years old had experienced some form of abuse, with name calling
and put downs the
most common forms
This highlights the
need to define when mistreatment passes into elder abuse. The longitudinal study
asked three questions:
• Has anyone close to you tried to hurt you or harm you recently?
• Has anyone close to you called you names or put you down or made you
feel bad recently?
• Are you afraid of anyone in your family?
OPA guardians would not necessarily have categorised all instances of name
calling as elder abuse, especially if they did not occur
on a regular basis.
Hence, OPA data may have used a higher threshold when categorising an experience
as abusive, compared to the
Australian Longitudinal Study of Women’s
Health. It is also possible that guardianship clients were less able to report
than people without significant cognitive impairment.
OPA clients experienced neglect at higher rates than are reported in the
general community,
respective prevalence rates of four per cent in 2013-14 and eight per cent in
2016-17 (of all older guardianship clients). Given
the protective jurisdiction
of guardianship, and the higher than average dependency rates of the cohort, it
is not surprising that
abuse and neglect rates of guardianship clients would be
higher than that of the general community.
Another unique feature of this cohort is their susceptibility to
‘impairment related abuse’. This form of elder abuse
is unique to
people with some form of physical or cognitive impairment, for example, hearing
loss, mobility challenges or memory
loss. Older people under guardianship
experienced ‘impairment related abuse’ at rates of almost one in 20
people (five
per cent) in 2013-14 and one in five elder abuse victims in the
2016-17 cohort. This highlights the importance of further research
'impairment related abuse' among older people with cognitive impairment, as well
as the relationship between dependency and
elder abuse.
Elder Abuse Victims’ Experience of
Financial abuse was the most common form of elder abuse experienced by
victims in both periods (57 per cent in 2013-14 and 46 per
cent in 2016-17).
Examples of financial abuse experienced by guardianship clients in the first
data set included forging and misusing
Power of Attorney documents, forging the
person’s signature to effect transfer of the person’s home to the
perpetrator,
and perpetrators spending the older person’s money on
themselves.
Table 3. Proportion of elder abuse victims who experienced each form of
elder abuse
Financial abuse
Psychological and emotional abuse
Physical abuse
Neglect and acts of omission
Other abuse
Sexual abuse
Impairment related abuse
In 2013-14, psychological and emotional abuse and physical abuse were tied as
the second most common form of abuse (47 per cent each).
Interestingly, in
2016-17 their incidence rates were much lower (23 per cent and 18 per cent
respectively). This can partially, but
not fully, be explained by the fact that
guardians were less likely to identify multiple forms of abuse against one
client than the
researcher who created the first data set. Some evidence of this
can be seen in the fact that in 2013-14, almost half of the cases
that reported
one of these forms of abuse also reported the other, while in 2016-17 this
correlation was lower at around one quarter.
In 2013-14, neglect and acts of omission were the fourth most common category
of elder abuse, at 29 per cent. However, in 2016-17,
this was the second most
common category of elder abuse, with 38 per cent of elder abuse victims
suffering neglect. The second data
set showed that 32 per cent of people who had
experienced financial abuse had also experienced neglect. The first data set
a less strong correlation, with only 17 per cent of people identified as
victims of financial abuse also identified as suffering
neglect. This higher
rate of correlation between the categories is notable in that most correlations
between categories were lower
in the second period, but could be partially
explained by the higher rate of neglect reporting in the second period.
Reports of impairment related abuse were more common in the second data set
than in the first: one person out of 51 in the first period
compared with 22
people out of 102 in the second period. This discrepancy is most likely
attributable to the different data collection
strategies, and suggests the need
for further exploration of what sorts of abuse events guardians are categorising
as ‘impairment
related’. This category, along with ‘neglect
and acts of omission’, are both valuable areas for further inquiry
cohort and in future elder abuse studies that include people with cognitive
impairment. The categories ‘other abuse’
and ‘sexual
abuse’ were reported at low rates in both periods. However, the
‘other abuse’ category was notably
lower in the second period than
the first. This discrepancy could also be explored further.
Likelihood of Substantiation
To identify the full extent of the violence, abuse and neglect perpetrated
against people with cognitive impairment, the OPA captured
information about a
guardian’s suspicions of abuse as well as when they were absolutely
confident that abuse had occurred –
herein called
‘substantiated’ and ‘not substantiated’ elder abuse.
This distinction is discussed above in
the research methods used for the second
data set. Table 4 displays the substantiation rates for different types of elder
This demonstrates how difficult it can be to be sure that elder abuse has
occurred or is occurring. Where the guardianship client
is living at home,
sometimes with a suspected abuse perpetrator, and either does not wish to or is
unable to disclose the abuse,
it can be very difficult for their guardian or
community support services to know whether or not abuse has definitively
Table 4. Proportion of persons for whom the identified elder abuse was
substantiated, by abuse type
Impairment related abuse (n=22)
Physical abuse (n=18)
Neglect and acts of omission (n=39)
Psychological or emotional abuse (n=23)
Financial abuse or exploitation (n=47)
TOTAL ABUSE AND NEGLECT (n=102)
Overall the substantiation rate was 60 per cent. Impairment related abuse and
physical abuse, which are probably the most visible
forms of abuse (lack of
hearing aids or wheelchair; bruising and more serious injuries), had the highest
rates of substantiation
(86 per cent and 78 per cent respectively). On the other
hand, less than half of the people who were suspected of experiencing financial
abuse had that abuse substantiated (49 per cent). This lower rate may stem from
the difficulties inherent in proving financial abuse
(particularly the less
significant forms), or it could be a reflection of the fact that guardians do
not make financial decisions
and therefore have limited access to information
they are appointed, would report higher rates of substantiation of
financial elder abuse. This is a potential area for future collaborative
Disability and Elder Abuse
Both data sets showed that people with intellectual disability and people
with dementia were more likely than people without these
disabilities to be
victims of elder abuse (see Table 5 below). The second data set (which reported
a higher proportion of elder abuse
victims overall) showed that 24 per cent of
people with an intellectual disability and 23 per cent of people with dementia
were victims
of elder abuse.
Table 5. Elder abuse prevalence rates by disability type
Intellectual disability
Mental illness
Acquired Brain Injury
Physical disability
Both data sets also presented the same broad picture of the prevalence of
elder abuse across the five main disability types recorded
in OPA's case
management system, with intellectual disability and dementia showing the highest
risk and acquired brain injury, physical
disability and mental illness showing
lower risk profiles.
Mental illness, however, stands out as the only group for whom prevalence
rates did not rise, despite the higher overall rate of identified
victims in the
second data set. The groups of guardianship clients with mental illness or
intellectual disability also grew faster
than those with other disability types.
It is not clear why this growth occurred, but the data suggests that elder abuse
the driver for the growth in the numbers of older guardianship clients
with a mental illness.
Age and Elder Abuse
The relationship between the age of guardianship clients and elder abuse is
not straightforward, and requires further exploration.
While the overall abuse
rates were lower in 2013-14 than 2016-17 in every age group (and for each
gender), there were some patterns
worth mentioning.
In both 2013-14 and 2016-17, the prevalence of elder abuse was higher for
women than men, both overall and in each age group. In 2013-14,
the prevalence
rate for both men and women was lowest in the 85 years and over age group.
However, in 2016-17, while men over 85
years old experienced less elder abuse
than men in the younger age groups (65-74 years and 75-84 years), women in the
group experienced a higher prevalence of elder abuse than any other
cohort (27 per cent).
The apparent rise in abuse rates for women over 85 years old cancelled out
the apparent fall in abuse rates for men in that cohort,
returning a relatively
flat overall profile of elder abuse prevalence by age (20 per cent for 65-74
year olds, 21 per cent for 75-84
year olds, 22 per cent for people over 85
Table 6. Proportion of elder abuse victims by age group and gender
The interplay between age and gender is worth exploring further, to test the
hypothesis that elder abuse prevalence rates in the older
age groups (for
example 85 years and over) vary with gender. The second data set suggests that
older women may be more vulnerable
to elder abuse than the other cohorts
explored here. The first data set suggests the opposite, that older female
guardianship clients
may be less vulnerable to elder abuse than the younger
cohorts. As discussed earlier, the second data set is believed to have more
reliably identified elder abuse than the first data set, due to the closer
relationship between the guardian that identified the
abuse and the guardianship
client. Further exploration of this issue would help decide whether older female
guardianship clients
are in fact more vulnerable to elder abuse.
It is very likely that a positive correlation exists between cognitive
impairment and elder abuse
between age and cognitive
impairment.
However, further
research is required to further elucidate these relationships.
Perpetrators of Elder Abuse
As elder abuse occurs in the context of relationships characterised by trust,
it is unsurprising that there is significant overlap
between family violence and
elder abuse. The data from 2013-14 shows that in practice most, but not all,
elder abuse of guardianship
clients fits under the banner of family violence.
This is because family violence against older people requires the perpetrator to
be either a family member or in a family-like relationship with the victim,
whereas elder abuse just requires that they be in a relationship
characterised by trust, which includes family and family-like relationships as
well as friends and others with whom the
person has formed an intimate
connection.
Of the victims of elder abuse identified in 2013-14, nine out of ten
experienced family violence. Women were more likely to have experienced
abuse in a family violence context than men (95 per cent compared with 69 per
cent). This large discrepancy suggests that gender
may play an important role in
determining people’s experiences of elder abuse, and that this is an area
for further research.
Table 7 below provides information on perpetrators of elder abuse. The three
largest categories of perpetrator were all family members:
children and their
spouses, the spouse of the victim, and other relatives. The data analysis found
67 perpetrators of abuse across
the 51 cases identified in 2013-14. Just under
30 per cent of elder abuse victims were being abused by multiple
perpetrators.
Table 7. Perpetrators of elder abuse (2013-14)
Number of perpetrators identified (n=67)
Children and their partners
Other relative
Friend/Neighbour
The method of data collection used in 2016-17 did not allow analysis of
perpetrator-victim relationships.
Limitations
These two methods of estimating elder abuse prevalence among guardianship
clients have some limitations. The first method used to
estimate prevalence was
likely to have returned an underestimate of elder abuse rates, as the free-text
case summaries used to identify
potential elder abuse would not always have
mentioned all the abuse the person had
experienced.
Abuse suffered may
be hidden from interested parties and service providers, it may have occurred in
the past, or it may not be central
to the issues that brought the matter to the
guardianship jurisdiction. These would all be reasons that the person’s
case summary
and files may not contain reference to their experience of elder
abuse. Note that the first case file review study employed the World
Organisation’s widely accepted definition of elder abuse as ‘a
single or repeated act or lack of appropriate action,
occurring within any
relationship where there is an expectation of trust which causes harm or
distress to an older
The case review
method allowed the identification of the relationship between victim and
perpetrator.
The prevalence rates of abuse and neglect gathered from the mandatory data
fields would return a more accurate estimate than the file
review method. This
is because the appointed guardian would have gathered a good understanding of
the person’s situation by
the time they closed the
The main limitation of
this data set is that the case management system does not allow easy reference
to the perpetrator or perpetrators
of any abuse or neglect. Hence, it is
possible that a few of the instances of abuse and neglect returned by this
method may include
abuse that occurred outside of a ‘relationship of
trust’. This abuse is not normally recognised as ‘elder
For these reasons, the two sets of results generated by these
different research methods are not precisely comparable. However, as
above in the research methods section, the analysis undertaken on the first data
set strongly suggests that the number
of cases among the second data set that
did not involve ‘elder abuse’ and ‘relationships of
trust’ would
An overarching limitation, when considering the prevalence rates of elder
abuse among people with cognitive impairment, is that people
under guardianship
represent a very small subset of this cohort, and, as such, prevalence rates of
elder abuse among guardianship
clients are not representative of this broader
VI CONCLUSION
The Australian Government responded to the ALRC’s recommendations
coming out of the elder abuse inquiry by committing to lead
the development of a
National Plan to Combat Elder Abuse and funding a research program that includes
a national elder abuse prevalence
study. Given the dearth of population-level
evidence about elder abuse, this research will set the stage for the development
needed evidence-based policy and services in this area.
Only one national prevalence study, to date, has been inclusive of the
experiences of people with cognitive
impairment.
This is because
conducting studies that include people with cognitive impairment are more
expensive and more difficult. However,
with just under one in ten Australians
over 65 years old suffering from dementia, and strong evidence to suggest a
positive correlation
between cognitive impairment and elder abuse, it is
imperative that future research includes this cohort. The research presented
here contributes to the task of measuring the prevalence of elder abuse. In
particular, it contributes to the difficult task of measuring
elder abuse among
people with cognitive
impairment.
It found elder abuse
prevalence rates among guardianship clients of 13 per cent in 2013-14 and 21 per
cent in 2016-17. It also found
that women experienced elder abuse at higher
rates than men, and that the vast majority of the elder abuse identified was
by relatives and also constituted family violence. Guardianship
clients with dementia or intellectual disability were more likely
experienced elder abuse than those with other disability types. Financial abuse
was the most commonly identified form of
elder abuse in both periods, with
neglect, psychological abuse and physical abuse also identified at significant
rates (from four
to eight per cent) in both periods.
The comparatively high rate of ‘impairment related abuse’
identified by guardians in the 2016-17 period (five per cent)
is of interest, as
this is not a category seen in elder abuse research conducted with people living
independently in the community.
It suggests that older people with cognitive
impairment and higher levels of dependency may be vulnerable to a wider range of
of elder abuse than others. Further research into this cohort would be
valuable, as would any research that further unpacks the relationships
elder abuse, cognitive impairment and age.
Given the questions raised about the overuse of guardianship as a health and
community service sector response to elder abuse among
people with cognitive
impairment, it is unclear whether the differing rates of abuse by disability
for action (aside from the development
of alternative service responses to guardianship for this cohort, for example,
through funding
for adult safeguarding agencies). However, it would be
worthwhile for public guardians to be made aware of the potential for increased
susceptibility to elder abuse among guardianship clients who have dementia or an
intellectual disability. Public guardians may also
like to implement violence
and abuse screening tools that identify dementia and intellectual disability as
risk factors.
Where possible, it would be interesting to replicate this research in
different jurisdictions, ideally before and after the law reform
and service
initiatives discussed herein. Doing so would shed light on the success or
otherwise of these reforms from a human rights
perspective.
Finally, we see these findings as a driver for change towards research into
elder abuse being consistently inclusive of the experiences
of people with
cognitive impairment and as contributing to building the knowledge base about
this cohort.
* B Comm (UniMelb), B Arts (Hons) (UniMelb), Senior Policy and Research
Officer at the Office of the Public Advocate, Victoria.
** LLB (UniMelb), B Arts (Hons) (UniMelb), PhD (UniMelb), Deputy Public
Advocate at the Office of the Public Advocate, Victoria.
*** B Sc (Curtin University of Technology), B Comm (Curtin University of
Technology), B Psych (Hons) (UWA), PhD (UniMelb), Data Analyst
for the Office of
the Public Advocate, Victoria.
Victoria, Royal Commission into Family Violence,
Recommendations
(2016) vol 5, 67–98.
Australian Law Reform
Commission,
Elder Abuse—A National Legal Response
, Report No 131
(2017) 18 [1.7] (‘
Elder Abuse Report
Rae Kaspiew, Rachel Carson and
Helen Rhoades, ‘Elder Abuse: Understanding Issues, Frameworks and
Responses’ (Research
Report No 35, Australian Institute of Family Studies,
February 2016) 5.
Elder Abuse Report
above n 2, 9.
Briony Dow and Bianca
‘Elder Abuse National Research: Definition’
(Discussion Paper, Australian Institute of Family Studies, 2017) 1.
See, eg, National Initiative
for the Care of the Elderly, ‘Into the Light: National Survey on the
Mistreatment of Older Canadians
2015’ (Research Report, Canadian Network
for the Prevention of Elder Abuse, June 2016); Alice Mowlam, Rosalind Tennant,
Dixon and Claudine McCreadie, ‘UK Study of Abuse and Neglect of
Older People: Prevalence Study Report’ (Research Report,
National Centre
for Social Research, August 2007).
Isabel Iborra Marmolejo,
‘Elder Abuse in the Family in Spain’ (Research Report, Queen Sofia
Centre for Studies on Violence,
It is estimated that 8.8 per
cent of Australians over 65 years old suffer from dementia (Australian Institute
of Health and Welfare,
Australia's Health 2016
(2016) 107); Kaspiew,
Carson and Rhoades, above n 4, 8
Lois Bedson, ‘Are
National Elder Abuse Prevalence Studies Inclusive of the Experiences of People
with Cognitive Impairment?
Findings and Recommendations for Future
Research’ (Research Report, Office of the Public Advocate, May 2017).
Guardianship and
Administration Act 1986
(Vic) s 22(1).
Elder Abuse Report
above n 2, 15–16.
John Chesterman,
‘Taking Control: Putting Older People at the Centre of Elder Abuse
Response Strategies’ (2016) 69
Australian Social Work
Guardianship
and Administration Act 1986
Guardianship Act 1987
Guardianship and Administration Act 2000
(Qld); Subject to the laws and
terminology in the different states and territories,
‘administration’ usually refers to
substitute decision-making in
relation to estate and financial matters and ‘guardianship’ covers
lifestyle matters including
accommodation, services and health-related
Chesterman, above n 13,
Convention on the Rights
of Persons with Disabilities
, opened for signature 30 March
2007, 2515 UNTS
(entered into force 3 May 2008) art 13.
Ibid art 12.
Australian Law Reform
Commission,
Equality, Capacity and Disability in Commonwealth Laws
Report No 124 (2014) 52 [2.71] (‘
Equality, Capacity and Disability
[2.73]–[2.90].
Elder Abuse Report
above n 2, 382 [14.32].
Equality, Capacity and
Disability Report
, above n 19, 58–9 [2.101] (emphasis in
Fleur Beaupert, Linda
Steele and Piers Gooding, ‘Introduction to Disability, Rights and Law
Reform in Australia: Pushing Beyond
Legal Futures’
Guardianship and
Administration Act 2000
Guardianship and Administration Act
Guardianship and Management of Property Act 1991
Guardianship Act 1987
Guardianship and Administration Act
Queensland Law Reform
Commission,
A Review of Queensland’s Guardianship Laws
, Report No
67 (2010); Victorian Law Reform Commission,
Guardianship
, Final Report No
24 (2012); ACT Law Reform Advisory Council,
Guardianship Report
Report (2016); New South Wales Law Reform Commission,
Review of the
Guardianship Act 1987
Draft Proposals (2017); Tasmania Law Reform
Review of the
Guardianship and Administration Act 1995
Issues Paper No 25 (2017).
For example, Queensland
recommended that the ‘“best interests” approach reflected in
the current General Principle
7(5)’ be replaced with promotion of the
‘adult’s rights, interests and opportunities’ to give the
Principles a strong human rights focus and reflect more closely the
relevant articles of the CRPD (Queensland Law Reform Commission,
A Review of
Queensland’s Guardianship Laws
, Report No 67 (2010) xii); Victoria
recommended that ‘the phrase “best interests of the person”
should be replaced
with the “promotion of the personal and social
wellbeing of the person”’ as a guiding principle for substitute
decision making’ (Victorian Law Reform Commission,
Guardianship
Final Report No 24 (2012) 92); NSW recommended that ‘new decision-making
principles should require representatives to give
effect to a person’s
will and preferences wherever possible rather than a person’s “best
interests”’
(New South Wales Law Reform Commission,
Review of the
Guardianship Act 1987
, Draft proposals (2017) 2).
Guardianship and
Administration Bill 2018
Ibid s 7(1).
Ibid s 8(1)(b).
All reviews have also
recommended that guardianship appointments must only be made where they are the
least restrictive response
possible to resolving the matter, for example, in
Victoria’s new Bill VCAT is directed to consider whether other less
restrictive
options such as mediation might be able to resolve the matter
(Guardianship and Administration Bill 2018 (Vic) cl 31(b)).
Elder Abuse Report
above n 2, 384 [14.40].
Ibid 25 [1.48].
Kaspiew, Carson and
Rhoades, above n 4, 6.
State Trustees Limited,
‘Financial Elder Abuse: A Survey of Victorians’ (Poster presented at
National Elder Abuse Conference, Sydney, 19-20 February
See also Bedson, above n
10, for a discussion of the requirements of such a study.
Australian Institute of
Health and Welfare,
Australia's Health 2016
(2016) 108.
The legal requirements are
set out in the
Guardianship and Administration Act 1986
(Vic) s 22. To
provide some context, an estimated 81,771 Victorians over 65 years old suffered
from dementia in 2016 (8.8 per cent
of 929,214 older Victorians), while only 349
Victorians over 65 with dementia were subject to a guardianship order in
2016-17. Hence,
an estimated 0.4 per cent of Victorians with dementia were OPA
guardianship clients in 2016 (Australian Bureau of Statistics,
Population Estimates by Age and Sex, Regions of Victoria, 2016
(2017) Data
cube sheet 6; Australian Institute of Health and Welfare, above n 39, 108).
Jo Wainer, Peteris Darzins
and Kei Owada, ‘Prevalence of Financial Elder Abuse in Victoria:
Protecting Elders’ Assets
Study’ (Research Report, State Trustees,
10 May 2010).
Monash University used OPA
data, along with other sources, to explore the characteristics of people
experiencing financial elder
abuse, but did not comment on the prevalence of
elder abuse in this cohort. (Wainer, Darzins and Owada, above n 41,
The mandatory fields, which
collect information about the types of abuse the person has experienced, and
whether or not the abuse
was substantiated, must be completed before the file
can be closed.
World Health Organisation,
A Global Response to Elder Abuse and Neglect: Building Primary Health Care
Capacity to Deal with the Problem Worldwide
http://www.who.int/ageing/publications/ELDER_DocAugust08.pdf
Some people were subject to
multiple guardianship or temporary guardianship orders in the one year, and so
the research consistently
refers to people or ‘guardianship
clients’, as opposed to new matters, so the prevalence rates of the
population are
not skewed by multiple entries relating to the one person.
The person’s human
right to freedom of movement was violated by procedures put in place to manage
wandering behaviours of
other residents.
Individuals may have
multiple orders across the period reviewed. The 487 people identified were
involved in a total of 520 matters
recorded in OPA’s case management
The level of evidence used
to make this determination would not necessarily guarantee a conviction in
That 13 per cent is 51 of
388 guardianship clients for whom OPA received guardianship orders in
Family Violence
Protection Act 2008
Some of the less commonly
used categories here are: ‘Impairment related abuse’ includes
deliberately restricting a person’s
access to their hearing aids, mobility
aids or medication; ‘other violence and abuse’ includes everything
that does not
fit in to the other categories and may include legal or civil
abuse and systemic abuse; and ‘acts of omission’ is defined
‘the failure to act upon a legal duty or responsibility’ and
includes doctors who fail to offer medical treatment
because they base the
decision not to offer treatment on judgements about the value of the person's
life, due to their disability,
rather than on the clinical value of the
treatment (Office of the Public Advocate, ‘Guide to Completing Violence,
Neglect Fields on Resolve’ (Practice Guide, Office of the Public
Advocate, September 2015) 3 [3.2.5]).
Financial abuse and
psychological abuse are the two abuse types most frequently reported to elder
abuse helplines in Australia.
No Australian prevalence rates exist, however the
World Health Organisation’s 2015 report on elder abuse showed financial
estimates of between one and nine per cent in high- and middle-income
countries (the highest range of all common abuse types) (Kaspiew,
Rhoades, above n 4, 5–7).
The 2013-14 rate of
financial abuse among guardianship clients was 7.5 per cent.
Australian Longitudinal
Study on Women’s Health,
1921-26 cohort: Summary 1996-2013
<https://www.alswh.org.au/images/content/pdf/Cohort_summaries/ALSWH_1921-2_%20cohort_summary.pdf>.
The WHO reported estimated
prevalence rates for neglect constituting elder abuse of zero to six per cent
across high- to middle-income
countries (World Health Organisation,
Report on Ageing and Health
http://apps.who.int/iris/bitstream/handle/10665/186463/9789240694811_eng.pdf;jsessionid=05905CCB857F8B3092C50DD9A4FAC8E4?sequence=1
The longitudinal study of Australian women found that around 20 per cent had
experienced neglect. However, the questions asked
included ‘Are you sad
and lonely often?’ and ‘Do you feel that nobody wants you
around?’ which are not necessarily
indicative of neglect of a
person’s daily care needs (World Health Organisation,
World Report on
Ageing and Health
http://apps.who.int/iris/bitstream/handle/10665/186463/9789240694811_eng.pdf;jsessionid=05905CCB857F8B3092C50DD9A4FAC8E4?sequence=1
Forms of abuse that were
experienced by small number of our sample were excluded from this table so as
not to cause confusion. For
example, one woman was identified as having suffered
sexual abuse and that abuse was substantiated; this would give sexual abuse
substantiation rate of 100 per cent.
World Health Organisation,
World Report on Aging and Health
, above n 56, 75
Australian Institute of
Health and Welfare, above n 39, 108.
Both overall rates of elder
abuse and rates for individual types of abuse would be underestimated.
World Health Organisation,
A Global Response to Elder Abuse Report
, above n 45, 1.
Except for the rare matters
where the person moved out of Victoria or died before the guardian became
familiar with their matter.
Out of 52 identified cases
of abuse of older people (65 years and over), in only one did the abuse not
occur in a ‘relationship
Marmolejo, above n 8.
Bedson, above n 10,
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (390 KB)
PDF format (463 KB)
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter