URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/journals/ALRS/2010/11.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 14:13:16
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Thornton, Margaret --- "Women and Discrimination Law" [2010] ALRS 11; In Patricia Easteal (ed), Women and the Law in Australia, LexisNexis
In Patricia Easteal (ed),
Women and the Law in Australia
, LexisNexis
Butterworths, Sydney,
, pp 131-51 (pre-publication version)
WOMEN AND DISCRIMINATION
Margaret Thornton
Professor of Law
Australian National
margaret.thornton@anu.edu.au
Introduction
The division between public and private life that has
been historically etched onto the bodies of men and women lies at the heart
women’s struggle for
As Patricia
Easteal makes clear in Chapter 1, this division has been normalised through the
assignation of women to caring and unpaid
work in the home, leaving men free to
dominate public affairs and the world of paid work. This chapter will examine
the efficacy
of sex discrimination legislation as a mechanism for breaking down
stereotypical assumptions in the
particularly the notion that the ideal worker is unencumbered and committed to a
full-time career.
In the course of the evaluation, I will elaborate on the main conceptual,
substantive and procedural problems posed by the legislation
in order to
highlight the difficulties for complainants. I will focus on the
Discrimination Act 1984
(Cth) (SDA) as it has national application, but I
will also make reference to distinctive aspects of State and territory
legislation;
thoroughgoing analysis of the nine jurisdictions that presently proscribe sex
discrimination in Australia is beyond the scope of
Endorsing the Status Quo
The objects of the SDA are ambitious,
promoting the principle of equality between men and women and specifying the
elimination
of discrimination in certain
However, there
is a significant gap between the rhetoric and the reality as the legislation
continues to uphold the problematic division
between public and private life. As
legal regulation is largely confined to the public sphere, a truly radical
approach would be
required to address properly the inequities of the private
sphere. Even then, the legislation does not apply to the public sphere
whole but is restricted to certain specified areas of public and quasi-public
life, such as employment, education, accommodation,
access to goods and
services, and clubs, with minor variations between jurisdictions. Nevertheless,
the dividing line between public
and private is not rigid. The inclusion of
grounds, such as the proscription of discrimination against workers with family
responsibilities,
provides evidence of the dynamic nature of gender relations.
When we move
beyond the rhetorical aims, it can be seen that the philosophy underpinning the
legislation is one of formal equality,
which involves treating like cases alike
– regardless of sex or other characteristic. Thus, when Mary applies for a
position with XYZ P/L, a multinational company, she has to be judged
on her merits according to the selection criteria in the same
way as John and
other male applicants. She cannot be rejected at the outset because of
stereotypical assumptions about women in positions
of authority, and she cannot
be interrogated about whether she intends to have children, her method of
contraception or her child
care arrangements – unless the same questions
are asked of male applicants.
Substantive equality is directed towards
achieving equitable outcomes for an entire class. Thus, XYZ could take on board
the under-representation
of women in management by developing strategies to
change the gender profile of the organisation, such as identifying talented
creating opportunities and providing leadership
measures represent a ‘soft’ form of affirmative or positive action,
which does not conflict with the norms of anti-discrimination
legislation.
‘Hard’ forms, such as quotas, could lead to a complaint of
discrimination if a man missed out on a benefit
because of a perception that
women were being treated more
favourably.
Australian anti-discrimination legislation makes scant provision for
proactive initiatives, apart from ‘special measures’
circumstances, such as pregnancy or
childbirth.
underlying assumption is one of strict equal
despite the fact that the UN Convention on the Elimination of all Forms of
Discrimination against Women, on which the SDA
is based, is sex-specific, while
the SDA itself, like other Australian anti-discrimination legislation, is
sex-neutral, that is,
it applies equally to men and women. Such contradictions
point to the fact that the legislation consists of an amalgam of both radical
and conservative provisions, which reflects its contentious
contradictions contribute to the contested character of discrimination.
legislation is designed to provide a course of action and a remedy for an
aggrieved individual (the complainant) rather than punishment
of the perpetrator
(the respondent). The significance of the individualised focus is that the
emphasis inevitably tends to be on
the tip of Easteal’s iceberg: that is,
complaints that are overt and close to the
example, if Bloggs, the CEO of XYZ, tells Mary that she was the ‘best
qualified but the wrong sex’, we would assume
that she had been treated
less favourably than John, the successful applicant. If Bloggs did not make such
a crass comment but proceeded
to reject Mary anyway, it would be difficult for
her to prove discrimination, however outstanding her qualifications, for an
is all too often able to proffer a seemingly rational
non-discriminatory explanation for its conduct. Thus, while claiming to have
appointed John ‘on merit’, XYZ would probably assert that some
aspect of Mary’s qualifications – or experience
management style – was wanting. Even if Mary suspects that the reason
given was pretextual, she will be unable to
disentangle the discriminatory
conduct from the social prejudice against women in positions of authority and
that she was treated less favourably than John because of her sex.
The systemic discrimination that lies deep within the social psyche
resistant to exposure and remediation under individual complaint-based
discrimination legislation.
Despite the problems of form and substance that
inhere within the legislative framework, including the numerous exceptions and
qualifications
that evince deference to vested interests, the hope is that the
legislation will ultimately effect a modicum of substantive social
virtue of the cumulative effect of the resolution of myriad individual
complaints. The fact that thousands of complaints
are lodged annually, and show
no signs of
that the aspiration may be unrealisable. Anyone proposing to have recourse to
the legislation needs to be realistic about
what is achievable.
Total Sex Discrimination Complaints
(including breastfeeding, pregnancy, carer or parental
status, sexual harassment and family responsibilities)
total complaints
Threshold Issues
(i) Lodgement of Complaints
SDA operates concurrently with State and territory legislation, which means that
Mary is free to choose under which Act to lodge
her complaint. An agency such as
the Australian Human Rights Commission (AHRC) will then attempt conciliation. If
unsuccessful, Mary
may proceed to a formal hearing before a tribunal or court.
She will then carry the burden of proof and possibly face the legal costs
XYZ, as well as her own, if unable to make out her case successfully. This
possibility represents a powerful incentive to agree
to a settlement at the
conciliation stage.
I stress that barely two per cent of all complaints
proceed beyond conciliation to a formal hearing. However, our understanding of
discrimination law and practice derives almost entirely from that small
proportion of decisions because they are determined in public
and the written
judgments are reported. In contrast, conciliation is largely a confidential and
opaque process
(See Ch 2).
It might also be noted that neither causation
nor any other issue has to be formally proved at the conciliation stage.
(ii) Direct discrimination
The alleged discrimination must
arise from a proscribed ground and complainant and respondent need to be
connected by an unbroken
linear thread; that is, the discriminatory conduct must
be shown to have been
by the respondent. Direct discrimination
focuses on the tip of the iceberg and conduct that is overt, such as the comment
that Mary was the ‘wrong sex’. Comparability is the
essence of direct discrimination in all jurisdictions except the
ACT, where the
focus is on treatment that is unfavourable or effects
disadvantage.
Comparability requires a complainant to demonstrate that she was treated less
favourably than another in the same or similar circumstances.
Issues such as the
feminised character of precarious
dearth of women in
management,
complicate the comparability requirement. This has become more contentious since
a disability case decided by the High Court.
of the High Court conceptualised the appropriate comparator as a secondary
student without a disability who engaged in
the same conduct as a complainant
disability.
Discrimination could be established only if the hypothetical comparator had been
similarly disruptive in the classroom but was not
suspended. The narrow
conceptualisation of the comparator apropos
, who is now expected
to evince the same characteristics as the complainant,
has significant
ramifications for direct discrimination complaints
Mary would have to establish that she was treated less favourably than John
but, apropos
, she would not necessarily succeed. In the case of a
senior position, an applicant’s qualifications and experience need to
evaluated in light of the organisational
criteria do not speak for themselves. There is inevitably going to be deference
towards the views of XYZ, which might choose
to emphasise one criterion, such as
overseas experience, to argue that Mary was less meritorious than John. The
chances of success
for a complainant at the recruitment level are also reduced
because the respondent inevitably has a monopoly over the evidence.
proving her case, Mary has to show on the balance of probabilities that XYZ
caused the harm. However, it is notable that the normal
civil standard has been
subtly elevated in discrimination complaints because of the moral odium
associated with naming someone ‘a
discriminator’.
The standard of ‘reasonable satisfaction’, developed by Dixon J in
Briginshaw v
Briginshaw,
Plevitz argues that the
standard has become the accepted test
in the anti-discrimination
There are numerous reported decisions in which a complainant has been unable to
discharge the burden of proving that the alleged
discrimination arose from a
proscribed ground. Instead, some other seemingly rational explanation, such as
the personality failings
complainant
‘organisational change’ is
burden of proof is heightened by the inequality of bargaining power between
Mary, an individual, and XYZ, a powerful corporate
respondent.
(iii) Indirect Discrimination
If overseas
experience was a specified selection criterion, Mary might be better off
conceptualising her complaint as a manifestation
of indirect discrimination.
This form of discrimination takes a halting step towards addressing systemic
discrimination by considering
practices that are neutral on their face but
exercise a disparate effect by virtue of sex or other characteristic. Mary, like
other women in the company, has not had overseas experience as social norms
expected her to follow her male partner and accept positions
close to the family
indirect discrimination purports to recognise that men and women are rarely
similarly situated because of their different life
experiences, the complainant
and respondent must still be linked to the impugned practice, but proving the
nexus is not easy. Most
legislation includes a complex four-part test, although
the SDA now incorporates a somewhat simpler
be required to show that there was a requirement or condition with which she was
expected to comply, which disadvantaged
her by virtue of her sex and which was
not reasonable. Reasonableness remains the key element, although the burden of
proof shifts
respondent,
is not the case with most State legislation.
It would seem to be relatively
uncontentious that the requirement or condition that Mary had to satisfy was to
have had an overseas
posting, either with XYZ or some other company, although a
threshold question is whether an overseas posting was an absolute requirement
The SDA has
dispensed with the complex test of measuring the impact of the requirement or
condition on the complainant’s sex
by proving that proportionately more
men than women could comply with
Even if this
element had to be proved, it would probably not be difficult to show that a
substantially higher proportion of men could
this would depend on the numbers of complying men and complying women in
relation to the total pools. In undertaking the
computation, care has to be
taken not to perpetuate discrimination against women in light of their historic
exclusion from senior
While the concept of disadvantage, which has replaced proportionality in the
SDA, is not defined, a court could draw on the notion
of disproportionality
without becoming enmeshed in statistical complexities. It might take judicial
notice of the fact that men find
it easier to accept overseas postings than
women generally. Also of relevance to the picture being constructed would be the
that women comprise only 10.7 per cent of executive managers in
evidence revealed that only those women without family responsibilities were at
the managerial level in XYZ in contradistinction
to the experience of male
managers, the issue of disadvantage would be confirmed.
The key question on
which Mary’s case would turn would be whether the requirement or condition
of having held an overseas posting
is reasonable or not. The slippery
subjectivity of reasonableness is a vexed one and many complainants falter on
this part of the
Despite the
reversal of the burden of proof, employer prerogative enables the respondent to
reframe and constrain what constitutes
discrimination.
Even if criteria to help determine reasonableness are included in the
legislation, they must still be evaluated in light of organisational
SDA refers to the nature of the disadvantage, the feasibility of mitigating it
and the proportionality of the
disadvantage.
the requirement is non-negotiable, the disadvantage is devastating. However, as
reasonableness is a question of fact, all circumstances
need to be weighed up,
including cost, the respondent’s financial circumstances and available
alternatives.
XYZ would undoubtedly argue that overseas experience was essential for a
senior managerial position with a multinational company.
The question is whether
there are alternatives or not. Could the training be done on-line or through
simulations? Reasonableness
is not just a question of convenience for the
respondent,
the standard is not particularly
higher burden of proof attaching to complainants does not seem to carry over to
the reversal of proof of an evidentiary burden.
This means that, despite the
specification of criteria for reasonableness, corporate power and administrative
convenience continue
privileged.
Generalist courts, including the High Court, have tended to adopt a more
deferential stance towards respondents in discrimination
cases, which does not
augur well for women seeking to rely on indirect
discrimination.
Grounds of Discrimination
‘Sex’ is the term that is used consistently
within the legislation, with the exception of Tasmania, which uses
What is the difference? ‘Sex’ clearly has a biological dimension and
is sometimes contrasted with ‘gender’
to refer to the socially
constructed elements of masculinity and
femininity.
other occasions, sex and gender are used loosely and interchangeably so that the
biological dimensions of ‘sex’ merge
with the socio-cultural
elements, as may be seen from the legislative inclusion of ‘a
characteristic that is generally imputed’
to persons of one
provision would encompass gendered stereotypes, such as an assumption that men
are better suited to authoritative positions.
Marital status, pregnancy or
potential pregnancy, family responsibilities and sexual harassment are all
included in the SDA, denoting
the way they are interlinked, although one or more
of these grounds may be raised in conjunction with the ground of sex itself.
Breastfeeding
is a discrete ground in a number of jurisdictions, but not the SDA
where it is encompassed by ‘a characteristic that appertains
generally to
the most part, each ground is treated as a mirror image of the other, although
sexual harassment is treated separately, as will
Sex may also
intersect with other proscribed grounds, such as race, disability, sexuality and
age. The issue of intersectionality
involving discrete grounds is theoretically
easier to deal with at the State or territory level, where all grounds are dealt
in the one Act. At the federal level, there are separate Acts for
sexuality is not proscribed at all. However, as AHRC administers all federal
Acts and, if Mary happened to be an Indigenous
or non-English speaking
background (NESB) woman and she believed that race was a factor in her
rejection, she would not have to choose
between the grounds of race and sex in
the lodgement of her complaint. Intersectionality, however, is not properly
addressed by either
the legislation or
jurisprudence.
Indeed, as well as sex plus race (
, sex plus sexuality (
sex plus disability (
problematic for women. In
sex, sexual harassment and disability were dealt with simultaneously, but not
intersectionally, by the Federal Magistrates Court.
In upholding the complaint
on the ground of disability, McInnes FM observed of the complainant, a former
Lieutenant in the Navy,
that her ‘recollection of the claims relating to
sexual harassment and unlawful discrimination should be viewed in the light
her then suffering from serious depressive illness and that she was then
undergoing active
treatment’.
In an intersectional analysis, the Court would have considered whether the
incidents of sexual harassment and sex discrimination
contributed to the
complainant’s disability.
The intersection of sex plus a cognate
ground, such as marital status, pregnancy, family responsibilities or sexual
harassment is
more familiar. However, it is notable that when sex is coupled
with one of these grounds, attention tends to be deflected away from
discrimination itself. Sexual harassment and reproduction appear to be somewhat
more tractable to remediation under the legislation
than the abstract notion of
sex discrimination, at least at the conciliation level, although the number of
complaints lodged remain
high. The way managerialism and merit, for example,
become entwined with masculinity and power cannot be easily captured, as
by the XYZ scenario. Despite the best endeavours of feminist scholars
to change conventional understandings of sex and gender, female
remains at the heart of discrimination against women in the workforce, which
does little to challenge the power structures
underpinning the
discrimination.
(ii) Marital Status
Marital status has attracted
relatively little litigation in its own right although it is a ground that is
often coupled with sex.
What if Mary’s partner, David, worked for OPQ, a
rival company of XYZ and she was refused the position as a result? Would this
constitute unlawful discrimination against her on the ground of marital status?
Again, the authorities are divided. In
the complainant was the best qualified applicant but she was cast aside when it
was learned that her husband worked for a rival pharmaceutical
tribunal found that the decision was made on the basis of a characteristic
imputed to married women, namely, they are prone
to tell secrets to their
partners, but the decision was overturned by the NSW Supreme Court. The Court
held that ‘marital status’
did not extend to cover discrimination
based on the identity or situation of one’s spouse, which would
significantly restrict
Mary’s chances of success.
However, in
Waterhouse,
another New South Wales case, in which the complainant had been denied a horse
trainer’s licence because she was married to
a rogue, the court
distinguished
It found that the complainant in that case had a
close relationship with an employee of a competitor rather than because of a
characteristic
generally imputed to married women. This reasoning allowed the
court to find for the complainant. More recently, a biologist who
proceedings in the Federal Court against the Australian Stem Cell Centre because
she was allegedly dismissed for being
married to the centre’s former chief
executive, accepted an out-of-court
settlement.
the problem of
appears to have been partially resolved in New
South Wales, it could re-emerge as a result of
Hence, Mary would
be advised to lodge her complaint under the SDA.
(iii) Pregnancy or Potential Pregnancy
Despite the sustained
efforts to address pregnancy in the workplace through discrimination and
industrial laws,
(See Ch 16)
employers are reluctant to accommodate either the pregnant or
the post partum woman. There is a significant disjuncture between formal
policies that operate at a high level of abstraction and their implementation.
Pregnant women receive general societal approval –
but not in the
workplace. Psychological studies suggest that women, unlike men, trade perceived
workplace competence for warmth when
they become parents, a bias that extends to
typical scenario involves the time a woman informs her employer of her pregnancy
and seeks maternity leave. The employer,
unwilling to accommodate the pregnancy,
grant leave or guarantee the employee’s return to the same or a comparable
maternity leave, alleges poor work performance by the woman, who may
then be dismissed.
In determining whether direct discrimination has occurred or not, the
woman’s treatment is compared with a real or hypothetical
employee who was
similarly situated to the complainant, but with one proviso: ‘the only
impugned discriminant that needs to
be excluded from the characteristics of the
comparator is
pregnancy’.
Even though the accusations and dismissal may well have been pretextual, HREOC
commissioners accepted the respondents’ reasons
for dismissal as bona fide
in as many as one-third of reported cases in the first twenty years of the
underscores both the bias theory as well as the difficulty of satisfying the
burden of proof when the unlawful reason, viz,
dismissal on the ground of
pregnancy, becomes intertwined with the ostensibly lawful reason, namely, the
unsatisfactory performance.
The second typical scenario for women commonly
arises when a woman endeavours to return to work after maternity leave and finds
that she has been effectively demoted because the quality of her work has
been downgraded.
detriment may be found to have occurred, even if the woman is remunerated at the
same rate as
Comparability still has to be established in the case of direct discrimination
on the ground of pregnancy which means that the comparator
is an ‘employee
...who was not pregnant and who was returning after nine months leave and with
rights of the kind reflected
in the maternity leave
proving that the less favourable treatment arose from pregnancy, maternity leave
has been accepted as a characteristic that appertains
generally to pregnant
ground of potential pregnancy refers to discrimination against women of
childbearing age arising from bias in the workplace against
the first case of sex discrimination to go to the High Court, is a classic
example. The complainant was rejected as a trainee pilot
because she was a woman
of childbearing age perceived to be someone likely to take extended leave.
Although this complaint arose
at the level of recruitment, the complainant was
able to demonstrate conclusively that she had performed better on the aptitude
than a number of successful male applicants. The complainant survived a
constitutional challenge to win her case after a protracted
(iv) Family Responsibilities
The ongoing tension between public and
private life is apparent in regard to the struggle to effect a work/family
balance, an issue
that has been described as ‘
topic of the
Century for families, employers and
government’.
This tension has engendered widespread ambivalence within discrimination
discourses. For example, the proscription of discrimination
in employment on the
ground of family responsibilities under the SDA is limited to the dismissal of
the complainant,
including constructive
places the onus on the individual rather than the state. The ground is then
ostensibly sex-neutral and an appropriate comparator
is another worker with
similar workplace duties but without caring responsibilities. The legislative
limitation in the SDA means
that sex discrimination becomes the default
position, although State legislation is less restrictive. Thus, while caring for
elderly parent or other family member is not a characteristic of being
a woman in the way that pregnancy and breastfeeding are, a
claim of direct
discrimination on the ground of sex would have to establish that ‘the
characteristic of having responsibility
to care for their own children is a
characteristic that appertains generally to, or is generally imputed to,
Conflation between family responsibilities and sex may occur via pregnancy
discrimination, as problems in the workforce frequently
arise following the
return from maternity
stage, a familiar scenario is that some women wish to change their conditions of
work from full-time to part-time. This is
where the limited nature of the
proscription of discrimination on the ground of family responsibilities under
the SDA commonly compels
a complainant to resort to sex discrimination. Thus, a
condition or requirement that a woman must work full-time to maintain her
position has been found to constitute indirect discrimination on the ground of
sex, for it is a condition ‘likely to disadvantage
finding of constructive dismissal that constitutes indirect sex discrimination,
rather than discrimination on the ground of family
responsibilities, may result
from the refusal of part-time work because the condition impacts
disproportionately on women. Nevertheless,
the judicial response has been
Ambivalence persists because the question of whether the respondent has acted
reasonably or not is once again the
complainant’s argument was not accepted in
because it was held
that Qantas did not impose a requirement on the complainant to work
problem was that there were no part-time positions available. Driver FM made
clear that an employer can always refuse part-time
work if it is reasonable to
constitutes discrimination is always viewed through the contestable lens of
reasonableness. If the complainant objects to the
work she is assigned after she
returns from leave, it would be clearly unreasonable to assign her even less
favourable assignments,
conduct that may crystallise as
victimisation.
contrast, in
, the evidence revealed that the complainant had taken
some time off as personal sick leave and carer’s leave. Although entitled
to this leave, which was accepted by Raphael FM, Branson J qualified the support
for it on appeal:
[I]t is not illegitimate for an employer, all other things being equal and
provided indirect discrimination is avoided, to favour
for re-employment an
employee who takes limited leave over an employee who regularly takes a lot of
leave, albeit that it is leave
to which he or she is
This view would seem to undermine the already tepid legislative commitment in
the SDA to the non-discrimination principle in respect
responsibilities. While Branson J rejected the finding of sex discrimination and
constructive dismissal, she upheld the
discrimination on the ground of family
responsibilities, but reduced the amount of damages.
Ambivalence would seem
to beset the work/family interface at every
accountant with XYZ, was unable to obtain permission to work part-time and then
sought to work from home two days per week
to care for an asthmatic child. When
XYZ refused permission, she resigned and lodged a complaint of discrimination.
The challenging
question that emerges once again is what degree of accommodation
for Jane’s caring responsibilities is reasonable on the part
Should an accountant be required to be physically present in the workplace on a
full-time basis when the technology is available
to enable the work to be
carried out at home for part of the working week?
The requirement or
condition in
was that the employee should carry out the work of transcription as a
parliamentary Hansard reporter in the designated workplace,
a requirement with
which a higher proportion of the population who did not have the status of a
carer were able to
Reasonableness was once again the sticking point. Phillips JA evinced hostility
towards the idea of accommodating the complainant,
finding it ‘almost
inconceivable that the attendance requirement for sub-editors to attend the
house on sitting days should
be regarded as not
reasonable’.
His view was that employer prerogative should be unquestioningly upheld despite
a workable alternative. The Court of Appeal decision
and that of the Supreme
with the views of the Victorian Civil and Administrative
makes it impossible to give firm advice to Jane. This is despite the fact that
XYZ would carry the burden of proof if Jane
lodged her complaint under the SDA,
whereas Ms Schou bore the burden of proving that the requirement or condition
was not reasonable
under the EOA (Vic). The divided opinions regarding the
work/family intersection highlight the gap between the legislative mandate
the conservative world view of those charged with administering what many still
regard as novel
(iv) Sexual Harassment
Sexual harassment complaints are more
likely to be successfully conciliated than complaints of sex discrimination,
especially if the
behaviour is overtly (hetero)sexed and unwanted; the law has
no interest in consensual sexual activity between
that the greater willingness to accept sexual harassment as a discriminatory
harm is because sex at work has the potential
to disrupt productivity. In
analysing the phenomenon elsewhere, I have argued that the more sexualised
the harassment is in
heterosexed
terms, that is, where there is a
male harasser and a female target, the greater are the chances of success for
the complainant.
If the sexual elements are less overt, the more difficult it is for a
complainant to succeed, as the complaint then merges into an
abstract issue of
sex discrimination.
In all cases, the burden of proof looms large at the
formal hearing level, especially if the impugned conduct took place in private.
Nevertheless, an employer cannot rely on the ‘private’ descriptor to
evade vicarious liability easily, although a harassing
employee may be joined as
respondent.
paradigm of sexual harassment involves a male employee importuning a female
employee for sexual favours, although there are manifold
variations on this
Poniatowska v
Hickinbotham
the complainant had been propositioned by several co-workers, a lewd MMS
photograph had been sent to her, sexually explicit remarks
had been made by a
female supervisor and no remedial action had been taken by management when the
complainant made her grievances
known. Instead, the complainant was sent warning
letters for allegedly poor work performance and then dismissed. Mansfield J did
not agree with the negative assessment of the complainant’s work
performance: ‘In my judgment, the employer then determined
that she was a
person who did not “fit” its work environment because she was a
female who would not tolerate sexual harassment
and the robust work
environment’.
Ms Poniatowska’s complaints in respect of both sexual harassment and sex
discrimination were therefore made out. In terms of
sexual harassment, the
relevant test was found by the judge to be satisfied, that is, a reasonable
person would have anticipated
that the complainant would be offended, humiliated
or intimidated.
addition, the judge found that Ms Poniatowska had been discriminated against on
the grounds of sex, being dismissed in circumstances
that would not have
occurred in the case of a male employee. What is remarkable about this case is
not only the unequivocal acceptance
of the complainant’s version of events
but the amount of damages awarded. The sum of $466,000 was awarded, which is
considerably
more than the few thousand dollars the typical complainant
the case of lewd conduct on the part of co-workers, all tribunals have not been
as quick as Mansfield J in
Poniatowska
to find sexual harassment,
especially if the respondent has a sexual harassment policy in
Nevertheless, sexually permeated workplaces involving the display of
pornographic imagery and the normalisation of obscene language
and crude sexist
jokes may ground a finding of sexual harassment. They are frequently masculinist
workplaces where the female complainant
may be the first woman. Such a case was
which the complainant was the first woman to be appointed as manager of the
Train Crew Assignment Centre for the New South Wales
Rail Corporation. The
hostile sexually permeated work environment was exacerbated by poor management
practices, which caused the
complainant to go on stress leave and then
Mary did happen to be the first woman appointed to a senior managerial position
with XYZ, where there were disaffected male colleagues
who were resentful of her
exercising authority over them, she could find herself subject to harassment
designed to drive her from
the workplace. Bullying conduct and gender
disparagement, however, will not amount to sexual harassment without the
Thus, if Bloggs were to prod Mary in the chest while telling her to do what she
was told, that may not constitute sexual
harassment.
test of being ‘offended, humiliated or intimidated’ would probably
not be met.
Mary were prodded in an erogenous zone, such as the breast, she might succeed in
respect of sexual harassment.
It nevertheless would be open for Mary to
argue that the harassment constituted sex discrimination, although it might be
hard to prove
less favourable treatment, even though she might suspect that a
male manager would not be treated in the same way. In
the NSW Equal Opportunity Tribunal found that ‘sex-based
harassment’ of a petty vindictive kind constituted sex discrimination
because the complainant was treated less favourably than a male manager.
However, one suspects that a barrage of micro-inequities,
including gender
disparaging remarks, may not have quite the same effect when directed at a male
manager. We see once again that
gender specific conduct does not lend itself
well to a strict notion of comparability.
Dispute Resolution
Conciliation
Conciliation
is an informal mode of dispute resolution that involves a range of practices on
the part of an agency. A conciliation
officer acts as a go-between, which means
that a face-to-face meeting may not be necessary. Lawyers are usually not
involved, but
may be represented at a conciliation conference with permission.
For a fuller treatment of ADR,
A settlement can be
effected on whatever terms the parties agree.
As mentioned, conciliation is
the primary mode of resolving disputes under anti-discrimination legislation
with no more than a tiny
fraction of complaints proceeding to formal hearing.
This does not mean that all complaints are resolved satisfactorily; many lapse
or are withdrawn because the complainant is worn down by what seems like a war
of attrition being conducted against
Conciliation does have some very positive features as a mode of dispute
resolution. It is cost-free, expeditious, flexible in terms
of effecting a
settlement and non-threatening. The parties might be represented at a
conciliation conference with permission, but
a face-to-face meeting may not be
necessary. The downside of conciliation is that the entire process takes place
behind closed doors.
The terms of settlement are also confidential, which
inhibits the dissemination of knowledge about discrimination to the wider
Formal Hearings
While the idea of pursuing justice in a public
tribunal or court and being declared to be in the right by a judge is appealing
theory, the reality can be a scarifying experience for a complainant, as
there may be a protracted hearing, followed by challenges
and appeals. In the
case of a powerful respondent, such as XYZ, which has substantial resources,
this could take years. The cocoon
of privacy enveloping the conciliation process
is replaced by the full glare of media publicity, which can be overwhelming in
case of sexual harassment complaints where aggressive cross-examination may
be a characteristic of the formal
and Jane would have to be very resilient to persevere with a complaint within an
adversarial setting against a multinational
corporation. A stigma may also
attach to them for lodging a complaint about XYZ and pursuing it in a public
forum. In the light of
Mary’s senior executive status, it could even lead
to possible blacklisting and the inability to obtain another position in
representative complaint initiated by a group of women who were all
deleteriously affected by the requirement of overseas experience
could deflect
attention away from Mary if it were feasible.
Hearings in the first
instance, such as those before the Federal Magistrates Court, are not bound by
the strict rules of
complainant may appear in
although her credibility would probably be enhanced if she were
represented.
The acceptance of the
standard of proof discourages
self-representation as it exposes complainants to ‘unnecessary pedantic
It would be especially difficult for Mary to run a case based on indirect
discrimination unaided due to its complexity. XYZ would
undoubtedly be
represented by high status senior counsel who could choose to focus on technical
points of procedure to deflect attention
away from the merits of the complaint,
as occurs in respect of
constitutionalisation.
Nevertheless, both she and Jane would find that legal aid for civil litigation
is limited.
In contrast to the flexibility of conciliation, the
legislation sets out the bases on which a remedy might be effected at a hearing.
The ‘make whole’ principle underlies the raison d’etre of any
civil remedy. A payment of damages is the most familiar
means of compensating
for emotional harm and injury to feelings. In addition, economic loss, including
lost wages – front pay,
as well as back pay – medical expenses, and
loss of all kinds may be
compensated.
Any reasonable act may be ordered, such as an apology or retroactive seniority.
Reinstatement is rarely practicable, as is an injunction
enjoining the
respondent not to persist with the discriminatory conduct. The possibility of
encountering a hostile workplace would
suggest that a damages award would be
most appropriate for Mary, whereas flexible conditions of work might be more
appropriate for
Policy changes may be negotiated at the conciliation
level but are problematic at the quasi-judicial and judicial stage where the
focus is on compensating the
individual,
although the NSW Administrative Decisions Tribunal may order the development and
implementation of a program in respect of a vilification
While the principle underpinning hearings before specialist tribunals in the
past was that each party pay their own costs, a more
legalistic approach arising
from the shift towards general tribunals and courts has seen an increasing
tendency to award costs against
the unsuccessful party, which makes the
litigation route risky business.
This chapter has outlined the contemporary approach
towards issues of concern in relation to sex discrimination in the workforce.
has highlighted the problems arising from legislation that favours formal
equality. The jurisdiction can be positive for the occasional
woman who is able
to establish that she was treated less favourably than a comparable male
colleague in instances that are overt,
but is problematic in cases involving
pregnancy, maternity leave and caring responsibilities, where comparability is
contestable.
An indirect discrimination complaint may succeed in instances where
the impugned practice is egregious but, for the most part, instances
of systemic
discrimination are not tractable to remediation. The heroic complainant requires
fortitude, tenacity – and resources
– to challenge any instance of
discrimination beyond the level of conciliation.
Thanks to Dr
Trish Luker for research assistance and the Australian Research Council for
assistance.
Margaret Thornton, 1995, ‘The Cartography of Public and Private’, in
Margaret Thornton (ed),
Public and Private: Feminist Legal Debates
Oxford University Press, Melbourne, pp
2007–08, 87 per cent of complaints lodged with HREOC under the SDA related
to the area of employment. See Human Rights and
Equal Opportunity Commission,
Annual Report 2007-2008
Williams, 2000,
Unbending Gender: Why Family and Work Conflict and What to do
, Oxford University Press, New
Discrimination Act 1984
Anti-Discrimination Act 1977
Equal Opportunity Act 1995
Anti-Discrimination Act
Equal Opportunity Act 1984
Opportunity Act 1984
Anti-Discrimination Act 1998
Discrimination Act 1991
Anti-Discrimination Act
1992 (ADA NT).
Peter Bailey, 2009,
The Human Rights Enterprise in Australia and
Internationally
, LexisNexis Butterworths, Sydney; Neil Rees, Katherine
Lindsay & Simon Rice, 2008,
Australian Anti-Discrimination Law: Text,
Cases and Materials,
Federation Press, Sydney; Chris Ronalds, 2008,
Discrimination Law and Practice
Federation Press, Sydney; Patricia Easteal, 2001,
Less than Equal: Women and
the Australian Legal System
, Butterworths, Sydney; Rosemary Hunter, 1992,
Indirect Discrimination in the Workplace
, Federation Press, Sydney;
Margaret Thornton, 1990,
The Liberal Promise: Anti-Discrimination Legislation
in Australia
, Oxford University Press,
ratified ILO Convention 156, Workers with Family Responsibilities, in 1990. In
1992, the ground was included in the SDA.
All States and Territories, except
South Australia, now include parental status, or a cognate term, as a ground in
their anti-discrimination
legislation: ADA (NSW) s 49(s); EOA (Vic) s 6(1); ADA
(Qld) s 7(1)(d); EOA (WA) s 35A; ADA (Tas) s 16(i); DA (ACT) s 7(1)(e); ADA
s 19(1)(g).
Equal Opportunity for Women in the Workplace Act 1995
Regents of the University of California v Bakke
[1978] USSC 145
SDA ss 7D, 31 & 32. A women’s health service was upheld as a bona fide
special measure in
Proudfoot v ACT Board of Health
Margaret Thornton, 2001, ‘EEO in a Neo-Liberal Climate’, 6(1)
Journal of Interdisciplinary Gender Studies
Glenda Strachan, John Burgess & Lindy Henderson, 2007, ‘Equal
Employment Opportunity Legislation and Policies:
The Australian
Experience’, 26
Equal Opportunities International
See the debates at
http://www.aph.gov.au/hansard/index.htm
accessed 7 August 2009. For commentary, see Susan Ryan, 2004, ‘The
“Ryan Juggernaut” rolls on’, 27
University of New South
Wales Law Journal
828–832; Susan Magarey, 2004, ‘The
Sex Discrimination Act 1984
Australian Feminist Law Journal
The Liberal Promise
McDonald & Kerriann Dear, 2008, ‘The Incidence and Patters of
Discrimination and Harassment affecting Working Women
in Australia’, 22
Women’s Studies Journal
from the Annual Reports of each jurisdiction,
See Patricia Easteal & Susan Priest, [2006/2007],
‘Employment Discrimination Complaints at the ACT Human Rights Office:
Players, Process, Legal Principles and Outcome’
Contemporary Issues in
Judy Fudge & Rosemary Owens, 2006,
Precarious Work, Women, and the New
Economy: The Challenge to Legal Norms
, Hart, Oxford.
Sinclair, 1998,
Doing Leadership Differently: Gender, Power and Sexuality in
a Changing Business Culture
, Melbourne University Press.
New South Wales (Department of Education and Training)
[2003] HCA 62
(2003) 217 CLR 92.
160 [220] (Gleeson CJ, Gummow, Hayne and Heydon
Smith, 2008, ‘From
– How far has
Australian Anti-discrimination Law come in 30 Years?’, 21
Journal of Labour Law
, pp 3–29. Since
Discrimination Act 1992
has been amended to require
‘reasonable adjustments’ for people with
disabilities.
Margaret Thornton, 1985, ‘Affirmative Action, Merit and the Liberal
State’ 2(2)
Aust Journal of Law & Society
Beth Gaze, 2002, ‘Context and Interpretation in Anti-Discrimination
Melbourne University Law Review
, pp 325–354, at
[1938] HCA 34
Jonathan Hunyor, 2003, ‘Skin-deep: Proof and Inferences of Racial
Discrimination in Employment’, 25
Sydney Law Review
Loretta de Plevitz, 2003, ‘The
“Standard of
Proof” in Anti-Discrimination Law: “Pointing with a Wavering
Finger”’, 27
Melbourne University Law Review
Fenwick v Beveridge Bldg Products Pty Ltd
(1986) EOC 92-147
Dobrzynska v Aust Telecommunications Corp
(1990) 92-305
Ho v Regulator Australia Pty Ltd
[2004] FMCA 62
(2004) EOC 93-332
Van Druten v Sheraton Pacific Hotels P/L
[1996] HREOCA 23
(1996) EOC 92-855
New South Wales v Amery
[2006] HCA 14
(2006) 226 ALR
Secretary of the Department of Foreign Affairs & Trade v Styles
[1989] FCA 342
(1989) 23 FCR
Australian Iron & Steel v Banovic
[1989] HCA 56
(1989) 168 CLR 165.
Indirect Discrimination
v Minister for Education
(1991) EOC 92-340 (WA
, 180 (Deane & Gaudron JJ); 191 (Dawson
http://www.eowa.gov.au/Australian_Women_In_Leadership_Census/2008_Australian_Women_In_Leadership_Census/Media_Kit/EOWA_Census_2008_Publication.pdf
accessed 4 August 2009.
Commonwealth Bank
of Australia v Human Rights and Equal Opportunity Commission
[1997] FCA 1311
(1997) 80 FCR
Commonwealth Bank of Australia v Human Rights and Equal Opportunity
[1997] FCA 1311
(1997) 80 FCR
Charlesworth, 2005, ‘Managing Work and Family in the “Shadow”
of Anti-Discrimination Law’ in Jill Murray
Work, Family and the
, Federation Press, Sydney, pp 88–126, at
Waters v Public Transport Corporation
[1991] HCA 49
(1991) 173 CLR 349
Toohey JJ at
Styles v Secretary, Dept Foreign Affairs & Trade
[1988] FCA 364
(1988) 84 ALR 408
409 (Wilcox
Indirect Discrimination
Commonwealth Bank;
Margaret Thornton, 2008, ‘Sex Discrimination, Courts and Corporate
Federal Law Review
Gatens, 1991, ‘A Critique of the Sex/Gender Distinction’ in Sneja
Gunew (ed),
A Reader in Feminist Knowledge
, Routledge, London, p
Discrimination Act 1975
Disability Discrimination Act 1991
Age Discrimination Act 2004
(Cth). See Patricia Easteal, Channy Hiu Tung
Cheung & Susan Priest, 2007, ‘Too Many Candles on the Birthday Cake:
Age Discrimination,
Work and the Law’, 7
Queensland University of
Technology Law & Justice Journal
Elena Marchetti, 2008, ‘Intersectional Race and Gender Analyses: Why Legal
Processes Just Don’t Get It’, 17
Social & Legal Studies
Hopper v Virgin Blue Airlines P/L
[2005] QADT 28
, the focus was on the
youth of flight attendants (under 35), not sex, yet the eight complainants were
all women in an industry where
appearance is
Wiggins v Department of Defence – Navy
[2006] FMCA
Beth Gaze, 2004, ‘The
Sex Discrimination Act
After Twenty Years:
Achievements, Disappointments, Disillusionment and Alternatives’, 27(3)
UNSW Law Journal
, pp 914–925 at
Boehringer Ingelheim v Reddrop
(1984) 2 NSWLR
Waterhouse v Bell
(1991) 25 NSWLR
Dayton, 2009, ‘Science centre settles with ex-chief’s wife’,
The Australian,
Fair Work Act 2009
. Paid maternity leave will be
introduced in 2011. See Australian Government,
Australia’s Paid
Parental Leave Scheme: Supporting Working Australian Families
http://home.deewr.gov.au/Budget/documents/PPLBooklet.pdf
accessed 23 July
Masser, Kirsten Grass & Michelle Nesic, 2007, ‘“We Like You, But
We Don’t Want You” – The
Impact of Pregnancy in the
Workplace’, 57
Chilcott v HPH Investments
(1990) EOC 92-353 (HREOC)
v De Mestre
(1993) EOC 92-506 (HREOC)
Hancock v TP & PM
Caravan P/L
(1993) EOC 92-539 (HREOC)
Milevski v Boral Building
(1995) EOC 92-645 (HREOC)
Manley v East West Holdings P/L
(1995) EOC 92-645 (HREOC)
Dare v Hurley
[2005] FMCA
[104], per Driver
Thornton, 2005, ‘Auditing the
Sex Discrimination Act
’ in Marius
Smith (ed),
Human Rights 2004: The Year in Review
, Castan Centre for
Human Rights Law, Monash University, Melbourne, pp
Ilian v ABC
[2006] FMCA
Gibbs v Australian Wool Corporation
(1990) EOC 92-327 (HREOC)
Thomson v Orica Aust P/L
[2002] FCA 939
Rispoli v Merck Sharpe &
[2003] FMCA
at [82] per Driver FM. Cf
at 138 per Allsop
Ansett Transport Industries (Operations) P/L v Wardley
[1980] HCA 8
(1980) 142 CLR
Sarah Squire & Jo Tilley, 2007,
It’s About Time: Women, Men, Work
and Family,
Human Rights and Equal Opportunity Commission, Sydney, p xi. See
also Barbara Pocock, 2003,
The Work/Life Collision,
Federation Press,
Commonwealth of Australia v Evans
at [51], per Branson
Smith & Joellen Riley, 2004, ‘Family-friendly Work Practices and the
Sydney Law Review
v Hickie & Hunt
(1998) EOC 92-137
, per Evatt C;
Escobar v Rainbow
Printing P/L (No 2)
[2002] FMCA
Adams, 2005, ‘Indirect Discrimination and the Worker-Carer: It’s
just not Working’ in Jill Murray (ed)
Work, Family and the Law
Federation Press, Sydney, pp
Mayer v ANSTO
[2003] FMCA
Qantas Airways Ltd
[2004] FMCA 242.
Kelly v TPG Internet P/L
[2003] FMCA
Correy v St Josephs Hospital Ltd
[2009] NSWADT
v St Josephs Hospital Ltd
[2009] NSWADT
French v Gosford City Council
(2004) 93-318 (NSW ADT);
Hammond v Raging Thunder P/L
(2004) 93-341 (QADT);
International Cargo Express
(2004) 93-351 (NSW
of Victoria v Schou
[2004] VSCA 71
(2004) EOC 93-328 (VCA).
For commentary, see Gaze,
2002, ‘Context and Interpretation in Anti-Discrimination Law’, n
complaint was lodged under the EOA
State of Victoria v Schou
v State of Victoria (Department of Victorian Parliamentary Debates)
v State of Victoria Melbourne (Department of
Parliamentary Debates)
[2002] VCAT 375
Charlesworth, ‘Managing Work and Family’, n 38; Adams,
‘Indirect Discrimination and the Worker-Carer’, n
77, at 18, 32;
Thornton, ‘Sex Discrimination, Courts and Corporate Power’, n
v Clisby P/L
[2004] VCAT 1817
Margaret Thornton, 2002, ‘Sexual Harassment losing Sight of Sex
Discrimination’, 26
Melbourne University Law Review
For analysis of sexual harassment cases under the SDA, 2000-07, see Patricia
Easteal & Skye Saunders, 2008, ‘Interpreting
Vicarious Liability with
a Broad Brush in Sexual Harassment Cases’, 33(2)
Alternative Law
McDonald, Sandra Backstrom & Kerriann Dear, 2008, ‘Reporting Sexual
Harassment: Claims and Remedies’, 46
Asia Pacific Journal of Human
173–195; Easteal & Saunders,
‘Interpreting Vicarious Liability’, n
Howard v Geradin P/l t/a Harvard Securities
[2004] VCAT 1518
(2004) EOC 93-358.
Styles v Murray Meats P/L (Anti-Discrimination)
[2005] VCAT
Rail Corporation of New South Wales
[2007] NSWADT 152.
Margaret Thornton, 2004, ‘Corrosive Leadership (Or Bullying by another
Name): A Corollary of the Corporatised Academy?’
Aust Journal of
Malone v Pike
(1997) EOC 92-868 (HREOC). Cf
Hosemans v Crea’s
Glenara Motel P/L
(2000) EOC 93-062
For critique, see Jenny Morgan, 1995, ‘Sexual Harassment and the
Public/Private Dichotomy: Equality, Morality and Morals’
in Margaret
Thornton (ed), n 1, pp 89–110; Gail Mason & Anna Chapman, 2003,
‘Defining Sexual Harassment: A History
of the Commonwealth Legislation and
its Critiques’, 31
Federal Law Review
Hill v Water Resources Commission of NSW
(1985) 92-127 (NSW
Charlesworth, ‘Managing Work and Family’, n 38; Thornton,
Liberal Promise
, n 1, Ch 5: ‘The Equivocations of
Conciliation’.
Easteal & Priest, ‘Employment Discrimination Complaints at the ACT
Human Rights Office’, n
Rosemary Hunter, 2000, ‘Evidentiary Harassment: The Use of the Rules of
Evidence in an Informal Tribunal’ in Mary Childs
& Louise Ellison
Feminist Perspectives on Evidence
, Cavendish,
Dunn-Dyer v ANZ Banking Group Ltd
(1997) 92-897
Human Rights and Equal Opportunity Commission Act 1986
(Cth) (HREOCA), s
Patricia Easteal & Kezia Judd, 2008, ‘“She Said, He
Said”’: Credibility and Sexual Harassment Cases in
Australia’,
Women’s Studies International Forum
pp 336–344, at
Plevitz, ‘The “
Standard of Proof”’, n
26, at 329.
Aldridge v Booth
[1988] FCA 170
Margaret Thornton, 1999, ‘Towards Embodied Justice: Wrestling with Legal
Ethics in the Age of the New Corporatism’,
Melbourne University Law
ADA (NSW) s 108(2)(a) sets the cap at $100,000.
(1986) EOC 92-167 (NSW
Misso v City of Moorabbin
ADA (NSW) s 108(2)(e).
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (244 KB)
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter