URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/journals/UMelbLRS/2016/8.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 15:41:25
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Young, M --- "Trade Measures to Address Climate Change: Territory and Extraterritoriality" [2016] UMelbLRS 8
TRADE MEASURES TO ADDRESS CLIMATE CHANGE: TERRITORY AND
EXTRATERRITORIALITY
Margaret A. Young
[States can reduce
global greenhouse gas emissions through trade measures such as energy subsidies,
labelling or certification requirements
or tax adjustments. These measures
modify production or consumption behaviour without regard to territorial
borders. Yet territory
is a significant concept for international efforts at
climate change mitigation: the UNFCCC Paris Agreement, for example, relies
nationally determined contributions in the context of common but differentiated
responsibilities. Moreover, public international
law doctrine on
extraterritorial jurisdiction may be said to require a ‘territorial
nexus’ between the object of the
trade measure and the state imposing the
measure. Should the state concentrate on activities within its borders rather
than shifting
the burden of climate change mitigation to other countries through
trade measures? The issue of historical responsibilities for climate
becomes even more fraught if the adverse effects of trade measures are felt
disproportionately by indigenous peoples and other
marginalised communities
within states. This chapter reviews trade law and other jurisprudence and argues
that trade measures addressing
climate change are unlikely to enliven –
let alone violate – public international law rules on extraterritorial
In the alternative, it argues that if a nexus is required, it is
relatively easy to satisfy. Neither of these findings, however,
dispose of the
issue of the lack of parity between and within states with respect to historic
contributions to the cause of climate
change and vulnerabilities to its impacts.
This chapter thus demonstrates the importance of an understanding of how
territory—and
to address climate change, and how this understanding points to a need
aware of the status and conditions of people within the territory of affected
trading partners.]
[Key words: trade law, climate change, extraterritoriality, territorial
nexus, indigenous peoples]
1. INTRODUCTION
Climate change mitigation
has a distinctly territorial aspect. Although greenhouse gas emissions (GHGs)
mix in the atmosphere without
regard to territorial boundaries, most of the
emissions come from states with particularly carbon-intensive patterns of
and consumption within their borders. The effects of climate change
are not necessarily felt on those same states: instead, changing
patterns, increased vulnerability to extreme events and the loss of land due to
rising sea waters is felt within some territories
more than others.
To address climate change occurring both within and outside their territory,
states are currently seeking to implement a series of
trade measures. These
measures will modify production or consumption behaviour, either within or
outside the territory of the relevant
states. For this reason, any legal
assessment of trade measures addressing climate change must include an analysis
of the rules on
public international law. While such rules are relevant and even
similar to the
requirements that trade measures be non-discriminatory, origin neutral and least
trade-restrictive (as discussed in
the current volume) they demand separate and
sustained analysis. This is the aim of the current chapter.
Proposed trade measures to address climate change follow precedents that have
demonstrated that import bans, labelling or certification
requirements and
subsidies can be used effectively to address environmental problems. We know
that such measures need to be carefully
designed and implemented so as to be
consistent with World Trade Organization (WTO) obligations. This task becomes
especially complex
if the relevant environmental problem occurs outside of the
territory of the state imposing the trade measure. Questions may arise
‘extraterritoriality’ or the exercise of ‘extraterritorial
States (US) imposes a ban on
shrimp in order to protect sea turtles, does a connection between the turtles
and the US territory need
to be established? Does it matter in legal terms if a
ban by the European Union on seal products impacts on the economic livelihoods
of indigenous groups recognized as having special rights within the territory of
another country? Can a WTO member regulate the way
in which information about a
product’s production method outside of its territory appears on a label
when the product is sold
within its borders? While the General Agreement on
Tariffs and Trade (GATT) is silent on the issue of
the Appellate Body has variously responded with a ‘probably’,
‘perhaps’, and ‘yes’—to each
of these scenarios,
which I discuss in more detail below.
As a category of environmental problems that is immediately more complex and
diffuse than specific issues of biodiversity protection
or animal welfare,
climate change poses particularly difficult questions relating to territory. The
United Nations Framework Convention
on Climate Change
) has apportioned GHG
emission reductions on a territorial basis, and also notes that historic
contributions and capacities to mitigate
are vastly divergent as between
states—as articulated most clearly in the concept of ‘common but
differentiated responsibilities’
Yet trade measures may
alter behaviour and livelihoods in ways that pay little heed to these
principles. Indeed, trade measures may
even seek to alter the behaviour of
people outside the territory of the measure-imposing state who are not only
historically relatively
uninvolved in the causes of climate change but are
marginalized within their own states, such as indigenous peoples. (This scenario
is not unknown in the broader climate change mitigation context, as demonstrated
by recent efforts within the UNFCCC to reduce emissions
from deforestation and
forest degradation (REDD+), which have led to concern and complaints by
indigenous peoples and other forest-dwelling
communities.
climate change mitigation occurs, and whose behaviour it targets, is extremely
important in an assessment of trade measures addressing
climate change.
Drawing on earlier work relating to trade measures addressing environmental
concerns in faraway
this chapter considers and rejects the idea that trade measures addressing
climate change can
be classified as an exercise of
‘extraterritorial jurisdiction’. Section 2 offers a brief
taxonomy of the types of trade
measures that might be adopted by states to
address climate change. It asks whether trade measures are classified as
internal or
external to the state taking the measure, and compares other
measures seeking to regulate carbon, or GHG emissions, including measures
in the aviation and coal mining sectors. Section 3 then provides an analysis of
public international law and trade law jurisprudence
on extraterritoriality. It
considers the (contested) need for a ‘nexus’ between trade measures
and climate change mitigation,
drawing particularly on the Appellate Body
decision in
as well as associated jurisprudence. The chapter goes on, in section 4, to
examine the situation of trade measures addressing climate
change that impact
upon indigenous peoples, or other historically marginalized groups, in areas
outside the territory of the relevant
state. It offers an explanation of how
indigenous issues may arise in trade contexts, drawing in particular on WTO case
law, including
Finally, in section 5,
and in line with the ambitions of this volume, the chapter concludes with
implications for the design and
implementation of trade measures to address
climate change.
2. MEASURES TO ADDRESS CLIMATE CHANGE THROUGH TRADE
Mitigating climate change
can involve a range of measures that seek to change production or consumption
behaviour over a long period
of time, as has been acknowledged in
of the Appellate
The location of the behaviour that such measures are seeking to address could be
said to be within a state’s territory or abroad.
Where the latter is the
focus, the measures might be classified as ‘extraterritorial’ in
that they are focused on conduct
outside of the territory of the importing
state, with associated legal questions relating to jurisdictional limits and the
on communities outside of the state’s territory. As well as the
need to conform to trade law (with the GATT Article XX often
the most relevant
) the measures may be
required to satisfy express or implied jurisdictional limitations. The latter
leads to complex legal questions
involving public international law rules of
prescriptive jurisdiction, including the need to establish a ‘territorial
between the objective of the trade measure and the importing state.
This section discusses the relevance of the idea of extraterritoriality
providing a brief set of examples of the types of measures at issue, before
moving to demonstrate the complexity of the notion
of ‘territory’ in
the climate change context and the status of the law.
2.1 Carbon-related Trade Measures
Trade measures have been
used—very successfully—to reduce the prevalence of some substances
that are hazardous to the
atmosphere: the effective reduction of ozone-depleting
substances by the
Montreal Protocol
is a case in
More recently, measures
to mitigate climate change through trade have been addressed at the energy
sector, with a focus on carbon
as one of the main components of the
UNFCCC’s list of sources of GHG
Measures that are most sensitive in terms of trade effects are border carbon
adjustments and renewable energy subsidies. The latter
have been subject to
challenge at the WTO, including disputes brought against Canada’s
feed-in-tariff (FIT) program for renewable
energy generation in
and India’s
program for solar cell
production.
Fossil fuel
subsidies, which are currently provided by states for consumption and
production, have so far escaped WTO challenge,
but increasingly policy reform is
directed at this issue.
carbon-related trade measures include certification, labelling or traceability
for a range of products: a prominent example
is labelling for ‘food
miles’ to alert consumers to the distances travelled (and thus
transport-related GHG emissions)
by particular food
Such measures continue
to emerge and adapt on the basis of changing scientific understandings; the
growing awareness that forests
and the oceans are operating as ‘carbon
sinks’, for example, may mean that trade measures on illegally harvested
or fish will include climate change mitigation as one of many regulatory
Alongside these measures to mitigate climate change are the market-based
mechanisms that create tradeable permits for GHG emissions,
such as the
EU’s emissions trading scheme (ETS) as well as financial incentives for
carbon sequestration such as REDD+. Moreover,
the need to keep carbon ‘in
the ground’ has led to proposals for investment divestments by
universities and public pension
and the cessation of new
federal mining leases.
impact on trade of these measures is less direct.
2.2 Carbon Measures: at Home or Abroad?
Measures to mitigate
climate change are difficult to classify in terms of geographical scope. On the
one hand, effects of global warming
are felt worldwide, and so importing states
could legitimately claim to be addressing their own environmental problems (as
others) by using trade measures. On the other hand, the cause of climate
change is historically associated with the very countries
who are proposing to
use such trade measures, and it could be argued that these countries should use
domestic regulation to address
this problem rather than impose the costs on
other countries through trade measures. This is similar to environmental
that displaces costs onto foreign trading
Whether climate change
mitigation is classified as addressing an environmental challenge arising
the territory of the importing state, or
territory, is inherently controversial and political, involving complex
questions of justice and distribution.
It is helpful to consider measures that have been historically devised to
mitigate climate change that do
prima facie involve trade.
Predominant among these is, of course, the UNFCCC, which has adopted a specific
territorially-bounded notion
of GHG emissions. Under the UNFCCC, parties provide
national inventories of their anthropogenic emissions as part of their general
commitments to reduce GHG
Subject to limited
exceptions, the GHG emissions are ‘production-based’ in that they
account for emissions in the territory,
rather than for consumption of products
that embody
This concept has implications when seeking to identify national contributors to
climate change: from the perspective of production-based
emissions, the
contribution to climate change of developed countries appears to have
stabilized, while consumption-based contributions
suggest a rise in GHG
emissions at an annual rate of approximately 10 per
The UNFCCC’s territorially-bounded notion of GHG emissions is
reproduced in the
In the first
commitment period of the
Kyoto Protocol
, certain developed states parties
assumed legal obligations for specific GHG emission reductions. These targets
are expected to be
continued in the next iteration of the commitment
Importantly, the
has recognized that the reduction of GHG emissions is worthwhile,
regardless of where the reduction occurs. This is achieved through
the process
offsetting,
in which those countries that assume legally binding
targets can purchase offsets of GHG reductions occurring in other
territories.
Kyoto Protocol
thus reinforces the notion of territorially-bounded GHG reductions that can be
augmented, but only if the relevant country pays for
it in some way. A similar
rationale accompanies REDD+: tropical forested nations are asked to ensure that
they keep their forests
standing (and their carbon sequestered) but only through
the provision of financial incentives—either market-based carbon credits
or direct funds.
The UNFCCC’s model of territorially-bounded GHG emissions is replicated
in the Paris Agreement negotiated at the Conference
of the Parties (COP21) in
Paris in December 2015.
Paris Agreement relies on a concept of ‘nationally determined
contributions’, according to which states parties submit
national plans
that detail their mitigation methods and objectives. The agreed global aim is to
collectively achieve mitigation that
ensures global temperature rises do not
increase beyond 2 degrees Celsuis above pre-industrial levels, with a limit of
1.5 degrees
Celsius temperature increase the stated aim. While countries may
pursue offset arrangements on a voluntary
the modalities of this
form of carbon trading were not set out in the Paris Agreement and will instead
be established in the meetings
of the parties now that the Agreement has entered
into force.
A similar conception of territoriality in the climate change context has
arisen in domestic environmental cases, with different implications
that depend
on the context in which the claim arises. For example, the recent Dutch case of
relating to the responsibility of the Netherlands in climate
change mitigation
can be contrasted to a series of domestic challenges to
coal mines in Australia and New Zealand. In
non-governmental organization (NGO) submitted that the Netherlands was acting
contrary to its duty of care towards its members
and the greater Dutch society
due to its failure to place further limits on GHG
A second argument was that the state was wrongly exposing the
international
to the risk of dangerous climate change. The Hague District Court
accepted the first argument, and concluded that the state had a
duty of care to
take mitigation measures.
government’s duty of care ‘extends across Dutch
territory’.
found that no conclusion needed to be made about whether Urgenda’s
reduction claim could also be successful in that
it promoted ‘the rights
and interests of current and future generations from other
countries’.
The focus on the responsibility for territorially-bounded emissions has been
advanced in a similar way, but with different consequences,
in domestic coal
mine challenges. For example, environmental groups in Australia and New Zealand
have submitted that the GHG emissions
from the burning of coal in overseas
territories should be taken into account in the domestic mine approval
One recent decision
rejected this formulation on the basis that it would require the domestic
decision-maker (the authority approving
the mine) to regulate activities
extraterritorially. Rather than drawing on a notion of UNFCCC-driven
apportionment, the lower-court
New Zealand judge noted the bureaucratic
difficulties of incorporating ‘overseas discharges’ into domestic
decision-making,
One leviathan of environmental law (i.e. the RMA [Resource Management Act])
is more than enough for lawyers, experts, environmental
managers, planners, the
local authorities and the Courts of this country. The prospect of a district
council assessing whether an
end use of coal (or other greenhouse gas emitting
resources) is subject to sustainable environmental policy, regulatory control,
mitigation or compensation in Cambodia or a province in China, in Japan or
Brazil, Zimbabwe or Kenya, or other foreign jurisdictions
is palpably
unattractive. I do not think it is a matter that is properly justiciable under
the RMA in accordance with acceptable
These examples of international and domestic efforts to mitigate climate
change through a reduction in GHG emissions are clear in
asserting territorial
boundaries for relevant action. This can be contrasted to the EU’s attempt
to incorporate aviation emissions
within the EU regulatory framework. Against
the anomaly of GHG emissions within the aviation sector not being adequately
in the UNFCCC framework, the EU’s Aviation Directive sought to
include emissions from aviation in the EU
This included
‘extraterritorial’ GHG emissions, in the sense that the emissions
were not simply generated over the EU
airspace, but rather by flights occuring
over any other airspace so long as they were generated by a flight departing
from, or arriving
to, an EU airport. The EU’s measure was seen by many as
potentially disrupting the agreed territorial demarcation (and cost
allocation)
of climate change mitigation, and led to challenge at the Court of Justice of
the European
The challenge included arguments that the Directive was an exercise of
extraterritorial jurisdiction, but these arguments were rejected
by the Court,
which emphasised the territorial nexus created when the flights arrived to or
departed from the EU.
EU’s aviation measure is akin to trade measures, which by their very
nature involve modification of production and consumption
behaviour in different
territories through supply and demand. The next section considers whether the
concept of extraterritorial
3. TRADE AS AN EXERCISE OF JURISDICTION?
The policies and cases
reviewed in section 2 show that the concept of territory has been emphasized in
the climate change context
in order to allocate responsibilities between states
and create effective carbon accounting. Does this mean that measures addressing
climate change through trade ought to be classified as
‘extraterritorial’? On the one hand, a body of work would point
the fact that trade measures are applied ‘at the border’ (such as
customs duties or bans) or ‘behind the border’
(such as labelling
requirements) thus creating an explicit link to territory that could be said to
be the basis for
Applied to the climate context, trade measures would be unlikely to be
extraterritorial. This position would be even more indisputable
if there was a
demonstrable link to the moral and economic intentions of citizens and consumers
within the territory imposing the
relevant trade measure.
On the other hand, this broad-brush attitude to trade measures fails to
recognize their impact on external sovereigns (and people).
As I have written
elsewhere, the core issue animating the debate on jurisdictional limits is the
wish to avoid states interfering
with the domestic affairs of other
The economic dimensions
of this situation are set out in Principle 12 of the Rio Declaration:
States should cooperate to promote a supportive and open international
economic system that would lead to economic growth and sustainable
development
in all countries, to better address the problems of environmental degradation.
Trade policy measures for environmental
purposes should not constitute a means
of arbitrary or unjustifiable discrimination or a disguised restriction on
international trade.
Unilateral actions to deal with environmental challenges
outside the jurisdiction of the importing country should be avoided.
Environmental
measures addressing transboundary or global environmental problems
should, as far as possible, be based on an international
This formulation of Principle 12 of the Rio Declaration was reportedly
influenced by the complainant states in the GATT-era dispute
over tuna import
restrictions to combat the mortality of
The Panel in that
dispute famously brought into question the extra-jurisdictional application of
measures necessary for the protection
of life and
Although the US had
denied that the trade measures were extraterritorial, instead arguing that they
‘simply specified the products
that could be marketed in the territory of
the United States’,
second Panel subsequently retracted the first Panel’s position on
territory and jurisdiction,
seeds were sown that trade measures could be seen to involve extraterritorial
3.1 Public International Law and Prescriptive
Within public
international law, the general position is that jurisdiction is
territorially-based, and that for an exercise of extraterritorial
to be lawful, it must have a specific
The notion of ‘prescriptive jurisdiction’—also termed
‘legislative
to the geographical reach of a state’s
‘enforcement’ jurisdiction refers to the exercise of power in a
foreign country. In the
case, the Permanent Court of
International Justice (PCIJ) recognized that states enjoy a broad discretion as
to the territorial reach
although that position has
been gradually narrowed so as to require a permissive
Permissive grounds
relate to the nationality principle (permitting the exercise of jurisdiction
over a state’s national for
certain acts committed abroad), the
‘passive personality’ principle (permitting jurisdiction over acts
that occurred
abroad but which harmed a national), the ‘protective’
or ‘security’ principle (jurisdiction over aliens for
acts carried
out abroad which affect the security or key interests of the state) and the
‘effects doctrine’ (allowing
offences outside the territory of the state that caused a harmful effect). If a
trade measure prescribes
laws that cover foreign conduct or involves the
enforcement of domestic laws abroad, and is not accompanied by a justifying
it may be said to violate international law principles of
extraterritoriality. On this basis, some scholars, such as Bartels, consider
unilateral trade measures to involve an exercise of extraterritorial
prescriptive jurisdiction.
Others disagree, and point to the absence of
legal effect
of unilateral
trade measures on foreign jurisdictions: while there may be a new-found
inability to export due to trade measures addressing
climate change, there is
not an exercise of jurisdiction over those
On the latter view, ‘as long as the importing country regulates directly
only behaviour within (or at) its borders, then it
is not regulating
extraterritorially even if its goal is to avoid encouraging behaviour beyond its
3.2 The Need for a Nexus in WTO Cases
The difference in views
on this question has lingered. In
the newly formed
Appellate Body had occasion to rule on the question in the context of another
challenge to a US measure addressing
a transboundary or global environmental
concern: the protection of sea
well-known, the US imposed a domestic regulation which required the domestic
shrimp fishing industry to adopt technology known
as ‘turtle excluder
devices’ in their fishing practices, and the US thereafter effectively
conditioned access to its
lucrative market on the use of these devices outside
of its coastal jurisdiction. Malaysia, India, Pakistan and Thailand challenged
this as a GATT violation. The European Community (EC) appeared as a third
participant and submitted that WTO members should be able
to act unilaterally to
protect a global environmental resource, but that this should be a last resort
and ‘would only be justified
... if consistent with general principles of
public international law on “prescriptive
In contrast to the complainants’ view, the Appellate Body found that
‘[c]onditioning access to a Member’s domestic
market on whether
exporting Members comply with, or adopt, a policy or policies unilaterally
prescribed by the importing Member may,
to some degree, be a common aspect of
measures falling within the scope of one or another of the exceptions (a) to (j)
turtle species that the US measure was designed to protect occurred in waters
over which the US had jurisdiction as well
as other waters – both coastal
and high seas – given their recurrent migrations. The Appellate Body noted
was no claim of any rights of exclusive ownership over the turtles,
and commented that ‘[w]e do not pass upon the question
of whether there is
an implied jurisdictional limitation in Article XX(g), and if so, the nature or
extent of that
limitation’.
Instead, it
held there was a sufficient nexus between the endangered marine populations and
the US for the purposes of Article
Such a nexus accords with the principle of prescriptive jurisdiction in
public international law that requires a ‘genuine connection
between the
subject-matter of jurisdiction and the territorial base or reasonable interests
of the state in question’.
It is separate in character to the requirements of GATT Article XX, and
particularly the
the Appellate Body found that the US had failed to satisfy
requirements. It noted that apart from a regional agreement
on turtle conservation, no agreements with the broader group of countries
affected by the embargo were reached ‘or seriously attempted’ by the
The Appellate Body
emphasized that ‘concerted and cooperative efforts on the part of the many
countries whose waters are traversed
in the course of recurrent sea turtle
migrations’
was necessary for the protection and conservation of sea
The US’s failures
in this regard amounted to ‘unjustifiable discrimination’, while its
conditioning of market access
on the adoption by trading partners of the same
regulatory techniques (rather than a regulatory programme ‘comparable in
effectiveness’)
was considered to be rigid and inflexible and as a
consequence amounted to ‘arbitrary
discrimination’.
The need for a nexus to satisfy jurisdictional requirements has not been
articulated by subsequent Appellate Body decisions. In 2012,
‘dolphin-safe’ labelling dispute of
opportunity for the Appellate Body to apply the notion of nexus but, tellingly,
it chose not to do so. The Appellate Body did
not accept Mexico’s
complaint that the US measure ‘unilaterally and extraterritorially
impose[d] US fishing method requirements’
as a condition for market
Although Mexico
succeeded in establishing a violation of the TBT Agreement, this was based on
the impugned measure’s scope
of application (which set stricter labelling
conditions for tuna caught in the Eastern Tropical Pacific
rather than its
targeting of the production and process methods of the tuna catch
than extraterritorial jurisdiction, the problem for the US was in failing to act
in a non-discriminatory way. No nexus was
required between the aim of the
measure (i.e. reducing dolphin mortality) and the US’ jurisdiction (or, if
it was required,
it was established so easily as to pass without comment). This
accords with analysis such as that of Cassimatis, Howse and Regan,
as identified
Similarly, the
not argued on the basis of jurisdictional limits. The dispute arose because of
an EU ban on the import of seal products due
to the ‘deep indignation and
of EU citizens and consumers towards the trade in products hunted in inhumane
conditions within and outside EU territory. Norway
and Canada challenged the
ban, particularly because of concerns that the exemptions to the ban—which
applied inter alia
to Inuit and other indigenous
communities
—were being
applied in a way that was discriminatory.
Canada and Norway did not frame their complaint in
the link between the seal ban and the EU’s
territory; so much could be
US−Tuna II.
However, the public morals dimension adds a
further element to the question of jurisdiction: the ban was motivated by the
non-physical
public morality of EU citizens and consumers. Cases falling within
GATT Article XX(a) are arguably different from those that fall
within GATT
Article XX(b) or (g).
response to questioning from the Appellate Body during the oral hearing, the
participants agreed ‘that there is a sufficient
nexus between the public
moral concerns and activities addressed by the measure, on the one hand, and the
European Union, on the
The Appellate Body
held that: ‘while recognizing the systemic importance of the question of
whether there is an implied jurisdictional
limitation in Article XX(a), and, if
so, the nature or extent of that limitation, we have decided in this case not to
examine this
In sum, the WTO cases do not give a clear position on whether there is a need
for a jurisdictional nexus (beyond the fact of the border)
in the types of
scenarios where respondents rely on GATT Article XX(a)−(b) or (g). In the
most recent case of
the absence of litigant
submissions on jurisdictional limitations supports the view that there is no
textual or implied jurisdictional
limitation in the measures listed in the
enumerated paragraphs of GATT Article XX–or at the very least not for
public morals
in Article XX(a).
The next section considers why this might be so, a reflection that is
particularly pertinent in the context of trade measures addressing
3.3 The Underlying Aims of Territorial Connection
The previous section
reviewed the key cases of
US−Shrimp, US−Tuna II
to assess whether there are jurisdictional limits within
trade law. In
the Appellate Body entertained the idea of
a ‘nexus’ requirement, but this was not applied in
Yet in the latter case, the Appellate Body felt
compelled to comment on jurisdictional limitations—indeed, note the
importance’ of the question—without any instigation
from the disputing parties. This intervention is perhaps an indication
sense of foreboding about the potential breadth of the public morals exception.
The ability of public morals to ground within
a territory many non-trade
values—well beyond environmental challenges—gives rise to the
apprehension that keeping WTO
members true to their GATT commitments will become
increasingly difficult. Maintaining the need for a ‘nexus’ (and not
simply relying on the GATT Article XX chapeau tests) ensures a central role for
a WTO dispute settlement body in adjudicating upon
the sufficiency of any
connection between the state imposing the trade measure and its subject matter.
But would a ‘nexus’ requirement confine the scope of trade
measures addressing climate change? Containment is unlikely,
and increasingly
so. In the context of climate change, any nexus between a trade measure and the
object of climate change mitigation
seems ever easier to demonstrate. Certainly,
the historic and emerging effort of states to agree upon obligations at the
significant. Even apart from UNFCCC obligations, there are a range of
legal obligations for governments to avert the harmful effects
change, based on existing international human rights law, environmental law and
For example, the Dutch
found that the
Netherlands had a duty of care to take mitigation measures, which was informed
by, but not necessarily based on, constitutional
law and international and
European climate policy. This finding was made notwithstanding that ‘the
Dutch contribution to climate
change is currently
In the context of
the legal challenge to the EU’s Aviation Directive, the Court of Justice
of the European Union (CJEU) did
not rely on the UNFCCC context but instead
ruled that there was no incompatibility between the EU’s Aviation
Directive and
the territorial principle of jurisdiction in customary
international law because of the territorial nexus between the EU and its
of regulation (the flights departing from or arriving into the
Apart from law, there is emerging evidence from a range of disciplines that
contribute to an understanding of the interconnected nature
of climate change.
For example, the science of climate change is constantly evolving in new areas,
such as recent research that shows
how overfishing leads to climate
In the behavioural
sciences, recent research shows that humans have evolved to develop ethical
frameworks for the protection of other
humans outside of their tribes or
The interconnected
nature of the problem of climate change allows—and even arguably
—states to act in ways that modify behaviour both within
and outside of their territories.
The ease with which a finding of nexus can be made in the context of trade
measures addressing climate change is not, however, the
end of the matter. As
Scott demonstrates, the requirement of ‘nexus’ does not answer the
broader philosophical, ethical
and legal issues of climate change mitigation.
She shows that the CJEU judgment failed to incorporate the principle of
By imposing costs in the
aviation sector, the EU was forcing behavioural change in other states but also
distributing a burden that
it would otherwise have to meet. A similar problem
arises in the context of border carbon adjustments, which may displace the costs
of climate change mitigation in manifestly unfair
There is, therefore, a need for a framework that allows entities such as the
EU to use their market power in an effort to induce other
countries to mitigate
climate change, but also respects the fair and ethical apportionment of costs
that the CBDR principle encapsulates.
Such a framework is not currently
contained in jurisdictional rules. The key question for trade lawyers is whether
there are trade
law rules—such as the GATT Article XX test—that can
address these inequities and difficulties. Arguably, trade law’s
requirement that the relevant measure be designed and applied flexibly and with
attempt to resolve the moral concern through multilateral
negotiations is a step in this
Moreover, the
Appellate Body’s finesse in incorporating international law principles in
could be undertaken again with respect to key UNFCCC
concepts such as territorially-assigned emissions targets and CBDR. The concepts
become even more complex when placed alongside contested sovereignties within
foreign territories, a topic taken up in the next section.
4. CLIMATE CHANGE, INDIGENOUS PEOPLES AND TRADE
Trade measures to
address climate change and the question of territoriality become even more
ethically and philosophically fraught
when viewed from the perspective of
indigenous peoples and other groups that have been historically marginalized by
their respective
states. The problem of climate change may be considered to be
conceived, created and imposed entirely outside of the social norms
practices of the relevant communities. In the case of REDD+, for example,
indigenous peoples have complained that they may be
disadvantaged or displaced
by proposed interventions to reduce emissions from
deforestation.
Yet indigenous
peoples might support a trade intervention, as was demonstrated in the softwood
lumber dispute between the US and
Canada, when indigenous groups in Canada
supported countervailing duties imposed by the US, on the basis that
non-recognition of
aboriginal land and resource rights constituted a
This section attempts to provide a brief explanation of how indigenous issues
may arise in trade contexts and a discussion of how
similar issues were raised
dispute, in order to demonstrate the relevance of
this issue for trade measures addressing climate change.
4.1 Trade Liberalization and Indigenous Peoples
The situation of
indigenous peoples is special in part because their status depends on recognized
or contested property, tenure, or
other legal arrangements with settler states.
The impact of trade liberalization on this special situation has been recognized
trade law. Although the GATT does not explicitly provide for differential
treatment for indigenous peoples, a number of subsequent
preferential or
regional trade agreements have set out affirmative action measures. For example,
New Zealand’s trade agreements
with Thailand and Trans−Pacific
partners includes a general exceptions clause that recognizes New
Zealand’s right to
adopt measures ‘it deems necessary to accord more
favourable treatment to Maori in respect of matters covered by this Agreement
including in fulfilment of its obligations under the Treaty of
Other regional
trade agreements contain exemptions for aboriginal peoples from trade
commitments relating to cross-border services,
investment and government
procurement.
The Energy Charter
Treaty (ECT) contains an exception for measures ‘designed to benefit
Investors who are aboriginal people
or socially or economically disadvantaged
individuals or groups or their Investments and notified to the Secretariat as
circumstances.
Aside from trade agreements, the need to protect the economic and social
interests of indigenous communities has been recognized in
a number of
international agreements. Two important examples are the United Nations
Declaration on the Rights of Indigenous Peoples
and the ILO Convention
concerning Indigenous and Tribal Peoples in Independent Countries (ILO
The United Nations Declaration on the Rights of Indigenous Peoples (UNDRIP) is a
declaration supported by a majority of the states
voting within the UN General
ILO Convention 169 is a binding treaty with 22 ratifications, mainly of Latin
American parties.
In addition,
the Convention on Biological Diversity (CBD) recognizes the need for indigenous
peoples to have access to the benefits
arising from the utilization of their
knowledge, innovations and
A range of other
bilateral and unilateral instruments grant exemptions from prohibitions on
hunting for particular indigenous practices
if they are done for non-commercial
4.2 Exceptions and Exemptions
Questions of
to address climate change may impact
upon indigenous peoples and other groups
such as artisanal and subsistence fishers, forest dwellers or Inuit seal
hunters. Irrespective
of legal status, these people may have a continuous
connection to the land or natural resources that predates formal settlement,
may be forced to alter income-generating activities due to the policies of
states other than the ones in which they live.
A similar scenario emerged with the EU’s ban on seal products. In an
attempt to reconcile the problems that would have been
faced by indigenous
peoples, the EU exempted trade from Inuit and other indigenous communities from
the ban. The challenge to the
EU’s ban by Canada and Norway forced the
Appellate Body to address this issue for the first
As already mentioned, the EU’s ban on seal products was imposed due to
the concerns of citizens and consumers about the welfare
of seals. The ban
contained three exceptions, one of which was designed to allow trade from Inuit
and other indigenous communities.
The need for this exception was identified
during the legislative process, given the adverse or significant impact of a
seal product
ban on the Inuit and other indigenous
communities,
who were expressly included in the resulting
Regulation.
The conduct of the hunt of those peoples was considered to have special
characteristics, particularly relating to the identification
of the hunter
within a local seal hunting tradition, the relevant community’s continuing
use or consumption of at least some
of the products of seal hunting, and a
contribution of the hunt to the subsistence of that
Part of the grievance of Norway and Canada was that the exceptions were in
practice only available to the Greenlandic Inuit and they
argued that this
amounted to de facto
discrimination. In adjudicating this claim, the
Appellate Body drew on its interpretation of the chapeau
of GATT Article
It found that the application of the measure was
overly casual and informal, and that the EU had not made ‘comparable
to facilitate access to the exception for the Canadian Inuit as
it did for the Greenlandic
It cited the finding in
of likely arbitrary or unjustifiable discrimination
‘when the application of the measure at issue does not allow for any
into the appropriateness of the regulatory program for the conditions
prevailing in those exporting
countries’.
implication was that the EU should have responded to the conditions that
prevailed in exporting countries by informing itself
particularly about the
relevant issues pertaining to the special group of the Inuit and other
indigenous communities within those
There were additional aspects of the
decision that gave
rise to expectations for importing countries dealing with indigenous
communities. For example, the Appellate Body
had some difficulty with the fact
that the exception for seal products from Inuit and other indigenous
communities, though partly
aimed at ‘subsistence’ activities (where
‘subsistence’ was undefined in the relevant regulations), could
nonetheless enter the market on a commercial basis. Also viewed as ambiguous was
the condition that indigenous seal hunts continue
their tradition of at least
‘partial use’ by the community of products of the hunt. For the
Appellate Body, it was not
clear how indigenous hunters would fulfil this
requirement. Although the measure envisaged the accreditation by designated
of the hunts, the Appellate Body considered this process to be
insufficiently fair and just when viewed in the context of providing
transparent
and clear market opportunities for indigenous communities from outside the
These aspects were
additional grounds on which the Appellate Body found that the exception did not
meet the requirements of the chapeau.
4.3 Guidance from International Law
The difficulties in
classifying commercial activities, traditional use and other issues relating to
indigenous and special groups,
as encountered by the Appellate Body, are fairly
common quandaries within other international regimes. The EU cited the UNDRIP
ILO Convention 169 to support its formulation of the exception, and the two
instruments were referred to by the
During the appeal,
Ecuador, as one of the third participants, supported the Panel’s inference
of ‘subsistence as including
income-generating activities necessary to
support traditional forms of life for indigenous communities, and its reference
to international
instruments to inform its
Use may also
have been made of CITES, whose parties have attempted to deal with the
definition of commercial activity, albeit in
a non-indigenous
The Panel took account of international laws with conscious self-restraint.
They were considered as factual evidence rather than law.
Referring to the
UNDRIP and ILO Convention 169, the Panel noted that ‘these instruments are
not WTO instruments and they do
not set out WTO obligations
appearing to align itself with the oft-expressed view that the applicable law of
WTO dispute settlement bodies is restricted
to the WTO covered
agreements.
restrictive view, and one that is disputed by Pauwelyn, who notes that
‘nothing in the [Dispute Settlement Understanding]
or any other WTO rule
precludes panels from addressing and, as the case may be, applying
rules of international law in order to decide the WTO claims before
Aside from the
issue of applicable law, the Panel might have drawn upon these international
instruments as tools of treaty interpretation,
in the same mode in which the
Appellate Body drew upon CITES and other treaties in
Although expressly envisaged in the Dispute Settlement Understanding (DSU),
interpreting WTO law using other international instruments
has been rather
restricted since
For example, a panel in
required that to be relevant rules of international law, other international
instruments must be binding on all WTO
(a need that is readily met by customary international law but could be
impossible to meet for smaller treaties like ILO Convention
169 or UN General
Assembly Declarations like the UNDRIP). The
Panel avoided
this issue and the international instruments, although mentioned, did not have
any normative effect in the dispute.
The Appellate Body in
did not refer to the two
international instruments. This may well have been because the parties did not
make submissions on them (although,
as we have seen in the context of
extraterritorial jurisdiction in the
case, the absence of
submissions on a legal point will not necessarily go unremarked). Even the
briefs—which can be conduits for international laws and even
indigenous issues
not appear to have relied on
Nor was there any
consultation between the WTO and other international
organizations.
seeking guidance from established international instruments, the difficult
peoples and sovereignty—such
as the identification of indigenous
the nature of
indigenous land and resource rights, the relative empowerment of indigenous
peoples and the characterization of subsistence
or artisanal
practices—were left to the importing states.
The impacts on indigenous peoples confronted by the importing state in the
dispute may have been considered to be relatively
straightforward in territorial terms. As we have seen, the impacts were
during the legislative process creating the ban; this contrasts with
a generally acknowledged deficiency of representation and participation
indigenous communities in government and political
The relevant
communities were also relatively confined: although the definition of indigenous
communities in the EC regulation was
broad (and taken directly from ILO
Convention 169) the application of the law was restricted to communities with a
very specific
cultural heritage relating to seal hunting. As such, the Appellate
Body may have been more comfortable in placing the onus on importing
states—with the necessary guidance for outreach and flexibility as
required by the chapeau
of GATT Article XX—to identify, engage with
and act justly towards indigenous peoples in other states, rather than relying
on obligations contained in the UNDRIP, ILO Convention 169 and other
instruments.
Other scenarios will be less straightforward. For example, as ILO Convention
169 reminds us, indigenous and tribal peoples should
be identified and accorded
rights-protections due to social, economic, cultural and political factors that
are ‘irrespective
implication of this is that it may not always be sufficient or appropriate for
importing states to defer to the domestic law
of the exporting state in these
matters, given that those states may be withholding legal status due to an
underlying unwillingness
to protect certain rights. In addition, any special or
differential treatment of indigenous peoples within the countries they inhabit
may be based on reparative property-based measures, cultural reasons or other
negotiated arrangements. These relational practices
may be impossible to
accommodate multilaterally within the trade
The Appellate Body
will find that dealing with such complexities in climate change and other
contexts requires guidance from international
5. CONCLUSION
Trade measures to
address climate change are available to states wishing to modify production or
consumption behaviour. This is to
address a problem—global
warming—that is manifest worldwide with no differentiation as to
territorial boundaries, notwithstanding
the particular vulnerability to rising
sea levels of low-lying island states. The intended change in behaviour brought
measures is the reduction of GHGs emissions, especially through
the promotion of a low-carbon economy, or the sequestration of carbon
outside of, the territory of the relevant state. Unilateral measures have
recently emerged or are proposed which include
energy subsidies, mooted border
tax adjustments, certification, labelling and traceability requirements and
import bans.
Territory is a significant concept for international, regional and domestic
efforts at climate change mitigation. In the UNFCCC, for
example, the integrity
of international obligations is secured through carbon accounting models that
rely on national inventories
and targets, including the nationally determined
contributions submitted as part of the newly formed Paris Agreement. In the EU
context and in domestic coal mining legal challenges, legal arguments
have focused on the need to contain the territorial aspects
of regulation. An
understanding of how territory—and jurisdiction—operates in the
context of trade measures to address
climate change is, unsurprisingly, just as
This chapter has sought to consider the relevance of territorial jurisdiction
to trade measures addressing climate change. It incorporates
the perspective,
already understood within the UNFCCC, that while the effects of global warming
are manifested worldwide, the historic
and current major contributors come from
a more limited number of countries. This places into sharp relief the potential
measures may be unilaterally adopted by the very states that are
historically associated with the causes of climate change (the western,
industrialized, developed states), with adverse trade effects for developing
countries. Even more ethically fraught is the potential
that adverse effects
will be felt disproportionately by indigenous peoples and other marginalized
communities within states.
The chapter’s primary finding is that trade measures addressing climate
change are unlikely to enliven—let alone violate—public
international law rules on territorial jurisdiction. This is because the
importing country is regulating behaviour within (or at)
its borders, and
therefore has a territorial basis for jurisdiction. Though not an uncontested
view, this position is strengthened
still by the increasing public
interest—even public morality—in issues of climate change
mitigation, which provides a
territorial basis for the (psychological or
ethical) position of citizens and consumers. In the face of increasing public
ethical concern about climate change, it is possible that trade
measures to address climate change will be defended by states on
the basis of
the GATT Article XX(a), rather than Article XX(b) or (g) or the more rarely used
Article XX(d) or (j).
While the Appellate Body has reserved a (so far latent) role for dispute
settlement bodies to require that trade measures to protect
public morals
demonstrate a jurisdictional nexus, it seems that such a nexus would be
relatively easily satisfied in the context
of climate change due to the
interconnected nature of the problem and its causes. The nexus could flow, for
example, from a connection
to the effects of climate change within the relevant
state’s territory, or from public concern about the effects of climate
change more broadly.
The key question for trade lawyers, however, is whether the shifting of
mitigation burdens through trade measures is justifiable.
The underlying issue
surrounding extraterritoriality is similar to the WTO rules on
non-discrimination—namely, the protection
of sovereigns from outside
interference with their domestic affairs. Efforts to seek international
collaboration to address climate
change will be key for both, as will principles
that have apportioned international responsibility based on historic practices
equity. Oft-used tests within the chapeau might serve as a basis for this
inquiry. For example, in
an assessment of discrimination
was inherently tied to the conduct of sovereigns in negotiating multilateral
solutions within other
international legal
This methodology
supports the incorporation of concepts such as the UNFCCC’s principle of
The concept of ‘territory’, like ‘climate change’
itself, is of historical and ethical complexity. There are
many marginalized
communities, including indigenous peoples, who have inadequate recognition and
protection by states. Notions of
legal responsibility and historical
reparations, though developing some degree of consensus, are often disputed.
Trade measures addressing
climate change must operate within this context. This
will require the state exercising the relevant trade measure to engage not
with trading partners but with marginalized communities (as the Appellate Body
called for in
which is an onerous and difficult
task—more onerous that any ‘nexus’ requirement in
likelihood, WTO Panels and the Appellate Body will
require guidance from international law on these questions.
PhD, LLM (Cambridge); BA,
LLB(Hons) (Melbourne); Associate Professor, Melbourne Law School, University of
Melbourne, Australia. The
author is grateful for comments from the editor,
research assistance from Kathleen Auld, and the support of the Australian
Council (ARC) for the project ‘Climate Change Law and
Mitigation’ (ARC DP110100259). Contact:
m.young@unimelb.edu.au
Key provisions of GATT Art XX
provide that countries should not be prevented from adopting or enforcing
certain trade measures where
the measures are ‘necessary to protect public
morals’, ‘necessary to protect human, animal or plant life or
or relate ‘to the conservation of exhaustible natural
resources’, with no express jurisdictional limit: General Agreement
Tariffs and Trade 1994 (Marrakesh, 15 April 1994; in force 1 January 1995)
(GATT), Art XX(a)−(b) and (g).
Rio de Janeiro, 9 May 1992; in
force 21 March 1994.
UNFCCC, Art 3(1). See also
Paris Agreement (Paris, 12 December 2015; in force 4 November 2016), Art
Some indigenous communities
have disputed that they should alter their forest practices to sequester carbon
for the international
community: See further M Tehan, L Godden, MA Young and K
Climate Change Responses and Indigenous and Forest Communities:
International, National and Local Law Perspectives on REDD+
University Press, forthcoming).
MA Young, ‘Trade Measures
to Address Environmental Concerns in Faraway Places: Jurisdictional
Issues’ (2014) 23
Review of European, Comparative and International
Environmental Law
(India, Malaysia, Pakistan, Thailand)
(WT/DS58/AB/R) (1998).
(Canada, Norway)
(WT/DS400/AB/R) (2014).
Brazil–Tyres (EC)
(WT/DS332/AB/R) (2007)
certain complex public health or environmental problems may be tackled only
with a comprehensive policy comprising a multiplicity
of interacting
measures.... Moreover, the results obtained from certain actions—for
instance, measures adopted in order to
attenuate global warming and climate
change, or certain preventive actions to reduce the incidence of diseases that
may manifest
themselves only after a certain period of time—can only be
evaluated with the benefit of time.
GATT, above n
, especially Art XX(a)−(b) and (g),
but note also the relevance of key agreements such as the Agreement on Technical
to Trade (Marrakesh, 15 April 1994; in force 1 January 1995) and the
Agreement on Sanitary and Phytosanitary Measures (Marrakesh,
15 April 1994; in
force 1 January 1995) as discussed further in this volume.
Montreal Protocol on
Substances that Deplete the Ozone Layer (Montreal, 16 September 1987; in force 1
January 1989).
The original Kyoto Protocol
Annex A comprised six GHGs: carbon dioxide (CO
), nitrous oxide (N
O), perfluorocarbons (PFCs),
hydrofluorocarbons (HFCs) and sulphur hexafluoride (SF6) (Kyoto, 11 December
1997; in force 16 February
2005). Nitrogen trifluoride (NF
added as a seventh GHG in the Doha amendment that also establishes the second
commitment period: ‘Doha Amendment to the
Kyoto Protocol
December 2012; not yet in force, Art 1:B.
Canada–Renewable Energy
(WT/DS412/AB/R) (2013)
India–Certain Measures Relating to Solar Cells and Solar Modules
(WT/DS456/AB/R) (2016). Although the Appellate Body’s decision was
handed down after the completion of the manuscript for the
current chapter, its
rejection of India’s reliance on GATT Art XX(d) and Art XX(j) to justify
domestic content requirements
in the solar sector contain important perspectives
on territory that warrant future analysis. For a different approach justifying
domestic content requirements for renewable energy, see T Meyer, ‘How
Local Discrimination Can Promote Global Public Goods’
University Law Review
T Meyer, ‘Energy
Subsidies and the World Trade Organization’ (2013) 17:22
see also T Meyer, ‘Explaining Energy Disputes at the World
Trade Organization’ in
International Environment Agreements
(forthcoming) and other submissions in that symposium.
M Kolsky Lewis and AD
Mitchell, ‘Food Miles: Environmental Protection or Veiled
Protectionism’
Michigan Journal of International Law
See, e.g. S Alexander, K
Nicholson and J Wiseman ‘Fossil Free: The Development and Significance of
the Fossil Fuel Divestment
Movement’ (2014) MSSI Issues Paper No 3,
Melbourne Sustainable Society Institute, The University of Melbourne; see also N
‘Revising Divestments’
Hastings Law
(considering the fiduciary duties arising from decisions of
public pension funds to divest their holdings in fossil fuels).
See, e.g. the letter to
President Obama to request cessation of new public leasing of fossil fuels by
groups including Geenpeace
and the Sierra Club (21 September 2015). Available
http://www.keepitintheground.org/
accessed 6 August 2016.
R Revesz, ‘Federalism
and Environmental Regulation: Lessons for the European Union and the
International Community’
(1997) 83:7
Virginia Law Review
further Young, above n
UNFCCC, Article 4.
J Scott, ‘The
Geographical Scope of the EU’s Climate Responsibilities’ (2015) 17
Cambridge Yearbook of European Legal Studies
Ibid, and sources cited
Kyoto Protocol
It is noted that the
second commitment period, which is not yet entered into force, applies
to a smaller number of states parties; see further Doha Amendment
These market-mechanisms are
achieved primarily through the Clean Development Mechanism (CDM).
The REDD+ funding mechanism
is still to be agreed upon: see further Christina Voigt (ed)
Handbook on REDD+ and International Law
(Edward Elgar, 2016).
Paris Agreement, Paris, 12
December 2015; in force 4 November 2016.
Ibid, Article 6.
‘Urgenda’, a
contraction of the words ‘urgent agenda’ was established as a Dutch
NGO in 2008. See the Hague
District Court (the Netherlands),
Foundation v The State of the Netherlands,
C/09/456689 / HA ZA 13-1396 (24
June 2015) (English translation). The decision is currently on appeal.
Ibid, para 4.83.
Ibid, para 4.91.
Ibid, para 4.92.
Wildlife Preservation
Society of Queensland Proserpine/Whitsunday Branch Inc v Minister for the
Environment and Heritage
[2006] FCA 736
(2006) 232 ALR 510 (Dowsett
J, declining to
consider that the legal responsibility for the adverse impacts caused by the
mine extended to the subsequent burning
Anvil Hill Watch
Association Inc v Minister for the Environment and Water Resources
FCA 1480 (Stone
J, declining to distinguish the approach of Dowsett J on account
of an estimate of GHG emissions being recorded by the decisionmaker)
confirmed by the Full Federal Court; see also
Australian Conservation
Foundation v Minister for the Environment
[2016] FCA 1042
(currently on
New Zealand High Court case
Royal Forest and Bird Protection Society of New Zealand Inc v Buller Coal
[2012] NZHC 2156 (Whata
J). This High Court decision was affirmed on
appeal in the Supreme Court.
Directive 2008/101 [2009] OJ
Case C-366/10,
Transport Association of America and Others v Secretary of State for Energy and
Climate Change,
21 December 2011.
For criticisms that the
Court’s decision unsufficiently accounts for the apportionment of
territorially-bounded concepts of
GHG emissions furthered by the IPCC, see
Scott, above n
J Crawford,
Brownlie’s Principles of Public International Law
University Press, 2012),
8th edn, 479. Indeed, such territorial
‘An Economic
Analysis of Trade Measures to Protect the Global
Environment’
Georgetown Law Journal
Young, above n
Rio Declaration on
Environment and Development, in: Report of the UN Conference on Environment and
Development (UN Doc. A/CONF.151/26/Rev.1
(Vol. I), 14 June 1992), Annex,
Principle 12. The wording of the ‘Cartagena Commitment’ of the
United Nations Conference
on Trade and Development (UNCTAD) is near-identical;
the difference is that its reference is to ‘transborder or global
environmental
problems’ and its incorporation of a range of GATT
principles is more express: see UNCTAD, ‘A New Partnership for
Development:
The Cartagena Commitment, United Nations Conference on Trade and
Development, 8th Session (1992). Available at:
http://unctad.org/en/Docs/tdviiimisc4_en.pdf
accessed 6 August 2016, para 152. See further MA Young, ‘Principle 12: The
Environment and Trade’, in: J.E. Viñuales
Declaration on Environment and Development. A Commentary
(Oxford University
Press, 2015), 325.
See further G Handl,
‘Declaration of the United Nations Conference on the Human Environment
(Stockholm Declaration), 1972 and
the Rio Declaration on Environment and
Development 1992’.
United Nations Audiovisual Library of International
(2012); available at:
http://legal.un.org/avl/pdf/ha/dunche/dunche_e.pdf, 7, accessed 6 August
GATT Panel Report,
US−Tuna I (Mexico)
(DS21/R) (1991).
Ibid, para 3.49.
GATT Panel Report,
US−Tuna I (EU)
(DS29/R) (1994), para
5.20 (‘the Panel
could see no valid reason supporting the conclusion that the provisions of Art
XX(g) apply only to policies
related to the conservation of exhaustible natural
resources located within the territory of the contracting party invoking the
provision’).
See, e.g. Crawford, above n
, 456; C Ryngaert,
International Law
(Oxford University Press, 2008) 21.
L Bartels, ‘Article XX
of GATT and the Problem of Extraterritorial Jurisdiction: The Case of Trade
Measures for the Protection
of Human Rights’
(2002) 36:2
World Trade
See, e.g. Ryngaert, above
(France v Turkey) (Judgment)
[1927] PCIJ (ser A) No 10, 21.
Ryngaert, above n
Bartels, above n
A Cassimatis,
Rights Related Trade Measures under International Law: The Legality of Trade
Measures Imposed in Response to Violations of Human
Rights Obligations under
General International Law
(Martinus Nijhoff, 2007) 364.
R Howse and D Regan
‘The Product/Process Distinction: An Illusory Basis for Disciplining
“Unilateralism” in Trade
(2000) 11:2
Journal of International Law
, at 278; also at 274 (‘Process-based
restrictions do not directly regulate any behaviour occurring outside the
The following discussion of
case draws from Young, above n
, para 73. The need to justify measures in this way is in
line with academic commentary calling for public international law rules
‘default’ rules: see H Horn and P Mavroidis, ‘The Permissible
Reach of National Environmental Policies’
(2008) 42:6
Journal of World
, at 1145. However, the EC’s assumption that the trade
measure at issue was an exercise of extraterritorial jurisdiction has
criticized by Scott as incorrect: see J Scott, ‘Extraterritoriality and
Territorial Extension in EU Law’
(2014) 62:1
American Journal of
Comparative Law
, para 121.
Ibid, para 133.
Such a connection is argued
by Crawford to be emerging as a ‘cardinal principle’ on matters of
prescriptive jurisdiction:
see J Crawford, above n
GATT, above n 1, Art XX,
chapeau (requiring that measures are ‘not applied in a manner which would
constitute a means of arbitrary
or unjustifiable discrimination between
countries where the same conditions prevail, or a disguised restriction on
international
, para 167.
Ibid, para 168.
Ibid, paras 177−84.
See also AB Report,
US–Shrimp (Malaysia) (Art 21.5)
(WT/DS58/AB/RW)
(2001), para 144.
(WT/DS381/AB/R) (2012),
Ibid, especially at paras
See above n
The following discussion of
case is drawn from Young, above n
, 311. Note also the almost parallel
proceedings at the Court of Justice of the EU:
Tapiriit Kanatami, established in Ottawa (Canada), et al v European
, Case T526/10 (25 April 2013).
As described by the EC: see
Panel Report,
EC−Seals (Canada, Norway)
, para 7.395.
The exemption applied: (i)
for Inuit and other indigenous communities, whose hunting had contributed to
their subsistence (the ‘IC
exception’); (ii) for people selling (on
a non-profit basis) the bycatch of hunting conducted for the sole purpose of the
sustainable
management of marine resources (the ‘marine resource
management exception’); and (iii) for people travelling in the EU,
brought in seal products for personal, non-commercial use (the ‘traveller
exception’): see AB Report,
EC−Seals (Canada, Norway)
Indeed the Appellate Body
noted that the EU’s arguments that the measure also protected the health
of seals were too limited
to establish a
prima facie
case for a defence
under GATT Art XX(b): ibid, para 5.183.
Ibid, para 5.173 (fn
Ibid, para 5.173.
This is the implication of
Howse and Langille’s early analysis of the dispute. They consider that the
traveller exception to
the ban was designed to ensure that the ban itself could
be reconciled with the territorial principle of jurisdiction, and any
importation
of seal products purchased
by travellers was outside
of any regulatory or trade remit: R Howse and J Langille, ‘Permitting
Pluralism: The Seal Products
Dispute and Why the WTO Should Accept Trade
Restrictions Justified by Noninstrumental Moral Values’
(2012) 37:2
Yale Journal of International Law
, at 385. In contrast to this
analysis, an inclusion of travellers in the ban might have been justified by
their ‘transient
presence’ in the EU. For further discussion of
‘transient presence’ as a jurisdictional basis for a number of EU
measures: including with respect to aircraft and fishing vessels, see J Scott,
‘The New EU “Extraterritoriality”’
Market Law Review
See, especially, the
‘Oslo Principles on Global Obligations to Reduce Climate Change’,
developed in response to the threat
climate change poses to humankind, other
life, and global security and well-being (1 March 2015). Available at:
www.osloprinciples.org
August 2016.
See above n
Ibid, para 4.83.
See above n
and surrounding text.
See, e.g. TB Atwood et
al., ‘Predators help protect carbon stocks in blue carbon
ecosystems’
Nature Climate Change
(2015). Available at:
doi:10.1038/nclimate2763 /
http://www.nature.com/nclimate/journal/v5/n12/full/nclimate2763.html (published
28 September 2015).
See, e.g. K Jensen, A Vaish
and M F H Schmidt, ‘The emergence of human prosociality: aligning with
others through feelings,
concerns, and norms’ (2014) 5
Frontiers in
Scott, above n
R Eckersley, ‘The
Politics of Carbon Leakage and the Fairness of Border Measures’ (2010)
Ethics and International Affairs
For similar requirements of
flexibility and multilateralism for EU measures involving ‘territorial
extension’, see Scott,
Report of the
Indigenous Peoples’ Global Summit on Climate Change
, 20−24 April
2009. Available at:
http://www.un.org/ga/president/63/letters/globalsummitoncc.pdf
para 5, accessed 6 August 2016.
A group called the Interior
Alliance submitted an
brief, as reported in Panel Report,
US−Softwood Lumber
(WT/DS236/R) (2002), para 7.2. See further M
Davis, ‘International Trade Law and Indigenous Peoples: A New Direction in
Rights Advocacy?’
Australian Indigenous Law
New Zealand−Thailand
Closer Economic Partnership Agreement (Bangkok, 19 April 2005; in force 1 July
2005) Art 15.8; Trans−Pacific
Strategic Economic Partnership Agreement
(Brunei, Chile, New Zealand and Singapore) (Wellington, 3 June 2005; in force 28
(New Zealand and Singapore), 12 July 2006 (Brunei), 8 November 2006
(Chile)), Art 19.5. The recently concluded negotiations of the
Trans−Pacific Partnership (TPP) sought similar protections (negotiations
concluded 6 October 2015; not yet signed
or entered into force).
See, e.g. the North American
Free Trade Agreement (NAFTA), the Canada−Chile Free Trade Agreement, the
Australia−US Free
Trade Agreement, and other examples cited by L Bartels,
‘Social Issues: Labour, Environment and Human Rights’ in S Lester
and B Mercurio (eds),
Bilateral and Regional Trade Agreements: Commentary and
(Cambridge University Press, 2014) 342, at 351.
ECT (Lisbon, 17 December
1994; in force 16 April 1998), Art 24.2(iii).
International Labour
Organization (ILO) Convention Concerning Indigenous and Tribal Peoples in
Independent Countries (Geneva, 27
June 1989; in force 5 September 1991) (ILO
Convention 169).
Declaration on the Rights of
Indigenous Peoples (UN General Assembly Resolution A/RES/61/295, 13 September
2007) (UNDRIP).
There are currently 22
parties to ILO Convention 169: see
http://www.ilo.org
accessed 6 August 2016.
CBD (Rio de Janeiro, 5 June
1992; in force 29 December 1993), Art 8(j). See also the Nagoya Protocol on
Access to Genetic Resources
and the Fair and Equitable Sharing of Benefits
Arising from their Utilization to the Convention on Biological Diversity
29 October 2010; in force 12 October 2014).
See, e.g. Convention on the
Regulation of Whaling (Washington DC, 2 December 1946; in force 10 November
1948), Art 4; 1911 Convention
for the Preservation and Protection of Fur Seals
(Washington DC, 7 July 1911; in force 15 December 1911), Art IV.
My discussion of the case
draws on Young, above n
See also G Marceau, ‘A Comment on the Appellate Body Report in
– Seal Products
in the Context of the Trade and Environment
Debate’ (2014) 23
Review of European, Comparative and International
Environmental Law
EC Regulation 1007/2009 on
trade in seal products [2009] OJ L286/36, preambular para 14: ‘The
fundamental economic and social
interests of Inuit communities engaged in the
hunting of seals as a means to ensure their subsistence should not be adversely
The hunt is an integral part of the culture and identity of the
members of the Inuit society, and as such is recognised by the United
Declaration on the Rights of Indigenous Peoples’. See also Panel Report,
, para 7.401.
The Inuit are defined as
‘indigenous members of the Inuit homeland, namely those arctic and
subarctic areas where, presently
or traditionally, Inuit have aboriginal rights
and interests, recognised by Inuit as being members of their people and includes
Yupik (Alaska), Inuit, Inuvialuit (Canada), Kalaallit (Greenland) and
Yupik (Russia)’: EC Regulation 1007/2009, above n
, Art 2.3. ‘Other indigenous
communities’ is defined as ‘[c]ommunities in independent countries
who are regarded
as indigenous on account of their descent from the populations
which inhabited the country, or a geographical region to which the
belongs, at the time of conquest or colonisation or the establishment of present
State boundaries and who, irrespective of
their legal status, retain some or all
of their own social, economic, cultural and political institutions’: EU
737/2010 laying down detailed rules for the implementation of
regulation, EC No. 1007/2009 of the European Parliament and of the
trade in seal products [2010] OJ L216/1, Art 2.1. This latter definition follows
ILO Convention 169, above n
Regulation 1007/2009, above
, Art 3.1, as cited in
, paras 4.9 and 5.323.
, paras 5.325−.328 and 5.337.
Ibid, para 5.337 (citing AB
, para 165).
Ibid, para 5.3.3.3.
Panel Report,
, para 7.292.
, para 2.259.
CITES Resolution Conf.
5.10 (Rev. CoP15), ‘Definition of ‘Primarily Commercial
Purposes’ (2010).
Panel Report,
para 7.295.
See, e.g. J Trachtman,
‘The Domain of WTO Dispute Resolution’
(1999) 40:2
International Law Journal
J Pauwelyn,
of Norms in Public International Law: How WTO Law Relates to other Rules of
International Law
(Cambridge University Press, 2003) 466 (citation
See further MA Young,
Trading Fish, Saving Fish: The Interaction between Regimes in International
(Cambridge University Press, 2011) 197−204.
Panel Report,
EC−Biotech (Argentina, Canada, United States)
(WT/DS291/R)
See MA Young, ‘The
WTO’s Use of Relevant Rules of International Law: An Analysis of the
International and Comparative Law
Peru-Agricultural Products (Guatemala)
(WT/DS457/AB/R) (2015)
where the Appellate Body focussed on the lack
of ‘relevance’ of two non-WTO instruments, namely a FTA (not yet in
and articles of the International Law Commission (ILC).
As was the case in Panel
US−Softwood Lumber
amicus curiae
briefs seemed to have concentrated on the animal welfare and fur trade
issues; see Panel Report,
, paras 1.17−.19; AB
This is a further avenue
for international law to be considered by a WTO dispute settlement body: see
Young, above n
Tribal self-constitution
is a notoriously difficult problem in the field: see generally K Gover,
Tribal Constitutionalism
(Oxford University Press, 2010).
Such participation is
particularly important for sustainable development; The Future We Want (UN Doc.
A/RES/66/288, 11 September
2012) (‘Rio+20 Outcome Document’), paras
ILO Convention 169, above
, Art 1.1(b), which informed the
EU’s definition of indigenous communities.
One way to address this
may be through the public morals exception of GATT Art XX(a). I note that
protection of public morals was
found by the
to apply to the policy’s differentiation for indigenous
given the policy was aimed at reducing the pain and suffering of
seals, and the impact on seal welfare was the same regardless of
whether general
or Inuit and indigenous practices were used:
Panel Report,
, para 7.275. The EU appealed this finding, but the
Appellate Body found it did not need to consider it: AB Report,
, para 5.314
, especially paras 163, 177. See also AB Report,
US−Shrimp (Art 21.5)
, paras 119−25.
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (407 KB)
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter