URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/journals/MqJlBLaw/2008/16.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 15:21:00
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Haddad, Michael --- "Adequacy of Reasons in Arbitral Awards" [2008] MqJlBLaw 16; (2008) 5 Macquarie Journal of Business Law 353
Adequacy of Reasons in Arbitral Awards
I Introduction
II The Obligation to Give Reasons
III The Adequacy of Reasons
A The Adequacy of Reasons Provided by a Judge
B The adequacy of reasons provided by an arbitrator
IV The Reasons Process
V The Form of Reasons
VI Conclusion
Adequacy of Reasons in Arbitral Awards
I Introduction
A recent Australian decision
highlighted the importance of the standard and the adequacy of the arbitral
award reasons which given in writing by the arbitrators
as the parties
didn’t agree otherwise. A decision by the Court of Appeal of the Supreme
Court of Victoria Australia
the first instance decision of Hargrave J in the case of BHP Billiton Ltd and
Oil Basins Ltd
[2006] VSC 402.
This decision and other connected precedent cases
from common law system will be examined. However, common questions regarding
awards will be answered first;
What is “Arbitral Award”? Arbitral award is a decision given by
the arbitral tribunal, which resolves the dispute. The
award gives a decision on
all claims submitted by the claimant. The purpose of the award is to dispose of
the controversy finally
and conclusively. It is made within the limits of the
arbitration agreement and it rules on each claim
Should arbitral award contain reasons? Any arbitral tribunal must have
reasons for its decision which conclude through arbitral award
and based on
facts the case and evidences provides by the parties. And this process is the
same if it is conducted in any
If it is accepted that any award is to resolve a dispute, do the reasons
underpinning the award have to be expressed? Or is it the
decision alone which
carries it own reasons?
Common arguments against "reasoned" awards are: (1) they could discourage
compromise awards when otherwise appropriate; (2) arbitration
awards accompanied
by written decisions may be challenged more frequently by petition to a court;
(3) experience shows that "reasoned"
decisions are often tailored predominantly
to avoid reversal or criticism; and (4) requirements for "reasoned" decisions
will ultimately
favour appointing lawyers as arbitrators, whereas the essence of
arbitration frequently is to obtain a business, rather than legalistic,
resolution.
On the other hand, a primary argument by supporters for "reasoned" awards is
that it requires the panel to articulate the basis of
its award in writing,
which should improve the quality of the award. It also gives the parties a
better idea of how they fared and
increases their confidence in the process
because it demonstrates, in a way that a one-line written award does not, what
the panel considered persuasive. Supporters of "reasoned" awards also
disagree that written decisions make awards more vulnerable
to post-hearing
challenge, because many arbitration clauses specifically relieve arbitrators of
the need to follow strict rules of
law, instead providing that awards should be
issued in accordance with the custom and practice of the subject matter of the
In order to know the adequacy and sufficiency of reasons, we will look first
in part II of this paper to the obligation of the arbitrator
to give reasons and
will posit the question is it a judicial or legislative duty? Part III discusses
what reasons are considered
to be adequate with respect to a judge, an
arbitrator. In exploring this issue this paper will also discuss the recent
decision in
BHP Billiton Limited v Oil Basins
. Part IV and V will
describe the major features of reasons process and form.
II The Obligation to Give Reasons
The obligation to give reasons by arbitrators is different from country to
country. Some jurisdictions require arbitrators to provide
reasons for the
award, otherwise it can be revoke. Other jurisdictions simply do not, unless all
parties request the Panel to explain
the reasons for its award.
Internationally
, the movement is in
favour of giving reasons, unless the parties agree otherwise. This may be seen
in the Model Law, which stipulates:
(2) The award shall state the reasons upon which it is based, unless the
parties have agreed that no reasons are to be given or
the award is an award on
agreed terms under article 30.
The Washington Convention calls for a reasoned award, without
restriction,
also the Convention
on the Settlement of the Investment Disputes between States and National of
Other States stipulates:
(3) The award shall deal with every question submitted to the Tribunal, and
shall state the reasons upon which it is
In addition, in practice, the ICC’s court deems awards which are
insufficiently reasoned to be defective as to
They are therefore
remitted to the arbitral tribunal for amendment before they may be approved in
accordance with Article 29 of the
ICC Rules. The UNCITRAL Arbitration
, London Court of
International Arbitration Rules
and European Convention of 1961,
take the same approach as the Model Law.
The pattern is the same in some national laws.
Switzerland
requires a reasoned
award as does the Netherlands
In England, a party may give notice
to the arbitral tribunal that a reasoned award is required; if the award does
not set out the
reasons of the award, or does not set them sufficiently, the
court may order the arbitral tribunal to state the reasons in sufficient
to consider any question of law arising out of the
However, unlike arbitration in the United Kingdom and certain other
the United States
custom and practice is that arbitration Panels, unless requested otherwise, do
not issue written explanations of
the basis of their award. Arbitration clauses
almost never require the Panel to explain the basis of its decision, although
the parties
are free to request the Panel to do
. The highest U.S. court has
ruled that: “Arbitrators have no obligation to the court to give their
reasons for an award.”
Yet, Australia takes the same approach as the Model Law; s 29 of the Uniform
Commercial Arbitration Acts (the Uniform Acts), set out
the formal requirements
which an arbitral award must comply with, which provides as follows:
29 Form of award
(1) Unless otherwise agreed in writing by the parties to the arbitration
agreement, the arbitrator or umpire shall:
(a) make the award in writing,
(b) sign the award, and
(c) include in the award a statement of the reasons for making the award.
(2) Where an arbitrator or umpire makes an award otherwise than in writing, the
arbitrator or umpire shall, upon request by a party
within 7 days after the
making of the award, give to the party a statement in writing signed by the
arbitrator or umpire of the date,
the terms of the award and the reasons for
making the award.
Accordingly, in the absence of written agreement to the contrary, an award
must be in writing, signed by the arbitrator, and include
a statement of the
reasons for the arbitrator’s decision.
As mentioned above, almost all jurisdictions and conventions required reasons
for an arbitral award. However, they were silent on
the nature and extent of
what is required in “a statement of the reasons for making the
. However the common
law fills the void by providing guidance on what the contents of those reasons
are to contain. This is the main
issue which will be addressed in this research
As noted above, s 29(1)(c) of the Uniform Acts provides that “(u)nless
otherwise agreed in writing by the parties to the arbitration
agreement, the
arbitrator or umpire shall …… (c) include in the award a statement
of the reasons for the award”.
Australian courts have considered the obligation to give reasons in a number
of decisions in recent times. A convenient summary of
the various cases, and the
relevant principles, can be found in the case
Beale v Government
, in which the
obligation to provide reasons for decision consider at first instance that a
judge or magistrate in particular cases
has an obligation to provide reasons for
the judgment given
obligation arises as a matter of judicial
. However, it’s a
normal incident of the judicial
. In matter of fact, it
does not arise from legislation as it does in the field of administrative
In the administrative field
there is, at common law, no obligation on primary decision-makers to provide
reasons for a decision.
In Australia, still undecided whether there is a general rule of law of
imposing a duty to provide
Although, the
obligation on courts to provide reasons may have a different source, it is an
incident of judicial duty. On the other
hand, the obligation for courts to
proved reasons for administrative decisions is a legislative requirement.
Although both types
of decision serve the same purpose, there content of reasons
are different.
Probably the main reason for an obligation on courts to provide reasons, is
the fact that a party seeking an appeal may generally
only appeal where the
trial judge has made an error of law. The absence of reasons or insufficient
reasons may not allow an appeal
court to determine whether the trial
judge’s verdict was or was not based on an error of law or an appellable
error. However,
the provision of full reasons has other benefits, such as, it
gives both party the confidence that the trail process went correctly.
the parties look to the arbitrator for a decision, not an explanation.
A failure to provide sufficient reasons can and often does lead to a real
sense of grievance that a party does not know or understand
why the decision was
This court has previously
accepted the proposition that a judge is bound to expose his reasoning in
sufficient detail to enable a
losing party to understand why they
One reason is obvious: if
decisions cannot be understood, a feeling of injustice can arise.
Aside from the sense of injustice which can be caused, there is a broader
interest in maintaining public acceptance of judicial decisions
and the judicial
system. The requirement to provide reasons can operate prophylactically on the
judicial mind, guarding against the
birth of an unconsidered or impulsive
decision. It enhances judicial
accountability.
The provision of
reasons has an educative effect: it exposes the trial judge or magistrate to
review and criticism and it facilitates
and encourages consistency in decisions.
The educative effect does not stop with judges but extends to other lawyers, to
and to the public. Decisions of courts usually influence the way in
which society acts and it is trite to point out that it is better
to understand
why one should act in a particular
III The Adequacy of Reasons
A The Adequacy of Reasons Provided by a
The content of an adequate statement of reasons is depends on the particular
matter, so the content of the reasons depends on the
particular circumstances of
the matter being considered by the
Further, it is an
incident of judicial duty for the judge to consider all the evidence in the
case. It is clearly unnecessary for
a judge to refer to all the evidence led in
the proceedings or to indicate which of it is accepted or rejected. In the
fact, the extent of the duty to record the evidence given and the
findings made depend, as the duty to give reasons does, upon the
circumstances
of the individual case.
Similarly, in
Soulemezis v Dudley (Holdings) Pty
the right of appeal is
given only in respect of a question of law, different considerations apply from
the case where there is a
full appeal. An ultimate finding of fact, which is not
subject to appeal and which is no way dependent upon the application of a
standard, can be treated less elaborately than an issue involving a question of
law or mixed fact and law.
no right of appeal is
given against
findings of fact, a failure to state the basis of even a crucial finding of
fact, if it involves no legal standard,
will only constitute an error of law if
the failure can be characterised as a breach of the principle that justice must
be done. But, if, in addition to the issue of credibility, other
matters were relied on as going to the probability or improbability
plaintiff’s case, such a simple finding would not be enough.
It follows, that reasons need not necessarily be lengthy or elaborate:
parte Powter; Re Powter.
scope of the reasons to be given is, as in
Housing Commission of
South Wales v Tatmar Pastoral Co Pty
related “to the
function to be served by the giving of reasons”. Accordingly, the content
of the obligation is not the
same for every judicial decision. No mechanical
formula can be given in determining what reasons are required. On the other
there are three essential elements of a statement of reasons, which it is
useful to consider. First, a judge should refer to relevant
evidence. There is
no need to refer to the relevant evidence in detail, especially in circumstances
where it is clear that the evidence
considered.
Secondly, a judge should set out any material findings of fact and any
conclusions or ultimate findings of fact reached. Where findings
of fact are not
referred to, an appellate court may infer that the trial judge considered that
finding to be immaterial. Where one
set of evidence is accepted over a
conflicting set of significant evidence, the trial judge should set out his
findings as to how
he comes to accept the one over the other. But that is not to
say that a judge must make explicit findings on each disputed piece
of evidence,
especially if the inference as to what is found is appropriately clear. Further,
it may not be necessary to make findings
on every argument or destroy every
submission, particularly where the arguments advanced are numerous and of
varying significance.
Thirdly, a judge should provide reasons for making the relevant findings of
fact (and conclusions) and reasons in applying the law
to the facts found. Those
reasons or the process of reasoning should be understandable and preferably
logical as well.
At the same time it is desirable to address these elements in giving reasons
for decision, it is the purpose which the reasons serve
which believes major
importance in determining the content of the reasons. That purpose must be
weighed against other considerations.
It has been noted that the content
required of a statement of reasons is to be measured against the burden that the
provision of
reasons imposes on the judicial
The reason for this is
that the giving of overly elaborate reasons can serve to undermine public
confidence in the judiciary and
in the judicial system in the same way that
insufficient reasons can. On the one hand, the provision of inadequate reasons
to a sense of injustice and a reduced appreciation or understanding of
legal rights and obligations. On the other hand, an overly
onerous duty to
provide reasons increases costs and delay in the judicial system which has the
effect of undermining public confidence
in the judicial system. In the end, the
balancing act which needs to be undertaken in considering the sufficiency of a
of reasons involves the adoption of, at the least, a minimum standard
which places the parties in a position to understand why the
decision was made
sufficiently to allow them to exercise any right of
B The adequacy of reasons provided by an
It should be note that because of the differences in appeals rights between
arbitration and litigation. Care needs to be exercised
in applying cases which
were mentioned previously to the adequacy of an arbitrator’s
Limitations on the leave to appeal from an arbitrator’s award due to
the amendments to s 38 of the Uniform Acts, as follows:
(4) An appeal under subsection (2) may be brought by any of the parties to an
arbitration agreement:
(a) with the consent of all the other
parties to the arbitration agreement, or
(b) subject to section 40, with the leave of the Supreme Court.
(5) The Supreme Court shall not grant leave under subsection (4)(b) unless it
considers that:
(a) having regard to all the circumstances, the
determination of the question of law concerned could substantially affect the
of one or more parties to the arbitration agreement, and
(b) there is:
(i) manifest error of law on the face of the award, or
(ii) strong evidence that the arbitrator or umpire made an error of law and
that the determination of the question may add, or may
be likely to add,
substantially to the certainty of commercial law.
The New South Wales Court of Appeal in
Promenade Investments Pty Ltd v New
South Wales
considered when
leave to appeal will not be granted. This decision has been followed and
approved in jurisdictions across Australia.
Sheller JA, who gave the leading
opinion, noted that the Second Reading Speech of the New South Wales Attorney
General in introducing
the amendment to the New South Wales Act, stated:
If arbitration is to be encouraged as a settlement procedure and not a dry
run before litigation, a more restrictive criterion for
the granting of leave is
desirable and the parties should be left to accept the decision of the
arbitrator whom they have chosen
to decide the matter in the first
Promenade Investments
can now be understood to
represents the
law in all Australian jurisdictions in relation to appeals under s 38 of the
Uniform Acts. In the space of 13 years
since 1992 it has been referred to in 88
subsequent decisions, including decisions of appellate courts in New South
Wales, Victoria,
South Australia and Western Australia, and by judges at first
instance in the Supreme Courts of all States and Territories. On 49
(including by the Courts of Appeal in New South Wales and Victoria, the Full
Court of the Supreme Court of South Australia,
and the Full Court of the Supreme
Court of Western Australia) the decision has been followed, and has been
mentioned on 39 occasions.
In no case has the decision in
Investments
been distinguished or not followed.
Peter Schwarz (Overseas) Pty Ltd v
Byrne J of the
Victorian Supreme Court, summarized the adequacy of reasons provided by an
arbitrator in the following terms:
“It is the duty of an Arbitrator to consider and deal with all matters
the subject of the reference [
Askew v Fields
[1985] HCA 4
(1985) 156 CLR 268
270]. Commonly, the arbitrating parties will present contentions of fact and law
in support of their own case in opposition
to that of the opponent. Often there
will be multiple contentions put forward, sometimes in the alternative to those
which have preceded
them. The Arbitrators must have regard to them all. When it
comes to preparing the award pursuant to s 29(1), and to “a statement
reasons for making the award”, the obligation is not identical. The
statutory requirement that the reasons be “reasons
for making the
award”, means that the Arbitrators are not required to provide reasons
which did not lead to the determination
of the disputes referred to arbitration.
Accordingly, it is not necessary for them to deal with an alternative basis of
defence when the primary claim or defence has been accepted.
The requirement for reasons in s 29 means that the Arbitrators must set out
the facts which they have found and the legal principles
which they have relied
upon as the foundation for the award and that this should be in terms
suffıcient for the parties to understand
why they have won and lost and for
them to decide whether to make and for
the Court to determine an
application for leave to appeal or enforcement. [
Housing Commission of New
South Wales v Tatmar Pastoral Co Pty Ltd
[1983] 3 NSWLR 378
Hutley JA, at 385 per Mahoney JA.]
I have mentioned the purposes which the statement of reasons is to serve. The
statement of reasons, at a minimum, must be suffıcient
to achieve these
purposes. I say “at a minimum”, because I am concerned with the
point at which the Court will take an
active interest in the insufficiency of
reasons; the prudent Arbitrator will not be tempted to stray close to this cliff
question may arise whether a particular contention must be dealt with
in the statement of reasons. Judges, mindful of their own judgment-writing
experience, have been careful not to impose upon Arbitrators a burden greater
than their own. And so, there is no need to deal with
contentions which are
frivolous, irrelevant or even peripheral to the matters in issue.
This has led the Court to stipulate that Arbitrators must deal with every
“submission worthy of serious consideration”.
Sydney Water Corp
Ltd v Aqua Clear Technology Pty Ltd
(unreported, NSWSC), Rolfe J, 17
December 1996) at 51.]
In Fletcher Construction
Australia Ltd v Lines
MacFarlane and Marshall Pty Ltd [[2002] VSCA 189 at [166]] the Court of Appeal
in this State said that a reasoned
judgment of a court must “deal with the
central contentions advanced by the parties”. However the test is
the minimum requirement is not that the Arbitrators deal with every
contention. Precisely where the line is to be drawn in a given
case will depend
upon the circumstances, including the relevance of the contention to the
Arbitrators’ conclusions. The decision
to deal in the reasons with a
particular rejected submission may also depend upon an assessment of its weight,
particularly in a
case where the arbitrating parties are not legally
represented. Putting it bluntly, some points are so obviously bad that no good
purpose is served by dealing with them in any detail. I need hardly add that the
prudent Arbitrator will prefer to err on the side
of comprehensiveness in order
that the award should be of benefit to the parties.
A further matter bearing upon the application of this principle is that the
Arbitrators will commonly not have had the benefit of
legal training.
Accordingly, Smart J in a much quoted
passage has said this:
Elaborate reasons finely expressed are not to be expected of an arbitrator.
Further, the court should not construe his reasons in
an overly critical way.
Menna v HD Building Pty Ltd
(unreported, SC (NSW), 1 December 1986), at
In what are often called trade arbitrations, the parties and the Arbitrators
are all engaged in a particular trade. In such arbitration
the reasons may be
expressed in the jargon of the trade or they may ignore matters which will be
well known to the participants.
Such an award which may appear deficient to an
outsider may nonetheless satisfy the fundamental purpose of the statement of
It cannot be the case that an award should be drafted only with an eye
to informing an appeal court which may be unfamiliar with
the trade and its
practices.”
Recently, a decision in
BHP Billiton Limited v Oil Basins
which A decision by
the Court of Appeal of the Supreme Court of Victoria
upheld the first
instance decision, requires arbitrators to give reasons in certain
circumstances, in the same form as is required
from a judge. A number of cases
on the subject were not referred to in the
which were the subject
of comprehensive exposition two decades ago by Tom Bingham in an address in
which he set out in point form
the different requirements of reasons by a court
and reasons by an arbitrator.
As a result of the treatment in the
BHP Billiton Limited v Oil Basins
, we can conclude
that the decision of Supreme Court of Victoria regarding the duty of arbitrators
to provide sufficient reasons on
an equal basis of judges.
For the following reasons a different and less stringent standard could be
seen to apply to arbitrators
(a) That the parties look usually to the arbitration for a decision, not an
explanation.
(b) The arbitration process is quite different from litigation; arbitration is
less formal and more flexible than litigation, in
which the outcomes will not
always be alike, particularly the reasons process.
(c) Arbitrators are usually experts in their
who may not have the
ability to include reasons at the arbitral award in away similar to judges.
(d) In addition, arbitration delivers a faster settlement to the parties, in
which will not give the arbitrators the time to provide
a sufficient reasoned
(e) The parties have chosen the arbitrators by their free will and they have to
bear the consequence and the responsibilities of
the arbitration outcome.
Another issue is that the royalty agreement between the late Dr Lewis Weeks
and BHP provided that it “shall be interpreted and
applied in accordance
with the law of the State of New York, United Sates of
arbitration between Oil Basins and BHP was conducted under the
Arbitration Act 1984
mentioned before, according to the custom and practice of US, which is unlike
arbitration in Australia,
arbitrators do not have an obligation to provide reasons for rendered the
IV The Reasons Process
Before commencing the task of writing the award, an arbitrator should
consider the framework for the award and reasons, such
(a) the issues in dispute;
(b) the factual evidence in respect of those issues, and submissions made by
the parties in relation to the factual evidence;
(c) the arbitrator’s findings on the facts, and the reasons for those
(d) submissions made by the parties on the legal principles relevant to the
arbitrator’s determination;
(e) the arbitrator’s findings on the legal principles relevant to the
arbitrator’s determination, and the reasons for
those findings;
(f) the application of relevant legal principles to the facts as found by the
arbitrator;
(g) the determination made, by applying relevant legal principles to the facts
as found; and
(h) any consequential matters, such as entitlement to
The arbitrator task of preparing and writing the award and reasons then
involves carefully and logically filling in the detail for
the framework.
Arbitrator, it would be expected, should provide a brief re-statement of the
background facts and of the issues of the dispute when
rendering an award. Such
an approach helps the arbitrator to address the reasons for deciding each
disputed issue, and informs the
parties (and others) just what the arbitrator
has done, and why.
perhaps seeming obvious that agreed facts are restated often such an exercise,
to the parties, is not a waste of time
and energy: it is a disciplined way of
focusing attention of both the arbitrator and the parties and on a satisfactory
The reasoning process of an arbitrator often involves dealing with the
evidence by reference to those issues in dispute and recording
why one body of
evidence is preferred to another, and then stating – as succinctly and
clearly as possible – why each
question has been decided in that manner by
the arbitrator giving the parties an insight into the fabric of the award.
This approach also opens the eyes of the arbitrator and leads them to realize
that often the first impressions of a dispute that an
arbitrator has cannot be
supported by a clear exposition of the facts and a reasoned resolution to the
problem by reference to the
relevant law.
From the perspective of clarity and also efficiently providing reasons may
also help an arbitrator to settle similar disputes in the
same matter
concurrently, grouping like issues together and only dealing with evidence once
will allow the arbitrator to more efficiently
and flexibly resolve a dispute.
Some cases present a large number of issues. It is useful, in that type of
dispute, to group like items together, and firstly deal
with the general
principles which apply to the group of items, so that individual items can then
be dealt with more briefly.
V The Form of Reasons
For the best form of reasons, an arbitrator firstly should prepare the
reasons as a separate document, and then to use them to prepare
the form of the
award, where the reasons are clearly included into the Award itself.
The reasons are clearer if they are set out in a logical sequence. An example
(a) Introduction.
(b) A summary, by way of re-statement by the arbitrator, of the issues in
(c) The contract, identifying particular contractual provisions which the
parties say are relevant to the issues in dispute, any
relevant legal principles
involved in the proper interpretation of the contact, the arbitrator’s
findings on contractual issues
and the reasons for those findings.
(d) A summary of the factual evidence, including any general findings on issues
of credit where witnesses give differing testimony.
(e) Each of the issues raised in the claimant’s claim, referring to the
evidence which has been led together with the arbitrator’s
findings of
fact and reasons for those findings; identifying any relevant legal principles
involved, together with the arbitrator’s
findings on the application of
those principles and reasons for those findings; the evidence on quantum,
together with the arbitrator’s
findings on quantum and reasons for those
(f) Each of the issues raised in any cross claim by the respondent, referring to
the evidence which has been led together with the
arbitrator’s findings of
fact and reasons for those findings; identifying any relevant legal principles
involved, together
with the arbitrator’s findings on the application of
those principles and reasons for those findings; the evidence on quantum,
together with the arbitrator’s findings on quantum and reasons for those
(g) Interest, including the date from which and the rate at which, interest
should be awarded, referring to the evidence and any
relevant legal principles,
and setting out the arbitrator’s findings and the reasons for those
(h) A summary setting out the total amount awarded, and the various items
included in the total amount.
The length of the form of reasons will depend on the extent and
complexity of the issues contained in the
VI Conclusion
Arbitrators should balance the parties’ right of having a binding
award, and the right to know and understand why the decision
was made, in a
logical and professional approach. As not away to make the awards “appeal
proof”. Depending on the complexity
of a particular matter, the task of
preparing reasons of sufficient standard may be difficult and time consuming. It
is a task which
demands both attention to detail and reasonable
The standard to be applied in considering the sufficiency of an
arbitrator’s reasons depends upon the circumstances of the case
the facts of the arbitration, the procedures adopted in the arbitration, the
conduct of the parties to the arbitration
and the qualifications and experience
of the arbitrator or
arbitrators.
decision raises some
concerns among arbitrators, in a result of the large powers of judicial
supervision on commercial arbitration.
While these statutory powers should be
regarded as conferring a supervisory jurisdiction principally directed to
maintaining the
integrity of the process of arbitration.
The statutory power to review produces an appeal on a question of law. That
must not mean that every time such a question exists the
power to intervene must
be exercised.
It can be suggested that the supervisory jurisdiction may interferes in way
with the autonomy of the parties which is the underlying
rationale of commercial
arbitration and the reason why it has acquired a broad level of acceptance in
dispute resolution.
The autonomy of arbitration and the supervisory jurisdiction should be in
balance, in order to enhance the confidence of the commercial
community with
respect to the arbitration process.
requires arbitrator to provide equal standards of reasons as same as required
from a judge; will open the door widely for other
cases to fallow its pattern.
In fact, the consequence of the BHP case is very serious on arbitration process;
first, it shift arbitration
to litigation because of the time consuming that
arbitration process will take regarding the judicial
. Secondly, as a result,
the use of arbitration as an alternative dispute resolution method will be
reduced dramatically. Finally,
the losing parties will abuse the inadequacy of
reasons, in order to get raid of the arbitral award.
A recommendation, all parties in arbitration and judicial systems should work
together to limit the leave of appeal, regarding insufficient
reasons of the
arbitral award.
PhD Candidate, Macquarie
University.
BHP Billiton Ltd and Oil
[2006] VSC 402.
BHP Billiton Ltd and Oil
[2007] VSCA 255.
Mailto Geoffrey Hartwell,
The Reasoned Award in International Arbitration
http://www.hartwell.demon.co.uk/intaward.htm
at 22 August 2007.
Bingham, “Reasons and
Reasons and Reasons: Differences Between a Court Judgment and an Arbitral
Arbitration International
reprinted in Australia
The Arbitrator
ARIAS. U.S.,
arbitration
http://www.arias-us.org/index.cfm?a=42
at 7 November 2007.
Charles Forer,
Many Reasons
Exist for a “Reasoned” Award
http://www.eckertseamans.com/media_center/publications/articles/2002_03_25_162.asp
at 9 November 2007.
BHP Billiton Limited v Oil
Basins Limited
[2006] VSC 402.
J.C.T. Chuah,
International Trade
ed, 2001) Sweet & Maxwell, London,
Model Law, Art. 31.
Washington Convention, Art.
Convention on the
settlement of the Investment Disputes between States and National of other
states, Art. 48.
ICC Rules, Art. 25(2).
UNCITRAL Arbitration Rules,
Art. 32(3).
London Court of
International Arbitration Rules, Art. 26(1).
European Convention of
1961, Art. VIII.
Swiss Private International
Law, Art. 189.
Netherlands Arbitration
Act, Art. 1057(4).
Jordanian Arbitration Act,
Art. 41(b).
Tunisian Arbitration law,
Prt. 75, Art.458.
Omanian Arbitration Law,
Art. 43(2).
Universal Petroleum v
Handels Uncl
[1987] 1 Lloyd’s Rep. 517.
Crowley D., The Duty to
Give Reasons: English v. Emery Reimbold & Strick Ltd (2002)
Journal of the Charted Institute of Arbitrators
ARIAS. U.S., Improving
arbitration,
http://www.arias-us.org/index.cfm?a=42
at 7 November 2007.
United Steelworkers of
America v Enterprise Wheel & Car Corp
[1960] USSC 108
363 U.S. 593
, 598 (1960).
Robert Hunt, The adequacy
of reasons, (2007)
Beale v Government
Office (NSW)
[1997] 48 NSWLR 430.
Pettitt v Dunkley
[1971] 1 NSWLR 376.
Housing Commission of
New South Wales v Tatmar Pastoral Co Pty Ltd
[1983] 3 NSWLR 378
Public Service Board of
New South Wales v Osmond
(1986) 159 CLR 656.
see, for example,
Administrative Decisions (Judicial Review) Act (Cth) s 13, Administrative
Appeals Tribunal Act (Cth) s 28, s 37
Public Service Board of
New South Wales v Osmond
(1986) 159 CLR 656.
Our Town FM Pty Ltd v
Australian Broadcasting Tribunal
[1987] FCA 301
(1987) 16 FCR 465
Re Poyser and
Mills’ Arbitration
Clutha Ltd v Risby
(Court of Appeal, unreported, 26 March 1996).
Dave Hoffman,
Obligation to Give Reasons
http://lsolum.typepad.com/legal_theory_lexicon/2004/02/legal_theory_le_2.html
at 4 November 2007.
Dave Hoffman, The
Obligation to Give Reasons, 2007,
http://lsolum.typepad.com/legal_theory_lexicon/2004/02/legal_theory_le_2.html
at 4 November 2007.
Beale v Government
Insurance Offıce
(1997) 48 NSWLR 430.
Beale v Government
Insurance Offıce
(1997) 48 NSWLR 430.
Mifsud v Campbell
(1991) 21 NSWLR 725
Soulemezis v Dudley
(Holdings) Pty Ltd
(1987) 10 NSWLR 247
Ex parte Powter; Re
[1945] NSWStRp 35
(1945) 46 SR (NSW) 1
Housing Commission
New South Wales v Tatmar Pastoral Co Pty Ltd
[1983] 3 NSWLR 378
North Sydney Council v
Ligon 302 Pty Ltd
(1995) 87 LGERA 435.
Rajski v Bainton
(Court of Appeal, unreported, 6 September 1991).
International
Commercial Law
ed, 2003) LexisNexis Butterworths, Sydney,
Sincik v Tess
of Appeal, unreported, 15 March l995).
Beale v Government
Insurance Office
(1997) 48 NSWLR 430.
Crowley D., The Duty to
Give Reasons: English v. Emery Reimbold & Strick Ltd (2002)
Journal of the Charted Institute of Arbitrators
Promenade Investments
Pty Ltd v New South Wales
(1992) 26 NSWLR 203.
Peter Schwarz (Overseas)
Pty Ltd v Morton
(2004) 20 BCL 133;
[2003] VSC 144.
BHP Billiton Limited v
Oil Basins Limited
[2006] VSC 402
BHP Billiton Ltd and Oil
[2007] VSCA 255.
The Honourable J J
Spigelman AC, Supreme Court NSW, 2007,
http://64.233.169.104/search?q=cache:2oFV_U7WwKwJ:www.lawlink.nsw.gov.au/lawlink/Supreme_Court/ll_sc.nsf/pages/SCO_spigelman100807+reasons+and+reasons+for+reasons+differences+between+a+court+judgment+and+an+arbitral+award&hl=en&ct=clnk&cd=1&gl=au
at 26 November 2007.
Tom Bingham, “Reasons
and Reasons and Reasons: Differences Between a Court Judgment and an Arbitral
Arbitration International
reprinted in Australia
The Arbitrator
BHP Billiton Limited v
Oil Basins Limited
[2006] VSC 402
Gabriel Moens and Peter
International Trade and Business: Law, Policy and Ethics
ed, 2005) Routledge-Cavendish, Oxon, 567.
Richard Granett et al,
Practical Guide to International Commercial Arbitration
2000) Ocean Publications Inc., New York, 31.
BHP Billiton Limited v
Oil Basins Limited
[2006] VSC 402
Crowley D., The Duty to
Give Reasons: English v. Emery Reimbold & Strick Ltd (2002)
Journal of the Charted Institute of Arbitrators
., Improving
arbitration
http://www.arias-us.org/index.cfm?a=42
at 7 November 2007.
Robert Hunt, The adequacy
of reasons, (2007)
Robert Hunt, The adequacy of
reasons, (2007)
Re Poyser and Mills’
Arbitration
(1964) 2 QB 467.
Alan Redfern and Martin
Law and practice of International Commercial Arbitration
ed, 2004) Sweet and Maxwell, London, 155.
BHP Billiton Limited v
Oil Basins Limited
[2006] VSC 402.
BHP Billiton Limited v
Oil Basins Limited
[2006] VSC 402.
BHP Billiton Limited v
Oil Basins Limited
[2006] VSC 402.
Peter Gillies and Niloufer
Selvadurai. Reasoned Awards: How Extensive Must the Reasoning Be?
Arbitration 125-132
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (206 KB)
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter