URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/journals/AboriginalLawB/1997/14.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 14:41:42
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Blokland, Jenny --- "A Feminist Amicus Brief in the Stolen Generation (NT) Litigation" [1997] AboriginalLawB 14; (1997) 3(89) Aboriginal Law Bulletin 10
A Feminist Amicus Brief in the Stolen Generations (NT) Litigation
By Jenny Blokland
"This article is a revised version of a paper delivered at the Symosium
'Feminist Interventions in International Law', Melbourne
University, 30th
September 1996. In accordance with the theme of the symposium, the writer
inquires whether there are concealed gender
issues of legal signifiance in the
Stolen Generations (NT) case which could be made explicit by the use of an
intervenor or amicus
curiae charged with such a task. The paper was orginally
the second section of a three part joint presentation made with Barbarra
Cummings, Stolen Generations (NT) Group, and Rebecca LaForgia, Faculty of Law,
Northern Terriiitory University. The author wishes
to acknowledge their
assistance and to thank them."
This article examines the nature of the material which might be canvassed in a
brief which has the object of informing the High Court
on the significance of
select legal issues of importance to women in the Stolen Generations (Northern
Territory) (`NT') litigation;
Kruger & Ors v The Commonwealth
Amicus curiæ
, the `friend of the court', is a term which describes
a representative who is not a party to the proceedings but is granted a limited
right to be heard on an issue. Hence, the feminist
imagined as a vehicle to highlight these issues. In this article, particular
regard has been paid to the emphasis Barbara
given to the gender bias inherent in the operation of the
Aboriginals
(NT) and the continued loss suffered by members of
the Stolen Generations (NT) Group who have been removed from their families as
children under government policy.
It is not my intention to revisit or criticise the comprehensive arguments
agitated before the High Court. Rather, this article seeks
to examine what
feminist jurisprudence could practically and legitimately add to a
multi-dimensional case such as the Stolen Generations
(NT) Group litigation.
The harm suffered by the members of the Stolen
Generations (NT), especially the way in which women and children have been
distinctively
harmed, is not of a kind for which redress is regularly claimed
before the courts. It may well be invisible unless specifically addressed.
It is also suggested that the concerns of the
Stolen Generations (NT) group may be best informed by international legal
surrounding the question of assessment of loss.
An opportunity to be heard
In Australian law, there exists a sharp distinction between the intervenor who
must demonstrate a proprietary, material or financial
interest to be granted
intervenor status, and the
who may be given
permission to make submissions. The test to make submissions as
is strict, as can be seen in
At the outset of
International Commission of Jurists (`the ICJ') was refused leave to appear as
. The ICJ had sought to make submissions on fundamental
Constitutional freedoms, protection of the family from undue state
interference,
and on the international obligation on states to ensure effective
remedies when the state is in breach of international human rights
instruments.
The Court refused the ICJ's
application, as it found there was no indication that the parties were unable
or unwilling to adequately
protect their own interests, nor that the
intervention would assist the Court to come to the correct determination.
Of the ICJ's written submission, it must be
said that most of the subjects covered were comprehensively dealt with by the
save the ICJ's proposed brief submission on the obligation on states
at international law to provide a remedy for breaches of human
The issue of effective remedy remains problematic for the Stolen Generations
(NT). Any civil proceedings may be barred by statutes
of limitation,
and because the type of harm suffered by the
children and mothers is not easily accommodated by way of damages in common law
a victory in the courts may not deliver appropriate redress. An
Australian court, for example, would be dealing with distinctively
new heads of
damage or loss such as those related to problems in claiming land according to
the `traditional' terms of the
Aboriginal Land Rights (NT) Act 1976
briefs, or the granting of
formal intervenor status, often involve cases concerning supposed
quintessential `women's' legal issues
such as abortion and sexual assault.
In the Australian context, for example, the
High Court has recently granted
status to the Catholic Health
Care Association and Abortion Providers of Australia in a medical negligence
case for alleged failure
todiagnose pregnancy.
The Stolen Generations (NT) litigation, however, forces consideration of the
interrelationship of both race and gender which cannot
be treated as `mutually
exclusive categories of experience and analysis'.
The first hurdle for the feminist
would be to convince the Court that, in a case primarily concerning serious
race discrimination, the concealed issues of gender
are of such significance
that if not heard, the Court could reach the wrong result.
Secondly, the feminist
brief should take heed that, at the heart
of feminist jurisprudence, including its engagement with international law,
lies the actual
experiences of women.
the rarefied setting of cases of Constitutional challenge, the complexity and
subtlety of the specific experiences of mothers
and their children in a group
may not be placed before a court by virtue of the balance of convenience
favouring the preliminary
resolution of questions of law. This was apparent in
an exchange between counsel in the Stolen Generations litigation concerning
right to freedom of association. McHugh J stated: `This is where I feel the
lack of evidence in this particular case because
there is just no evidence as
to what these children were deprived of in general terms or what they may have
gained. How do we fill
answered: `We cannot fill it with evidence, your Honour.' A feminist
brief would seek to keep the questions as widely drawn as
possible and persuade the Court to hear evidence of the experiences of
plaintiffs, even against the balance of convenience.
Genocide was dealt with extensively in the plaintiffs' written submission
and responded to by the Commonwealth, which
argued that the issue would be the subject of evidence, and was thus incapable
raised in the context of the Constitutional challenge.
Thecontroversy over the issue of `intent' within the
Genocide Convention
is well recognised.
A dominant view is that it must be shown that, if acts
are to be characterised as genocide, then they must be committed `with intent
to destroy, in whole or in part' the group.
It is suggested here, that, despite arguments which have been raised in the
Stolen Generations litigation concerning the issue of
`intent' within the
Genocide Convention
the loss suffered by members of
the Stolen Generations is best understood and reflected in an appropriate
remedy if the wrongs perpetrated
against them are seen as genocide (or, at the
very least, as a
genocide situation). The Special Rapporteur to
the United Nations (`the UN') Human Rights Commission has assimilated slavery
`like' practices in the work on reparations.
A similar argument should apply to genocide-`like'
The reliance on Article II(d) and (e) of the
Genocide Convention
(imposing measures intended to prevent births and forcible transfer of children
of a group to another group) in the plaintiffs'
written submission raised an
issue which indicated harm specifically towards women.
As Barbara Cummings has shown, the children concerned
were primarily in the care of their mothers, and more female children were
removed than males, who were often required as stock workers.
The Stolen Generations (NT) have described the nature of their loss as
For a mother whose child was stolen, this meant--
Loss of association, including cultural association, with her child;
Loss of cultural experience and fulfilment in respect of her child;
Loss of maternal experience and fulfilment, and other rights and entitlements associated
with motherhood and the rearing of a child;
Pain, suffering and mental anguish.
For the children taken away, this meant--
Loss of association with parents, family culture and community;
Loss of cultural experience, fulfilment and spiritual affiliations;
Loss of amenities and opportunities for education; formation of personal
relationships with family and community; personal freedom
opportunities of life because of institutionalisation in a different cultural
and racial environment to that into which
they were born;
Pain, suffering and mental anguish;
Loss, diminution of, or impediment to hereditary entitlements including
entitlements to participate in land claims and right to land provided for or
existing under Northern Territory or Commonwealth legislation
or at common
Given the extent of this loss, it is curious that the
characterisation of the
Aboriginals Ordinance 1918
and the consequent
acts perpetrated as genocide, which have so long been part of the public debate
raised by the Stolen Generations
(NT), was not part of oral argument before the
If it is found that the
Aboriginal Ordinance
is valid and
that what has occurred are acts of genocide, devoid of intent, it may be that
what remains are, as Strickland has said
of the situation in the United States,
acts of `lawful' genocide:
`I am talking not about these cold blooded atrocities but about law and the
ways in which genocidal objectives have been carried
out under colour of
law--in de Tocqueville's phrase "legally, philanthropically, without shedding
blood, and without violating a
single great principle of morality in the eyes
of the world" ... The legal genocide, cultural as well as physical, practised
the American Indian could only have been the product of a society such
as ours, a society with a strong sense of the "rule of law"
Australia has an obligation to prevent and punish acts of genocide.
In taking steps to comply with this part of
Genocide Convention
, Australia has asserted that laws in force in
relation to the offences of `murder, manslaughter, assault, conspiracy and
and other matters are sufficient to enable Australia to comply with
its obligations under the
Ironically, it would appear that Australia had not
conceived that to comply with the
Genocide Convention
, it may need to
prohibit conduct outside of the usual scope of those traditional criminal law
If the obligation to prevent genocide cannot be reflected in the High Court's
ruling on the validity of the
Aboriginals Ordinance 1918
, then the acts
amounting to or having the effect of genocide (even if intent in the full sense
is not proved) should, it is argued, inform the question of
remedies if the
Aboriginals Ordinance
is found to be invalid
for other reasons.
Until the Stolen Generations (NT) campaign and subsequent litigation, it would
appear that little attention has been given in Australia
to the legality of
arbitrary forced removal of children by the state. Rather than passing laws to
prevent it, Australia passed laws
to promote it. In this event, the feminist
brief might argue that the forced removal of children has been
wrongly regarded as a `softer' form of feminised `cultural genocide'.
Intertemporal issues
The Commonwealth has also argued that the evolving nature of human rights meant
Aboriginals Ordinance 1918
should be judged according to the
social, cultural and political context of the time. In his opening, Counsel for
the Commonwealth
`The Commonwealth admits the real issues of social and political concern; it is
an area where there is intense attention being given
to the serious social
issues arising from the operation of these ordinances repealed so long ago, but
acceptance of this situation
does not, we submit, enable this Court to involve
itself in what is, in essence, an invitation for the retrospective re-writing
the course of our Constitutional evolution. We say to entertain this case
would be, in effect, to apply back for 80 years or so the
operation of newly
articulated Constitutional rights, entitlements, or freedoms.'
The plaintiffs argued as follows:
`The proposition that racist or discriminatory views can dictate the meaning or
effect of the
Constitution
directly contradicts the very nature of the compact
and the inherent equality of the parties to it. Taken to its logical extreme,
the defendant's pleading would have justified the attempts by the Third Reich
to subject Jews to unprecedented discrimination under
the law--eventually
leading to genocide--on the basis that such a plan accorded with the
"contemporary values and perceptions" of
the German people'.
The feminist
brief would seek to persuade a court to ignore the
Commonwealth's intertemporal argument, insisting that successor governments are
bound by the responsibility incurred by predecessor governments for gross
violations of human rights. This is reinforced bythe
work of the UN
Commission on Human Rights.
As a matter of
state responsibility, a new government must make reparations. Indeed, at
international law, gross violations of human
rights occurring in the past have
attracted reparations. Recently, for example, the claim has been made that
reparations are available
for the continuing damaging consequences of the slave
system, although slavery was once accepted as the norm and was legal in
Further, the work of the UN Commission on Human Rights states that `Reparations
may be claimed by the direct victims and, where appropriate,
the immediate
family, dependants or other persons having a special relationship to the direct
Contrary to the Commonwealth's
contention that this is a case of ancient history, the Stolen Generations (NT)
litigants are the persons
directly affected--as mothers and children.
Australia's ratification of the
Genocide Convention
on 8th July 1949
also goes some way to indicating that, at the time of the operation of the
Aboriginals Ordinance 1918
, Australia had made a decision to be bound by
an international obligation to refrain from acts of genocide. It also signals
the community values of the time rejected genocidal practices. Even prior
to Australia signing the
Genocide Convention
, it was well accepted that
genocide was contrary to international law.
The arguments before the High Court in
continually raise the need to examine the legislation according to the values
at the time. How that is to be assessed is a problem
in the Commonwealth's
The acceptance of a submission that intertemporal views defeat claims for
redress of serious violations of human rights is a subject
for inclusion in the
brief given that many rights protecting women are
relatively recent.
Throughout the argument
on `freedom of religion' canvassed in
, there are a number of
exchanges between Counsel and the Bench which indicate that various atrocities
perpetrated on women readily
spring to mind in the context of the legitimate
bounds of state control of religion. Female circumcision and suttee are both
during the course of argument.
Less dramatic but no less fundamental, rights historically denied to women in
Australia are also discussed--the right to participate
and the right to vote.
In one sense, it is heartening to read that these issues are considered in the
context of argument on Constitutional issues. However,
it is also a reminder of
some of the grossest violations against women. Consequently, there is a need
for the feminist
to persuade the Court to proceed cautiously
before striking out the ability to remedy past wrongs.
The plaintiffs in
claimed damages for breach of Constitutional
rights and guarantees independent of any common law cause of action. Arguments
whether breach of the
Constitution
can give rise to an action
sounding in damages. If this is the case, how might damages be calculated?
Would any State or Territory
limitation statutes apply? Are any declaratory
relief or other equitable remedies applicable? On each issue, the parties and
of the Court indicated there was significant uncertainty on the
law--statutory reform of limitations statutes was raised.
If the plaintiffs' case is successful to the point of calculation of damages
and other relief, the feminist
brief would attempt to persuade
the court that the principles to be applied should be informed by Special
Rapporteur Theo van Boven's
recommendations on reparations, including
reparation by restitution.
Reparation in this case might include the provision of lands, or, where not
practicable, financial compensation. Reparations also
embrace compensation for
mental harm, legal costs, pain and suffering and emotional distress. They might
include reparations by way
of rehabilitation--support, counselling and access
to victim services. They might also involve reparation by way of
satisfaction--public
disclosure, declaratory judgment, apology, acceptance of
responsibility, commemorations for victims, and inclusion of an accurate
of the human rights violation in educational materials.
It is unlikely that a mix of the above measures by way of reparations could be
adequately reflected in orders from the High Court
in consequence of a
successful Constitutional challenge. In the context of further civil litigation
or submission on appropriate
measures for recommendation by the Human Rights
and Equal Opportunity Commission, the feminist
brief would
ideally argue that on the point of remedy, the reparations as set out by van
Boven should be used to develop and inform
the common law.
Whether this can occur will depend on convincing the forum concerned that
serious harm has resulted from the acts of removal. If
the nature of the harm
cannot be comprehended, its magnitude should be understood by reference to
gross violations--such as genocide--in
order that it can be treated with the
seriousness it deserves. At the heart of the feminist
the need to persuade each forum to adopt the principle that women be treated
seriously, that the way we might be distinctively
harmed be appropriately
acknowledged, and that wrongs perpetrated against women in the past not be
swept aside in favour of adopting
the dominant culture of a previous time. The
benefits of this approach should flow to both men and women who have been
serious but not immediately obvious ways.
Kruger, Muir, Cole, Hansen, Hill,
McClary v The Commonwealth of Australia, High Court of Australia
of 1995) and
Bray & Ors v The Commonwealth of Australia
D005/95), argued 12-14 February 1996. (Referred to in this paper as
'.) The same issues may be relevant in subsequent civil
proceedings. See `Stolen Generations: the Kruger action' by L Kennedy and
Nance, Vol 3,
Aboriginal Law Bulletin
Barbara Cummings, 'Writs and Rights in the
Stolen Generations (NT) Case', Vol 3,
Aboriginal Law Bulletin
November 1996.
This litigation primarily concerns
and Others v The Commonwealth
(above). Relevant also is the `National
Inquiry Into the Separation of Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander Children
Families' conducted by the Human Rights and Equal Opportunity
Commission. The potential for further civil litigation was alluded
argument and since hearing
500 writs have been
filed on behalf of individuals affected by the
Aboriginals Ordinance
R Graycar and J Morgan,
The Hidden Gender
, Federation Press, 1990, p 272. Chapter II begins with the heading
`Social Injury-The Ways in Which Women are Distinctly Harmed'.
Transcript,
12th February
1996, p 12. See also
Bropho v Tickner
[1993] FCA 25
(1993) 40 FCR 165
Australian Railways Union v Victorian Railways Commission
[1930] HCA 52
(1930) 44 CLR 319
at 331 per Dixon J; Australian Law Reform Commission,
`Standing in Public Interest Litigation', Report No. 27.
`Amended submissions of the International
Commission of Jurists (Australian Section) On the Questions Reserved', 1, 12.
Transcript,
, 12th February
1996, p 12.
ICJ amended submission at 12. It is argued
in this article that common law remedies in the Stolen Generations (NT) case
informed by international law.
There is disagreement on whether the
limitation statute of the State or Territory in which the proceedings were
issued applies, or
whether the statute of the place of commission of the tort
NLC v Olney
(1992) 105 ALR at
551. See also Rosemary Baird, `Respect the Survivors', Paper presented to the
International Conference on Land
Rights, Canberra, 17th August 1996.
For example, cases conducted in Canada by
Women's Legal Education and Action Fund (LEAF). Consent in the context of
sexual activity
in the medical setting:
Norberg v Wynrib
(1992) 92 DLR
; maintenance:
Moge v Moge
(1992) 99 DLR (4th) 456
; challenge
to maternity leave:
Schacter v The Queen and Canada Employment and
Immigration Commission
(1988) 52 DLR (4th) 524.
`Abortion: the mum who holds the key;
Abortion rights and wrongs',
The Weekend Australian
, 21-22 September
1996. This case has settled prior to argument on the merits.
Kimberle Crenshaw, `Demarginalising the
Intersection of Race and Sex: A Black Feminist Critique of Antidiscrimination
Doctrine, Feminist
Theory and Antiracist Policies',
The University of
Chicago Legal Forum
, 1989, 139-67; Marie Brooks, `The Incarceration of
Aboriginal Women', in
(eds, Bird, Martin, Nielsen), Federation
Press, 1996, p 266 refers to the `The Double Jeopardy: Gender and Race'.
Charlesworth, Chinkin and Wright,
`Feminist Approaches to International Law' (1991) 85
, Transcript, 12th February
1996, p 62.
`Genocide and the
Constitution
plaintiffs' submissions, p 63, 4th November 1995.
`Fundamental Rights and Genocide',
respondent's submissions, p 62, 29th November 1995.
Starkman, `Genocide and International
Law: Is There a Course of Action?' (1984)
ASILS Int's LJ
; Le Blanc, `The
Intent to Destroy Groups in the Genocide Convention: The Proposed US
Understanding' (1984) 78
369; Clark, `Does the Genocide Convention
Go Far Enough? Some Thoughts on the Nature of Criminal Genocide in the Context
of Indonesia's
Invasion of East Timor', (1981)
Ohio Northern ULR
Respondent's submissions at p 64.
It is noted that Special Rapporteur Theo
Van Boven in `Study concerning the right to restitution, compensation and
rehabilitation
for victims of gross violation of human rights and fundamental
freedoms' E/CN 4/sub 2/1993/8 refers to genocide, slavery and slavery-`like'
practices (General Principles 1). UN Human Rights Commission, Submission on
Prevention of Discrimination and Protection of Minorities,
Plaintiffs' submission, p 63.
Barbara Cummings,
Jaqui Katona, `We've been waiting all our
lives for this', National Press Club, 13th February 1996.
Strickland, `Genocide at law: An Historic
and Contemporary View of the Native American Experience'
Genocide Convention
Art I: `The
Contracting Parties confirm that genocide whether committed in time of peace or
in time of war, is a crime under international
law which they undertake to
prevent or punish'.
Minister for Foreign Affairs, Senator
, 15th August 1974, p 965, cited in Ryan (ed),
International Law in Australia
, Law Book Company, 1984, p 163. The
inclusion of manslaughter is curious--not being a crime of intent, it is
difficult to see how
`non-intentional' killings could ever conceivably lead to
proof of `intent' to destroy the group.
Transcript,
, 13th February
1996, p 162.
Plaintiffs' submission, p 100.
Special Rapporteur Theo van Boven, `Study
concerning the right to restitution, compensation and rehabilitation for
victims of gross
violations of human rights and fundamental freedoms' (1993),
as reproduced in Stolen Generations Litigation Unit, `Submission to
Rights and Equal Opportunity Commission', 29th July 1996.
Lord Anthony Gifford QC, `The Legal Basis
of the Claim for Reparations', paper presented to the First Pan-African
Congress on Reparations,
Abuja, Federal Republic of Nigeria, April 27-29,
. Another factor militating in
favour of this approach is the principle that statutes of limitations should
Genocide Convention (Preamble)
Lemkin, `Genocide as a Crime Under International Law' (1947) 41
For example
Sex Discrimination Act
Affirmative Action (Equal Opportunity for Women) Act
Human Rights and Equal Opportunity Commission Act 1986
Industrial Relations Act 1988
pp 111, 112.
Commonwealth submission, p 93.
Special Rapporteur Theo van Boven, `Study
concerning the right to restitution, compensation and rehabilitation for
victims of gross
violations of human rights and fundamental freedoms' (1993),
as reproduced in Stolen Generations Litigation Unit, `Submission to
Rights and Equal Opportunity Commission', 29th July 1996.
Note above, Recommendations 11, 19.
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
No downloadable files available
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter