URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/journals/MarStudies/2008/18.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 15:17:10
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Khalid, Nazery --- "Conference Report: Protecting port cities and communities from security threats: report on The Security of Global Port Cities - Community, Environment and Marine Policy Conference" [2008] MarStudies 18; (2008) 160 Maritime Studies 27
CONFERENCE REPORT: Protecting port cities and communities from security threats
Security of port cities and communities: In search of a new paradigm
Maritime security or insecurity? Post-9/11 perspectives
Rising from the ashes: Rebuilding cities, engaging communities
Environmental security as a component of the security matrix
Protecting port cities and
communities from security
Nazery Khalid
Security of port cities and communities: In search of
a new paradigm
‘Veins of goodness, love and grace Intertwine through sacred space’
(Joyce Brinkman)
To the romantics, the sublime phrase conjured by Joyce Brinkman,
Indiana’s Poet Laureate, is aptly descriptive of port cities
and coastal
communities. However, it only tells half the story about these complex dwelling
places and their habitats.
Port cities and coastal communities indeed are ‘sacred space’ to
their dwellers. They also act as ‘veins of goodness’
through which
economic riches flow, but at the same time provide the stage for many negative
acts and forces. These cities and communities
provide a fascinating lens through
which various aspects of life including socio-economic development, security,
community welfare,
environmental protection, infrastructural capacity building
and public policies can be observed. International spotlight has not
brighter on port cities worldwide than at present. An estimated 90 per cent of
world trade is carried by maritime transport,
underscoring the immense role of
ports as trade facilitators and their host cities and hinterlands in providing
cargo and ancillary
services, supporting infrastructure and human resources
supporting port operations. Port cities have also grown into complex dwelling
areas for their inhabitants who face a plethora of old and new dynamics, issues
and challenges that affect the way they live and
work. In the post-9/11 security
matrix, the issue of security of ports and port cities warrants close inspection
given the importance
of international seaborne trade. They are also exposed to
the vagaries and destruction of natural calamities and disasters such as
hurricanes, earthquakes and tsunamis.
It is in acknowledgment of the good and bad of port cities that the
conference on
The Security of Global Port Cities
was organised by the
Center for the Study of Global Change at Indiana University in Bloomington,
Indiana, USA. Themed ‘Community,
Environment and Marine Policy’, the
conference provided a platform for renowned scholars from diverse disciplines
environment, security enforcement, anthropology, economics,
architecture and sociology to discuss the issue of security of global
cities and coastal communities in a comprehensive manner. The conference was
aimed at developing a framework of security for
the communities of port cities
which integrate measures to safeguard against ‘traditional’ security
threats such as smuggling
and piracy with more lofty community goals such as
ecological resiliency, social inclusion and the development of vibrant public
waterfront spaces.
Maritime security or insecurity? Post-9/11
perspectives
The meeting at the picturesque Indiana University campus in Bloomington
kicked off with a roundtable discussing the forces of order
and disorder in the
‘new geographies’ of the maritime frontier. The session heard that
in a post-9/11 world where port
cities are faced with growing asymmetrical and
non-conventional threats coming from fluid, nebulous sources, new dynamics are
within and beyond port cities that affect their security and their
responses thereto. Speakers coming from various geographical and
backgrounds shared their views on the threats of smuggling, piracy and the now
ubiquitous ‘maritime terrorism’,
and the impact they have on
seafarers, security agencies and port communities. They managed to unearth fresh
perspectives and yield
interesting observations on the issue of port security
and the dynamics triggered by measures to protect ports and global seaborne
trade. Among the salient points made during the session are the following:
While much efforts have been undertaken to boost port security since the
9/11 attacks, much of the cargo passing through ports remains
unchecked, and the
maritime supply chain remains as vulnerable as ever. Despite having introduced
many maritime security measures
since the fateful incident, policymakers still
appear not to have developed a good understanding of the way ports work and the
goods flow through the maritime supply chain. This situation invites
questions on the efficacy of the measures put in place and of
their long term
sustainability
(Carolyn Nordtsrom, University of Notre Dame)
A certain tension is created from the differing objectives of
‘neoliberal globalisation’ of ensuring smooth flow of global
and the ‘hardening of the edges’ of boosting port security and
increasing inspection of cargo. At best, the push-and-pull
between the two
provides a calming force, but it is not influential enough to resolutely address
the multiplicity of security threats
faced by ports and the global supply chain
(Sue Roberts, University of Kentucky)
Security in crucial sea line of communication (SLOCs) should be seen in a
wider context and not be dictated by post-9/11 paranoia.
Maritime security
responses should address the whole gamut of threats that could pose a risk to
the communities of the littoral states
of the SLOCs and not be confined to the
risks perceived by the international users of such sealanes
(Nazery Khalid,
Maritime Institute of Malaysia)
New geographies, dimensions and dynamics are created in the governance of
global trade as a result of technological responses made
to scan containers at
ports to counter the threat of smuggling and terrorism. While the deployment of
technology to boost security
at ports is welcomed, there is a certain
experimentation that goes on at ports post-9/11 that mimics economic and
political trends
that have little to do with the actual objective of addressing
security concerns at ports and in the maritime supply chain
(Brenda Chalfin,
University of Florida at Gainesville)
The complexities of the dynamics and calculus of global port cities and
coastal communities in today’s world and security matrix
demand that the
discourse of their security incorporates an historical context and given an
ethnographic treatment. Adopting such
an approach will help develop a better
appreciation of the many influences shaping the characteristics and
socio-economic compositions
of those cities and communities and in determining
the course of their development
(Lessie Jo Frazier, Indiana
University)
Rising from the ashes: Rebuilding cities, engaging
communities
The second roundtable discussed various models of participation in community
rebuilding processes of port cities and coastal communities
struck by natural
disasters. Focusing on surviving environmental and industrial disasters,
speakers who had first-hand experience
in disaster-struck zones such as New
Orleans which was battered by Hurricane Katrina in 2005 and Nias Island off
Sumatra, Indonesia
which was shaken by an earthquake in the same year,
highlighted the need to engage the affected communities in the rebuilding
The following are the highlights of the session:
Often lost amid grand pronouncements of security measures are the
‘small voices from the margins’ of coastal communities.
but almost not surprisingly, their views are marginalised in the very
discussions targeted towards safeguarding and rebuilding
their communities. It
is indeed high time that their perspectives are taken into account as their
communities are increasingly facing
the risk of being marginalised by the
powerful forces of globalisation and sidelined by international responses to
disasters and
unilateral security measures
(Stephen Koester, University of
Colorado at Denver)
There is a need for genuine participatory approach to addressing natural and
unnatural vulnerabilities and security threats in coastal
communities.
Researchers and policy-makers must not leave the very communities they are
trying to help in the equation of drawing
up the responses to such threats to
ensure that the weaknesses of the communities are accurately assessed and the
right remedies
can be prescribed. The local knowledge and contribution of the
local communities are powerful and indispensable tools which should
into and utilised in dispensing effective preventive and mitigating measures to
address their plight
(Gregory Button, University of Tennessee at
The experience of Broadmoor, a community in New Orleans that got severely
hit by Hurricane Katrina, stands testimony to the resilience
and resourcefulness
of communities that make up port cities in picking themselves after being struck
by disasters. While such beleaguered
communities need, and undoubtedly
appreciate, external assistance to rebuild their lives and neighbourhoods, their
own input is just
as – if not more – valuable in ensuring the
successful execution of plans drawn up to make their surroundings a safe
(David Jan Cowan, Indiana University – Purdue University at
Indianapolis)
Smooth information flow and exchange between the official domain and the
public are crucial in the successful handling of health
threats. This is
underlined in the emerging field of public health preparedness in the wake of
natural calamities such as Hurricane
Katrina and the Asian tsunami. For health
emergency management policies to work efficiently, the input of the population
in helping to remedy natural disasters affecting human health. Health
emergency model programs should be built on the platform of
engagement’ that involves the citizens in remedying health disasters
Monica Schoch-Spana, University of Pittsburgh Medical Center)
Environmental security as a component of the security
The third roundtable on environmental sustainability and port city
development focused on the experiences of various coastal communities
harnessing available natural and communal resources in keeping with the
principles of sustainable development. Speakers stressed
the need for such
communities to exploit resources in an environmentally friendly manner to ensure
that the latter’s socio-economic
well-being and ‘environmental
security’ are safeguarded. Among the highlights of the presentations were
the following
Security is largely defined and dictated by state interests. Although well-
meaning, the formulation of state policies to provide
security to port cities
and coastal communities often do not take into consideration the views of the
very people that those policies
seek to address. There is an urgent need to
redress this disconnect by including environmental security in the security
such communities through a human security perspective because it will
have a bearing on how societies respond to their ever-changing
landscape and an
environment in flux
(Gundhild Hoogensen, University of Tromso)
The experiences of selected port cities in Brazil and Argentina provide rich
examples of the complex relationship between ecology,
infrastructure and what is
termed ‘the politics of possibilities’ in global port cities and
coastal communities. Port
cities observed in the two countries are located in
areas that provide fascinating research fields to examine the delicate
and relationships between societies and the environments they
inhabit. The cities highlight various ‘conundrums of scales’
from the dynamics of people-environment interaction in the paradoxical
operational universe of port communities
(Stephanie Kane, Indiana
University)
The experience of Lisbon, a port city with a glorious heritage in its
heyday, underscores the importance of paying attention to the
prerequisites of
revitalising obsolete quarters of port cities from the perspectives of
environmental security, economic development
and social cohesion. The successful
rehabilitation of Lisbon’s East Quarter provides a template for the
critical success factors
and the application of necessary knowledge in
resuscitating of port areas within the ambit of urban redevelopment strategy
(Carlos Barbosa, Parque Expo 98, Lisbon)
The development of port cities – often dominated by globalisation and
the relationship between urbanisation and natural conditions
cities’ surroundings – demands a new paradigm in light of the scale
of the activity and the explosive economic
growth of some of the cities. New
issues concerning poor water management and unchecked urban development requires
a new approach
to the transformation of port cities, with an emphasis on
developing a coherent linkage between their delta landscape, urban design
hydraulic engineering. A fresh approach is needed in the design and construction
of sustainable urban landscapes of port cities
and coastal regions. It should
strive to link various relevant disciplines such as urbanism, civil engineering,
urban planning, architecture,
landscaping and environmental design to develop a
sustainable urban delta-landscape paradigm
(Han Meyer, Delft University of
Technology, The Netherlands)
communities more liveable
Quite simply, the conference provided a breath of fresh air in the dialogue
on maritime communities by expanding the scope and widening
the dimensions of
the discourse to include various disciplines, elements and perspectives. Several
interesting concepts and theories
in socio-economic development, security,
community welfare, environmental protection, infrastructural capacity building
policies are given legitimacy by on-the-ground research and
exhaustive fieldworks by the speakers in the course of preparing their
Applied correctly, the sharp observations made and interesting ideas unpacked by
the speakers can lead to the sowing of the
seeds of solid policymaking and
inspire further meaningful work in the field of maritime studies.
In its broad treatment and rendition of issues affecting the security of port
cities and communities, the conference managed to unravel
the vast dimensions
and numerous elements influencing them. To researchers and students of maritime
studies attuned to their specific
areas of expertise, the rich facets, diverse
features and manifold factors on maritime security covered in the conference
eye-opener. Those uninitiated to the concept of comprehensive maritime
security should leave the meeting with a heightened sense
of appreciation of the
components, complexities and challenges in securing port cities and communities
in a holistic manner.
The conference was successful in fostering better understanding of the broad,
international and inter-disciplinary framework in conceptualising
security framework that encompasses a wide range of dimensions and dynamics. It
is hoped that from such an event, the
academics can contribute in the construct
of a firm platform on which meaningful policies addressing the risks and
vulnerabilities
of the unique population and environment of port cities and
communities can be formulated.
The Security of Global Port Cities –
Community, Environment and Marine Policy Conference held at Indiana University,
Bloomington,
Indiana, USA, 1-2 May 2008.
Maritime Institute of Malaysia.
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
No downloadable files available
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter