URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/journals/LegEdDig/2013/43.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 15:13:55
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Fruehwald, E S --- "How to become an expert law teacher by understanding the neurobiology of learning" [2013] LegEdDig 43; (2013) 21(3) Legal Education Digest 40
How to become an expert law teacher by understanding the neurobiology of
E S Fruehwald
Independent SSRN, 2012, pp 1-57
Legal education is changing. Law schools are incorporating skills classes
into their curriculums, and law teachers are integrating
new techniques into
their teaching. Subjects that were never taught before are now appearing in
law school curriculums. Now for
the last step – turning law professors
into expert teachers.
Law professors generally teach using the Socratic method, often combined with
lecture. This consists of teaching students by asking
them questions. In a
typical law class, the professor will examine several appellate cases using
this method, sometimes adding
hypotheticals after each case.
Many legal scholars have criticised the use of the Socratic/case method as an
ineffective teaching method. Among the deficiencies
in this method are: (1) it
does not teach students how to apply the law; (2) it focuses attention on one
student at a time, while
other students may not pay attention; (3) students
become bored with the constant use of the Socratic method; (4) focusing just on
appellate cases gives students an incomplete view of the legal context; and (5)
many students are intimidated by the Socratic method
to the point that they have
emotional problems.
Best Practices
has asserted, ‘Members of a law school faculty
should base their teaching decisions on research about effective teaching, or
least hypotheses grounded in research.’
Thinking, learning, memory, and perception are physical processes in the
brain. One can succinctly describe how these processes work:
‘Brain cells
[neurons] fire in patterns’. The firing neuron sends a chemical signal
call a neurotransmitter across the
synaptic gap to other neurons. Neurons
interact to create complex representations, concepts, and processes.
The brain is the result of both nature and nurture: ‘The
macro-architecture of the brain is genetic, but the micro-architecture
environmental.’ In other words, genetics provides the framework;
experience the details. Learning is part of the details.
Importantly for learning, ‘Neurons grow or die and neural connections
are created or eliminated based on which ones are active.’
When humans learn something, it becomes Knowledge stored in the brain –
in long-term memory consisting of the firing potentials
and interconnections of
neurons. Professor Shell and his colleagues define Knowledge differently than it
normally is in education
scholarship: ‘Knowledge is everything we know. It
not only means facts and concepts, but also problem solving skills, motor
behaviours, and thinking processes.’
Working memory is both the key to learning and the ‘bottle neck of
learning’. Working memory has two functions –
temporary storage and
processing of information. Storage is the ‘process of turning a specific
[sensory] input into a permanent
trace’ in the long-term memory. However,
the working memory cannot handle all this sensory input, so one of its roles is
‘attention’
– to process some of this input and ignore other
parts. ‘If the neural pattern does not decay, it activates a neural
pattern in the cortical region that produces a permanent memory trace of the
original input.’
Working memory has only about four slots. However, these slots can hold from
single letter to complex chunks (schemas).
When the trace is the same as a neural pattern already in long-term memory,
the pattern is fired, and it is strengthened in the long-term
memory. If this
happens frequently, the pattern is further strengthened, and working memory
recognises it more quickly (called retrieval).
The fact that this can continue
infinitely ‘is how our knowledge of things and concepts are built.’
In sum, ‘learning
is about connections’.
Working memory is substantially connected to and receives input from the
emotions. More specifically, ‘Motivation in working
memory is derived from
emotional inputs as well as from [K]nowledge that has been stored about previous
performance, goals, rewards,
and ourself. These motivational influences
determine the effort level that is put into learning.’
Based on the above, Dr. Shell and his co-authors have developed the three
basic principles of learning (the Unified Learning Model
or ULM): (1) Learning
is a product of working memory allocation; (2) Working memory’s
capacity for allocation is affected
by prior Knowledge; and (3) Working
memory allocation is directed by motivation.
They then set out five rules of learning: (1) New learning requires
attention; (2) Learning requires repetition; (3) Learning is about
connections;
(4) Some learning is effortless; some requires effort; and (5) Learning is
The first step in becoming an expert teacher is to become an engaged teacher
and an engaged learner. Daniel Kahneman has developed
the idea of the
‘engaged’ thinker. He writes, ‘[t]hose who avoid the sin of
intellectual sloth could be called
“engaged.” They are more alert,
more intellectually active, less willing to be satisfied with superficially
answers, more skeptical about their intuitions.’ In contrast,
lazy thinkers are characterised by ‘a reluctance to invest
more effort
than is strictly necessary.’
Kahneman’s idea of engaged and lazy thinkers is based on his concept of
how the human mind works. He believes that evolution
produced two interactive
modes of thinking: System 1 operates automatically and quickly, with little or
no effort and no sense of
voluntary control. System 2 allocates attention to the
effortful mental activities that demand it, including complex computations.
operations of System 2 are often associated with the subjective experience of
agency, choice, and concentration.
Thus, System 1 is unconscious, intuitive thought (automatic pilot), while
slower System 2 is conscious, rational thinking (effortful
system). The reason
that many thinkers are lazy is that cognitive thought in System 2 requires a
great deal of mental effort (ULM
rule 4), and people who are unmotivated do not
expend that mental effort. In such a situation, lazy thinkers often adopt
superficially plausible answer that comes readily to mind’, which
comes from System 1 (which is subject to biases), rather
than the correct answer
that requires more work.
Accordingly, to be an engaged teacher, a professor must have the discipline
to overcome the lazy thinking of System 2 and the biases
of System 1.
An engaged teacher gives more to his students because he is more prepared. He
reflects on each class and whether that class was effective.
Most importantly,
he cares that the students learn.
An engaged teacher must also be an engaged learner. Law professors may be
experts in a field, such as Contracts, but many of them
are not experts at
teaching Contracts to novices (pedagogical- content knowledge).
Being an engaged thinker or teacher requires deliberate practice. With the
usual type of practice, the learner works at a skill to
reach automaticity,
after which the skill can be executed with little effort. On the other hand,
‘individuals engaged in deliberate
practice tend to resist
automaticity’, and they ‘strive to continuously achieve mastery of
increasingly higher levels
of performance through the acquisition of more
complex and refined cognitive mechanisms.’
In sum, because law professors are not generally taught to be teachers, the
law professor must teach herself through deliberate practice;
she must become a
self-regulated and reflective learner/ teacher.
Becoming a self-regulated thinker, learner, or teacher begins with
Bloom’s taxonomy (the six levels of cognition): (1) recall;
understanding; (3) application; (4) analysis; (5) synthesis; and (6)
evaluation.
Using Bloom’s taxonomy, Professor Schwartz divided self-regulated
learning into three parts: forethought, performance, and reflection,
subdivided each of the parts. I have modified Schwartz’s categorization
for self-regulated teaching.
The forethought stage involves the thought processes you undertake before you
start teaching – ‘task perception, self-efficacy,
self-motivation,
goal setting, and strategic planning’. First, you should identify and
classify the task, by perceiving its
skill domain and the subject of the task.
For Law teaching, the skill domain will be a legal subject and the subject of
is teaching a part of that particular subject. For example, the task
may concern teaching personal jurisdiction in Civil Procedure.
In the second forethought sub-stage, the teacher ‘assesses her efficacy
for accomplishing the task’. A teacher should
know their skill and
experience levels. If a teacher is not confident in her efficiency, she should
do additional preparation for
the class and learn more about effective
Based on the earlier stages, the reader then sets goals (purposes) for the
teaching (the desired outcome). In coming up with a purpose,
the teacher should
be as specific as possible. ‘The purpose of this class is to teach
personal jurisdiction through three cases
and supplementary material. By the end
of the class, I want the students to be able to synthesise the law of personal
and apply it to real world problems.’
Similarly, the teacher must consider the context of the teaching task. For
example, how does teaching personal jurisdiction relate
to your goals in the
class? How does this task relate to other subjects the students have learned?
How does this task relate to what
lawyers do?
The final step in the forethought stage is developing a teaching strategy
based on the earlier sub-stages.
The performance stage is the actual teaching. This stage encompasses three
processes: (1) ‘attention-focusing’; (2) ‘the
itself’; and (3) ‘the self-monitoring the [teacher] performs as she
implements her strategies and starts to
learn.’ Having a purpose or goal
when teaching helps attention-focusing, as does being enthusiastic about
The final stage in teaching is the reflective stage. In this stage, the
teacher critically reflects on what she has taught and considers
how effective
the class was. The reflective stage is very important in helping a teacher
improve their teaching.
Being a reflective learner/teacher starts at the metacognitive level, which
is part of System 2. Metacognition is the ability to use
prior knowledge to plan
a strategy for approaching a learning task, take necessary steps to problem
solve, reflect on and evaluate
results, and modify one’s approach as
needed. In sum, metacognition is one’s inner voice or inner critic, and an
thinker develops her inner voice.
An expert teacher improves his teaching over a lifetime by setting growth
goals (attitude). For example, a law professor could focus
on improving a couple
of aspects of teaching every semester. For instance, one semester a teacher
could concentrate on using multimedia
materials better in the classroom, while
in another semester the teacher could work on dealing with students
individually. Also,
doing scholarship helps expert teachers grow because it
increases their knowledge and helps them make connections. Another way for
teachers to improve their teaching is to keep a journal about their teaching
experiences (habit).
Expert teachers develop the habit of employing their skills across domains
(domain transfer). Professor Halpern describes the process
of developing
domain-transfer skills: ‘When critical- thinking skills are taught so that
they transfer appropriately and spontaneously,
students learn to actively focus
on the structure of problems or arguments so the underlying characteristics
become salient, instead
of the domain-specific surface characteristics.’
Stated more simply: domain transfer is applying existing skills to a new
it is an analogical skill. The key to this process ‘involves
the ability of external cues to trigger retrieval processes in
long-term memory,
so information about a thinking skill can move into working memory, where
it can be consciously considered.’
‘One can effectively organise
material in long-term memory by developing ‘interconnected knowledge
structures’
(schemas) – relating concepts to other concepts.
Professor Kowalski writes, ‘The more schemas a person has available
comparison, the better a pervasive schematic can illuminate the differences
between patterns in situations, training the brain
to search for knowledge that
can be generalised and applied to solve a new problem’.
Teachers can develop their domain-transfer skills in several ways. First,
when you are reading, think about the ways what you are
reading relates to other
concepts, question the text, and think of alternatives. Similarly, when reading
a case, think about how
that case relates to other relevant cases and critique
the reasoning. Finally, Halpern suggests using authentic materials (materials
that are similar to real world situations) to aid transfer.
An engaged teacher has an enthusiastic attitude about teaching. Engaged
teachers study their areas of expertise, as well as how to
be better teachers.
They read articles on legal education, and they attend teaching conferences.
They seek feedback on their teaching.
If the teacher is bored with the material, the student will be, too.
Expert law teachers use a variety of teaching strategies in each class. A
variety of teaching approaches helps keep students engaged
and focuses their
attention. This includes incorporating experiential techniques; law students
learn doctrine better when they apply
that doctrine. Teachers should also use
multi-modal techniques –‘learning material through multiple means,
such as reading,
listening, writing, practicing, and viewing images.’
Expert teachers have the habit of including context-based teaching in their
classrooms because context helps create connections. Professor
Maranville has
explained why context-based teaching is important: ‘First, students are
more interested in learning when the
information they are studying is placed in
a context they care about. Second, when teachers provide context for their
students, they
increase the likelihood that students will understand the
information. Third, and especially significant for the law school context,
learning information, we may organize and store it in memory differently for the
purpose of studying for a test than we do in
order to retrieve it for legal
practice.’ In addition, creating context aids domain-transfer skills,
which is also an important
skill for law students. ‘The seemingly obvious
solution to [improving] transfer would be to have students use their knowledge
in situations where it will need to be used in the real world.’
Consequently, legal education needs more real world experiences. Clinics,
skills courses, simulations, and externships are the large-scale
ways of doing
this. On the micro-level, one way to incorporate context-based learning into
doctrinal classes is to use case files,
which take a case from the initial
client interview to the appellate decision. A final way is to help students
think in a role, such
as prosecutor, defence attorney, judge, or contract
Another part of context is what a student already knows. Engaging a
student’s existing knowledge and employing it creates connections
Law teachers should use formative, rather than just summative, assessment.
Learning should be a journey, not a destination. Formative
assessment is used
during learning with feedback at several points in the course, while summative
assessment is used after instruction
(i.e., the end of semester law school
exam). Formative assessment helps students learn in steps; it makes learning a
process, not
a product. Feedback helps students see they are progressing to
their goals, and it helps them develop the ability to provide feedback
themselves. Formative assessment helps students attend to learning, which helps
short term memory, and it helps long-term memory
by repetition.
Teaching students how to learn is just as important as teaching students
substance because lawyers must be life-long learners.
One way to develop reflective learners is to ask questions that cause
students to reflect on what they have learned. Another way is
to require that
students keep a journal concerning their learning experiences; this helps them
reinforce long-term memory and create
connections.
A law teacher should not just teach the ‘cognitive
apprenticeship’, which focuses on expert knowledge and modes of thinking,
usually using the Socratic/case method. She should also teach how that knowledge
applies to facts – problem solving. Problem
solving is ‘the ability
to combine previously learned principles, procedures, declarative knowledge, and
cognitive strategies
in a unique way within a domain of content to solve
previously unencountered problems.’ Problem solving is a good teaching
tool because problem solving requires active participation (not just
observation), it challenges students to develop legal skills
in context rather
than relying on knowing legal rules, and it facilitates self-reflective
It is often better for teachers to use worked examples or guided practice
before students solve problems on their own, so that they
can see the proper
approach. In other words, they should explicitly expose their own thought
processes to the students because students
need to understand the ‘mental
processing necessary to perform the observable tasks.’ In addition, hands
on learning
should be reinforced by follow-up practice or review so that the
hands on learning will be reinforced in long-term memory (so it
Creativity is also part of the legal thinking process, and expert teachers
teach their students how to be creative. In college, I
learned a twostep
approach to creativity. First, ‘brainstorm’ to come up with as many
ideas as possible without being
critical in any way. Second, criticise the
Finally, expert teachers serve as professional and ethical role models for
their students. They should teach their students ethics,
and they should help
them become professionals.
Being an expert teacher does not mean that the teacher adopt a single
teaching method; there are many different types of expert teachers.
Nevertheless, being an expert teacher requires that the teacher be an engaged
teacher, a self-regulated teacher, and a reflective
learner/teacher.
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (660 KB)
PDF format (3.89 MB)
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter