URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/journals/CanLawRw/2022/6.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 14:51:15
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Jardine, Adam; Bromberg, Marilyn; Cardaci, Nicholas --- "No More Fighting Like Cats And Dogs: It's Time For A New Pet Custody Model In Australia" [2022] CanLawRw 6; (2022) 19(1) Canberra Law Review 86
No More Fighting Like Cats And Dogs:
It’s Time For A New Pet Custody Model In Australia
Adam Jardine*, Marilyn Bromberg** and Nicholas Cardaci***
Currently, when a couple separates in Australia, the Federal Circuit and
Family Court of Australia (‘FCFCA’) treats their
pets as chattels.
For many Australian families, pets are not chattels. Australians love their pets
and many treat them as a bona
fide family member. This article argues that it is
worth considering modifying Australian law to reflect our social understanding
of companion animals. It further argues that Australian law should be modified
to adopt an alternative model of pet custody that
does not rely on the premise
that pets are property. To this end, the article discusses three alternative
models of pet custody and
the premises upon which they are based. These models
Pets as Persons Model, Sentimentality Model,
The article concludes that any of these three models would be
superior to the extant pet custody model in Australia, and would better
Australian attitudes and values.
I INTRODUCTION
Beulah, Minnie and Karen are performers, though not by choice. Brought to the
US decades ago, they have, collectively, an impressive
spanning commercials, theatre, film, modelling, circuses, fairs, parties, sales
promotions, weddings, and Republican
political gatherings. It is not
who enjoy the fruits of a successful career, though, but the masters who keep
them. They live, by some accounts, in squalid conditions:
sad, sedated, and
mired in their own faeces. They are denied adequate medical care to see to their
skin conditions, and pulled about
by bullhooks to control their movements. Then,
of course, there are the indignities of ‘kiddie rides’,
power-washing
and the petting
No doubt the reader was well ahead of the preceding sentence in determining
that the trio are elephants (or were; Beulah and Karen
passed away in
But they were also
plaintiffs at the centre of a unconventional
It was brought on their
behalf by the Nonhuman Rights Project (‘NRP’), a civil rights group
working towards personhood
for nonhuman animals and certain rights it entails
(like freedom from arbitrary detention). It is one of a series bound by a bold
goal: freeing (some) nonhuman animals from captivity via the writ of habeas
corpus. Other clients have included Hercules, Leo, Tommy
and Kiko – all
chimpanzees confined by humans for human
These suits fought against an ingrained assumption of law: that non-human
animals are not people. Philosophically, PETA’s position
is similar yet
more expansive than Steven Wise’s position that chimpanzees and bonobos
should be afforded legal
personhood.
Thus far, the suits have been unsuccessful. So, too, were People for the
Ethical Treatment of Animals’ (‘PETA’)
attempts to have the
orcas named Tilikum, Katina, Corky, Kasatka and Ulises freed from SeaWorld under
the Thirteenth Amendment to
Constitution
(prohibiting
and to have Naruto, a
crested macaque, enforce his copyright in his
Alaska, too, has been experimenting, with what we
might loosely call ‘pet custody’. In 2017, its legislature amended
Stat §§ 25.24.010–25.24.990 (2017) (on ‘Divorce and
Dissolution of Marriage’) to make the wellbeing of
animals an explicit
consideration in divorce
proceedings.
Illinois and
California have similar laws.
legislation is relevant because it provides a very different view from how
Australian family law regards pets: as chattels.
The obligation in the American
laws mentioned is to
the animal’s wellbeing, which does
not sound like a very onerous standard. One can consider the wellbeing of an
decide that its welfare is of little weight relative to some other
concern. Nonetheless, the change is significant. Ordinarily, separation
proceedings focus on the wellbeing of children, if there are any, and the
spouses or partners, not pets. As David Favre stated: ‘For
the first time,
a state has specifically said that a companion animal has visibility in a
divorce proceeding beyond that of property
— that the court may award
custody on the basis of what is best for the dog, not the human
The statute is
phrased in terms of ownership and joint
and the best
interests of the pet need not be secured in every decision, but it does put pets
on a very different footing than, say,
the fine china. Moreover, if we can speak
of ‘pet custody’, what of other aspects of parenting law, like
visitation or
even maintenance?
This article argues that a pet custody regime may better reflect the unique
place that companion animals occupy in Australian society.
This is contrary to
the current approach of Australian law where pets are regarded as chattels. This
article suggests that a midpoint
approach reflecting our social understanding of
pets as part of the family should be adopted. It is however recognised that
pets should not be treated as property/chattels, they should also not be
treated as having the same rights as humans: a nuanced approach
is required.
Since Australia has one of the highest rates of pet ownership
internationally,
particularly important to consider this issue.
This article adds to the debate. This article makes the novel argument that
Australia should adopt an alternative pet custody model
that does not treat pets
as property. The article now proceeds as follows:
of this article outlines the basics of ‘custody' law
concerning children in Australia: in particular, its objectives and the
assumptions embedded within it.
briefly outlines the law of child custody in Australia.
explores the prevailing doublethink (i.e., cognitive
dissonance)
underpinning
animals legal position in Australian law; being simultaneously things and
not-things.
discusses three alternative pet custody models — the
personhood, sentimentality and ‘liminal’ models.
Ultimately, the article concludes that legal ‘thinghood’ is not
quite right for pets. Given this, adopting an alternative
model of pet custody
would allow the law to better reflect how humans approach their companion
animals. In turn, the law would be
a better expression of Australian attitudes
and values.
‘Custody’ of Children in Australia
In the context of child-rearing, ‘custody’ at common law is
‘a term encompassing most of the rights and duties concerned
upbringing of children’, including ‘the power to control a
child’s education, religion and property as
well as a personal power of
physical control’ and the duty ‘to provide the child with food,
clothing, shelter, education
and other necessities of
In its current
Family Law Act 1975
the term ‘custody’.
Indeed, ‘residence’ and ‘contact’ are apparently
considered too ‘cold’, having been replaced
with the ‘more
family focused’ term ‘parenting
What is meant by
parenting orders and what parenting orders may deal with is explained in
including: the allocation of parental responsibility for
children and with whom a child should live or spend time with. . A parenting
order thus carves out certain aspects of what parenting usually entails (where
the child lives and with whom the child spends time,
decisions over education or
religious upbringing and so forth) for one parent or the other.
The best interests of the child being the paramount interest is the criteria
for such decision making
Section 60CC
which contains primary and additional considerations guides the process
for determining the best interests of children. The legislation
thus embodies
certain ideas about what is generally good for children, and seeks to guide the
process accordingly.
Parental responsibility concerns decision making authority and
responsibility. This is separate from with whom a child lives and spends
Where equal shared parental responsibility applies, parents must make long term
decisions about the child
The presumption
regarding shared parental responsibility is rebuttable and only applies to
parents although people other than parents
may be allocated parental
responsibility.
It is not a
presumption that equal time must be spent with each
though the legislation
is strongly geared towards that
or if applicable, a
parent spending ‘substantial and significant time’ with their
What is clear, from this brief summary, is that where a parenting dispute
arises regarding where a child lives and/or with whom a
child should spend time,
the child is not considered a ‘chattel’, ‘property’ or
‘thing’. The
Objects and Principles
(which deals with children) states that children have
‘rights’ and parents have ‘duties and responsibilities’,
with the best interests’ of the child the guiding principal in the
decision making process.
III Australia’s Prevailing Doublethink[ing] View of
as Chattels or Things
As indicated in the article’s introduction, in separation proceedings,
contrary to the manner in which the law approaches children,
the law treats
companion animals as property which available for distribution. In
Australia’s State courts there have been
clear statements of principles
that pets are property, and in federal family law cases thisprinciple has been
applied to distribute
pets to one party or another. Some of the relevant cases
from both State and federal jurisdictions are now discussed.
A State Cases Concerning Pets’ Status as Property
First, the nature of pets as property under was illuminated in the recent
appeal case of
an earlier order from the Local Court. The order was that one
party (the applicant) to a de facto relationship must return the dog
‘Harold’ to the other party (the
respondent.)
On appeal, Nelson
DCJ considered the question of whether Harold constituted ‘goods’,
because if Harold was ‘goods’
then the NSW Local Court was within
its power to order Harold’s
Nelson DCJ felt it
appropriate to survey
the traditional meaning of
‘personal property’ and ‘goods’ in property law and sale
of goods legislation
respectively.
From this survey,
and after noting that ‘goods’ encompasses personal chattels (i.e.
personal property),
There can be no doubt that an animal is a chattel. As what I have quoted from
Megarry and Wade makes clear, the word chattel is derived
from the same etymon
as the word cattle. A cow or an ox is a chattel. Any animal is a
The dog belonged to the respondent. He paid for it. It was his property just
as much as if he went out and bought a cup of coffee
As such, Nelson DCJ held that Harold constituted goods and personal property
that could be returned under the NSW Local Court’s
The dog was a chattel. The dog could be described as "goods". There is no
doubt that the Local Court in its Small Claims Division
had power to order the
delivery of the dog by the applicant to the
respondent.
Another case in the State courts which illustrates the status of pets as
Chow v Chang
This case concerned a white male Pomeranian dog named Kobe in the context of a
previous intimate relationship between the plaintiff
respondent.
Kobe was in the
possession of the respondent.
The plaintiff applied to the Court for ‘an order that the Dog be returned
to his possession as the rightful
and pleaded that
the respondent’s possession constituted an act of
conversion.
In response, the
respondent contended that Kobe was rightfully hers, as Kobe had been gifted from
the plaintiff to the respondent.
Magistrate Hoare dealt with the case on these pleadings. The authors note
that the Court, by dealing with the case on these pleading,
accepted the
pleadings’ underlying premise that Kobe was property. The
plaintiff’s cause of action (of conversion), and
the respondent’s
claim that Kobe was a gift, both rest of the unstated premise that Kobe is
The evidence bore out that during the relationship, after receiving many
requests from the respondent, the plaintiff bought Kobe for
$4,300 from a
In addition,
Kobe’s microchip registration and the purchase receipt listed the
plaintiff’s name.
Ultimately, Magistrate Hoare preferred the respondent’s evidence and ruled
that Kobe had been a gift to the respondent, and
dismissed the plaintiff’s
application for Kobe’s
B Federal Cases Illustrating Extant Pet Custody Model and the
Distribution of Pets to Family Law Litigants
Moving onto federal family law cases, a key case demonstrating
Australia’s extant pet custody model, in which pets are allocated
parties as chattels (despite how hard as distribution rules may be to apply to a
beloved pet)
was decided in the former Family Court of Australia. The case
concerned an interlocutory
application.
The applicant was
‘urgently’ seeking,
the return of a dog
from the respondent.
dispensing the application,
Cronin J began by acknowledging that the
‘makes no reference
to pets’ and applicant’s concession that ‘a dog does not fit
within any other category
of property than a
Further, the
respondent was in agreement with the court and respondent on the dog’s
status of property
Cronin J held that the relevant provisions of the
included the
provisions concerning alteration of property interests between the
Ultimately, Cronin J held that the Court
exercise its
aforementioned powers to alter property interests between the parties to order
the dog’s return to the
Nonetheless, Cronin J
refused the application on the grounds that it was not appropriate in the
circumstances particular to this
was applied in the subsequent case of
Davenport v Davenport
which applied where
during property proceedings, the husband sought interim orders for ‘shared
custody’ of the dog that
belonged to the
Judge Tonkin refused
the application stating: that a dog is a chattel or an item of personal
On this basis Her
Honour found that it was inappropriate to make orders for ‘shared
1 Similar Treatment of Animals in Canadian Family Law Cases
is not unique in how it treated animals in family law
proceedings. In Canada, the law considers pets to be ‘personal property
much like other chattels’,
as shown by the similar approach used overseas in the Canadian case of
where White JA
explained bluntly:
[...] [W]hen two people disagree about who should get a dog, the question is
not who has the most affection for the dog or treats
it better (so long as both
parties treat the dog humanely). The question is who owns
The traditional Canadian approach has also been succinctly and described by
Jessica Fox as follows: ‘Courts do not allow a party
to have joint custody
flat screen television, and as pets are personal property, they
will not allow joint custody of the
Joint ownership is
disfavoured, for the same reason pet custody is: courts do not want to
continually play referee.
Further, custody ‘was created for the benefit of human children, not
Consequently,
since pets can be the subject of property distribution, but not a custody
To determine ownership of a pet, Papageorgiou J in
Duboff v Simpson
held that ‘[t]he traditional approach to determining who owns [a pet]
focuses primarily on who purchased and paid for the [pet]
and whether there are
any discrete transactions where ownership
Traditionally, once the property rights are determined, the issue is settled.
The situation does not change with different circumstances,
However, more recently
this traditional approach has been put aside in favour of ‘a broader
approach to ownership than who
purchased the
in other Canadian
The broader approach rests on the premise that the question ownership of
pets, while remaining property,
is more complex than ownership of a
As such, the broader
approach instructs Canadian courts to consider the following
non-exhaustive
list of factors in determining who should receive a pet in separation
proceedings:
i. Whether the animal was owned or possessed by one of the people before
their relationship began;
ii. Any express or implied agreement as to ownership, made either at the time
the animal was acquired or after;
iii. The nature of the relationship between the people contesting ownership
at the time the animal was first acquired;
iv. Who purchased and/or raised the animal;
v. Who exercised care and control of the animal;
vi. Who bore the burden of the care and comfort of the animal;
vii. Who paid for the expenses related to the animal’s upkeep;
viii. Whether at any point the animal was gifted by the original owner to the
other person;
ix. What happened to the animal after the relationship between the litigants
changed; and
x. Any other indicia of ownership, or evidence of agreements, relevant to who
has or should have ownership of the
In sum, while Australia’s pet custody model is congruent with the
traditional Canadian approach, Australia’s model is
more recent Canadian
C Australia’s Incongruent Legislative Limits to the Thinghood of
Returning to Australia in detail; while Australia’s federal and State
case law treats animals as chattel (i.e. things) in the
realm of family law,
animals are treated as being more than mere things in other Australian
legislation. Indeed, animals have their
welfare protected to some degree under
Australian legislation. This incongruence is obvious and the authors suggest
this reflects
the aspect of aforementioned prevailing doublethink which
considers animals as more than things. On the social unacceptability of
to animals (despite being mere chattel in family law), Epstein claims:
[I]t would be simply insane to insist that animals should be treated like
inanimate objects [legally]. The level of human concern
for animals, in the
abstract, makes this position morally abhorrent to most people, even those who
have no truck whatsoever with
the animal rights
Animal welfare legislation, and parts of the criminal law, provide some of
the restrictions on harming
We cannot, for example,
be arbitrarily cruel to animals
(under what is obviously an attenuated definition of cruelty, given what we
do). Taking responsibility for an animal can also carry a minimal
duty to maintain it.
The virtue of anti-cruelty initiatives has historically been seen to lie not
in recognition of an animal’s interests, but in
the cultivation of moral
excellence (or at least, reduced cruelty) in
or in respect for the
owner’s property rights (meaning only non-owners were
Today, the concern
may have more to do with the animals themselves. That is, they are thought to
have intrinsic worth divorced from
their instrumental value (to
This intrinsic worth
supports the idea that the law should treat animals as something more than
chattels. Insofar as the point of
animal welfare legislation is to ensure the
welfare of animals, it may be suggested that their special moral status is
recognised.
In a loose sense,
they might even be said to have
While these restrictions are welcome, the legal limits on animal cruelty are
themselves limited, which renders suspect the claim that
animals currently have
rights. As ‘[w]hen an interest is protected by a right, the interest may
not be ignored or violated
simply because it will benefit
but alleged animal
‘rights’ often can be violated or ignored under legislation
permitting ‘reasonable’ or
‘necessary’
Such legal cruelty, if
permitted on humans, would be far less tolerated if at
An owner cannot do whatever
they like to animal property, but ‘protection remains a qualification of
the otherwise absolute
property interest that an owner of [an] animal enjoys in
the animal.’
In essence,
‘[w]e protect animals only if and insofar as this protection is consistent
with our use of them’,
‘sacrificing even the most basic interests of animals to the most trivial
interests of humans’.
The caveat here is important. The community does not tolerate
‘pointless’ cruelty. But the bar for pointlessness is set
Youths playing ‘quokka soccer’ (kicking a species of marsupial
abundant on Rottnest Island, in the authors’
Australia) will be judged harshly. Whatever enjoyment they get from the act is
not a good enough ‘point’.
The law protects the interests of animals to the extent it is consistent with
their exploitation.
and nonhuman animal interests collide, the human always
This is the ethic of ‘humaneness’: the ‘key governing norm
underpinning companion animal protection’. ‘This
ethic allows that
animals have intrinsic worth, and should be protected against harm,
to the extent that this does not interfere with conflicting human interests
such as buying and selling animals for profit, imposing harmful breeding
standards or freely relinquishing animals when no longer
Francione states
that ‘[w]hen it comes to other animals, we humans exhibit what can best be
described as moral’ schizophrenia
‘Although we claim to
take animals seriously and to regard them as having morally significant
interests, we routinely ignore
those interests for trivial reasons’: and
the law permits us to do just
The law treats them as
property, so we can treat them as property: the source of a profound and
persistent hypocrisy.
Humanity’s treatment of non-human animals betrays Orwellian
double-think — believing two contradictory things
simultaneously
exemplified by article 898.1 of the Civil Code of Quebec:
Animals are not things. They are sentient beings and have biological
In addition to the provisions of special Acts which protect animals, the
provisions of this Code and of any other Act concerning property
nonetheless
apply to animals.
The Australian Capital Territory has Australian first legislation that
considers animals to be sentient beings. The objects of the
Animal Welfare Act
provide that ‘animals are sentient beings that
are able to subjectively feel and perceive the world around
New Zealand has
similar legislation recognising animals have
and the Victorian
Government has proposed new animal welfare
legislation,
which recognises
that ‘[s]cience tells us that animals are
In short, Australian laws protect animals from cruelty to a degree, but these
protections are themselves limited.
1 The Special Treatment of Pets in Australian Law
As the authors have shown, Australians believe animals are things, and we
believe they are not. We treat them like they are things,
and we treat them like
they are not. The best example of this double-thinking tendency comes from
nonhumans we buy to be part of
our families: animals we do not always relate
of course, of pets.
Many Australians own a pet. In fact, there are
more pets than there are Australians. In 2016, there were more than 24 million
pets and less than 24 million Australian
Around 62% of Australian
households included a pet (giving the nation one of the highest pet ownership
rates in the world),
and cats being the most popular (found in 38% and 29% of households
respectively).
The most commonly
cited reason for getting a dog or a cat was companionship (66% and 65%
respectively), but once acquired, 64% considered
the dog a member of the family;
65% thought the same of their
Pet parents will ascribe to their fur babies characteristics they would see
in their own children: wilfulness, playfulness, obstinacy,
and above all,
We give them human
We rely on them for
emotional support.
sacrifice for them — money, sleep, even our
— not just to
keep them alive, but to give them the best possible
When they die, they are
A new one can be
purchased, but a lost one is
irreplaceable.
creatures are not property. They are
Pets further complicate the position of animals in Australian law, as pets
are a special class of animal that enjoy greater legal
protections than other
animals. This situation means that Australia inadvertently manifests another
Orwellian phrase: ‘all
animals are equal but some animals are more equal
than others.’
a pet’s position is not quite like that of other animals. Pets
‘enjoy the fullest regulatory protection of all
and courts,
as we shall see, have sometimes treated them as more than mere property. The
general Australian attitude towards dogs
in particular were inadvertently
well-articulated by the far-away Wisconsin Supreme Court in
Rabideau v City
: ‘[l]abeling a dog “property” fails to describe
the value human beings place upon the companionship that they enjoy
Despite pet’s privileged position
other animals, the
‘pet personhood’ conceit does not translate into the jurisprudential
or legal consequences of personhood,
and the protections which do exist are lax.
As Pendergrast notes, ‘people can leave a dog outside, never walk them,
never interact
with them or give them any interactions with people or other
animals and that is still an acceptable use of the property, despite
this having
a very detrimental impact on the dog’s quality of life and mental
Even the most
basic responsibility one could have to a dependent animal — to keep it
alive — has an ‘out’.
‘Animal welfare shelters in
Australia take in enormous numbers of unwanted animals every year, including
those surrendered
or relinquished by their owners’, leading to ‘the
unnecessary killing of a large number of otherwise healthy
The rhetoric of pets being family members likewise makes little sense, in
legal terms. Fur babies stand in a very different position
than actual babies.
‘The excitement of acquiring a pet (especially for children) often fades
quickly and this is where the
animal’s future welfare hangs in the
As Pallotta
puts it: ‘“Family member” is a conditional position that
confers life or death on individual animals,
and this status can be dissolved at
any time based entirely on the discretion of the sole rights-holder in the
relationship: the
Pethood, as an institution, involves dissonance. ‘[C]ompanion animals
are regarded as
members of the family and as objects to be discarded
without legal sanction when it
Legally, pets
are property. Extra-legally, humans do not treat them that way: or rather, not
. They love and care for them as they love and care for something
which can love them back. They do not
them; as they are more than
Pets are in a socially unconventional ‘liminal’ or
‘in-between’ space. They are, in Pallotta’s words,
‘elevated above both mere chattel and other animals who are not defined as
companions, yet uniquely vulnerable due to both
their legal classification as
property and inconsistencies in the cultural narrative that defines them as
Pallotta uses
the phrase ‘rhetorical family
‘rhetoric’ can suggest either artfulness or speciousness. Dafna
Shir-Vertes has referred to them as ‘flexible
persons’ or
‘emotional commodities’, ‘loved and incorporated into human
lives’ but able ‘at any
moment [to] be demoted and moved outside of
the home and the
The language
of dissonance may be most apt: believing contradictory things
simultaneously.
like the right label for habits of thought under which companion animals are
‘bred, bought, sold, trained, caged
and killed according to our
will’ but ‘also share our homes and our lives, drawing upon our
emotions and
resources’.
Now that the existing law has been explored, it is time for the article to
present what could be.
IV Alternatives to Thinghood for Pets
There are alternative pet custody models to better reflect pets status as
more than mere chattel that is already reflected in Australian
attitudes and
criminal/animal welfare legislation (despite the legislations’
limitations.) This article now explores these
alternative models.
Human relationships break down. Difficult decisions have to be made regarding
children: who they will live with, who they will have
points they will have contact, and so forth. Courts are very familiar with those
kinds of dispute. In Australia,
as already mentioned earlier in the
the paramount
consideration in determining what orders to make is the best interests of the
child. But what happens to a fur baby
when their human parents split up? Could
they be subject to a similar system?
Some of the factors when the court considers when deciding the best interests
of the child translate easily from human children to
pets. For example, an
important consideration in deciding with whom a child will spend time or where a
child will live is ‘the
attitude to the child, and to the responsibilities
of parenthood, demonstrated by each of the child’s
If one of the
people seeking an order viewed pets as a full-time responsibility, and the other
viewed them as an after-work distraction
to be left alone in the house for 10
hours a day, the choice would be clear. If one of them had a record of violence
against the
animal, which is also a consideration involving the best interests
of human children,
weigh heavily against an order in their favour and potentially ban them from
owning pets in these circumstances.
Other custody considerations demand more thought before they travel. Could a
pet’s relationship with children or other pets
be taken into account? (The
former Family Court did not, after all, try not to separate
How relevant is
maintaining the status quo to a pet custody order? Should the Court inquire into
the capacity of each party to provide
for the pet? What if one of the parties
wants to move the pet to a location where it would not be feasible for the other
to maintain
say, a party’s new spouse — into account? (Would
‘plus’ if they remarried a veterinarian, and a ‘minus’
if they married a convicted animal abuser?)
Are there circumstances in which an
‘independent pet’s lawyer’ should be appointed to ‘form
an independent
view ... of what is in the best interests of the
Should ‘pet
maintenance’ orders (or ‘petimony’) be
Those questions
demonstrate that the model for pet custody and the model for child custody will
differ to the degree children and
pets do (in relevant ways).
The best interests of a human are not the best interests of a Chihuahua.
‘However similar to us as our pets are, they are not
‘their views of the world, needs and preferences are, in many ways, very
different to ours.’
Discussing ‘next-friend’ standing for animals in the US, Judge Smith
stated: ‘We have millennia of experience understanding
the interests and
desire[s] of humankind. This is not necessarily true for
, Crompton J worried about where ‘best interest’
thinking for pets might lead.
[W]ould it be abusive to forget to clean the fish bowl or have Tabitha
declawed? If the door were opened on this type of litigation,
the Court would
next be forced to decide such issues as which dog training school, if any, is
better for Zach’s personality
the summer solstice or allowed to romp ‘au
Travis v Murray
, the Court stated bluntly: ‘[T]here is no
proven or practical means of gauging a dog’s happiness or its feelings
a person or a place other than, perhaps, resorting to the entirely
unscientific method of watching its tail wag’ (or conducting
However, humans have millennia of experience living with and understanding
companion animals, like dogs and cats. We cannot ‘get
into the head’
of a nonhuman animal to determine with certainty which owner it
but we can interpret
obvious markers of comfort and distress, and make sensible judgements on which
environments might be better
for them. For example, an important factor in the
New York decision of
Ramseur v Askins
was the dog’s obvious anxiety
when being separated from the defendant’s
In the Vermont case
Hament v Baker
, the trial court used the fact the dog was accustomed
to a daily routine that involved going to the husband’s workplace (a
veterinarian’s clinic) to judge that his welfare was best served by
remaining with the husband.
similar emphasis on the status quo appears in
Mitchell v Snider
, from Alabama.
the latter, the Court judged that a place with a yard was better for a dog than
the ‘cramped quarters of a hotel
In some cases,
dogs have been awarded to their primary caregiver, in much the same way a child
might be: not as a reward to the caregiver
for services rendered, but in
recognition that their charge’s welfare is likely to be better secured
In others, owners
who have demonstrated insufficient investment in their animals (by, for example,
handing them to others to care
for and not showing much concern for their fate)
have been denied them in
The fundamental difference between a human baby and a fur baby is easily
stated. The human is a person, and has rights. The non-human
is not, and does
If you begin from the
premise that non-human animals are property, you cannot treat them like
If the law moves
away from this premise, new models of pet custody are possible. Indeed,
alternative models are the
Pets as Persons Model, Sentimentality Model, and
Each of these alternative models consider animals as something other than
pure property. Equally crucial is that these alternative
premises resonate with
aspects of contemporary attitudes towards companion animals. For this reason,
each model has a solid claim
to being more socially conventional than the
existing pet custody model, which is incongruent with contemporary attitudes
pets. The article now proceeds on to discuss, in detail, these three
alternative models for pet custody.
A ‘Pets as Persons’ Model
There is an established body of philosophy and jurisprudence on animal
personhood (for example, from Peter Singer and Gary Francione).
There is even
some (very limited) precedent for extending personhood to
or more commonly,
extending the law’s reach to animals in areas once reserved for people
(such as trusts and protection orders
in domestic
It is fair to say,
though, that animal personhood remains a ‘fringe’ idea. We began the
article with the Nonhuman Rights
Project’s attempts to extend personhood
to elephants and chimpanzees: but their optimism about the possibilities of
common law did not translate into legal success.
A wide variety of animals are kept as
characteristic common to all that could be positioned as legally relevant in
personhood debates would be difficult. It
is, however, possible to have a system
where only certain pets are subject to a ‘custody’ analysis,
recognising their
personhood, and others are subject to a ‘property’
analysis, in which they are
If there was to be a recognition of animal personhood, it would make sense
for it to start with the most human-like animals (as they
are the most analogous
with the only universally-acknowledged ‘natural’ person). The
NRP’s cases, for example,
have focused on a select group of animals that
have certain ‘human’ characteristics, such as high intelligence,
self-recognition,
emotional complexity and a degree of
(as opposed to
something very broad, like the capacity to
and which are not
domesticated (thus, not ‘central to contemporary Western economies or ways
of life’ — that is,
they lack a ‘designated
However, the
species that function as fur babies are
the ones that are most
human-like.
characteristics that make an animal suitable as a companion resonate with
human capacities, such as an ability to respond to human
body language and
Others would
be virtues in a contemporary free-spirited Australian: such as low or modest
intelligence, pliability, and comfort with confinement.
characteristics that let us feel it is ‘okay’ to keep them. The
desire for autonomous action is the mark of
Where possible, pets are
trained or conditioned — indeed, bred — for
compliance.
Their will is
subsumed to their master’s. If they run, they will be brought back. None
of this is necessarily malicious: but
if done to a human, it would constitute
Moreover, some animals that have the person-like qualities of a good
companion are not generally recognised as such, perhaps for cultural
Pigs have many of the dog’s virtues — intelligence, trainability,
sociability, and positive responses to human
companionship.
In Australia,
they are not usually viewed as pets (and local government rules may make it
difficult to keep them as such). It would
be hypocritical to routinely use
person-like characteristics to confer personhood sufficient for custody purposes
on pets, and routinely
ignore it in animals culturally positioned as
Assuming the problem of definition can be addressed, there is then a question
of scope. Personhood indicates a capacity to bear rights,
but not necessarily
the rights a person
have. Children are definitely
However, they are
subject to a form of stewardship and control (albeit one they will grow out of,
in most cases). They do not have
all the rights of a fully functional adult
human (e.g. the right to vote). Pets could be governed by a similar
They would have the
rights appropriate to them, and lack the ones that are
just as corporations
cannot have a right to bodily integrity and men cannot have a right to
Species-specific
rights for pets could include a right to have their interests accounted for in
custody disputes.
Fundamentally, though, there is a large ‘disconnect’ between
personhood and the pethood paradigm. We anthropomorphise
pets, to an extent, so
that we can see something in them that we want, like affection. Yet if they were
human, we could not buy them
and keep them, no matter the quality of the
The nature of pethood
is confinement and control, for the comfort of another: not choice, not
self-direction, not parity. It relies
on them being so much less than us that
our controlling every aspect of their lives is doing them a favour. If pethood
as an institution
is to continue, the property status of pets cannot be swept
away, any more than slavery makes sense if slaves are fully people.
In terms of making a big statement — encouraging a fundamental rethink
of the way humans relate to nonhuman animals —
making animals people,
rather than property, will definitely deliver.
The NRP cases demonstrate, though, that it is hard to make headway with an
animal personhood model.
is too radical a rethink of the relationship between human and nonhuman to be
accepted without a lot of groundwork going into
the jurisprudence, and a lot of
political activism shifting
(along with a lot of
thought as to the implications of such a profound shift throughout the
That is so even in the
US, where animal jurisprudence is a more established field.
In Australia, where animal jurisprudence is less
the chances of
successfully implementing this model are currently
That does not mean
it is not worth discussing. It would be wise, however, to manage one’s
expectations first.
Sentimentality Model
The ‘pets as people’ model looks to pets as creatures capable of
having their own interests. The opposite end of the spectrum,
unsurprisingly, is
a far more anthropocentric
one in which pets are
treated differently from other types of property to reflect the special position
they have in
lives. This is a system that offers concessions to
human sentimentality as it is premised on valuing such sentimentality.
On this model (henceforth the ‘Sentimentality Model’), we look
less to reality than perception. Whether an animal actually
capacities we ascribe to it is not the point. A dog’s friendship and
enthusiasm might be pack instinct and anxiety when
left alone. As long as the
animal’s expressions trigger their
friendship,
enthusiasm, desire for play, and ultimately love, the owner will be invested in
its welfare.
The framework for the Sentimentality Model is relatively straightforward, and
at least part of it synchronises with Australia’s
extant pet custody
model. A court, in a property dispute, needs to do justice between the parties.
If the parties have no particular
affective investment in an item, the most
important thing is likely the overall value, and the portion of it that an
individual receives.
Selling the property and splitting the proceeds is a viable
solution. If an individual
have a strong affective investment in a
piece of property, the matter is more complex. That the particular item goes to
than Y, or to no one,
Pets attract substantial affective investment. Selling a dog and splitting
the proceeds because the parties cannot agree on ownership
will make only the
most callous owners happy.
Most pets are not good investments, in dry financial terms. Like children, they
cost money to maintain, and the rewards they give
are not usually
concession to human sentimentality would be to account for that in making
distributions: to treat pets as something which
cannot be subsumed into the
general property solution. Like heirlooms or works of art, their sentimental
value may mandate a special
approach: a perspective adopted in New
and perhaps possible
to accommodate under existing distribution
But the sentiment
involved may be on another plane, as Friedman J explained in the case of
Corso v Crawford Dog and Cat Hospital,
An heirloom while it might be the source of good feelings is merely an
inanimate object and is not capable of returning love and affection.
It does not
respond to human stimulation; it has no brain capable of displaying emotion
which in turn causes a human response. Losing
the right to memoralize a pet
rock, or a pet tree or losing a family picture album is not actionable. But a
dog — that is something
else. To say it is a piece of personal property
and no more is a repudiation of our
humaneness.
Indeed, given pets can sometimes take the place of children in a
couple’s affections,
be a huge part of a child’s
the investment could
be intense.
The relevant orders may have to be more complex than a once-and-for-all
disposition. If the parties both have substantial affective
investment in a pet,
justice and fairness may demand that both of them be given access. Thus, there
could be something like the residence
and contact orders family lawyers are
familiar with: recognising, contrary to the pure property analysis, that setting
a visitation
schedule for a dog is not like setting one ‘for a table or a
legislation was partly inspired by a court’s amenability to dog
visitation,
and there are
some precedents for pet custody and visitation
arrangements
(in an overall
context of strong
opposition).
A Sentimentality Model could be more equalising among the species than the
personhood model. The focus is the feelings of the pet
owner. An expressive and
empathetic creature, like a dog, has an advantage over, say, aquatic life,
because it is a lot easier to
see a Labrador reciprocating affection than a neon
tetra. If an individual subjectively feels a great attachment to their fish,
no amount of philosophising will show their position to be weaker than
the dog owner’s.
There is a chance that a Sentimentality Model will lead to better outcomes
for companion animals. It may heighten the chance a pet
will become the property
of the owner who is most invested in it. Alternatively, the pet may have the
benefit of being cared for
by two owners invested in it if some sort of shared
custody is facilitated. It would depend partly on how much influence the
‘attachment’
consideration had in practice.
However, the welfare of the pet is not the primary consideration here. It is
a human-centred model, concerned with the happiness of
pet owners. If the point
of pet custody reform is to promote
happiness, that is well and
good. For a strong advocate of animal rights or animal welfare, though, it is
not a satisfying solution.
The underlying premise is not what one would hope
for, and the role the interests of the animal actually plays is limited. It is
perhaps the easiest to accommodate in existing law because it does the least:
which is very much a ‘good news, bad news’
‘Liminal’ Model
When humans are emotionally invested in their children, there is a
‘selfish’ (in a non-pejorative sense) component: they
children with them. There is another layer to their investment, though. They
want their children to prosper and be happy,
even when they are parted from
them. They recognise that children are valuable in themselves, and have their
own interests as distinct
beings which will not always coincide with what would
be most gratifying for their parents in the short term. That
is easy to agree that the best interests of the child should be the paramount
consideration in residence determinations — until a judge decides that the
best interests of
children are not secured by them living with
. Abstracting out from the individual to society, though, confidence
in the system increases if it is known that the interests of
children — a
cherished, yet vulnerable, group — are safeguarded.
As pets still fit, legally and to a large extent culturally, within the
property model, one cannot assume the same degree of deference
will be given to
their welfare over the autonomy of their owners. There is generally little
pressure for owners to think that what
is best for their animals may be
different from what they (the owners) desire. Nonetheless, so far as companion
animals are recognised
as having their own interests — if only because
they have their own welfare — a society
make a more
pet-friendly determination.
To adopt such a reform, the law cannot treat animals as pure property: but it
does not have to recognise them as people, either. It
could start from a premise
that the Australian community already adopts, albeit without much reflection:
non-human animals are ‘kind
of, but not really’ property. They can
be sensibly analysed as a category of property: they are the subject of a
of rights’, including the right of alienation. But it is an
uneasy classification. They are in a category unlike the
Pets are in a
‘liminal’ space: not quite one thing, not quite the other. They are
semi-people or semi-property, or ‘property
They would not
the rights a human person has for pet custody to work, but they
would need this one: the right to have their interests taken into
account when
property distributions are made in separation proceedings.
The strongest model would be the closest analogue to child custody, where the
best interests of the child are paramount: a ‘best
interests of the
pet’ model. There is some case law from the US in which courts have
borrowed elements from child custody cases
in making pet-focused
but with few
exceptions ‘even the decisions employing custody or custody-like
considerations to dog disputes have uniformly
rejected the application of a
“best interests”
assumption tends to be that ‘[h]owever strong the emotional attachments
between pets and humans, courts simply cannot evaluate
interests” of an
companion animals are not worth the extraordinary consumption of time and
resources that goes into an assessment of a child’s
Another option is to adopt a ‘best interests of all concerned’ or
‘best interests of the family’ model. Under
this approach, one
‘person’s’ interests are not the overriding consideration
— certainly not their property
interests — and the concept of
‘interest’ in play is broad. It is quite possible that
‘intangible, highly
subjective factors’ will win out over ‘the
ordinary indicia of actual ownership or right to possession such as title,
purchase, gift, and the
For example, the
special place pets have in the lives of children (as friends, as substitute
siblings, as teachers of empathy) may
be a factor encouraging the court to keep
pets and children together. Their role as companion, alleviating loneliness, may
significant to one spouse than another, and that might be decisive in
the right case.
More importantly, for present purposes, the animal is recognised as having
its own interests worthy of consideration. That a dog has
a role in decreasing
its owner’s anxiety would not necessarily be more significant than the
fact the owner has a role in
the dog’s anxiety.
Such an approach has surfaced in New York, in cases such as
Courts have been
prepared to depart from the traditional property analysis and ‘recognize
that animals are undoubtedly more
significant than a chair, table or other piece
of property’.
also some scholarly support for
On a ‘liminal’ model, it is not necessary to treat every type of
pet the same. How we approach the species depends on
the extent to which they
exhibit whatever characteristic we take as important to the creature’s
moral worth. The characteristics
may simply be the ones which determine how
amenable the species is to the type of ‘best interests’ analysis
custody disputes
‘In-between’ models such as the liminal model are not unknown in
jurisprudence. Favre, for example, has a model of equitable
self-ownership for
animals which could be viewed as ‘kind of, not really’ ownership. It
is similar to a trust in the
following respect. A trustee is in
respects the owner of property, though not in others. To explain, a trustee
title to property, on trust, for the benefit of another
who is also in
respects the owner, that is, the beneficiary (holding
title). As described in the paragraph below, in
Favre’s model, ownership of an animal is also divided into the legal and
equitable. He favours the term ‘guardian’ for animals, as
Under Favre’s model, the ‘self-owned’ animal is the
beneficiary of duties derived from two main sources: ‘anticruelty
and the concepts developed for defining the parent-child
relationship
with the parents of a child, the guardians of a pet would have a broad (though
not unlimited) discretion to determine what is
in the pet’s best
interests: but on a relationship breakdown, the parties may have very different
ideas. If they cannot agree,
then the court must step in: and ‘[t]he issue
will not be resolved by reference to who wrote the check for [the pet] or which
human wants [the pet] the most, but rather what is in the best interests of [the
If the guardian model is held to be closely analogous to guardian and human
child, we have something akin to the full personhood model,
with correspondingly
strict obligations. A good guardian, as Fruh and Wirchnianski note, has a
‘basic concern’ or ‘foundational
drive ... to fulfill her
child’s best
interests’.
Fruh and Wirchnianski believe such a guardianship model is inappropriate for
pets. It makes the pet’s interests ‘a near
constant and
often-decisive presence in the guardian’s deliberations’, and
introduces ‘a problematic moral priority
for [their] companion
(which they
illustrate with
hypotheticals about dogs and humans on a
lifeboat, choosing whether to give braces to one’s daughter or one’s
deciding whether to save a beetle from a burning
Will Kymlicka has an approach which, while not strictly liminal — it is
grounded in an alternate basis than personhood, not
— could have
something of the same effect. In his view, arguing through a personhood/property
framework presents reformers
with a dilemma. Substantial change is not possible
while animals are still viewed as property. While they are things, they will be
exploited. But extending personhood to animals is not politically
His solution
‘is to get domesticated animals included into other legal categories such
as “workers” or “members
of the family” which carry with
them social standing and social rights, even if not full legal
personhood’.
[H]aving taken [domesticated animals] out of the wild, and bred them to live
and work alongside us, we must accept that they are now
members of a shared
society, and that society belongs to them as much as to
He refers to this as the ‘social recognition
animals, for example, are recognised as part of the family unit, with more than
instrumental value.
Because companion animals are recognised as family members, and referred to
as such (in a display of ‘interspecies
some of the
protections that ordinarily apply to family members would also apply to them:
including some drawn from child custody
Kymlicka does not think this model is more just. He explicitly states that
justice for domesticated animals requires recognition of
their personhood.
Personhood is what grants important negative rights — ‘such as the
right not to be killed, experimented
‘Membership without personhood is a radically precarious and unjust
However, the
strategy is politically feasible, and may help make the personhood model more
viable in the long-term.
It is also possible to focus directly on the ‘special
relationship’ between companion animals and humans, and hold that
‘primary moral obligation ... is to develop, nurture, respect, and
protect’ it.
Harvey favours such a model as an antidote to a ‘utilisation with
safeguards’ paradigm (in which the animal’s
welfare is likely to be
protected only as far as is convenient for humans). The ethic arises from
‘the deep and abiding affection
the animals give and seek, the profound
emotional and physical vulnerability they face because of it, and the blunt fact
that humans
in general control the relationship and have the power either to
treasure or betray their animal
companions’.
animals purely as property undermines the special relationship: indeed, has the
potential to sever it completely.
Putting the ‘special relationship’ front and centre in a pet
custody dispute takes us far from a property model. It could
lead, for example,
to a recognition of the need to facilitate the maintenance of a relationship
with both ‘parents’.
That does not sit well with the one-time
distribution decision at the core of the property model, but it is analogous to
Family Law Act
model for children.
Part-way approaches may not be as intellectually satisfying as a straight
‘personhood’ or ‘property’ analysis,
if one seeks
closure. Because the latter are binary philosophies (it is a person, and has
rights, or it is property, and does not),
they are easy to apply. A model
recognising a thing that is not quite property, not quite person, but with
aspects of both —
a type of liminal being — could be a difficult
thing to ‘square’, conceptually. There are also serious questions
to how much good such a half-measure can do. Mackinnon has asked: ‘If
qualified entrance into the human race on male terms
has done little for women
— granted, we are not eaten, but then that is not our inequality problem
— how much will being
seen as humanlike, but not fully so, do for other
Still, the liminal model meets the community and the courts closer to where
they are at. Favre writes: ‘If the next step for
animal jurisprudence
continues to be spoken in terms of traditional property concepts, then the
judges and lawmakers will be more
comfortable in pushing the process
Indeed, in the
New York case of
Lynch J indicated
the courts should ‘take the next step in recognizing that pets are more
than just “personal property”
when it comes to resolving a dispute
between owners’ and view them as a ‘special category of
V Conclusion: A Special Place in the Heart, A Special
Place in the Law
It is difficult for the law to be more sensible than the jumble of
conflicting concepts and ingrained doublethink it must apply
humanity’s relationship with nonhuman animals is riddled with
inconsistency, jurisprudentially unsatisfying legislation
may be the best we can
hope for. To resolve the conflicting, unsatisfying and inconsistent nature of
today’s laws; it makes
sense to recognise pets as more than property in
the law. As such, the authors suggest that Australia would be well served by
an alternative model (without expressing a preference for a particular
model) for pet custody, which would better accord with modern
attitudes towards pets. Currently, Australia’s pet custody model is
anachronistic and no longer in sync with Australian
attitudes. In 1994, in the
Bueckner v Hamel
, Justice Andell relevantly stated:
The law must be informed by evolving knowledge and attitudes. Otherwise, it
risks becoming irrelevant as a means of resolving conflicts.
Society has long
since moved beyond the untenable Cartesian view that animals are unfeeling
automatons and, hence,
As Kymlicka writes, ‘A lot is happening in animal law, around the
world, at a speed that makes it difficult to keep up with
international developments have made pet custody more thinkable — and less
socially unconventional — than it used
to be. There is ‘a growing
gulf between the self-understandings of average citizens and the rules of the
law, which is a source
of growing frustration for many citizens, who are calling
for the law to move [companion animals] out of the property box into the
category of family
social reality is that [companion animals] are members of the family, and
whenever the law is so far out of touch with
social realities, it needs to
adapt, and indeed it is adapting on these issues of custody ...
Whether Australian jurisdictions should legislate to accommodate pet custody
is a complex question with many moving parts. ‘[C]ustody
battles are
expensive, difficult, and emotionally tolling experiences for all parties
involved’, burdensome on the courts,
and complicated, given the
‘enormous amount of information’ a court needs to make a best
interests finding.
clear that extending those battles to pets would be practical, all things
considered, and it is not clear what shape reform
should take. What
clear is that there is enough intellectual substance behind the core ideas of
pet custody not to be flippant or dismissive. Modern
child custody, after all,
is only possible because of a paradigm shift. Children, too, were once viewed as
property, subject to the
rights of an
Given the unique relationship between pets and humans in Australia, this
article has argued that family law should not consider animals
chattels. Such a regime may better reflect the special place that companion
animals have in Australian society. It would
consider our social understanding
that pets are family members.
As the Court stated in the New York case
Travis v Murray
‘matrimonial judges spend countless hours on other disputes that do not
rise to a level of importance anywhere near that of
judicial resources can be devoted to such matters as which party gets to use the
Escalade as opposed to the Ferrari, or
who gets to stay in the Hamptons house
instead of the Aspen chalet, there is certainly room to give real consideration
involving a treasured
It is quite
possible that many Australian pet owners might agree with such a statement.
* Adam Jardine BA(Hon) LLB(Hon) is a former lecturer in law. Adam dedicates
this article to late dog, Pierre.
** Dr Marilyn Bromberg BBA (Hon), LLB (Dist), PhD, GCUT is the Director
Higher Degrees Coursework at the University of Western Australia
Law School. Dr
Bromberg dedicates this article to her dog, Hero.
*** Nicholas Cardaci LLB, B.Comm (Finance); is an Australian lawyer, formerly
for the Australian Securities & Investments Commission,
as well as an author
of peer-reviewed research. Nicholas dedicates this article to his much-loved
cat, Smudge.
The authors thank Associate Professor Adiva Sifris for her valuable feedback
on the article.
Nonhuman Rights Project, ‘Clients: Beulah, Karen, and
Nonhuman Rights Project
(16 December 2020)
<https://www.nonhumanrights.org/clients-beulah-karen-minnie/>.
Nonhuman Rights Project Inc
v R W Commerford and Sons Inc
(Conn Super Ct, No LLICV175009822S, 26
December 2017).
Nonhuman Rights Project,
‘Litigation’,
Nonhuman Rights Project
<https://www.nonhumanrights.org/litigation/>.
Steven M Wise,
Rattling the
Cage: Towards Legal Rights for Animals
(Perseus, 2000) 4. Wise’s
positions rests heavily on the cognitive sophistication of chimpanzees and
bonobos. See At Ch 10.
Tilikum v Sea World Parks
& Entertainment Inc
(2012) 842 F Supp 2d
Naruto v Slater
888 F 3d 418
Alaska Stat §§
25.24.160, 25.24.200(f), 25.24.220(d), 25.24.230(a) (2019). Alaska Stat §
25.24.990 (2019) defines
‘animal’ as ‘a vertebrate living
creature not a human being’. Fish were initially excluded, but not in the
legislation’s final form. See Morgan Chandler Handy, ‘The
“De-Chattelization” of Companion Animals through
Legislation: How Alaska’s HR 147 Has Dismantled the Traditional Property
Law View of Pets’
(2018) 52(1)
Family Law Quarterly
See 750 Ill Comp Stat 5/503
§ (n) (2019); Cal Fam Code § 2605 (2019). See Pamela Babcock,
‘Are Pets Assets or Part
of the Family? States Are Passing Laws That Give
Judges a Longer Leash in Divorce Custody Proceedings’
(2019) 105(5)
; Nicole R Pallotta, ‘Chattel or Child: The Liminal Status
of Companion Animals in Society and Law’ 8(5)
Social Sciences
Karin Brulliard, ‘In a
First, Alaska Divorce Courts Will Now Treat Pets More like Children’,
Washington Post
(online, 24 January 2017)
<https://www.washingtonpost.com/news/animalia/wp/2017/01/24/in-a-first-alaska-divorce-courts-will-now-treat-pets-more-like-children/>.
Favre had foreseen the possibility much earlier: see David Favre, ‘A New
Property Status for Animals: Equitable Self-Ownership’
Rights: Current Debates and New Directions
(Oxford University Press, 2004)
Cf the symbolic change in
terminology from ‘owner’ to ‘guardian’ that occurred in
Rhode Island in 2001: See
Handy (n 8); Susan Hankin, ‘Making Decisions
Guardians?’
Stanford Journal of Animal Law and Policy
(‘Making Decisions About Our Animals’ Health Care’).
RSCPA Australia, ‘How
Many Pets Are There in Australia?’,
RSPCA Knowledgebase
<https://kb.rspca.org.au/knowledge-base/how-many-pets-are-there-in-australia/>.
An Orwellian term famously
coined in George Orwell,
(Vintage UK, 2021). Doublethink is ‘a
simultaneous belief in two contradictory ideas’: See Merriam-Webster,
‘Doublethink’,
Merriam-Webster.com Dictionary
<https://www.merriam-webster.com/dictionary/doublethink>.
LexisNexis,
Encyclopaedic
Australian Legal Dictionary
(at 6 December 2019) ‘Custody’.
Western Australia has its
own legislation, the
Family Court Act 1997
(WA). This Act essentially
mirrors the Commonwealth legislation. This situation was brought about by the
State’s refusal to
refer the relevant legislative power to the
Commonwealth. See CCH Intelliconnect,
Australian Family Law and Practice
Premium Commentary
(at 6 December 2019) [ 13-015], [ 16-005].
Commonwealth,
‘Parliamentary Debates, House of Representatives, 8 December 2005’
(Philip Ruddock, Attorney-General) 11.
On the types of order, See
Family Law Act 1975
Goode v Goode
FamCA 1346.
Drake v Drake
s 64B(2)(c).
See the note in
consider child spending equal time or substantial and significant time with each
parent in certain circumstances). On what
‘consider’ means in this
context, See
Goode v Goode
(2006) 206 FLR 212, 229;
which concern the advice that advisers must give.
(2)(b). See also Commonwealth (n 16) 10.
Britt v Parcell
[2021] NSWDC 464
’).This case which although not a
decision of the Family Court as the relationship was for less than two years did
the de facto relationship jurisdiction of the Family Court
Ibid [9], [15].
Ibid [10]-[14]. Nelson DCJ
did also consider the effect of the
Companion Animals Act 1988
Though this is less relevant to the subject of animals as property, as the
Act is more concerned with pet registration and owners’
responsibilities
and ‘does not otherwise amend the law relating to the ownership of
chattels.’ See especially
(n 23) [25]-[26]. See generally
Ibid [16]-[26].
is a word apt to describe all personal chattels that are corporeal.’:
(n 23) [12].
Ibid [10]-[12]. The
reference to Megarry and Wade is a reference to Robert Megarry and HWR Wade,
The Law of Real Property
(Stevens & Sons Ltd, 3rd ed, 1966).
Foreshadowed early in the
judgment by the heading ‘A dog is a chattel personal’ above Ibid
[9]. See also Ibid [12], [15].
Chow v Chang
Ibid [8]-[15].
Ibid [30]-[34].
Downey v Beale
[2017] FCCA 316
, [10], [11], [14], [45]-[49] (‘
Gaynor v Tseh
Ibid [1], [4].
Ibid [2], [3].
Ibid [8], [9];
17) ss 90SM, 90SF.
Gaynor v Tseh
Ibid [4], [13]-[14]. Cronin
, that the dog had been in the respondent’s
possession for some time, and so there was an apparent lack of the required
for an interlocutory order.
Davenport v Davenport
(2020) 62 FamLR 222.
Ibid [39]-[41].
Duboff v Simpson
[2021] ONSC 4970
Baker v Harmina
[2018] NLCA 15
Ibid [12]. This case has
received favourable treatment in Canada. It was subsequently applied in the more
recent Canadian cases of
Poole v Ramsey-Wall
[2021] BCCRT 789, [16];
(n 54) [15]-[17].
Jessica Foxx, ‘The Use
of Agreements in the Resolution of Pet Custody Disputes’ (2017) 85(2)
UKMC Law Review
‘An order for sharing
does not end the conflict. Instead it creates a regularly scheduled opportunity
for conflict that recurs
for the rest of the dog’s life [...] [t]hese
opportunities can be particularly tempting for former romantic partners’:
(n 55) [22], [23] (White JA). See also
Prim v Fisher
[2009] Vt Super Ct S1464-09 (‘
[2017] BCPC 115
Arrington v Arrington
613 SW 2d 565
’); Foxx (n 57) 456. See also
Clark v McGinnis
, 298 P 3d 1137 (Kan Ct App, 2013). Being part of the
same biological order will not assist. ‘The monkey is not a child. Callous
as it may seem, the monkey is a chattel, that is to say, a piece of
Nakhuda v Story Book Farm Primate Sanctuary
[2013] ONSC
, [4] (Vallee J).
Timothy L Arcaro,
‘Should Family Pets Receive Special Consideration in Divorce’
Florida Bar Journal
Bueckner v Hamel
(1994) 886 SW
(n 41) [19];
Hament v Baker
(2014) 97 3d 461, 463 (‘
Morgan v Kroupa
(1997) 702 2d 630, 632–3
(n 54) [17];
(n 55) [11].
Arcaro (n 60) 24; L Morgan
Eason, ‘A Bone to Pick: Applying a “Best Interest of the
(2017) 62(1)
South Dakota Law Review
(n 60) 465;
Juelfs v Gough
(2002) 41 P 3d 593, 596
Travis v Murray
(2013) 42 Misc 3d 447,
’). However, See
See e.g., the reasoning of,
and cases cited in,
Coates v Dickson
[2021] ONSC 992
, [8], [10],
[17]-[19] (‘
(n 55) [49]
(Hoegg JA).
Ibid [52] (Hoegg JA,
dissenting).
(n 64) [8],
(n 54) [18].
Richard A Epstein,
‘Animals as Objects, or Subjects, of Rights’ in
Animal Rights:
Current Debates and New Directions
(Oxford University Press, 2004) 143,
Western Australia, for
example, has an
Animal Welfare Act 2002
(WA). On Australian animal
protection rules, in the context of companion animals specifically, See Steven
White, ‘Companion
Animals: Members of the Family or Legally Discarded
[2009] UNSWLawJl 42
(2009) 32(3)
UNSW Law Journal
(‘Companion Animals’).
As Favre puts it, ownership
of a pet is distinguished from ownership of a rock ‘primarily by the fact
that prevention-of-cruelty
laws apply to owners of pets but not to owners of
rocks’: Favre (n 10) 238; See also Pallotta (n 9) 4.
Animal Welfare
(n 69) s 19(3).
Cass R Sunstein,
‘Introduction: What Are Animal Rights’ in A
nimal Rights: Current
Debates and New Directions
(Oxford University Press, 2004) 3; Gary
Francione, ‘Animals – Property or Persons?’ in
Rights: Current Debates and New Directions
(Oxford University Press, 2004)
110–12; Jean Harvey, ‘Companion and Assistance Animals: Benefits,
Welfare Safeguards,
and Relationships’ in
Pets and People: The Ethics
of Companion Animals
(Oxford University Press, 2017) 4; Richard A Posner,
‘Animal Rights: Legal, Philosophical, and Pragmatic Perspectives’
Animal Rights: Current Debates and New Directions
(Oxford University
Press, 2004) 51, 70–1; Peter Singer,
(Pimlico, 2nd ed, 1995) 244 (‘Animal Liberation’). This is a
Kantian view.
‘[H]e who is cruel to animals
becomes hard also in his dealings with men’: Immanuel Kant,
Lectures on
Tr Louis Infield (Harper Torchbooks, 1963) 240. See also Martha C
Nussbaum, ‘Beyond “Compassion and Humanity”: Justice
Nonhuman Animals’ in
Animal Rights: Current Debates and New
(Oxford University Press, 2004) 299, 300.
Pallotta (n 9) 4 n 16.
Ralph A DeMeo,
‘Defining Animal Rights and Animal Welfare: A Lawyer’s Guide’
Florida Bar Journal
42, 47; Steven White, ‘Standards and
Standard-Setting in Companion Animal Protection’
[2016] SydLawRw 21
, 468, 488–9 (‘Standards’).
White (n 74) 463–4,
Francione (n 72) 124.
Ford v Wiley
[1889] UKLawRpKQB 92
(1889) 23 QBD 203
, 209–10 (Lord Coleridge CJ). See also Kyle Fruh and
Wolodymyr Wirchnianski, ‘Neither Owners nor Guardians: In Search
Morally Appropriate Model for the Keeping of Companion Animals’ (2017)
Journal of Agricultural and Environmental Ethics
55, 57; White (n
69) 861; White (n 74) 467 n 23, 470, 472; David J Wolfson and Mariann Sullivan,
‘Foxes in the Hen House —
Animals, Agribusiness, and the Law: A
Modern American Fable’ in
Animal Rights: Current Debates and New
(Oxford University Press, 2004) 212–3.
Sunstein (n 72) 8.
Speaking of companion
animals specifically, See White (n 69) 865.
Will Kymlicka, ‘Social
Membership: Animal Law beyond the Property/Personhood Impasse’
Dalhousie Law Journal
Ibid 127. See also Harvey (n
72) 4; White (n 74) 472. Kymlicka goes so far as to decry the use of the phrase
‘animal protection
laws’ and assert that what we really have are
‘animal use laws’. ‘At its core, animal law authorizes the
harming of animals: indeed, that is its fundamental legal purpose, to provide
legal cover to the harming of animals’: Kymlicka
(n 81) 126–7.
Francione (n 72) 120.
Ibid 117, 120, 122; Fruh and
Wirchnianski (n 78) 57.
White (n 74) 488.
Francione (n 72) 108.
For example, Singer points
out that, as children, we (who are not raised by vegetarian parents) are given
animal flesh to consume,
long before we are in a position to judge the morality
of eating animals, while at the same time we are taught love and affection
animals. ‘[R]ather than having one unified attitude to animals, the child
has two conflicting attitudes that coexist, carefully
segregated so that the
inherent contradiction between them rarely causes trouble’. See Singer (n
Kymlicka (n 81) 129 n 17.
See also Pallotta (n 9) 24.
Animal Welfare Act
s 4A(1)(a).
Animal Welfare Act
(NZ) s 9 states in relation to Part 1 of the Act: ‘The purpose of
this Part is to ensure that owners of animals and persons
in charge of animals
attend properly to the welfare of those animals. [...] [This Part 1] requires
owners of animals, and persons
in charge of animals, to take all reasonable
steps to ensure that the physical, health, and behavioural needs of the animals
Premier of Victoria, the
Honourable Daniel Andrews (Press Release, 20 October 2020)
<https://www.premier.vic.gov.au/have-your-say-new-animal-welfare-act>.
Victorian Government,
New Animal Welfare Act for Victoria: Policy Proposals
(October 2020) 2, Item
1.1 <https://engage.vic.gov.au/download/document/14169>.
James Yeates and Julian
Savulescu, ‘Companion Animal Ethics: A Special Area of Moral Theory and
Practice?’ (2017) 20(2)
Ethical Theory and Moral Practice
Animal Medicines Australia,
Pet Ownership in Australia
<https://animalmedicinesaustralia.org.au/wp-content/uploads/2016/12/AMA_Pet-Ownership-in-Australia-2016-Report_sml.pdf>
Pet Ownership
Ibid 9, 16. For comparison,
65% of US households have a pet.
Ibid 10, 49. According to
the American Veterinary Medical Association’s
US Pet Ownership &
Demographics Sourcebook 2017–18
, the figures in the US for the
‘family’ designation are 85% of dog owners and 76% of cat owners.
Only 1% and 3% respectively
considered their pets to be property: Humane Society
of the United States, ‘Pets by the Numbers’,
<https://humanepro.org/page/pets-by-the-numbers>. Pallotta
a pet is a family member and
treating them
family member are two different things: Pallotta (n 9) 17, 19. This is a
conclusion this article strongly supports.
Eason (n 62)
‘[O]f the top dog
and cat names in 2016, most are human names’: Animal Medicines Australia
In an American Animal
Hospital Association survey, 40 percent of married female dog owners reported
receiving more emotional support
from the dog than their spouse or children: See
Hal Herzog, ‘Why People Care More About Pets Than Other Humans’ (13
<https://www.wired.com/2015/04/people-care-pets-humans/>. See also Foxx (n
Indeed, rules and
practices for emergency evacuation changed in the US after Hurricane Katrina to
reflect the fact people would not
abandon their pets during the crisis: Harvey
Animal Medicines
Australia (n 96) 29, 40. An estimated $12.2 billion in pet products and services
was spent by Australian households
in a twelve-month period reported in 2016: at
31. For American statistics, See Pallotta (n 9) 6–7. On the range of
non-essentials
this expenditure covers, See Andrea Laurent-Simpson,
‘“They Make Me Not Wanna Have a Child”: Effects of Companion
Animals on Fertility Intentions of the Childfree’ (2017) 87(4)
Sociological Inquiry
586, 588. Pallotta notes that the (US) media favours
stories about extravagant owners ‘wasting’ money on pets, but
‘individuals
experiencing poverty or homelessness often put their
companion animals’ needs ahead of their own’: Pallotta (n 9) 7.
‘People do not plan
memorial services, or invest in serious medical treatment for their books or
lawnmowers’: Kathy Hessler,
‘Mediating Animal Law Matters’
Journal of Animal Law & Ethics
, 28. See Pallotta (n 9)
(n 60) 376;
(n 55) [48] (Hoegg JA);
Strickland v Medlen
(2013) 397 SW 3d 184
’); Yeates and Savulescu (n 95) 351.
(n 41) [49];
Gardiner‑Simpson v Cross
[2008] NSSM 78
Gardiner-Simpson
Houseman v Dare
’) (on the importance of making specific
performance available in disputes about pet ownership);
[20]–[21]; Animal Medicines Australia (n 96) 50;
Rabideau v City of
(2001) 627 NW 2d 795
(n 62) 452 (Cooper J cites a Gallup Poll indicating most pet
owners would not trade their pet for $1 million).
Few of the sources
consulted for this article failed to make this point, but See
60) 378. Andell J noted: ‘[C]ourts should not hesitate to acknowledge that
a great number of people ... treat their pets
as family members. Indeed, for
many people, pets are the only family members they have.’ As for the
negative side of pets being
considered family, Pallotta notes that a family
member can be a target of family violence (and that pets frequently are). Also,
to Pallotta, ‘[C]ompanion animals are part of the abuser’s
web of dominance and control’: Pallotta (n 9) 8.
George Orwell,
(Project Gutenberg Australia,
1945) Ch 10
<https://gutenberg.net.au/ebooks01/0100011.txt>.
White (n 74) 854;
Pallotta (n 9) 3 n 10, 10 34, 15.
798 (Bablitch J); Foxx (n 57) 465, 467; Pallotta (n 9) 12–3;
(Va Ct App, No 1644-10-4, 22 February 2011)
Nick Pendergrast,
‘Your Dog Isn’t a “Fur Baby”, It’s Your
(online, 17 February 2018)
<https://www.abc.net.au/news/2018-02-18/pet-ownership-your-dog-is-property-not-a-fur-baby/9414096>.
White (n 69) 854; Foxx (n
57) 455; Pallotta (n 9) 3.
Animal Medicines
Australia (n 96) 25.
‘[P]arents are
typically not allowed to drop their children off at a shelter facility’:
Pallotta (n 9) 18. See also DeMeo
(n 74) 42. See generally Pallotta (n 9)
White (n 74) 877.
Catharine A Mackinnon,
‘Of Mice and Men: A Feminist Fragment on Animal Rights’ in
Rights: Current Debates and New Directions
(Oxford University Press, 2004)
Pallotta (n 9) 3.
Dafna Shir-Vertesh,
‘“Flexible Personhood:” Loving Animals as Family Members in
Israel’ (2012) 114(3)
American Anthropologist
420, 420; Pallotta (n
Pallotta (n 9) 17.
Yeates and Savulescu (n
95) 347. We should note another conception of the ‘pets as family’
idea: that of a marketing
strategy with about as much real emotion behind it as
the commercialised love (or guilt) on display in a Valentine’s card.
Pallotta (n 9) 18–19.
See above at
II. ‘Custody’ of Children in
60CC(3)(i).
CCH Intelliconnect (n 15)
[ 16-210]; Arcaro (n 60) 24;
In re Marriage of Berger
(2013) 834 NW
Finn v Anderson
(2019) 64 Misc 3d
273, 279 (‘
’) (not a separation case, but one in which
the emotional attachment of children to a cat helped determine where the best
of all concerned lay). See also
(Mich Ct App, No
304624, 23 October 2012).
The authors are adapting
the language of
(n 15) s 68LA(2)(a).
Australia has child
support legislation which means an actual maintenance order under the
is only required in certain circumstances. See
Div 7. ‘Is there such a thing as doggie support?’: Babcock (n 9).
See also Eason (n 62) 93.
Yeates and Savulescu (n
On pet custody specifically, See
(n 106) 28.
Nuzzaci v Nuzzaci
(Del Fam Ct, No CN94-10771, 19 April 1995) (‘
Dubin v Pelletier
(RI Super Ct, CA No WC 10-0825, 21 November 2012)
(n 62) 459;
Arcaro (n 60) 25; Eason (n 62) 95;
(n 125) 276; Foxx (n 57) 468;
(n 106) 28;
(n 60) 633. Cf
(n 125) 277
(Larson J): 'This Court is not persuaded that a court could not evaluate the
“best interests” of a pet.’
Judge Larson located the relevant
difference in the notion that ‘the “best interests” of the
child standard is
based on the implicit understanding that the ultimate goal of
the Courts is to ensure that the child is nurtured into independent
adulthood’, and ‘[i]t is the future adult that must be the
Court’s primary consideration’: a consideration
that does not apply
with pets.’.‘
125) 279 — a case in which the plaintiffs took in and cared for a cat they
thought was a stray, but was actually owned by
the defendant — the judge
did suggest that the cat might have ‘voted with its feet’ when it
escaped from the plaintiffs’
Kemp v Osmond
[2017] NSSM 25
Ramseur v Askins
(2014) 997 NYS 2d 101
affirming the trial court’s approach. See also Foxx (n 57) 466.
also indicated that the husband’s habit of treating the dog
‘like a dog’ was preferable to the wife’s habit
of treating it
‘like a child’:
(n 60) 462, 464. Cf
(2015) 454 SW 3d 912
degree of ‘mothering’ (my term) of the parties’
‘baby’ (the wife’s term), a dog,
seems to have been taken as a
Mitchell v Snider
(Civil Ct NY City, No CV-017738-14/NY, 18 March 2016)
Placey v Placey
(2020) 51 3d 374, 379 (‘
Ibid (Thomas J).
Foxx (n 57) 466.
Ct, No 309513/17, 7 June 2019).
Jessica Berg, ‘Of
Elephants and Embryos: A Proposed Framework for Legal Personhood’
Hastings Law Journal
White (n 69) 875.
Pendergrast (n 111)
(noting support for dolphin personhood in Indian law).
Feger v Warwick Animal
(2008) 59 AD 3d 68, 72 (‘
In a different context
(damages for loss of pet companionship), Willett J of the Texas Supreme Court
(n 105) that ‘people form genuine bonds with a
menagerie of animals, so which “beloved family pets” ... would merit
such preferred treatment? Domesticated dogs and cats only[?] Furry, but not
finned or feathered? What about goldfish? Pythons? Cockatiels?’See
(n 106) 798–9, 802.
James Rachels,
‘Drawing Lines’ in
Animal Rights: Current Debates and New
(Oxford University Press, 2004) 162, 164. Cf Mackinnon (n 116)
271. On different options for defining the scope of animals subject
‘pet custody’, See Foxx (n 57) 472–3. The issues Foxx notes
are not about personhood. For example, she notes
that ‘[a] court or
attorney may encounter ethical concerns if they allow a couple to spend a large
amount of money litigating
custody of an animal with a very short life
expectancy’: At 473.
Wise focuses on the
degree to which a creature exhibits ‘practical autonomy’. Practical
autonomy is not necessarily possessed
only by human-like creatures or close
relatives. However, we are surer that close relatives (like chimpanzees and
bonobos) have it
than more distant ones: Steven M Wise, ‘Animal Rights,
One Step at a Time’ in
Animal Rights: Current Debates and New
(Oxford University Press, 2004) 19, 39–40. See also Daniel
Davison-Vecchione and Kate Pambos, ‘Steven M Wise and the
Common Law Case
for Animal Rights: Full Steam Ahead’
(2017) 30(2)
Canadian Journal of
Law and Jurisprudence
See Davison-Vecchione and
Pambos (n 146) 288, 295; DeMeo (n 74) 42–4; Epstein (n 68) 157; Rachels (n
145) 164. Cf Francione
(n 72) 129–31.
Kymlicka (n 81) 133.
‘Oddly, the
sentimental attachment to animals is not well-correlated with genetic closeness,
as is implicit in my noting that
we can like some animals more than we like
people. We are more closely related genetically to chimpanzees than to cats or
falcons or leopards, but most of us like chimpanzees less than these
other animals, which we find more glamorous or more beautiful.’:
Posner, ‘Animal Rights’
[2000] YaleLawJl 12
The Yale Law Journal
‘Many people who
love and admire dogs as family members do so because of the traits that dogs
often embody. These represent
some of the best of human traits, including
loyalty, trust, courage, playfulness, and love. ... At the same time, dogs
lack the worst human traits, including avarice, apathy, pettiness, and
(n 60) 377 (Andell J).
[48] (Hoegg JA). Hoegg JA noted: ‘[d]ogs are possessive of traits normally
associated with people, like ... the ability
to communicate
and follow orders
’ (emphasis added).
Yeates and Savulescu (n
They can even learn their
name, be trained to walk with a leash, and be toilet trained: RSCPA Australia,
‘Can Pigs Be Kept
RSPCA Knowledgebase
(1 May 2019)
<https://kb.rspca.org.au/knowledge-base/can-pigs-be-kept-as-pets/>. See
also Singer (n 72) 119. ‘Pigs are
curious and intelligent creatures and
can make wonderful companion animals.’: Department of Primary Industries
and Regional
Development (WA), ‘Small Scale Pig Ownership’ (1 May
<https://www.agric.wa.gov.au/pigs/small-scale-pig-ownership?nopaging=1>.
On a Western Australian
government website about pigs promising that pigs can make wonderful companion
animals’, one is also
assured they can offer extra income from the
‘lucrative markets for pork’: Department of Primary Industries and
Development (WA) (n 153).
That is, of course, less surprising
when one reads the closing thanks from Australian Pork Ltd for assistance in
producing the material.
Indeed, children are so
self-evidently people that one of the proffered justifications for
to recognise personhood in something — its inability to take up
responsibilities in exchange for the rights it receives —
is simply not
applied to them. It is
they are the exception. There is no need
to make it an explicit stance. See
People ex rel Nonhuman Rights Project, Inc
, 124 AD 3d 148, 152 n 3 (Peters PJ) (Sup Ct App Div, 2014):
To be sure, some humans are less able to bear legal duties or
responsibilities than others. These differences do not alter our analysis,
is undeniable that, collectively, human beings possess the unique ability to
bear legal responsibility. Accordingly, nothing
in this decision should be read
as limiting the rights of human beings in the context of habeas corpus
proceedings or otherwise.
Sunstein (n 72) 1.
Francione (n 72) 132;
Pendergrast (n 111); Singer (n 72) 2; Peter Singer, ‘Ethics beyond Species
and beyond Instincts: A Response
to Richard Posner’ in
Animal Rights:
Current Debates and New Directions
(Oxford University Press, 2004) 79.
Singer (n 72) 2.
‘It matters not
whether the particular form of slavery is “humane” or not; we
condemn all human slavery’:
Francione (n 72) 124.
Kymlicka (n 81) 131.
‘A liberation
movement demands an expansion of our moral horizons. Practices that were
previously regarded as natural and inevitable
come to be seen as the result of
an unjustifiable prejudice’: Singer (n 72) xii. For any sort of animal
personhood to be plausible,
it would also be necessary to disabuse the public of
certain misconceptions regarding the implications: such as the notion that,
personhood rights, ‘a primate would be able to run for president of the
United States’:DeMeo (n 74) 44. Note that
technically, they can, given
that humans are primates.)
Davison-Vecchione and
Pambos (n 146) 306.
White (n 74) 853;
Pallotta (n 9) 1.
White (n 69) 875 n
‘humancentric’ vs animal rights approaches in general, see Posner (n
Note the comment in Ineke R van Herwijnen et al,
‘The Existence of Parenting Styles in the Owner-Dog Relationship’,
I Anna S Olsson (2018) 13(2)
e0193471, 3 that ‘[d]ogs
seem to exploit our tendencies towards empathy, nurturing and anthropomorphism,
and tap into mechanisms
that underlie parent-child relationships.’
Henderson v
[2016] SKQB 282
Gardiner-Simpson
(n 106) [8];
Kemp v Osmond
(n 132) [7].
See Eason (n 62) 95;
Harvey (n 72) 5.
Handy (n 8);
See, for example,
Jarvis v Weston
[2007] FamCA 1339
, where a child’s attachment to
his dog and fears for its safety led the Court to make orders designed to keep
the dog and the
boy together.
Corso v Crawford Dog
and Cat Hospital, Inc
(1979) 415 NYS 2d 182.
This was a bizarre case in
which an animal hospital substituted the body of a cat for that of a poodle in a
funerary casket to hide
the fact it had wrongly disposed of the latter.
Unfortunately, the owner opened the casket at the funeral.
See Babcock (n 9). See
also Herwijnen et al (n 166); Laurent-Simpson (n
104); Pallotta (n 9) 2.
Gail Gross, ‘The
Benefits of Children Growing Up With Pets’,
(7 June 2015)
<https://www.huffpost.com/entry/the-benefits-of-children-growing-up-with-pets_b_7013398>.
Montemuro J in
Desanctis v Pritchard
(2002) 803 2d 230, 232: stating that this
the correct analogy.
See also Arcaro (n 60) 24.
Handy (n 8).
Arcaro (n 60) 23–4;
(n 59). See also
Van Arsdale v Van Arsdale
(Conn Super
Ct, No FA114021194, 15 March 2013).
This is based largely on
the need for courts to provide the parties with finality in judgments and their
unwillingness to ‘get
into the flora or fauna visitation business’:
(n 130); Babcock (n 9); Arcaro (n 60) 22, 25. See also
(1995) 655 2d 109; DeMeo (n 74) 44; Eason (n 62) 86, 94–5,
100–1; Foxx (n 57) 467–8;
(n 62) 460–1;
(n 60) 633;
State v Sheperd,
(2017) 170 3d 616, 623. See also Andell J in
(n 60) 377 (‘simple property concepts cannot reflect the
complex reality of the relationships between humans and their pets.
consider them to belong to a unique category of “property” that
neither statutory law nor caselaw has yet recognized’).
DeMeo (n 74) 44.
Arcaro (n 60) 23–4;
Eason (n 62) 92–4;
(n 62) 456–7. See, e.g.,
(n 136) 379.
(n 60) 633;
(n 106) 28;
(n 62) 457–9.
458–9. Cf Adjudicator Slone in the Nova Scotia Small Claims Court case of
Kemp v Osmond
(n 132) [3] in which it was noted ‘[i]n a more
perfect world there would be special laws recognizing pets as living, feeling
creatures with rights to be looked after by those who best meet their needs or
interests, and there would be specialized accessible
courts to determine the
“best interest of the dog,” as there are for children in the Family
455–6 (Cooper J).
Eason (n 62)
(n 62) 460;
Foxx (n 57) 468–9. ‘[T]he court considers who is in the best
position to meet the dog’s daily physical
and emotional needs based on a
healthy, active lifestyle, time constraints, type of home and yard, emotional
bond, safety concerns,
financial ability, opportunities to socialize with other
dogs, access to dog-friendly parks and outdoor activities and access to
veterinary care and pet stores.’: Per Edwards J in
Raymond v Lachmann
264 AD 2d 340 (Sup
Ct App Div, 1999).
Arcaro (n 60) 24;
(n 125) 277–8;
Hennet v Allan
(2014) 43 Misc 3d 542,
133). Per Cooper J’s estimation in
(n 62) 449, 453‘pet
custody’ cases in New York were still a rarity at the time of that
judgment (2013). Further, Cooper
J described a ‘slow but steady move in
New York case law away from looking at dogs and other household pets in what may
seen as an overly reductionist and utilitarian manner’. Cf
(n 130) concerning Rhode Island.
See e.g., Eason (n 62).
See also Handy (n 8).
Favre (n 10) 234,
Fruh and Wirchnianski (n
Kymlicka (n 81) 144 n
Ibid 124–5.
Ibid 134–5.
See Ibid 138, 150.
Working animals, by contrast, establish membership rights ‘through
relations of collegiality, as co-workers
in a shared workplace[.]’
Ibid 135,153–4.
Ibid 125–6, 153.He
concedes ‘[i]t is far too early to make confident assertions about the
efficacy of this strategy,
in part because it is largely untested.’
Harvey (n 72) 14.
Mackinnon (n 116) 271.
See also Francione, who rules out moral theories which violate ‘the
principle of equal consideration
— the rule that we ought to treat like
cases alike unless there is a good reason not to do so’: Francione (n 72)
But see Favre (n 10) 236. Favre states ‘[i]t is a burden of the
animal rights movement that so many of its leaders will support
only the purest
philosophical position, regardless of political feasibility.’
Favre (n 10) 239.
Per Lynch J in
Ibid 547. See also
(n 143) 72 in which Leventhal J noted that
‘[r]ecognizing companion animals as a special category of property is
with the laws of the State and the underlying policy inherent in
these laws to protect the welfare of animals.’
Pets were also
referred to as a ‘special category of property’ in
60) 463 (Crawford J). In North America, there are lawyers who specialise in the
‘niche area’ of pet custody: Tony
Bogdanoski, ‘The Marriage of
Family Law and Animal Rights: How Should Australian Family Law Approach the Rise
Custody” Disputes?’
[2006] AltLawJl 51
(2006) 31(4)
Alternative Law
, 216 (‘The Marriage of Family Law and Animal
‘To the extent that
the law is out of sync with our private understanding of companion animals, this
is in part due to dissonance
in that private understanding itself’:
Pallotta (n 9) 35.
Kymlicka (n 81) 124.
Ibid 136–7. See
also Pallotta (n 9) 5–6. ‘The changes in the way society regards
dogs and other household pets
all but insure that cases involving the type of
dispute seen here will only increase in frequency.’:
461 (Cooper J).
Pallotta (n 9) 2;
Kymlicka (n 81) 141–2.
See Handy (n 8). See also
Arcaro (n 60) 25–6;
Bennett v Bennett
130); Eason (n 62) 94, 100–1; Foxx (n 57) 458, 467, 469–70;
(n 62) 458–9.
‘[F]or much of
Western history, the family has been seen as the property of the male head of
household: women, children, slaves
and animals were all considered in law as
property of the
paterfamilias
. The family was seen as a zone governed by
natural hierarchy and biological imperatives, in which the father’s
exercise of
private power was restrained only by his sense of love and moral
duty, not by legal rights.’: Kymlicka (n 81) 143 n 55.
(n 41) [11]; Foxx (n 57) 471; Pallotta (n 9) 22;
Schyler P Simmons, ‘What Is the Next Step for Companion Pets in the Legal
System? The Answer May Lie with the Historical Development of the Legal Rights
for Minors’ (2013) 1(1)
Texas A&M Law Review
253; Yeates and
Savulescu (n 95) 351.
459–60 (Cooper J). See also Foxx (n 54) 471.
(Cooper J). See also Arcaro (n 60) 26;
(n 55) [59] (Hoegg JA).
Foxx uses the example of Leona Helmsley’s multi-million dollar
testamentary gift for her dog ‘Trouble’
to help assert there are
‘individuals [who] would not find the aspect of fighting over a dog
comical’: Foxx (n 57) 456–7.
See also Yeates and Savulescu (n 95)
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (1.06 MB)
PDF format (550 KB)
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter