URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/journals/WALawTRw/2024/4.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 15:58:20
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
McCutcheon, Jani; Andersen, Camilla --- "Using Simulated Workplace Learning and Roleplaying in Teaching Business Law in Practice" [2024] WALawTRw 4; (2024) 2 The Western Australian Law Teachers' Review 23
USING SIMULATED WORKPLACE
LEARNING AND ROLEPLAYING IN TEACHING BUSINESS LAW IN PRACTICE
JANI McCUTCHEON AND CAMILLA ANDERSEN *
I INTRODUCTION
Role-playing, group work and work-integrated
learning (‘WIL’) have become major features of tertiary education.
Each learning
approach has a number of claimed benefits. This article explores
the confluence of these learning tools in a unit which incorporates
each, but with a twist. We examine these phenomena in the context of a recently
re-designed law unit, Business Law in
Practice (‘BLIP’), in an
undergraduate business law program at a Western Australian university. BLIP is
the capstone
unit of the University of Western Australia’s undergraduate
Business Law Major, which is available in the Bachelor of Commerce.
The unit was
updated in 2020 to allow for more interactive teaching, and to enable scaffolded
learning in groups role-playing the
establishment and operation of a business
start-up. As such, the unit combines
, the largely simulated
role-playing,
-focused aspects of WIL.
However, it stretches boundaries even further by stepping into a relatively new
area of educational practice,
which we will refer to as ‘simulated
workplace learning’ (‘SWL’). This article does not revisit the
rich literature on group work, role-playing, and WIL, but focuses
instead on the SWL aspects of BLIP.
This article first outlines the design, educational objectives and background
to BLIP (Part II). It then outlines the major features
of group work,
role-playing and WIL, before focusing on the unique contours of SWL, comparing
those models to the bespoke compilation
of BLIP. (Part III). We then reflect on
the benefits of applying these tools in the specific context of BLIP (Part IV).
We conclude
with our perspective on opportunities for improvements and lessons
learned (Part V).
II THE DESIGN AND BACKGROUND TO BLIP
BLIP attracts around 160–170 students annually, and is currently
offered once per year. As a core capstone unit, BLIP builds
on the knowledge
embedded in the previous Business Law Major units, and draws them together to
develop collaborative, cognitive,
technical, research and communication skills
relevant to business law.
BLIP was designed with the deliberate rationale of being interactive,
practical, skills based, fun, informative and interesting. In
considered that Business Law Major students had consistently learned their units
through traditional methods of mostly passive
knowledge absorption, application
of that knowledge in exams and assignments, before moving on to the next unit.
We saw that students
consequently lacked knowledge and experience about how the
law applies to business
in practice
. To cure this, we designed BLIP. We
posited that exposing students to the experience of devising, working in and
running a business
start-up in an environment mimicking the real world would be
an excellent scaffold for students to apply the knowledge and skills
learned throughout the Business Law Major. Due to the large number of students
and the practical vagaries of diverse businesses,
placing students as interns in
real-world business environments was not practicable, and so their businesses
needed to be simulated,
and we would require students to role-play working in
those businesses.
BLIP uses a blended learning design, combining online lectures and
independent reading with a weekly two-hour mandatory face-to-face
workshop. In
the first week of semester, students are placed in a group of around 10 students
based on student last name, and work
together in that group throughout the
12-week semester in the workshops and other scheduled meetings to design and
role-play running
the simulated business entity conceived and designed by the
The students are given five portfolio challenges from various areas of
business law and practice, which typically include: teamwork
and leadership
theory and skills; managing intellectual property; contract management and
design; legal risk management; conflict
and dispute resolution; and business
engagement skills and strategies. For each portfolio challenge, two to three
group leaders are
allocated, and two to three record keepers, with all students
taking their turn to act as group leader and record-keeper once per
Otherwise, the roles played by the students are determined by the groups
themselves, and must adapt to the particular business
the groups design, and the
individual portfolio challenge.
Detailed instructions are provided for each portfolio challenge, which
generally run for two weeks. Students must also conduct independent
specific to both their unique entity and each challenge. This is designed to
facilitate the development of leadership, collaboration,
communication,
organisational and accountability skills, and a better understanding of law in
At the end of each portfolio, the groups prepare a written report, with a
shared mark, outlining how and why they navigated and resolved
the challenge as
they did for each of their businesses. To test their knowledge of the reading
materials and lectures, students take
5 quizzes aligned to each challenge.
Students also prepare two personal reflections on their learning and teamwork
experiences during
semester. These assessment items are individually marked.
There is no exam. To promote accountability and a positive teamwork experience
for each portfolio challenge, students must anonymously peer review their
colleagues’ performance, and prepare a report of
the work they personally
undertook in navigating the challenge. The group record-keepers must keep
detailed records of meetings and
workshops, and of task allocation and
completion.
There is constant pressure in the unit to be working, drafting reflections
and reports, researching, preparing for and attending workshops
and meetings,
and completing the quizzes by the deadlines. It is in this simulated
high-pressure working environment, designed and
run by the students, that the
legal challenges are addressed through the semester.
III ROLE-PLAY, GROUP WORK, WORK-INTEGRATED LEARNING AND
SIMULATION-BASED LEARNING IN LEGAL EDUCATION: OFF THE BEATEN TRACK
As mentioned in the introduction, BLIP is a melange of teaching and learning
tools which combine the simulation features of role-playing,
the collaborative
nature of group work, and the workplace environment of WIL. In searching for a
pedagogical ‘home’ for
this unique combination, we encountered the
relatively nascent topic of SWL. It is useful to first briefly revisit some of
characteristics of role-playing, group work, and WIL to identify
whether and, if so, how BLIP aligns with those concepts, before
turning to SWL
and locating BLIP in that innovative educational territory.
Role-playing
Role-playing is difficult to define
conclusively,
and it is not this
article’s purpose to do so. We employ the nomenclature of
‘role-playing’ in BLIP, while acknowledging
its many guises and
changing shape over the decades, and BLIP’s perhaps weak relationship to
conventional role-playing models.
Traditionally, the focus of role-playing in
law has been the development of soft skills in the delivery or practice of the
its related fields,
particularly in relation to mooting, dispute resolution and client negotiation
and interviewing — however, role-playing extends
across all aspects of
education. As Soo et al note: ‘[r]ole-playing in education has been
gaining popularity with recognition
of its benefits and it has been applied in
training a variety of professions. Apart from being used to teach courses on
skills it is also used in a much wider and general context in
education’.
It is claimed to
be a valuable learning tool:
In relation to the learning of soft skills, role-playing has several other
advantages. It puts students into real-life problem settings
and helps create
more initiatives for active learning; when done in groups, it encourages team
building and brainstorming among students,
both observing and participating in
the role-playing sessions; and it provides students with the necessary
confidence for dealing
with similar situations in their real-life work. More
important, role-playing itself can also be fun for educators and students.
Role-playing in legal education traditionally tends to go through the stages
of briefing students, the actual role-play, and then
debriefing.
Usually, teachers
sketch out some broad parameters, such as a fact scenario, allocated roles, and
provide written instructions.
Teachers usually attend, and even direct, the role-playing sessions. The
role-playing tends to be a discrete episode in the teaching
programme, perhaps
for one or several sessions. The role-playing in BLIP differs in some
significant respects. Teachers exert less
pressure on the parameters in BLIP
role-playing than in conventional settings. We allocate leaders and
record-keepers, but leave
it to students to determine how those roles are
performed. We do not scrupulously script or structure scenarios, with the
of the dispute resolution portfolio, which is co-written by two
students and approved by teachers. Otherwise, we provide detailed
instructions
setting brief parameters for each portfolio challenge, but students must then
interpret those instructions, determine
what work needs to be done, and allocate
roles to achieve that. Further, we do not physically attend the entire
role-playing sessions.
Rather, student groups work in break-out rooms, with
teachers circulating through those rooms for each workshop, asking and answering
questions and providing feedback. Finally, the role-playing in BLIP is not in
isolated episodes. Rather, it is an integral feature
of the unit, embedded in
the unit’s very DNA, and runs for the entire 12 weeks of the semester.
There is very rich literature on group work in tertiary
which we will not
revisit. We mention group work only to acknowledge that BLIP is essentially
designed around it. As mentioned, students
work together
their simulated business start-ups, with shared marks for major aspects of the
unit’s assessment, and students peer review
their colleagues’
performances, including their teamwork and leadership. Group work, in its
broadest sense, is usually also
an essential component in the other two features
of BLIP’s design — role-playing and WIL, simply because students
not to work alone in either of those contexts. Each of those contexts also
have the same learning objectives as group work in developing
collaboration,
communication, self-reflection and teamwork skills.
Work-integrated Learning
WIL ‘is an umbrella term referring to a range of practical experiences
designed to give students valuable exposure to work-related
activities relevant
to their course of study’.
generally requires universities to partner with real-world employers to place
students in internships and
WIL is said to be
necessary to assist university graduates in being career-ready, and to prepare
students ‘to be flexible,
adaptive and able to apply their technical
skills to real-world
situations’.
core of many professional training schemes, increasingly featured in university
programs, and remains a cornerstone in
establishing work readiness. This is
reflected in the literature, including the re-naming of the previously titled
of Co-Operative Education’ to the ’Journal of Work
Integrated Learning’ in
We recognise the value of
important aspects of WIL, and the beneficial student attributes it can help
develop. We acknowledge the
perhaps compelling argument that
workplace learning, through placements, projects and internships, is superior to
any simulated cousin. The
pressures of a
placement might
induce better incentives and learning outcomes than those achieved through a
simulated alternative.
However, BLIP does not implement a conventional WIL design. While the primary
reason is the practical challenge of arranging 160 placements,
the simulated
nature of BLIP’s SWL also helps avoid the numerous challenges of WIL,
including identifying suitable projects
and tasks for students to complete,
ensuring students have some decision-making capacity which they could learn
consequences from,
host capacity to
relationships between host organisations and
universities,
assessing student performance.
It is not always practical, feasible, or even ethical, to place and fairly
assess students in real environments. Even outside the
serious challenges
imposed by a pandemic, good WIL programs require meticulous planning and
cooperation across diverse organisations.
It is also sometimes highly doubtful
whether students’ placements actually result in real challenges and
learning, or in the
modern-day equivalent of coffee-making and photocopying.
Moreover, even without these problems, internships as exploitative unpaid
raise difficult ethical issues.
Further, ‘real’ WIL would also compromise the collaborative aspect
of BLIP that we value. While, as mentioned, working
as part of a group
(usually) integral to a placement in a real-world workplace, students rarely
work alongside, and in collaboration with, other
students in WIL placements.
Instead, we rely on students’ responsibilities to other team members to
simulate a pressure to
do well, alongside the need to attract good marks in the
assessment items.
In view of the challenges of WIL mentioned above, simulation of a workplace
environment becomes an attractive alternative. In particular,
controlled environment of SWL can be easier to moderate than the real-world
vagaries of students’ diverse experiences
across potentially very
different work environments, which in itself raises potential equity issues. It
also ensures that any risks
resulting from student activities remain theoretical
rather than the potentially real risks that could be experienced by businesses
as a result of hosting students. But what is SWL, and how does BLIP comport with
that model?
Simulated Workplace Learning
As with role playing, and even WIL, there is no recognised definition of
‘simulated workplace learning’. A version of
the term seems to have
originated in Margaret Jollands’ 2016 article on chemical engineering
Jollands observes that
while work experience is generally considered the best way to develop
employability, there are often too few
work placements to meet graduate
To combat this
challenge, Jollands developed what she labelled ‘non-placement authentic
work integrated learning’. Her
module used a real chemical engineering
project from a local STEM company, with rich complex resources. Students were
co-supervised
by Jollands and an engineer from the project company, who met with
students every fortnight for consultation. The students also participated
variety of bespoke workshops targeted at developing critical employment skills.
Jollands noted the dearth of research showing
whether learning outcomes are
equivalent to real work
experience.
research suggests that an authentic simulated WIL project is as effective as
work experience in increasing students’
confidence in their work
readiness. We contend, at minimum, that it is certainly better than traditional
learning alone, and refer
again to some of the potential ethical and equity
problems connected to WIL mentioned above.
Various nomenclature for SWL is used, and it takes different forms, both
analogue and digital, in different settings. For example,
simulations’ are particularly familiar in vocational education settings,
where mechanics students might work
in a ‘garage’, future cooks will
prepare meals in a replica kitchen for real guests, and horticulture students
bouquets in a room set up to look like a
Alternatively, the
workplace simulations may be digital, including using games to teach students,
such as flight simulators for training
As with many educators,
we are beholden to the COVID-19 pandemic for accelerating our development of the
online and flipped classroom
in this unit. As recent literature has shown, the
pandemic also furthered the adoption and greater acceptance of SWL in response
to interns being unable to enter physical working environments during
This prompted
institutions to search for a range of innovative solutions and redesign their
conventional placement-based activities
or programs to enable students to meet
graduate profile criteria through alternative means, such as virtual or
simulated working
experiences.
A 2017 United States Department of Education report explored the value of
SWL, and compared various simulated work-based learning
models, as captured in
Table 1 below.
Models of Simulated Work Based Learning
Simulated Workplaces
School-based Enterprises
Create safe opportunities to teach specific skills or tasks associated with
a given job
Replicate a range of workplace environments designed to develop
employability skills and increase student engagement
Offer students a holistic experience of running an actual business to
foster entrepreneurial skills and deepen student engagement
Intended skills
- Critical thinking/ decision-making
- Preparation/exposure to specific work scenarios
- Confidence
-Technical skills
- Employability (on time, drug free, interviewing, safety, professionalism,
- Responsibility
- Leadership
- Career awareness
- Entrepreneurism
- Critical thinking
- Problem solving
- Communication
- Collaboration
Typical program elements
- Use of common and emergency scenarios
- Some clinical credits for simulation time (health care)
- Debrief/reflection processes that allow for learning from mistakes
- Classes organised as student-led companies
- Time clocks, uniforms, drug testing
- Facilities resemble industry settings
- Teacher serves as facilitator
- Student-run businesses provide products or services for sale to other
- Businesses plan development
- Teacher serves as facilitator
Required resources
- Simulation tools
- Operations and maintenance costs
- Additional training for instructors or coordinators
- Professional development
- Employer partnership and input/guidance
- Equipment for student businesses
- Start-up capital
- Additional training for instructors or coordinators
This table is replicated from the United States Department of
Education 2017 Report.
In adopting the taxonomy of this report, we could argue that BLIP fits most
comfortably in the ‘School-based Enterprises’
model, while
acknowledging that it shares features with the other two categories.
In their evaluation of the growth of SWL during COVID-19, Wood et al linked a
number of observations and studies based on their review
of literature analysing
diverse models of work-based learning beyond conventional work
placements.
They conducted a
meta-analysis of these models to provide a compiled synthesis of existing
practice from within the field.
The synthesis revealed that remote and simulated WIL traversed a wide array of
disciplines, and that there was greater acceptance
of remote WIL placements,
including the potential to work more closely with international virtual
internship agencies, although it
stressed the importance of the authentic
inclusion of industry so that it is WIL, rather than a classroom activity. It
the potential of using both physical and virtual built workspaces and
developing interdisciplinary collaborative simulated experiences.
Finally, the
report also identified that conventional and remote WIL sometimes overlapped
through combinations of conventional, remote,
and/or simulated WIL, resulting in
hybrid or blended WIL spaces.
Iipinge et al recently explored Namibian students’ perceptions of WIL
readiness skills developed from an offline and online
two-day business
simulation course, before and during the COVID-19
These simulation
sessions reflect aspects of the BLIP experience, in that students working in a
team are presented with realistic
business scenarios. The team must analyse the
given information and develop a strategic approach to solve the scenario within
a specified
time frame, allocating roles to each other such as leadership.
Pre-COVID-19, these sessions were held physically on campus. During
they were conducted online. The findings indicate that both versions of the
business simulation sessions were able to inculcate
WIL readiness skills in the
students, and that students perceived the business simulation course to be an
appropriate learning tool
in developing the skills needed for WIL.
Interestingly, the researchers concluded that key skills, including
communication, professionalism,
leadership, teamwork, analytical problem
solving, critical thinking, assertiveness, time management, willingness to
learn, attention
to detail, diversity and accountability were more significantly
developed in the offline business simulation than in the online version.
therefore recommend investigating further pedagogical and content-related
strategies that can enhance online business simulations
in order to improve
actual workplace learning.
Chand et al have stressed a pressing need for engineering students to be work
ready when they graduate,
problem-solving and real-world skills that complement the necessary technical
skills to function once in the workplace. Similar
to Jollands’ example,
Chand et al examined SWL in a project-based engineering course. The lecturer
functioned as a ‘client’,
setting an engineering task. The students
worked in teams to deliver engineered solutions to the ‘client’
brief. Chand
et al posit that problems solved during the simulated learning
process should be based on practical, real-world scenarios, and detail
assessment activities that provide a simulated work-integrated learning
experience which ensures work readiness.
Many SWL models explored in the literature focus on the authenticity of the
workplace environment (whether real or virtual), which
is seen to be key to
students learning effectively.
Also, like Jollands’ model for example, the veracity of the learning
project being harvested from a real-world business is
important. A notable
feature of these SWL models is the
authenticity
of the workplace
environment or workplace-generated project as a key requirement. BLIP makes no
attempt to replicate real physical
workplaces, or even real projects. Our
students are not learning hard, technical skills, such as suturing a wound or
baking a cake.
Instead, we want them to understand how the law applies to
businesses in practice. We think this can be done effectively and efficiently
setting realistic challenges to students which force them to do research, learn
something about the law, and about how businesses
interact with real-world
pressures. We therefore value the focus on realism that these SWL models
incorporate. To that end, we endeavour
to set realistic challenges, and our
group assessment emphasises the realism of how students navigate the portfolio
challenges we
Even if BLIP departs from some key aspects of contemporary SWL models, the
unit nonetheless draws on SWL’s other beneficial
aspects. In particular,
BLIP reflects two aspects which are important to SWL, namely linking theory and
practice and tailoring learning
to learners’
We recognise other
benefits of SWL identified by Fatima Lateef in her early 2010 study of
simulation-based learning in a medical
practice context, where she outlined the
educational utility of simulating real
There are many clear
parallels between her position and ours. Lateef highlights how simulation-based
learning can develop health
professionals’ knowledge, skills, and
attitudes, whilst protecting patients from unnecessary risks. We follow a
similar ethos
in BLIP. We require student teams to concoct a start-up business
without having to worry about real financial or legal risk or actual
competition. Lateef also highlights the benefits of using simulation-based
education as a valuable tool in learning to
mitigate ethical tensions and
resolve practical dilemmas. We have seen both ethical issues and practical
problems come up in the
running of BLIP businesses over the years, and it is a
relief these issues did not occur with real-life consequences. We have also
noted how the group dynamic enhances the experience of simulation-based
training. By applying techniques, tools, and strategies in
designing structured
learning experiences, as well as tailoring assessment items as measurement tools
linked to targeted teamwork
competencies and learning objectives, we have seen a
wider set of skills in professional conduct grow in our students. And, as Lateef
points out, teamwork training conducted in the simulated environment may offer
an additive benefit to the traditional didactic instruction,
performance, and possibly help reduce
IV REFLECTIONS ON THE BLIP SWL MODEL
While BLIP students are not placed in a real-world workplace, nor do they
undertake projects generated by real firms, we consider
that the students in
BLIP mirror working in, and learning from, the real world of a business start-up
in several important respects:
1. People who may not always know each other well may still come together to
create or work in a start-up business;
2. They have considerable autonomy in designing the business structure, and
determining the goods and or services that the business
will provide;
3. They must work together in large groups to manage and achieve success in
the business and record the business’s operations
and decision making;
4. They encounter situations that generate legal, ethical, practical,
commercial and teamwork issues and must undertake research to
understand,
navigate and resolve those issues;
5. They must reflect on the success or otherwise of how those issues were
resolved, and consider opportunities for change;
6. They must navigate and resolve real-world work situations such as: social
loafing, a lack of acknowledgment of work, personality
clashes, deciding how to
allocate work fairly, accountability, and providing and receiving constructive
7. They are forced to work effectively with people they have not chosen as
their colleagues;
8. They undertake different roles over time, reflecting sometimes shifting
hierarchies of power in the workplace, and in the process
develop various
skills, including communication, teamwork, leadership, research and
record-keeping skills;
9. They must learn how to manage time-sensitive deadlines as a group in an
environment of constant pressure to complete tasks;
10. They learn actively by doing, which complements the more passive learning
achieved through engaging with written or audio learning
materials; and
11. They must be agile, adapting to unforeseen and unscripted problems,
challenges and risks.
The BLIP experience also highlights several important life and workplace
values, including the values of:
1. commitment to a group and teambuilding;
2. responsibility and accountability;
3. effective communication and constructive feedback;
4. reflective practice and identifying opportunities for improvement; and
5. supporting others in completing tasks.
Many of these positive and ‘work-ready’ aspects of BLIP are
reflected in students’ anecdotal summations of the unit,
which stress the
opportunity to extend group working skills, develop confidence in speaking up
and voicing opinions, resolve disagreement
and meet taxing deadlines.
Knowledge Retention
Our experience with BLIP suggests that the interactivity and practical
application of the law through SWL enhances student learning
by allowing
students to better retain the knowledge developed during semester. Again, this
is consistently reflected in student feedback,
which highlights the increased
opportunities to incorporate
and apply in real life the learning achieved
through the readings and teaching and the preference for this more
interactive, experiential
and on-going method of learning over end-of-semester
examinations based on concentrated memorised learning which is quickly
Student feedback suggests anecdotally that the ability to
understand the context behind the law, such as the reasons why a company
structure was better than other options, significantly aided
knowledge retention
and understanding.
Group Work Skills
Perhaps one of the most important aspects of real-world WIL is the
opportunity to develop knowledge and skills that will assist graduates
function as effective team members in groups with very different personalities
and skills. While the group work in BLIP is one
of the more challenging aspects
of managing the unit, given the natural potential for conflict among humans, the
strongest themes
emerging from anecdotal student feedback are the benefits of
working in groups, and the relevance of group work to work readiness.
communication, organisational and interpersonal skills acquired through BLIP,
and required for a teamwork-ready student are consistently
addressed by
students, which illuminates how the unit is highly reflective of a real working
environment in terms of relational learning
and exposing opportunities to
improve in conflict resolution, organisational, delegation and team-management
skills, and develop
as a professional and teammate by working for a long period
with the same people.
Real-world Relevance
The relevance of the knowledge and skills learned through the SWL model of
BLIP as it applies to real-world employment is a consistent
theme in anecdotal
student feedback, which illustrates how the practical tasks of doing the work in
teams of diverse people develops
knowledge and skills which students feel they
will use in their everyday lives upon entering the workforce and possibly
running businesses.
Learning by Doing
In our interactions with BLIP students, they have often identified the
utility of the skills learned through the experiential learning
aspect of BLIP,
its emphasis on learning by doing, and the translation of those skills to the
real world. This helps students to
see the relevance of what they learn in
context and not just as an academic assignment.
The agility required to respond to unforeseen and complex challenges in the
real world is also developed in BLIP, and again is reflected
in anecdotal
student feedback which highlights how BLIP, as in the real world, presents
situations which are not black-and-white
and require the need to dynamically
adapt thinking.
V CONCLUSION
WIL, group work and role-playing are important and beneficial features of
contemporary legal education. Following the pandemic’s
restrictions on WIL
placements, and with the increased use of electronic interfacing and learning
tools, SWL has become a more normalised
and accepted alternative to WIL. We look
forward to continuing to utilise and develop BLIP’s unique SWL model.
This symbiotic mesh of learning models through role-playing in groups, and in
a fabricated workplace environment, intensifies and
entrenches the development
of soft skills, deepens students’ understanding of the knowledge they gain
and apply in the unit,
and enhances their work readiness.
Of course, the defining features of BLIP’s learning modes are the
role-playing model it employs, and the
nature of SWL. Each
year, we ask a graduating student to film a short video for their incoming peers
the following year. Most urge
prospective students to invest seriously in BLIP,
and caution that they will get from BLIP what they put in. Nevertheless,
role-playing
requires cooperation and a genuine commitment from students to be
fully effective and, of course, this is something that we cannot
always control.
The very nature of
belies a suggestion that it is inferior
to the real. There is a natural tendency to privilege the real over the
fabricated, notwithstanding
some of the problems associated with real-world WIL
that we identified in this article. To test the competing merits of the real
the simulated, it would be ideal if we could run a controlled experiment,
simultaneously running two versions of BLIP, one using
its existing simulated
model, and another placing students in the real world. However, some of the
challenges posed by BLIP will
not be easily resolved, due to the large number of
students and the concomitant pressures on resources and teaching staff.
we are resolved to maintaining a simulated model of WIL. With their
hunger for real-world immersion unsatisfied, this can result
in some students
not taking the exercise seriously, and in social loafing. There are consequences
to how students run their simulated
businesses, however they are ultimately
consequences felt personally by the students in the marks they receive, and the
provided by their peers. Otherwise, students can shrug off anything
that didn’t quite work. There is no oversight by real-world
managers or mentors. There are no real-world consequences to businesses flowing
from the decisions students make. To combat
the risk of social loafing and poor
engagement in SWL, we have bolstered the peer assessment mechanisms employed in
BLIP to enhance
accountability and encourage self-reflection. To encourage
students to take the role playing seriously and emulate the features of
business workplace, we include in our assessment rubric a realism criterion.
We encourage educators to expand and consolidate the
scarce research on SWL, and share their successes and failures. We are always
looking for opportunities to improve our SWL model. In particular, we see
prospects to enhance the realism of students’ experiences,
maintaining the essential features of the model. In 2025, we will introduce a
new assessment item which requires students to
prepare a real-world
‘Business Law in Practice Report’. This will require them to compare
their simulated business start-up
with a real-world business. We envisage that
this will help students test the realism of their start-up businesses, and learn
aspects from the real-world business that they choose to compare
themselves against. In conducting the research for their report,
encourage students to reach out to real-world businesses and speak directly with
them as they answer the research questions
we set them. Other possible methods
for enhancing opportunities for students to interact with real businesses could
be establishing
business panels, at which students could ask questions, and be
questioned by panel members.
We also see scope in developing some tools to assist students to embrace,
enthusiastically and effectively, the SWL model of BLIP.
We think students may
benefit from further targeted guidance on how to role-play effectively, which we
could introduce as a separate
module for students to complete, or alternatively
run as a discrete workshop.
In the meantime, we will continue to encourage our students to ‘fake it
‘til they make it’.
* Jani McCutcheon is an Associate Professor at the UWA Law School, the
University of Western Australia,
https://orcid.org/0000-000
Camilla Andersen is a Professor at the UWA Law School, the University of Western
https://orcid.org/0000-0002-8231-7057
See, eg, Shawna Shapiro and Lisa Leopold, ‘A Critical Role
for Role-Playing Pedagogy’ (2012) 29(2)
TESL Canada Journal
Gary Soo et al,
‘Role-Playing for Group Learning of Law in Engineering and Construction
(2009) 1(4)
Journal of Legal Affairs and Dispute Resolution
in Engineering and Construction
See, eg, Martin Davies,
‘Groupwork as a Form of Assessment: Common Problems and Recommended
Solutions’ (2009) 58
Higher Education
Universities Australia,
Work-Integrated Learning in Universities: Final Report
(Final Report,
<https://www.ijwil.org/about-the-journal>.
Denise Jackson et al,
‘Employer Understanding of Work-Integrated Learning and The Challenges of
Engaging In Work Placement
Opportunities’ (2017) 39(1)
Continuing Education
See, eg, Sarojni Choy and
Brian Delahaye, ‘Partnerships Between Universities And Workplaces: Some
Challenges For Work-Integrated
Learning’ (2011) 33(2)
Continuing Education
See, eg, Judith McNamara,
‘The Challenge of Assessing Professional Competence in Work Integrated
Learning’ (2013) 38(2)
Assessment & Evaluation in Higher
183; Denise Jackson, ‘Challenges and Strategies For
Assessing Student Workplace Performance During Work-Integrated Learning’
(2018) 43(4)
Assessment and Evaluation in Higher Education
See, eg, Jackson (n 14).
Margaret Jollands, ‘A
Non-Placement Authentic Simulated Work Integrated Learning Project For Final
Year Students’ (Conference
Paper, Proceedings of the Australian Conference
on Science and Mathematics Education, 21 August 2017).
Ibid 170, citing Calvin
Smith et al, ‘The Impact of Work Integrated Learning On Student
Work-Readiness’ (Final Report,
Australian Government Office for Learning
and Teaching, 2014).
See, eg, Helen Jossberger et
al, ‘Learning in Workplace Simulations in Vocational Education: a Student
Perspective’ (2018)
Vocations and Learning
See, eg, Judene Pretti,
Jenny Fleming and Karsten Zegwaard, ‘Refereed Proceedings of the
WACE International Research Symposium on Cooperative and
Work-Integrated Education, 2022, Kanazawa Institute of Technology, Japan’
(Conference Paper, WACE International Research Symposium on Cooperative and
Work-Integrated Education, 2022).
See, eg, Selma Iipinge et
al, ‘Using Simulations to Improve Skills Needed for Work-Integrated
Learning Before and During COVID-19
in Namibia’ (2020) 21(5)
International Journal of Work-Integrated Learning
531; Natarsha Tezcan et
al, ‘Scaffolded, Simulated Work-Integrated Learning in Design
Education : Beyond the Live Project’
(2020) 21(5)
International
Journal of Work-Integrated Learning
521; Yvonne Wood, Karsten Zegwaard and
Wendy Fox-Turnbull, ‘Conventional, Remote, Virtual and Simulated
Work-Integrated Learning
: A Meta-Analysis of Existing Practice’
(2020) 21(4)
International Journal of Work-Integrated Learning
(‘Wood et al’).
United States Department of
Education, ‘Simulated Work-Based Learning: Instructional Approaches and
Noteworthy Practices’
(Report, August 2017) xii.
See Wood et al (n 21) 335.
The study specifically focused on publications in the International Journal of
Work-Integrated Learning,
Work-Integrated Learning in the 21
Century, the International Handbook for Cooperative and Work-Integrated
Education, and the conference proceedings of the New Zealand
Association for
Collaborative Education (NZACE) (1999–2019), Australian Collaborative
Education Network (ACEN) (2010–2018),
and WACE — the international
collaborative education association (2016–2019).
Wood et al (n 21).
See Iipinge et al (n
See Praneel Chand et al,
‘Using Simulated Work-Integrated Learning in Mechatronics Courses’
(Conference Paper, IEEE International
Conference on Engineering, Technology
& Education (TALE), 2021).
See, eg, Jossberger et al (n
Fatima Lateef,
‘Simulation-Based Learning: Just Like the Real Thing’ (2010) 3(4)
Journal of Emergencies, Trauma, and Shock
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (77.8 KB)
PDF format (542 KB)
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter