URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/journals/WALawTRw/2024/2.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 15:58:13
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
McMillan, Jim; Lilley, Rob --- "After Law School: A Critical Evaluation of Practical Legal Training in the Australian Context" [2024] WALawTRw 2; (2024) 2 The Western Australian Law Teachers' Review 1
AFTER LAW SCHOOL: A CRITICAL
EVALUATION OF PRACTICAL LEGAL TRAINING IN THE AUSTRALIAN CONTEXT
JIM McMILLAN AND ROB LILLEY *
I INTRODUCTION
In every jurisdiction in Australia, Practical
Legal Training (‘PLT’) represents the final hurdle for most, if not
aspiring legal
practitioners.
PLT emerged, in its modern form in Australia, in the late 20th Century as a
...overcome the inadequacies of articles training by providing training in
the essential skills and major areas of practice so as
to ensure that a person
entering the legal profession can function at a standard of competency which can
reasonably be expected of
a first-year
practitioner.
Based on the authors’ experience of PLT at different institutions, both
as former students and as current teachers, and considering
recent research, it
is doubtful that the current form of PLT in Australia achieves this
This article examines the current Australian approach to PLT in the broader
context of experience in other jurisdictions, especially
in England and Wales,
and in New Zealand (‘NZ’). It considers whether the current PLT
approach is ‘fit for purpose’
in equipping new law graduates with
the necessary skills to achieve success as entry-level legal practitioners. It
concludes with
some suggestions about changes that could be made to the PLT
course structure, to better meet the needs of students and of the legal
profession more generally. It builds on previous research about alternative PLT
models that could be adopted.
II PRACTICAL LEGAL TRAINING IN AUSTRALIA: THE VIEW FROM THE WEST
Western Australia (‘WA’) was late in adopting PLT as a pathway to
admission for new legal practitioners. Until the end
of 2010, aspiring
practitioners completed an ‘Articles Training Program’ conducted by
the Legal Practice Board of Western
Australia (‘LPBWA’), in
conjunction with a period of supervised work as an articled
In contrast, other states
such as New South Wales (‘NSW’) and South Australia
(‘SA’) commenced PLT courses
in the 1970s which progressively became
the sole pathway to practice.
Numerous PLT courses are now available in Australia, delivered by both
university and non-university providers.
All PLT providers in Australia comply with the core curriculum requirements
set by the Law Admissions Consultative Committee (‘LACC’)
Practical Legal Training Competency Standards for Entry-Level Lawyers
While the LPBWA voluntarily adopted the
LACC Standards
some time ago,
they now have legislative effect through the adoption of the
Legal Profession
Uniform Law
and its subsidiary legislation by WA in 2022. The
are incorporated into Schedule 2 of the
Legal Profession
Uniform Admission Rules 2015
LACC Standards
, PLT students must complete training in 4
skills areas (Lawyers Skills, Problem Solving, Work Management and Business
Skills, and
Trust and Office Accounting) as well in three compulsory practice
areas (Civil Litigation Practice, Commercial and Corporate Practice,
Property Law
Students must also complete two other units from a number of other optional
practice areas (such as Family Law Practice, Criminal
Law Practice and
Administrative Law Practice) and a period of legal workplace experience
(‘LWE’) through a placement,
most often, in a legal
LACC Standards
are quite specific in their requirements, extending
to one or two pages of criteria for most units. An illustrative example is the
mandatory Commercial and Corporate Practice unit, which specifies that an
entry-level lawyer should be able to conduct commercial
transactions such as the
sale and purchase of a small business (and identify any risks associated with
such a transaction), advise
on and set up business structures, advise on
commercial finance arrangements, and ‘assess the type of advice needed to
the revenue implications of standard commercial transactions.’ For
each of those learning outcomes, there are several so called
‘performance
criteria’ that comprise the assessable components of the
The ‘admitting
of each State
and Territory retains its own responsibility for accrediting PLT courses,
subject to the
In WA, courses
approved for new practitioners seeking admission include those offered by the
College of Law (Sydney-based) and the
Leo Cussen Institute (Melbourne-based),
which dominate the national market for PLT and, consequently, tend to be
preferred as the
PLT providers for the larger national and international law
firms. In the case of the College of Law, it also provides PLT courses
Zealand (since about 2004). The Piddington Society Inc and Curtin University
also provide PLT courses which are only accredited
for admission in
Nationally, there are numerous other PLT courses which tend to be locally
focused, and which are mostly provided by universities.
In some cases, courses
are run in conjunction with a local law society such as in South Australia,
where the University of Adelaide
and the Law Society of South Australia
collaborate in delivering a PLT
The University of
Newcastle offers a unique PLT model, which is integrated with the last 2 years
of a student’s undergraduate
law studies, and in which the legal workplace
experience requirement is managed though the University of Newcastle Legal
community legal centre operated by the law
Despite the attempt to create a nationally consistent approach to PLT, there
remain some parochial differences in between jurisdictions
as to how graduates
may qualify for admission.
There are also differences in the way in which PLT courses are accredited. In
WA, for instance, PLT course accreditation is governed
by the LPBWA, which has
its own internal criteria.
Thus, accreditation requirements do vary between different jurisdictions (and
even within jurisdictions), most notably with respect
to completion of a
‘legal workplace experience’ (‘LWE’) component. Under
LACC Standards
, the minimum LWE requirement is 15 days, which has
been adopted as the requirement in
a more onerous LWE
requirement of 75 days is imposed in most cases. There are, however, variations
to the LWE component, even within
a single jurisdiction. For instance, in WA,
if the student undertakes their LWE in the John Curtin Law Clinic (part of
School), the requirement is reduced from 75 to 40 days. Furthermore,
in the Australian Capital Territory, Victoria and WA, the College
of Law offers
additional courses of study (for an additional fee) whereby students can reduce
or completely bypass the requirement
to undertake a period of
III THE EXPERIENCE IN ENGLAND AND WALES
It is noteworthy that over the past decade, the legal profession in England
and Wales has undertaken a major review (the Legal Education
and Training Review
— ‘LETR’) of its system of legal education and training,
resulting in the abandonment of the
PLT approach adopted in the 1980s and 1990s
(the Legal Practice Course — ‘LPC’), and the introduction of a
centralised examination in its place (for solicitors, this is the Solicitors
Qualifying Examination —
Some of the
criticisms noted in the LETR were that the generalist curriculum of the LPC
lacked utility in an increasingly specialised
profession, the inconsistency of
standards between different LPC providers, the lack of flexibility in course
delivery, and the high
costs of the
These criticisms resonate
in the context of the Australian approach to PLT.
In England and Wales, the Solicitors Regulatory Authority (‘SRA’)
describes the new pathway to legal practice for a new
solicitor as follows:
• have a degree in any subject (or equivalent qualification or work
experience);
• pass both SQE assessments - SQE1 focuses on functioning legal
knowledge and SQE2 on practical legal skills and knowledge;
• have two years' Qualifying Work Experience; and
• meet the SRA’s character and suitability
requirements.
As can be seen, this involves a substantial departure from the Australian
pathway to legal practice for a new practitioner, with the
SRA primarily focused
on the examination requirement and the completion of two years of legal
workplace experience, rather than whether
the practitioner has completed a
degree in law and a formal practical legal training course (as is the case in
Australia).
The website of the Solicitors Regulation Authority indicates that the legal
skills assessment (Solicitors Qualification Exam Part
‘SQE2’) involves rigorous testing of various skills over a number of
days, covering multiple practice
Some assessments are
oral, whilst others involve the completion of written tasks. The oral
assessments are conducted over two half
days and cover a mix of advocacy (civil
and criminal) as well as interviewing and note taking tasks. Written
assessments (conducted
over an additional three half days) cover case and matter
analysis, legal research, legal writing and legal drafting. Testing covers
multiple areas of law: criminal, contract, tort, land law, wills and estates,
and business organisations. Questions may also require
some knowledge of
taxation, and some questions will also raise ethical and professional conduct
issues, which students are expected
to identify and address.
IV NEW ZEALAND: THE PROFESSIONAL LEGAL STUDIES
In NZ, law graduates who intend to practice law must first complete the
Professional Legal Studies course (colloquially known as ‘Profs’,
which is how it will be referred to in this article). Profs is a 13-week
full-time (or equivalent) course governed by the NZ Council
of Legal Education
(‘NZCLE’), which is a statutory body established in 1930 and
continued under the
Lawyers and Conveyancers Act 2006
The Profs course is currently offered by the Institute of Professional Legal
Studies (which was created under legislation as a wholly
owned subsidiary of the
NZCLE) and the NZ branch of the College of Law. As with many Australian PLT
providers, flexible options
are available for students who require a part-time
study load or need to attend workshops online or outside of normal business
The Profs course focuses on practical skills that are relevant to legal
practice but are not typically taught within an undergraduate
law degree. The
course content is prescribed by
regulations,
and includes
professional conduct and the following skills:
1. Interviewing;
2. Advising;
3. Fact investigation and analysis;
4. Writing;
5. Drafting;
6. Negotiation;
7. Mediation;
8. Advocacy;
9. Problem-solving;
10. Practical legal research and analysis; and
11. Office and personal
management.
The core skills must be taught contextually against the background of a
simulated legal matter or transaction that might be routinely
encountered by
entry-level lawyers.
quite different to the Australian approach, which is organised primarily by area
of law as outlined in
of this article. The benefit of the NZ approach
is that each of the required skills is only required to be taught and assessed
whereas under the Australian model, students tend to be assessed several
times on the same skills (especially writing and drafting)
within different
practice areas. For instance, ‘advising’ (in some form or another)
appears as an assessable performance
criterion eight times across the three
compulsory practice areas alone, and 19 times total across the
. In our experience, this results in pointless overassessment of
certain skills across several practice areas at the expense of others.
That said, however, the NZ branch of the College of Law does organise its
course along practice area lines, offering six compulsory
subjects (being
Property Practice, Commercial Practice, Civil Litigation Practice, Interviewing
and Advising, Negotiation and Mediation,
and Advocacy) and one elective (from
Family Law, Criminal Law, In-house Practice, and Corporate
The reason for this
may have simply come down to ease of conversion from the College of Law’s
Australian PLT course, which
is structured predominantly around practice areas
rather than skills.
Another major difference between the NZ and Australian approaches is that, in
NZ, there is no requirement for graduates to undertake
a period of LWE prior to
admission. This will be further discussed in
and VII of this
V THE MOVEMENT FOR CHANGE
It is understood that the Council of Australian Law Deans has initiated a
reconsideration of the adequacy of legal education in Australia
(including both
the Priestley 11 requirements and the
LACC Standards
) in preparing law
graduates for professional practice. There is also a recently published study
of legal practitioners’ attitudes
which indicates widespread
dissatisfaction with the level of ‘work-readiness’ of newly admitted
legal practitioners in
Queensland.
This raises
important questions about the pathway of law students to legal practice and
especially expectations about the skills
and knowledge that entry-level lawyers
should possess.
It should be noted that the
LACC Standards
were based on principles
developed in the 1990s, they were first released in 2002, and they were later
revised in 2015 and 2017.
the vast changes to the legal profession in the past 30 years, it is
questionable whether competency standards first developed
so long ago continue
to meet the needs of the profession. Taking the compulsory Property Law
Practice unit as an example, every
newly admitted legal practitioner in
Australia must learn how to complete a real property conveyance. Given the
diversity of career
paths now available to legal practitioners, does such a
requirement remain reasonable or relevant in 2024? It may have been the
that in the 1990s, when the
LACC Standards
were under development,
conveyancing formed an important component of legal practice in many parts of
Australia, so it was important
that new practitioners learned conveyancing
skills. It is unlikely that this remains the case today, given the rise of
conveyancers as a distinct industry (whilst acknowledging, of course,
that some legal practitioners do continue to provide conveyancing
This leads into a broader consideration of how a PLT course should be designed
to meet the needs of the profession in
the 2020s and beyond.
VI CRITICISMS OF PRACTICAL LEGAL TRAINING
A key criticism of the
LACC Standards
is that they focus on specific
practice areas, rather than on developing broader skills and knowledge which are
relevant to new practitioners
in multiple practice areas. Again, to refer to
the conveyancing example, consider the relevance of this skill to a new
practitioner
embarking on a career as a prosecutor with the Director of Public
Prosecutions. Would it be better if, instead, the new practitioner’s
practical legal training incorporated training on matters of more general
relevance such as the use of artificial intelligence, or
the role of experts in
legal practice (such as forensic scientists, psychologists, and accountants), or
even the significance of
morality in legal practice? There is no requirement in
LACC Standards
for any of these matters to be dealt with in a PLT
course, although PLT providers have some flexibility to provide additional
to students should they choose to do so. It is noteworthy also that
Criminal Law Practice is not one of the compulsory practice
areas. It is not
clear why it should be compulsory for an Australian PLT student in 2024 to learn
how to complete a real property
conveyance, but not to learn how to make a
simple plea in mitigation in a minor criminal matter before a magistrate.
More generally, what is the value to a new practitioner through being forced
to develop competencies in practice areas where they
will never work in the
future? It is at least arguable that these requirements degrade the relevance
of PLT training both to the
new practitioner and to the profession generally.
Also, bear in mind that the new practitioner (or in some cases, their employer)
bears the cost of an expensive PLT course (PLT course fees in Australia
typically range between $9,000–$13,000 for domestic
which in many cases
delivers them training about practice areas for which they will have no future
need. Would it be preferable
for PLT training to instead focus on teaching a
new practitioner skills and knowledge in areas that have greater general
Could this lead to a shorter and lower cost course that allows a new
practitioner to be better equipped with skills and knowledge
to meet the demands
of modern legal practice? These are legitimate issues that need to be
considered.
Another criticism may be levelled at the requirement for legal workplace
experience. Not all law firms are alike. So much is obvious.
This inevitably
means that the experience of law graduates undertaking their LWE differs,
perhaps vastly, from placement to placement.
This lack of a consistent training
experience was, in fact, one of the criticisms of the articles training program
that led to the
implementation and adoption of PLT half a century
The LWE requirement also potentially reinforces inequity and nepotism within
the profession: students whose parents or close relatives
are involved in the
profession are likely to find it much easier to find a LWE placement than a
person without those connections.
Our teaching experience suggests that some
students find it very difficult to find LWE placements, especially mature age
looking to transition into a legal career but are working full time in
a non-legal role, or international or immigrant students who
don’t have an
established local network or work history. It is also not a stretch to imagine
a situation where a disabled
graduate is ‘overlooked’ for a LWE
placement due to some perceived inconvenience involved with making any necessary
adjustments to facilitate a fifteen week work
In New Zealand, as explored above, lawyers are admitted to practice without
having to ever set foot in a law firm. A change to introduce
mandatory LWE as a
precondition to admission in New Zealand was considered and roundly rejected in
Of course, there is
nothing to stop law students and graduates from obtaining a job as a paralegal
or clerk in a law firm prior
to admission, but it is clearly not a necessity
— especially when one considers the requirement of a period of supervised
practice (usually two years full-time) before a solicitor is entitled to
practice on their own account.
VII OBSERVATIONS AND CONCLUSION
Although the implementation of change with respect to PLT in Australia is
likely to take a number of years, the commencement of a
review is welcome.
There are clear indications that both legal academics involved in the delivery
of PLT courses and the profession
more generally are dissatisfied with the
current PLT approach, especially with respect to the core competencies. Some
practitioners
have a bleak view, evidenced by a comment made by a senior
practitioner to one of the authors recently to the effect that ‘PLT
waste of time — we all know it takes at least two years before a new
lawyer is any good.’ While this may be to
overstate the issue somewhat,
legal educators and LACC need to pay heed to these sentiments. If the current
PLT model is not meeting
the needs of the profession, then change becomes
inevitable.
From the brief analysis in this article, it should be obvious that the
LACC Standards
are in urgent need of reform to cater to modern legal
practice. With the changing nature of legal work, increased specialisation,
changes in the way in which legal practice is organised, there is no longer any
such thing as a ‘typical’ entry-level
lawyer (if there ever was).
In such an environment, subject-oriented practical legal training seems
pointless, illustrated by the
example highlighted in this article that all new
lawyers in Australia must still learn how to complete a real property
conveyance.
If it is accepted that the purpose of PLT is to provide a bridge between a
student’s academic legal study of the law in an LLB
or JD degree and the
commencement of their work as a new legal practitioner, then PLT must inevitably
shift towards skills-based
training, along the lines adopted in New Zealand,
especially if this could result in courses of shorter duration and lower cost to
students. Achieving consistency in the approach to the LWE requirement for
different Australian jurisdictions should also be considered.
Perhaps even
adopting the NZ model, which involves no such requirement, may prove to be a
better and more equitable approach?
PLT should be focused on filling the ‘skills gap’ between what is
studied in a law degree and the requirements of legal
practice. Inevitably,
this should be oriented towards skills such as legal drafting, advocacy,
negotiation, interviews, and mediation.
Some focus on ethics and professional
responsibility must also be part of PLT. To this mix, perhaps, could be added
introductory
training in some specialist areas of non-legal knowledge that a
legal practitioner may encounter in the future. The use of technology
rise of artificial intelligence are obvious areas for focus, but consideration
could be extended to other fields of knowledge,
such as psychology, forensic
science, valuations, and accounting.
The departure from the PLT model in England and Wales and the adoption of a
model of work experience plus an independent exam is an
interesting development
and one which deserves more consideration. However, the change to an exam-based
approach appears to have
been motivated by concerns about barriers to entry to
practice, and inconsistencies in the quality of legal education provided to
students. It may be the case that through a combination of the number of law
schools in Australia, the HECS/FEE-HELP system, and
the independent and rigorous
accreditation process for legal training providers in Australia (with each of
Australia's eight State
and Territory jurisdictions having a role in regulating
legal education), the same issues do not arise here as in England and Wales.
These are not easy issues and there is no simple solution. However, it is
hoped that with the commencement of a process to review
the core PLT
competencies, legal educators will increasingly focus on their role in educating
future legal professionals and achieve
a balance in delivering a sound education
in core legal concepts and providing new practitioners with the skills they
succeed as entry-level lawyers.
* Dr Jim McMillan is a Senior Lecturer and the Practical Legal Training
Course Lead at Curtin Law School. Rob Lilley is a Lecturer
at Curtin Law School
and the Principal Lawyer of the John Curtin Law Clinic.
Rob Lilley and Christina Do, ‘What Should an Entry-Level
Lawyer Look Like In A Post-COVID World?’ (2022) 1
Western Australian
Law Teachers’ Review
Frank Langley, ‘Preparing
for the Practice of the Law: Post-Graduate Pre-Admission Training in
(1985) 3(2)
Journal of Professional Legal Education
Lilley and Do (n
) 24; Francina Cantatore, Tanya Atwill and
Rachael Field,
The Job Readiness of Law Graduates and Entry Level Solicitors
in Private Practice
(Final Report, 1 December 2022) 73–8.
Lilley and Do (n
Kelli MacMillan, ‘The
End of an Era – Western Australia Farewells ATP’
(2010) 37(8)
Lilley and Do (n 1) 21.
Law Admissions Consultative
Committee (‘LACC’),
Practical Legal Training Competency Standards
for Entry-Level Lawyers
(Standards, October 2017) (‘
‘Practical Legal
Training Requirements’,
Legal Practice Board of Western Australia
<https://www.lpbwa.org.au/Becoming-A-Lawyer/Practical-Legal-Training-Requirements>.
Legal Profession Uniform
Admission Rules 2015
(WA) sch 2 (‘
Admission Rules
Ibid, sch 2, part 2, cl
Admission Rules
) sch 2, part 4, cl 14.
Defined in the
) as ‘the body
responsible in a jurisdiction for approving the content of...PLT
courses...’ [2.1]. In WA, the admitting
authority is the Legal Practice
Board of WA (‘LPBWA’) pursuant to the
Legal Profession Uniform
Law Application Act 2022
Legal Profession Uniform
‘Practical Legal
Training Requirements’,
Legal Practice Board of Western Australia
<https://www.lpbwa.org.au/Becoming-A-Lawyer/Practical-Legal-Training-Requirements>.
‘Graduate Diploma in
Legal Practice (GDLP)’,
Law Society of South Australia
<https://www.lawsocietysa.asn.au/gdlp>.
University of Newcastle
<https://www.newcastle.edu.au/school/law-and-justice/experience/law-in-practice>.
LACC Standards
See, eg, LPBWA,
for Approval of Practical Legal Training Course (PLT)
(1 July 2009).
‘Placement and
Law Society of South Australia
<https://www.lawsocietysa.asn.au/gdlp>.
‘Practical Legal
Law Society of New South Wales
<https://www.lawsociety.com.au/practical-legal-training>.
Experience’,
College of Law
<https://www.collaw.edu.au/learn-with-us/our-programs/practical-legal-training-programs/work-experience>.
Jack Burke and Hugh
Zillmann, ‘Creating a Gold Standard for Practical Legal Training in Common
Law Countries’
(2018) 5(1)
Journal of International and Comparative
‘What is the
Solicitors Regulation Authority
<https://sqe.sra.org.uk/about-sqe/what-is-the-sqe>.
‘SQE2 assessment
specification’,
Solicitors Regulation Authority
<https://sqe.sra.org.uk/exam-arrangements/assessment-information/sqe2-assessment-specification>.
Lawyers and Conveyancers
See also ‘Background’,
New Zealand
Council of Legal Education
<https://nzcle.org.nz/background.html>.
See, eg, ‘Profs
– Workshop Schedule’,
College of Law
<https://www.collaw.ac.nz/learnwithus/our-programmes/professional-legal-studies-course/workshop-schedule>.
Professional Legal
Studies Course and Assessment Standards Regulations 2002
Ibid r 2.1.
Ibid r 2.2.
College of Law NZ,
Course Guide
(Brochure, 7 August 2023) 5, available for download from
<https://www.collaw.ac.nz/learnwithus/our-programmes/professional-legal-studies-course/plsc-handbook>.
Cantatore, Atwill and Field
By contrast, the cost of the
Profs course in New Zealand for a domestic student is about half that price:
see, eg, ‘Profs –
Professional Legal Studies’,
(Web Page) <https://www.collaw.ac.nz/>.
See generally Abbey Dalton,
Ella Alexander and Natalie Wade, ‘No More Hiding in Plain Sight: The Need
for a More Inclusive
Legal Profession’
Sir Andrew Tipping,
Review of the Professional Legal Studies Course
(Report, August 2013)
Legal Profession Uniform
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (55.2 KB)
PDF format (524 KB)
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter