URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/journals/LegEdDig/2013/38.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 15:13:42
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Bemellen van Gent, E V --- "Legal education: a new paradigm" [2013] LegEdDig 38; (2013) 21(3) Legal Education Digest 22
Legal education: a new paradigm
E V Bemellen van Gent
Bynkershoek Law Review
, 2012, pp 2-18
In the past, between the years 1800 and 1950, legal education was a local,
generalist, apprentice- based, non-corporate, and highly
self-explanatory affair. Most of the legal professionals regarded themselves as
involved in ex-post private law and criminal
litigation/trials. Legal theory and
the curriculum, correspondingly, could focus mainly on local private and
criminal law contained
in approximately 10,000 pages.
At the start of the 21st century a number of things have changed. Around 100
specialised areas of legal theory and practice have emerged,
along with millions
of pages of new material. The sources of these new rules are increasingly
international and regional, especially
in Europe. The legal profession has also
industrialised. The sole practitioner is outnumbered by legal professionals that
producing legal services and legislative instruments, as well as
adjudicative products. Client demand has changed the emphasis to
be more focused
on ex ante: preventing disputes. Employers are expecting more than ever that
graduates are well on their way through
this increased volume of material, plus
well versed in critical thinking, advocacy and research techniques. Moreover, in
the countries
where legal education is subsidised, universities are expected to
educate more pupils for less money, plus accepting lower entry
qualifications
favouring historically less privileged groups. This process includes attempts,
again especially in Europe, to harmonise
the higher education degree structure
across states.
Law school traditions have not responded to these developments yet. The
curriculum and teaching techniques have remained largely the
same as in the 1800
to 1950 era.
The time is ready to change legal education drastically. To guide and justify
that change, a modern, 21st century paradigm is required,
addressing what the
legal profession entails, what issues the legal profession deals with and what
legal competences are required,
to solve legal problems cheaply, efficiently and
in a client friendly manner. Such a new paradigm should also provide the
assessment criteria evaluating which law graduates may be permitted
access to legal practices, including the various professional
admission procedures but also corporate hiring practices for junior and senior
The debate will improve if we acknowledge that law school prepares for more
legal professions than that of the attorney-at-law/solicitor/barrister
equivalent. I will therefore give a new definition of the legal profession (A).
Furthermore, to assess the value of any proposed
changes in legal education I
will provide a short overview of the changes in the profession, society, young
employees and employers
(B), as well as changes in learning methods (C) in order
to identify the problem to which eventual changes might be the answer. This
answer is Law School 4.0: a newly designed all inclusive law school that
prepares for all junior positions in all Legal Practices
(D). As guideline to
the required outcome of such new curriculum I present to you a new efficient
competence matrix (E). I conclude
to present to you a selected list or
‘canon’ of legal issues that forms a method to determine what the
content of (initial)
legal education should be (F).
Putting the citizen that undergoes a legal system, or putting the customer of
legal services at the heart of the reasoning, I have
to re-define the word legal
profession. In doing so, I argue that all persons that as a normal day job
produce legal products (objective
criterion) and regard themselves as jurist
(subjective criterion), are to be considered Legal Professionals. On this point,
inspired by the variety of ways people become a jurist on the globe: from
eight years of state funded and examined academic legal
education to no legal
education at all, from a heavily regulated and test based mechanism to a
liberalised market mechanism.
This definition requires also a definition of Legal Product: a piece of
writing or oral presentation that deals with legally relevant
questions, that engages with sources of law to answer these questions and that
comes to conclusions that focus on legal
consequences, like ‘guilty or
‘innocent’ (in criminal law), ‘liable’ or
‘not-liable’ (in
contract and tort law). A top twelve of Legal
Products is:
(1) advice letter; (2) advice meeting; (3) summon letter; (4) indictment; (5)
writ; (6) court pleading; (7) court judgment; (8) contract;
(9) deed; (10)
legislation/act of parliament; (11) executive branch directive/order; and (12)
academic article.
Legal Professionals are further to be categorised as working in four
distinctive practices. These four Legal Practices are: (1) Governmental
Practice; (2) Private Legal Practice; (3) Corporate Legal Practice and (4)
General Interest/International Organisation Practice.
The distinction between
these practices lies in the interest each practice represents, ranging from that
of the state, the individual
person, an enterprise and the society at large
respectively. Furthermore, the distinction in four practices helps to identify
requirements or competencies a Legal Professional should have. All in all,
these definitions helps to approach the following discussion
on the Legal
Profession from a broader perspective than the ‘JD or LLM plus bar
exam’ perspective.
The key question is when a person should be allowed to act as a jurist and to
produce Legal Products, given the reality that this
question matters in the
light of the effects wrongful Legal Products can have on the lives of people.
Why is this question a relevant
question? Because the landscape changed
dramatically, both in terms of the expectations of all Legal Practices and in
terms of the
expectations of the society. I argue that the current system of
couple of years legal education and a bar exam does not satisfy these
expectations and needs, as others argue also.
The changes in the Legal Profession I refer to are (1) the increase in total
numbers of Legal Professionals; (2) the increase in
the use of legal
services by the communities on the globe or the awareness that
relationships could be seen through a
legal perspective and corresponding
procedures; (3) the democratisation of legal knowledge through the internet; (4)
the increased
service level demand of customers due to among others email; (5)
the tendency to create Legal Products in teams; (6) the tendency
to specialise
in niche areas of law; (7) the increase of transnational aspects in many Legal
Practices; and more generally (8) the
hope of each employer that candidates are
ready to produce value as of day one.
From the perspective of the society I can add moreover (1) the expectation
that Legal Products are taking the socio-economic situation
or cultural
sensitivities into account; (2) the expectation that in the creation of Legal
Products knowledge and insight of other
disciplines are taken into account; (3)
the expectation that for instance judges avoid tunnel vision or
narrow-mindedness in their
appreciation of evidence; (4) the expectation that
also disadvantaged persons can have access to justice; (5) the expectation that
Legal Products should be cheaper; and more generally (6) that the Legal
Profession is becoming more and more demystified. Moreover,
the expectations
expand also in the area of compliance with (7) United Nations standards; (8)
good citizenship; and (9) ethical standards.
Now that we will discuss legal education today, I wish to add the expectation
of students also: (1) to have a dynamic student time;
(2) to be enlightened; (3)
to meet depth; and (4) to be prepared for a job as Legal Professional. And
expanding into the early years
of a career, young Legal Professionals expect job
satisfaction in terms of (5) realisation of personal goals; (6) adherence to
standards; (7) room for flexibility in working hours; and (8)
flexibility in changing to other Legal Practices.
In the long list of expectations towards Legal Professionals, the expectation
of each employer may not miss: (1) analytical skills;
(2) creativity; (3)
experience (or wisdom); (4) knowledge of relevant areas of law; (5) research and
learning skills; and in broad
terms (6) professionalism.
The scope of this article does not allow to dwell on the pedagogical
innovations of the last few decades. I focus on learning outcomes.
And I focus
on problem based learning in the sense that I present to you today, a method, a
‘canon’, how to identify
problems, read: legal issues, that should
be included in (initial) legal education, with the exclusion of other topics,
to the detriment of current faculty structures.
I do compare law school to other professional education, like music
conservatories. Very telling, the success of that education is
measured 100 per
cent on the outcome: is the graduate able to perform Mozart & Beethoven to
the liking of the public or not.
Similar to that, also graduating jurists should
be able to have the equivalent outcome: to produce Legal Products in a competent
way, regardless whether that legal education is labelled undergraduate or
graduate, LLB, LLM or JD, and/or regardless whether it
takes three, four or five
years. The alternative is less persuasive, being the outsourcing of important
parts of the legal education
to the employer, who translates the costs of same
to unjustified or at least undisclosed higher prices of the Legal Products.
In general terms the legal industry has produced a few standards in the
context of learning outcomes. I refer to the recent Carnegie
2007 Law School
Report and the European 2002 Dublin Descriptors, with respectively three general
standards (Analysis, Skills, Ethics)
and five standards (Knowledge, Application
of Knowledge, Judgment, Communication, and Transfer). Although these standards
for learning
outcomes are appealing and cover indeed the essence of the legal
education, both are too broad to function as a guideline, and lack
related to the actual work in Legal Practices. As alternative I present here the
Bynkershoek Competence Matrix, which
could function as such general concrete
guideline for law schools. Each competence is defined as a cluster of
knowledge, skills,
insight and attitude.
This matrix can be visualised by a Greek temple, with General Professional
Competencies and Language as fundament. The columns of
the temple represent
Legal Analysis, Legal Advice, LegalRepresentation and Legal Regulation. The roof
of the Greek temple consists
of Legal Products and Legal Professionals.
Legal Analysis, the thinking as a jurist, is one of the universal features of
the Legal Profession. Not un-similar to the tradition
of all judges, being a
central Legal Profession, this Legal Analysis consists of the diagnosis of the
legal issue, with the determination
of the legally relevant facts and legal
relevant questions. Subsequently, the applicable law is identified and through
deliberations
and by testing the elements of the legal rules on the facts, it is
established what answer to the legal questions should be given.
Analysis ends with the important step of a jurist to come to a decision or
conclusion. Another description of the steps
of Legal Analysis is the
abbreviation IRAC (issue, rule, analysis, conclusion), used in North American
Law Schools.
The first result of Legal Analysis is the competence of Legal Advice. In
this category the letters of advice and advice meetings
fall. The second
result of Legal Analysis should be Legal Representation. In this category the
summons, indictments, writs, pleadings
etc. fall. Subsequently, many legal
problem or procedures end with the competence of Legal Regulation. This category
consists of
Legal Products as judgments and legislation/acts of parliament, as
well as contracts, deeds and other arrangements between private
No system without exceptions. If no concrete interest is at stake or in all
other situations that these three competencies do not
cover the work of a Legal
Professional, the competence of Other Legal Products & Research is
available. This competence consists
of Legal Products like academic articles,
objective writing within a legal organisation (memorandum) etc.
It is not so difficult to imagine the specific characteristics of these
competencies, since they appeal to both the process of analysis
in the Legal
Profession as to the production of Legal Products.
Obviously, and almost not contested, the heart of each Legal Professional
consist of knowledge of the law or the knowledge of potential
answers to legal
What do we mean with that, now that more than 100 times more law and laws
exist since the design of the current law school system,
now that most law
graduates do not remember precise parts of the law that was taught in law school
anyway? How should we make a selection
out of the about one million legal issues
and rules that can exist in any given jurisdiction?
In quite a few jurisdictions this question is partly subject to the
regulatory framework of the profession of bar licensed lawyers.
constitutional law, criminal law, contract law and tort law, both substantive
and procedural, are the measure stick. But that
only applies to the academic
phase of legal education. In subsequent professional pre-bar-exam education
other elements of the competencies
are developed, like writing, advocacy and
general professional skills.
I argue that a ‘canon’ of legally relevant issues would help this
discussion, and allows to form Top-10, Top-15 or Top-100
lists that can guide
the design of three, four, or, say, eight year curricula. The benefit of such
‘canon’ is also, that
all types of issues are identified, prior to
looking at the current status quo of law, which status quo depends on what
parties now
deem necessary to litigate on or what parliaments now deem necessary
to legislate on.
The ‘canon’ of legal issues can be visualised by a gyroscope. In
the centre of the gyroscope a disc appears, with on that
disc the division on
four Legal Practices. The axis of the gyroscope represents all the issues of
human beings. One ‘gimbal’
of the gyroscope represents the issues of
governments, one of enterprises and the last represents the issues of the
society at large.
Issues of Humans:
(1) Birth; (2) Family; (3) Food & Water; (4)
Health & Education; (5) Property;
(6) Labour; (7) Housing; (8) Goods & Services; (9) Development &
Expression; and (10) Death.
Issues of Government:
(1) Status & protection people; (2)
Territory (Defense of); (3)
Constitution
(4) Judicial Branch; (5) Parliament; (6) Administration & tax; (7) Other
Agencies; (8) Health &
Education; (9) Criminal Justice; (10) Infrastructure; (11) Economy &
Trade; (12) Development;
(13) Property (registration); (14) Reserve; and (15) Transnational
cooperation.
Issues of Businesses:
(1) Incorporation; (2) Organs; (3) Capital; (4)
Investment – Research & Development; (5) Labor; (6) Markets; (7)
Production;
(8) Regulators; (9) Creditors; (10) Taxation;
(11) Corruption; (12) Corporate Social Responsibility; (13) Liability;
(14) Insolvency; and
(15) Liquidation.
Challenges of Our Age:
(1) Overpopulation; (2) Poor health;
(3) Food & Water shortage;
(4) Endangered animals; (5) Climate change; (6) Energy crisis; (7) Weapons;
(8) Corruption;
(9) Inhuman treatment; (10) War; (11) Poverty; (12) Gender inequality; (13)
Freedom of belief;
(14) Access to education; and (15) Failed states.
As a summary of these legal issues I can mention: birth, death, health,
labor, property and contracting as topics typically relevant
individual person; I can mention the defense of the territory, the
administration of justice, the collection of taxes and
the fostering of economic
infrastructure as classic domains of any government; I can mention the articles
of incorporation, the issuing
of shares, the responsibilities of agents, the
development and distribution of products and services, the payment of taxes and
dealing with litigation as dominant legal issues around enterprises; and I
can mention the potential over population, nuclear arms,
shortages of water and
food, wars, poverty, gender inequality and limitations to freedom of belief as
issues of our time. In total
this ‘canon’ lists 55 issues.
Each issue can be subdivided in corresponding legal questions: around the
issue of birth, legal questions on the birthing itself,
legal capacity and
nationality can be asked; around the issue of property legal questions on
acquisition, disturbance of neighbours
and hypothec can be asked; around the
issue of taxation, legal questions on the taxable subject matter, exceptions and
can be asked. If all of the 55 issues are subdivided in three, the
result is a first batch 165 legal questions and corresponding
legal rules. As
example, if you would want to give law students a one year introduction to
relevant topics in the Legal Profession,
and a year would be 40 study weeks,
less assessment time, so say 30 lecture weeks, each week should then contain 5.5
topic, a bit
more than one per day. If we would increase the amount of legal
questions with 100 per cent we would end of with a bit more than
two topics per
Faithful to the ambition to keep and foster the good parts of legal
tradition, I argue that the order of these legal rules may follow
the well-known
division of areas of law we all know: public law, criminal law, private law,
with all its subdivisions. I suggest
repeating that division three times: one
time for the international level, one time for the regional or federal level and
for the state level.
International level:
Public International
Law, International Criminal Law, Private International Law.
Regional level:
Public European law, European Civil Law, and European Private Law.
National or State level:
National Public Law, National Criminal Law, and
National Private Law.
There are enough good reasons to innovate legal education, to contribute to
the emancipation of the legal profession as global profession
and to expect more
of each and every Legal Professional. To that end it helps to stop talking about
one Legal Profession, but to
divide the profession in four Legal Practices,
distinct in their interest, in who is paying and partly distinct in their
Furthermore, it is crucial to identify the competencies that are needed to
produce these Legal Products in a 21st century fashion,
paying tribute to the
expectations of society, customer, young professional and employer.
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (693 KB)
PDF format (3.27 MB)
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter