URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/journals/ALRS/2010/7.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 14:12:58
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Cox, Noel --- "Legal aspects of Church-State relations in New Zealand" [2010] ALRS 7; (2010) 8(1) Journal of Anglican Studies 9-33
Legal aspects of Church-State relations in New Zealand
though the Church law of the Anglican Church in New Zealand is based upon the
consensus of the members of the Church, the laws
of the State also have an
important part to play. In particular, not only is the Church, as a juridical
body, subject to the law
of the land, it also has relied upon the State for the
enactment of certain laws. This has been necessitated by the evolution of
Church in New Zealand, and is also a legacy of the pre-colonial Church of
England. This is also affected by the lack of an indigenous
method or style of
approach in the exposition of ecclesiastical law.
Establishment; canon law; New Zealand; Church-State relations; consensual
compact; authority; ecclesiastical law.
1.1 Introduction
The current law of the Church of the Province of
Aotearoa, New Zealand and Polynesia defines the Church’s nature as a
constituent
member of the Anglican
same time the Anglican Church’s constitutional structure and laws, as well
as its general laws, reflect its place in
New Zealand’s secular
constitutional structure and history.
The current (1992)
Constitution
Church in New Zealand has a comprehensive statement of its reasons for
Constitution
itself provides a justification for these internal
Anglican Communion generally, further laws regulate the Churches’
relations with the State and with non-members. The
sources of these laws are
different in countries which have – or have formerly had –
established Churches, yet even in
New Zealand the Church and State are not as
completely legally separate and distinct, as may at first appear.
in their relationship with the State, may be classified as established,
quasi-established,
dis-established, or non-established. All but the first are normally based on the
principle of consensual compact (or ‘voluntary
compact’ as it is
called in the inaugural 1857 and the current 1992 constitutions), in which it is
the voluntary membership
of the Church which alone imposes binding or mandatory
obligations upon
in New Zealand may be broadly regarded as non-established, yet for several
reasons this fails to fully explain the true
nature of the Church in this
country. In part this is because the State may be still characterized – or
at least was until
comparatively recently – as de facto
sense that it is a ‘Christian Society under the aspect of legislation,
public administration, legal tradition and
to quote from a writer on the somewhat dissimilar American situation, ‘a
nation whose predominant institutions, including
government, reflect Christian
pre-suppositions and Christian
has led to a continuing legal relationship between Church and State, as had the
very forms through which the Church regulates
its own affairs (such as trusts).
The question of whether any state can be described as Christian – whether
or not the Church
officially established, is a more difficult question, and one
for which the answer depends very much upon the precise meaning of
used. Nor is is clear whether the influence of the State has been intrusive and
unwanted, sought and desirable or an unavoidable
reflection of evolving
political life.
In this article we will examine the sources of secular
authority in the Church – in particular secular legislation. We will
examine the founding of the Church in New Zealand in the nineteenth century, and
some aspects of the nature of its relationship
with the State. The example taken
is the Anglican Church. This is not unique in its treatment except insofar as
the breadth and depth
of legislation which has been enacted. The Roman Catholic
Church in New Zealand relied to a lesser extent upon secular
legislation,
part because of its post-Reformation tradition as a non-established Church in
England, and in part because of its more fully developed
canon law and a
comparatively active
importance of this study lies in the fact that most Anglican provinces, and
other denominations in the Commonwealth and beyond,
which share the same form of
reliance on State laws as does the Church of the Province of Aotearoa, New
Zealand and Polynesia.
1.2 Dis-established and Non-Established Churches and the Doctrine of
Consensual Compact
Church of England remains formally established by law in
the other Churches of the British
of the West
dis-established.
In some cases this was because of changing political circumstances, in others
for more overtly theological reasons. Since the Church
was never formally
established in New Zealand this category need not detain us longer.
Churches within the Anglican Communion (and indeed beyond it) are
non-established, in that they are not formally recognized or
supported by the
State, do not enjoy a privileged position with respect to other Churches, and
were never in that position, vis-à-vis
other bodies. The Churches are,
within the Commonwealth, broadly based upon the principles which eventually
governed the status of
the dissenters in
the absence of formal regulation by the State, or the recognition by the State
of Church laws and institutions, the non-established
Anglicans, like the
non-conformists in earlier centuries in England, were governed on the basis of
consensual compacts – or
associations of
co-religionists.
King Charles I, by Order-in-Council in 1634, placed all British subjects
overseas under the ecclesiastical jurisdiction of the Bishop
of London. The East
India Company was responsible for the payment of salaries to a bishop and any
archdeacons, if the Government
patent of 2 May 1814 the Bishop of Calcutta was appointed, and granted full
power and authority to exercise a bishop’s
spiritual and ecclesiastical
functions as prescribed by ecclesiastical laws in
1824 this jurisdiction was extended to those lands under the Charter (rather
than the Government) of the Company –
then including Australia and Van
these lands were no longer mentioned in the letters patent of the Bishop, and so
presumably passed back to the inherent jurisdiction
of the Bishop of
Marsden’s involvement in New Zealand was largely through the Church
Missionary Society which was a voluntary society
(with no establishment status
within the Church of England). It is also notable that Broughton visited New
Zealand in 1838-39 and
undertook episcopal ministrations on the basis of his own
episcopal authority by virtue of his consecration rather than because of
legal status of the
Augustus Selwyn was appointed the first Bishop in New Zealand in
establishment of a colonial government in New Zealand in
patent, modelled upon those of the Bishop of Australia, of which New Zealand had
been a suffragan,
erected the latter country into a see on 14 October
officially no voluntary compact at this time; but neither was the Church
formally established. The status of the Bishop
in New Zealand in relation to the
Bishop of Australia was to change several times in the first 15
Bishop was not entirely without official support. The payment of half of
Selwyn’s salary by the Colonial Office was one
of the links back to the
Government in England. He also was given the status of number three on the
precedent list and was for a
period a member of the Legislative Council.
Gladstone as Colonial Secretary in 1846 raised the possibility of
‘voluntary compact’,
being a better method to settle the status of
the colonial Church than legislation
a group of New Zealand laity led by the Governor, Sir George Grey, wrote to
Bishop Selwyn asking for the estalishment of a
formal Church
government.
proposed a General Convention of bishops, in an Upper House, and elected
deputies of clergy and laity in a Lower House. Neither
house would be empowered
to alter the doctrines or ritual of the Church of England, or the Authorized
Version of the
Selwyn agreed with the broad basis of the proposal of Grey and the
not entirely surprising, since Selwyn attended an important conference of
Australasian Bishops in
and was one
of its leaders.
But Selwyn was not entirely sure of the possibilities
regarding a constitution. In his 1853 Pastoral Letter he wrote that he
still looking to England to gain “the consent of the heads of
the State and of the Church in England to some form of Church
Constitution
adapted to our circumstances and
Only when the three attempts to define the legal status of the Church by
parliamentary legislation failed (1852, 1853, 1854) –
and with the
necessary English legal advice that the Church could constitute itself as a
voluntary compact – did Selwyn finally
feel he could go ahead on that
The instrument by which the broad aim outlined in 1850 was to be
achieved was the 1857
Constitution
, which was not however enacted by Parliament
or expressly consented to by the
attempts during 1852-54 to obtain an imperial Act for the Church in Australia
had failed.
part this was due to reluctance by the Imperial Parliament to legislate for
those parts of the empire which had their own legislature,
a stage just reached
in New Zealand by this
also due to the belief that an attempt was being made to obtain exclusive
privileges for the Church of
was that ‘Establishment’ by this time meant that the colonial Church
had more restrictions upon it than the
Roman Catholic Church, or
“non-conformists”,
and few, if any, advantages. The debate about whether and when the Church of
England was established in Australia, and when it was
no longer established, is
beyond the scope of this article. There is a degree of disagreement about this
question, unlike the situation
in New Zealand.
Meanwhile, on 13 June 1857, at
a General Conference held at Auckland, the
of the clergy and laity of the Church in New
missionary clergy, agreed to a
Constitution
for the purpose of associating
together by voluntary compact as a branch of the ‘United Church of England
Constitution
declared the Doctrine and Sacraments which the Church held and
maintained,
provided for a General
‘[F]undamental provisions’ (mentioned under ‘PROVIDED THAT....
’) were entrenched in the
Constitution
as a means of safeguarding the
doctrinal and liturgical integrity of the Church in its connection with the
mother-Church in England.
Fundamental provisions could not be changed, thus
preserving the identity of the Church as part of the wider Church of
In accordance with the then still current imperial practice, the
bishop received a letter patent from the Crown when he became a metropolitan
1858. However, following the example of the South African bishops, in 1865 this
surrendered.
in New Zealand, the legal basis for the Church was consensual compact, rather
than legislative
although specific parliamentary Acts were needed to provide for trusts and
similar ancillary
institutions.
least until 1865 the royal supremacy was acknowledged, but thereafter, under the
influence of wider imperial developments, this
became largely
inapplicable.
The ‘Christian’ influence on New Zealand in the nineteenth
century was pervasive. But they were partially countered by
the determined
effort of many parliamentarians to avoid privileging any one denomination over
another. That is reflected in a number
of parliamentary debates. These include
the opening of sessions with prayer, the refusal to accept responsibility for
Bishop Selwyn’s
stipend when the Colonial Office discontinued payment, and
Education Act
with its ‘secular’
Zealand, by contrast to the situation in Australia, the Church early assumed
independence, and was comparatively less concerned
with the nature of the
underlying basis of authority – at least until its constitutional debates
and reforms of the late twentieth
century. Broughton’s episcopal acts in
New Zealand, and Selwyn’s calling of synods in 1844 and 1847 were on the
of inherent episcopal powers through consecration. These actions
challenged the supreme authority of the Crown. Selwyn himself engaged
consultative process both in New Zealand and in England between 1847 (his second
synod) and 1857.
Selwyn was very cautious in moving until he was clear from his consultations in
England that the Church could go ahead on the basis
of voluntary compact.
1.3 The Applicability of Pre-Existing Canonical Systems
only is it necessary to ascertain the nature of authority in a colonial Church,
it is also necessary to establish precisely what
pre-settlement English laws
applied, and what their effect was. Various devices are employed by Churches to
ensure the binding effect
of Church laws and the rights and duties conferred by
devices may be applied to clergy, lay officers or the lay membership generally.
They include overriding principles containing
general statements that the law of
the Church is binding, and declarations, promises or oaths by which an
undertaking is made to
assent to or conform to the law of the Church or the
decisions of its tribunals. There may also be provisions requiring compliance
with executive directions (typified by the doctrine of canonical
obedience).
most ancient of these are the canons, which were preserved, at least in
partially pre-settlement form, in at least some overseas
England, in most of the overseas Churches canon law is binding on the laity, at
least those laypersons who are members of
whether this is legally binding – in the sense that it is justiciable in
the secular courts – or merely morally
binding, or enforceable in the
Church courts or tribunals, is a further
question remained however as to just what comprised the canon law. In the
Protestant Episcopal Church of the United States of
America English
ecclesiastical law continues for some purposes
and English
canon law does not now apply in
these Churches are consensual bodies, these pre-settlement laws are not
automatically enforceable. The applicable canon law
was generally that new canon
law created by the provincial or national Churches, or their dioceses. Indeed,
as the diocese may have
their own canon law, there is considerable scope for
differences across a single province.
Even consensual associations are subject to the secular power, even if
‘the ... Church of England ... is not a part of the constitution
settlement’.
The Queen in Parliament has authority ‘over all persons in all causes, as
well ecclesiastical as temporal, throughout her dominions
supreme’, for
Parliament can legislate for the Church as it can for any part of society. This
is a consequence of the Reformation
and the development of parliamentary
recognized by Selwyn and
and later in
Constitution
since 1857 the Church in New Zealand made its own canons, which have supplanted
and replaced the pre-existing canon law
of the Church of
1.4 The Anglican Church in New Zealand
The Church in New
Zealand may be classified broadly as quasi-established in the sense that whilst
having the status of a contractual
society, there are close legal links between
Church and State. The authority of internal Church law rests at least in part
existence of secular legislation, and secular legislation expressly and
directly regulates some of the temporal affairs of the
parliamentary statutes ‘declare and define the Powers of the General Synod
of the Church of the Province of New
they govern the alteration of the formularies of the
regulate its trust
(former) missionary
clergy pensions
The secular
courts may intervene to ensure compliance by the Church with its own internal
law and with State law applicable to the
Zealand the secular courts will enforce the constitution and rules of
they will be reluctant to intervene in Church matters unless there are valid and
strong reasons for doing
even where a statute has been passed specifically relating to a Church or
religious organisation and its property, this does
not involve parliamentary
recognition of the institutions and procedures established by the rules of the
Church. The institutions
and procedures are still seen as private or
though the institutions may be private, nevertheless they are relying, for at
least a part of their legal authority, on
the laws of the State.
Even within
its own jurisdiction the authority of the Church is limited. With respect to its
fundamental provisions, ‘it shall
not be within the power of the General
Synod, or of any Diocesan synod, to alter, revoke, add to, or diminish any of
In New Zealand this law is fundamental in the sense that it is unalterable by
the Church acting alone – though it may be altered
in accordance with the
provisions of an Act of
Parliament.
limitation on the legislative competence of the Church was stated in qualified
terms. It was not comparable to the superficially
analogous limited competence
of the (colonial) New Zealand Parliament; rather, its origins lay much deeper.
Constitution
states that the fundamental provisions (including the Book of
Common Prayer, the Form and Manner of Making, Ordaining, and Consecrating
Bishops, Priests, and Deacons, and the Thirty-nine Articles of Religion) might
it is also stated that
2. PROVIDED THAT nothing herein contained shall prevent the General Synod
from accepting any alteration of the above-named formularies
and Version of the
Bible as may from time to time be adopted by the United Church of England and
Ireland, with the consent of the
Crown and of
Convocation.
This suggests that there was some residual authority inherent in the Church
of England – perhaps associated with the royal supremacy
fundamental constitutional provisions (if not doctrine), which the local Church
might follow. This may probably
be taken to not extend to doctrine per se, as
synods, in the history of the Church, were seen as not having authority to
doctrine, and had only local authority, and the Church of England
asserted no wider
qualification may, therefore, be taken to refer to the Church of England’s
authority to maintain order and discipline in
liturgy and worship.
Church of England Empowering Act 1928 (N.Z.), passed to allow the Church in New
Zealand to make changes in its fundamental provisions
so that it would not
imperil its ownership of property. It provides for the alteration of the
formularies contained in the
Constitution
provides that:
It shall be lawful for the Bishops, Clergy and Laity of the Church, in
General Synod assembled, from time to time in such way and
to such extent as may
to them seem expedient, but subject to the provisions in this Act contained, to
alter, add to, or diminish
the Formularies, or any one or more of them, or any
part or parts thereof, or to frame or to adopt for use in the Church or in any
part of the Province or in any Associated Missionary Diocese new Formularies in
lieu thereof or as alternative thereto or of or to
any part or parts thereof and
to order or permit the use in public worship of a version or versions other than
the Authorized Version
of the Bible or of any part or parts thereof:
Provided that the provisions of this section shall not empower or be deemed
to empower the General Synod to depart from the Doctrine
and Sacraments of
Christ as defined in clause one of the
Constitution
The procedures to be followed include gaining the consent of a majority of
diocesan synods, a delay of at least a
holding of General Synod elections before the enactment comes into
procedure is similar to the legislative process for secular legislation, yet
differs because law in the Church depends for its
authority upon identification
of the divine will rather than the consent of the
also an attempt at ensuring that law is truly a manifestation of the divine in
human law, so far as this is possible.
Internally, the Church can exercise
coercive power or
, as well as persuasive power or
, often derived from secular
includes Acts of Parliament, statutory regulations, canons and
synodical orders.
includes policy documents, regulations, directives, codes of
practice, circulars, guidance,
guidebooks.
have only moral or persuasive
depend upon secular authority. The Church uses some secular laws, and legal
procedures such as Acts of Parliament, but
it is not to be inferred thereby that
it has a right to do so greater than any non-public association or
secular law by the Church is not surprising, given its frequent use in the
post-Reformation history of the Church.
Although the supremacy of the State
in all legal matters – for it is scarcely less than that – is not
asserted over the
Anglican Church in New Zealand, in that the State does not
interfere in religious matters, yet religion is not altogether ignored
State. Nor is the position of the State ignored by the Church.
The sixteenth
century (re-)iteration of royal
over matters religious as well
as secular was to have a continuing effect upon the law of the Church, effects
which may still be
seen in twenty-first century New
the Church is not, and never has been, established in New
1.5 The treatment of the Anglican Church in statute
New Zealand Bill of Rights Act 1990 (N.Z.) recognizes that everyone has the
right to freedom of thought, conscience, religion,
and belief, including the
right to adopt and hold opinions without
interference.
also provides that everyone has the right to manifest his or her religion or
belief either individually or in community with others,
in worship, observance,
practice, or teachings, and either in public or in
effect of this Act is principally confined to the actions of public
prevented from infringing this freedom of opinion. Thus they are both precluded
from imposing its doctrine or practices
upon unwilling individuals, but are
equally protected against suppression.
The provisions of the laws of the
Church are not generally justiciable in a secular
the extent that they are involved in a matter concerning Church property
governed by
otherwise within the jurisdiction of secular courts – and this latter
varies between
courts have been reluctant to deal with theological matters.
But there are a
great number of statutes which regulate aspects of the Anglican Church’s
life and work in New
these are concerned with the property which the Church acquired since the
nineteenth century, and are similar to many others
enacted for the benefit of
particular Churches or other
organisations.
practice the secular courts will become involved in Church disputes where the
interests of justice so require.
Examining just a small selection of the Acts
which have conferred secular legal powers upon the organs of the Anglican
see several common elements. For example, Anglican Church Trusts Act
1981 (N.Z.), a private Act, is described in its long title as:
An Act to widen the powers of trustees under trusts in connection with the
Church of the Province of New Zealand and the Church of
the Province of
Melanesia and to provide for the administration of such trusts
More importantly, the preamble explains the rationale for the Act:
WHEREAS there is real and personal property in New Zealand held on trusts for
and in connection with the Anglican Churches in New
Zealand and Melanesia: And
whereas the powers of the trustees in relation to the investment of the trust
assets are limited by the
instruments creating the trusts: And whereas it is
desirable to consolidate and extend the powers conferred on trustees by the
of England Trusts Act 1913 and its amendments and to give greater powers
of investment to the major Trust Boards holding property
for the said Churches:
And whereas there are trusts held for religious or charitable purposes in
connection with the Anglican Church
where it has become impossible or
impracticable or inexpedient to carry out the trust objects or purposes, and by
reason of the limited
assets of the particular trusts or for reasons of expense
it is desirable to provide a means for varying the trusts in addition to
means provided by the Charitable Trusts Act
This Act is therefore to give the Church institutions greater flexibility
than was then enjoyed by the general public in respect of
instance in the range of funds in which it could investment. This is one field
which is commonly the subject of secular legislation
enacted for the benefit of
the Church.
Church of England Tribunal (Validation of Election) Act 1934 (N.Z.) was of
historical interest in that it was ‘An Act to
validate the First Election
of the Tribunal elected under the Church of England Empowering Act 1928 (N.Z.),
to hear and determine
Appeals under that
1931 the first election of an appellate tribunal under the Act of 1928 was
disrupted by the series of earthquakes referred to
in the Hawke’s Bay
Earthquake Act 1931 (N.Z.). The proceedings of the General Synod were to some
extent disorganized by reason
of these earthquakes, and the first election of
the Tribunal was not held in accordance with the Act, but was held at the
of the General Synod which took place at Napier in
Church of England Tribunal (Validation of Election) Act 1934 (N.Z.) is purely a
validating Act, to ensure that the validity of
the election should not be
questioned on the ground that the provisions of the Act had not been complied
is significant that recourse should be had to secular authorities, and shows the
extent to which the Church’s procedures
were influenced by (secular)
great majority of other Acts are concerned with the temporal goods of the
Church, and regulate trusts and property.
The Church is not however exempt
from regulation by general legislation. Thus, the Church is bound by the general
prohibition on discrimination
on the grounds of religious
unlawful for an employer, or any person acting or purporting to act on the
employer’s behalf, to refuse or omit to employ
a qualified applicant by
reason of the applicant’s religious or ethical
also unlawful to discriminate on the grounds of sex, or on a number of other
grounds, in employment, the provision of goods
or services, access to public
facilities housing, and in education. But the Human Rights Act 1993 (N.Z.)
allows for the different
treatment of people based on sex, where the
discrimination is for the purpose of an organized religion and is required to
with the doctrines, rules, or established customs of the
‘Religion’ is, moreover, defined
special statutory provisions are made for the personnel of the Churches.
‘Ministers of
are prohibited by statute from disclosing in any proceeding a confession that
was made to the minister in his or her professional
character, except with the
consent of the person who made the
confession.
However any communication made for criminal purposes is not
privileged.
Whilst only a minority of marriages in New Zealand are today conducted in a
church, the names of ministers of religion that have been
sent to the
Registrar-General of Births, Deaths and Marriages by any of the religious bodies
referred to in the Marriage Act 1955
(N.Z.) are entered in the list of marriage
celebrants.
There is no requirement for separate civil and religious weddings, as the
Churches’ own ministers will normally be authorized
– as marriage
celebrants – to conduct marriages.
The offence of blasphemy remains in
the Crimes Act
offence punishable by up to one year’s imprisonment for any person to
publish blasphemous
that this provision will apply only to attacks on Christian
Whether a particular published matter is or is not a blasphemous libel is a
question of fact. To express in ‘good faith and
decent language’ a
religious opinion of any sort is not an offence. In New Zealand, unlike England,
the law regarding blasphemy
is confined to published
only reported New Zealand case on the scope of the offence, the judge’s
direction to the jury asked whether on the basis
of community standards the
words had exceeded the bounds of propriety and reached contemptuousness,
reviling, and
number of respects, while no particular religious denomination is preferred,
religion as such – particularly Christianity
– receives a favoured
treatment. This includes direct aid, immunities, regulation of cemeteries,
school and hospitals, and
in the recognition of religious practices by the
can be seen from the above that the Anglican Church and (perhaps to a lesser
extent) other religious denominations enjoy a special
legal status in New
Zealand, especially in respect of property holdings and investments. The
Anglican Church is not an established
Church, but it does, often in common with
other recognized Churches, enjoy certain legal rights not enjoyed by other
corporate bodies
– though it is only special in contrast to the other
Churches in the scale and scope of its use of secular
these owe their origins to the extensive grants of land to the Church of England
during the nineteenth century, particularly
in the southern province of
Canterbury.
Ironically, perhaps, the advance of humanism, and oft-times militant
secularism (and even anti-Christian sentiment) in modern western
society, is
especially noticeable in New Zealand. Thus it might be questioned whether it is
a Christian, post-Christian, or non-Christian
State. The legal relationship of
the Anglican Church and the State doesn’t seem to have had a significant
impact upon that.
1.6 Conclusions
concept of the deliberate and complete separation of Church and State, so
influential in many parts of the
never dominant in New Zealand, since the two developed together during the
colonial period. Belief in this full separation is
alien to both the secular
laws and Church practice. Civil law cannot be separated from Biblical law, for
the Biblical doctrine of
law includes all law, civil, ecclesiastical, societal,
familial, and all other forms of law. The law of Western civilisation has
historically been Christian law, and the links remain important, for both Church
and State. The ecclesiastical law of the Church
of the Province of Aotearoa, New
Zealand and Polynesia is partly created by the State.
The Church is neither
established nor dis-established, but rather the Anglican Church in New Zealand
may be classified broadly as
quasi-established in the sense that whilst having
the status of contractual societies, there are close legal links between the
and State. The authority of internal Church law rests at least in part
upon the existence of secular legislation, and secular legislation
expressly and
directly regulates some of the temporal affairs of the Church.
argued that the Anglican Church is no more established than any other Church.
Wood argues that by the end of the 1850s the
privileges which had been enjoyed
by Anglicans compared with other denominations had virtually
relationship was much more than a question of ‘privileges’. The
quasi- or pseudo- establishment status of the
Anglican Church in New Zealand has
much to do with the way in which it has assumed and sometimes been given the
‘establishment’
role, for example on state occasions. While the
identity of the Church, particularly in relation to its property, is regulated
secular law it could be argued that this does not make it quasi-established.
However, it is argued that the extent of the relationship
between Church and
State is more complex, and inter-dependent.
The laws of the Church are made
by the Church itself, and its members are bound to one another by consensual
compact. But several
parliamentary statutes ‘declare and define the Powers
of the General Synod of the Church of the Province of New
and they govern the alteration of the formularies of the
spiritually autonomous, the Church must show that, as the organic body of
Christ, it has the capacity to determine truth from
error, that it is possessed
of a Doctrine of the
freedom of the Church to conform to the universality of the whole Church is at
once limited by the dependence, in form if not
substance, on secular statutory
provisions for altering fundamental provisions of the
Constitution
, and by an
assertion that General Synod can ‘develop
result is that, although the Church is free to regulate its own doctrinal and
liturgical laws, and is a purely a voluntary association,
it is not unknown to
this means that certain of the formularies of the Church may not be altered
without following a process enacted by Parliament,
this is not necessarily
wrong, per se, for it imposes upon the Church an external check. This prevents
precipitate changes, and encourages
mature deliberation and consideration.
However, there are inherent tensions in the
‘quasi-Establishment’ of the Anglican Church of New Zealand relying
secular State, especially when the State is at times militantly
post-Christian, or non-Christian. The role of the State hasn’t
intrusive or unwanted, because direct regulation has been sought by the Church
itself and therefore thought to be desirable.
But the indirect consequence of
this interdependent relationship hasn’t necessarily been wholly beneficial
for the Church,
when the organs of the State itself are anti-Christian or
post-Christian.
MTheol(Hons)
GradDipTertTchg
Barrister of the High Court of New Zealand, and of the Supreme Courts of the
Australian Capital Territory, New South Wales,
the Northern Territory,
Queensland, South Australia, Tasmania, and Victoria, Professor of Law at the
Auckland University of
Technology.
Const. Preamble, 18: ‘ ... this Church is part of and belongs to the
Anglican Communion’. “Const.” as used
hereafter refers to the
Constitution
of the Anglican Church in New Zealand, as revised
Const. Preamble, 10. This is consistent with the emphasis on self-regulation
expressed in the 1850 letter from a group of New Zealand
laity led by the
Governor, Sir George Grey, to Bishop Selwyn; V
Colonial Church Chronicle
(1852), p. 161.
Under secular legislation the Church of England in Nova Scotia [Mutiny Act 1758
(32 Geo. II c. 5) (G.B.)], New Brunswick [Trade
with America Act 1786 (26 Geo.
III c. 4) (G.B.)], and Prince Edward Island [Indemnity Act 1802 (43 Geo. III c.
6) (U.K.)] enjoyed
certain statutory privileges over other Churches.
Scandrett v. Dowling
[1992] 27 N.S.W.L.R. 483 (N.S.W.)
would appear to
support the proposition that Church members are associated only on the basis of
a shared faith without legal sanction
for its enforcement; Mr. Justice Bruce
McPherson, ‘The Church as consensual compact, trust and
corporation’,
Australian Law Journal
74 (2000), pp. 159,
particular, see Rex Ahdar, ‘New Zealand and the Idea of a Christian
State’, in Rex Ahdar and John Stenhouse (eds.),
God and Government
(Dunedin: University of Otago Press, 2000), pp.
The Idea of a Christian Society
(London: Faber and Faber, 1939),
Smolin, ‘Regulating Religious and Cultural Conflict in Postmodern America:
A Reply to Professor Perry’,
Iowa Law Review
76 (1991), pp.
1067-1104, 1097. See also Ivanica Vodanovitch, ‘Religion and legitimation
in New Zealand: redefining the relationship
between church and state’,
British Review of New Zealand Studies
3 (1990), pp. 52-62, 52
[‘non-specific and non-sectarian Christianity’]. However, [Sir
Robert] Stout C.J., a freethinker,
characterized New Zealand as a secular state;
Doyle v. Whitehead
[1917] NZGazLawRp 39
[1917] N.Z.L.R. 308
, 314; Peter Lineham,
‘Freethinkers in Nineteenth-Century New Zealand’,
New Zealand
Journal of History
19 (1985), pp. 61-81,
surviving examples being the Roman Catholic Lands Act 1876 (N.Z.) and the Roman
Catholic Bishops Empowering Act 1997 (N.Z.).
may be attributed to the survival of the faculty jurisdiction. For this see
George H. Newsom,
Faculty Jurisdiction of the Church of England
Sweet & Maxwell, 2
edn., 1993).
instance, the
Thirty-Nine Articles of Religion
, enacted in 1562, and
confirmed in 1571 by the Subscription (Thirty-Nine Articles) Act 1571 (13 Eliz.
I c. 12) (Eng.); There has
occasionally been talk of this status ending, a
possibility which was again raised with the appointment of Rowan Williams,
of Wales (where the Anglican Church is dis-established), as
Archbishop of Canterbury. For his translation see Anglican Communion
Service, “Announcement of the 104
Archbishop of
Canterbury”, 23 July 2002, available at
http://www.anglicancommunion.org/acns/articles/30/50/acns3072.htm
the Irish Church Act 1869 (32 & 33 Vict. c. 42) (U.K.), the Church of
Ireland is now a voluntary association;
State (Colquhoun) v. D’Arcy
[1936] I.R. 641.
The independent Church in Wales was created by the Welsh
Church Act 1914 (4 & 5 Geo. V c. 91) (U.K.), though dis-establishment
delayed until after the end of the First World War; Suspensory Act 1914 (4 &
5 Geo. V c. 88) (U.K.); Welsh Church (Temporalities)
Act 1919 (9 & 10 Geo. V
c. 65) (U.K.). The Scottish Episcopal Church was dis-established in 1689 (Claim
of Right Act 1689 c.
28) (Scot.). The Church of Scotland is established in a
different sense to that used in England, being more a national Church than
legally established one; Gordon Donaldson,
The Scottish Reformation
(Cambridge: Cambridge University Press,
Barbados – Anglican Church Act 1969 (Barbados) [see
Blades v. Jaggers
[1961] 4 WIR 207
, 210]; Bermuda – Church of England in Bermuda Act
1975 (Bermuda); Dominica – Laws of Dominica 1961, Ordinance 1878
(Dominica);
Grenada – Church of England Dis-establishment Act 1959
(Grenada); Jamaica – Church of England Dis-establishment Law 1938
The Church in India remained established, at least in some respects, until
Indian Church Act 1927 (17 & 18 Geo. V c. 40) (U.K.); Indian
Church Measure 1927 (17 & 18 Geo. V No. 1)
Church of England in the United States of America, established in some of the
colonies, was dis-established by the American
Revolution in 1776;
[1817] USSC 19
(9 Cranch) 43
, 47 (1815). See George Brydon,
Life of Virginia in the Seventeenth Century
(Williamsburg: Virginia
Anniversary Celebration Corporation, 1957), p. 14
[the Church of England was established in Virginia from
were developed by the courts from the principles of such Acts of Parliament as
the Toleration Act 1688 (1 Will. & Mary
c. 18) (Eng.), and the Nonconformist
Relief Act 1779 (19 Geo. III c. 44) (G.B.). Scottish Episcopalians were
associated under canons
after 1727; P.H.E. Thomas, ‘A Family Affair. The
Pattern of Constitutional Authority in the Anglican Communion’, in Stephen
Sykes (ed.),
Authority in the Anglican Communion
(Toronto: Anglican Book
Centre, 1987), p. 123. See also Leo Pfeffer,
Church, State and Freedom
(Boston: Beacon Press, 1953), pp.
dissenters were, however, long subject to persecution on account of their
non-conformity.
East India Company Act 1813 (53 Geo. III c. 155) (U.K.). The East India
Company, as a result of the 1813 Charter renewal, also paid
for a Church of
Scotland minister in
the Submission of the Clergy Act 1533 (25 Hen. VIII c. 19) (Eng.), the right of
nomination to a bishopric lay in the Crown, and
letters patent were issued in
the colonies to make the nomination effective till 1863, as a consequence of
Long v. Lord Bishop of Cape Town
(1863) 1 Moo. N.S. 411 (P.C.).
Constitutional History of the Australian Church
Skeffington and Son, 1928), Appendix C, p. 198. In the 1823 letters patent of
Reginald Heber, second Bishop of Calcutta,
the jurisdiction covered Australia,
Van Diemen’s Land and the adjacent islands; Standing Committee of the
General Synod of
the Church of England in Australia,
The Anglican Church of
(Sydney: Standing Committee of the General Synod of the Church of
England in Australia, c.1981), p.
Committee of the General Synod of the Church of England in Australia,
Anglican Church of Australia
(Sydney: Standing Committee of the General
Synod of the Church of England in Australia, c.1981), pp.
Patriarch and Prophet: William Grant Broughton 1788-1853. Colonial
Statesman and Ecclesiastic
(Melbourne: Melbourn University Press, 1978), pp.
was a call for a bishopric of New Zealand at the time of the formation of the
Colonial Bishoprics Fund; William Sachs,
The Transformation of Anglicanism
(Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1993), pp.
Treaty of Waitangi and a series of proclamations; David Williams, ‘The
annexation of New Zealand to New South Wales
in 1840: What of the Treaty of
Australian Journal of Law and Society
(1985), p. 41;
David Williams, ‘The Constitutional Status of the Treaty of Waitangi: an
historical perspective’,
New Zealand Universities Law Review
(1990), p. 9; David Williams, ‘The Foundation of Colonial Rule in New
New Zealand Universities Law Review
13(1) (1988), p. 54.
parallel development, New Zealand was administered as a part of New South Wales
at this time; Alexander H. McLintock,
Crown Colony Government in New Zealand
(Wellington: Government Printer,
Standing Committee of the General Synod of the Church of England in Australia,
The Anglican Church of Australia
(Sydney: Standing Committee of the
General Synod of the Church of England in Australia, c.1981), p.
1841-47 Selwyn was under the Archbishop of Canterbury as Metropolitan; 1847-54
he was under the Bishop of Sydney; 1854-58 he
came under Canterbury again. In
1858 Selwyn became Metropolitan for New
Davidson, ‘“A Sort of Cast-Off Step Daughter”: Established but
Not Established. Defining Anglican Sovereignty
in Colonial New Zealand’,
Anglican Historical Society Newsletter
38 (2007), p.
Colonial Church Chronicle
V (1852), p.
Church and State in Australia 1788-1872 (London: S.P.C.K., 1962
Colonial Church Chronicle
V (1852), p. 161;
Colonial Church Chronicle
VI (1853), p.
for example, E.D. Daw, ‘Church and State in the Empire: The Conference of
Australian [
] Bishops 1850’,
Journal of Imperial and
Commonwealth History
5(1) (1976), pp.
Ibid., p.3.
Though the role of the Crown was not altogether ignored:
PROVIDED THAT
nothing herein contained shall prevent the General Synod from accepting any
alteration of the above-named formularies
and Version of the Bible as may from
time to time be adopted by the United Church of England and Ireland, with the
consent of the
Crown and of Convocation.
– Const. A2,
Church and State in Australia 1788-1872 (London: S.P.C.K., 1962
This was introduced by the New Zealand
Constitution
Act 1852 (15 & 16 Vict.
c. 72) (U.K.). There were limitations upon the authority of colonial legislative
assemblies to change
settled principles of the common law until the passage of
the Colonial Law Validity Act 1865 (28 & 29 Vict. c. 63)
Church and State in Australia 1788-1872 (London: S.P.C.K., 1962
Ibid, pp. 192-3.
diocese of New Zealand (eventually to be renamed Auckland in 1868), dioceses
were subsequently formed in Christchurch
(1856), Waiapu, Wellington and Nelson
(1858-59). Dunedin was added 1869 (formerly part of Christchurch), and Waikato
(from the southern
part of Auckland) in
bishop, eight clergymen, and seven laymen. The two bishops at the conference
were Selwyn himself and Bishop H.J.C. Harper. Harper
arrived in New Zealand in
December 1856. There was an error in Harper’s letters patent and he was
put under the jurisdiction
of Australia while Selwyn was under Canterbury; A.K.
Davidson, ‘“A Sort of Cast-Off Step Daughter”: Established
Not Established. Defining Anglican Sovereignty in Colonial New Zealand’,
Anglican Historical Society Newsletter
38 (2007), p.
passage of the Irish Church Act 1869 (32 & 33 Vict. c. 42) (U.K.), no longer
the United Church.
1862, when the diocese of Ontario was formed, the bishop was elected in Canada,
and consecrated under a royal mandate, letters
patent being by this time unused.
And when, in 1867, a coadjutor was chosen for the bishop of Toronto, an
application for a royal
mandate produced the reply from the colonial secretary
that ‘it was not the part of the crown to interfere in the creation
new bishop or bishopric, and not consistent with the dignity of the crown that
he should advise Her Majesty to issue a mandate
which would not be worth the
paper on which it was written, and which, having been sent out to Canada, might
be disregarded in the
most complete manner.’ The Canadian bishops pressed
the Archbishop of Canterbury to convene a conference of all the world’s
Anglican bishops, and the first “Lambeth Conference” met in 1867, as
a consequence of this jurisdictional difficulty,
as well as the questions
regarding the Church’s ability to deal with Bishop Colenso; Jan Nunley,
‘Authority versus autonomy
an old debate for Anglicans’ Episcopal
News Service 2001-47 (23 February 2001) at
http://www.episcopalchurch.org/ens/2001-47.html
October 2002. See also Margaret Ogilvie,
Religious Institutions and
the Law in Canada
(Scarborough: Carswell,
Church and State in Australia 1788-1872 (London: S.P.C.K., 1962
p. 249; See also D.N. Swain, ‘Self Government in the Anglican Church in
New Zealand, 1838-1865’, (1965) Victoria University
of Wellington MA
thesis; G.A. Phillipson, ‘The Thirteenth Apostle, Bishop Selwyn and the
Transplantation of Anglicanism in
New Zealand, 1841-1868’, (1992)
University of Otago PhD thesis; Warren Limbrick,
Bishop Selwyn in New Zealand
(Palmerston North: Dunmore Press, 1983); John H. Evans,
Militant: George Augustus Selwyn, Bishop of New Zealand and Lichfield
(Wellington: Allen & Unwin/Reed, 1964); A.K. Davidson,
Christianity in
Aotearoa: A History of Church and Society in New Zealand
(Wellington:
Education for Ministry, 3
William Sachs,
The Transformation of Anglicanism
(Cambridge: Cambridge
University Press, 1993), p. 191; Henry W. Tucker,
Memoir of the Life and
Episcopate of George Augustus Selwyn, DD
(London: Wells Gardner, 1879), vol.
I, p. 89f; G.A. Wood, ‘Church and State in New Zealand in the
Journal of Religious History
8(3) (1975), pp. 255-70.
Because the
Crown generally had little involvement in appointing bishops; see Sir Robert
Phillimore,
The Ecclesiastical Law of the Church of England
Sweet & Maxwell, 2
edn., 1895), vol. II, p. 1786.
example A.K. Davidson, ‘Christianity and National Identity: The Role of
the Churches in “the Construction of
Nationhood”’, in John
Stenhouse and Brett Knowles (eds.),
The Future of Christianity: Historical,
Sociological, Political and Theological Perspectives from New Zealand
(Adelaide: ATF Press, 2004), pp. 16-35; G.A Wood, ‘Church and State in
the Furthest Reach of Western Christianity’, in
John Stenhouse and G.A.
Wood (eds.),
Christianity, Modernity and Culture: New Perspectives on New
Zealand History
(Adelaide: ATF Press, 2005), pp. 207-39.
Kaye, ‘The Strange Birth of Anglican Synods in Australia and the 1850
Bishops’ Conference’,
Journal of Religious History
(2003), pp. 177-97.
consensual compact binding on the conscience of the individual members. Its
provisions are without contractual force and
are not justiciable in a civil
Court, except to the extent that they may be involved in a matter concerning
Church property governed
by statute;
Dodwell v. Bishop of Wellington
(1886) N.Z.L.R. 5
S.C. 263 and
Scandrett v. Dowling
(1992) 27 N.S.W.L.R.
, 512, 554, 564 (CA N.S.W.); cf. Mr. Justice Bruce McPherson, ‘The
Church as consensual compact, trust and corporation’,
Australian Law
74 (2000), pp. 159,
example, in New Zealand, Title A canon II.3;
Gregory v. Bishop of Waiapu
[1975] 705, 712 per Beattie J. Mr. Justice Beattie had been Chancellor of
the Diocese of Auckland 1967-69, from which position he
resigned upon
appointment to the Supreme Court of New
Middleton v. Crofts
[1736] EngR 23
(1736) 2 Atk. 650 (K.B.)
[binding only if declaratory
of ancient usage and law]; approved in
Bishop of Exeter v.
(1868) L.R. 3 H.L. 17.
In New Zealand, ordained ministers give a
declaration of canonical obedience to their bishop at ordination (Title D canon
and on appointment to office any ordained minister and office bearer
to be licensed make a declaration of Adherence and Submission
(Const. C.15) and
a Declaration (Title A canon II.3; Title D canon I.C1.2.2). Non-licensed office
bearers make a declaration of Adherence
and Submission (Const. C.15) or a
declaration of Acknowledgement of Authority of General Synod (Title B canon XXI;
Title D canon
I.C1.2.2). ‘All persons who are subject to episcopal
following acts or omissions ... ’; Title D canon I.C2.3;
Bishop of Waiapu
[1975] 1 N.Z.L.R.
Justice Bruce McPherson, ‘The Church as consensual compact, trust and
corporation’,
Australian Law Journal
74 (2000), pp. 159-74.
Pawlet v. Clark
[1815] USSC 38
(9 Cranch) 292
parte The Reverend George King
(1861) 2 Legge 1301 (N.S.W.)
Inhabitants of Brampton
[1808] EngR 362
(1808) 10 East. 282
per Lord Ellenborough, C.J.
[ecclesiastical law carried by settlers]. Indeed, each diocese has its own canon
law; Standing Committee
of the General Synod of the Church of England in
The Anglican Church of Australia, Canon Law in Australia
(Sydney: Standing Committee of the General Synod of the Church of England in
Australia, c.1981), p. 5. However, this has only been
since the independence of
the Australian Church, as in 1850 it was affirmed by an Australasian conference
of metropolitan and bishops
that the 1603 canons were applicable; Robbie A.
Constitutional History of the Australian Church
Skeffington and Son, 1929), Appendix K, p.
Lord Bishop of Natal
[1864] EngR 864
(1864) 3 Moo. P.C.C. N.S. 115
, 148, 152 (P.C.);
approved in
Baldwin v. Pascoe
(1889) 7 N.Z.L.R. 759
‘Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction in the Church of the Province of Aotearoa,
New Zealand and Polynesia’,
Deakin Law Review
6(2) (2001), pp.
266-84; Conrad Earl Russell, ‘Whose Supremacy? King, Parliament and the
Church 1530-1640’,
Ecclesiastical Law Journal
4(21) (1997), pp.
the 1850 letter from a group of New Zealand laity led by the Governor, Sir
George Grey, to Bishop Selwyn;
Colonial Church Chronicle
V (1852), p.
161. For Selwyn’s reply see
Colonial Church Chronicle
VI (1853), p.
authority for New Zealand canons derives from the
Constitution
, B.5; Church of
England Empowering Act 1928 s.
Canon Law in the Anglican Communion
(Oxford: Clarendon Press, 1998),
p. 14; Noel Cox, ‘Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction in the Church of the
Province of Aotearoa, New
Zealand and Polynesia’,
Deakin Law Review
6(2) (2001), pp.
Church of England Empowering Act 1928 (N.Z.) (as amended), Preamble.
England Empowering Act 1928 (N.Z.) (as
Anglican Church Trusts Act 1981
(N.Z.). Selwyn held all the land in
trust up until 1858 when the Bishop of New Zealand Trust Act (N.Z.) was passed.
From 1858 Church
property had been vested in trustees; William Sachs,
Transformation of Anglicanism
(Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1993),
p. 191; Henry W. Tucker,
Memoir of the Life and Episcopate of George Augustus
(London: Wells Gardner, 1879), vol. I, p. 89ff; G.A. Wood,
‘Church and State in New Zealand in the 1850s’,
Religious History
8(3) (1975), pp.
Church of England (Missionary Dioceses) Act 1955
Zealand Anglican Church Pension Fund Act 1972 (N.Z.).
historical material see William P. Morrell,
The Anglican Church in New
(Dunedin: McIndoe,
Gregory v. Bishop of Waiapu
[1975] 1 N.Z.L.R.
Ibid, 708 per Beattie J. cf.
Barker v. O’Gorman
[1971] 1 Ch.
[1970] 3 All E.R.
[1998] 2 N.Z.L.R. 161 (C.A.)
, where a letter by the respondent to an
official of the Methodist Church complaining about the plaintiff’s
behaviour as a minister
of the Church was not protected by absolute privilege
either under the Defamation Act 1992 (N.Z.) or at common
A.1; Church of England Empowering Act 1928 (N.Z.). In accordance with the
principle of the supremacy of Crown-in-Parliament;
Article 37 of the
Thirty-Nine Articles
(enacted in 1562, and confirmed in 1571 by the
Subscription (Thirty-Nine Articles) Act 1571 (13 Eliz. I c. 12)
Const. A.1.
Const. A.2.
Edward Norman, ‘Authority in the Anglican Communion’,
(Ecclesiastical Law Society Lecture given during the Lambeth Conference
transcribed by the Society of Archbishop Justus: 1998).
was repealed and substituted, as from 28 September 1966, pursuant to s. 3 Church
of England Empowering Amendment Act 1966
allow for appeals to the judicial tribunals of the Church, see C.W. Haskell,
Scripture and the ordination of women
(Wellington: privately published,
1979); Rosemary Neave (ed.),
The Journey and the Vision
(Auckland: The
Women's Resource Centre, 1990), pp. 3,
Hubert Box,
The Principles of Canon Law
(London: Oxford University Press, 1949), p.
Doe, ‘Ecclesiastical Quasi-Legislation’, in Norman Doe, Mark Hill
and Fr. Robert Ombres (eds.),
English Canon Law
(Cardiff: University of
Wales Press, 1998), p. 95.
without qualification, the latter depending upon internal constitutional rules
of legislation-making, because of the
doctrine of parliamentary sovereignty.
Generally, see Geoffrey Marshall,
Parliamentary Sovereignty and the
Commonwealth
(Oxford: Oxford University Press,
Doe, ‘Ecclesiastical Quasi-Legislation’, in Norman Doe, Mark Hill
and Fr. Robert Ombres (eds.),
English Canon Law
(Cardiff: University of
Wales Press, 1998), p.
contrary view has been expressed; J. Burrows, ‘Judicial Review and the
Church of England’, (1997) University
of Wales Cardiff LL.M.
dissertation.
Scandrett v. Dowling
[1992] 27 N.S.W.L.R. 483
, 489 per Mahoney J.A.
‘Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction in the Church of the Province of Aotearoa,
New Zealand and Polynesia’,
Deakin Law Review
6(2) (2001), pp.
Church and State in the Post-Colonial Era: The Anglican Church and the
Constitution
in New Zealand
(Auckland: Polygraphia,
This Bill of Rights applies only to acts done –
legislative, executive, or judicial branches of the government of New Zealand;
(b) By any person or body in the performance of any public function,
power, or duty conferred or imposed on that person by or pursuant
The secular courts do not endeavour to interfere in matters of difference
within a religious group, nor can they decide theological
or liturgical
Cecil v. Rasmussen
(unreported, High Court, Auckland,
A1269/83, 9 December 1983, Baker J.);
Misa v. Congregational Christian Church
of Samoa (Wainuiomata) Trust Board
[1984] 2 N.Z.L.R. 461 (C.A.)
Presbyterian Church Property Trustees v. Fuimaono
(unreported, High
Court, Auckland, A1595/85, 16 October 1986, Thorp J.). This is not, however, an
absolute exclusion of
Dodwell v. Bishop of Wellington
(1886) N.Z.L.R. 5
Scandrett v.
(1992) 27 N.S.W.L.R. 483
, 512, 554, 564 (N.S.W.
Scandrett v. Dowling
(1992) 27 N.S.W.L.R. 483
, 513, the Court of Appeal
of New South Wales treated Church members as associated only on the basis of a
shared faith without legal
sanction for its enforcement; Mr. Justice Bruce
McPherson, ‘The Church as consensual compact, trust and
corporation’,
Australian Law Journal
74 (2000), p. 159,
including the Anglican Church Trusts Act 1981 (N.Z.), Anglican Church Trusts
Amendment Act 1989 (N.Z.), Anglican Trust
for Women and Children Act 1962
(N.Z.), Anglican Trust for Women and Children Amendment Acts 1968 (N.Z.) and
1975, Anglican Trustees
Investment (Auckland) Act 1972 (N.Z.), Cathedral-Site
Parnell Leasing Act 1886 (N.Z.), Christ’s College Canterbury Act 1885
(N.Z.), Christ’s College (Canterbury) Act 1928 (N.Z.), Christ’s
College, Canterbury Act 1999 (N.Z.), Christ’s College
(Canterbury)
Amendment Act 1929 (N.Z.) and 1945, Church of England Empowering Act 1928
(N.Z.), 1934 and 1966, Church of England
(Missionary Dioceses) Act 1955
(N.Z.), Church of England Tribunal (Validation of Election) Act 1934 (N.Z.),
Church Property Trust
(Canterbury) Act 1879 (N.Z.), Church Property Trust
(Canterbury) Act 1887 (N.Z.), Church Property Trust (Canterbury) Act 1879
Act 1889 (N.Z.), 1906, 1915, 1927, 1934, 1951, 1962, 1964 and 1990,
Church Property Trustees (Canterbury) Indemnity Act 1890 (N.Z.),
Church Reserves
(Canterbury) Act 1904 (N.Z.), College House Act 1985 (N.Z.), Dunedin Anglican
Social Services (Child Welfare) Act
1978 (N.Z.), Melanesian Trusts Board 1974
(N.Z.), New Zealand Anglican Church Pensions Act 1972 (N.Z.), New Zealand
Mission Trust
(Port Waikato Maraetai) Empowering Act 1986 (N.Z.), Saint
Mary’s Guild Trust Act 1956 (N.Z.), Nelson Diocesan Trust Board Empowering
Act 1937 (N.Z.), St. John’s Anglican Church (Parochial District of
Johnsonville) Burial Ground Act 1964 (N.Z.), St. John’s
College Trusts Act
1972 (N.Z.), St. Mary’s Church (Karori) Burial Ground Act 1963 (N.Z.),
Social Service Council of the Diocese
of Christchurch Act 1952 (N.Z.), Waikato
Anglican Boys College Trust Act 1987 (N.Z.), Warkworth Anglican Burial Ground
Act 1968 (N.Z.),
Wellington Bishopric Endowment Trust (Church of England) Act
1929 (N.Z.) and 1934, Wellington City Mission (Church of England) Act
(N.Z.) and 1965, and the Wellington Diocesan Board of Trustees (Church of
England) Act Repeal Act 1988
for example, those for the Roman Catholic Church [Roman Catholic Bishops
Empowering Act 1997 (N.Z.)], Methodist Church [Methodist
Church Property Trust
Act 1887 (N.Z.)], Baptist Church [Auckland Baptist Tabernacle Act 1948
Anglican Church Trusts Act 1981 (N.Z.).
Church Trusts Act 1981 (N.Z.) preamble.
following Regulations were made pursuant to this Act:
Anglican Church Trust
Boards Order 1982 (S.R. 1982/274); Anglican Church Trust Boards Order 1985 (S.R.
1985/110); Anglican Church
Trust Boards Order 1990 (S.R. 1990/299); Anglican
Church Trust Boards Order 1992 (S.R. 1992/219); Anglican Church Trust Boards
1994 (S.R. 1994/218); Anglican Church Trust Boards Order 1996 (S.R.
1996/310); Anglican Church Trust Boards Order 1998 (S.R.
This legislation takes the form of private, rather than public, Acts. The
difference lies in the method of passage, rather than
in the effect.
England Tribunal (Validation of Election) Act 1934 (N.Z.) preamble.
Roman Catholic Church is also legalistic, but in a different sense, relying upon
its own comprehensive internal legal and judicial
structures.
Human Rights Act 1993 (N.Z.), s. 21(c), apart from the exceptions in s. 28.
Rights Act 1993 (N.Z.), s. 22(1)(a);
Human Rights Commission v. Eric Sides
Motor Co. Ltd.
(1981) 2 N.Z.A.R. 443.
It includes a belief in a supernatural being, thing, or principal, and the
acceptance of canons of conduct in order to give effect
to that belief;
Centrepoint Community Growth Trust v. Commissioner of Inland Revenue
[1985] 1 N.Z.L.R. 673
Church of the New Faith v. Commissioner
for Pay-roll Tax (Victoria)
[1983] HCA 40
(1983) 154 C.L.R. 120
49 A.L.R. 65
A.C.J. and Brennan J.
This is defined as including a person who is for the time being exercising
functions analogous to those of a minister of religion;
Evidence Act 1908
(N.Z.), s. 2, definition of
‘minister’.
Evidence Amendment Act (No. 2) 1980 (N.Z.), s. 31(1);
Cook v. Carroll
[1945] I.R. 515
Francome v. Mirror Group Newspapers Ltd
[1984] 2 All E.R. 408 (C.A.).
For confessions generally, see Rupert
Bursell, ‘The Seal of the Confessional’,
Ecclesiastical Law
2 (1990), p.
Evidence Amendment Act (No. 2) 1980 (N.Z.), s. 31 (2);
R. v. Gruenke
[1991] 3 S.C.R. 263
[where the S.C.C. rejected a claim to privilege and
confidentiality involving a confession of murder made to a pastor and
counsellor].
The Church required Ministers to ‘keep information
confidential whether imparted in confession or informally in conversation
not improperly disclose it’; Title D canon I.A.12.7; Title D canon
I.A.13.1.4 (for ordained or lay ministers).
These bodies are the Baptists, Anglican Church, Congregational Independents,
Greek Orthodox, all Hebrew congregations, Lutheran
Churches, Methodists,
Presbyterian Church, Roman Catholics, Salvation Army. Other organisations
permitted to nominate celebrants
may apply to the Registrar-General to be
included in the list of approved bodies. To be included the objects of the
organisation
must be primarily to uphold or promote religious beliefs or
philosophical or humanitarian convictions; s.
Act 1961, s. 123. However, the consent of the Attorney-General is required for
any prosecution and doubt has been expressed
whether there is any particular
room for application of this section. See, for the English position, Graham G.
Routledge, ‘Blasphemy:
the Report of the Archbishop of Canterbury’s
Working Party on Offences Against Religion and Public Worship’,
Ecclesiastical Law Journal
1(4) (1989), p.
See for example
Ex parte Choudhury
[1991] 1 Q.B. 429
[1991] 1 All E.R.
; New South Wales Law Reform Commission,
(Sydney: New South
Wales Law Reform Commission, 1994), Report 74.
[1922] G.L.R. 185
, 187 per Hosking J.: ‘The object of the law
of blasphemy is to prevent disorder in the community, and, there being such
numbers of the community who have reverence and respect for certain
religious and sacred subjects, it is desirable that provocation
outrage of those feelings should be prevented.’
His Honour further
observed that, ‘the law does not take God under its protection in these
matters. That is not the object of
blasphemy.’
R. v. Glover
[1922] G.L.R. 185
[where the offence involved publishing a
poem by Siegfried Sassoon in which the slang word ‘bloody’ was used
in connection
with Christ and redemption. The jury acquitted, but as a rider
suggested that such words should be
discouraged].
Sir Ivor Richardson,
Religion and the Law
(Wellington: Sweet &
Maxwell, 1962), p. 8; Peter Lineham, ‘Government Support for the Churches
in the Modern Era’,
in Rex Ahdar and John Stenhouse (eds.),
(Dunedin: University of Otago Press, 2000), pp.
All faiths are equal before the law:
Centrepoint Community Growth Trust v.
Commissioner of Inland Revenue
[1985] 1 N.Z.L.R. 673
Church of the
New Faith v. Commissioner for Pay-roll Tax (Victoria)
[1983] HCA 40
(1983) 154 C.L.R. 120
[1983] HCA 40
49 A.L.R. 65
Nelan v. Downes
[1917] HCA 51
(1917) 23 C.L.R. 546
[1862] EngR 724
(1862) 31 Beav. 14.
the City of Christchurch. See the Church Property Trust (Canterbury) Act 1879
(N.Z.) and 1887 (N.Z.), Church Property Trust
(Canterbury) Act 1879 Amendment
Act 1889 (N.Z.), 1906, 1915 and 1927, Church Property Trust (Canterbury)
Amendment Act 1934 (N.Z.),
1951, 1962, 1964 and 1990, Church Property Trustees
(Canterbury) Indemnity Act 1890 (N.Z.), Church Reserves (Canterbury) Act 1904
the modern world governments have generally sought either to be entirely
separate from Churches or to manipulate them to their
own purposes; James
An Introduction to Canon Law
(New York: Paulist Press, 1991), p.
‘Church and State in New Zealand in the 1850s’,
Religious History
8(3) (1975), pp.
The Anglican Church in Aotearoa, New Zealand and Polynesia in the canons of the
Church since 1992: ‘This Church, which in
the Fundamental Provisions of
the Constitution/te Pouhere, is designated as a “Branch of the United
Church of England and Ireland’,
shall be referred to and designated in
The Anglican Church in Aotearoa, New Zealand and Polynesia
and shall be referred to and designated in te reo Maori, as
Te Hahi Mihinare
ki Aotearoa ki Niu Tireni, ki nga
Moutere o Te Moana Nui a
” (Title G canon
Church of England Enabling Act 1928
Edward Norman, ‘Authority in the Anglican Communion’,
(Ecclesiastical Law Society Lecture given during the Lambeth Conference
transcribed by the Society of Archbishop Justus: 1998).
The suggestion that they exist solely as voluntary associations, and that
although they may be recognized in statute, they are otherwise
voluntary associations, is not sufficient to explain the nature of the
relationship of Church and State;
Gregory v. Bishop of Waiapu
N.Z.L.R. 705
Lord Bishop of Natal v. Green
(1868) 18 L.T. 112
[1868] N.L.R. 138 cf. Mr. Justice Bruce McPherson, ‘The Church as
consensual compact, trust and corporation’,
Australian Law Journal
74 (2000), pp. 159-74.
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (295 KB)
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter