URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/journals/ALRCRefJl/2009/44.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 14:12:33
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
CoseNZa, Isabella --- "The war at home: Re-assessing the rules of engagement and our legal armoury" [2009] ALRCRefJl 44; (2009) 94 Australian Law Reform Commission Reform Journal 55
Reform Issue 94 Summer 2009
This article appears on pages 55–58 of the original
The war at home
Re-assessing the rules of engagement and our legal armoury
By Isabella Cosenza*
While homes should be safe havens and family life critical to our
well-being, the alarming reality is that a significant number of
individuals are
facing or fleeing a war at home.
Family violence encompasses varying degrees of severity—at the worst
culminating in death. Violence can be physical, sexual,
psychological, social, economic, or spiritual. Whatever form it takes, a central
and predominant feature is that violence
involves the perpetrator exercising
control and power over the victim. Violence can be directed towards partners,
children, elders,
siblings, other relatives, persons within Indigenous kinship
groups, and those being cared for—although not all of these groups
recognised uniformly across state and territory family violence legislation.
Family violence is being committed across different terrains—from
regional and rural areas to remote Indigenous communities—and
it involves
perpetrators and victims across socio-economic, generational, cultural and
religious divides. The casualties of family
violence are predominantly women.
The Australian Bureau of Statistics has estimated that nearly one in three
Australian women experience
physical violence and almost one in five women
experience sexual violence over their
There are, however, a
large number of silent victims—those who are unknown, who may be too
ashamed or frightened to report
family violence. Addressing the under-reporting
of family violence remains a challenge.
As with any war, the costs and consequences of family violence to the
individual and to the wider community are significant. Of immense
concern is the
finding that family violence is the leading contributor to death, disability and
illness in women of reproductive
In 2009, the economic
cost of violence against women and children in Australia has been estimated at
$13.6 billion.
Studies have
documented the adverse emotional and psychological impact on children
experiencing or being exposed to family violence.
The causes of family violence are multifaceted, complex and intertwined.
Achieving a ceasefire will require more than a single solution.
cultural, attitudinal, economic, political, and legal factors all come into
play. Prevention and protection strategies will
invariably need to address the
enormously difficult problems of homelessness, poverty, mental illness, access
to justice by marginalised
communities, drug and alcohol abuse—to name
just a few. Indeed family violence has been the subject of numerous reports and
inquiries over the decades. The National Council to Reduce Violence against
Women and their Children, in its report
Time for Action
, focuses on
strategies and actions for prevention, early intervention, improved service
delivery and justice.
ALRC’s Terms of Reference
Within the context of this wider social fabric—and alongside a number
of key concurrent inquiries relevant to this area—the
ALRC has been asked
to consider the interaction in practice of family violence laws and child
protection laws with the
Family Law Act 1975
(Cth) and the criminal law.
The ALRC has also been asked to consider the impact on victims of inconsistent
interpretations or applications
of sexual assault laws within the context of
family violence.
In each case, the ALRC has been asked to consider whether improvements could
be made to the relevant legal frameworks. The ALRC’s
Terms of Reference
are therefore limited to considering improvements to the law—although
undeniably laws cannot be considered
in isolation from the social and cultural
frameworks and the processes within which they operate.
The relevant interactions that the ALRC is to consider cross: geographical
by the division of
legislative powers; criminal and civil jurisdictions; and public and private
law. The potential battlefields are,
therefore, numerous and splintered. For
example, a woman may simultaneously be involved in: civil proceedings to obtain
violence restraining order; a criminal prosecution for the act of
violence committed against her; family proceedings to determine
orders; and child welfare proceedings in respect of children considered at risk
because of their having experienced or
been exposed to family violence. Each set
of proceedings has its own rules of engagement. Legal representation across the
be fragmented or non-existent. The delivery of legal services may be
dependent on federal and state or territory cooperation. For
example, the
federal machinery of the Family Court does not have an investigative arm to
examine allegations of child abuse and is
reliant on state and territory child
welfare authorities in this regard—which from many accounts are
battle-weary and severely
under-resourced.
The danger of multi-jurisdictional involvement is that victims of
violence—particularly children—may be left in no man’s
worse, thrust unwittingly into the line of battle. This can result, as outlined
below, because of the fact that courts across
with making orders that are consistent with each other—rather than
focusing on the issue of
whether individuals are at risk of violence.
Resolving inconsistent orders—masking the potential for
Concurrent or consecutive proceedings may arise in the local or magistrates
court, the Children’s Court or Youth Court, and
the Family Court or
Federal Magistrates Court. This raises the potential for conflicting orders. A
person may simultaneously be subject
to a restraining order, bail conditions and
Family Court contact orders.
For example, there may be direct conflict between a family violence
restraining order made in the local court which prohibits a father
approaching the family home, and a contact order under the
Family Law Act
which provides for the father to collect children for contact from the
family home. Section 68Q of the
Family Law Act
provides that in cases of
such inconsistency, the contact order prevails and the family violence
restraining order is invalid to the
extent of the inconsistency. This may expose
victims to further violence. Previous reports have recommended that when the
Court makes a contact order it should satisfy itself that the order will
not expose women and children to an unacceptable risk of
violence, irrespective
of whether the proposed contact order and an existing family violence order are
inconsistent.
The Family Court may make orders inconsistent with a family violence
order—even when it is aware of the order—because
the mere existence
of the order does not amount to evidence of violence. This is especially the
case with respect to many family
violence restraining orders that are obtained
by consent without admissions by the person against whom the order is made.
State and territory courts exercising family law jurisdiction have the power
to modify or revoke a contact order under the
Family Law Act
effect to a family violence restraining order. Such power, however, is rarely
used. This is partly because magistrates may
be unaware of the existence of the
As a matter of practice,
many magistrates avoid potential inconsistency by making family violence
restraining orders subject to any
Family Law Act
. This standardised approach to family violence restraining
orders increases the potential for the risk of violence to be masked.
problem is exacerbated by the practical reality that proceedings for family
violence restraining orders in some jurisdictions
have been found to be very
brief, rarely receiving particularised attention from magistrates. Rosemary
Hunter’s study concluded
that the median hearing time for all proceedings
for family violence restraining orders in magistrates’ courts in Victoria
was three minutes.
Triggering intervention
A key issue is that the rules of engagement for triggering legal intervention
in cases of family violence vary among the states and
territories. Whether
protective family violence restraining orders under family violence legislation
can be deployed to protect victims
from future acts of violence will depend on:
the parameters of the varying definitions of ‘family violence’
state and territory jurisdictions; whether the victim is in a defined
relationship with the alleged perpetrator, and varying legal
tests for the
activation of the order. For example:
• Some jurisdictions do not expressly include sexual assault as a type
of family violence.
• Only four jurisdictions expressly include kidnapping or deprivation
of liberty as a form of family violence.
• All jurisdictions except Tasmania specify damage to property as
constituting a form of family violence.
• Victoria is the only jurisdiction where causing a child to witness or
otherwise be exposed to the effects of family violence
itself constitutes family
violence—although some other jurisdictions expressly allow for the making
of orders to protect children
from such exposure.
While the family violence legislation of some jurisdictions—such as
Tasmania and South Australia—provide protection to
a relatively narrowly
defined group of people, other jurisdictions adopt a broader approach. For
example, the Queensland legislation
recognises that Indigenous persons may have
an extended concept of family, and it includes in the definition of
person whom the relevant person reasonably
regards as a relative. It also extends protection to informal care
relationships.
Understanding precisely what constitutes family violence in each jurisdiction
is a fundamental prerequisite to considering whether
and how, in any particular
matter, family violence laws interact with the
Family Law Act
has its own definition of family
Family violence is
especially relevant in the context of relationship breakdowns. Significantly,
the Family Violence Strategy of
the Family Court of Australia acknowledges that
the definition of ‘family violence’ in the
Family Law Act
too narrow to meet the objectives of the Strategy.
Family Law Act
contains a number of provisions guiding the
Court’s discretion. These include that the Family Court and any court
safety from family violence.
Insofar as the Family Court has to decide what is in a child’s best
interests it has to consider as a primary consideration
the need to protect the
child from physical or psychological harm from being subjected to, or exposed
to, abuse, neglect or family
The Court must also
consider as an additional consideration any other fact or circumstance that the
Court thinks is relevant.
An issue which the ALRC will explore is whether, in practice, the differences
in the definitions of ‘family violence’
across family violence
legislation and them
Family Law Act
are causing gaps in protection or
preventing relevant evidence or information about family violence from being put
before the Family
Court. In particular, the ALRC will inquire whether the
combined effect of the Family Court’s broad discretion and the guiding
principles in the
operate at a practical level to
surmount definitional constraints.
Understanding the definitions of family violence in each jurisdiction is also
critical to assessing whether and how those laws interact
with the criminal law
in any particular matter. For example, where family violence is defined by
reference to specific criminal offences—as
it is in the family violence
legislation of New South
—there is clear
potential for overlap between civil and criminal redress. The same conduct can
form the basis for a protection
order as well as a prosecution for a criminal
offence, although the latter will require a discharge of the criminal burden of
proof—beyond
reasonable doubt. In all jurisdictions breach of a protection
order is a criminal offence. In other cases, definitions of family
violence will
include examples of conduct—such as emotional abuse—which do not
attract the protection of the criminal
law, although they form the basis for the
obtaining of a civil family violence restraining order. The Victorian
legislation, for
example, explicitly provides that ‘to remove doubt it is
declared that behaviour may constitute family violence even if the
would not constitute a criminal
Whether a victim will have the armoury of the criminal law for particular
forms of abuse may also be jurisdiction-dependent. For example,
Tasmanian legislation makes economic abuse
The way forward?
What strategies and legal machinery are needed to combat family violence? The
flow of accurate and timely information is critical
to survival in war—and
this is no less applicable to the war at home. Courts should be aware of
pre-existing orders affecting
the parties before them, especially when those
orders may impact on safety. The ALRC will be exploring measures to ensure that
flow of information between courts, and between courts and relevant state
departments and agencies is optimal.
Should there be single rules of engagement in the form of model family
violence laws across the jurisdictions—as was proposed
by a Domestic
Violence Legislation Working Group in 1999? Should family violence matters be
heard in specialist family violence courts—as
is the case in some
for therapeutic jurisprudence?
How can the legal armoury be strengthened or
tailor-made to assist particular groups of vulnerable victims of
violence—such
as Indigenous women, the mentally ill, and women from
linguistically and culturally diverse backgrounds?
When people take marriage vows ‘for better or worse’ and
‘til death do us part’—they do not bargain
for the worst
outcome of death or severe injury at the hands of their spouse—or that
their children will be targets of violence
from their spouse. The law can only
go so far to address family violence but it is important that it goes as far as
it possibly can.
Timetable for the Inquiry
The Australian Law Reform Commission (ALRC) and the New South Wales Law
Reform Commission are working on a joint consultation paper,
which will outline
the scope of the Family Violence Inquiry and seek community feedback on relevant
It is anticipated that the consultation paper will be released in March 2010.
The commissions will embark on an intensive round of
consultations, before
submitting a final report to the Attorneys-General of Australia and New South
Wales at the end of July 2010.
The report will be publicly available once it is tabled in the Australian and
NSW parliaments.
Register an interest
The ALRC website allows people who are interested in the progress of the
Family Violence Inquiry to register an interest to receive
email updates and
copies of the consultation paper, once it is released.
www.alrc.gov.au
* Isabella Cosenza is a Senior Legal Officer at the Australian Law
Reform Commission (ALRC). She is currently assigned to the joint
ALRC/New South
Wales Law Reform Commission Inquiry on Family Violence.
Australian Bureau of Statistics, Personal
Safety Survey, ABS Cat No 4906.0, 2005, cited in
Background Paper to Time for
Action: The
National Council’s Plan for Australia to Reduce
Violence against
Women and their Children
Victoria Health,
The Health Costs of
Violence: Measuring the Burden of Disease Caused by Intimate Partner Violence: A
Summary of Findings
The National Council to Reduce Violence
Against Women and their Children,
The Cost of Violence Against Women and
their Children
, (March 2009), 34.
The NSW Law Reform Commission has
received identical Terms of Reference and will be working jointly with the ALRC
on this Inquiry.
Kearney McKenzie & Associates,
Review of Division 11
(1998) 26. This approach was supported by the
Family Law Council.
Ibid, 18–19.
Domestic Violence Law Reform
and Women’s Experience in Court
The workability of any proposal to have a
national registration of family violence orders may be compromised by multiple
definitions
of family violence, especially where those definitions are in
conflict on particular aspects.
Family Law Act 1975
Ibid s 60CC(2)(b).
Ibid s 60CC(3)(m).
Crimes (Domestic and Personal
Violence) Act 2007
Family Violence Protection Act 2008
Family Violence Act 2004
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (224 KB)
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter