URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/journals/MelbJlIntLaw/2024/7.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 15:17:45
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Richardson, Benjamin J --- "Natural Perception: Environmental Images and Aesthetics in International Law" [2024] MelbJlIntLaw 7; (2024) 25(1) Melbourne Journal of International Law 169
BOOK REVIEW
Book Reviews
Natural Perception: Environmental Images and Aesthetics in International
by Alice Palmer
(Cambridge University Press, 2023) 313 pages.
Price AUD183.95 (Hardback) ISBN 9781009350129.
How legal institutions assess and apply nature’s aesthetic values,
especially alongside other knowledge from the physical sciences
and economics,
has been a longstanding governance problem. The groundbreaking Commonwealth
enquiry of 1973 into the damming of Tasmania’s
iconic Lake Pedder, now
located within the Tasmanian Wilderness World Heritage Area, was perhaps the
first time an Australian official
body grappled with this challenge for a place
of great international significance. The enquiry established by Prime Minister
Whitlam received nearly 200 submissions including from many artists, from
poets to painters, who readily impressed the federal commissioners
lake’s sublime
photographs and even a film about Lake Pedder were tendered as
However, the enquiry struggled to
make headway in formulating how this scenic gem’s aesthetic values, in the
own words, ‘might be assessed and perhaps quantified as a
decision-making’.
In both the domestic and
international realms, environmental lawyers have since continued to wrestle with
related difficulties for
several decades despite a plethora of legislation and
treaties explicitly affirming aesthetic values, most commonly ‘natural
beauty’, for protection.
Disputes over
wind farms, roads through “pristine” parks and pollution eyesores
are just a few of the many domains where
the beauty and ugliness of our use of
the natural world can end up involving lawyers. However, few legal academics
have shown much
interest in such matters, in contrast to the plethora of
philosophers, art historians and others who have written literature on
environmental
aesthetics.
Superficial
understandings of this subject by lawmakers can undermine accountability for
their decisions, and result in aesthetic
values being confusingly conflated with
other values, such as recreational or spiritual values, or marginalised
altogether by the
seemingly greater gravitas of economic and scientific
knowledge bearing on environmental issues.
Alice Palmer’s new work,
Natural Perception: Environmental Images
and Aesthetics in International Law,
seeks to address some aspects of the
foregoing, adding to contributions she is indebted to such as
Environmental Law: Governing with
Law and the Visual: Representations, Technologies, and
Derived from her PhD
dissertation, Palmer’s analysis focuses on photographic images in seeking
to understand how international
legal institutions have considered
nature’s aesthetic qualities in decision-making under treaties governing
World Heritage
areas, cetaceans and other biodiversity, as well as to consider
how to improve the quality of their decision-making. From the proposition
‘photographs could be embraced as forms of legal argument, interpretation
and judgment in international
Palmer’s interest springs from her concern that photographs are ‘not
acknowledged in the prosaic practice of international
environmental law’,
a deficit she believes diminishes the integrity of international legal
Palmer’s advocacy for
‘understandings of the environment’s aesthetic worth that are
sensitive to the likely plural
conceptions of aesthetic value among the many
nations that commit to international environmental
appropriately acknowledges
the diverse cultural and intellectual framings of aesthetic appreciation, though
this observation is also
pertinent to the domestic legal realm that she largely
ignores, where considerable contestation over environmental aesthetic judgements
and values also occurs, such as in Australia as associated with its rival
Indigenous and colonial settler
The notion of “aesthetics” may be unfamiliar to many legal
scholars. As a noun, it often refers to the branch of philosophy
concerned with
appreciation of nature or art, and as an adjective concerns the qualities
ascribed to experiencing such phenomena.
large field of scholarship is now devoted just to
environmental
aesthetics. Whether it is auditory, tactile, olfactory or visual, sensory
stimulation from the environment can generate, argue these
aestheticians,
valuable emotional and cognitive connections to nature that are different to
other forms of cultural knowledge.
direct aesthetic appreciation of many dimensions of nature may not be possible
for many, it is also vital to recognise how the
arts have acquired a crucial
role in mediating aesthetic appreciation of nature, and how art historians have
contributed to interpreting
Photography is a plausible entry point chosen by Palmer to tackle this
subject. Although landscape painting has a far longer history,
invention and popularisation of photography in the 19
century that
has done far more to build our visual
The pictorial revolution it
spawned has been influenced in particular by representations of the natural
environment often being the
dominant way many people “see” nature,
as it was for the Lake Pedder enquiry commissioners in 1973, of whom only one
the four actually visited the lake.
In tackling this subject, Palmer’s book is organised principally into
two halves. The first unpacks the conceptual terrain
relating to what she terms
‘aesthetic vantages’ and the second half applies these vantages to
case studies relating to
decision-making associated with the
concerning the Protection of the World Cultural and Natural
International
Convention for the Regulation of
Convention on
Biological Diversity
followed by a
concluding chapter that attempts to canvass wider application of her critique
and proposals. Given the subject matter,
the inclusion of over 50 photographs,
many of which serve to anchor her case studies rather than be mere decoration,
is a valuable
aid to the reader.
In the first half of the book, in Chapters 2, 3, and 4, the author
elaborates her notion of “aesthetic vantages”, whereby
knowledge disciplines and cultural traditions, including in international law,
that have shaped how aesthetic values relating
to nature are identified and
assessed. She first takes readers on a journey through the work of aesthetic
philosophers and art historians
and practitioners, and although this discussion
does not generate new theoretical insights it is helpful for legal researchers
are unlikely to be conversant with it, as Palmer acknowledges. The big names
in this field such as Allen Carlson and Emily Brady
receive generous analysis.
Chapter 3 examines international law’s doctrinal methods for interpreting
treaties so as to understand
how international lawyers might interpret an
environment’s aesthetic value, and Palmer draws heavily on Brady in
should highlight aesthetic values as distinct from other
environmental values considered by international
She then, in Chapter 4, introduces
some of the visual arts that have engaged with the natural world as well as how
some legal scholars
have considered visual art to promote more critical thinking
on environmental or international law. Much relevant work is canvassed
although by focusing on
forms rather than the full suite of pictorial
forms, many made without artistic intentions — such forms including
utilitarian
cinema or prosaic print media
— some potentially valuable insights remain undeveloped for understanding
how to evaluate the variety of graphic representations
The case studies in the book’s second half, in Chapters 5, 6 and 7,
examine the subject matter in the context of one subfield
of international
environmental law: nature conservation. Here Palmer investigates the treatment
of aesthetic values and photographic
images associated with the nomination of
properties to the World Heritage List and associated
determinations,
the Antarctic whaling
litigation that pitched Australia against
and international decision-making
relating to biodiversity, particularly in regard to the fourth edition of the
Global Biodiversity Outlook
principal rationale given for these case studies is that they ‘represent
an evolution spanning decades in international
environmental law from the
protection of species to spaces to
Whilst this approach
informs readers of some salient dimensions in the evolution of international
environmental law, Palmer’s
focus on nature conservation leaves many older
and newer dimensions of international environmental law considered only
or minimally, such as those concerning fossil fuel emissions,
hazardous wastes or transboundary natural resources, among many issues
subject to international environmental
regulation.
Nonetheless, highlighting
nature conservation likely covers quite well examples and patterns where
aesthetic values are most explicitly
acknowledged in international law.
The concluding chapter attempts to extrapolate some findings of broader
application whilst advocating how to make international legal
institutions more
aesthetically literate and competent in their use of graphic images. Here Palmer
draws again on Brady to frame
her argument. Palmer considers better procedures
and principles to govern consideration of photographs in settings that include
judgments, conferences of state parties to international treaties and
administrative determinations of international bodies. She
seeks a more critical
and competent treatment of aesthetic values as related to but distinct from
other environmental values such
as mere ethical value or cultural value.
Palmer’s focus on and treatment of photography, which she assesses by
drawing heavily on art historians and environmental aestheticians,
has strengths
and limitations. Though not considered by Palmer, Australian academic Jarrod
Hore’s recent book offers a valuable
account of the problematic role of
photographers in the cultural representation of landscapes in 19
century Pacific Rim settler societies, having helped propagate colonising
imagery of unpeopled “wilderness” that disguised
its Indigenous
Likewise, my own work on corporate
environmental marketing shows another questionable side of how photography and
other imagery can
serve to manipulate public opinion to disguise unethical or
unsustainable environmental practices.
is important to be mindful that when seeking to ascribe a legal meaning to
aesthetic values that is distinct from other values
relevant to decision-making
in international treaties that we appreciate how some photographic
representations of nature might be
complicit in an undesirable agenda. Returning
to the Lake Pedder example, to illustrate further, Tasmania’s
Hydro-Electric
Commission tried to manipulate public opinion by circulating its
own photographs of the enlarged, dammed lake with the by-line that
it was more
beautiful than the original.
Palmer is not
unaware of some of these risks, but her professed reliance on ‘aesthetic
concepts and methods, developed for
the arts, to describe the
environment’s aesthetic value from
photographs’
risks losing valuable,
critical insights from other disciplines such as media and cinema studies that
could help challenge that risk.
certainly some valuable perspectives from art critics and aestheticians, such as
Brady and others including Alan Braddock,
but a wider lens that taps into visual culture research yields a bigger
Thus, Palmer’s call for a more
critical perspective on her subject matter by inclusion of greater
‘aesthetic expertise’
in international lawmaking from ‘experts
in aesthetic philosophy’ might not be so readily attainable from the
of the few scholarly disciplines and techniques she relies on
The status of film itself is also glossed over, with the author tending to
conflate still photography with film, or ‘video’
preferred terminology.
Whilst her book
discusses some interesting examples of video art, such as Julie Gough’s
her work and the
scholarly literature cited do not enable readers to properly understand how film
and photography compare and contrast,
and how film can contribute distinctive
perspectives on the book’s subject matter. We certainly cannot just assess
an art form. Environmental cinema has become hugely influential in the
modern environmental movement over the past half century as
a utilitarian,
pedagogical and advocacy tool for aesthetic and other values, and film has
sometimes been a resource cited or acknowledged
in some of the decision-making
processes that Palmer considers.
instance, in Australia’s 1981 nomination of the western Tasmanian
wilderness to the World Heritage List, seven films about
the region were cited
as supporting evidence, such as
Franklin River Journey
Whilst film and photography
obviously overlap, and a still image can be extracted from a movie, a complete
film such as a natural
history documentary or an eco-protest campaigning film
will offer far greater information and aesthetic variety than a photograph
even a collection of images. By combining narrative with visual and acoustic
content, films may also problematise any effort to
separate aesthetic values
from other values or information relevant to the natural environment. A now
large literature in film studies
offers some useful ways to evaluate critically
some of the most prevalent visual representations of nature of relevance to
environmental
decision-making domestically and
Finally, it is crucial to recognise that the problem of dealing with
environmental aesthetics in legal decision-making is sometimes
not so much the
issue Palmer focuses on but how to
aesthetic and non-aesthetic
values in such decisions. Improving the aesthetic literacy of decision-makers
certainly matters, but
we also need methodologies and processes for deciding how
aesthetic values against competing considerations such as
economic costs, poverty alleviation, etc. Sometimes trade-offs are needed.
methodological problem confounded the Lake Pedder enquiry in its ultimately
unsuccessful search for a way to value the scenic
charms of the lake against the
ostensible benefits of hydro-power development.
Overall, despite some constraints, Palmer’s substantial book helps
tackle a subject gaining global attention. Already, additional
legal literature
is circulating,
and entire conferences are
being devoted to the subject,
that the necessary critical mass of interest is at last emerging.
Notwithstanding a few omissions, her book’s bibliography
offers a useful
resource to support further enquiries. Whilst I suspect the 1973 Lake Pedder
enquiry would still find it challenging
to assess the aesthetic values and their
photographic evidence were it able to access the scholarly advances of the past
the enquiry would hopefully be closer to a satisfactory resolution
were it undertaken today thanks to the work of Palmer and other
Benjamin J Richardson
Lake Pedder Committee of Enquiry,
Parliament of Australia,
Final Report of the Lake Pedder Committee of Enquiry
on the Flooding of Lake Pedder
(Report, April 1975) 171–3 ('
Report of the Lake Pedder Committee of Enquiry
Benjamin J Richardson, Emily Barritt and
Megan Bowman, ‘Beauty: A Lingua Franca for Environmental Law?’
(2019) 8(1)
Transnational Environmental Law
59, 61, 64, 71–3.
See, eg, Allen Carlson,
Aesthetics and
the Environment: The Appreciation of Nature, Art and Architecture
(Routledge, 2000); Emily Brady,
Aesthetics of the Natural Environment
(Edinburgh University Press, 2003).
Benjamin J Richardson,
Environmental Law: Governing with Aesthetics
(Hart Publishing, 2019).
Desmond Manderson (ed),
Law and the
Visual: Representations, Technologies, and Critique
(University of Toronto
Press, 2018).
Alice Palmer,
Natural Perception:
Environmental Images and Aesthetics in International Law
University Press, 2023) 4.
See generally Eve Vincent and Timothy
Neale (eds),
Unstable Relations: Indigenous People and Environmentalism in
Contemporary Australia
(UWA Publishing, 2016); Matthew Colloff,
Landscapes of Our Hearts
(Thames and Hudson, 2020).
See Bence Nanay,
Aesthetics as
Philosophy of Perception
(Oxford University Press, 2016).
See, eg, Allen Carlson and Arnold
Berleant (eds),
The Aesthetics of Natural Environments
(Broadview Press,
See, eg, Mark A Cheetham,
into Eco Art: Articulations of Nature Since the ‘60s
(Pennsylvania
State University Press, 2018).
Jane Kromm and Susan Benforado
Bakewell (eds),
A History of Visual Culture: Western Civilization from the
(Berg, 2010).
Final Report of the Lake Pedder
Committee of Enquiry
Convention concerning the
Protection of the World Cultural and Natural Heritage
, opened for signature
16 November
1972, 1037 UNTS 151
(entered into force 17 December 1975).
International Convention for the
Regulation of Whaling
, opened for signature 2 December
1946, 161 UNTS 72
(entered into force 10 November 1948).
Convention on Biological
, opened for signature 5 June
1992, 1760 UNTS 79
(entered into
force 29 December 1993).
Palmer (n 8) 53.
See Charles R Acland and Haidee Wasson
Useful Cinema
(Duke University Press, 2011).
See generally UNESCO World Heritage
Centre, ‘World Heritage List Nominations’,
UNESCO World Heritage
(Web Page) <
https://whc.unesco.org/en/nominations
archived at <
https://perma.cc/4WC4-2ES4
Whaling in the Antarctic (Australia
[2014] ICJ Rep 226.
See Secretariat of the Convention on
Biological Diversity,
Global Biodiversity Outlook 4
(Report, 2014) <
https://www.cbd.int/gbo/gbo4/publication/gbo4-en-hr.pdf
archived at <
https://perma.cc/U9A3-RSRK
Palmer (n 8) 12.
See generally Pierre-Marie Dupuy and
Jorge E Viñuales,
International Environmental Law
University Press, 2
Jarrod Hore,
Visions of Nature: How
Landscape Photography Shaped Settler Colonialism
(University of California
Press, 2022).
Richardson (n 6) 182–208.
Palmer (n 8) 151.
See generally Lee Artz (ed),
Media Dialogues: Industry, Politics, and Culture
(Routledge, 2024); Lee
Cinema and the Wealth of Nations: Media, Capital, and the Liberal
World System
(University of California Press, 2018).
See, eg, Alan C Braddock,
‘Ecocritical Art History’ (2009) 23(2)
American Art
See, eg, TJ Demos,
Against the
Anthropocene
(Sternberg Press, 2017).
Palmer (n 8) 258.
See, eg, Palmer (n 8) 228, 230.
See John A Duvall,
Environmental Documentary: Cinema Activism in the 21
(Bloomsbury Academic, 2017).
Tasmanian Government and Australian
Heritage Commission,
Nomination of Western Tasmania Wilderness National Parks
by the Commonwealth of Australia for Inclusion in the World Heritage List
(Nomination, November 1981) 26. For analysis of the roots of such filmmaking in
Tasmania, see Benjamin J Richardson, ‘Norman
Laird (1915–1978):
Pioneering Tasmanian Filmmaker, Writer and Naturalist’ (2023) 157
Papers and Proceedings of the Royal Society of Tasmania
See, eg, Robin L Murray and Joseph K
Ecology and Popular Film: Cinema on the
University of New York Press, 2009); Stephen Rust, Salma Monani and Sean Cubitt
Ecocinema Theory and Practice
(Routledge, 2013); Rayson K Alex and
S Susan Deborah (eds),
Ecodocumentaries: Critical Essays
Macmillan, 2016).
See, eg, Sebastian Machado,
‘Towards an Aesthetic Epistemology of International Law’
Nordic Journal of International Law
; Giulia Parola, Silvano
Chue Muquissai and Margherita Paola Poto, ‘A Co-Created Project of Legal
Design and Visual Law Applied
to International Environmental Law: Transformation
of the Escazú Agreement and Environmental Access Rights into Visual
for and with the Chiquitano People’ in Eva Julia Lohse and
Margherita Paolo Poto (eds),
Coproduction of Knowledge in Climate
(Berliner Wissenschafts-Verlag, 2023) 57.
Central European University,
Aesthetics of International Law
(Conference Program, 12–13 May 2023).
* Professor of Environmental Law, University of Tasmania; Adjunct Professor,
York University and Queen’s University, Canada.
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (56.5 KB)
PDF format (272 KB)
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter