URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/journals/WAStuLawRw/2020/1.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 15:58:48
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
McCavana, Conor --- "Property Is A Social Right: A Comparison Of American, European And Australian Governmental Acquisition Jurisprudence And Property Theory" [2020] WAStuLawRw 1; (2020) 4 Western Australian Student Law Review 4
PROPERTY IS A SOCIAL RIGHT: A COMPARISON OF AMERICAN,
EUROPEAN AND AUSTRALIAN GOVERNMENTAL ACQUISITION JURISPRUDENCE AND PROPERTY
CONOR MCCAVANA
PROPERTY—SOCIAL RIGHT—INDIVIDUAL
RIGHT—COMPARISON—ABSOLUTE APPROACH—EMINENT
DOMAIN—ACQUISITIONS—TAKINGS—EXPROPRIATION—CIVIL
LAW—AMERICAN JURISPRUDENCE—NATIVE
TITLE—PANDECTISTS—GERMAN CONSTITUTIONAL LAW
The question of ‘what is property?’ has plagued many a jurist,
philosopher, and academic. This article explores an aspect
question—whether property is a social or individual right. This is done by
exploring the concept of property from a
philosophical and comparative legal
perspective within the substantive area of governmental acquisitions. Three
approaches to the
concept of property are set out. Firstly, the absolutist
approach as it appears in the American jurisprudence. Secondly, the European
approach and its philosophical basis. Lastly, this article examines the
Australian approach to property as it compares to the absolutist
and European
approaches. While the importance of comparison is easy to overlook, this article
furthers the position that by comparing
the three approaches, a useful
proposition can be stated—property is inherently a social right, not an
individual right.
I INTRODUCTION
Answering the question of ‘what is property?’ is a task
‘not without its own
difficulties’.
Gray and Gray
have said that ‘few concepts are quite so fragile, so elusive or so
frequently misused as the notion of
A number of
additional, and respected, authors write of property’s ‘inextricable
circularity’,
remark about
its similarity to the word love,
and have declared the concept of property a
or the root of all
This article focuses on but
one aspect of the larger question—whether property is social or
individual. Through understanding
the social-individual interplay, we can
properly understand the basis of property.
To arrive at a conclusion on whether property can be considered to be an
individual right or a social right, a number of theoretical
approaches to
defining property will be examined and compared. Part II of this article will
examine the absolute approach prevalent
in the jurisprudence of the United
States. The absolute approach is characterised by a focus on individualism; a
focus that will
be illustrated below with reference to
Keystone Bituminous
Coal Association v DeBenedictis
a United States Supreme Court decision on
Part III will examine
the European approach and the major philosophical ideas that underpin it. In
that part, the facts of
will be analysed as if it were decided
under the European approach. The difference in analysis and outcome shows that
property under
the European approach is inherently social, and not individual.
The benefit of that treatment is also furthered. Finally, Part IV
looks at the
Australian approach and compares it to the preceding two approaches. This
comparison will assist the author to develop
the proposition, and conclude, that
property is best treated as a social right, rather than an individual right.
II ABSOLUTE APPROACH
The absolute approach relies upon the assumption that property is
‘something that is objectively definable or identifiable,
apart from the
social context,’ representing ‘the sphere of legitimate,
assumption, the individual’s right to their property is treated as
superior to societal interests (or, arguably,
the societal interests are not
considered) because an absolute property right is, by its very nature, incapable
of being impinged
or fettered.
The absolutists use this version of property as a means to represent and protect
the individual’s autonomous sphere of influence
into which no one else can
Simply, the absolute approach is one of the on-off variety: property is
either held (requiring absolute protection from interference)
or not held
(requiring no protection from interference), there is nothing in
absolutists’ underlying question, when confronted with a property issue,
is ‘who owns the
The focus is
always on the individual who then holds a right to unfettered and unimpeded
possession, disposition, use, and abuse
of corporeal and incorporeal
Immediately, the
simplistic nature of this approach reveals incoherencies—it is difficult
to point to any right in the modern
world which is truly incapable of being
impinged or fettered in some way, whereas the absolute approach says property is
of being impinged or
This incoherency is the problem with the absolute approach, that is, if
something is property it must be afforded absolute protection,
yet nothing can
truly be afforded absolute protection (and on occasion infringement is not only
lawful but necessary). Therefore,
the only way to avoid infringing
‘absolute property rights’ is to argue that the right concerned is
not property, for
if one says the right is property it cannot be infringed.
Therein lies the conundrum, the practical operation of which can readily
in judicial consideration of the state takings limb contained in Amendment V of
United States
Constitution
, which states that private property
shall not ‘be taken for public use, without just compensation’.
is one such judicial consideration and further assists with
demonstrating the problems posed by the ostensible adoption of the absolute
, the Supreme Court of the United States was petitioned by
the plaintiffs who held fee simple estates in coal-laden, subsurface,
Pennsylvanian
Importantly
in this case, under Pennsylvanian law, the surface estate, mineral estate, and
support estate are regarded as separate
interests in land that can be conveyed
apart from each other.
been enacted
to prevent subsidence (the sinking of the surface ground) by
restricting mining below surface structures in order to pursue the societal
of preventing subsidence damage to those
structures.
As a result, the
plaintiffs were unable to mine 27 million tons of coal in their support
The plaintiffs sought to
enjoin the regulatory body from preventing the plaintiffs’ mining the 27
million tons of coal on the
basis the law was unconstitutional under Amendment V
United States
Constitution
; that it took their private property
for public use without just
compensation.
The Supreme Court held that the ‘27 million tons of coal do not
constitute a separate segment of property for takings law
majority’s statements throughout indicate an ostensible use of the bundle
of rights theory of property as a rendition of
the absolute theory (essentially,
the full bundle will be called property, but not any individual
The Supreme Court held
that the support estate was only one strand in the bundle (the full bundle
consisting of either all three
estates, or at least the support estate and one
Therefore, the support
estate was held to not be property in and of
This was despite the
fact that the surface estate, mineral estate and support estate are separate
interests conveyable in and of
themselves,
and the fact the
support estate was itself a bundle of
Here we see the problem of ostensible use of the absolute approach manifest.
If the support estate (and the 27 million tons of coal
therein) was property, it
must be afforded absolute protection, yet the law restricting mining would
infringe the right. Therefore,
the only way to avoid infringing absolute
property rights is to say the right concerned (the support estate) is not
property—the
alternative would have been to essentially allow subsidence
to occur at the public’s peril. Importantly, the Supreme Court’s
analysis focuses on the interplay between these estates on the basis that if any
or all are property it must be absolute. The Supreme
Court was, for example, not
able to approach the problem from the perspective that property entails social
duties (like the European
approach) and certainly not from the basis that
property is a social right.
The illogical nature of the majority’s finding (that a fee simple
estate of enormous potential economic value is not property)
is emblematic of
how an absolute approach led to the law being manipulated
‘surreptitiously’.
Certainly, the dissenting judgment of Rehnquist CJ in
clear that it is laudable for the majority to have held that 27 million tons of
coal was not property.
Relevantly, Rehnquist CJ said the restrictive
will require petitioners to leave approximately 27 million tons of coal in
place. There is no question that this coal is an identifiable
and separable
property interest ... From the relevant perspective—that of the property
owners—this interest has been
destroyed every bit as much as if the
government had proceeded to mine the coal for its own use. The regulation, then,
does not merely
inhibit one strand in the bundle, cf.
Andrus v. Allard
supra, but instead destroys completely any interest in a segment of property.
Rehnquist CJ went on to point out that the majority’s view of the
support estate as a single strand in the bundle ‘allows
the Court to
conclude that its destruction is merely the destruction of one
“strand” in petitioners’ bundle of
property rights, not
significant enough in the overall bundle to work a
suggests that the error in the majority’s ways that Rehnquist CJ pointed
to is an inkling of the Supreme Court’s
conflict between its
‘ostensible use of an absolute conception of property and its actual use
of a broader conception’.
It follows then that the absolute approach is practically unworkable in the
modern world and requires if anything an ostensible use
and an actual use of
some other approach. Consequently, classifying property as an individual right
through the absolute approach
is unworkable and approaches incorporating
property as a social right are furthered below.
III EUROPEAN APPROACH
The property law of the Romans is widely accepted to be the
terminus a quo
(the ‘starting point’)
of property law in continental
For this reason, the
analysis of the European approach begins by setting out its Roman foundation. In
Ancient Rome, when the nation
was still an agrarian empire,
res corporales
(‘corporeal things’) involved in agriculture were afforded
heightened protection and
One such example of
this heightened protection and formality can be seen by examining how interests
in agrarian
res corporales
and non-agrarian
res corporales
legally transferred. To affect the legal sale of agrarian
res corporales
(which included things such as land, work animals and slaves), the purchaser was
required to pronounce a set phrase of acquisition
in front of five Roman
citizens while another person held a bronze balance. The purchaser was then
required to strike the balance
with an ingot held in the purchaser’s right
hand and deliver that ingot to the seller as purchase
In stark contrast,
complete ownership in non-agrarian
res corporales
‘transferred by merely informal delivery of
possession’.
This differential treatment of interests in agrarian and non-agrarian
property demonstrates that Ancient Roman society protected that
which it deemed
worthy of protection, that is, an agrarian society will protect agrarian rights
with greater vigour than other rights.
This point is further reinforced by the
fact that the Romans could not hold
(‘dominium’,
‘ownership’ or, alternatively, ‘master’)
res incorporales
(‘incorporeal things’), except for where
res incorporales
was one of an agrarian
While the Romans’ treatment of agricultural
res corporales
evidences that the Romans clearly protected rights in property in accordance
with the Romans’ societal values and interests,
it must be noted that the
right granted to a
over their property has widely been said to be
the absolute right to use and abuse the property within the limits of the
That may seem on the face
of it to be an absolute approach of the kind adopted in America, for the reason
that it would grant to
the property owner an absolute sphere of autonomy over
the property concerned. However, importantly, this seemingly absolute approach
is constrained and qualified by the notion that the right to use and abuse the
property must be done so within
the limits of the law
. As is explored
below, the European civil systems adopted the Roman
and in so doing continued
to limit property according to socially demarcated limits of the law. This
concept of limiting property
rights according to laws is explained below to be
at least a limb of the social approach to property evident in the modern
of expropriation.
Philosophical Foundations of the European
Before examining the European approach, it is first beneficial to outline the
philosophical thought which underpins and informs it.
This section will discuss
the philosophical theories which led to and influenced the modern jurisprudence
of the European approach.
The theory developed by the Romanist German Historical
School, especially the
Pandektenwissenchaft
‘Pandectists’), is of particular practical analytical relevance
because it heavily influenced the modern German
legal system (the German legal
system is illustrative of the European approaches
generally).
Major philosophical works on property share a common social trait. Blackstone
wrote that property is ‘derived from society’
and that maintaining
societal expectations is contingent on property’s
protection.
Similarly, Locke
theorised that societies were formed to protect the absolute liberty held by
every individual in their person which
would, through labour, imbue things with
that absolute liberty making it property or, put simply, society came into being
although he may lack a ‘succinct ... theory of
aligns with
Locke and Blackstone on property’s social origin. Impactfully he wrote,
‘the first man who, having enclosed
a piece of ground, bethought himself
of saying “This is mine”, and found people simple enough to believe
him, was the
real founder of civil
According to
Rousseau, as a natural extension of society having come into existence to
protect property:
the right which each individual has to his own estate is always subordinate
to the right which the community has over all: without
this, there would be
neither stability in the social tie, nor real force in the exercise of
Sovereignty.
The common thread that unifies these ideas is that property is inextricably
societal, that is, societal rights and interests can logically
(in their view)
take precedence over any individual property right. Savigny, as a forerunner to
Pandektenwissenchaft
opined that the
(the ‘spirit of the people’) was
the root of all law.
therefore, would be contingent on and connected to the
had created the property rights.
This, as part of the Historical School and
Pandektenwissenschaft
influenced the German
Grundgesetz
(‘Basic Law’, being the
German constitution) and the European systems
As will be shown,
this idea that property is inextricably societal was and is firmly integrated
into the European systems’
conceptions of property.
European Approach
The European civil systems are largely similar, though are distinct from the
English common law.
For example,
the civil codes restrict ownership in a proprietary context to
whereas the
English common law is not concerned with tangibility—the English common
law is such that a ‘thing is no less
a thing in law merely because it is
intangible’.
As the civil
systems are largely similar, this section will primarily explore the European
approach to the concept of property with
reference to the law of Germany, as the
law of Germany is illustrative of, and comparable to, the law of other
continental European
systems will also be made for further comparative reference in the footnotes
this article.
The civil codes define property as a right that is inherently societally
restricted. The German
Grundgesetz
guarantees property as a
(a ‘fundamental right’), which is limited by the
and other civil codes do
Property is a
with the qualification that it carries with it
responsibilities and must serve the public
The State can expropriate
property for the public good,
but compensation is to be given and must be determined by establishing a fair
balance between the interests of the public and the
individual.
philosophical approach to property outlined above is reproduced. German law (and
the civil systems generally) defines property
as something that is subject to
the rights of the society that created those rights. This is an obvious adoption
of the philosophical
approaches described
Therefore, the European
approach does not differ all too much from that of the Roman law of
the proprietor an absolute right over a thing. This may seem to be at odds with
the statement above that the European
and Ancient Roman approach is not
absolute, however, as Proudhon noted, the object of the seeming limitations is
not to limit property,
but to prevent the domain of one proprietor from
interfering with that of another—it is a recognition that property exists
in society and cannot be viewed as devoid of that necessary social
It is through this that German law (and the civil systems generally)
integrates the tension between property rights and the social
context in which
they exist.
This tension
‘between the individual and the collective’ has been said to be
integral to a fully developed approach to
On the one hand, the
Grundgesetz
acknowledges and guarantees the liberal view of property,
that is, the fundamental right of an individual to have authority over their
property and domain. On the other hand, and unlike the absolute approach, the
European approach does not stop there and also recognises
the social function of
property, that is, the fact the rights are created, and necessarily restricted
by, society. It is this duality
that leads to an approach which avoids the
illogical consequences of ostensible use of the absolute approach. The
theoretical comparison
partially draws out the deficiencies in the absolute
approach but an explanation of the practical operation of each is useful. Just
as with the discussion of the absolute approach, takings law (or, rather,
expropriation law in the German sense) is a useful vessel
through which to
demonstrate the practical operation of the European approach.
Naßauskiesungbeschluss
The landmark case in German expropriation law is the 1981 decision in
relation to
Naßauskiesung
(‘wet gravel’) (hereinafter
Naßauskiesungbeschluss
The facts are markedly analogous to those in
, a law was enacted that denied the plaintiffs’ use of 27
million tons of coal in their estate. They alleged that a taking occurred
without just compensation, but the Supreme Court of the United States found the
estate was not property (see
above). The approach adopted by the
Supreme Court in
and the approach adopted by the German Federal
Constitutional Court in the
Naßauskiesungbeschluss
make evident the
deficiencies in the absolute approach. We will see the European approach allowed
the German Federal Constitutional
Court to balance social interests without
having to conclude that something that is obviously property is not
Naßauskiesungbeschluss
the plaintiff owned land near
Münster on which he operated a gravel pit. The plaintiff used underground
water from his land in
the course of operating the gravel pit. Reforms were
enacted to the
Wasserhaushaltsgesetz
(‘water resources law’)
after the plaintiff had been using his land in this way for
An aspect of the reform
required anyone using groundwater to have a permit to do so. This was, at least
in part, enacted to address
the rampant groundwater contamination resultant from
extensive gravel mining to support post-World War II
reconstruction.
The plaintiff
applied for a permit to continue but was denied on the basis that the use of the
groundwater for a gravel pit may cause
harm to the public water
The plaintiff alleged
that by denying the permit the plaintiff’s property had been expropriated
without the compensation guaranteed
under art 14(3) of the
Grundgesetz
The German Federal Constitutional Court drew a clear line between the
regulation of property (permissible under art 14(1)–(2)
Grundgesetz
) and the expropriation of property (permissible with
compensation under art 14(3) of the
Grundgesetz
). The former is not
compensable, but the latter is.
In reaching its decision, the Federal Constitutional Court recognised that the
plaintiff’s right to use the land as a gravel
pit and use the groundwater
under it was an
Eigentumsgarantie
(‘guaranteed property
That is to say
that, unlike the Supreme Court of the United States, the Federal Constitutional
Court did not deny that property was
property. From the basis that the rights
affected are property, the Federal Constitutional Court then pointed to sentence
14(1) of the
Grundgesetz
, which stated that ‘
Schranken werden durch die Gesetze bestimmt
’ (‘the content and
limits [of property] are fixed by the law’), and held the permit
requirement was such a law
fixing the limits of
In doing so, the
Federal Constitutional Court upheld the public policy aim without subverting
common sense because the European approach
to property (that property is a
social right and it therefore can be limited to benefit society from time to
allowed it to do
Naßauskiesungbeschluss
set out, the differences between
the European approach and the absolute approach may be illustrated by comparing
Naßauskiesungbeschluss
. Under the German
constitutional framework, the law restricting sub-surface use would be
categorised as either an acquisition of
property for the public good requiring
compensation or, alternatively, a mere delineation of the content and limits of
The impugned legislation in
restricted mining but did
not take the coal from the plaintiffs and give it to the government. Therefore,
under German law, it would
not be an expropriation because nothing was
physically taken.
Rather, the
was establishing the content and limits for public good
(preventing subsidence where buildings were situated), which is integral
property within the European approach. Here, the European approach achieves the
same end as the Supreme Court’s ostensible
use of the absolute approach in
but it can do so without denying that 27 million tons of
coal is property.
The European approach is underpinned by the premise that property is a social
creation. It therefore balances the individual rights
that are necessary to
maintain personal liberty against essential societal interests without requiring
the circumventive logic employed
through the non-social absolute approach.
Certainly then, entrenching a social conception of property is favourable to an
one—it can openly and logically balance valid interests against
each other. Direct importation of this approach into Australia
is of course
impossible given the separate and unique histories which inform the civil and
common law legal systems.
However, the Australian approach serves as a useful comparison and demonstrates
that the European approach is not the only way to
entrench a social approach to
property into law.
IV AUSTRALIAN APPROACH
Early English common law was such that at least some property rights were
absolute. In the 17
century, one’s house was his or her
‘castle and
into which it
was then said that even the ‘King of England cannot
certainly be an absolute approach—the state would not dare interfere or
infringe upon the sanctity of one’s
castle. This guaranteed the absolute
individual right of property in one’s own home. However, the saying that a
house is his
does not hold true
in modern Australian common law.
Unlike their European counterparts, the Australian constitutional framers
relied little on theoretical discussion of property and
practicality.
judgments also typically make limited reference to extensive philosophical
justifications of property.
Furthermore, no recourse can be made to a code to define property in Australia
as is the case in the civil systems and the
Constitution
only five express references to
As one would expect,
none of these provisions define property. Where Australian legislation does
define property, the definitions
are often circular and only operate to include
personal and real property, interests or estates in personal and real property,
choses in action,
is to be expected in common law
The reason for
the absence of an adequate statutory definition of property is that in the
context of the common law, particularly
in Australia, ‘abstract principles
fashioned a priori are of but little
assistance’.
regard, the absence of a rigid statement of property allows the law to closely
reflect that property is societal and allows
conceptions of property to evolve
according to the societal requirements.
Generally, property in Australia is defined by the bundle of rights theory of
This theory operates
in Australia such that for a court to find that a particular right or interest
is property, the right or interest
must be ‘definable, identifiable by
third parties, capable in its nature of assumption by third parties, and have
some degree
permanence’.
The fact that
a right will take up a certain
‘propertiness’
is identifiable by third parties or capable of assumption by third parties
illustrates that property is a social right. The
third parties are naturally
members of society, so the bundle of rights theory forwards at the least the
inception of property as
contingent on social interests and expectations. As
with the absolute and European approach, the Australian approach is easiest
through practical examples. Below, the Australian approach to
property is outlined through acquisition law and native title law.
Property Under Australian Acquisition Law
Section 51(xxxi) of the
Constitution
Commonwealth power to make laws with respect to the acquisition of property on
just terms for any purpose in respect of
which the Commonwealth Parliament has
power to make laws.
provision is a correlative of the American and German guarantees to compensation
discussed above in relation to
The High Court
has generally taken a broad approach to the definition of property when
s 51(xxxi).
For example, property encapsulated within the operation
has historically included not only traditional property such as
realty and personalty, but also ‘every species of valuable
Furthermore, a
law extinguishing the right to bring an action for damages can be an
acquisition.
A great dissenting
opinion suggests that
may even extend to protect all fundamental
human rights from being eroded on terms other than
When answering the
question of whether any law operates to authorise the acquisition of the
property of an individual, there is,
unlike the absolute approach, no precise
test or ‘universal criterion’ to which a court will turn to
determine what property
may view that as an incoherency on the part of the High Court, in that it has
failed to clearly delineate a definition of property
for the purposes of
However, as the High Court has previously held per curium, property is
necessarily defined differently depending on the
This allows property to
transform according to social interests as described below.
In Australia’s acquisition law we see an inherent reflection of the
social aspects of property through the reflection of social
expectations on the
acquisition power. A characteristic feature of a sovereign power is, according
to Rich J in
Minister of State for the Army v Dalziel
[1944] HCA 4
(1944) 68 CLR 261
what the Americans name ‘eminent domain’—the power to
‘take to itself any property within its territory,
or any interest
therein, on such terms and for such purposes as it thinks
Naturally, the
sovereign power in Australia is representative of Australian
It follows that when
the Australian legislature exercises its sovereign right of eminent domain as it
thinks proper, it is essentially
done in a way that Australian society thinks
When an acquisition
occurs, s 51(xxxi) of the
Constitution
operates to acknowledge the competition between society’s interests and
the individual’s interests. It operates
to acknowledge that
society’s interests cannot be absolute and cannot crush the
individual’s right to property and vice
Importantly, unlike the United States Supreme Court, the Australian
acquisitions jurisprudence does not resort to denying the existence
of property
in things which are clearly property. A key distinction is that whilst the
Constitution
acquisitions
United States
Constitution
requires there to be no
without just
compensation.
Similarly to the
German approach described above, the acquisitions provision in the
Constitution
does not regulate
but does regulate
acquisitions
distinction is an important one and was enunciated eloquently by French CJ in
JT International v Commonwealth
[2012] HCA 43
(2012) 250 CLR 1
, where his honour
Taking involves deprivation of property seen from the perspective of its
owner. Acquisition involves receipt of something seen from
the perspective of
the acquirer. Acquisition is therefore not made out by mere extinguishment of
As a result, to bring the Australian constitutional provision into play it is
not enough that the legislation regulates a property
right and in so doing
restricts the right.
there must have been an acquisition ‘whereby the Commonwealth or another
acquires an interest in
It is plain
to see that this is the same as the delineation in Germany between a compensable
expropriation and a mere regulation
which is not compensable (albeit it is not
as overt a statement in Australia as in Germany). Furthermore, Australian
acquisition
law involves striking a balance between competing social
Here then, in the
Australian approach, we see essentially the same European concept of property
within the acquisition context. That
is to say, the Australian approach
establishes a
fair balance between the interests of the public and the
and does not hold property out as an absolute right but instead
one which can kneel to the needs of the society that creates the property
(without denying that property is property).
Native Title
The recognition of native title rights illustrates that that property in
Australian law is societally delimited. Prior to the recognition
title, an absolute view was adopted. Although later overruled by the High Court,
Blackburn J held in
Milirrpum v Nabalco Pty Ltd
(1971) 17 FLR 141
property implies the right to use, exclude others from, and alienate the
Because the indigenous
group did not absolutely exclude others from all parts of land and only excluded
others from specific ritual
sites, it was held that their interests in the land
were not property.
Court later rejected this position in
Mabo v Queensland (No 2)
[1992] HCA 23
and adopted a more flexible definition of property, which better reflected
collective social interests.
Mabo v Queensland
(1989) 166 CLR 186
, the High Court held, in
finding that the traditional rights of the native peoples to be property rights,
that property in this context
meant ‘rights of any kind in or over’
As developed in
Mabo v Queensland (No 2)
, it was the possessory, traditional, and
lifelong rights of the native peoples in the land that amounted to a sufficient
rights making them
Essentially, the
author posits that what the High Court did was reveal that native title had
existed and existed due to the fact
that social groups held title in and had
proprietary connections with native title lands. In
Mabo v Queensland (No
, Brennan J directly alluded to the influence that changes in societal
standards had in bringing about the recognition of native title
This is the social
approach to property manifest—acknowledging that society creates property
and even that interests in land
can vest not in an individual or a number of
identified individuals but in a
In essence, the High Court of Australia found that the common law of
Australia recognises a form of native title which reflects the
entitlement of
indigenous inhabitants, in accordance with their laws or customs, to their
traditional lands.
the High Court held that, subject to the effect of a number of particular Crown
leases, the land entitlement of the Murray
Islanders in accordance with their
laws or customs was preserved, as native title, under the law of
Queensland.
This was so in
cases where native title has not been extinguished. The Court also held that the
general principle that the common
law will only recognise a customary title if
it is consistent with the common law is subject to an exception in favour of
traditional
native title.
Predicating its decision on Australia's ratification of the
Protocol to the International Covenant on Civil and Political
the High Court
found that even if in earlier days there had been a refusal to recognise the
rights and interests in land of the indigenous
inhabitants of settled colonies,
‘an unjust and discriminatory doctrine of that kind can no longer be
As long ago
as 1921, in
Amodu Tijani v The Secretary, Southern Provinces
[1921] UKPC 80
(1921) 2 AC
, the Privy Council recognised not only usufructuary rights but also
interests in land vested not in an individual or a number of
individuals but in a community. In that case, Viscount Haldane
The title, such as it is, may not be that of the individual, as in this
country it nearly always is in some form, but may be that
of a community. Such a
community may have the possessory title to the common enjoyment of a usufruct,
with customs under which its
individual members are admitted to enjoyment, and
even to a right of transmitting the individual enjoyment as members by
inter vivos or by succession. To ascertain how far this latter
development of right has progressed involves the study of the history
particular community and its usages in each case.
Relying on this, the High Court of Australia concluded that if it is
necessary to categorise an interest in land, arising out of individual
usufruct, as proprietary (in order that it survive a change in sovereignty), the
interest possessed by a community that
is in exclusive possession of land falls
into that category.
said it poignantly when he stated that ‘it is not possible to admit
traditional usufructuary rights without admitting
a traditional proprietary
community title’.
difficulties of proof of boundaries, or of membership of the community, or of
representatives of the community, which was in
exclusive possession might arise,
these should not be used as a reason to deny the existence of a proprietary
community title capable
of recognition by the common
It is, therefore, a
clear illustration that property is delimited by society in Australian law. The
community can hold native title,
native title is identified by the
community’s engagement with the land and ultimately the recognition was
part of a social
shift for the better.
V CONCLUSION
The tension between the individual and collective is part of property, and
property is the intermediary between individual rights
and the State exercising
power. The absolute approach does not reflect those propositions and the
problems entailed are multifarious.
As illustrated in
absolute approach is essentially unworkable and requires an ostensible use with
some other approach actually used. In Europe,
codification manages to balance
those inherent social factors as a result of involving philosophical thought
directly in their legislative
process. They go as far as to constitutionally
inhibit the fundamental right to property to the extent society may seek to do
from time to time. The European approach to property recognises and
entrenches in property the social nature of the right.
Australian property law, as viewed through the lens of
title, duly reflects the requirement that on occasion the State may be required
to infringe an otherwise absolute property
right. By maintaining an imprecise
and non-absolute approach to property, the High Court has rightly been able to
uphold social interests.
It follows that Australia has, in line with the great
common law tradition, been flexible enough to have a social concept of property.
Without fashioning abstract principles a priori like in the European codes,
Australia has avoided the pitfalls of the absolute approach.
Nonetheless,
Australia is, in regard to property in an acquisition context, wholly consistent
with the ‘general law of European
Final year LLB student
at Murdoch University, Murdoch.
All translations are
those of the author unless otherwise indicated.
Yarmirr v Northern
(2001) 208 CLR 1
, 38 (Gleeson CJ, Gaudron, Gummow and Hayne JJ)
(citations omitted).
Kevin Gray and Susan Gray,
Elements of Land Law
(Oxford University Press, 5
86. See also
Yanner v Eaton
[1999] HCA 53
(1999) 201 CLR 351
, 365–6 [17].
Stephen Waddams,
of Private Law: Categories and Concepts in Anglo-American
Legal Reasoning
(Cambridge University Press, 2003) 173. See also
Sarah Worthington,
Personal Property Law: Texts and Materials
University Press, 2000) 665.
James Edelman, ‘Two
Fundamental Questions for the Law of Trusts’
Law Quarterly
Pierre-Joseph Proudhon,
Qu'est-ce que la propriété?
Ou Recherche sur le principe du Droit et du Gouvernement
property? Or An inquiry into the Principle of Law and Government] (Brocard, 1st
ed, 1840) 2.
Alan Carter,
Philosophical Foundations of Property Rights
(Harvester Wheatsheaf, 1989)
Keystone Bituminous Coal
Association v DeBenedictis
[1987] USSC 33
‘Takings’ is
used here as an equivalent to the concept of eminent domain. Throughout this
article the preferred term
for eminent domain is: (a) for American
jurisprudence, taking; (b) for European jurisprudence, expropriation; and (c)
for Australian
jurisprudence, acquisition.
Laura S Underkuffler,
‘On Property: An Essay’
(1990) 100(1)
Yale Law Journal
133 (emphasis added).
See generally Joseph
William Singer and Jack M Beermann, ‘The Social Origins of Property’
Canadian Journal of Law and Jurisprudence
See especially Charles A
Reich, ‘The New Property’
Yale Law Journal
Joan Williams,
‘Recovering the Full Complexity of Our Traditions: New Developments in
Property Theory’
(1996) 46(4)
Journal of Legal Education
Joseph William Singer,
‘The Reliance Interest in Property’
Stanford Law
Richard Epstein,
Takings: Private Property and the Power of Eminent Domain
University Press, 1985). Admittedly, Epstein’s interpretation of the
absolute approach is an extreme one and would
see even taxes that cannot be
directly attributed to a public good constituting a taking under the
Constitution
, but the underlying proposition is consistent with the
absolute approach more generally: see, eg, Frank Michelman, ‘Takings,
Columbia Law Review
For examples of property
rights which are infringed through redistribution lawfully, see Williams (n 12)
Ibid 500–1.
Bituminous Mine
Subsidence and Land Conservation Act of 1966
, 16 Pa Cons Stat § 1406.4
(Supp 1967);
(n 7) 485–92.
United States
Constitution
amend V; ibid 470.
Ibid 479–81, 497. See
also Underkuffler (n 9) 142–3.
Ibid 500–1.
Underkuffler-Freund, ‘Takings and the Nature of Property’
Canadian Journal of Law and Jurisprudence
Ibid 516, 518.
Underkuffler (n 9) 129.
Ancient Greek law
influenced Roman law, however, Roman law is widely accepted as the starting
point: see especially John E Ecklund,
The Origins of Western Law: From Athens
to the Code Napoleon
(Talbot Publishing, 2013) vol 1, 318; Peter Stein,
Roman Law in European History
(Cambridge University Press, 1
ed, 1999) 44. See also generally J M Kelly,
A Short History of Western Legal
(Clarendon press, 1992).
Alan A Watson,
of Property in the Later Roman Republic
(Oxford University Press, 1968)
16–20, 117; Max Kaser,
Römisches Privatrecht
[Roman Private
Law] (C H Beck, 14
ed, 1986) 120.
Edward Poste,
Institvtiones or Institutes of Roman Law by Gaius
[Institutes of Roman Law
(Clarendon Press, 1904) 74–5.
F De Zulueta,
Institutes of Gaius:
(Oxford University Press, 1963) 62.
Declareuil,
Rome the Law-Giver
(Routledge, 1996) 158. Here,
Declareuil wrote ‘
jus utendi et abutendi re sua, quatenus iuris ratio
’ [use and misuse the thing insofar as the right allows it].
See also Robert-Joseph Pothier,
Traité du droit de domaine de
propriété, Par l'Auteur du Traité des Obligations
[Treaty of the Right of Domain and Property, by the Author of the Treaty of
Obligations] (Chez Debure frères, 1776) and Proudhon
(n 5) ch 2. Cf Shael
Herman, ‘The Uses and Abuses of Roman Law Texts’
(1981) 29(4)
American Journal of Comparative Law
Manlio Bellomo,
Common Legal Past of Europe 1000-1800,
tr Lydia G Cochrane (CUA Press, 1995)
J Guttentag,
dem Entwurfe eines Bürgerlichen Gesetzbuches für das Deutsche Reich:
Sachenrecht
[Motives to Draft a Civil Law Book for the German Empire:
Property Law] (1896) vol 3, 1, 3.
William Blackstone,
‘Civil Liberty and Civil Rights’ in Henry Ballantine (ed),
Blackstone’s Commentaries
(Blackstone Institute, 1915) vol 15, 455,
John Locke,
Treatise of Government
, ed Crawford Macpherson (Hackett, 1
ed, 1980) 27.
James McAdam,
‘Rousseau: The Moral Dimensions of Property’ in Anthony Parel and
Thomas Flanagan (eds),
Theories of Property: Aristotle to the Present
(Wilfrid Laurier University Press, 1979) 181–202.
Jean-Jacques Rousseau,
‘A Discourse on a Subject Proposed by the Academy of Dijon: What is the
Origin of Inequality Among
Men, and is it Authorised by Natural Law?’ in
The Social Contract & Discourses by Jean-Jacques Rousseau
(J.M. Dent and Sons, 1923) 207.
See generally Ernst
Geschichte der Deutschen Rechtswissenschaft
[History of the
German Jurisprudence] (Oldenbourg, 1898) 1–49, 69–88.
Friedrich Charles von
Of the Vocation of Our Age for Legislation and Jurisprudence
Abraham Hayward (Littlewood, 2
ed, 1831) 24. For a discussion of
the historical school (of which the
Pandektwissenchaft
was a part), see
generally Robert E Rodes, ‘On the Historical School of
Jurisprudence’
American Journal of Jurisprudence
See, eg, Savigny (n 46) ch
See generally Ecklund (n
32) vol 1, 318. See also Peter Stein,
Roman Law in European History
(Cambridge University Press, 1
ed, 1999) 44.
See generally Bellomo (n
Bürgerliches Gesetzbuch
[Civil Code] (Germany) art 90, which states
sachen im Sinne des Gestezes sind nur körperliche
e’ [only corporeal objects are things in the sense of
the law]; 民法 [Civil Code] (Japan) art 85, which states
‘この法律において「物」とは、有体物をいう’
[‘thing’, in this law, means tangible things];
Zivilgesetzbuch
[Civil Code] (Switzerland) art 713, which states ‘
Gegenstand des
Fahrniseigentums sind die ihrer Natur nach beweglichen körperlichen Sachen
sowie die Naturkräfte, die der
rechtlichen Herrschaft unterworfen werden
können und nicht zu den Grundstücken gehören
[The object of ownership are physical moveable things and natural forces
which can be subjected to legal domination and not part of
Burgerlijk Wetboek
[Civil Code] (Kingdom of the Netherlands) art 3:2,
which states ‘
voor menselijke beheersing vatbare stoffelijke
’ [human objects subject to human control].
Carleton Kemp Allen,
California Law Review
Grundgesetz fur die
Bundesrepublik Deutschland
[Basic Law for the Federal Republic of Germany]
art 14(1), which states ‘
Das Eigentum und das Erbrecht werden
gewährleistet. Inhalt und Schranken werden durch die Gesetze
[Property and inheritance are guaranteed. The
contents and limits are fixed by the law].
[Civil Code] (France) art 544,
which states ‘
La propriété est le droit de jouir et
disposer des choses de la manière la plus absolue, pourvu qu'on n'en
pas un usage prohibé par les lois ou par les
’ [Property is the right to enjoy and dispose of
things in the most absolute manner, provided that they are not used as
by laws or regulations];
Codice Civile
[Civil Code] (Italy)
§ 832, which states ‘
Il proprietario ha diritto di godere e
disporre delle cose in modo pieno ed esclusivo, entro i limiti e con
l'osservanza degli obblighi
stabiliti dall'ordinamento giuridico
[An owner has the right to enjoy and dispose of things in a full and
exclusive way, within the limits of the law and observing obligations
established by the law];
Zivilgesetzbuch
[Civil Code] (Switzerland) art
641, which states ‘
Wer Eigentümer einer Sache ist, kann in den
Schranken der Rechtsordnung über sie nach seinem Belieben
’ [Anyone who owns a thing can dispose of it at his
discretion within the limits of the law]; 民法 [Civil Code]
art 206, which states
‘所有者は、法令の制限内において、自由にその所有物の使用、収益及び処分をす
る権利を有する’ [An owner has
the right to freely use, deal with, and dispose of
their property within the
limits of the laws and regulations].
Grundgesetz fur die
Bundesrepublik Deutschland
[Basic Law for the Federal Republic of Germany]
art 14(2), which states ‘
Eigentum verpflichtet. Sein Gebrauch soll
zugleich dem Wohle der Allgemeinheit dienen
[Property entails
responsibilities. Its use shall simultaneously serve the public good].
The author notes that the
German word, ‘
’, used in the
Grundgesetz
conveys the concept of eminent domain. ‘Expropriation’ has been
chosen in place of, and is to be distinct from, ‘acquisition’
used when discussing English based systems. This is because it more accurately
reflects that under German law,
requires the Government to
physically take the property and not merely regulate it.
Grundgesetz fur die
Bundesrepublik Deutschland
[Basic Law for the Federal Republic of Germany]
art 14(3), which states ‘
Eine Enteignung ist nur zum Wohle der
Allgemeinheit zulässig. Sie darf nur durch Gesetz oder auf Grund eines
Gesetzes erfolgen,
das Art und Ausmaß der Entschädigung regelt. Die
Entschädigung ist unter gerechter Abwägung der Interessen der
Allgemeinheit und der Beteiligten zu bestimmen. Wegen der Höhe der
Entschädigung steht im Streitfalle der Rechtsweg vor
den ordentlichen
Gerichten offen
[Expropriation is permissible only to benefit
the general public. It may be done only through or due to a law which governs
and extent of compensation. The compensation is to be determined with
fair consideration of the interests of the general public and
those involved. In
case of a dispute as to the amount of compensation, legal action in the ordinary
courts is open].
See generally Ecklund (n
32) vol 1 and Stein (n 48).
The Civil Law
Including the Twelve Tables, The Institute of Gaius, The Rules of Ulpian, The
Opinions of Paulus, The Enactments of
Justinian, and The Constitutions of Leo
(Lawbook, 2001) vol 1, 57.
Proudhon (n 5)
Peter Badura,
Staatstrecht: Systematische Erläuterung des Grundgesetzes für die
Bundesrepublik Deutschland
[Constitutional Law: Systematic Explanation of
the Basic Law for the Federal Republic of Germany]
ed, 2003) 330–1.
Underkuffler (n 9) 147.
Bundesverfassungsgericht
[German Constitutional Court], 1 BvL 77/78, 15 July 1981 reported in (1981)
58 BVerfGE 300 (‘
Naßauskiesungbeschluss
Ibid [65]–[68].
Ibid [114].
Ibid [87], [118],
[172]–[174].
Ibid [171]–[203].
Ibid [99], [203].
Bundesverfassungsgericht
[German Constitutional Court], V ZR 200/97, 17 December 1998 reported in (1998)
140 BGHZ 223 [17].
Bellomo (n 38) 109;
Frederick Pollock and Frederic Maitland,
The History of English Law: Before
the Time of Edward I
(Cambridge University Press, 1
Semayne’s Case
[1572] EngR 333
(1604) 77 ER 194
Henry Brougham,
Historical Sketches of Statesmen Who Flourished in the Time of George III
(Richard Griffin & Co, 1855) vol 1, 42.
Developed from the
statement of Sir Edward Coke in
Semayne’s Case
(n 73) 195. See also
Edward Coke,
The First Part of the Institutes of the Laws of England
Simon Evans,
‘Property and the Drafting of the Australian
Constitution
Federal Law Review
ICM Agriculture Pty
Ltd v Commonwealth
[2009] HCA 51
(2009) 240 CLR 140
, 208–12, [177]–[184]
(Heydon J).
Constitution
ss 51(xxxi)
Property Law Act 1969
(definition of ‘property’);
Law of Property Act 2000
(definition of ‘property’);
Property Law Act 1974
(Qld) sch 6 provides no definition;
Real Property Act 1900
provides no definition;
Property Law Act 1958
(definition of
‘property’);
Law of Property Act 1936
(interpretation of ‘property’);
Conveyancing and Law of Property
(interpretation of ‘property’);
(Property) Act 2006
provides no definition.
Stephen Waddams,
Dimensions of Private Law: Categories and Concepts in Anglo-American
Legal Reasoning
(Cambridge University Press, 2003) 173.
Commonwealth v Yarmirr
(2001) 208 CLR 1
[11] (Gleeson CJ, Gaudron, Gummow and Hayne JJ), quoting
Amodu Tijani v Secretary, Southern Nigeria
[1921] UKPC 80
[1921] 2 AC 399
, 404 (Viscount
Minister of State for
the Army v Dalziel
[1944] HCA 4
(1944) 68 CLR 261
Telstra Corporation Ltd v
Commonwealth
[2008] HCA 7
(2008) 234 CLR 210
, 230–231 [44] (Gleeson CJ, Gummow,
Kirby, Hayne, Heydon, Crennan and Kiefel JJ).
National Provincial Bank
Ltd v Ainsworth
[1965] UKHL 1
[1965] AC 1175
, 1247–1248, quoted in
R v Toohey; Ex
parte Meneling Station Pty Ltd
[1982] HCA 69
(1982) 158 CLR 327
, 342 (Mason J);
Agriculture Pty Ltd v Commonwealth
[197] (Heydon J);
Smith v ANL Ltd
(2000) 204 CLR 493
[190] (Callinan
Kevin Gray, ‘Property
in Thin Air’
Cambridge Law Journal
Constitution
s 51(xxxi).
Andrews v Howell
[1941] HCA 20
(1941) 65 CLR 255
, 282 (Dixon J);
The Australian Apple and Pear Marketing
Board v Tonking
[1942] HCA 37
(1942) 66 CLR 77
Minister of State for
the Army v Dalziel
(n 82) 290.
Smith v ANL Ltd
(2000) 204 CLR 493
, 498–9 [3] (Gleeson CJ).
Ibid 530 [104] (Kirby
Ibid 528–9;
Nelungaloo Pty Ltd v Commonwealth
[1952] HCA 11
(1952) 85 CLR 545
Trade Practices
Commission v Tooth and Co Ltd
[1979] HCA 47
(1979) 142 CLR 397
Mutual Pools &
Staff Pty Ltd v Commonwealth
[1994] HCA 9
(1994) 179 CLR 155
Attorney-General
(NT) v Chaffey
[2007] HCA 34
(2007) 231 CLR 651
Telstra Corporation Ltd
v Commonwealth
(n 82) 230–1 [44] (Gleeson CJ, Gummow, Kirby, Hayne,
Heydon, Crennan and Kiefel JJ).
Minister of State for
the Army v Dalziel
[1944] HCA 4
(1944) 68 CLR 261
, 284 (Rich J).
Constitution
Emer de Vattel,
, ed Richard Whatmore and Béla Kapossy (Liberty Fund, 2008)
bk 1, ch 4.
Constitution
United States
Constitution
JT International v
Commonwealth
[2012] HCA 43
(2012) 250 CLR 1
, 33 [41], 53 [118], citing
Commonwealth v
[1983] HCA 21
(1983) 158 CLR 1
, 145, approved in
Georgiadis v Australian and
Overseas Telecommunications Corporation
[1994] HCA 6
(1994) 179 CLR 297
JT International v
Commonwealth
(n 96) 33 [42] (citations omitted).
Commonwealth v
[1983] HCA 21
(1983) 158 CLR 1
, 145, cited in
JT International v Commonwealth
(n 96), 34 [42].
JT International v
Commonwealth
(n 96) 87 [236].
Milirrpum v Nabalco
(1971) 17 FLR 141
Ibid 270–4.
Mabo v Queensland
(1989) 166 CLR 186
, 217 (Brennan, Toohey, and Gaudron JJ).
Ibid 51 (Brennan J), 111
(Deane and Gaudron JJ), 207 (Toohey J).
Ibid 40 (Brennan J).
Ibid 50 (Brennan J),
Amodu Tijani v The Secretary, Southern Provinces
[1921] UKPC 80
(1921) 2 AC 399
Mabo v Queensland (No
[1992] HCA 23
(1992) 175 CLR 1
, 15 (Mason CJ and McHugh J), 57 (Brennan J), 110 (Deane
and Gaudron JJ).
Ibid 65 (Brennan J).
Optional Protocol to
the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights
, opened for
signature 16 December
1966, 999 UNTS 171
(entered into force 23 March 1976).
Mabo v Queensland (No
(n 107) 42 (Brennan J).
Amodu Tijani v The
Secretary, Southern Provinces
[1921] UKPC 80
(1921) 2 AC 399
403–4, cited in
v Queensland (No 2)
(n 107) [52] (Brennan J).
Mabo v Queensland (No
(n 107) 50–1 (Brennan J), 89 (Deane J and Gaudron J), 184, 195
(Toohey J).
Ibid 51 (Brennan J).
(Brennan J).
John Quick and Robert
The Annotated
Constitution
of the Australian Commonwealth
& Robertson, 1901) 641.
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (330 KB)
PDF format (526 KB)
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter