URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/journals/IntTBLawRw/2004/9.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 15:05:22
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Quinn, James P --- "The Interpretation and Application of the United Nations Convention on Contracts for the International Sale of Goods" [2004] IntTBLawRw 9; (2004) 9 International Trade and Business Law Review 221
The interpretation and Application of the United Nations Convention on Contracts fro the International Sale of Goods
Introduction
Challenges to achieving an accurate interpretation
A brief history of the Convention
The method of interpretation prescribed by the Convention
Reference to specific provisions of the CISG: Article 7(1)
Handelsgericht Zurich (Commercial Court of the Canton of Zurich) (Parties Unknown)
Reference to general principle of the CISG: Article 7(2)
INternationales Schiedsgericht der Bundeskammer der gewerblichen Wirtschaft (Arbitral Tribunal, Vienna) (Parties Unknown)
The use of alternative source to interpret the CISG
Reference to Private International Law: Article 7(2)
Reference to UNIDOIT Principles
Filanto SpA v Chilewich Int’l Corp
Reference to domestic sales law
ICC International Court of Arbitration (Paris) (Parties Unknown)
Reference to other sources when private international law is inapplicable
Reference to foreign case law interpreting the CISG
Medical Marketing International Inc v Internazionale Medico Scientifica Srl
Reference to domestic case law interpreting the CISG
Mitchell Aircraft Spares Inc v European Aircraft Service AB
Reference to scholarly writings
MCC Marble v Ceramica Nuova d’Agostino
Reference to legislative history of the Convention
Delchi Carrier SpA v Rotorex Corp
The interpretation and Application of the United
Nations Convention on Contracts fro the International Sale of Goods
James P Quinn
Introduction
The United Nations Convention on Contracts for the International Sale of
Goods (hereinafter CISG or Convention) was promulgated in
1980 to provide a
uniform law for the international sale of goods. Since its enactment in 1988,
the CISG has been ratified by over
60 countries, including the United
As Canada, Mexico and most of the European countries have
also adopted the CISG,
the Convention now governs a majority of the
foreign sales transactions conducted by the United States.
countries have even adopted the CISG as their domestic sales law,
and in the United States, the Permanent Editorial Board for the Uniform
Commercial Code (hereinafter UCC) is using the Convention
as a model in its
efforts to revise the UCC.
In general, the CISG governs contracts for the sale of goods between parties
from different countries that have signed the Convention.
supersedes the domestic sales laws of each respective country in the formation
of sales contracts and the rights and obligations
of the parties to sales
Thus, in the United States, for example, when the CISG
was ratified by Congress in 1986, it became a self-executing treaty with the
pre-emptive force of federal law.
This means that, under the
Supremacy Clause of the US
Constitution
, the CISG trumps all contrary domestic
sales laws such as the UCC.
Although US cases involving the CISG
have been quite scarce until recently, a number of US federal courts have
struggled properly
to apply and interpret the CISG where the Convention is the
applicable law.
This paper discusses the interpretive techniques which commentators suggest
will enable courts to accurately interpret the CISG. The
section headed
Challenges to achieving an accurate interpretation identifies the current
difficulties in interpreting the CISG which
confront signatory courts and
lawyers. The section headed A brief history of the Convention traces the history
of the Convention
to lend some perspective on its interpretive policy. The
section headed The method of interpretation prescribed by the Convention
examines those particular CISG provisions that prescribe the method of
interpretation intended by the framers. The section headed
alternative sources to interpret the CISG considers those sources that may be
consulted when the CISG itself does not
directly resolve a legal issue
presented. These latter two sections also present examples of judicial decisions
which illustrate
the methods of interpretation used by courts and tribunals to
interpret the CISG.
Challenges to achieving an accurate
interpretation
Before drafting any international sales contract, it is essential that
counsel become aware of the challenges that await them in interpreting
unfamiliar sales code such as the CISG. An awareness of such difficulties will
also enable counsel better to appreciate those
techniques which will enable them
to achieve a more accurate reading of the Convention. First, some of the rules
contained in the
CISG are notably different from those contained in domestic
sales laws with which counsel may be more familiar.
For example,
the CISG is more liberal toward the use of parol evidence in interpreting
contracts of sale than is the UCC.
Similarly, the CISG provides
restitution remedies which are broader than under those under the UCC.
On the other hand, the CISG is more restrictive toward a party’s
right to revoke offers than is the UCC.
Similarly, the CISG
conditions a party’s right to claim avoidance on a fundamental breach by
the other party, while the UCC
preserves the perfect tender rule for single
delivery contracts.
Moreover, there are certain terms contained in
the CISG that counsel may find unfamiliar based on their regular use of domestic
For example, the CISG contains articles that embrace
certain European concepts such as the ‘Nachfrist’ notice, which
imported from German law but contains no equivalent in the UCC.
Secondly, the organisational structure of the CISG varies considerably from
that of domestic sales law such as the UCC.
For example, the CISG
addresses concisely in a single article the quality standards which are required
of all contract goods, while
the UCC devotes three separate sections to express
warranty, implied warranty of merchantability, and implied warranty of fitness
for a particular purpose.
The CISG addresses systematically in a
single section the standards required to avoid a contract and the consequences
of avoiding
a contract,
while the UCC addresses these same matters
through a series of sections scattered throughout the Code.
Thirdly, there are certain subjects involving international sales about which
the CISG is ambiguous and inconsistent.
For example, Article 1 says
that the CISG applies to situations where the parties have places of business in
different states which
are signatories to the Convention, or where the rules of
private international law require the application of the law of any such
However, Article 95 allows contracting states to opt out of
the latter provision by declaring a reservation.
Article 46 appears
to grant the buyer ample rights to the remedy of specific performance.
However, Article 28 allows the court to apply any restrictions to specific
performance which apply under its own domestic laws.
Fourthly, there are certain aspects involving international sales that the
CISG does not even address.
For example, the CISG nowhere provides
any general definition of ‘place of business’, even though this term
is essential
in determining the applicability of the Convention.
Article 2 of the CISG excludes from application those transactions
involving consumer goods, as well as those transactions involving
investment securities.
Article 4 of the CISG excludes from
application those issues concerning the validity of the contract, or the
validity of any of its
specific provisions.
The same article also
excludes from coverage issues relating to property ownership in the goods
Article 5 excludes from application issues concerning
liability for death or personal injury caused by the goods.
Due in large part to the problems mentioned above, many international
attorneys in the US have appeared reluctant to create or enforce
contracts based
on the CISG for over a decade.
In fact, according to some scholars,
many US legal practitioners are suspicious about and even afraid of the
Hence, many US lawyers often advise their clients simply to
opt out of the CISG, as is actually permitted under Article 6 of the
Convention.
Consequently, until very recently, US courts have
encountered ‘surprisingly few cases’ in which the CISG was even
Despite these problems, however, the CISG has significant potential to reduce
the difficulties frequently encountered in international
sales transactions by
creating a uniform norm for international trade.
This is because
simplification is the essence of the Convention.
Its fundamental
characteristics are ‘simplicity, practicality and clarity … free of
legal shorthand, free of complicated
legal theory and easy for the businessman
to understand’.39 The uniform code of law established by the CISG greatly
the use of multiple documents and contract laws that would otherwise be
necessary for parties to create international sales contracts.
Although the CISG had initially appeared to increase the complexity of
international sales transactions, it is expected that the CISG
will ultimately
enable parties to achieve ‘simplification and uniformity in the long
Ultimately, any apprehension which practitioners may
have toward the CISG can be alleviated only through a better understanding of
the Convention and the methods used to interpret it.
A brief history of the Convention
An examination of the Convention’s drafting history will provide
insight into the interpretive policy intended by the framers.
The process of
achieving agreement in international sales law evolved in three stages. The
first stage of the project began in 1928
at the Sixth Session of the Hague
Conference on Private International Law.
During this first stage, virtually all the participants came from the
industrialised, capitalist countries of western Europe.
which they produced was specific to the civil law tradition, to the neglect of
the common law tradition and other world
legal traditions.
Consequently, the first draft failed to gain worldwide approval.
The second stage of the project began in 1951 when the Government of the
Netherlands convened a conference at The Hague which produced
two drafts.
Encouraged by the favourable reactions which the drafts received, a
Diplomatic Conference was convened at The Hague in 1964.
the adoption of two Conventions: the Uniform Law of International Sale (ULIS)
and the Uniform Law on the Formation of Contracts
for the International Sale of
Goods (ULF).
However, member states of the United Nations
disapproved both the ULIS and the ULF, describing these sets of laws as too
complex, and predominantly of the European civil law tradition.
The third and final stage of the project began in 1966, when the United
Nations Commission on International Trade Law (UNCITRAL) set
out to create a
draft that would include the perspectives of a wider array of countries.
This UNCITRAL body was widely represented, including nine countries from
Africa, seven from Asia, six from Latin America, five from
Eastern Europe, and
nine from Western Europe.
In all, representatives from 62 states
and eight international organisations convened in Vienna in 1980.
The outcome of the Vienna Conference was the enactment of the CISG which
today is the system of laws regulating international sales
contracts in over 60
Indeed, the final draft of the Convention reflected a
wide diversity in legal traditions.
However, this wider
representation also required compromise among the various states in order to
achieve consensus.
Therefore, it is important for courts to realise
when interpreting the CISG that it is the product of diverse legal systems and
as well as the product of negotiations
where specificity was sometimes compromised in order for an agreement to be
The draftsmen were aware that different countries would
inevitably come to put different interpretations on the same enacted
This is why they inserted provisions into the Convention to
a subject to
be explored in the following section.
The method of interpretation prescribed by the
Among the primary objectives for the CISG draftsmen was to achieve uniformity
in the application of international sales law. This
purpose is evidenced by the
Convention’s preamble which states, ‘Being of the opinion that the
adoption of uniform rules
which … take into account the different social,
economic and legal systems (will) contribute to the removal of legal barriers
international trade and promote the development of international
To achieve their goal of uniformity in the
application in international sales law, the draftsmen inserted a key provision
the practitioner in his interpretation of the CISG: Article 7 of the
Convention.
Reference to specific provisions of the CISG:
Article 7(1)
Article 7(1) governs the rules of interpretation of the text of the
Convention. This article provides that when interpreting the CISG,
‘…regard is to be had to its international character and to the need
to promote uniformity in its application …’.
to legal scholars, this means that when interpreting the CISG, one should always
consider the fact that it is the product
of international unification efforts,
and that it was not created with any particular legal system in mind.
When interpreting the Convention, courts must consider such factors as the
difference between the common law and the civil law, the
East and the West, the
third-world countries and the industrialised countries, and the socialist
countries and the free-market countries.
The tendency to resort to
domestic sales law to interpret the CISG should be avoided.
However, the draftsmen apparently realised that while an
‘autonomous’ interpretation would likely encourage uniformity,
would not necessarily guarantee it. Therefore, they provided that, in addition
to having ‘regard to the Convention’s
international
character’, one should also have regard ‘to the need to promote
uniformity in its application’.
In their analysis of Article
7(1), some legal writers have deduced that anyone interpreting the CISG has the
obligation to adopt
solutions which are tenable on an international level, that
is, solutions which can also be taken into consideration in other contracting
Other legal scholars have deduced that Article 7(1)
requires that in applying the CISG, courts must consider relevant decisions in
other states.
Despite the differing views among interpreters of the
CISG, there does seem to be a consensus that the common law approach of judicial
interpretation through case law should be used, together with the civil law
‘positivist’ approach of looking to the text
of the Convention to
find solutions.
Although Article 7(1) provides clear guidance on the criteria to be
considered when reading the Convention in order to promote uniformity
interpretation, it nonetheless leaves unanswered the precise method by which
uniformity of interpretation is to be achieved.
comprehensive reading of sub-sections
(1) and (2) of Article 7, legal scholars have inferred that in cases which
involve the CISG, a judge should first refer to the CISG
text itself to see
whether there is a particular provision that applies directly to the legal
question at issue.
For example, if a case involves a question of
whether a party may avoid its contractual obligations without giving prior
another contracting party, the first step a judge must take is to
refer to the CISG itself. Article 26 of the CISG is directly applicable,
providing that ‘a declaration of avoidance is effective only if made by
notice to the other party’.
Thus, the judge makes his finding
of law based on Article 26 of the CISG.
While the CISG is intended to govern fully the rights and obligations of
parties involving international sales contracts, situations
often arise where an
issue cannot be resolved by direct reference to the text of the
Convention.
In this case, the judge must resort to other means of
finding an answer to the problem presented. When the CISG does not directly
address a problem at issue involving the parties’ contractual terms and
performance, then one should decide the case in conformity
with general
principles derived from the Convention, a subject to be explored in below.
Handelsgericht Zurich (Commercial Court of the Canton
of Zurich) (Parties Unknown)
A Swiss buyer and an Italian seller entered into a contract for the sale of
furniture that was to be manufactured by the seller. The
buyer paid only part of
the purchase price, and then some time later alleged that the furniture was
defective. The buyer also refused
to accept the seller’s offer to remedy
any defects in the furniture delivered. The Italian seller sued the Swiss buyer
payment of the purchase price.
The court correctly determined that the CISG was the applicable law. It found
that, based on Article 1(1)(a), the contract was governed
by the CISG because
the parties had their places of business in different contracting states. As
further grounds for the CISG’s
applicability, the court noted that this
dispute involved a contract for the supply of goods to be manufactured or
produced pursuant
to Article 3(1). Citing Articles 7(2), 38, and 39, the court
stated that it is implicit in the Convention that the buyer must prove
existence of defects and that it must notify the seller of any such defects
within a reasonable time. The court then held that
the buyer had lost its right
to base its argument on a defect in the goods because it neither provided
evidence of any defects nor
gave notice of any defects within a reasonable time.
The court ordered the buyer to pay the purchase price plus interest at the
interest rate of the applicable Italian law pursuant to Article
This case provides a good illustration of how a national court in the first
instance correctly looked to the CISG as the governing
law. It resisted the
temptation to resort to its familiar domestic sales law and instead based its
findings by reference to particular
CISG provisions. It observed the directive
of Article 7(1) in applying the plain language of the Convention, and thereby
the goal of uniformity and consistency in the interpretation of
contracts under the CISG.
Reference to general principle of the CISG:
Article 7(2)
While the draftsmen provided rules in Article 7(1) to govern the
interpretation of the text of the CISG, they also provided rules
to govern in
situations where a legal issue does not fall squarely within any of the articles
of the Convention. Article 7(2) provides
that issues not expressly settled by
the CISG ‘… are to be settled in conformity with the general
principles on which
it is based or, in the absence of such principles, in
conformity with … the rules of private international law’.
Therefore, when the CISG does not answer a question directly, then one
should first apply general principles derived from the Convention
to fill the
When searching the CISG text for general principles, one must
do so while observing the requirements of ‘international character
’, ‘uniformity of application’, and ‘observance of good
faith in international trade’.
Certain general principles may
be derived from the CISG to help the interpreter to fill gaps, such as: keeping
the deal together;
enforcing the parties’ intentions; ensuring that each
party receives the fruits of the exchange; and awarding damages to compensate
aggrieved parties and not to punish breaching parties.
general principles which can be gleaned from the CISG include: the freedom of
contract; the duty to act reasonably; and the
duty to perform in good
INternationales Schiedsgericht der Bundeskammer der
gewerblichen Wirtschaft (Arbitral Tribunal, Vienna) (Parties Unknown)
A German buyer and an Austrian seller entered into a series of contracts for
the sale of rolled metal sheets. The initial contracts
provided that the goods
were to be delivered ‘FOB Hamburg’. When the buyer later encountered
financial difficulties,
the seller allowed the buyer to take delivery in
instalments. The buyer took delivery of some of the goods without paying, and
to take delivery of other goods. Pursuant to an arbitration clause
contained in the sales contract, the seller commenced arbitral
proceedings,
demanding payment of the price. In addition, the seller demanded damages,
including those arising from his substitute
sale of certain goods which the
buyer had earlier refused to accept.
The arbitrator noted that the parties had chosen Austrian law, a state which
was a contracting party to the Convention. This meant
that their contracts were
governed by the CISG as the international sales law of Austria pursuant to
Article 1(1)(b) of the Convention.
The arbitrator held that, according to
Articles 53 and 61, the seller was entitled to payment for the goods which he
delivered to
the buyer. He further held that, according to Article 77, the
seller was entitled to damages for the cover sale that he made for
the rejected
goods. In calculating these damages, the arbitrator held that the seller was
also entitled to interest as provided under
Article 78, but noted that the CISG
did not define a precise method for calculating the interest rate. Since the
calculation of interest
was a matter that was governed but not expressly settled
by the CISG, the arbitrator ruled that it was to be settled in conformity
the general principles on which the CISG is based as provided in Article 7(2).
Referring to Articles 74 and 78, the arbitrator
found that full compensation is
one of the general principles underlying the CISG. In relations between
merchants, it is common for
the seller to resort to bank credit at the interest
rate prevailing in his own country when the buyer is late on payment.
Consequently,
the interest rate awarded was the average prime rate in the
seller’s own country, being Austria.
This case provides a good example of how a national tribunal correctly looked
to the general principles underlying the Convention
to resolve an issue not
expressly governed by any particular CISG provision. It resisted the temptation
immediately to consult alternative
sources, and instead confined its search to
the four corners of
the Convention itself to glean general principles that applied to the issue.
It observed the directive of Article 7(2) by consulting
the Convention’s
general principles when its text supplied no answers, thereby promoting the goal
of uniformity and consistency
in the interpretation of contracts under the CISG.
The use of alternative source to interpret the
Reference to Private International Law: Article 7(2)
It is reasonable to assume that the Convention draftsmen anticipated
situations where the CISG would not clearly indicate the responsibilities
parties had to each other, and where even its general principles would be
inadequate to resolve the matter.
Without providing an alternative
source of reference when general principles are lacking, practitioners would
find themselves without
any basis on which to perform under a contract, or to
make a claim for its breach.
In those rare situations where the
interpreter is unable to derive general principles from the CISG in order to
fill gaps, the Convention
allows a further recourse by reference to private
international law. Article 7(2) requires that the judge resolve any gaps by
general principles first, but if there is an ‘absence of such
principles, (then) in conformity with the law applicable by virtue
of the rules
of private international law’.
Reference to UNIDOIT Principles
One form of private international law that may be used to interpret the CISG
is the general principles of private international law
set forth in the UNIDROIT
Principles of International Commercial Contracts. The UNIDROIT Principles were
formulated by a Working
Group made up of judges, academics and civil
The purpose of the UNIDROIT Principles is to provide
general rules for international commercial contracts.
Principles were intended to codify communal principles of existing legal systems
and to recommend those solutions that are best
suited to the special
requirements of international commercial contracts.85 The UNIDROIT Principles
resemble the CISG provisions
and may occasionally provide a more detailed guide
to the court.
The UNIDROIT Principles provide several advantages as compared to other
alternative sources used to interpret the CISG. First, the
Principles were
created by a group of legal scholars representing various countries.
Secondly, because the Principles were not drafted as an international
treaty, the draftsmen avoided the need for compromise and generality
characterise international conventions such as the CISG.
the Principles share many of the same general principles that are also be found
in the CISG, such as the principle of good
faith, the recognition of party
autonomy, and the freedom of form, among others.
complementary nature of the Principles, they are especially useful to help
explain the meaning behind the CISG text while
maintaining the international
character of the interpretation.
One legal scholar argues that
seeking reference to the UNIDROIT Principles is an effective way to interpret
the CISG in order to
resolve gaps.91 Moreover, he insists that using the
UNIDROIT Principles to supplement the CISG is the best way of achieving
consistency,
uniformity and fairness in the application of the
Convention.
Filanto SpA v Chilewich Int’l Corp
A Russian enterprise and a US enterprise entered into a master agreement for
the sale of footwear. The master agreement contained
a clause which required
disputes to be arbitrated in Moscow. To fulfil the terms of the agreement, the
US buyer entered into multiple
contracts with an Italian supplier of footwear.
Under one of the contracts, the Italian seller delivered shoes but the US buyer
only partial payment. The Italian seller sued the US buyer in a US Federal
District Court to recover the price. Arguing that their
contract incorporated
the master agreement containing the arbitration clause, the US buyer sought a
stay of proceedings to permit
arbitration in Moscow. In order to grant the stay
for arbitration, the court had to determine whether a written agreement to
existed between the parties.
Initially, the judge determined that the CISG was the applicable law pursuant
to Article 1(1)(a), since both parties had their place
of business in different
states which were signatories to the Convention. The court concluded that an
agreement to arbitrate existed
based on the Italian seller’s failure to
object to the arbitration clause in a timely fashion. The court held that
of their extensive course of prior dealings, the Italian seller was
obligated to alert the US buyer to its objections in a timely
reaching its determination, the court relied primarily on CISG Article 18(1),
which allowed it to consider conduct as
an acceptance, and Article 8(3), which
allowed it to consider the course of prior dealings. Thus, the court allowed
prior dealings
accompanied by silence to the transaction to indicate an
acceptance. To support this rule of law, the court relied on the Restatement
(Second) of Foreign Relations, as well as two US federal court cases. It noted
that the Southern District of New York has held that
the CISG allows silence to
indicate an acceptance if this is the parties’ prior course of dealings.
However, this finding is
contrary to Article 18(1), which explicitly excludes
silence as a form of acceptance.
However, if the court had consulted the UNIDROIT Principles, it would have
found that Article 2.6(1) requires conduct of the offeree
to indicate
acceptance.
Furthermore, Article 2.6(3) provides that as a result
of the parties’ course of conduct, the offeree may indicate acceptance
performing an act without notice to the offeror.
according to the UNIDROIT Principles, mere silence is inadequate as a form of
acceptance. Instead, a specific act is necessary
to indicate assent.
Reference to domestic sales law
Domestic law is arguably another form of private international law that may
be used to render a more accurate interpretation of the
Convention. Throughout
history, domestic sales laws have often been used in private international
agreements.
However, one of the greatest concerns for the
Convention’s draftsmen was that ‘national courts (would) place a
gloss” on CISG cases’, thereby preventing uniform
application of the CISG.
Judges are apt to view issues through the
legal lenses that they have created within their own legal systems.
This tendency can result in a mechanical application of domestic laws in
preference to the CISG, which was a major concern for the
Convention’s
However, such a tendency is understandable when one
considers that the CISG is entirely new to most court systems around the
This means that those less familiar with the CISG may find
themselves performing more work in their efforts to render an autonomous
interpretation of the Convention.
Not only must they scrutinise
those provisions relevant to the contract at issue, but they also must carefully
examine the entire
Convention to find analogous provisions or overarching
principles.
In the process, they must comprehend and utilise
different systems of legal thinking under the Convention.
Nevertheless, there are some situations that may warrant recourse to domestic
law. According to one prominent legal scholar, the interpreter
should begin with
any applicable CISG provisions, after which he should take ‘a measured
response to the Convention’s
invitation to consider its “general
principles”, before turning to domestic law’.
Moreover, he asserts that there are some situations in which ‘the
tribunal must seek (via the rules of private international
law) some rule of
domestic law dealing with’ the legal question at issue.
Therefore, there are some instances where domestic law can serve a vital
function in interpreting the Convention. This means that
when there are no
relevant general principles to be found in the Convention, the court may look to
the country’s conflict-of-laws
rules and apply the proper domestic
legislation.
Thus, it is evident that domestic law may serve a role in interpreting the
CISG in certain instances. When a gap appears, Article
7(2) requires that it be
resolved ‘in conformity with’ the Convention’s underlying
principles.
This means that if a domestic law satisfies the
uniformity requirement of Article 7(1), and also conforms to the general
underlying the CISG, then that law may be applied to resolve issues
left unsettled by the Convention.
Therefore, any interpretation
should begin with an analysis of the CISG text itself. If its provisions do not
directly apply to the
issue in dispute, then the Convention’s general
principles should govern any other applications.
However, in those
rare instances where these two sources prove inadequate, practical necessity and
the text of the CISG itself permit
the interpreter to resort to domestic sales
ICC International Court of Arbitration (Paris)
(Parties Unknown)
A US buyer and a Dutch seller entered into a contract for the sale of four
Coke Breeze
. The parties agreed that the contract was to be
governed by the ‘laws of Switzerland’, and that any dispute arising
of their contract would be resolved by arbitration. When the buyer took
delivery of the cola he claimed that it did not conform to
the terms of their
agreement and sued the seller for damages, including lost sales, costs, and
The tribunal initially found that the parties had expressly made their
contract subject to the ‘laws of Switzerland’.
According to the
tribunal, the CISG was incorporated into Swiss law in accordance with that
country’s ratification of the Convention.
Therefore, the contract was
found to be governed by the CISG pursuant to Article 1(1)(b). The tribunal then
examined the seller’s
obligations under Article 35, as well as the
buyer’s remedies under Articles 45 and 74. It concluded that the buyer had
that the seller had delivered to it a product which could not be
considered to be
Coke Breeze
. The court therefore ordered the seller to
indemnify the buyer to cover all losses sustained by the buyer, including loss
As to the question of interest rate and the method of calculating interest,
the tribunal noted that the Convention is silent, since
neither Article 74 nor
Article 78 expressly settled the issue. The tribunal then considered the general
principles underlying the
Convention as required under Article 7(2). After
finding that the CISG contained no general principles that directly resolved the
issue, the tribunal considered the rules of private international law as
required under the same article. Observing that the parties
had made their
contract subject to the laws of Switzerland, the tribunal concluded that the
interest rate had to be determined under
Swiss law. The tribunal explained its
holding by stating that ‘as general principles do not settle the matter
(...) and the
parties have referred to the laws of Switzerland, it seems
justified to refer to Article 73 of the Swiss Code of obligations whereby,
the absence of a determination of the rate of interest by agreement or law or
usages, that rate shall be 5% per annum’.
This case demonstrates that domestic law certainly does have a place in
interpreting the CISG. Indeed, the CISG text itself should
always be the first
point of analysis. Its general principles should take priority over any
alternative sources, and resort to domestic
laws cannot diminish the actual
provisions of the CISG or disregard its principles. However, when neither the
CISG text itself nor
any of its general principles are adequate to resolve a
matter at issue, the court may seek recourse to domestic law.
Reference to other sources when private
international law is inapplicable
Reference to foreign case law interpreting the
Case law from foreign jurisdictions is another source of law that may be used
to interpret the CISG when private international law
sources are
inapplicable.
Although it may be argued that the method of
consulting foreign case law utilises more of a common law approach than a civil
the goal of promoting uniformity of interpretation
may lead a court to consult foreign decisions in some instances. Article 7
the interpreter to have ‘regard’ to uniformity when
interpreting the CISG. There is some debate among legal scholars
as to whether
this term requires courts to treat such law as binding or simply
persuasive.
The argument for making it binding is that it would
the Convention.
However, the term ‘regard’ does not
seem to require that judges consider such foreign decisions as binding.
Instead, a more accurate interpretation of this term would probably be
that it is simply urging courts to use such precedent as a
persuasive source of
This would mean that a court should consider foreign
decisions for their persuasive value in their own efforts to render uniform
Medical Marketing International Inc v Internazionale
Medico Scientifica Srl
A US buyer and an Italian seller entered into an agreement granting the US
buyer the exclusive right to market certain radiology devices
in the United
States. After the buyer had purchased some units, the US Food and Drug
Administration determined that the devices failed
to comply with federal safety
standards. The buyer declared that the seller was in breach of their agreement
due to the defective
units and cancelled the contract. The parties disagreed as
to which was responsible for complying with the federal regulations. When
were unable to work out their differences, the buyer submitted their dispute to
an arbitration panel pursuant to their contract.
The tribunal initially determined that the CISG was the applicable law.
However, the tribunal found that the CISG did not explicitly
address the issue
of responsibility for meeting the federal regulations. At the request of the
seller’s counsel, the arbitrators
referred to a German Federal Supreme
Court interpretation of Article 35. In this German case, a German buyer
purchased mussels from
a Swiss seller. More than a month after delivery of the
mussels the buyer notified the seller that the mussels were of poor quality.
When the buyer refused to pay for the mussels, the seller brought an action to
recover the payment he should have received. The German
court found that, under
Article 39(1), the buyer had failed to notify the seller of the defective
mussels within a reasonable time.
The court also found that, under Article 35,
the seller is normally not responsible for meeting the regulations in a
country. Upon a closer examination of Article 35, however, the
tribunal found that this case also fitted into an exception contained
(3) of that same article, where the seller may be liable in instances where
he knew or should have known of the non-conformity.
The tribunal concluded that the seller was aware of the federal regulations
from its prior sales of the devices in the United States.
The arbitrators noted
that the seller had made prior statements to the buyer that its equipment
complied with all federal safety
regulations, leading the buyer reasonably to
rely on these statements. The arbitrators held, therefore, that the seller was
responsible
for meeting the federal safety regulations. On appeal to US District
Court, the seller argued that the tribunal improperly applied
the CISG by not
following the German court’s holding. The district court held that the
tribunal properly followed the German
holding, but that this case met the
exception contained in Article 35(3).
This case is significant because it represents one of the few cases
internationally that actually cites case law from another country.
The fact that
the tribunal consulted a foreign tribunal’s decision in its efforts to
interpret a CISG article appears justified.
Following this method of analysis
comports with Article 7’s directive to have regard for the
Convention’s international
character and its need to be applied in a
consistent manner.
Reference to domestic case law interpreting the
Reference to cases within the same jurisdiction that have interpreted the
CISG could also serve as an effective method in achieving
uniformity in the
application of the Convention.
For example, a court could examine
the reasoning of another court within the same jurisdiction and comment on its
persuasive value
when rendering its own decision.
In this way, the
use of domestic case law interpreting the CISG could serve as a check within
that jurisdiction, ensuring a uniform
and accurate application of the CISG among
its various courts.
It may be argued that such a method would
allow bad decisions to be followed by other courts that are unwilling to perform
the research
required to find analogous CISG decisions.
this problem would probably occur only in a minority of cases.
Instead, it is more likely that opposing counsel would refer to the flawed
reasoning of bad decisions that weakened their positions,
and judges would
comment on the flawed reasoning used by these bad decisions when issuing their
This source of interpretation is perhaps most useful to
courts within the common law system.
Mitchell Aircraft Spares Inc v European Aircraft
A US buyer and a Swedish seller entered into a contract for the sale of
certain aircraft parts. After the parts were delivered, there
arose a dispute
between the parties as to whether the seller had falsely represented the goods
which were delivered. The parties
disagreed as to the substance of earlier
communications between them. The buyer brought suit to recover damages for
breach of the
alleged misrepresentation, claiming that the goods did not conform
to contract specifications.
Initially, the judge determined that the CISG was the applicable law pursuant
to Article 1(1)(a), since both parties had their place
of business in different
states which were signatories to the Convention. The court found that the
contract was ambiguous as to the
specific type of aircraft parts that were to be
delivered. The court then addressed the issue as to whether the parol evidence
was applicable to cases governed by the CISG. If the parol evidence rule
were found to apply, it would effectively bar the evidence
of any prior oral
communications between the parties that contradicted the terms of their
contract. After finding that there ‘was
virtually no case law under the
Convention’, the court referred to US case law. Citing the decision in
, the court stated that Article 8(1) requires the court to
consider evidence of the subjective intent of the parties, and that to
this subjective intent, Article 8(3) requires the court to examine all the
relevant circumstances surrounding the case.
Consequently, the court found that the CISG requires that it examine the
contract, together with any evidence concerning negotiations,
agreements, or
statements made prior to the issuance of the purchase order. Thus, the court
denied summary judgment to both parties
because it found, based on the parol
evidence of prior communications, that there was an issue of material fact as to
whether the
seller had agreed to supply the buyer with certain aircraft
case is significant because the court based its decision
on another US case applying the CISG. While referring to domestic case law
interpreting the UCC is generally not advisable, this method of interpreting the
CISG can provide some uniformity in the application
of its provisions.
Therefore, federal courts should follow the example of
outside their circuits to achieve a uniform application of the Convention within
the United States.
Reference to scholarly writings
General international law recognizes treaties and commentary by noted legal
scholars as a source of law. Article 38 of the Statute
of the International
Court of Justice (ICJ) provides that ‘the Court, whose function is to
decide in accordance with international
law such disputes as are submitted to
it, shall apply … the teachings of the most highly qualified publicists of
the various
nations, as subsidiary means for the determination of rules of
Courts in both common law and civil law nations do give consideration to
scholarly writings, albeit in different degrees. Specifically,
differences exist
between the national courts involving the issue of what constitutes primary and
secondary sources of legal authority.
For example, while a US
judge would likely refer to prior CISG case law in his efforts to render a
uniform interpretation of the
Convention, a French judge would likely refer to
scholarly commentary in place of the judicial decisions themselves.
This is because civil law courts generally regard scholarly commentary as
a highly valued source of law, while common law courts
generally regard such commentary as less reliable because it is perceived as
tainted by the scholar’s interpretive subjectivity.
Considering the major differences which exist between legal systems in the
sources of law they prefer to consult, achieving a uniform
application of the
CISG may be compromised by reference to scholarly writings.
MCC Marble v Ceramica Nuova d’Agostino
A US buyer and an Italian seller made an oral agreement on the terms for the
purchase of ceramic tiles. After the parties recorded
the terms of their
agreement on the seller’s standard, preprinted order form, the
buyer’s president signed the form on
behalf of his company. The order form
was printed in the Italian language and contained terms stating that the buyer
had agreed to
the terms printed on the back of the form. Four months later the
parties entered into a requirements contract providing that the
seller was to
supply the buyer with tiles at discounted prices so long as the buyer purchased
sufficient quantities of tiles. The
buyer brought suit against the seller
claiming that it had breached the requirements contract for failing to deliver
the tiles ordered.
In its defence, the seller pointed to the preprinted terms
contained in the order form, which authorised it to suspend deliveries
buyer failed to make payment. The seller argued that it was under no obligation
to fulfil the buyer’s orders because
the buyer had defaulted on payments
for previous contracts. In turn, the buyer argued that it had never intended to
be bound by the
terms printed on the reverse side of the order form.
The court correctly referred to the CISG as the applicable law, and based its
entire findings on the language contained in Article
8(1) and Article 8(3). The
court stated that Article 8(1) required it to consider the subjective intent of
the parties. In making
its determination, the court stated that Article 8(3)
required it to consider all relevant circumstances involving the case. Thus,
court was required to consider the affidavits submitted by the buyer indicating
that the buyer did not intend to be bound by
the terms printed on the reverse
side of the order form. The court recognised that its holding was in contrast
with the parol evidence
rule adopted by US domestic law. The court stated,
however, that its rejection of the parole evidence rule was ‘in accordance
with the great weight of academic commentary on the issue’. The court
relied on commentary from nearly a dozen commentators,
including John O Honnold,
David Moore, Louis F Del Duca, Henry D Gabriel, Herbert Berstein, Joseph
Lookofsky, Harry M Fletchner,
John E Murray, Jr, Peter Winship, Ronald A Brand,
and Albert Kritzer.
To support its assertion that Article 8(3) was a rejection of the parol
evidence rule, the court made direct reference in its opinion
to the works of
John O Honnold and David Moore. Honnold argued that: ‘[T]he language of
Article 8(3) that “due consideration
is to be given to all relevant
circumstances of the case” seems adequate to override any domestic rule
that would bar a tribunal
from considering the relevance of other agreements
… Article 8(3) relieves tribunals from domestic rules that might bar them
from “considering” any evidence between the parties that is
relevant.’ Moore argued that the parol evidence rule
often permits the
admission of evidence discussed in Article 8(3). He also argued that: ‘the
parol evidence rule, by limiting
the incentive for perjury and pleading prior
understandings in bad faith, promotes good faith and uniformity in the
interpretation
of contracts and therefore is in harmony with the principles of
the CISG, as expressed in article 7.’
is a significant decision, due in large part to the
court’s reference to scholarly studies on this issue, a typical civil law
The decision is also remarkable because it took into
account scholarly authority, rather than domestic sales law, in formulating
decision. The scholarly authorities referenced by the court support the
proposition that the CISG eliminates the parol evidence
decision is now precedent for US case law on the CISG and its
method of analysis will encourage other courts to refer to the studies
scholars to guide their interpretation of the CISG.
Reference to legislative history of the
The historical background of a treaty can also be considered when seeking to
interpret an ambiguous provision. The legislative history
surrounding a treaty
can provide insight into the draftsman’s intent with regard to the proper
scope and application of its
provisions.
In fact, the use of
legislative history is generally regarded as an accepted source of law in many
civil law countries.
However, courts should proceed with caution
when consulting legislative history as a source of law. This is because the
of delegates from various countries is often conflicting. Moreover,
statements by one representative should not necessarily be considered
reflecting worldwide consensus.
Furthermore, delegates to a
convention may propose legislation which is never ultimately enacted.
The primary benefit of using legislative history is that it provides
insight into the meaning of the final text of a document.
Delchi Carrier SpA v Rotorex Corp
A US seller and an Italian buyer entered into a contract for the purchase of
10,800 compressors to be delivered in three instalments.
The seller delivered
the first instalment and the buyer made the required payment. Before the second
instalment arrived, however,
the buyer discovered that the compressors from the
first shipment
were defective. The buyer thereupon rejected the shipment and cancelled the
contract. The buyer then brought suit in the US District
Court to recover
damages suffered due to the seller’s breach. After awarding summary
judgment to the buyer, the seller appealed
to the Second Circuit to contest the
amount of damages awarded.
On appeal, the Second Circuit affirmed the award of damages, holding that the
district court was correct in concluding that the case
was governed by the CISG.
The Second Circuit stated that since there was virtually no case law under the
Convention, it was necessary
to look to ‘the language of the Convention
and to “the general principles” upon which it is based’. One
the general principles underlying the CISG is that of ‘full
compensation’ for any losses caused by a party’s breach.
recognising the importance of considering general principles of the Convention,
however, the Second Circuit resorted to domestic
sales law. The court stated
that the CISG did not precisely define the method by which lost profits should
be calculated. It further
explained that ‘in the absence of a specific
provision in the CISG for calculating lost profits, the District Court was
to use the standard formula employed by most American courts and to
deduct only variable costs from sales revenue to arrive at a
figure for lost
A large portion of the award in
consisted of damages for lost
profits arising from the seller’s lost sales of air conditioners. Indeed,
Article 74 explicitly
allows for recovery of lost profits.
However, the CISG does not specifically address whether a party is
entitled to recover interest on lost profits, or how that rate
of interest
should be calculated. To resolve the issue, the court quickly resorted to the
domestic tradition of granting discretionary
awards of prejudgment interest
without looking to the legislative history of the Convention.
During the drafting of the CISG, there was much debate over Article 78,
making it one of the most controversial articles.
language of Article 78 entitling a party to interest on ‘any … sum
… in arrears’, reflects a compromise
among the States.
Thus, due to the general language of this provision, it is not clear that
the draftsmen of the CISG intended that interest on lost
profits be awarded and
calculated at the rate of the debtor’s country.
However, if the court had looked to the legislative history of the
Convention, it could have gleaned insight into the framers’
regarding the proper interest rate to be applied to lost profits. Earlier drafts
of the CISG omitted any rules involving interest.
However, a 1976
draft included a provision granting the seller the right to recover interest at
the rate of the country where the
seller maintains his principal place of
Under Article 78, both the buyer and the seller are
entitled to recover interest on any unpaid amounts.
Thus, it may
be analogised from earlier drafts that the appropriate rate of interest would be
the interest rate of the country where
the injured party has its place of
business, since this is the cost of credit.
The CISG has tremendous potential to minimise confusion and litigation
involving international sales transactions. In establishing
a system of laws to
govern international sales contracts, its draftsmen intended that national bias
would be displaced by promoting
uniformity in international sales transactions.
In order to achieve a useful level of uniformity, however, there must develop a
application of case law that promotes the Convention in harmony with
its text and principles. National courts have made significant
progress in
achieving uniformity of the CISG. In general, courts have shown a preference for
consulting secondary sources to interpret
the CISG, particularly domestic case
law and scholarly writings. In order correctly to apply the CISG, however,
courts must begin
to look at primary sources of interpretation, such as general
principles underlying the CISG, general principles of private international
foreign cases interpreting the CISG, and the Convention’s legislative
history. Careful application of the interpretive
methods discussed in this paper
will further the international character and uniformity of the CISG while
providing decisions in
accordance with the rules of the Convention.
United Nations Conference on Contracts for the International Sale of Goods,
Final Act (10 April 1980), UN DOC A/CONF 97/18, reprinted
in S Treaty Doc No
98–9, 98th Cong., 1st Sess., and
(1980) [hereinafter CISG or
Convention].
See Peter Winship, ‘Changing contract practices in the light of the
United Nations sales convention: a guide for practitioners’,
525 (1995), 527.
See US Dept of Com, Statistical Abstract of the United States 1997,
803–06 (117th edn 1997).
Norway has adopted the CISG wholesale; Finland and Sweden have altered
their sales laws to conform with the CISG. See Peter Winship,
‘Domesticating international commercial law: revising UCC Article 2 in
light of the United Nations Sales Convention’,
(1991), 46.
See generally
The Convention does allow reservations to be made in addition to other
qualifications.
CISG, Article 4.
Richard E Speidel, ‘The revision of UCC Article 2, sales in light of
the United Nations
Convention on Contracts for the International Sale of Goods’, 16
J Int’l L& Bus
165 (1995), at 166.
US Const Article VI, cl 2.
See Rod Andreason, ‘MCC-Marble Ceramic: the parol evidence rule and
other law under the Convention on Contracts for the International
(1999), 352 (discussing that of the 464
cases governed by the CISG only 32 have involved US companies; therefore,
federal courts
have not had a significant opportunity to interpret the CISG).
Mark B Wessman,
Practitioner’s Guide to the Convention on
Contracts for the International Sale of Goods (CISG) and the Uniform Commercial
, by Henry Gabriel (New York: Oceana Publications Inc,
(1996), 1791.
Henry Gabriel, Practitioner’s Guide to the Convention on Contracts
for the International Sale of Goods (CISG) and the Uniform
Commercial Code
(UCC), (New York: Oceana Publications Inc, 1994), 29–32.
, 139–41, 185–87.
, fn 11, 1791.
, fn 12, 134–36, 182–85.
, fn 11, 1790.
, fn 12, 104–09.
, 139–41, 185–92.
See UCC 2-106(3) & (4), 2-601, 2-602, 2-608, 2-612, 2-703 –
2-710, 2-711 – 2-717, 2-602, 2-608 (1990).
, fn 11, 1788.
, fn 12, 3.
, fn 11, 1787.
, fn 12, 6.
, fn 10, 352.
See John E Murray Jr, ‘The neglect of CISG: a workable
solution’, 17 JL & Com 365 (1998), available at
http://www.cisg.law.pace.edu/cisg/biblio/murray1.html.
See also John P McMahon,
When the UN Sales Convention Applies and Some of the Reasons Why it Matters
to You and Your Clients
, Pace Database on the CISG and Int’l Com L
(1996), at http://www.cisg.law.pace.edu/cisg/biblio/mcmah.html.
, fn 10, 352.
See eg John O Honnold, Uniform Law for International Sales Under the 1980
United Nations Convention, 47 (1982).
Larry A DiMatteo, ‘An international contract law formula: the
informality of international business transactions plus the
internationalisation
of contract law equals unexpected contractual liability’, 23 Syracuse J
Int’l L & Com 67 (1997),
78 (quoting Kuzuaki Sono,
The Vienna Sales
Convention: History and Perspective, in International Sale of Goods: Dubrovnik
, 7 (Peter Sarcevic & Paul Volken (eds), 1986)).
, fn 10, 355.
See Arthur Rosett, ‘Critical reflections on the United Nations
Convention on Contracts for the International Sale of Goods’,
(1984), 267.
Jeffrey S Sutton, ‘Measuring damages under the United Nations
Convention on the International Sale of Goods,
Philip Hackney, ‘Is the United Nations Convention on the
International Sale of Goods achieving uniformity?’,
(2001), 473.
Nives Povrzenic,
Interpretation and Gap-filling under the United
Nations Convention on Contracts for the International Sale of Goods
Of nine states which ratified ULIS and ULF only two were non-European:
Gambia and Israel, others belonged to EEC: Belgium, the Federal
Republic of
Germany, Italy, Luxembourg, the Netherlands, San Marino and the United Kingdom.
At the 1964 Hague Conference, Latin America was represented only by
Colombia, Asia by Japan and Africa by Egypt.
John O Honnold, ‘The United Nations Commission on international
trade law: mission and methods’, 27
Am J Comp L
201 (1979), 207.
Dr Bruno Zeller, The Development of Uniform Laws – A Historical
Perspective, 14
Pace Int’l L Rev
163 (2002), 163.
, fn 44, 739.
RJC Munday, Comment: The Uniform Interpretation of International
Conventions, 27 Int’l & Comp LQ 450 (1978).
It has often been stated that it is only possible to reduce the danger of
diverging interpretations; it is not possible to eliminate
them altogether; see,
eg, Joseph M Lookofsky,
Consequential Damages in Comparative Context
294 (1989).
, fn 1, preamble.
CISG, art 7(1).
Werner Melis, art 7, in Kommentar zum UN-Kaufrecht 87 (Heinrich Honsell
(ed), Zurich
); Roland Loewe, Internationales Kaufrecht 32 (Vienna, 1989).
See Sara G Zwart, The New International Law of Sales: A Marriage Between
Socialist, Third World, Common, and Civil Law Principles,
13 NC J Int’l L
& Com Reg 109 (1988).
, fn 45, 477.
Ulrich Magnus, Wiener UN-Kaufrecht (CISG) 153 (Berlin 1999), 155.
Franco Ferrari,
Interpretation uniforme de la Convention de 1980 sur la
vente internationale
internationale de droit compare 813 (1996), 831–32.
Sunil R. Harjani, ‘The Convention on Contracts for the International
Sale of Goods in United States courts’, 23
Hous J Int’l L
(2000), 62.
Monica Kilian, ‘CISG and the problem with common law
Transnat’l L &
217 (2001), 226.
, fn 68, 62
, fn 1, art 26
See Convention arts 1 and 7(2). Specific questions within the realm of
formation of the contract and the obligations of the parties
to a sale are
prescribed by the Convention.
???AQ: where is this in the text, relates to fn
71. fn renumbering 64 – 72 correct???
Handellsgericht Zurich, Switzerland, No HG930138.U/HG93, 9 September 1993,
, fn 1, Article 7(2). 75 Hackney,
45, 478. 76
Robert A Hillman,
Applying the United Nations Convention on Contracts
for the International Sale of Goods: The Elusive Goal of Uniformity
Review of the Convention on Contracts for the International Sale of Goods 21
(1995), 26–27.
, fn 45, 478.
Internationales Schiedsgericht der Bundeskammer der gewerblichen
Wirtschaft Wien (Austria), SCH-4318, 15 June 1994, CLOUT No 94.
, fn 10, 377.
Paul Amato, Recent Developments: CISG, UN Convention on Contracts for the
International Sale of Goods – The Open Price Term
and Uniform Application:
An Early Interpretation by the Hungarian Courts, 13 JL & Com 1 (1993), at 22
(quoting International
Contract Manual: Guide to Practical Applications of the
United Nations Convention on Contracts for the International Sale of Goods
Detailed Analysis 139 (Albert H Kritzer (ed), 1992) (stating that ‘the
contract drafter should designate a “receptive
domestic sales law”
as the gap-filling law’)).
, fn 1, art 7(2).
The UNIDROIT Principles of International Commercial Contracts, reprinted
in Burton &
Contract Law: Selected Source Materials
The UNIDROIT Principles of International Commercial Contracts, reprinted
in Burton & Eisenberg,
Contract Law: Selected Source Materials
See Alejandro M Garro, ‘The gap-filling role of the UNIDROIT
principles in international sales law: some comments on the interplay
the principles and the CISG’,
69 Tul L Rev
(1995), 1152.
, fn 68, 69.
, fn 86, 1152 (discussing the fact that a
practical use of the UNIDROIT
principles is to interpret or supplement uniform law instruments such as the
, 1153 (proposing that enhancement of an international
instrument like the CISG with the UNIDROIT principles has the advantage of
improving consistency and fairness in the adjudication of international
commercial disputes).
Filanto SpA v Chilewich Int’l Corp
789 F Supp 1229
Burton & Eisenberg,
, fn 83, 336.
. (relying on UNIDROIT art 2.6(1), 2.6(3)).
, fn 10, 377.
, fn 38, 96 (quoting Amato,
26). Timothy N. Tuggey, ‘The 1980 United Nations Convention on Contracts
for the International Sale of Goods: will
a homeward trend emerge?’, 21
Tex Int’l LJ
540 (1986), 542.
, fn 10, 374.
, fn 37, 133.
, fn 45, 478.
, fn 1, art 7(2).
, fn 10, 378.
ICC International Court of Arbitration, No 7565 (1994), Bull ICC, Vol
6/No 2, November 1995, p 64–67.
Franco Ferrari, ‘CISG case law: a new challenge for
interpreters?’, 17
245 (1998),
. 114 See Honnold,
, fn 37, 143. 115 Hackney,
fn 45, 479. 116
Medical Marketing International Inc v Internazionale Medico
Scientifica SRL
, No 99-0380, 1999 US Dist LEXIS 7380 (ED La, 17 May 1999).
, fn 77, 22.
Richard B Cappalli, ‘At the point of decision: the common
law’s advantage over the civil law’, 12
Temp Int’l &
87 (1998), 92.
, fn 68, 69.
, fn 77, 22.
Mitchell Aircraft Spares Inc v European Aircraft Service AB
Supp 2d 915
(ND Ill, 1998). Statute of the International Court of Justice, 59
Stat TS No 993, art 38 (1945).
, fn 37, 144.
Vivian Grosswald Curran, ‘Romantic common law, enlightened civil
law: legal uniformity and the homogenisation of the European
Colum J Eur L
63 (2001), 67.
Christian Kirchner, ‘A “European Code”: potential,
conceptual, and methodological implications’,
U C Davis L Rev
(1998), 676.
MCC Marble Ceramic Ctr Inc v Ceramica Nuova d’Agostino
[1998] USCA11 1817
(11th Cir, 1998).
, fn 69, 233.
, fn 134, 1390–91 (citing
numerous prominent legal scholars, including John Honnold, Harry M Flechtner,
John E Murray, Peter
Winship). See also Henry D Gabriel, ‘A primer on the
United Nations Convention on the International Sale of Goods: from the
perspective of the Uniform Commercial Code’, 7
Ind Int’l &
279 (1997), 281. (‘Subjective intent is given primary
consideration [Article 8] allows open-ended reliance on parol evidence.’)
, fn 68, 64.
In European civil law systems, legislative history is known as
préparatoires
, fn 37, 138.
Michael P van Alstine, ‘Dynamic treaty interpretation’, 146
687 (1998), 717–18.
, fn 37, 142.
Delchi Carrier SpA v Rotorex Corp
[1995] USCA2 1270
71 F 3d 1024
, fn 1, art 74.
Joanne M Darkey, ‘A US court’s interpretation of damage
provision under the UN Convention on Contracts for the International
Goods: a preliminary step towards an international jurisprudence of CSIG of a
missed opportunity?’, 15
139 (1995), 148–49.
, fn 37, 422.
, fn 144, 148.
It is unclear under US law whether interest on consequential damages
should be awarded. Honnold remarks that an interpretation of
the Restatement
(Second) of Contracts provision for allowance of interest in cases ‘as
justice provides’ could support
such an award: Honnold,
37, at 422 (citing restatement (Second) of Contracts section 354, 12, cmt d).
See Sutton,
, fn 44, 749 (citing Comments by Governments and
International Organisations on the Draft Convention on the International Sale of
Goods [1977] VIII YB INT’L L COMM’N 109, UN Doc A/CN 9/125).
, fn 1, art 78.
See Sutton,
, fn 44, 750.
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (169 KB)
PDF format (142 KB)
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter