URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/journals/PrivLawPRpr/2006/2.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 15:30:46
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Roth, Paul --- "Unlawful Photography in Public Places: the New Zealand Position" [2006] PrivLawPRpr 2; (2006) 11(8) Privacy Law and Policy Reporter 213
Unlawful Photography In Public Places: The New Zealand Position
Unlawful Photography in Public Places: the New Zealand
Can it be unlawful to take photographs of people in a public place? The New
Zealand Court of Appeal recently upheld the conviction
of someone who did just
and it implied that if he had been a paparazzi, he might not
have been convicted, because he would then have had a “legitimate
purpose” in taking the photographs. This was not
“up-the-skirt” filming,
but the surreptitious
photographing of high school girls walking to school along a public street.
The defendant in
was convicted under s 4(1)(a) of the Summary
Offences Act 1981 for behaving in an offensive manner in a public place. This
to be a surprising conclusion given that taking a photograph is not
in itself an offensive act, and that the photographs concerned
intrinsically offensive since they depicted an unexceptional scene that people
could see for themselves on a public street.
However, it was the fact that all
of defendant’s subjects were schoolgirls, and that the defendant took the
photographs while
concealed in his parked van, that rendered the taking of the
photographs on this occasion “offensive”.
The case is noteworthy because it indirectly gives people a right to privacy
in public places under the criminal law where no similar
right exists in similar
circumstances under civil law. In the recent decision by the New Zealand Court
of Appeal in
Hosking v Runting
it was unanimously held that
there was no tortious right to privacy in public places in the circumstances of
that case since there
was no public disclosure of private facts, nor were the
photographs that were taken offensive to a person of ordinary sensibilities.
that case, photographs were taken of a television personality’s twin 18
month-old daughters while they were being pushed
around a shopping district in a
stroller. The family was unaware at the time that they were being photographed.
Justices Gault and
Blanchard commented that in terms of making out a privacy
tort, they were “not convinced a person of ordinary sensibilities
find the publication of these photographs highly offensive or objectionable even
bearing in mind that young children are involved.”
Justice Tipping remarked that he could not “see how it can reasonably be
said that publication of these photographs
should be regarded as likely to cause
substantial offence or other harm to a person of reasonable
sensibility.”
Moreover, the right affirmed in the
case did not depend on the
person being photographed having some expectation of privacy, as discussed in
recent European Court of
Human Rights cases.
The Court simply found
that the actions of the defendant amounted to “offensive behaviour.”
Interestingly, and unlike
the European cases, the defendant did not make any
argument based on his right to freedom of expression. The defendant might have
tried to mount an argument based on s 14 of the New Zealand Bill of Rights Act
1990, which provides that “Everyone has the
right to freedom of
expression, including the freedom to seek, receive, and impart information and
opinions of any kind in any form.”
The New Zealand Bill of Rights Act,
unlike the European Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and
Fundamental Freedoms,
does not contain any guarantees for the
protection of individuals’ privacy apart from the s 21 right to be secure
from unreasonable
The Police in
contended that “the offensive interference
need not be to a civil right, since it was enough that the behaviour was likely
offend the right of reasonable usage of a public place.”
The Police went on to argue that “Covertly photographing school girls on
their way to school, in the circumstances disclosed,
was voyeuristic behaviour
involving a deliberate and furtive targeting of the girls and was therefore
offensive.” The Court
of Appeal accepted this approach, and stated:
“Because the offence is one against public order and must occur in, or
within view of, a public place the notion that the conduct
must infringe the
rights of a user, or users, of that public place is conveyed. More commonly the
right which is infringed is simply
the freedom to use and enjoy the public place
in question.”
The defence, on the other hand, had contended that the conduct in question
had to be offensive per se, and that the act of taking
a photograph was not
offensive in and of itself. The Court found, however, that the action of taking
photographs in this case was
offensive per se because “the furtive or
covert nature of the behaviour spoke for itself.”
The Court placed some importance on the fact that there was no apparent bona
fide reason for the defendant to take the photographs,
apparently not a bone fide photographer. Accordingly, the Court found that there
was no legitimate purpose for the taking
of the photographs, and it stated that
“An absence of legitimate purpose, so that behaviour is naturally
perceived as gratuitous
or even sinister, may increase its tendency to
In the end, the Court split 2-1 on whether the defendant’s behaviour
was offensive or not. The Court noted that “Two judges
consider that the
appellant’s conduct did have the necessary tendency to seriously offend
right-thinking members of the community
and that it warranted the intervention
of the criminal law.”
The majority held that the
defendant’s actions were self-evidently furtive; that any legitimate
purpose for taking the photographs
was patently absent; and that the furtive
targeting of the particular group -- schoolgirls -- was particularly pertinent.
The majority
remarked that unlike the situation in the
which involved a professional photographer making unnoticed photographs of a
celebrity’s children for a women’s
magazine, “all the
observable indications were sinister.”
Given that the
photographing went unnoticed by the subjects in both the
cases, it seems a bit odd that the Court should have referred to
the “observable indications”.
The majority summed up its findings by stating that the defendant’s
behaviour on the date in question “was offensive having
regard to the
time, place and circumstances in which it occurred, one such circumstance being
a manifest absence of legitimate purpose.”
The Court might
also have pointed to a distinction that could be drawn between photographing
celebrities (and their offspring),
and photographing private individuals. In
von Hannover v Germany
the European Court of Human Rights
quoted the German Federal Constitutional Court’s suggestion that ordinary
individuals had
rights to privacy that were superior to those of celebrities:
“Pictures of people who are of no significance in contemporary
should not be made freely accessible to the public: they require the prior
consent of the person concerned.”
there was no indication that the photographs were going to be published, and
indeed, this was even held against the defendant
when it was invoked to question
whether he had any “legitimate purpose” in taking the photographs.
However, the non-celebrity
status of the defendant’s subjects could have
been brought into the equation and used, perhaps, to support an argument that
the subjects would have had an expectation of privacy in the circumstances,
given that they were ordinary girls merely walking to
The minority judge did not accept that objectively, it was open to conclude
that the photographs were taken without a legitimate purpose.
He remarked:
“Had the photographer been for example, a police officer taking
photographs for the purposes of a criminal investigation
or a paparazzi taking
photographs for a newspaper or magazine, the observable behaviour would have
been identical.”
He went on to observe:
“Offence may be caused if the photographs were used for a sinister
purpose. But it would be the use which caused offence, not
the taking of the
photographs.”
case, which had been appealed to the highest level to which
it could proceed, sets an interesting precedent that has numerous implications.
Given that one is free to look at whomever one wishes when in a public place,
and to later recall and describe the person, it is
now forbidden to make a
photographic record of the person in situations such as in the
This case concerned schoolgirls. Would the same principle
apply, say, if pregnant women, macho musclemen, disabled people, or members
particular minority were the photographer’s subjects? Would furtively
drawing pictures or recording an oral or written
description of the same subject
matter incur liability as well, or is it only photographs? And if so, what is
the magic in a photograph
that is absent from an accurate pictorial, oral, or
written description?
The result in the
case also suggests analogous applications of
the criminal law to other situations, such as the taking of photographs with
mobile phone
cameras, which can often easily appear to be furtive, and the
taking of pictures in public that are of questionable taste, such as
photographs
of accident scenes. This hypothetical had already been more or less suggested in
Bathurst City Council v Saban
where Young J opined that
civil relief would be available for “a plaintiff who complained that
someone had taken a photograph
of him in a shockingly wounded condition after a
road accident”, or where the photograph was otherwise offensive. The
availability
of such relief, however, would arguably depend on whether or not
the photograph was published.
As a postscript, the defendant in
was recently arrested and
convicted again in the District Court for similar conduct, this time furtively
taking photographs of young
women studying in a university library.
He was convicted on the authority of the Court of Appeal case in which he had
figured before. Interestingly, the judge took into
account the subjects’
expectations of privacy in assessing whether, in the circumstances of the
situation, the defendant’s
behaviour was offensive:
“Still in the twenty first century it remains reasonable to expect a
library to afford a sanctuary for quiet contemplation where
its occupants and
perhaps particularly women can let down their guard from the ubiquitous risk of
being photographed covertly or
otherwise and largely free from public gaze. This
reasonable expectation makes occupants off guard and
unsuspecting...”
In the result, the court found that the defendant’s conduct
“would arouse feelings of anger and/or potential disgust”
minds of a right thinking member of the community. Accordingly, it found the
taking of photographs in the circumstances to
be offensive conduct. The case is
being appealed.
Dr Paul Roth is Professor in the Faculty of Law, University of Otago, New
, CA 374/04, 18 April 2005, O’Regan,
Robertson, and Panckhurst JJ. The defendant was first convicted and discharged
penalty in the District Court (
Police v Rowe
, Dunedin, 20
Februrary 2004, O’Driscoll J) and failed in his appeal to the High Court
Rowe v Police
, Dunedin, CRI 2003 012 12199, Chisholm J). Leave to appeal
to the Supreme Court was declined in
Rowe v The Queen
[2005] NZSC 40
June 2005, Gault and Keith JJ.
This issue was recently examined by the New Zealand Law
Commission in its report Intimate Covert Filming (Study Paper 15, Wellington,
June 2004). It led to the introduction into Parliament of the Government’s
Crimes (Intimate Covert Filming) Amendment Bill
on 12 April 2005.
[2004] NZCA 34
[2005] 1 NZLR 1.
Ibid, para 165.
Ibid, para 260.
Peck v The United Kingdom
, No 44647/98, 28 January 2003,
von Hannover v Germany
, No 59320/00, 24 June 2004.
Article 8(1) of the Convention provides that “Everyone has
the right to respect for his private and family life.”
There had been a deliberate decision not to include a right to
A Bill of Rights
for New Zealand: White Paper
(Wellington, 1985), para 10.144: “There
is not in New Zealand any general right to privacy, although specific rules of
legislation protect some aspects of privacy. It would be inappropriate
therefore to attempt to entrench a right that is not by any
means fully
recognized now, which is in the course of development, and whose boundaries
would be uncertain and contentious.”
The Long Title to the New Zealand
Bill of Rights Act states that is an Act “To affirm New Zealand’s
commitment to the
International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights”.
However, there is nothing in it to affirm article 17(1) of the International
Covenant, which provides that “No one shall be subjected to arbitrary or
unlawful interference with his privacy, family, home
correspondence.”
, CA 374/04, para 19.
Ibid, para 22.
Ibid, para 34.
The defendant did not give evidence in this case.
, CA 374/04, para 33.
Ibid, para 37.
Ibid, para 39.
, the defendant was apprehended after the police
were notified by the firm that was developing his films. The police caught the
in the act by snooping around his van and peering into it behind its
curtains. Accordingly, there were no “observable indications”
as the schoolgirls or any other member of the public were concerned. In the
case, the fact of the photographing came to the parents’
attention when the magazine informed them that it proposed to publish
photographs.
, CA 374/04, para 46.
von Hannover v Germany
, No 59320/00, 24 June 2004.
Ibid, para 25, section (aa).
, CA 374/04, para 39.
Ibid, para 40.
See the Canadian case of
Aubry v Éditions Vice-Versa
[1998] 1 SCR 591
for the legal position in the law of Québec,
where individuals have a personality right to their own image and have legal
remedies if photographs of them are taken and published without their consent
(except where the individual appears in a crowd or
otherwise in an incidental
manner in a public place, as opposed to being the focus of the photograph).
[1985] 2 NSWLR 704
But contrast the English Court of Appeal case of
(1990) 19 IPR 147
, where such a civil remedy was not available in
respect of photographs of a celebrity in a hospital bed following a serious road
accident. The set of facts there would probably now be actionable since the
enactment of the Human Rights Act 1998 (UK): see
Campbell v MGN Ltd
[2004] UKHL 22.
Police v Rowe
, Dunedin, CRN 4012013821, 23 September
2005, Smith J.
Ibid, para 30.
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
No downloadable files available
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter