URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/journals/AUJlMOA/2009/2.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 14:34:48
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Kadir, Rizal Abdul --- "Maritime transport services: Are developing countries' needs met by existing WTO rules?" [2009] AUJlMOA 2; (2009) 1(1) Australian Journal of Maritime and Ocean Affairs 2
Maritime transport services: Are developing countries’ needs met by existing WTO rules?
Introduction
Scope of maritime transport services
Growing impact from developing countries
The notion of ‘developing country’
Developing countries and changing needs
Special and differential treatment (SDT)
Market access
Status of GATS negotiations – impact on maritime transport services
Some immediate issues for developing countries
Policy considerations
Maritime transport
services: Are developing countries’ needs met by existing WTO
Rizal Abdul
Maritime transport services facilitate international trade. But the vast
range of activities in maritime transport services demand
understanding of each driver and associated intricacies. Ultimately, do existing
WTO rules impacting maritime transport
services, particularly the WTO General
Agreement on Trade in Services, meet disparate needs of developing countries?
This article
first reviews the scope of maritime transport services and the
significance of developing economies in world trade. The notion of
countries’ needs and changing trends are then investigated before
scrutinising twin issues on the subject for developing
economies namely, special
and differential treatment and the issue of market access. Before concluding,
the article considers some
policy options and contemporary issues facing
developing economies on the subject. Enhanced implementation of WTO rules is
for developing economies to benefit from maritime transport services
although developing nations themselves will need to be pragmatic
development policies.
______________________________________________
Introduction
The United Nations Conference on Trade and
Development (UNCTAD) estimated in 2005 that developing countries’ share of
seaborne trade reached 49 per cent of goods loaded and 31 per cent of
goods unloaded.
Recent World Trade Organization (WTO) reports on developing countries’
contributions to world output growth and merchandise
indicate that developing
economies are becoming increasingly significant in international
Developing countries’ share of registered world tonnage (deadweight)
also reflects considerable global presence. For instance,
estimates from UNCTAD
place developing countries’ share of registered world tonnage (deadweight)
at 22.6 per cent but this
figure excludes open registry territories whose share
in the same period reached 45.1 per
Statistically it may be
contended that WTO Members appear to be progressively moving towards greater
liberalisation in maritime transport
services under the request-offer approach
of the Doha Development Round.
Rules may only be considered effective if they are properly understood and
followed. The WTO rules are no exception. The WTO rules
are intended to promote
trade liberalisation. Through trade liberalisation, developing countries are
expected to better integrate
into the global economy. This article will focus on
the impact of maritime transport services on developing countries. Specific
will be drawn to the General Agreement on Trade in Services
(‘GATS’) as this WTO agreement has a direct impact on maritime
transport services. Reference will be made to other WTO rules as the context may
require. Like other WTO agreements, GATS has the
ultimate goal of promoting
trade and development through progressive liberalisation. Another key purpose of
GATS is to stimulate
economic activity in various service sectors, through
commitments secured from WTO member countries. But although in principle the
provisions in GATS applies to all service sectors, two exceptions exist. First,
services supplied in the exercise of governmental
authority are exempted from
GATS. Typically these are services that are supplied neither on a commercial
basis nor in competition
with other suppliers. Secondly, the GATS Annex on Air
Transport Services provides that GATS provisions will not apply to measures
affecting air traffic rights and services directly related to the exercise of
such rights.
It is important to appreciate several preliminary points about GATS. First,
GATS distinguishes between four modes of supplying services:
cross border trade,
consumption abroad, commercial presence, and presence of natural persons. Each
mode would naturally attract different
implications. Thus for instance, in
relation to maritime transport services, it may well be possible that the supply
of a particular
service may only be possible through simultaneous physical
presence of the service provider and consumer. This may occur, for example,
foreign parties having a local presence in a developing country to provide
auxiliary services to international shipping companies
which themselves may also
wish to have a local presence due to strategic and cost benefits. Thus, for the
context of this article,
the implications of the various modes on a developing
country may well differ between each mode. Secondly, the basic obligations
GATS may be placed into two categories: General obligations and specific
commitments. The former applies to all WTO members
and services sectors. Thus,
for instance, under Article II of GATS WTO members are required to extend
immediately and unconditionally
to services or services suppliers of all other
WTO members ‘treatment no less favourable than that accorded to like
and services suppliers of any other country’. In other
words, in principle, WTO members are not allowed to discriminate. Meanwhile,
specific commitments are required from WTO members in
relation to market access
and provision of national treatment. On national treatment, in essence, WTO
members are not allowed to
favour their local service industry over the
competition which is similar though not quite the same as the general obligation
earlier in relation to Article II.
Since maritime transport services falls under the purview of GATS for
purposes of WTO matters, it is necessary to appreciate the two-fold
significance
of maritime transport services. While maritime transport services constitutes a
powerful service industry, maritime
transport services is also a core ancillary
economic activity to trade in goods. It is for this reason that, although GATS
matters pertaining to maritime transport services, other WTO
agreements including WTO rules and regulations may well impact issues
maritime transport services.
Undoubtedly therefore, the maritime industry is a key facilitator for
international trade. In this context, the maritime transport
services in the
GATS system functions as a catalyst to persuade countries to open their domestic
markets. Consequently, such gain
would also result in access to domestic port
related activities. As discussed in the next section, maritime services cover a
array of services classified under different ‘pillars’. The
impact of WTO rules on these maritime services forms the
underlying theme to
this article.
This article begins by reviewing the scope of maritime transport services.
This is followed by a brief analysis of the impact from
developing countries on
the world economy. The notion of ‘developing countries’ needs’
merits scrutiny given arguably
differing views between developed countries and
developing countries on what these needs may be. An understanding of developing
needs may be better appreciated by assessing broad issues
within areas such as Special and Differential Treatment (‘SDT’)
Market Access. Both of these are key factors in negotiations on maritime
transport services. The status of negotiations on maritime
transport services is
also considered, in light of the broader negotiations on the General Agreement
on Trade in Services. This in
turn will require an assessment of issues arising
for developing countries before a review of some policy considerations for these
nations regarding maritime transport services.
Scope of maritime transport services
The subject of maritime transport services is diverse but has intricate
underlying issues. This has often led to difficulties in WTO
negotiations on the
topic. The scope of maritime transport services ranges from shipping to port
facilities and related services.
Each of these services is organised in complex
and different ways. For instance, in bulk shipping the services are relatively
competitive
but in liner shipping the services are dominated by bilateral
arrangements, monopolies and even state enterprises. The significance
of rate-setting conferences cannot be cast
These conferences, typically
made up of private shipping entities, would agree on pertinent shipping terms
such as applicable rates,
cargo type and shipping routes to mention a few.
Consequently, this would set the tone for maritime transport. It is acknowledged
that many countries exempt the conferences from anti-monopoly laws as
conferences are deemed to be a factor of stability. For instance,
their private
arrangements enable applicable rates to be maintained at certain levels at any
point in time. Similarly, conferences
have also been deemed a source of
technical progress and compared with state-owned enterprises, conferences are
widely perceived
as having the ability to provide better services to the
However, given the declining impact of conferences, the subject will not be
given in-depth treatment. For now, suffice it to note
that the practice of
exempting the conferences from anti-monopoly laws differs between countries.
Ultimately, however, negotiating
an optimal solution for progressive
liberalisation in the maritime transport sector demands balancing a myriad of
Officially, negotiations on maritime transport services have centred on three
pillars of the maritime transport sector: international
shipping, auxiliary
services and access to and use of port
facilities.
Each pillar covers a
different set of maritime services. For instance, international shipping deals
with transporting passengers
or freight between ports in different countries.
Auxiliary services cover, among other activities, cargo-handling, storage and
warehousing.
For the purpose of this article, it is necessary to note that in
relation to auxiliary services, issues on foreign operators’
rights (i.e.
requirements) to establish their own facilities and supply these services in
domestic markets are covered in the WTO
negotiations. With respect to the third
pillar, access to and use of port facilities covers, for instance, pilotage,
towing and tug
assistance. It is also appropriate to appreciate that WTO
negotiations on this aspect of maritime transport services extends to rights
(i.e. requirements) of foreign ships to gain access to these services without
discrimination. These three pillars constitute the
spectrum of issue areas in
maritime transport services to which negotiators have developed a framework for
negotiations commonly
referred to as the ‘Maritime Model
WTO Members negotiate issues arising in these three areas, adopting the
‘request-offer approach’ that was introduced
when negotiations on
services in the Doha Round resumed in 2000. But some proponents of maritime
transport liberalisation contend
that the quality of offers from developing
countries have been far from satisfactory. A core issue therefore is whether the
impacting maritime transport services can enable developing countries
to make better quality offers while at the same time meet their
development
A new area emerged in the current Doha Round to extend negotiations on
maritime transport services to include the notion of door-to-door
transport i.e.
‘multimodal transport’ – essentially maritime transport
service involving multiple modes of transport
in addition to
The advocates for this
notion contend that emerging market realities and trends in the fields of
transport and trade necessitate
But this new area has yet to gain acceptance from all WTO Members. Even a WTO
joint statement comprising developed and developing
member countries supporting
liberalisation of maritime transport services was silent on the issue of
multimodal transport.
practical reason for this may be the fact that the notion of multimodal
transport goes beyond maritime transport to include road
and rail transport. As
such, the idea of multimodal transport cannot be considered in isolation from
other modes of transport. Effectively,
it would appear that the notion of
multimodal transport would require consideration of other regulatory regimes and
necessitate parallel
negotiations on commitments in other transport related
Further, concerns have
been raised that multimodal transport liberalisation may also infringe national
cabotage laws albeit the impact
of cabotage practice and restrictions on trade
should not be underestimated.
Ultimately, while the momentum towards multimodal transport cannot be ignored,
to officially recognise a fourth pillar at this stage
would make the negotiation
of commitments on maritime transport services far more complicated. However, it
cannot be denied that
the Doha Round witnessed several attempts at placing the
issue of multimodal transport on the negotiating
Adding to the complexity, it is important also to note that the notion of
multimodal transport has in recent times been
revisited and negotiations
have been extended to include logistics services. This is an important new area
of negotiations on maritime
This development stems
from the 1996 Maritime Model Schedule which contains key differences from the
1993 Maritime Model Schedule.
The former defines the concept of
‘multimodal transport operator’ and ‘multimodal transport
services’ but
the 1993 model does not define the concept of
‘multimodal transport services’. However, neither version is
regarded as
an ‘established version’. And for purposes of
structuring their commitments, Members have generally adopted the WTO
Secretariat
Services Sectoral Classification List, commonly referred to as the
classification.
It is important
to note that while the W/120 classification and both Maritime Model Schedules
are not necessarily contradictory,
differences in scope of coverage
Clearly, however, both
Maritime Model Schedules explicitly exclude the notion of cabotage. Effectively
therefore, the issue of cabotage
may be said to have been practically excluded
from WTO negotiations on maritime transport services although as will be noted
in this article, there remain attempts to include the topic.
Growing impact from developing countries
While conferences have had a great impact on maritime transport services,
their influence has eroded with the emergence of state trading
and operators in
South East Asia. These operators, which include the likes of operators in
developing countries, have become capable
of offering on their own services at
par with those offered by the
conferences.
The emergence of
such operators from developing countries may in part be attributed to the
failure of a United Nations treaty initiative
which intended to
‘open-up’ the restricted ‘club’ of the conferences to
third world shipping lines through
a cargo sharing
World Bank reports show that shipping remains the dominant mode of transport
for international goods, accounting for almost two-thirds
of world trade by
Mindful of the present
global economic uncertainty, developing economies, among others, have thus far
maintained or strengthened
their expansion of output. Together with the
Commonwealth of Independent States, the developing economies contributed more
per cent of world output growth in
Developing countries’ share of world merchandise trade (exports plus
imports) reached a new record level of 34 per cent in
These two groups of
countries are expected to record faster growth in imports than exports; together
they are expected to contribute
more than one half of global import growth in
And in some developing and
least developed countries, sea transport accounts for up to 90 per cent of
foreign trade by volume.
countries are at various levels of development which has perhaps hindered early
comprehensive agreement on a set of commitments
towards liberalisation of
maritime transport services. It is thus incumbent to now briefly explore the
notion of ‘developing
country’ before later parts of the article
investigates potential obstacles towards the desired level of liberalisation on
Maritime Transport Services.
The notion of ‘developing country’
The WTO rules provide that country status is a matter of self-declaration and
more than three quarters of WTO Members have declared
themselves as a developing
But a ‘least
developed country’ is defined according to a UN
And along the continuum of developing countries and least developed
countries are countries that are either landlocked or in
transition.
Landlocked states
are geographically disadvantaged in that they have no ports. Consequently, the
export competitiveness of landlocked
countries becomes adversely affected. In
turn, the price of their product becomes more expensive to compensate for such
disadvantage.
Although complex
financial modalities are mooted to tackle such and other problems affecting
developing countries generally, implementation
has been fraught with
considerable challenges.
Meanwhile, another category of developing country comprises transitional
economies which may be characterised as those countries
whose economy is in
transition from a planned economy to a free
Developing country status generally entails benefits from special WTO
with extra attention for least-developed
Prevailing WTO rules are silent on the timeline for graduation of a
country’s status – but other members can challenge
the decision of a
member to make use of special provisions available to developing
For convenience, reference to developing countries hereafter will include
least-developed countries unless otherwise stipulated.
Developing countries and changing needs
Empirical evidence reveals no consensus on how the trade needs of developing
countries should be reflected in the trade rules and
principles.
Disparate interests
among developing countries make pin-pointing specific needs
Such disparity may be
ascribed to different stages of economic growth and varying degrees of
competitiveness between developing countries,
for example, for ‘like
Experience from
the Ministerial Conferences in Seattle, Doha and Cancun indicate serious
concerns over, inter alia, an evolving trade
policy agenda and changing
perspectives, roles and influence of developing
The difficulty in
identifying specific needs of developing countries is compounded given evidence
that developing countries are now
becoming important exporters of manufactured
Yet, primary
commodities like agriculture, cotton and textile remain significant
Maritime transport services, however, is an issue area that significantly
affects developed and developing countries
Member countries to date
have yet to agree on a package of commitments although various offers have been
made. In 1996, at the time
when negotiations for maritime transport services
were suspended, 42 governments from both developing and developed countries
participated
negotiations.
From this, 24
countries submitted conditional offers for Market Access commitments but two
countries subsequently withdrew their
offers and another two made good their
offers by turning them into formal
commitments.
As of 2005,
pursuant to negotiations on the General Agreement on Trade in Services which
resumed in year 2000, 68 initial offers
were secured from 92 Members that
participated in the negotiations. As of end June 2008, 71 initial offers had
been submitted by
Members and as of the same period the WTO received 31 revised
Thus, as of end June 2008, 82 initial offers remain outstanding representing
a little over 50 per cent of the WTO Membership which
as of July 2008 stood at
153 with another 29 countries, practically developing countries, currently
negotiating their accession to
Although the number of offers is considerable, the figures of itself cannot
be construed to mean that liberalisation in this sector
will be promising.
Indeed apprehension on the general quality of offers has stifled progress on
negotiations. It is also important
to appreciate that the offers themselves have
no legal status. In this case, an offer is merely a proposal from a WTO Member
extent that it is willing to allow market access to its economy. It is
important instead to focus on the commitments arising from
negotiations on the
offers. However, to provide a detailed analysis of the commitments would be
beyond the scope of this article
but readers may wish to consult the cited
literature for an idea of the underlying complexities to negotiating market
access in maritime
transport services.
While there may be strength in numbers, individually these countries require
various forms of assistance and different levels of attention.
From the old days
of General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade (GATT) right through present day WTO
rules on international trade, the
framework for assisting developing countries
has always been in place. The WTO rules on Special and Differential Treatment
relating to Market Access are pivotal towards understanding
contemporary issues faced by developing countries on issues concerning
transport services. While such rules may be lauded by developing countries, it
is necessary to investigate whether problems
arising from its implementation are
due to the concept or the process, or perhaps both!
At this juncture, it should be noted that while progressive liberalisation is
an underlying goal in WTO matters, Article XIX of GATS,
for instance, provides
that due respect be given for national objectives and WTO Members’
development levels, in individual
sectors as well as a whole. Apart from
various provisions in WTO agreements ostensibly favouring developing countries,
also be noted that developing countries are entitled to receive
technical assistance from the WTO Secretariat. The next section therefore
to examine how WTO agreements, in particular GATS, may help meet the needs of
developing countries.
Special and differential treatment (SDT)
The notion of ‘single undertaking’ in the Uruguay Round requires
WTO members to accept all the results of the Uruguay
Round without exception.
However, there are special provisions throughout WTO agreements to help meet
needs of developing
These special provisions are better known as provisions allowing for
For example, the
Multilateral Agreements on Trade in Goods, Part IV of GATT contains key
principles, objectives and commitments in
relation to trade and development
which benefit developing countries. Further, there is explicit recognition that
special measures
may be used by developing countries to promote their trade and
development.
How developing
countries conduct their trade activities in relation to this agreement has a
significant bearing on negotiations in
maritime transport services, in view that
a significant amount of international trade, particularly from developing
countries, is
transported by sea.
SDT measures can go a long way towards progressively achieving higher levels
of liberalisation in the maritime transport services
sector. This is
particularly true for developing economies with poor infrastructure, inefficient
practices or outdated business models.
With SDT, such economies can gradually
reduce impediments seen as trade barriers in the maritime sector. For instance,
in the context
of the increasingly important area of multimodal transport, an
inefficient transport sector leads to higher transport costs which
translate to a more expensive product. Such drawbacks reflect poorly on
developing economies whom are then considered as
being the producer of
non-competitive goods. Understandably, however, any economy would seek measures
that would not jeopardise the
development and growth of local industries. Thus,
in the context of maritime transport services, effective SDT measures are
required in various segments of the industry of developing economies.
For instance, through effective technical assistance and capacity
developing economies may be more amenable to favourable foreign equity holdings
in local shipping companies and perhaps
less resistant to restrictions on the
establishment of branch offices by foreign carriers. Indeed, a more efficient
system in developing
economies that does not jeopardise their respective
national interests may also lead towards better taxation policies and a more
equitable mechanism in implementing port dues.
As noted at the outset of this article, for negotiations on maritime
transport services, GATS is the key WTO text. A key provision
is Article IV of
GATS which is aimed at increasing the participation of developing countries in
world trade. In the context of SDT,
it should be noted that the Article IV
targets, among other things, strengthening the domestic services competitiveness
of developing
countries through access to technology and improving access of
developing countries to information networks. The impact of technology
maritime transport services is perhaps most felt in relation to port services.
In essence, this entails building the capacity
and competency of ports in
developing countries to employ technology in the business. For developing
countries that are traditionally
labour intensive in their operations, the
transition to capital and technology intensive mode of operations would require
of assistance from human capital development to financial assistance.
Ultimately, a key goal of GATS in this area of services is
to enable these
developing countries to provide the services locally at competitive rates to
that of their foreign counterparts.
But in spite of 155 SDT provisions throughout all WTO agreements – with
additional references for least developed
the provisions are
principally good-faith statements in favour of
development
making it difficult
to readily realise net tangible
Observers contend that
many developing countries regard SDT provisions as meaningless while many
developed countries consider the
same as bad economics and
For maritime transport
services, providing access to technology and access to information networks,
pursuant to the Article IV GATS,
without more, would not really enable the
developing countries to be self-reliant. Instead, it may make them dependent on
service providers with little attention towards building their own
capacity. Ostensibly, capacity building remains a key purpose
of that SDT
The issue of SDT is significant in both the problems and development of
negotiations on maritime transport services. SDT is closely
connected with the
Most Favoured Nation (MFN) principle in Article II of the General Agreement on
Trade in Services (GATS). The MFN
principle essentially means ‘favour one
favour all’. The Article II, however, allows a member country to derogate
the general principle and thus have in place measures which are
inconsistent with the said principle. When WTO member governments
suspend market access negotiations for maritime transport services in 1996, it
was agreed that, for the time being, the
non-discrimination provision (aka MFN
Clause) would not apply to maritime transport – an understanding which
currently remains
in place. This understanding was significant, as normally
countries are required to formally make known which sectors or sections
services in which non-discrimination will not
Thus, in other words,
until today, as the package of commitments on maritime transport services has
yet to be agreed, members are
generally assumed to be discriminating until
negotiations are completed. It may therefore be said that the negotiations have
a stalemate position.
To counter the impasse in negotiations on maritime transport services some
developing countries have adopted regional trade agreement
with developed countries for each to gain access into the others domestic
However, problematic
WTO rules relating to regional trade type of agreements tend to hamper the
effectiveness of such agreements
and have shown to be a key setback for
developing nations which depend on maritime transport to export their
As a general principle, developing countries will continue to rely on SDT in
their quest to integrate into the world economy. Securing
SDT for maritime
transport services is a negotiation process in itself. But more importantly,
implementation of SDT is less clear.
For instance, should SDT serve to enable
developing countries to meet their WTO obligations or as a basis for exemptions
SDT provisions
legitimise derogation from the important MFN
– effectively
discriminating against other WTO Members. For the time being, as noted earlier,
all WTO Members – developing
and developed countries alike – are
deemed to be discriminating. But this phase is only intended to be temporary in
As such for now, developing countries and particularly least developed
countries will continue to rely on SDT provisions in derogation
of their MFN
obligations.
Scholars believe SDT to be a source of
this can be attributed
to the roots of SDT which attempted social justice but grew into a complex
multi-layered plan hampering effective
implementation.
For instance,
when the Generalised System of Preferences obtained permanent legal cover
through the Enabling Clause,
intention was to phase out SDT when countries attained a certain level of
development.
But that level was
never defined and trade preferences became dependent on the discretion of
preference-granting countries.
Such granting of preferences is entwined with the request-offer approach in the
GATS negotiations in the Doha Development Round.
And in the context of
negotiations on maritime transport services, developing countries may be hard
pressed to make quality offers
under the ‘request-offer’ approach
especially if securing appropriate preferences are linked to fulfilling
find it difficult to derive meaningful benefit from SDT. In this
sense, SDT is
akin to a double-edged sword! Thus, it is not surprising that rather than
reflecting increased levels of integration
into the world economy, some
observers argue that industries and economies of developing nations remain
non-competitive despite benefiting
from, for example, protective
However, some argue that SDT can be an effective mechanism to meet the needs
of developing countries in trade and even competition
rule-making
initiatives.
This is significant
in maritime transport services, particularly for states that seek to leverage on
port operations and auxiliary
services. But the effectiveness of Sets in this
area arguably depends on the strength of the three pillars which support SDT
namely, improved market access, mechanisms to ensure that related WTO
rules and disciplines support development, and increased development
assistance.
In the context of negotiations on maritime transport services, the emphasis
on market access has focused more on access by developed
countries to the ports,
and by extension the domestic markets of developing economies. Indeed, Art. IV
of GATS may have enabled developing
countries to have access to technology and
information networks for purposes of improving their commitments towards
maritime transport
services. But the real test of the Art. IV may be whether the
domestic services capacity of developing countries have been strengthened,
made more efficient and competitive as a result thereof. From the text of the
Art. IV, it is arguable that the goal is to strengthen
domestic services
capacity whereas providing access to technology and information networks are
instead, some of the many possible
measures to facilitate achievement of the
Hence, the Doha
Ministerial Declaration that all special and differential treatment provisions
be reviewed with a view to strengthening them and making them more
precise, effective and
operational
is perhaps an
indication that developing economies have not been able to optimally benefit
from such SDT.
Further, the proposal for a Framework Agreement on SDT and similar objectives
by the WTO Committee on Trade and Development are a
big step towards consensus
in the application of SDT
provisions.
For the same
purpose, Annex C of the Decision Adopted by the General Council on 1 August 2004
sets out recommendations of the Special
Session of the Council for Trade in
Yet, a close review of
the document, which forms the basis of present negotiations on Services, reveals
that ‘specific’
recommendations remain general in nature and
difficult to measure. For instance, one recommendation stipulates that
assistance should be provided with a view to enabling developing
countries to participate effectively in the negotiations.’
While at first
sight the recommendation is significant and although the word
‘should’ may have better been replaced with
instil added impetus to the recommendation as envisaged by the Doha Ministerial
Declaration, the notions of
‘targeted assistance’ and
‘participate effectively’ are difficult to fully appreciate; for
example, what
would be sufficient and should the same be measured from the
perspective of the recipient developing country or the country providing
targeted assistance?
Market access
As noted at the outset of this article, market access is a key issue area on
specific commitments under GATS. Although market access
is not traditionally
linked with SDT, the net effect requires an element of ‘rebalancing’
of WTO rules.
For example,
greater market access calls for removal of existing special opt-out provisions
and exemptions which benefit interest
groups in industrialised
SDT and market access
concerns are especially important for developing countries preferring an export
orientation strategy.
context of maritime transport services, the issue of market access in
negotiations is principally two-fold: first, the issue
concerns rights of
foreign operators to establish their own facilities and supply auxiliary related
services for maritime transport
in the developing countries; secondly, the issue
is on rights of foreign ships to gain access to and use port facilities thereof
of developing countries without
discrimination.
In short, in
maritime transport services, the issue of market access appears to relate more
to the readiness of developing countries
to allow foreign players into their
domestic markets.
In contrast, the crux of the Uruguay Round bargain was that developing
countries would gain access to the markets of developed countries
areas of their export interest, namely agriculture and
textiles/clothing.
In exchange
developed countries secured commitments in relation to intellectual property
matters and services.
Inevitably, the notion of ‘single-undertaking’ at that time resulted
in developing countries automatically becoming bound
by commitments covered by
the earlier Tokyo Round codes to which only few developing countries signed
Effectively, market access
issues became inseparable from WTO rules on tariffs, quotas, tariff escalation,
and non-tariff
Yet, some contend that developing countries have not been the net
beneficiary in market access, despite having taken more efforts
towards removing
non-tariff barriers and reducing
The Doha round has
sought to address the imbalance by allowing GATS negotiations to proceed on a
request-offer approach towards securing
the desired level of commitments. For
completeness, it is necessary to note that different negotiation modalities
apply for negotiations
on market access issues for agriculture and
non-agriculture products which represent crucial areas of export interest to
At a macro level it can be seen that market access issues have contrasting
focus depending on the subject matter. WTO rules provide
developing countries
market access for processed, manufactured and certain primary
But tariffs and
non-tariff barriers remain central obstacles to market
The Doha Round envisages
greater market access through significant tariff cuts; and effective SDT can
facilitate major gains from
industrial trade
But recent reports
indicate that only incremental progress may be possible in that while developed
country tariffs would have decreased
under a new proposal, key products of
export interest to developing countries would have continued to face significant
import duties.
Perhaps, through effective technical assistance and capacity building
measures for purposes of balancing needs and interest between
maritime transport
services and agricultural and non-agricultural product related issues,
developing countries can optimise benefits
gained from flexibilities in
disciplines, obligations, thresholds, and transition
A closer analysis of market access issues in the negotiations on maritime
transport services shows that the focus is closely linked
‘national treatment’ principle under Article XVII of GATS, in the
sense that once a developed country is allowed
to supply the relevant services
in a developing country, there should be no discrimination between foreign and
local companies. In
view of this, the rationale for scheduling commitments on
the third pillar i.e. access to and use of port facilities under Article
(i.e. ‘additional commitments’) of GATS instead of under Article XVI
(i.e. ‘Market Access’) is not
immediately clear. One argument has
been that such division allows for a distinction between ‘pure’
maritime transport
services and related services necessary for performing an
international maritime transport
In reality, however,
Members have acknowledged that ‘access to and use of port services’
has remained subject to many
restrictions.
negotiations on this third pillar has focused on ensuring that Members allow
international maritime transport services suppliers
access to and use of port
services on reasonable and non-discriminatory terms and conditions. Thus, if the
issue does not involve
foreign services suppliers setting up a local presence,
it may be appropriate to schedule commitments on the third pillar under
‘additional
commitments’. Conversely, however, if developing
countries are faced with the prospect of having to allow foreign services
suppliers to set up base locally, then it is arguable that commitments on the
third pillar should fall within the purview of ‘market
Nevertheless, the issue of ‘non-discrimination’ has to be seen in
the context of Article II of GATS which deals with the
‘most favoured
nation’ principle. The MFN provision is a broad-based principle which
calls for a Member country to provide
every other Member country treatment which
is no less favourable than that accorded to like services and services suppliers
other country.
‘many restrictions’ on access to and use of port services
experienced by Members may be due to the fact that
Article II allows for
exemptions, hence effectively allowing discrimination. In principle however, the
permitted exemptions pursuant
to Article II are subject to review. But the 1996
decision to suspend negotiations on maritime transport services included in
the decision that the Article II will not apply to maritime transport
services until the negotiations are completed. Thus, even when
negotiations
resumed in year 2000, Members remained assumed to be discriminating. Any review
of the exemptions under Article II can
really only take place post completion of
the Doha Round negotiations on GATS. Even so, it cannot be conclusively said
that the exemptions
would cease upon completion of the negotiations as, in
principle, an exemption may effectively last not more than 10
The inherent difficulties with the notions of ‘market access’ and
‘special and differential treatment’ make
it increasingly difficult
to secure Members desired commitments on maritime transport services. The
request-offer approach, the hallmark
of the GATS negotiation method in the Doha
Round has arguably enabled developing countries to have a stronger footing in
negotiations.
But such negotiation method which started out on a bilateral
basis, which would enable each developing country to negotiate on its
was taken over by request-offer negotiations that were pursued more on a
plurilateral basis post 2005 Hong Kong Ministerial
Conference. Of course, this
has encouraged developing countries to form groups that may enable them to
collectively have a stronger
footing by enabling the group, rather than an
individual country, to champion a set of common concerns. Whether this has
the process for securing desired commitments or otherwise stifled the
negotiations process remains moot. What is clear however, eight
years on since
negotiations on Services resumed in 2000, the end cannot conclusively be said to
be in sight.
Status of GATS negotiations – impact on
maritime transport services
The 2008 ‘July Package’ brought results which gave rise to
optimism that the Services negotiations can be completed by
end of 2008. The
report from the Chairman of the Council for Trade in Services was accompanied by
an Annex which, in the words of
the report, ‘was considered by Members as
providing the elements required for completion of the services
negotiations.’
However, scrutiny of the report suggests that any optimism may be
short-lived. Granted, the request-offer approach towards securing
commitments
remains the preferred method of negotiations. But the latest negotiation text
shows that the proposed dates for revised
offers and final draft schedules
remain in square brackets
– which in negotiating terms mean that the issue remains open. Indeed, the
Chairman’s report stipulates that the dates
are subject to further
confirmation in the light of the overall calendar for the Doha Development
Agenda. Next, while Members agreed
that the draft text incorporate a statement
that a waiver mechanism was necessary for preferential treatment to be accorded
least developed countries, the understanding reached in the 2008 July
Package shows that the granting of such waiver would not be
so straight forward.
In particular, Members insisted that the impact of such a mechanism on other
developing countries be taken into
account in negotiating the principles and
characteristics of such a waiver. But perhaps most glaring is the position of
four Members,
all of whom are from developing countries, in objecting with the
formulation of the text to the 2008 July Package. These Members
insisted that
their position be formally registered in the Chairman’s report as well as
the Annex which accompanied the report.
The impact of their position can be seen
from the following text.
There is no consensus on a new text on services. Various delegations consider
that there is no mandate to agree on the elements that
go beyond the points
agreed by all Members in the Hong Kong Ministerial Declaration and that there is
no obligation to make commitments
at the highest possible level. Any language
that modifies Members’ current obligations has no binding force. However,
is total agreement on immediate implementation of any treatment in favour
of the least developed countries and the small and vulnerable
Although it is necessary to point out that the quoted text was
not discussed by other delegations at the Special
it has to be remembered
that the final text on Services can only be carried through by consensus. The
position of the four Members
clearly indicates that there is currently no
consensus; but in suggesting that any favourable treatment should also be
extended to
small and vulnerable economies, thus arguably opening up a new
category of developing country, pre-supposes that it may be sometime
consensus can be achieved. While special attention for least developed countries
is not something new, the growing emphasis
on ‘small and vulnerable
economies’ may be attributed, as recently as, to the negotiating mandate
achieved through the
2005 Hong Kong Ministerial
Declaration.
Indeed, in the 2008
July Package, it was reiterated that liberalisation of small economies shall be
in accordance with their development
Notwithstanding the position of the four Members, the annex accompanying the
Chairman’s report apparently contains elements
required for completion of
the services negotiations. But aspects of these elements merit scrutiny to
assess their impact on commitments
for maritime transport services.
When negotiations on Services resumed in 2000, the notion of
‘single-undertaking’ meant that commitments in the already
area of maritime transport services could no longer be secured independent of
other areas of Services. The annex provides
that commitments shall commensurate
with the levels of development, regulatory capacity and national policy
objectives of individual
Yet, the annex
contained a general reiteration that has significant impact on negotiations
towards maritime transport services –
‘there shall be no a priori
exclusion of any service sector or mode of supply.’ Such a statement
places the issue of
cabotage – a subject matter that hitherto has been
jealously guarded by Members, particularly developing countries, at risk.
it remains to be seen whether such an issue can be overcome through the targeted
technical assistance envisaged in the recommendations
stipulated in the annex to
the Chairman’s report. Indeed, targeted technical assistance remains a
crucial test for success
of the negotiations on maritime transport services in
the Doha Round, in as much as targeted technical assistance remains a key
for developing countries to participate effectively in the world
economy. And towards that end, pursuant to the Chairman’s
Report on the
2008 July Package, the WTO Secretariat was requested to provide a comprehensive
report of technical assistance activities
carried out since the Hong Kong
Ministerial Conference, in consultation with
Developing countries
should therefore take such opportunity to reflect their true state of readiness,
mindful that equal attention
will be paid towards understanding causes for
non-readiness.
Some immediate issues for developing
There is no denying that maritime transport services remain the most
economical and reliable mode of transporting merchandise goods
internationally
over long distances. This should augur well for developing countries which
account for a substantial portion of movement
of world trade. But whether these
countries can move up the ladder of development depends significantly on their
ability to effectively
facilitate trade. Excessive transaction costs,
uncertainty and delays are key factors that would hamper the competitiveness of
countries in facilitating international trade. If these factors are
left unchecked, not only would developing countries face difficulties
attracting trade and trade related activities into their economy, but in turn
also these developing economies would not be able
to benefit from the ‘new
geography of trade’ which thrives on increased exports of manufactured
goods and more trade
among South-South
However, changing production and trade patterns suggest that developing
countries will need to do more to effectively benefit from
the global supply
chains. While trade facilitation remains a pre-requisite, transport facilitation
remains a fundamental distinct
criterion for developing countries to benefit
from international trade. Closely linked with transport facilitation is the need
efficient logistics services. In this context, it is important to note, for
instance, that containerisation significantly facilitates
door-to-door transport services.
Particularly for landlocked developing countries, efficient land based modes of
transportation are therefore key for these countries
to benefit from the full
spectrum of containerisation transport services. Thus, inadequate or otherwise
inefficient land based modes
of transportation perhaps explains why many
landlocked states are still served by non-containerised transport
This brings into focus a first key issue for developing countries –
namely port services.
non-landlocked developing countries, efficient port services can compensate for
non-integrated land based modes of transportation.
For instance, such developing
countries may instead focus efforts towards being a transshipment hub as opposed
to a full service
port where an efficient multimodal transport is pivotal. But
providing efficient port services is a tall order for developing countries.
begin with sound port infrastructure is necessary. Consequently, high capital
expenditure would be required. Thus, in developing
countries it is not unusual
for ports to be managed and developed by state enterprises as opposed to ports
being driven largely or
purely by the private sector. However, some developing
countries, in particular transition economies through privatisation and
deregulation
have allowed private port operators to supply many port services.
But port infrastructure is noted to be both costly and dependent
upon careful
strategic planning.
As a transport node, ports need to be connected to transport networks at the
national, regional and international levels for there
to be clear returns on
investment in port infrastructure. Unless ports are integrated into these
transport networks, trade volumes
will not only be difficult to grow but may
evidently decline with competition from more efficient transportation networks.
that end it is imperative that the status of domestic shipping, i.e.
cabotage be resolved as soon as possible. The Guidelines and
Procedures for the
Negotiations on Trade in Services implies that cabotage should be
But the 1996
Council Decision referred only to ‘international maritime
pertinent to recall, both versions of the Maritime Model Schedules explicitly
exclude cabotage.
A second issue for developing countries, closely linked with the first issue,
is the impact on maritime transport services from growing
momentum towards
multimodal transport
Problems on the
meaning and scope of ‘multimodal transport’ have clearly hampered
negotiations on this item. Such definitional
problems have made it practically
impossible at this stage to secure scheduled commitments on market access or
national treatment.
Even so, if developing nations decide to make commitments on
multimodal transport, perhaps a finer problem for these countries will
determine whether such commitments on say, road and rail transport, should be
entered under the maritime transport services
subsector as opposed to scheduling
these services independently under rail and road transport services subsectors
– the implications
of one over the other will have to be properly
understood and evaluated. In this process, progressive liberalisation on
transport services may be acceptable if developing countries can play
a meaningful role. For instance, if local transport service
providers have
created a niche for themselves in the local market, partial liberalisation may
be a way forward towards the desired
end. Indeed, in partially liberalising,
local service providers may acquire technical knowledge and expertise that would
not be possible if the foreign counterparts were not allowed in to
local markets. In the long run, the local players may reach a
certain level
where it would no longer be competitive for foreign service providers to operate
The growing trend to link logistics services with the notion of multimodal
transport is a third key issue and one which clearly indicates
that ports are
integral to the logistics chain. However, trade transaction costs faced by
developing countries show that transport
and logistics services in developing
countries cannot compete with nations able to provide state-of-the art
The gap ranges from
infrastructure and information and communication technology requirements,
technical know-how to current commercial
practices. Therefore, for the majority
of developing nations, logistics services are still very much in the infancy
stage. Bridging
the gap may require intervention at all levels but any such
intervention should seek a careful balance between the needs of developing
countries and gains thereof, from relaxing various access rules, promoting more
efficient and effective methods of doing business
and through leveraging on
business partners to penetrate non-traditional markets.
Access to and use of port facilities perhaps remains the most pivotal pillar
in contemporary negotiations on maritime transport services.
In this sense,
other immediate challenges for non-landlocked developing countries relate
principally, in certain cases, from upgrading
infrastructure to the provision of
longer berth lengths, wider ship turning circles and deeper access channels
alongside berths for
modern ships. In addition, for transition economies in
particular and for those that have invested in heavily in port operations,
managing ports’ superstructure has also become more sophisticated and
demanding. Thus, securing enhanced technical assistance
and long-term capacity
building will be crucial for transition economies to meet these other immediate
challenges in respect of maritime
transport services.
Policy considerations
The bleak outlook of the global economy is likely to push back completion of
the Doha Agenda.
The economic health of developing nations which traditionally depend upon
external demand may require a shift in focus to stimulate
domestic consumption.
For maritime transport services, this can mean greater attention towards
cabotage policy, thus once again placing
in doubt the issue of domestic shipping
vis negotiations on maritime transport services. In addition, as all nations
seek to conserve
their resources, this can also mean lesser resources allocated
for targeted technical assistance and capacity building. The growing
emphasis on
multimodal transport and logistics services has resulted in negotiations on
maritime transport services becoming increasingly
complex. As such, the ability
of developing countries to be competitive in the area of maritime transport
services cannot be left
to time alone. At the same time, developing nations
themselves may wish to explore new policy initiatives or at least revisit
ones. Revisiting existing policy initiatives may entail a shift in
focus. Such shift should of course not usurp any limited resources
but instead
be pursued with a view of optimising economic potential. Having a new
perspective may also enable developing countries
to re-evaluate the type and
scope of SDT that would be required and ultimately allow for better quality
offer’s to be made.
Towards that end, in light of the earlier analysis in this article, a diverse
range of policy initiatives may be considered by developing
countries in order
to be more competitive in the area of maritime transport services. What follows
is by no means an exhaustive list
and in certain respects similar to ideas and
initiatives promoted by organisations like UNCTAD and WTO, to mention a few.
More importantly,
it is necessary to appreciate that there is no single formula
that can be applied to all developing countries. As such, the following
policy options and considerations may be applied with modification to suit
unique circumstances of a particular developing
1. Developing countries may wish to consider commercial ventures with an
appropriate stake for instance in areas of port operations
and logistics. These
ventures may initially take the form of a majority stake by the developing
country. With appropriate timelines
in order to enable the investing foreign
party to project its returns, such stake may be diluted where necessary,
enhanced or where
viable and appropriate the stake of the foreign party may even
be bought over. Either way, measurable outputs must be in place to
ensure that
such commercial ventures in the process effectively transfer knowledge, skills
and expertise to the developing country;
2. Developing countries should publicise measures it has taken to reduce
non-trade barriers and efforts it has made towards creating
an investor friendly
environment. On a broader plane, these efforts are necessary towards enhancing
foreign direct investment as
well as towards attracting both service providers
and users to the developing country;
3. Outsourcing may be an option for developing countries wishing or perhaps
needing to channel limited resources to other specific
areas of their economy.
In maritime transport services, given relatively lower levels of technology
components, auxiliary services
may be a suitable area for developing countries
to experiment with outsourcing;
4. Due to geographical location of certain ports, shipping lines may have a
commercially viable choice between neighbouring ports.
In such cases,
governments of developing countries may wish to review appropriate existing
policies in relation to its port operations
and make or otherwise enable the
policies to be non-discriminatory. The government may also facilitate
opportunities for the private
sector to be a full fledged port operator. Such
changes in policy have proven effective in attracting shipping lines from
ports. A case in point is the success stories in the operations of the
Port of Tanjung Pelepas, Malaysia;
5. The logistics industry, particularly for maritime transport services, can
be asset-based and non-asset based. In view of this,
developing countries can
choose to differentiate themselves by identifying niche areas where their
resources can be optimised;
6. The request-offer approach is key in negotiations on Services in the Doha
Development Round. Market access requests from developed
countries may be
broad-based in nature and not always specific. Therefore, where the request is
more general in nature, developing
countries may wish to identify areas in which
they can offer business opportunities at competitive rates and in the process
themselves to make valuable offers to facilitate market access requests.
Of course, the issue of market access goes both ways and
as such the offer from
developing countries may, in appropriate circumstances, be on condition of
reciprocity;
7. There is no contention that technical assistance and capacity building are
key enablers for developing countries to integrate into
the global economy.
Thus, in the context of the complex area of maritime transport services
developing nations should seek technical
assistance and capacity building to be
targeted at different levels ranging from ensuring that developing nations have
a clear understanding
of the scope of coverage of issues in negotiations on
maritime transport services up to the level of equipping developing
capabilities of being self-sufficient in providing the various
8. Investments in certain aspects of maritime transport services, like port
operations, can be costly and the returns visible only
over the longer-term.
Faced with huge expenditures and considerable uncertainty, developing countries
should ensure in place complementary
measures to mitigate potential negative
effects of adjustment costs associated with trade liberalisation;
9. One way to liberalise aspects of maritime transport services is for
developing countries to allow foreign services providers to
set up operations
locally. While developing countries may generally be averse to such policy
option, their governments may first
wish to evaluate the linkage between
commercial presence and foreign direct investment and in turn assess the impact
on commercial
interests and business opportunities that may be generated
thereof. Further, foreign service providers would normally pay various
tax which can be supplemented with a variety of policy incentives calculated to
promote the long-term interests of developing
economies; and
10. Towards enabling better quality offers to be made by developing countries
for services in general and maritime transport services
in particular, their
governments may wish to consider exploring linkages that may exist between
issues in trade facilitation negotiations
and transport and liberalisation of
logistics services.
The disparate needs of developing nations compound the difficulties in
securing commitments in the complex area of maritime transport
services. As a
framework for multilateral trade WTO rules have to strike a balance between the
needs of all its Members which include
developed countries. The vast scope of
maritime transport services and its intricate issues require a deep
understanding of the negotiating
modalities and different implications of WTO
rules. It appears clear that the issue of maritime transport services cannot be
in isolation from other WTO subject areas, for example, trade in
goods. At the same time, growing attention towards the subject of
transport, an additional area to the original scope of maritime transport
services, cannot be ignored. Likewise, the implications
of multimodal transport
on domestic shipping or cabotage remain unclear. And while negotiating
modalities on maritime transport services
clearly exclude cabotage, attempts to
include the topic on the negotiation agenda remain real. As such, enlargement of
the already
multifaceted original scope of maritime transport services has made
negotiations more intricate and difficult. The short to medium
term global
economic uncertainty may also adversely impact on-going initiatives towards
integrating developing nations into the global
Nevertheless, the followings findings can be made from the brief analysis on
maritime transport services in this paper. First, there
is no single notion of
developing country in view that the vast majority of developing nations is at
different levels of development
and therefore requires different forms of
attention and assistance. Secondly, the scope of maritime transport services,
particularly
for negotiations, is not entirely clear with differences existing
between the 1993 and 1996 Maritime Model Schedules. Similarly,
the governing WTO
document for structuring commitments in maritime transport services, the W/120
classification list, also contains
differences from both Maritime Model
Schedules. Hence, the complexity and multiplicity of documents add confusion and
poses difficulty
for developing nations to negotiate effectively. Thirdly,
Special and Differential Treatment and Market Access provisions permeate
rules and thus remain a primary mechanism to meet the needs developing
countries’. But only clarity in their application
and purpose of use can
in the General Agreement
on Trade in Services is broad based in nature. In
particular, as noted, the focus on market access in maritime transport services
and its associated problems are quite distinct from the issue of market access
in general. While the former concerns access to the
domestic markets of
developing countries, the latter seeks to address issues faced by developing
countries in accessing domestic
markets of developed nations. And, it cannot be
denied that market access issues are inseparable from WTO rules on, inter alia,
quotas and subsidies, all of which impact the needs of developing
countries. Fourthly, clarity in the WTO rules alone cannot help
meet the needs
of developing countries. Thus, developing nations will need to capitalise on the
special and differential treatment
through effective targeted technical
assistance. And such special and differential treatment may only be meaningful
if the targeted
technical assistance and capacity building are provided in a
timely, comprehensive and effective manner. The process of transfer
of know-how
and technology – which in itself may entail partial liberalisation in
maritime transport services - is an aspect
of capacity building that has to be
structured and nurtured so as to ensure that developing nations would be able to
ultimately independently
operate competitively. Towards that end, there is a
need to build on the significant milestones achieved through the 2005 Hong Kong
Ministerial Declaration and not dilute its impact in subsequent WTO related
Fifthly, while key contemporary issues in maritime transport services faced
by developing nations centre on port operations and services,
proponents of
maritime transport liberalisation must take cognisance that for a substantial
number of developing nations, there will
be competing demands for public funds.
Thus, although access to and use of port facilities may remain a pillar in
negotiations on
maritime transport services the extensive amount of funding
required for port investment may not outweigh the competing and in some
immediate needs of the population for public goods such housing and hospitals.
Further, the socio-economic implications on
developing countries in providing
value added services that go beyond the traditional cargo-handling functions
will have to be carefully
appreciated. Thus, developing nations may take quite a
while to have in place state of the art facilities in port operations hitherto
the activities are generally labour-intensive in nature. Through technical
assistance and capacity building labour intensive jobs
can be moved out of the
port into manufacturing goods for exports. Sixthly, although it is difficult to
expect developing countries
to be at par in the near future with developed
countries in providing maritime transport services, a range of policy options
open to developing nations towards liberalisation of this sector. The
choice may not always be easy or straightforward but with targeted
assistance, developing nations can be placed in a better position to decide on
suitable policies that would meet their
WTO obligations while at the same time
not compromise their levels of development and state of readiness.
When negotiations on maritime transport services, which were suspended in
1996 resumed in 2000, an ambitious approach was taken to
adopt a single
undertaking for WTO commitments on the whole area of Services. A breakthrough
was achieved through the 2005 Hong Kong
Ministerial Declaration. And while
significant progress has been made resulting in the 2008 July Package, it may
remain sometime
yet before developing nations can all fulfil their WTO
obligations on maritime transport services. Thus, on balance it may be safe
state that existing WTO rules partially meet the needs of developing countries.
But clearer implementation of WTO rules and comprehensive
targeted technical
assistance are required in order to meet the disparate needs of developing
nations, without which, it is likely
that the embargo on Article II of the
General Agreement on Trade in Services will remain in place for some time yet,
and all WTO
Members will continue to be deemed to be discriminating, thus
defeating goals towards trade liberalisation.
LLB(Hons), MA(Dist), LLM(Dist),
ACIArb, Barrister.Until recently, Rizal was a Research Fellow at the Maritime
Institute of Malaysia.
He is now pursuing Doctoral studies at the University of
Sydney, Australia under a University of Sydney World Scholars scholarship
Khazanah Global Scholarship, Malaysia. He can be reached at
rizal.abdulkadir@gmail.com
United Nations
Conference on Trade and Development, ‘Negotiations on Transport and
Logistics and Services: Issues to Consider’
(UNCTAD/SCTE/TLB/2005/3) 2006,
21, United Nations Conference on Trade and Development website <
http://www.unctad.org/en/docs/sdtetlb20053_en.
> at 31 January 2009.
World Trade Organization,
‘Developing, transition economies cushion trade slow down’ (Press
Release, 17 April 2008),
World Trade Organization website <
www.wto.org/
english/news_e/pres08_e/pr520_e.htm> at 31 January 2009
See also United
Nations Conference on Trade and Development,
Handbook of Statistics
(2008) United Nations Conference on Trade and Development website <
stats.unctad.org/Handbook/TableViewer/tableView.aspx?ReportId=1902
January 2009.
United Nations Conference on
Trade and Development, above n 1.
World Trade Organization,
‘Guidelines and Procedures for the Negotiations on Trade in
Services’, (S/L/93) adopted by
the Special Session of the Council for
Trade in Services on 28 March 2001. The negotiating proposal takes the form of
requests from
a World Trade Organization Member. This request is then sent
directly to another Member indicating what improvements are being sought
service suppliers and services to be rendered. In turn, a Member(s) then puts
forward an ‘offer’ which specifies
how and to what extent they are
willing to make binding commitments in response to the requests. Typically, the
triggers negotiations on a bilateral or plurilateral basis.
The important point to note for present purposes is that a ‘request’
is not provided to the WTO Secretariat whereas an ‘offer’ is
circulated to all Members as a WTO document. Ultimately,
final offers become
legally binding commitments specifying the conditions under which trade in
services is granted.
For further explanation of the
‘Maritime Transport
Services Background Note by the Secretariat’
(S/C/W/62) 16 November 1998.
Ibid. See also World Trade
Organization, ‘Singapore Ministerial Meeting – Maritime Transport
Press Media Briefs’
www.wto.org/english/thewto_e/minist_e/
min96_e/maritime.htm
> at 31 January 2009.
World Trade Organization
Council for Trade in Services, above n 5, [47]. See also Benjamin Parameswaran,
The Liberalization of Maritime Transport Services – With Special
Reference to the WTO/GATS Framework
(2004) 341.
World Trade Organization,
Uruguay Round - Group of Negotiations on Services - Services Sectoral
Classification List – Note
by the Secretariat, (
MTN.GNS/W/120) <
http:// docsonline.wto.org
> at 9 March
World Trade Organization,
United Nations Conference on
Trade and Development, above n 1.
World Trade Organization,
Council on Trade in Services Special Session,
Joint Statement on the
Negotiations on Maritime Transport Services
, (TN/S/W/11) 3 March 2003.
United Nations Conference on
Trade and Development, ‘Negotiations on Transport and Logistics and
Services’ n1 above.
The Logistics Services Checklist, which serves as a
guide for negotiations on logistics services, makes no reference to the concept
of multimodal transport
and such silence includes no mention on
the scope and extent of relevant commitments that would be expected from Members
access and national treatment issues. See also Parameswaran, above n
Ibid 12. See also
Parameswaran, above n 7, 60-61.
For example, see World Trade
Organization Council for Trade in Services Special Session, ‘Communication
from Australia –
Negotiating Proposal for Maritime Transport
Services’ (S/CSS/W/111) 1 October 2001.
United Nations Conference on
Trade and Development, above n 1, 5.
World Trade Organization,
‘Services Sectoral Classification List – Note by the
Secretariat’ (MTN.GNS/W/120) 10
July 1991. See also United Nations
Conference on Trade and Development, above n 1, 10.
United Nations Conference on
Trade and Development, above n 1, 2.
Convention on a Code of
Conduct for Liner Conferences, opened for signature 1 July 1974, Vol 1334 UNTS,
art 49(1) (entered into force
6 October 1983). Ibid.
Anon, ‘Ports and
Maritime Transport in West and Central Africa’ (2008) 3(4)
Research Digest
World Trade Organization,
Anon, above n 20.
World Bank,
Economic Prospects 2004 – Realizing the Development Promise of the Doha
(2003) 206.
The 32 World Trade
Organization members designated as least-developed counties are listed at World
Trade Organization website<
www.wto.org/english/thewto_e/
whatis_e/tif_e/org7_e.htm
> at 31 January 2009.
United Nations Conference on
Trade and Development,
Transit Systems of Landlocked and Transit Developing
Countries: Recent Developments and Proposals for Future Action
Ibid 11-15.
Ibid Ch II-III. See also
Barbara Stallings,
Globalization and Liberalisation: The Impact on Developing
(2001) United Nations, Ch II-IV.
United Nations Conference on
Trade and Development,
World Trade Organization Accessions and Development
(DITC/TNCD/11) 2001.
World Trade Organization,
‘Work on special and differential provisions’ <
http://www.wto/english/tratop_e/devel_e/dev_
special_differential_provisions_e.htm#legal_provis-ions
> at 31 January
World Trade Organization,
‘Understanding the World Trade Organization’ <http://
www.wto.org/english/thewto_e/
whatis_e/tif_e/utw_chap6_e.pdf
> at 31 January 2009. See also World Trade
Organization,
Decision on Measures in Favour of Least-Developed Countries
(LT/UR/D-1/3) 1994.
World Trade Organization,
‘Who are the developing countries in the WTO?’ <http://
www.wto.org/english/
tratop_e/devel_e/d1who_e.htm
> at 31 January 2009.
United Nations Conference on
Trade and Development,
Preparing for Future Multilateral Trade Negotiations:
Issues and Research Needs from a Development
Perspective (123,ITCD/TSB/6)
See, eg, World Trade
Organization,
LDC Trade Ministers Meeting-Zanzibar
, Tanzania 22-24 July
2001(WT/L/409); Joseph Stiglitz, ‘Two Principles for the Next Round, or
How to Bring Developing Countries
in From the Cold’ (2000) 23
437, 451-452; B Hoekman, R Chadha, W Martin, A Oyejide, M Pangestu,
D Tussie and J Zarrouk, ‘Developing Countries and the Next
Round of WTO
Negotiations’ (2000) 23
World Economy
431, 435-436; Surya P Subedi,
‘The Road from Doha: The Issues for the Development Round of the WTO and
the Future of International
Trade’ (2003) 52
International Comparative
Law Quarterly
425, 430-431, 444-445.
For difficulties with the
notion of ‘like product’ contrary to art I and III of GATT 1994 see,
Indonesia Certain Measures Affecting the Automobile Industry
(WT/DS54/ 55/59/64/R) (1998).
Joseph Stiglitz and Andrew
Charlton, ‘Development-friendly Prioritisation of Doha Round
Proposals’ (2005) 28
World Economy
293; Kamal Malhotra, ‘Will
a Trade and Investment Link in the Global Trade Regime Be Good for Human
Development?’ (2004)
European Journal of Development Research
716; E H Preeg, ‘Reactions to Seattle: The South Rises in
Seattle’ (2000) 3
Journal of International Economic Law
Robert Wolfe, ‘Crossing the River by Feeling the Stones: Where the WTO is
Going after Seattle, Doha and Cancun’
Review of International
Political Economy
World Bank, above n 25,
Concern over agriculture
issues was said to have caused the collapse at Cancun, see, eg, Joseph Stiglitz
and Andrew Charlton, above
World Trade Organization,
above n 11.
World Trade Organization,
Council for Trade in Services,
Decision on Maritime Transport Services
(S/L/24) 3 July 1996.
Maritime Transport
Services – Background Note by the Secretariat 1998
, WTO Doc, S/C/W/62
at 10-18 which provides an analysis of the Commitments and indicates, among
others, that as of 1998, 29 WTO Members
gave commitments in international
shipping services, 26 gave scheduled commitments in services auxiliary to
maritime transport and
six Members undertook commitments on port services.
For further information
regarding the World Trade Organization’s negotiations process, refer to
its document series TN/S/O
and TN/S/O rev 1. See also remarks in the World Trade
Organization’s 1996 annual report concerning the issue of negotiations
commitments in maritime transport services, available at <
http://www.wto.org/english/
tratop_e/serv_e/transport_e/transport_maritime_urneg_e. htm
January 2009. For a sample analysis of commitments in maritime transport
services see above n 42, and for a more recent
assessment, see
Transport Services – Background Note by the Secretariat
, (S/CSS/W/106)
http://docsonline.wto.org
at 9 March 2009.
World Trade Organization,
‘Summary table of ongoing accessions’ July 2008 at World Bank
Organization website <
www.wto.org/english/thewto_e/acc_e/status_e.htm
at 31 January 2009
World Trade Organization,
‘Understanding the World Trade Organization: Developing
at World Trade Organization website <
http://www.wto.org/english/thewto_e/
whatis_e/tif_e/dev1_e.htm
> at 31 January 2009.
World Trade Organization,
above n 32. See also
Decision on Measures in Favour of Least-Developed
(LT/UR/D-1/3) 1994.
See General Agreement on
Tariffs and Trade 1947/1994 art XXXVI:1(f). Understandings reached through
General Agreement on Tariff and
Trade 1994, 1(c)(i)-(vi) have a direct impact on
such principles, objectives and commitments.
Susan Prowse, ‘The
Role of International and National Agencies in Trade-related Capacity
Building’ (2002) 25
World Economy
1235, 1245 and Hunter Nottage,
‘Trade and Competition in the WTO: Pondering the Applicability of Special
and Differential Treatment’
Journal of International Economic
(23, 28, 31 stipulating there are no fewer than 145 SDT provisions).
Doha Briefing Series 3(13)
13 December 2004.
Ibid. See also art 15.1
Agreement on Agriculture; Article 6:6 Agreement on Textiles and Clothing.
Bernard Hoekman, Constantine
Michalopoulos and L Alan Winter, ‘Special and Differential Treatment of
Developing Countries in
the WTO: Moving Forward After Cancun’ (2004) 27
World Economy
This would be done by
listing out all the exemptions in an Annex to Article II – these
exemptions would then be subject to
periodical review with a view to removing
the exemptions within a period of time. The full text of the GATS agreement is
at <http://www.wto.org/english/docs_e/legal_e/ legal_e.htm> at
31 January 2009.
Sheila Page,
Special and Differential Treatment in post-Cotonou Services Negotiations
Overseas Development Institute. This was an Economic Partnership Agreements
(EPAs) between the European Union (EU) and African,
Caribbean and Pacific (ACP)
countries which extended to services. The agreement provides for applying
special and differential treatment
(S&D) in services negotiations in order
to benefit the ACP and the report discusses how that might be done.
‘Doha Ministerial
Declaration’ (WT/MIN(01)/DEC/1) [4]; ‘Compendium of Issues Related
to Regional Trade Agreements’
(TN/RL/W/8/Rev.1); ‘Submission on
Regional Trade Agreements – Paper by the African, Caribbean and Pacific
Group of States’
(2004) where the detailed proposal sought to incorporate
Special and Differential provisions into Article XXIV GATT, (TN/RL/W/155),
Section III. See also ‘Turkey – Restrictions on Imports of Textile
and Clothing Products’ (1999) (WT/DS34/AB/R)
[48], [52] and [58] where the
report states clarity in the WTO rules necessitate a standard interpretation of
key concepts impacting
regional trade agreements such as: ‘substantially
all the trade’, ‘other regulation of commerce’;
‘preferential
rules of origin’; and clarity is also required in
understanding the relation between the various WTO rules on RTAs including
Article XXIV and ‘Enabling Clause’. World Bank,
Global Economic
Prospects 2005 – Trade Regionalism and Development
(2005), ch 2.
Robert Wolfe,
‘Regulatory Transparency, Developing Countries and the WTO’
World Trade Review
World Bank, above n 25,
Robert Hudec,
the Nature of International Trade Law
(2000) 318.
Ibid 319-320.
Differential and
More Favourable Treatment, Reciprocity and Fuller Participation of Developing
28 November 1979, (L/4903,LT/TR/D/1) but note also arts 2-4.
World Bank, above n 25.
Mari Pangestu,
‘Special and Differential Treatment in the Millennium: Special for Whom
and How Different?’ (2000) 23
World Economy
1285, 1289.
Nottage, above n 48.
Bernard Hoekman, ‘More
Favourable Treatment of Developing Countries and the Doha Development
Agenda’, (Report 26921)
29 May 2003, 1-8.
General Agreement
on Trade in Services:
‘The increasing participation of developing
country Members in world trade shall be facilitated through negotiated specific
commitments…relating to: (a) the strengthening of their domestic services
capacity and its efficiency and competitiveness,
access to technology on a commercial basis; (b) the improvement of their
access to distribution channels and information
‘Doha Ministerial
Declaration’ above n 54, 44.
World Trade Organization
General Council, ‘Preparations for the Fourth Session of the Ministerial
Conference – Proposal
for a Framework Agreement on Special and
Differential Treatment’ (WT/GC/W/442) 19 September 2001. World Trade
Organization
Committee on Trade and Development, ‘Implementation of
Special and Differential Treatment Provisions in WTO Agreements and
Decisions’ (WT/COMTD/W/77) 25 October 2000.
World Trade Organization,
‘Doha Work Programme – Decision adopted by the General
Council’ (WT/L/579) 1 August 2004.
World Trade Organization
Committee on Trade and Development, above n 67.
Pangestu, above n 62,
World Trade Organization,
J Michael Finger, ‘The
Uruguay Round North-South Bargain: Will the WTO get over it?’, in Daniel L
M Kennedy and James
D Southwick,
The Political Economy of International Trade
Law-Essays in Honour of Robert E. Hudec
(2002) 301-310.
Ibid. Relevant commitments
covered by the codes include, rules of origin, subsidies and anti-dumping.
A significant issue in
itself in relation to agriculture negotiations.
‘WTO-Market Access:
Unfinished Business – Post Uruguay Round Inventory and Issues’,
(2001) 1, 1-7 and Section II
http://www.wto.org/english/res_e/publications_e/special
_studies6_e.htm
> at 9 March 2009.
Michael Finger, above n 73,
General Agreement on Tariffs
and Trade, 994 art XXXVI: 4 and 5.
Sungjoon Cho, ‘A
Bridge Too Far: The Fall Of The Fifth WTO Ministerial Conference In Cancun and
The Future of Trade
Constitution
Journal of International
Economic Law
Joseph François, Hans
van Meijl and Frank van Tongeren, ‘Gauging the WTO Negotiation’s
Potential Gains’ (2005)
Economic Policy
ICSTD Analysis
– Unpacking Lamy’s July 2008 Farm Trade Package
http://ictsd.net/i/news/bridges/27719/
at 9 March 2009.
Pangestu, above n 62,
1294-1301. Technical assistance and capacity building can help DCs strengthen
their macroeconomic fundamentals,
financial, regulatory, institutional, and
governance policies. See also Prowse, above n 48, 1237; World Trade
Organization, above
n 54, [38] which placed technical cooperation and capacity
building as core elements of the development dimension.
World Trade Organization
Council for Trade in Services, above n 5, 9.
Art II, General Agreement on
Trade in Services.
World Trade Organization,
‘General Agreement on Trade in Services: objectives, coverage and
disciplines’ para 7 (a) <
http://www.wto.org/english/tratop_e/serv_e/gatsqa_e.htm
at 31 January 2009.
World Trade Organization,
Chairman of the Council for Trade in Services, ‘Elements Required for the
Completion of the Services
Negotiations’ (TN/S/34) 2008.
Text as registered in the
Chairman’s Report, as requested by Bolivia, Cuba, Nicaragua and Venezuela
World Trade Organization,
‘Hong Kong Ministerial Declaration’ (WT/MIN(05)/DEC) 2005 at [26]:
‘Negotiations
shall have regard to the size of economies
added) of individual Members, both overall and in individual sectors.’
World Trade Organization,
Chairman of the Council for Trade in Services, above n 88, 3.
United Nations Conference on
Trade and Development, ‘Review of Maritime Transport’ (2005) 83.
United Nations Conference
on Trade and Development, above n 1, 22.
United Nations Conference
on Trade and Development, ‘Port Logistics – Key Issues for
Developing Countries
, United Nations Conference on Trade and
Development website <
http://www.unctad.org
> at 31 January
‘[T]here shall be no
a priori exclusion of any service sector or mode of supply.’ World Trade
Organization, above n 4.
further the liberalization of
international trade in maritime transport
(emphasis added) within the framework of the General Agreement on
Trade in Services’, World Trade Organization, above n 41.
United Nations Conference
on Trade and Development, above n 1, 24.
See, eg, Anon,
Pales Next to Financial Turmoil
(2008) 2(5) International Centre for Trade
and Sustainable Development and Anon,
Global Financial Crisis Focuses Mind on
(2008) 12(39) International Centre for Trade and Sustainable
Development website <http://
> at 31 January 2009.
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
No downloadable files available
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter