URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/journals/LawTechHum/2025/9.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 15:13:19
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Krook, Joshua --- "Building Serendipity into Recommender Algorithms on Online Platforms: Reviving the Chaos and Randomness of the Early Internet Aesthetic" [2025] LawTechHum 9; (2025) 7(1) Law, Technology and Humans 127
Building Serendipity into Recommender
Algorithms on Online Platforms: Reviving the Chaos and Randomness of the Early
Internet Aesthetic
Joshua Krook
University of Southampton, United Kingdom
Artificial intelligence; recommender systems;
serendipity; early internet.
1. Introduction
In 2011, the University of Sydney began removing
books from Fisher Library to make room for new laptop study
The librarian, John Shipp,
had the difficult task of deciding which books would stay on campus and which
would be shipped off to
a remote, off-site storage
To determine which books
would go, he invented the notorious ‘dust
Any books found to
have a layer of dust on them would be removed from the campus library, while
commonly used books would remain
on the shelves. Dusty books would still be
available via retrieval from an online
However, students would
have to request that the books be physically brought back to them on
This meant it was no longer
possible to accidentally stumble upon these obscure volumes on the shelves. You
needed to know what you
were looking for.
By the end of the ‘dust test’ process, over 500,000 books –
nearly half of the library’s collection –
were transferred off-site.
The library was transformed overnight from a place of discovery and exploration
to a largely digital space,
with smooth, seamless study spaces, gleaming white
desks and nap pods (Figure 1). Gone were the obscure history tomes, replaced by
textbooks and popular novels. Previously, visiting the library involved losing
yourself in the shelves, stumbling upon a few random
texts – perhaps
unrelated to the field you were studying – and learning something new.
What the ‘dust test’
killed was the serendipity of finding the
unexpected, to be replaced by the dull predictability of the common, the popular
One of the most significant yet often overlooked aspects of the ‘new
wave’ of artificial intelligence (AI) and its integration
into all aspects
of modern life is its rich potential for cross-disciplinary dialogue. These
conversations, particularly between
lawyers and computer scientists, are crucial
because they may hold keys to increased efficiency and accuracy in legal
administration
and access to justice. However, lawyers and computer scientists
do not always speak the same language. In their 2017 article ‘Playing
Data’, Lehr and Ohm present a compelling argument for lawyers to shift
their perception of machine learning from a monolithic
and abstract concept to a
nuanced process that encompasses problem definition, data collection and model
deployment, with several
At the same time, in their enthusiasm for increasingly clever machines, computer
scientists must not lose sight of the fact that
the law and legal reasoning do
not easily – and sometimes should not – adapt to computational data
and modelling. Herein
lies the crux of this article. The potential for
predictive analytics in the field of refugee status determination raises
questions about model appropriateness and how data can be collected
and used in a way that may subvert legal standards to the detriment
of the very
real human at its heart.
Figure 1. A malfunctioning ‘sleep pod’ in
Sydney’s revamped Fisher Library.
Source: Author’s photo, 2019.
The ‘dust test’ is a fitting ethnographic story for the digital
age in which we live today, where digitalisation attempts
to make all processes
smooth, efficient and seamless at the expense of interruption, accident and
Online platforms have the
same problem as the overcrowded library: they contain millions of items that
must be sorted and ranked
for users to see, with some items needing to be hidden
from view. The internet’s librarian is the recommender system. These
powerful algorithms make decisions on which items should be shown to
and which are too
‘dusty’ to show on screen. ‘Dusty’ items are hidden
behind search bars or obscure menu
options, where users need to manually search
Over time, these algorithms have begun to ‘curate’ the user
experience in order to increase platform efficiency. The push
towards efficiency
can be contrasted with the chaotic nature of life prior to digitalisation. Anne
Helen Petersen tells a relevant
story of looking for a friend on a college
campus in the early 2000s.
time before mobile phones, social media or digital cameras. If she wanted to
find a friend on campus, she simply had to
Typically, what
followed was an odyssey: walking through the halls of the campus, checking dorm
rooms, visiting the library to ask
whether anyone had seen the friend in
question. Sometimes they were found quickly; at other times the search turned
into a ‘college
night picaresque with distractions (shitty nachos) and
diversions (good gossip, a random dance
Petersen never
knew whether the night would work out: ‘There was so much less control, so
much less ability to curate what
your night would look
Walking through the
halls and bumping into strangers, there was a chance for new friendships or new
romantic relationships. All of
this felt more
, fulfilling and
joyful than the ‘sterile world of infinite choice’ facing her online
The curated life is the opposite of the serendipitous life. By serendipity, I
refer to ‘the finding of unexpected information
(relevant to the goal or
Curation, by
contrast, refers to a pre-planned show or display, or an ordering or structuring
of items to view.
Recommender
systems move our lives away from serendipity and towards curation by
structuring, ranking and organising the content
to which we are
This occurs via
personalisation, which removes the unexpected surprise of unusual items that do
not fit our expected taste.
Algorithms have the same biases as the ‘dust test’ of Fisher
Library, with a tendency to prioritise popular
homogeneity
over variation and
difference. In this way, they lead to the same drawbacks of diminishing
serendipitous encounters. Netflix, for
example, recommends new TV shows based on
a user’s past viewing history, including what TV shows they clicked on,
they watched for and what similar users have watched in the
Recommender algorithms create a feedback loop for new titles that reinforces
a feeling of sameness and repetition: a user will see
‘because you watched
Mission Impossible
... here are other movies featuring Tom Cruise’,
and therefore will be encouraged to watch a similar movie again. This new movie
gets fed back into the system, reinforcing the feedback
Meanwhile, genres with
which the user does not engage frequently are hidden from
The recommendations
resemble a mirror or a ‘you loop’: reflecting back opinions,
entertainment and content that we already
like and agree
In this way, the curated
life leads us towards a lack of personal growth, change or transformation.
Instead of seeing different content
and learning something new, we see content
that confirms our existing
We get trapped into a
‘filter bubble’ or a ‘neighbourhood’, surrounded by
other, similar users.
Personalisation filters out the different, so we are less exposed to views and
opinions that are different from our
The decline of serendipity online has correlated with the decline of shared
spaces of people radically different from one another
in the same viewing space.
Traditionally, viewers would watch the same TV show at the same time on
television, whereas today they
stream personally recommended TV shows on Netflix
at their own leisure. This decline of the ‘shared viewing
experience’
extends to the graphical user interface: Netflix transforms TV
and film posters to suit the viewing profile of the specific
A user who watches
romantic films will see new movie posters featuring romance, while a user who
watches action films will see the
same movies with more action-heavy
Curation of the user
experience limits the opportunity of the user to extend beyond their usual
watching patterns. Instead, they
are psychologically primed to reinforce their
pre-existing behaviours.
In the next section, I consider forms of resistance against algorithmic
ranking and efficiency, including nostalgia for the early
internet. This
includes a consideration of early websites that were more chaotic in nature
compared with the algorithmic rankings
of today. I argue that the movement
towards curation has resulted in a loss of serendipity for the user and the
narrowing of the
user experience, limiting their growth and the variety of
content they are exposed to. I then consider ways to move back to a more
content format, while retaining some of the advantages of digitisation and (some
of) the efficiency gains provided by recommender
2. Disturbing the Dust: Resistance to Efficient Design
‘We’re going to go and disturb the dust,’ Jo Ball said.
‘I don’t think books should have an expiry
Following the
announcement of the ‘dust test’ at Fisher Library, history graduate
Jo Ball organised a student protest
movement to ‘disturb’ the dusty
Ball began by setting up
a Facebook page, organising an event titled ‘Save the books! Disturb the
dust! Mass book borrowing
action this
Wednesday’.
students were encouraged to borrow the maximum number of books allowable on
their library cards, with the intent of disrupting
the university’s book
transfer process.
John Shipp,
the librarian, had mentioned that any books not borrowed in the last five years
would be removed from the
The students organised
to borrow all these books from the library at once. If enough books were
borrowed, their thinking went, the
library would be saved.
Ms Ball’s protest was doomed to failure, as the university had already
started the book-removal process. Nevertheless, the fact
that a student
rebellion occurred
provides a fascinating ethnographic moment of
resistance to digitalisation, change and efficiency. Consider the fact that
students were fighting to keep books on campus that they rarely, if ever,
The university was instigating digitalisation to make the library more
efficient, introducing new laptop study spaces and a new café,
room for popular textbooks and updating the online
Ball’s protest
represented a resistance to this process of ordering and structure, and a
preference for the chaos of the library
of old. One of the central complaints of
these students was that removing the books would be bad for researchers.
‘If you only
read the books that everyone else is reading, you can only
think what everyone else is thinking,’ writes Japanese author Haruki
Fisher Library had always been a densely populated space, riddled with books
in tightly crammed shelves, triggering disability and
Occupational, Health and
Safety (OH&S) concerns. The narrow ‘stacks’, as students called
them, barely had room for
two people to move between them abreast (Figure 2).
There were rumours of students making out between the stacks at midnight, away
from the prowling eyes of campus security. Even then, there was a charm to the
chaos and the teeming volumes on the shelves. It was
the lack of organisation
that students sought. The burgeoning shelves promised that you might find
something that you were
looking for. There was a lack of
organisation: unread volumes appeared side-by-side with staple textbooks, merely
sorted in alphabetical
or thematic order. A
element still existed,
in that the thematic texts contained rare or unusual books that defied neat
categorisation.
Figure 2. The Fisher Library ‘Stacks’ prior to
dust testing.
Source: ‘Jen Y’,
Fisher Library’s transformation mirrors the ongoing transformation of
the online world. The internet too has dealt with a burgeoning
volume of items,
and undergone a similar change: from chronological feeds showing everything to
algorithmic recommenders preferencing
some content and hiding
The early internet is
celebrated in popular media as a time of radical serendipity, where users
experienced the chaotic randomness
of life, but in an online format.
Commentators describe the early internet of the 1990s and 2000s in nostalgic
terms as ‘a
giant treasure
that was ‘full
of excitement to discover new
[and] frontier-like’,
fun aesthetic quality.
this might be overstated; however, it is true is that the early internet
encouraged users to individually express themselves
in stranger ways than the
modern form: creating their own websites, forums and later
Before the rise of social
media, a homespun aesthetic dominated the primitive online landscape with
websites such as Geocities and
MySpace allowing users to create their own
profiles, with their own images, music and
These sites provided
standardised profiles that could be customised to a much more substantial degree
than their successors.
Nostalgia for the early internet revolves around this serendipity and a
backlash against the newly algorithmic (and therefore more
predictable) feeds.
An analysis of nostalgic tweets about MySpace, for example, finds that users
celebrated its ‘chaotic aesthetic’
and the ‘dominance of
people of colour and young
One user wrote
that ‘sweet, smiling Tom ... never rearranged a timeline’,
celebrating the lack of algorithmic curation
At times, these sites
came across as childish, strange, oblique or niche, but also precisely
of this, they would rarely have slotted into the neat, tidy,
corporate aesthetic of a Facebook, Twitter or LinkedIn
These were the sites
that existed when the internet was ‘individualized and amateurish’,
but not yet
personalised
According to Miltner, MySpace turned users into ‘Front-End Web
Developers’, by changing their backgrounds, loading music,
sound effects,
buttons, widgets and in-profile videos to completely individualise their landing
By contrast, Facebook
adopted a standardised profile with a more mature look, in part because it
initially required a college email
Geocities.com allowed users to build their own websites with bright colours,
star banners, music and other features that allowed a
higher degree of
self-expression.
Pookie’s Palace
, a site from 1999, welcomed visitors ‘with a
swirling purple background, a rainbow teddy bear and neon text’ (Figure
Following the demise of
Geocities as a platform, archives and artistic reproductions have been created
in its image. Cameron Askin,
a New Zealand artist, created one such aesthetic
display with
Cameron’s World
, a ‘web-collage of text and
images excavated from the buried neighbourhoods of archived GeoCities pages
(1994–2009)’.
writes, ‘In an age where we interact primarily with branded and marketed
web content,
Cameron’s World
is a tribute to the lost days of
self-expression.’
archive celebrates the ‘weird’ of the early internet, lionised as a
time before people used their real names in association
with their social
The oblique nature of these early websites contributed to a feeling of
randomness. Without the constraints of platform dominance,
users were radically
empowered to control their own environment. Craigslist, which started in the
late 1990s, was the epitome of
this early internet
The site resisted
calls from venture capitalists, paid advertising and changes to its graphical
user interface to modernise.
First begun as a mail-in service posted online as a
newsletter,
it morphed into a
website where individuals would post random items for sale, jobs and
classifieds.
The items were
disorganised. The site retains its goal of being an uncurated place of
discovery, where users picked the categories
they wanted and saw a full
catalogue of items, rather than filtering items through a curated feed.
Where newer forums like Reddit curate the user experience with upvoting,
downvoting and algorithmic suggestions of new subreddits
to follow, early
websites showed the latest posts in purely chronological
everyone’s comments appeared as soon as they were posted. There was no
filtering or moderator preview. There was
less focus on the most popular or
engaging items and more focus on strange postings. The chaotic nature of the
early internet mirrored
the chaotic nature of life. Compared with LinkedIn, for
example, with its corporate chic aesthetic and ‘correct’ way
(praise your boss and company, appeal to status, thank mentors), early internet
forums rebelled in their eccentric style,
their abandonment of authority and
moderation. Jokes, memes and off-topic posts were more common, although some
amount of content
moderation did
As one user reflects,
‘early 2000s forums were the best ... like before Reddit and other social
media and smartphones took
The allure of these
early forums was the randomness of their structure and the democratic nature of
their discussion.
The evolution of the internet away from chaos and towards a corporate order
seems to mirror the evolution of culture that William
Deresiewicz describes at
American colleges: ‘now students all seem to be converging on the same
self, the successful upper-middle-class
professional, impersonating the adult
they've already decided they want to
Websites also
followed this shift in aesthetics. From the chaos of GeoCities came the relevant
order of MySpace and the substantial
order of Facebook, Twitter and LinkedIn
profiles, where everyone has the same profile, with only different photographs
to populate
it. The shift towards popularity meant these sites now appealed
aesthetically to as many people as possible. This is visually clear
comparing a GeoCities site (Figure 3) with the most dominant platform among
young people today, TikTok (Figure 4).
Source: Author screenshot, Wayback Machine, 10 October
Author screenshot, 16 June 2024.
In the mid-2010s, Facebook, Instagram and other social media sites started
shifting their algorithms away from a chronological feed
and towards algorithmic
engagement via recommendations.
Now users no longer saw posts as they were posted, but instead saw the
‘most engaging’
Jack Conte, CEO of
Patreon, marks this as the turning point of internet culture, where the major
platforms turned their backs on
content creators, preferencing engagement
statistics to keep people hooked to their platforms for the benefit of
advertising revenue.
Previously,
users saw content to which they subscribed, using the ubiquitous
‘Subscription’ button on YouTube and other
Now, even content users
subscribe to is hidden if it was not popular or engaging enough, effectively
negating the user’s own
The CEO of Meta, Mark
Zuckerberg, reveals that Facebook and Instagram have changed to follow this
Now, around ‘30% of
the posts on the Facebook feed’ and ‘more than 50% of the content
people see on Instagram is
recommended’.
substantial shift from the earlier chronological feeds of these platforms, which
lacked AI recommenders. Instead of showing
users what they choose to see via
subscription, platforms now recommend content that they think will be engaging
to the user, sacrificing
autonomy for efficiency.
Previously, chronological feeds retained a character of randomness and chaos;
users were exposed to everything posted recently rather
than only the most
popular posts. Now users are faced with the most engaging posts, limiting their
exposure to a diverse set of
This has two
significant effects. First, it cuts users off from
traps them into a filter bubble filled only with those who are similar to them
(in interests, likes and engagement
Second, it traps them
into what Byung-Chul Han terms the ‘you
The longer a user
spends on a platform, the more the recommender system learns what they like and
the more it recommends the same
Eventually, all other
content is filtered out.
user is left with a kind of mirror-reflection of themselves: a platform that
shows them things that they already like, that they
already agree with and that
they have already engaged with before. By nature, this is a stifling of
intellectual progression and
growth: the progression moves towards further
sameness rather than further difference.
This is significant precisely because recommender systems are so ubiquitous
today. Algorithmic recommenders now suggest, in part,
what news we read, what
movies we watch and what romantic partners we match with on dating apps. They
make these decisions based
on user data, negating explicit human input. On
Spotify, songs are chosen for the listener automatically (although this
exposes them to new
On TikTok, videos are
chosen for the user without any need for the user to subscribe to any channel
they want to follow.
‘subscription’ model is completely replaced in this instance by the
algorithm, so the user asserts no agency over
Instead, the platform
asserts agency over the user, telling them that these are the products they are
interested in.
Unlike previous ‘knowledge-based’ recommender systems, newer
algorithms do not ask the user what they want – they
show users what they
are presumed to want based on their implicit data and behaviour on the
TikTok is a radical
break from the subscription model, where users at least got to choose who they
followed. The entire TikTok interface
is built around its ‘For You’
The algorithm
optimises for user retention and time spent on the app, according to a leaked
In this way, engagement
becomes the number one factor for how the app is designed, rather than
considering whether the user can grow
or change by using the app to discover new
content. This automation of choice and decision-making may attenuate individual
When the user loses the
ability to choose, they also lose the ability to choose the unexpected: the
algorithm predicts their preferences
rather than providing them with the full
range of opportunities. This results in a loss of serendipity. As a result,
curation can
narrow the user experience by trapping users into their own
reflection.
Chayka suggests that we now live in a ‘vast, interlocking and yet
diffuse network of algorithms that influence our lives’,
simultaneously created a more ‘homogenous’ culture that
‘perpetuates itself to the point of
Visual artists
must now consider the Instagram algorithm when they make their work, while
songwriters tailor their songwriting to
the algorithm of
Charlie Puth breaks down
his songwriting into tiny ten-second videos to appeal to his TikTok audience
– a process he does not
At the same time, an
‘Airbnb aesthetic’ has started to influence interior design
decisions in a lot of popular holiday
destinations across
This algorithmic
sameness creates the
of culture – where differences in
culture are ironed out for the purposes of efficiency – for quickly
renting out that
top Airbnb location.
Far from a serendipitous space, algorithms therefore provide us with a space
of personalised content verging towards sameness, showing
us content that we
already expect to receive and therefore (eventually) triggering a form of
predictability and boredom.
Simultaneously, recommender systems make consumers more ‘passive’ in
their entertainment experience, and less capable
of thinking about the culture
they are consuming.
On Spotify,
where songs are chosen for the user automatically, the user does not engage in
the ‘browsing’ process for
a new playlist, foregoing choice for the
app’s decision-making.
Users are empowered to curate their own playlists, but even here the app
suggests songs for users to add to their list (often of
a similar nature or
genre). This decreases the serendipity of the prior experience in a record or CD
store. There, a consumer would
have to browse the shelves and physically pick up
the record they wanted to listen to. This gave them the opportunity to walk past
something new – a different genre that they rarely if ever listened
When an algorithm optimises for engagement, it creates ideas that ‘are
as acceptable as possible to as many people as
In other words,
it flattens culture and trends towards the average. Critics describe TikTok as
‘vulgar’ and ‘kitsch’,
referring to its highly engaging,
popular short-form video content of people binge-eating, mimicking popular dance
crazes or binge-drinking
The company admits that
such content has had an impact on culture and user behaviour, including exposing
users to new music and influencing
what users recommend to their
Among Gen Z, ‘I
saw this on TikTok’ has become a popular
catchphrase.
What gets lost in
the wash of this is the homespun DIY nature of an earlier internet age, a sense
of plurality of experiences online,
unique encounters and strange experiences
that differ from those of other users, while not yet being
personalised
and streamlined by an algorithm.
3. Rebuilding Serendipity Online
Designers of recommender systems can take a few key lessons away from
nostalgic user reflections of the early internet and the student
movement against the ‘dust test’ at the Fisher Library. First, some
users enjoy the randomness and chance
that the early internet gave to their
lives, the feeling of being on the frontier with new and unexpected discoveries
behind every
corner. Second, some users consider the algorithmic reordering of
their lives bland, repetitive or simply less exciting than the
internet of the
past, including the joys and unexpectedness of the chronological feed. Third,
the aesthetic quality of the early
internet and the Fisher library, with its
chaotic shelves, is an aesthetic that can inspire a feeling of discovery and
exploration.
Finally, empowering users to control their own experiences online
can improve the chances of experiencing serendipity, as well as
self-expression that have since gone out of fashion. If each user can express
themselves in more unique ways, this diversifies
the content of the internet for
every other user.
Recommender systems could be redesigned to place serendipity at the heart of
the user experience. This includes periodically including
more random items in
the feed, which at a minimum would prevent users from being shown the same item
many times,
and go beyond
popular items. Instead, the algorithm could be biased towards increased
serendipity
and an element of randomness –
unexpected items or less popular items being shown more
– that is, showing
users content from new genres, categories or themes and actually asking them,
‘Would you like to see
more diverse content on your feed?’ Finally,
from a cultural diversity perspective, designers could be encouraged by
to move away from a purely consumption (and attention) focus of their
apps and towards a more educational or intrinsic purpose, such
as an art gallery
featuring a broader diversity of items to its audience, to increase their
understanding of the world around
While many go to the
Louvre to see the
, the museum itself features thousands of
paintings that are just as striking, if not more so, in the rooms surrounding
the popular
Some call these diverse items ‘the long
recommender systems typically prioritise popular items, this can create a
‘long tail’ effect of lesser-known items
‘dusty’ items that never get borrowed because people do not know
they exist. In this case, the algorithm can
be adjusted to place a higher focus
on these lesser-known items, and simultaneously improve the profits of the
company. Long-tail
items provide an opportunity to target niche products to
niche consumers, who are otherwise left out by only being able to access
items. Netflix’s recommender system was based on this long-tail design
methodology in its original
conception.
This made use of
a huge catalogue of film and TV items that might appeal to the individual
user. However, long-tail methodology can
still result in trapping users into a
few key genres (even while showing them niche products of that genre). The
methodology of the
long tail must therefore be balanced with the need for
individual diversity in recommendations: expanding the lives of the users
showing them more variety and reinstating that feeling of surprise and
A few years after graduating, I returned to the Fisher Library. In many ways,
it was unrecognisable from the days when I studied there.
The nap pods that had
been installed were malfunctioning (Figure 1), the students were left sprawled
across the library amidst a
sea of laptops on gleaming white tables, and the
stacks that I remembered were gone, replaced by orderly rows of books at a
(more OH&S compliant) distance. Entire sections of the library that
had once held books were replaced, a new café stood
in the middle of the
room and I listened to the hum and hiss of the coffee percolating. It struck me,
looking at the students studying
there, that perhaps they didn’t
understand what they had missed out on: the joy of discovery, getting lost
amidst the shelves
in the middle of a project, finding something new and
obscure. Instead, amid the sea of those studying were a handful on TikTok,
Instagram, getting fed content by the machine that had been so accurately and
diligently trained on their personal data.
Bibliography
Akira the Don. [@akirathedon]. [Tweet]. August
https://twitter.com/akirathedon/status/1030495910386515969
André, Paul, M.C. Schraefel, Jaime Teevan, and Susan T. Dumais.
“Discovery is Never by Chance: Designing for (Un)Serendipity.”
Proceedings of the Seventh ACM Conference on Creativity and Cognition
305–14. New York, 2009.
https://doi.org/10.1145/1640233.1640279
Cao, Steffi. “A Nostalgic Look Back at When the Internet Still Felt
, March 14, 2024.
https://www.cnn.com/2024/03/14/style/lan-party-online-gamers-photos/index.html
Center for Advanced Research in Global Communication, “CARGC Symposium
– Turning Points: The Long 1990s in Internet History
| Annenberg.”
October 16, 2024.
https://www.asc.upenn.edu/news-events/events/cargc-symposium-turning-points-long-1990s-internet-history
Chayka, Kyle.
Filterworld: How Algorithms Flattened Culture,
Doubleday, 2024.
Chen, Xi, and Huang Zeng. “Analysis of Media’s Effect on
People’s Aesthetic: A Case Study on TikTok.”
Education, Humanities and Social Sciences
9 (2023): 120–126.
https://doi.org/10.54097/ehss.v9i.6434
Conte, Jack. “Death of the Follower & the Future of Creativity on
the Web with Jack Conte.” SXSW 2024 Keynote, SXSW.
Dash, Anil. “The Web We Lost – Anil Dash.”
, December 13, 2012.
https://www.anildash.com//2012/12/13/the_web_we_lost
Deng, Jireh. “Meta Now Has an AI Chatbot. Experts Say Get Ready for
More AI-Powered Social Media.”
Los Angeles Times
, May 2, 2024.
https://www.latimes.com/world-nation/story/2024-05-02/ai-chatbots-come-to-meta-more-social-media
Deresiewicz, William.
Excellent Sheep: The Miseducation of the American
Elite and the Way to a Meaningful Life.
New York: Simon and Schuster,
Dever, Ally. “How TikTok Has Changed the Music Industry.”
Boulder Today,
September 12, 2022.
https://www.colorado.edu/today/2022/09/12/how-tiktok-has-changed-music-industry
Diniz, Rodrigo. “The Charm of Internet Nostalgia and Why It Isn’t
Fun Anymore.” LinkedIn, April 15, 2024.
https://www.linkedin.com/pulse/charm-internet-nostalgia-why-isnt-fun-anymore-rodrigo-diniz-uto2c
Fletcher, Amelia, Peter L. Ormosi and Rahul Savani, “Recommender
Systems and Supplier Competition on Platforms,” SSRN
Working Paper
Foulonneau, Muriel, Valentin Groues, Yannick Naudet, and Max Chevalier,
“Recommender Systems and Diversity: Taking Advantage
of the Long Tail and
the Diversity of Recommendation Lists.” In
Recommender Systems,
edited by Gérald Kembellec, Ghislaine Chartron, and Imad Saleh,
71–92. Chichester: Wiley, 2014.
Gomez-Uribe, Carlos A., and Neil Hunt. “The Netflix Recommender System:
Algorithms, Business Value, and Innovation.”
ACM Transactions on
Management Information Systems
6, no 4 (2016).
https://doi.org/10.1145/2843948
Han, Byung-Chul.
Infocracy: Digitization and the Crisis of Democracy
Cambridge: Polity Press, 2022.
Han, Byung-Chul.
Non-Things: Upheaval in the Lifeworld
. Cambridge:
Polity Press, 2022.
Jansson, Johan. “The Online Forum as a Digital Space of
(2019): 115–124.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.geoforum.2019.08.008
Krook, Joshua and Jan Blockx. “Recommender Systems, Autonomy and User
Engagement.” In
Proceedings of the First International Symposium on
Trustworthy Autonomous Systems
(TAS '23). New York: ACM, 2023.
Lingel, Jessa.
An Internet for the People: The Politics and Promise of
. Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press, 2022.
Loder, Dave. “The Aesthetics of Digital Intimacy: Resisting
Airbnb’s Datafication of the Interior.”
2–3 (2021): 282–308.
https://doi.org/10.1080/20419112.2021.1945816
Mackinnon, Katie. “The Death of GeoCities: Seeking Destruction and
Platform Eulogies in Web Archives.”
Internet Histories
1–2 (2022): 237–252.
https://doi.org/10.1080/24701475.2022.2051331
Madden, Emma. “We Found Love in a Fictional Place.”
, December 18, 2019.
https://theoutline.com/post/8442/internet-nostalgia-2010s-geocities-tumblr-vaporwave
Magagnoli, Paolo. “The Internet as Ruin: Nostalgia for the Early World
Wide Web in Contemporary Art.”
Transformations
, 28 (2016).
http://www.transformationsjournal.org/wp-content/uploads/2016/12/Magagnoli_Transformations28.pdf
McRae, Sarah. “‘Under Construction’ Lives: Restorative
Nostalgia and the GeoCities Archive.”
European Journal of Life
https://doi.org/10.21827/ejlw.8.35623
Millecamp, Martijn, Nyi Nyi Htun, Yucheng Jin, and Katrien Verbert.
“Controlling Spotify Recommendations: Effects of Personal
Characteristics
on Music Recommender User Interfaces.” In
Proceedings of the 26th
Conference on User Modeling, Adaptation and Personalization
New York: ACM, 2018.
Miltner, Kate M., and Ysabel Gerrard. “‘Tom Had Us All Doing
Front-End Web Development’: A Nostalgic (Re)Imagining
of MySpace.”
Internet Histories
6, nos 1–2 (2022): 48–67.
https://doi.org/10.1080/24701475.2021.1985836
Murakami, Haruki.
Norwegian Wood.
New York: Random House, 2011.
Narushima, Yuko. “Students Plan Dust-up with Uni over Library’s
Book Cull.”
The Sydney Morning Herald,
May 13, 2011.
https://www.smh.com.au/education/students-plan-dust-up-with-uni-over-librarys-book-cull-20110512-1ektk.html
Narushima, Yuko. “You Can Judge a Book by Its ‘Dust Test’
as University Library Cuts Its Staff and Stock.”
The Sydney Morning
, May 11, 2011.
https://www.smh.com.au/education/you-can-judge-a-book-by-its-dust-test-as-university-library-cuts-its-staff-and-stock-20110511-1ej0z.html
Nikolakopoulos, Athanasios N., Xia Ning, Christian Desrosiers, and George
Karypis. “Trust Your Neighbors: A Comprehensive Survey
Neighborhood-Based Methods for Recommender Systems.” In
Recommender
Systems Handbook,
edited by Francesco Ricci, Lior Rokach, and Bracha
Shapira, 39–89. Dordrecht: Springer, 2022.
Pajkovic, Niko. “Algorithms and Taste-Making: Exposing the Netflix
Recommender System’s Operational Logics.”
Convergence
1 (2022): 214–235.
https://doi.org/10.1177/13548565211014464
Pearce, Gary. “The Curious Case of Shrinking Libraries, Coffee Carts
and ‘the Dust Test’.”
, May 25, 2011.
https://www.abc.net.au/news/2011-05-25/pearcecoffee/2730066
Petersen, Anne Helen. “The Sterile World of Infinite Choice.”
Culture Study
(blog), August 30, 2023.
https://annehelen.substack.com/p/the-sterile-world-of-infinite-choice
ResetEra. “Forum Culture from the Early 2000’s’. January 9,
https://www.resetera.com/threads/forum-culture-from-the-early-2000%E2%80%99s.358474
Ricci, Francesco, Lior Rokach, and Bracha Shapira.
“Introduction.” In
Recommender Systems Handbook,
Francesco Ricci, Lior Rokach, and Bracha Shapira, 1–35. Dordrecht:
Springer, 2022.
Smith, Ben. “How TikTok Reads Your Mind.”
The New York
, December 6, 2021.
https://www.nytimes.com/2021/12/05/business/media/tiktok-algorithm.html
Szablewicz, Marcella. “Internet Cafés: Nostalgia, Sociality, and
Stigma.” In
Mapping Digital Game Culture in China: From Internet
Addicts to Esports Athletes
, edited by Marcella Szablewicz, 29–49.
Dordrecht: Springer, 2020.
TikTok. “New Studies Quantify TikTok’s Growing Impact on Culture
and Music.”
TikTok NewsRoom
, August 16, 2019.
https://newsroom.tiktok.com/en-us/new-studies-quantify-tiktoks-growing-impact-on-culture-and-music
Wang, Jianling, Ziwei Zhu, and James Caverlee. “User Recommendation in
Content Curation Platforms.” In
Proceedings of the 13th International
Conference on Web Search and Data Mining
, 627–35. New York: ACM, 2020.
https://doi.org/10.1145/3336191.3371822
Wirawan, Shandy. “The Nostalgic Feelings of the Old Internet.”
(blog), September 8, 2023.
https://medium.com/@shandywirawan/the-nostalgic-feelings-of-the-old-internet-bae70749c0ac
Narushima, “Judge.”
Lehr, “Playing with the
Data,” 653.
Han, Non-Things; Han,
Ricci, “Introduction,” vii.
“Discovery,” 305–306.
Jansson, 115–124.
Nikolakopoulos,
“Trust,” 41; Wang, “User,” 627–635.
Nikolakopoulos,
“Trust,” 41; Wang, “User,” 627–635.
“Recommender,” 9.
“Recommender,” 9.
“Recommender,” 10.
Gomez-Uribe,
“Recommender,” 11.
“Algorithms.” 214, 220–222.
Han, Infocracy, 29.
Han, Infocracy, 29.
Nikolakopoulos,
“Trust,” 50.
Han, Infocracy, 29.
Han, Infocracy, 29.
Han, Infocracy, 29.
“Students.”
“Students.”
“Students.”
“Students.”
Murakami, Norwegian Wood,
Photo from “Jen.
Y.” on Flicker, licensed under CC-BY Attribution. 18
https://www.flickr.com/photos/this-is-snowman/8485507396
Conte, “Death of the
Diniz, “The Charm of
Internet Nostalgia.”
Wirawan, “The
Nostalgic Feelings.”
Szablewicz. “Internet
Cafés,” 30–33.
Cao, “A Nostalgic Look
Magagnoli, Paolo. “The
Internet as Ruin.”
Dash. “The Web We
Mackinnon. “The Death
of GeoCities,” 237–241.
Miltner, “‘Tom
Had Us All Doing Front-End Web Development.’” 48, 50–55,
Akira the don, “Sweet,
Smiling Tom.”
McRae, “‘Under
Construction’ Lives,” 8.
Madden. “We Found Love
in a Fictional Place.”
Miltner, “‘Tom
Had Us All Doing Front-End Web Development.’” 48, 50–55,
McRae, “‘Under
Construction’ Lives,” 8.
Mackinnon. “The Death
of GeoCities,” 237–241.
Mackinnon. “The Death
of GeoCities,” 237–241.
Mackinnon. “The Death
of GeoCities,” 237–241.
Mackinnon. “The Death
of GeoCities,” 237–241.
Lingel, An Internet for the
People, 71, 85, 118.
Lingel, An Internet for the
People, 71, 85, 118.
Lingel, An Internet for the
People, 71, 85, 118.
Lingel, An Internet for the
People, 71, 85, 118.
Conte, “Death of the
ResetEra. “Forum
Culture from the Early 2000s”; Center for Advanced Research in Global
Communication, “CARGC.”
ResetEra. “Forum
Culture from the Early 2000’s”; Center for Advanced Research in
Global Communication, “CARGC.”
Deresiewicz, Excellent
Conte, “Death of the
Conte, “Death of the
Conte, “Death of the
Conte, “Death of the
Conte, “Death of the
Deng, “Meta Now has an
AI Chatbot.”
Deng, “Meta Now has an
AI Chatbot.”
Han, Infocracy, 29.
Han, Infocracy, 29.
Han, Infocracy, 29.
Han, Infocracy, 30.
Han, Infocracy, 30.
“Controlling Spotify Recommendations,” 101–103.
Conte, “Death of the
Conte, “Death of the
Krook, “Recommender
Systems,” 2–4.
Smith, “How TikTok
Reads Your Mind.”
Smith, “How TikTok
Reads Your Mind.”
Krook, “Recommender
Systems,” 2–4.
Han, Infocracy, 29.
Chayka, Filterworld.
Chayka, Filterworld.
Dever, “How TikTok has
Changed the Music Industry.”
Loder, “The Aesthetics
of Digital Intimacy.”
Dever, “How TikTok Has
Changed the Music Industry.”
Chayka, Filterworld.
“Controlling Spotify Recommendations,” 101–104.
Chayka, Filterworld.
Chen, “Analysis of
Media’s Effect,” 120–126.
TikTok, “New Studies
Quantify TikTok’s Growing Impact.”
TikTok, “New Studies
Quantify TikTok’s Growing Impact.”
Foulonneau,
“Recommender Systems and Diversity,” 72.
Foulonneau,
“Recommender Systems and Diversity,” 72.
Foulonneau,
“Recommender Systems and Diversity,” 75.
Foulonneau,
“Recommender Systems and Diversity,” 75.
Foulonneau,
“Recommender Systems and Diversity,” 75.
Foulonneau,
“Recommender Systems and Diversity,” 75.
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (1.72 MB)
PDF format (578 KB)
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter