URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/journals/LegEdDig/2013/28.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 15:13:36
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Gerber, P; Castan, M --- "Practice meets theory: using moots as a tool to teach human rights law" [2013] LegEdDig 28; (2013) 21(1) Legal Education Digest 43
Practice meets theory: using moots as a tool to teach human rights law
Practice meets theory: using moots as a tool to teach
human rights law
P Gerber and M Castan
Journal of Legal Education
, Vol. 62, No. 2, 2012-2013, pp 298-310
The international community, through the United Nations, strongly advocates
that states must provide their people with human rights
education (HRE). More
recently, the international push for HRE has escalated with the General Assembly
proclaiming the Decade for
Human Rights Education (1995-2004) and the subsequent
World Programme for Human Rights Education (2005- ongoing), and adopting the
Declaration on Human Rights Education and Training.
These international commitments aside, empirical research has found that many
educators struggle with how to educate students about
human rights.
This article explores how moots can be an effective tool to do that, and
analyses three successful human rights mooting competitions
from around the
world for the purpose of highlighting best practices.
There is already considerable scholarly exploration of the pedagogical value
of mooting to the law school curriculum. However moots
are often perceived in
terms of a being solely a pedagogical model for teaching students the skills of
courtroom advocacy.
The mooting literature identifies a broad variety of legal and practical
skills that are enhanced by students’ involvement in
moots, including
advocacy, communication skills, critical thinking skills, self-confidence and
However, what is lacking in the scholarship is an in-depth analysis of moots
as a tool for deep doctrinal learning. Typically, the
literature concentrates on
the process of mooting, but neglects the content. An exception to this is Jack
Graves and Stephanie Vaughan,
who analysed the well-known annual international
commercial arbitration moot competition known as Vis Moot.
The purpose of HRE is not that students learn about human rights, but rather
that students know, understand and embrace the fundamental
principles that are
at the core of human rights. We argue that moots are an invaluable tool to help
achieve this, that is, moots
can play a pivotal role in assisting students to
learn the substantive principles of human rights law, as well as their practical
application. Thus in a human rights moot, not only do students develop clinical
skills of advocacy, but they also significantly increase
their knowledge of
human rights law through undertaking the research and preparation necessary to
cogently argue a human rights position
in a moot court.
What makes mooting such a useful learning device when it comes to legal
doctrine or subject matter, is that students must have comprehensive
and a deep understanding of the issues and applicable law, so that they can
respond to questions. Students participating
in moots are generally terrified of
not being able to answer a question put to them by the bench, and therefore tend
to make sure
that they have such an in-depth knowledge of the subject matter
that they can answer any question that may be thrown at them. Thus,
level, students are engaging with the material because of an extrinsic
motivation: to avoid failure. But we also see a more
positive perspective, as
preparing and arguing a moot is fundamentally a learning experience that is the
antithesis of the superficial
learning that time-poor students often engage in.
Mooting is one of the best forms of deep and experiential learning available to
law students. Because the decision to moot is often a voluntary one, students
who participate are embarking on a learning task that
they are inherently
motivated to complete, and hopefully enjoy. Thus, moots present a valuable and
engaging learning opportunity,
which is fundamentally different from the regular
law school education.
One of the challenging aspects of teaching human rights law is that there is
a dearth of cases where students can see a practical
application of human rights
in the legal system. With human rights, students can see the legal principles
set out in international
instruments, such as the Universal Declaration of Human
Rights and numerous human rights treaties, but there is not the same opportunity
to analyse the practical application of those principles by the courts. Human
rights mooting competitions seek to fill this void.
Mooting competitions that
focus specifically on human rights provide students with an opportunity to not
just learn about the concept
of human rights, but to actually play a part in the
application of those principles to hypothetical cases. This moves human rights
out of the realm of mere abstract concepts, and into the world of real and
practical application of the law, which provides students
with invaluable
knowledge and skills.
Notwithstanding the demonstrated role that moots can play in promoting deep
learning about human rights law, there are very few examples
of human rights
mooting competitions: (1) African Human Rights Moot and World Human Rights Moot,
both organised by the University
of Pretoria in South Africa; (2) Inter-American
Human Rights Moot Court Competition organised by the Washington College of Law
the American University; and (3) Castan Centre Human Rights Moot organised by
the Monash University Law School in Australia.
African Human Rights Moot: although the moot is organized by the University
of Pretoria in South Africa, the competition is held in
a different country each
year. Participating students also attend a conference or course on international
human rights law and go
on a one-day excursion to a place of national interest
to the host country. Thus, students have the opportunity to experience human
rights issues and perspectives in a variety of ways over and above the doctrinal
and practical knowledge acquired through their participation
in the formal
Students participate in two preliminary rounds where they argue each side of
the same case. The best teams from each language group
advance to the final
round where, by draw of lots, they are merged to form two new combined teams
with English, French and Portuguese
students on each side.
In recent years, the hypothetical problems used by the African Human Rights
Moot have related to such diverse issues as HIV discrimination
in employment;
right to medical care; right to a fair trial; harmful cultural practices;
conditions of work; freedom of expression;
independence of the judiciary; right
to development and self-determination; child soldiers; and property rights.
Thus, there has
been great diversity in the human rights issues addressed,
including coverage of both civil and political rights and economic, social
cultural rights.
The African Human Rights Moot requires students to engage in deep learning of
international and regional human rights laws.
The African mooting competition is the largest human rights educational
initiative in Africa. Its aims include ‘ensuring that
international human
rights, and in particular, the African regional system, are made part of the
curriculum of law faculties in Africa’,
and creating a network of young
African human rights lawyers. Thus, the focus of the moot competition is very
much about furthering
human rights knowledge and practices, rather than simply
developing advocacy and courtroom skills.
In part, because of its role in creating and maintaining the African Human
Rights Moot, in 2006, the Centre for Human Rights at the
University of Pretoria
was awarded the prestigious UNESCO Prize for Human Rights Education. The award
recognised the invaluable role
that the mooting competition played in deepening
students’ knowledge and understanding of the African Charter on Human and
Peoples’ Rights. Indeed, it has been noted that the African moot:
has revolutionised human rights teaching on the African continent. Its impact
institutionalised as law faculties across the continent
increasingly started
developing human rights curricula, including, in particular, elements of the
African regional human rights system.
In this way, not only moot participants
but generations of future students indirectly benefit from the moot.
There can be no doubt about the significance and long term impact of this
moot in terms of HRE across Africa.
The Inter-American Human Rights Moot Court Competition is organized by the
Washington College of Law and has been running for over
15 years. Law students
argue a hypothetical case before the Inter-American Court of Human Rights
(IACHR). Teams consist of two students
and a coach, and each university may
enter only one team.
Whether coaches should play a part in a human rights mooting competition
depends on a number of factors, including the role they are
permitted to play
and the availability of academic staff to take on such a role. While coaches are
common in moots which have as
their aim the development of advocacy skills, it
is suggested, that the main purpose of the moot is actually for students to
increase their knowledge of human rights law through the research they
do into the substance and application of such laws.
The moot is conducted in two stages. The first is submission of a written
memorandum not exceeding 30 pages. This is a sizeable piece
of work, and
suggests that this moot places a greater emphasis on the written arguments than
the oral application of human rights
law to the problem at hand. The memorandum
counts for one third of the overall score, with the other two-thirds based on
argument. Both elements involve deep engagement in the various aspects
of human rights law, and thus constitute HRE.
Oral argument is the second stage of this moot competition, which, common to
many moots, is conducted in three stages: a preliminary
round, where each team
argues twice; a semi-final round; and a final round. This is sufficient time to
allow a team to engage deeply
with the human rights issues. In the
authors’ experience, each team member needs at least 15-20 minutes for
oral presentation
to have sufficient time to delve deeply into the issues and
allow time for questions from the bench.
The semi-final round of competition consists of 16 of the highest ranked
teams – eight representing the victim, and eight representing
The final round is a championship match between the highest-ranking team
representing the victim and the highest-ranking
team representing the state.
The Inter-American Human Rights Moot Court provides a useful model for a
mooting competition aimed at facilitating increased learning
However, it could be improved by making it accessible to more students, through
the abolition or reduction of
the registration fees and by reducing the size of
the written submissions, which, at 30 pages, seems excessive.
The Castan Centre Human Rights Moot, which started in 2007, is the newest
human rights moot.
Initially, universities each fielded two teams of three students. However, in
2009, due to student demand, universities were permitted
to enter three teams of
three students each. The students take on the role of senior counsel, junior
counsel and instructing lawyer.
No coach is allowed. This model maximises
opportunities for student involvement by having larger teams. Students are not
to the same role throughout the competition, and often swap roles in
different rounds.
Each team submits an outline of its arguments, highlighting the issues the
team is focusing on, and a list of all cases, treaties,
and other authorities/
jurisprudence on which they will rely. The written submission is generally
prepared by the student who acts
as the instructing lawyer. It gives that
student an opportunity to develop their skills in applying human rights
arguments in the
written form, while their teammates develop skills at verbally
articulating human rights arguments.
Each team competes in two preliminary rounds. In the first round they argue
for one side, and in the second round they swap and have
to take the opposing
position. Requiring teams to argue that there has been a breach of human rights,
as well as that there has been
no violation of human rights, gives them a more
nuanced understanding of human rights law.
The four top teams progress through to the semi-final round, which is
conducted a few days after the preliminary round, and is based
on the same human
rights problem. The use of a single problem throughout the competition maximises
the opportunity for students to
engage in deep learning.
Because the Castan Centre Human Rights Moot sits outside the law curriculum,
students do not receive any academic credit for their
participation. In order to
ensure that there is an incentive to take on all the work involved in being part
of a human rights moot,
over and above their regular study commitments, monetary
prizes are awarded to the winners and runners up. Of the three moots analysed
this article, The Castan Centre Moot is the only one that provides prize money.
While the opportunity to win prize money has proved
a good incentive for
students wanting to enter and perform to the highest standard, we wonder how
this affects the intrinsic motivation
and aim of deep learning for the
Students who have participated in the Castan Centre Human Rights Moot have
benefited significantly from the intensive hands-on learning
involved in
preparing for, and participating in, this competition.
In 2010, the organisers of the Castan Centre Human Rights Moot surveyed
participants on their perception of the moot and how it could
be improved. The
results reveal that the moot is meeting its aim of increasing students’
knowledge of state human rights legislation,
with 90 per cent of students
reporting that they felt more comfortable incorporating human rights into legal
arguments than before
they participated in the moot. Thus, the moot is providing
students with practical experience in using human rights arguments which
likely to make them more comfortable and knowledgeable about using such
arguments once they enter practice. Although this moot
competition is barely
five years old, this feedback demonstrates that it is having its desired effect
of providing students with
deeper knowledge, skills and confidence regarding
human rights law and its application.
The African, American and Australian human rights mooting competitions
exemplify the way in which moots can be effectively used to
provide human rights
education through memorable and practical experiential learning. They
demonstrate that mooting can be about
much more than just learning courtroom
skills and can, in fact, provide a useful tool for students to engage deeply
with the substantive
area of law on which the moot questions are based.
A human rights moot promotes experiential learning, giving law students the
chance to translate theory into practice and apply human
rights laws to real
life problems. The process of reasoning issues through, and answering questions,
results in students truly engaging
with, and experiencing human rights laws and
jurisprudence, as opposed to just knowing about the abstract concepts. The deep
with legal doctrine can play an important role in promoting increased
knowledge of, engagement with and respect for human rights,
as well as form a
vital part of legal education and the preparation for legal practice.
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (53.8 KB)
PDF format (3.17 MB)
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter