URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/journals/UNSWLawSocCConsc/2024/13.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 15:47:14
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Willis, Sonya --- "Making Tax Fairer Not Harder: How Compliance Changes May Reduce the Current Inequities in Australia's Taxation System" [2024] UNSWLawSocCConsc 13; (2024) 18 UNSW Law Society Court of Conscience 91
MAKING TAX FAIRER NOT HARDER: HOW COMPLIANCE CHANGES MAY REDUCE THE CURRENT INEQUITIES IN AUSTRALIA’S TAXATION SYSTEM
I Introduction
II Tax Law: Voluminous, Complex And Your Responsibility
III The Convoluted History Of CGT Indexation, Averaging,
Discounts And Negative Gearing
IV Unintended Property Price Consequences Of CGT Simplification
V Technology-Based Compliance For CGT Is
Better Than Unfair Simplification
MAKING TAX FAIRER NOT HARDER: HOW COMPLIANCE CHANGES
MAY REDUCE THE CURRENT INEQUITIES IN AUSTRALIA’S TAXATION SYSTEM
Sonya Willis
Taxation is essential for society to run effectively but the enormous
compliance burden of Australia’s current taxation system
contributes to
unfairness for taxpayers. Capital Gains Tax (‘CGT’) is a key example
of how tax compliance measures exacerbated
societal inequity. This article
suggests it may be time for the Government, through the Australian Taxation
Office (‘ATO’),
with the assistance of technology, to reduce the
self-assessment compliance burden on taxpayers so that the complexity of
law does not exacerbate inequity.
I Introduction
Most people do not enjoy completing their annual tax return and the
compliance responsibility of Australia’s current self-assessment
adds to the burdensome nature of paying tax for most Australian
Australian taxation law
is voluminous and in a constant state of flux.
The complexity of taxation law and the relative unaffordability of taxation
advice, means that, often, only the wealthy can afford
legal tax planning advice
to avail themselves of tax structures that reduce tax liability and yet over 70%
of Australians feel compelled
to hire a tax agent to assist with tax return
compliance,
it is significantly
higher for those with rental
The complicated nature of
Capital Gains Tax (‘CGT’) provides a stark example of the links
between compliance costs, taxation
inequity and corresponding societal
The 50% CGT discount was
introduced to reduce tax compliance
complexity,
which should have
reduced tax inequity by making compliance more affordable, but, instead has
increased societal inequity across
the housing
This article concludes that the inequity of the current legislation makes it
imperative for the Federal Government to consider ways
to reduce the compliance
burden on taxpayers, including for capital gains, enabling inequitable laws,
introduced for simplification
purposes, to be reversed. Fortunately, dramatic
improvements in the capacity of technology to record, calculate and report
liabilities mean it should be possible for the Australian Taxation
Office (‘ATO’), with the assistance of technology,
banks and share
repositories, to reduce the self-assessment compliance burden on taxpayers.
Reducing the compliance burden could
reduce the numerous adverse impacts of
legislative complexity making tax fairer and simpler for individual
II Tax Law: Voluminous, Complex And Your
Responsibility
The self-assessment system was introduced in Australia in the tax year ended
30 June 1987 as a means to collect revenue with ‘minimum
administration
and compliance cost’ for the
Unfortunately, self-assessment
shifts the burden for complying with taxation laws to taxpayers and this burden
continues to expand
commensurate with the growing size and complexity of tax
legislation. The
Taxation Administration Act 1953
(Cth), which sets out
much of the self-assessment obligations, is 1,385 pages long, provided across
four volumes in the Federal Register
Legislation.
Most Federal taxation
law applicable to individual taxpayers is set out in the
Assessment Act
(Cth) and its predecessor, the
Assessment Act
(Cth) (which stubbornly refuses to die),
comprising 5617 pages across 12 volumes and 2018 pages across 7 volumes in the
Federal Register
of Legislation
respectively.
Hence, these three
core tax Acts gift individual taxpayers over 9000 pages of legislative bedtime
reading supplemented by numerous
additional Federal tax related
There are also a plethora
of regulations and state based taxes, such as transfer duties and land tax which
can affect individual
and, for taxpayers running businesses, the legislative load increases
Gary Banks, in comparing the
Income Tax Assessment Acts
from 1936 to
2003 noted that, if the growth rate continued for the remainder of the century,
by 2100 a paper version of the Act would
have 830 billion pages and require 3
million years to read.
have been significant efforts to simplify taxation legislation and its
consequent compliance
obligations.
Unfortunately,
these attempts have not been entirely successful and legislative tax changes in
recent decades may have increased
inequity and
complexity.
Legislative
amendment, as a necessary response to changes in society, the economy and
taxpayer behaviour, continues unabated. This
is, in part, due to the cat and
mouse game played by tax advisors and the ATO through wealthy taxpayers
employing tax advisors, to
devise and implement new tax structures designed
reduce tax payable.
As life becomes more complicated and tax advisors more imaginative, tax
simplification seems unlikely. For example, on 1 June 2024,
the Federal
Government amended several tax acts through the
Amendment (Tax Accountability and Fairness) Act
(2024) (Cth) including
provisions such as ‘Schedule 1—PwC response—Promoter penalty
law reform’ in response
to improper use of confidential information by
accounting firm PwC to devise loopholes to tax legislation designed to reduce
tax avoidance.
III The Convoluted History Of CGT Indexation,
Discounts And Negative Gearing
One key area where tax self-assessment and compliance costs have led to
unfairness is CGT. The combination of negative gearing, and
the 50% CGT discount
(introduced by the Ralph Report in 2000 to reduce compliance complexity)
rendered even loss-making housing investments
potentially profitable due to
their favourable tax treatment.
The growing use of residential property as a tax effective investment vehicle
has contributed to Australia’s inflated property
prices and consequent
housing crisis. Legislation designed to reduce tax compliance complexity may
have become a significant contributing
factor in Australia’s housing
CGT was introduced on 19 September 1985 to raise revenue by taxing capital
gains on property, shares and other
CGT made landlords
taxable on the increased capital value of a rental property upon sale. Until
2000, the acquisition costs of a
rental property were indexed for inflation when
calculating the sale price and the tax rate applied could be averaged over the
of ownership.
and averaging made CGT fairer because it meant the profits made on sale were not
unfairly inflated due to the decreasing
value of money over
Although indexation and averaging of capital
gains made CGT fairer, it also contributed to tax compliance
complexity.
Calculating CGT
using indexation could be particularly complex for assets such as share
portfolios, where taxpayers were acquiring
and disposing of assets, often
automatically, through dividend reinvestment plans, corporate restructures and
subsidiary sales.
Following the
1999 Ralph report, averaging and indexation were replaced for individual
taxpayers by a simple 50% discount on capital
gains which approximated the
average amount by which indexation and averaging had reduced CGT paid by
taxpayers at the time.
result of the introduction of the 50% CGT discount, September 1999 was the final
quarter of indexation available for capital
gains and indexation cannot be
applied simultaneously with the 50%
The Government
optimistically predicted the change would not decrease CGT
Australia also allows negative gearing on rental properties. Negative gearing
is the process whereby the expenses of owning a rental
property such as interest
payments, rates, repairs and real estate agent fees can be used to offset not
only rental income but all
Accordingly, net losses
from rental properties can be used each year by those owning investment
properties to offset other earnings
This makes investment
properties particularly attractive for high earners. Property investment reduces
annual tax payable while the
property holder increases the value of their
capital holdings (as property values appreciate) and net wealth. The current
combination
of the CGT discount and negative gearing, effectively allows
landlords to claim tax deductions for 100% of their rental losses each
while only paying tax on 50% of their capital gains upon sale of their rental
properties.
IV Unintended Property Price Consequences Of CGT
Simplification
Replacing indexation and averaging with a 50% CGT discount may not have
created problems if taxpayer behaviour had not altered in
response to the
change. The 50% discount represented the average by which indexation and
averaging reduced the amount of tax payable
But human nature, driven
by its strong desire for tax minimisation, responded accordingly to the change
in law causing a significant
change in property investment behaviour and a
consequential decrease of billions of dollars in CGT
Just as human nature caused wealthy property owners to brick up tenement
windows to avoid the United Kingdom’s 1696 window tax
(with scant regard
for their tenants’
wellbeing),
the 1999 CGT
simplification encouraged shorter ownership cycles, tax driven purchasing,
property inflation and leakage from Government
Following the
introduction of the 50% CGT discount in 1999, a high salary taxpayer could
reduce their taxable income by investing
in negatively geared rental properties
claiming 100% deductions for their losses to offset their taxable salary income
and then selling
those properties for a capital gain only 50% of which was
taxable thanks to the CGT discount. Thus, a compliance measure designed
reduce the burden of self-assessment, led to increased wealth for those
sufficiently wealthy to benefit from negative gearing
and rental property
investment significantly increasing tax-induced
Simultaneously, the
spike in property prices reduced the ability to purchase a principal residence
for lower income renters.
50% CGT discount also discouraged long term asset holding, because landlords who
held a rental property for decades were likely
to pay more tax using the 50%
discount than they would have if the original indexation system had continued
after 1999. Short term
asset holding, further disadvantaging renters who were
more likely to be evicted by landlords wanting to offer vacant possession
sale of their property.
The 50% CGT discount and its contribution to increased wealth inequity
demonstrates the potential risk of legislative amendments designed
to simplify
tax compliance obligations.
However, there could be tax compliance amendments which would be less risky and
more equitable for society.
V Technology-Based Compliance For CGT Is
Than Unfair Simplification
Computer power has increased exponentially since 1987 when Australia’s
tax self-assessment regime was first
introduced.
Nowadays there are a
plethora of programs and apps to manage complex property investment calculations
for taxpayers.
There have been
significant efforts in the past 2 decades to improve use of technology in the
tax sector to reduce the compliance
Most usefully, the
ATO introduced an online portal which pre-fills data such as employment and
dividend income for most personal
Prefilling simplifies
compliance obligations using improvements in
technology.
However, Australia
remains a significant distance from returning the compliance burden
predominantly to the ATO despite the Henry
Report recommending, in 2009, that
Pre-filled personal income tax returns should be provided to most
personal taxpayers as a default method of settling their tax affairs
The compliance efficiency imperatives which motivated the move to
self-assessment for the ATO in 1987 should have abated given the
computing power
available to assist the ATO. It would remain necessary for many taxpayers to
retain oversight of their tax returns,
particularly those engaging in activities
the ATO cannot ascertain except through taxpayer disclosure, such as deductions
for maintaining rental
properties.
However, the ATO, as
the custodian of tax legislation and its interpretation, would be the ideal
stakeholder to create software which
guided taxpayers through the documentation
and payment requirements accompanying capital asset acquisition, maintenance and
Such software, having obtained the information from the taxpayer,
would automate maintenance of records and calculations, on the
behalf, without substantial ATO staff cost post-development. The ATO could also
expand its sources of current third-party
autofill data beyond banks and
employers to state governments and local councils. The current environment of
increasing taxation
complexity combined with increasing computer power, makes a
compelling argument for the ATO to do considerably more to minimise
tax compliance obligations.
The ATO has done little so far to assist taxpayers with calculating capital
gains and the complexity of CGT provided the justification
for introducing the
inequitable 50% CGT discount.
the ATO began assisting taxpayers with the calculation of CGT, the Government
could justify removing the 50% CGT discount perhaps
by restoring the original
CGT indexation and averaging system for individuals. Restoring the pre 1999
system would reduce gains
from holding passive assets and remove the current
preferential taxation of those buying and selling after holding for relatively
short time periods. Unlike most tax reforms, the likely response of taxpayers is
highly predictable (other than transitional behaviour)
because the calculation
reform would constitute a return to the 1999 system. However, unintended
consequences must still be carefully
considered. Tax is complex and tax law
amendments encourage new ways to minimise the effect of those
To assist taxpayers with CGT compliance, the ATO would need to begin taking
an interest in the acquisition of taxable assets rather
than the current ATO
focus solely on their disposal, being the point at which the CGT liability
The unwinding of the 50%
CGT discount may need to be accompanied by other tax incentives designed to
encourage investment that meets
Australia’s housing goals such as a CGT
discount for investment in social housing. Unwinding the 50% CGT discount would
fully cure the housing problem it helped create but it might stem the price
tide. The key basis for introducing the 50% CGT discount
in 1999, complexity of
calculation, no longer exists. Technology now enables taxpayers to delegate the
record keeping and calculating
process to computers for which the data storage
and mathematics is trivial. It makes eminent sense for these computers to be
and run by the ATO as increased ATO involvement in tax calculations would
reduce both the heavy taxpayer compliance burden and the
scope for deliberate
and accidental taxpayer
non-compliance.
The complexity and cost to taxpayers of taxation compliance are key to the
long-term desire of Government to simplify tax laws, making
research into tax
compliance a critical area for research and
improvement.
Increased ATO
focus on compliance would also decrease the need for most individual taxpayers
to rely on expensive professional services
to manage their tax affairs, further
reducing tax-induced societal inequity. The combination of improved
technological capability
and the current unevenly distributed cost of living
crisis make now an ideal time for the ATO to replace inequitable tax
simplification
measures, such as the 50% CGT discount, with further automation
of compliance processes which simplify tax for taxpayers through
reclaiming the tax compliance burden.
Dr Sonya Willis is a
Senior Lecturer at Macquarie
University Law School who researches and teaches in civil procedure and taxation
with a particular research
interest in procedural fairness and equitable legal
processes. Dr Willis is also a Solicitor of the Supreme Court of NSW and the
High Court of Australia.
‘Self-assessment’ most commonly means an assessment
where the Commissioner accepts the statements of the taxpayer or assesses
taxpayer based on their returns and other information:
Income Tax Assessment
(Cth) s 995–
Income Tax Assessment Act 1936
Australia’s Future Tax
System: Report to the Treasurer Part One Overview
(Final Report, December
2009) 24, 31 (‘
Henry Report Overview
’); Richard Highfield and
Neil Warren, 'How Tax Gap Can Inform Tax Policy and Administration: A Case Study
of Australia's Individual
Income Tax' (2023) 20(2)
eJournal of Tax
203, 220, 234; Chris Evans and Binh Tran-Nam,
‘Australia’ in François Vaillancourt (ed),
Personal Tax Returns: A Comparative Analysis of Australia, Belgium, California,
Quebec and Spain
(Fraser Institute, 2011) 1, 4.
Approximately 90% according to
Highfield and Warren (n 2) 221.
Alan Morris, ‘The
Financialisation of Housing and the Housing Affordability Crisis in
Sydney’ (2018)
Housing Finance International (Summer)
Australia Review of Business
Taxation and John Theodore Ralph,
A Tax System Redesigned: More Certain,
Equitable and Durable
(Australia Review of Business Taxation, 1999)
Ralph Report
Morris (n 4) 63, 65.
Report on Aspects
of Income Tax Self Assessment
(Report, 2004)
Taxation Administration Act 1953
(Cth) (as at 26 June
As at 26 June 2024, see
Income Tax Assessment Act 1936
Income Tax Assessment Act 1
Other tax legislation
includes the
Medicare Levy Act 1986
International Tax
Agreements Act 1953
Income Tax (Dividend Interest and Royalties
Withholding Tax) Act 1974
Superannuation Industry (Supervision)
Superannuation Guarantee (Administration) Act 1992
Each Australian State and
Territory has its own state taxes such as the
Duties Act 1997
Land Tax Management Act 1956
(NSW) and the
Land Tax Act 1956
Chris Evans, Phil Lignier,
and Binh Tran-Nam, ‘Tax Compliance Costs For the Small and Medium
Enterprise Business Sector: Recent
Evidence from Australia
(Discussion Paper No 003-13, Tax Administration Research Centre, 26 September
2013) 31. Additional tax legislation applying to businesses
Tax System (GST) Act 1999
Fringe Benefits Tax Act 1986
Fringe Benefits Assessment Tax Act 1986
(Cth) as well as state-based
tax legislation applying to businesses such as the
Payroll Tax Act
(NSW) and other state equivalents.
Gary Banks, ‘The Good,
The Bad and The Ugly: Economic Perspectives On Regulation in Australia
(Speech, Conference of Economists, 2 October 2003).
Income Tax Assessment
(Cth) was designed to simplify tax, as were the amendments
following the
Ralph Report
John Tretola, ‘The
Simplified Tax System: Has it Simplified Tax at All and, if So, Should it be
(2007) 17(1)
Revenue Law Journal
; Enrico Rubolino
and Daniel Waldenström, ‘Tax Progressivity and Top Incomes Evidence
From Tax Reforms’ (2020) 18(3)
The Journal of Economic Inequality
261, 273–5.
Ken Devos, ‘The Impact
of Tax Professionals Upon the Compliance Behaviour of Australian Individual
(2012) 22(1)
Revenue Law Journal
Treasury Laws Amendment (Tax Accountability and Fairness)
Treasury Laws Amendment (Tax
Accountability and Fairness) Bill 2023
(Cth); Brent Fisse,
‘Accountability and the PwC Tax Leak Scandal’ (2023) 51(3)
Australian Business Law Review
Ralph Report
For a definition of negative gearing, see
Australia’s Future Tax
System: Report to the Treasurer
– Detailed Analysis – Volume
(Final Report, December 2009) 741 (‘
Henry Report
Seth Nicholls,
‘Perpetuating the Problem: Neoliberalism, Commonwealth Public Policy and
Housing Affordability in Australia’
(2014) 49(3)
Australian Journal of
Social Issues
John Clark, ‘Capital
Gains Tax: Historical Trends and Forecasting Frameworks (2014) 2
Kerrie Sadiq and Adrian
Sawyer, ‘New Zealand's “Experience” with Capital Gains
Taxation and Policy Choice Lessons
from Australia'
[2019] eJlTaxR 7
(2019) 16(2)
eJournal of
Tax Research
Australia’s
Future Tax System: Report to the Treasurer
- Detailed Analysis –
(Final Report, December 2009) (‘
Henry Report
1’) 82 suggested removing the remaining CGT indexation for
simplification purposes, Henry acknowledges the importance of indexation
combat inflation and its policy related complexity in the context of income
Henry Report
2 (n 18) at 518–20.
Paul Kenny,
‘Australia's Capital Gains Tax Discount: More Certain, Equitable and
Durable?’ (2005) 1(2)
Journal of the Australasian Tax Teachers
Association
38, 102, 107.
John Freebairn,
‘Indexation and Australian Capital Gains Taxation’, in Herbert
Grubel (ed),
International Evidence on the Effects of Having No Capital Gains
(The Fraser Institute, 2001) 123, 132; Sadiq and Sawyer (n 21)
Ralph Report
Kenny (n 23) 43–7.
Kenny (n 23) 47. See also
Peter Costello, ‘The New Business Tax System – A Reality’
(Press Release No 086, 10 December
Henry Report
John Minas,
Implications of Capital Gains Tax Rate Preferences
(Oxford University Press,
ed, 2020) 8.
Kenny (n 23) 54, 56;
Henry Report Overview
Australian Government,
Re:think: Tax Discussion Paper
(Discussion Paper, March 2015) 64.
Henry Report
(n 18) 418–20. This generous tax treatment of passive income
losses contrasts with Div 35
Income Tax Assessment Act
(1997) (Cth) which
quarantines business losses for individuals where the business is not of a
commercial size but expressly excludes
passive income from the loss quarantining
Ralph Report
John Minas and Brett
Freudenberg, ‘Australia's 50% CGT Discount: Policy Oversight?’
(2020) 35(1)
Australian Tax Forum
88, 100 (‘CGT Policy
Oversight’); Brett Freudenberg and John Minas, ‘Reforming
Australia's 50 Per Cent Capital Gains
Tax Discount Incrementally’
[2019] eJlTaxR 5
eJournal of Tax Research
, 319 (‘CGT Reform’);
Michael Keen and Joel Slemrod,
Rebellion, Rascals, and Revenue: Tax Follies
and Wisdom Through the Ages
(Princeton University Press, 2021) ch 9.
Keen and Slemrod (n 32)
222–4. See also ‘Window Tax’,
UK Parliament
<https://www.parliament.uk/about/living-heritage/transformingsociety/towncountry/towns/tyne-and-wear-case-study/about-the-group/housing/window-tax/>.
Kenny (n 23) 54, 57; Minas
and Freudenberg, ‘CGT Policy Oversight’ (n 32) 100, 103, 106;
Henry Report
(n 18) 418–20.
James Minas, John Minas, and
Youngdeok Lim, ‘A Cluster Analysis of Individual Taxpayers– What Are
the Characteristics
of Taxpayers Who Realise Capital Gains?’ (2023) 38(2)
Australian Tax Forum
245, 265 (‘A Cluster Analysis of Individual
Taxpayers’) provides excellent insight into how the CGT discount has
inequity. See also Kenny (n 23) 54–7.
Kenny (n 23) 56–8.
Chris Evans, ‘Taxing
Capital Gains: One Step Forwards or Two Steps Back?’
[2002] JlATax 4
(2002) 5(1)
Journal of Australian Taxation
, 127; Minas et al, ‘A Cluster
Analysis of Individual Taxpayers’ (n 35), 264–5.
Christian Jutten and Athina
Petropulu, ‘Celebrating Technological Breakthroughs and Navigating the
Future With Care [From the
Editor]’ (2023) 40(4)
IEEE Signal Processing
Dulani Halvitigala and James
Gordon, ‘The Use of Property Management Software in Residential Property
Management’ (Conference
Paper, 20th Annual Pacific Rim Real Estate Society
Conference, 2014). See also
Property Management Software
<https://www.softwareadvice.com.au/directory/1662/management-apps/software>.
Paul Tilley,
Australia’s Future Tax System
(Working Paper No 17, Tax and
Transfer Policy Institute
Highfield and Warren (n 2)
220; Evans and Tran-Nam (n 2).
Evans and Tran-Nam (n 2)
Henry Report
(n 18) 706 (see Recommendation 123).
Evans and Tran-Nam (n 2)
Evans and Tran-Nam (n 2)
Keen and Slemrod (n 32) 214.
Income Tax Assessment Act
(1997) (Cth), vol 3 ch 3, ss 100–5 to ss 100–70.
Highfield and Warren (n 2)
Jeff Pope, ‘The
Compliance Costs of Taxation in Australia and Tax Simplification: The
Issues’ (1993)
) Australian Journal of Management
85–6; Paul Tilley, ‘Tax Reform: Lessons from
History’ (2023) 52(1)
Australian Tax Review
Chardon, Brett Freudenberg, and Mark Brimble, ‘Tax Literacy in Australia:
Not Knowing Your Deduction From Your Offset’
(2016) 31(2)
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (97.6 KB)
PDF format (341 KB)
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter