URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/journals/SydUPLawBk/2011/16.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 15:39:55
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
O'Neill, Nick; Peisah, Carmelle --- "Chapter 14 - The Proper Practice and Law relating to decision-making about Treatment and Care at the End of Life" [2011] SydUPLawBk 16; in O'Neill, Nick; Peisah, Carmelle (eds), "Capacity and the Law" (Sydney University Press, 2011)
14. 1. Introduction
14. 2. Background issues relevant to decision-making about treatment and care at the end of life
14. 2. 1. How often and in what contexts is such decision-making required?
14. 2. 2. What sort of decisions need to be made?
14. 2. 3. The decision makers
14. 3. The Australian practice and law
14. 3. 1. The Australian common law
14. 4. The operation of the common law in some of the States and the interaction between it and the statute law
14. 4. 1. New South Wales
14. 4. 2. Victoria
14. 4. 3. Queensland
14. 4. 4. Northern Territory
14. 5. Care, treatment and decision-making at the end of life in all the Australian States and Territories
Chapter 14 - The Proper Practice and Law relating to decision-making about Treatment and Care at the End of Life
14. 1. Introduction
Dying is the final act of living. Despite the many advances in medical
knowledge, treatment and technology, every person born will
die. Many will live
long lives, some will have tragically short lives, others will be cut off in
their prime, but all will die. Chapter
11 dealt with developments in the common
law in response to advances in medical expertise and technology which allow life
to be sustained
for long periods when without that technology, treatment and
nursing expertise the person would soon die.
This chapter deals with the proper ethical practices and the Australian
common law and legislation relevant to decision-making about
treatment and care
when a person’s life is coming to an end. However, first it is useful to
have an idea of the scope of the
14. 2. Background issues relevant to decision-making
14. 2. 1. How often and in what contexts is such
decision-making required?
In 2005 the English Court of Appeal noted that each year approximately 50,000
patients are admitted to intensive care units in the
United Kingdom and of those
30% died in the unit or on the wards before hospital discharge. Most died
because treatment was withdrawn
or limited, albeit in circumstances where the
clinicians concluded that such treatment was likely merely to prolong the
dying. The court also noted that there is not always agreement on the
part of all concerned as to the withdrawal of
There are no similar Australian figures available for comparison but it is
important to note that Intensive Care Units are not the
only contexts for end-of
life decisions. A postal survey of Australian doctors selected from medical
disciplines in which there
were opportunities to be the attending doctor at
non-acute patient deaths and hence to make medical end-of-life decisions,
the proportion of medical end-of-life decisions in Australia. The
proportion of all Australian deaths that involved a medical end-of-life
were: euthanasia, 1.8% (including physician-assisted suicide, 0.1%); ending of
patient's life without patient's concurrent
explicit request, 3.5%; withholding
or withdrawing of potentially life-prolonging treatment, 28.6%; alleviation of
pain with opioids
in doses large enough that there was a probable
life-shortening effect, 30.9%. In 30% of all Australian deaths, a medical
end-of-life
decision was made with the explicit intention of ending the
patient's life, of which 4% were in response to a direct request from
Such decisions are made in a variety of contexts, most frequently in
intensive care settings and in residential care settings for
the aged. One
context for end-of life decisions that is sparsely dealt with in the literature
but a clinical and practical reality
for doctors, carers and families alike is
end-of-life decisions involving institutionalized, intellectually disabled
a study from the Netherlands, 89 doctors reported 222 deaths of
intellectually disabled people for which an end of life decision
was taken in 97
cases (44%); in 75 the decision was to withdraw or withhold treatment, and in 22
it was to relieve pain or symptoms
with opiates in dosages that may have
shortened life. In the 67 most recent cases with an end of life decision the
patients were
mostly incompetent (63) and under 65 years old (51). Only two
patients explicitly asked to die, but in 23 cases there had been some
communication with the patient. In 60 cases the doctors discussed the decision
with nursing staff and in 46 with a colleague. The
authors made the point that
the proportion of such decisions in the total number of deaths is similar to
that in other specialties,
although the discussion of such decisions is far less
open in the care of intellectual disability than in other
specialties.
14. 2. 2. What sort of decisions need to be
14. 2. 2. 1. Do not resuscitate and do not hospitalise orders
Not for resuscitation orders (NFRs) are a necessary aspect of medical
practice and have received currency both locally and internationally.
orders are regularly used in the acute care setting. A cross-sectional postal
survey of 157 Australian hospitals showed that
54% had NFR policies and 39% had
standardised order forms for documenting such decisions. Of interest was that
while 89% of hospital
policies stated that competent patients should be involved
in discussions relating to the decision not to resuscitate, only 38% stated
the patient must be informed of the decision and only 16% stated that the
competent patient’s wishes had to be
considered.
There has been increasing recognition that such decisions need to be planned
in advance in the residential care setting. As discussed
in Chapter 13, a recent
Australian study demonstrated the benefits of advance planning for nursing home
residents in terms of emergency
hospital transfers, stays and mortality as well
as increased satisfaction for staff and
Although the deleterious
effect of acute inpatient care on nursing home residents, particularly those
with dementia, has been increasingly
recognized,
do not hospitalise (DNH) orders are still in less use than NFR orders. A
study from Colorado showed that 32% of residents in US nursing
“do not resuscitate” directives, whereas less than 2% had “do
not hospitalise” directives. Factors
associated with having a do not
hospitalise or do not resuscitate directive at the resident level included older
age, cognitive impairment,
functional dependence, and Caucasian ethnicity.
Ethnic minorities were less likely to have do not hospitalise and do not
resuscitate
directives even after controlling for disease status, demographic,
facility, and geographic characteristics
NFR orders may act as indirect DNH orders. In a study of 36 nursing homes
(almost 4,000 residents) in central and eastern Missouri
in the US, DNR orders
independently reduced the risk of hospitalization for lower respiratory tract
infections. The authors postulated
that NFR orders may function as a marker for
undocumented care limitations or as a mandate to limit care.
14. 2. 2. 2. Artificial feeding and hydration
The loss of desire or ability to feed or hydrate oneself may be a feature of
several end-stage diseases. For example, the skills to
feed oneself, to use
eating and drinking utensils, and to consume items recognized as food or drink
thereby maintaining nutrition
and hydration, may be lost as dementia
. Further, nutritional
status is often compromised when a person has cancer involving the upper
gastrointestinal tract. Gradual reduction
and eventual cessation of oral intake
is a normal part of the dying
yet the decision
whether or not to intervene when this happens is one which still arouses much
controversy and is sometimes the precipitant
for legal intervention. The act of
feeding in particular is often equated with the provision of love and care, and
bystanders often
find it difficult to accept or allow food refusal at the
terminal stages of diseases such as dementia without intervention.
There is much fear among
families that failure to institute artificial feeding or hydration or removal of
these leads to people being
"starved" to death or dying in discomfort from
thirst. Yet, in palliative care units (and home care) food and drink, as well as
with eating and drinking, are always available to satisfy a
patient’s thirst and hunger, and mouth care to relieve a dry mouth
More aggressive “medical” treatments for dealing with these
symptoms include artificial feeding, administered via a percutaneous
gastrostomy tube (PEG), and hydration, administered via a subcutaneous line (a
small needle inserted under the skin).
The benefits of either of these
treatments remain unproven in the palliative care setting, particularly for
people with advanced
dementia. Multiple studies have shown that feeding tubes
are seldom effective in improving nutrition or increasing weight, maintaining
skin integrity or preventing pressure ulcers by increased protein intake,
preventing aspiration pneumonia, minimizing suffering,
improving functional
status, or extending life.
There is also no evidence that
medically administered nutrition and hydration enhances comfort or dignity
during the dying process.
While there is evidence that terminally ill patients
have biochemical dehydration, a relationship between hydration or biochemical
status and symptoms has not been established and thus there is very little
evidence at present to show that rehydration relieves
symptoms. Rather,
arguments have been made that fluid infusion might lead to fluid overload, and
reduce comfort.
As a result, specific inclusion of artificial nutrition and hydration as a
part of advance care planning has taken on growing importance
particularly in
the care of patients with advanced dementia.
The primary issue in patients
with dementia may be autonomy and the right of an individual to decide whether
or not a tube should
be placed at all. However, much of case law is derived from
cases of patients who were in a persistent vegetative
The clinician considering
such issues must take into account advance directives, ethical considerations,
legal and financial concerns,
emotional factors, cultural background, religious
beliefs, and the need for a family meeting incorporating all of these
principles.
14. 2. 3. The decision makers
14. 2. 3. 1. The patient
Ideally, patients are able to determine their own decisions for end-of-life
care. As has been seen in Chapter 13, people are being
encouraged to make
advance directives or to at least express their views about how they would like
to be cared for at the end of
life when they may need life-sustaining medical
interventions to keep them alive. However, patients often lose decision-making
before their wishes for the use of life-sustaining treatment have been
made known. In those situations the treating team and family
need to plan the
care that both consider to be in the patient’s best interests, that
reflects their wishes and values and,
as much as possible, avoids inappropriate
under and over-treatment.
common law and appropriate practice for the consensus approach for making end-of
life decisions for incapable persons will be
discussed further in this
14. 2. 3. 2. Decision-making by treating doctors
There is probably no other decision that so taxes a doctor’s moral,
ethical and religious beliefs or generates such stress than
that related to
end-of life care. Not surprisingly, a postal survey of 2172 Australian doctors
showed that treatment provided in
a hypothetical setting of terminal dementia
was significantly determined by the individual characteristics of the doctor and
solely by the nature of the medical problem. Doctors did not make consistent
decisions about withholding artificial food and fluids
from elderly patients
with dementia and their decisions varied systematically by sociodemographic and
medical training factors. While
they generally adhered to patient and family
wishes when these were known they did not adhere to a patient's request for
death. Again, the point was made that the participation of doctors in
the informed-consent process and in the preparation of advance
health care
directives would enable them to be more familiar with patient and family wishes
and could reduce variations of treatment
provided by doctors because of their
sociodemographic backgrounds and factors in their medical
However, even when advance directives are in greater currency, studies other
countries show that doctors still consider the medical
condition of the patient,
the wishes of the family, and the interpretations of the patient’s quality
of life by their care
providers to be more important than advance directives and
policy agreements. In a study of ten wards in two nursing homes in the
Netherlands, involving 35 patients with dementia, eight doctors, 43 nurses and
32 families, doctors' decisions about withholding
the artificial administration
of fluids and food from elderly patients with dementia were influenced more by
the clinical course
of the illness, the presumed quality of life of the patient,
and the patient's medical condition than they were by advanced planning
The authors made the point that in an attempt to understand the wishes of the
patient, doctors try to create the broadest
possible basis for the
decision-making process and its outcome, mainly by involving the
A study of end-of-life
decision-making across Europe and Australia found that most physicians would
withhold chemotherapy or intensify
symptom treatment at the request of a patient
with terminal cancer and be willing to deeply sedate such a patient until death,
there was less willingness to administer drugs with the explicit
intention of hastening death at the request of the patient. Predictors
decisions were requests from a competent patient (strongest predictor), shorter
patient life expectancy and uncontrollable
pain, the (latter two being more
stable across countries).
Even when physicians, nurses and relatives are guided by a best interests
principle, it seems that differences in religious beliefs,
perspective of the
patient, and responsibility can lead to different attitudes towards end-of-life
decisions. A study from the Netherlands
of nursing home physicians, relatives
and nurses showed that relatives attach more importance to advance directives
than physicians,
and have more permissive attitudes towards hastening
The recommendation that
physicians should discuss end-of-life decisions more openly and be aware of the
influences on attitudes and
incorporate them into communication about
end-of-life decisions seems a highly practical one.
14. 2. 3. 3. Decision-making by family members
Functioning as a substitute decision-maker (for example person responsible,
guardian or statutory health attorney) typically places
great moral, emotional,
and cognitive demands on that person. Surrogates (substitute decision-makers)
can experience long-term physical
and psychological outcomes from being
decision-makers.
particularly so when deciding about initiation of artificial hydration and
nutrition at the end of life.
Further, using “substituted judgment” to guess what their loved one
“would have wanted” in a given situation
is extremely difficult. In
studies world-wide using hypothetical scenarios to compare patients' choices and
surrogates' predictions
of those choices, surrogates demonstrated only low to
moderate predictive
Neither patient designation of surrogates nor prior discussion of
patients' treatment preferences improved surrogates' predictive
Patient-designated and family surrogates incorrectly predicted patients'
end-of-life treatment preferences in one third
of cases. These data undermine
the claim that reliance on surrogates is justified by their ability to predict
incapacitated patients'
treatment preferences. Further, family caregivers often
have a significantly more aggressive attitude toward each examined
life-sustaining
treatment for their ill family members than the patients' own
stated preferences.
The substituted judgment standard is not the only standard used by proxies to
make decisions. Several factors such as patient preferences,
perceptions of the
patient’s quality of life and severity of caregiver burden are taken into
account by caregivers when making
It is interesting to note that
caregivers of patients with dementia report lower scores on quality of life than
patients themselves,
partly because of the patient’s response shift and
partly because of caregiver’s bias as a result of their care burden:
higher the care burden the lower they rate the patient’s quality of life.
Caregivers often have
difficulty distinguishing between their own wishes and the opinions and wishes
formerly held by the patient.
In societies, such as in Asian countries, where physicians' respect for
patient autonomy is frequently subordinate to the power of
family, disagreements
between a patient and family about end-of-life care may result in the patient's
preferences being overridden
at the end of
In Australia, the
over-riding ethical and legal responsibility of the health care professional is
to the patient.
person’s prior expressed wishes regarding treatment or its limitation are
known then these wishes take priority over
those of the family, although there
needs to be a strong commitment at such times to resolve any disagreement by
discussion and facilitation
of the family’s acceptance of the persons
Physicians and
families frequently report conflicts when making end of life decisions.
Dealing with demands for what
is perceived by health care providers as inappropriate treatment frequently
causes substantial emotional
and moral dilemma for health care workers and at
times culminate in legal action. When in doubt, “standards of best
and “appropriate care”- treatment that falls within
the bounds of standard medical practice or interventions used by
“respectable minority” of expert practitioners – are best
Thus on the basis of standard care alone, and without appeal to medical
futility, clinicians have a sound basis for refusing to provide
ineffective,
experimental or outdated treatment.
Notwithstanding that, when disagreement among health care professionals, the
patient and their family persists, the clinician needs
to understand the
misunderstandings, emotional anguish and disagreements about fundamental values
that may lie at the heart of such
conflict and seek some sort of negotiated
The quality of
communication by health care providers significantly influenced family
satisfaction with decision-making and end of
End-of-life decisions may also precipitate intra-familial conflict such that
group or consensual decision-making involving multiple
family members is
preferred over individual surrogate decision-making.
Sometimes such issues provide
a focus for children to play out issues of sibling rivalry or competitions to be
the “best child”.
Clearly issues about when, where and how a person should die create a
potential for human conflict, yet most of the time these decisions
are able to
be made through consultation and a degree of consensus between the doctor and
staff, the patient and the family. However,
in the absence of consensus or when
uncertainty arises as to the “right” decision to be made, courts,
sometimes tribunals
and sometimes Public Guardians/Advocates are called upon to
make these decisions.
14. 3. The Australian practice and law
14. 3. 1. The Australian common law
The Supreme Courts of the States and Territories have wide-ranging
common law often called the parens patriae
This jurisdiction
arms the courts with jurisdiction to meet new situations that sometimes need to
be resolved by court intervention
and decision-making. In those States in which
the parens patriae jurisdiction is used in relation to issues and disputes about
treatment, it is seen as protective in
In a case brought to the Supreme Court of New South Wales by the sister of a
man who was unconscious and in relation to whom his treating
doctors intended to
withdraw life-sustaining treatment, O’Keefe J said:
The parens patriae jurisdiction of the Supreme Court extends to the protection
of the life and bodily integrity of persons who are
unable to do so for
themselves because of various exigencies, one of which is unconsciousness.
In exercising its parens patriae jurisdiction in the area of present concern the
paramount consideration is to preserve the life
of or safeguard, secure or
promote, or prevent the deterioration in the physical or mental health of the
person the subject of the
exercise of the jurisdiction. Any operative or medical
procedure that is carried out must be undertaken "to save their lives, or
ensure improvement or prevent deterioration in their physical or mental health".
This conclusion has also been supported by reference
to the principle of
necessity, with the consequence that treatment or other procedures undertaken
must be in the best interests of
preserving the life, health or welfare of the
person concerned.
He went on to note that:
The law in Australia is well settled that it is lawful for, and the duty of, a
hospital which or doctor who has undertaken the care
of a patient who is
unconscious, to carry out such treatment as is necessary and appropriate to
safeguard the life, health and welfare
of that patient, even though such patient
is in no position to give or refuse consent to the course
O’Keefe J went on to state that:
There is undoubted jurisdiction in the Supreme Court of New South Wales to act
to protect the right of an unconscious person to receive
ordinary reasonable and
appropriate (as opposed to extra-ordinary, excessively burdensome, intrusive or
futile) medical treatment,
sustenance and support. In this day and age ordinary
reasonable and appropriate treatment, for a person of the age and condition
[the patient], would extend to the administration of antibiotics and appropriate
feeding. The court also has jurisdiction to prevent
the withdrawal of such
treatment, support and sustenance where the withdrawal may put in jeopardy the
life, good health or welfare
of such unconscious individual. What constitutes
appropriate medical treatment in a given case is a medical matter in the first
However, where there is doubt or serious dispute in this regard the
court has the power to act to protect the life and welfare of
the unconscious
doctors agreed to continue artificial nutrition and hydration pending the
hearing and O’Keefe J ordered that the patient
“be provided with
necessary and appropriate medical treatment directed towards the preserving of
his life and the promoting
of his good health and welfare” and that no Not
for Resuscitation Order be made in respect of him without prior leave of the
However, the courts will not always require the continuation of treatment. In
a 2004 case, the Supreme Court of New South Wales refused
to intervene to stop
the withdrawal of treatment from a man who was unconscious and in a deep coma,
because it was not satisfied
that the withdrawal of [the patient’s]
present treatment is not in the patient’s best interest and
In that case, the patient was admitted to a hospital after an asystolic
cardiac arrest. His heart had stopped beating completely depriving
including his brain, of oxygen. As a result the patient had been unconscious and
apparently in a deep coma. His treating
doctor considered that active treatment
should cease and that he be placed under palliative care. This would have the
effect of reducing
his life expectancy from possibly weeks to possibly days. The
application was brought by members of the patient’s family in
restrain his treating doctor and other medical staff at the hospital from
altering the patient’s treatment. Family
members believed that, contrary
to medical opinion, there were some slight signs of improvement in the
patient’s condition
and that, if the current treatment regime continued
the patient’s condition might improve.
However, the judge was satisfied that there was no medical evidence
suggesting that there was any real prospect of improvement if
active treatment
were to be continued for any significant period of time. Except for extending
the patient’s life for some
relatively brief period, the active treatment
was futile. Also it was burdensome and
In 2005 Skene reviewed those decisions as well as decisions of the Supreme
Court of Victoria, VCAT and the Queensland Guardianship
and Administrative
Tribunal and was confident that, consistent with decisions in the USA and the
UK, it is lawful in Australia to
withhold or withdraw treatment where the
commencement or continuation of it would be futile and not in the incapable
best interests.
Consistent with the guidelines issued in 2005 by the NSW Department of Health
and discussed in the next section below, Skene suggested
a process for dealing
with for end-of-life cases in Victoria at least. A diagnosis should be made and
confirmed over time and in
consultation with the family. If there was consensus
on the issue that continued treatment was futile, then the treatment could be
withdrawn, with or without a court
She noted that if the now incapable and dying person had “expressed in
advance a wish that supports the withdrawal of treatment”
an application
could be made to the VCAT to appoint a guardian to refuse the treatment.
However, she did not believe that such a
course of action was necessary because
she accepted the view of Lord Goff of Chieveley that a patient’s wishes
could not be
relevant if they had no awareness of their condition because they
were in, for example, a persistent vegetative
Skene also noted that, because substitute decision-makers, family members or
others do not have a legal right to require treatment
to be continued against
medical advice, the only course for those wanting continuation of the treatment
was to challenge the diagnosis
by applying to the Supreme Court. In such a
case, the only issue would be the patient’s condition and prognosis, and
desire of either the patient or their substitute decision-makers, family
members or others to have the treatment continued. She concluded
that if the
court was satisfied, on the basis of the evidence, that it was futile to
continue the treatment, then the court could
make a declaration authorising the
withdrawal of the treatment and that was the end of the
It is suggested that the 2009 case
Hunter and New England Area Health
Service v A
has clarified the matter at least in relation to those who have
made advance directives in New South Wales and those who have made
directives under the common law elsewhere in
If an advance
directive is made by a capable adult, and is clear and unambiguous, and extends
to the situation at hand, it must be
respected and given effect
14. 3. 1. 1. Treating people at the end if their lives – the common
law and appropriate practice – a summary
As has been seen elsewhere in this book, health care planning is being
encouraged as a matter of policy. As part of that policy, people
encouraged to make advance directives or to at least express their views about
the medical care and treatment they wish
to receive when their level of
functioning is declining and they need life-sustaining medical technology, such
as ventilators, and
other interventions by health professionals, such as
cardio-pulmonary resuscitation, to keep them alive.
It is also now appreciated that an essential element of health care planning
and dealing with the care and treatment of an incapable
person at the end of
their life is to involve their substitute decision-makers, family members and
significant others in the decision-making
processes about that treatment and to
proceed through informed, consensus decision-making wherever possible. However,
where consensus
decision-making fails:
1. The incapable person’s treating doctors may withhold or withdraw
treatment where they consider that the commencement or continuation
treatment would be futile and not in the incapable person’s best
2. Neither the incapable person, through an advance directive, nor their
substitute decision-makers, family members or significant
others can require
such treatment to be given.
3. If the incapable person’s substitute decision-makers, family members
or significant others want that treatment to be given,
they must obtain an order
to that effect from the relevant Supreme Court.
14. 4. The operation of the common law in some of
the States and the interaction between it and the statute law
14. 4. 1. New South Wales
As has already been noted in 14. 3. 1 above, advance directives that are
clear and unambiguous, and extend to the situation at hand
must be respected and
given effect to in New South Wales. In circumstances in which the now incapable
person has not made such an
advance directive, the Supreme Court may exercise
its parens patriae jurisdiction to deal with disputes about end-of-life
decision-making
in New South Wales. However, there are other important
approaches to this difficult matter in place. In 2005 the NSW Department of
Health issued its
Guidelines for end-of-life care and
decision-making
guidelines set out a process for reaching end-of-life decisions. While they deal
with situations in which patients are able
to determine their own decisions for
end-of-life care, they note that often patients lose decision-making capacity
before they have
expressed wishes about life sustaining treatment for them. The
are directed particularly to those situations. They proceed on
the basis that, in those situations, the treating team, the multidisciplinary
team of health professionals involved in the patient’s management and
care, including doctors, nurses, other health professionals,
social workers and
counsellors, carers and spiritual advisors, and the family together need to plan
care that takes account of the
patient’s best interest, reflects their
wishes and values and avoids both over-treatment and under-treatment. The
promote a consensus-building approach. They also note that
dying patients are cared for in many settings including intensive care
hospital wards, hospice facilities, aged care facilities and at home.
are based on a number of principles which include the
1. A primary goal of medical care is the preservation of life, but that when
life cannot be preserved, the goal is to provide comfort
and dignity to the
dying person, and to support others in doing so.
2. All those receiving healthcare have a right to be informed about their
condition and their treatment options. They have a right
to receive or refuse
life-prolonging treatment. Caregivers have an ethical and legal obligation to
acknowledge and honour these stated
choices and preferences.
3. End-of-life care should intend to provide the best possible treatment for
an individual at that time. If the goals of care shift
to accommodate primarily
comfort and dignity, then withholding or withdrawal of life-sustaining medical
interventions may be permissible
in the best interests of the dying patient.
4. Families and healthcare professionals have an obligation to work together
to make compassionate decisions for patients who lack
decision-making capacity,
taking account of previously expressed wishes of the patient where these are
encourage planning in advance through the making of
advance directives. They note that decision-making capacity is often lost as
serious illness or death approaches. Consequently, it is more likely that the
appropriate decisions about end-of-life care will be
made in a more timely
manner if those close to the patient understand the patient’s wishes in
advance. If an advance directive
has been made, or at least discussion with the
patient as to their wishes has taken place, their preferences and values can
to inform decision-making as circumstances change during the time leading
to the patient’s death.
note that, in NSW, people can plan in advance for
end-of-life care by:
1. Developing an advance care plan in conjunction with their health care
professionals while being treated in a hospital, aged care
facility or other
place of treatment or care.
2. Discussing their preferences for life-sustaining treatment with their
family before they are acutely ill.
3. Formally appointing an enduring guardian giving them lawful directions
4. Writing an advance care directive.
point out that the critical aspect of effective advance
care planning is discussion between the patient and those close to them while
the patient still has decision-making
note that planning end-of-life care is a process that
has as its elements, assessment, disclosure, discussion and consensus building
with the patient or their family and the treatment team. This process can take
place over a short period, such as hours, where the
patient suddenly or
unexpectedly deteriorates, but also it can extend over weeks or
discuss assessment and the note that disclosure involves the provision of honest
information in non-technical language so that the
patient and their family may
participate meaningfully in decisions about end-of-life care. Any uncertainty
the likely response to treatment should be communicated
to the patient and their family. The patient and their family should be engaged
in open communication about possible outcomes early in treatment, especially
where the patient is seriously or critically ill, in
order to prevent
unrealistic expectations about what can be achieved with treatment. Early,
honest and regular communication can
also help create the trust needed for
shared decision-making and to defuse tension.
Discussions with the patient and their family about treatment limitation
should, if possible, occur in stages over a period of time
and, preferably,
while the patient can still determine the appropriateness of treatment or its
cessation. The treating team may wish
to take the opportunity to initiate or
revisit discussion about end-of-life care if the patient is hospitalised with
severe, progressive
illness or has had repeated recent admissions or where there
have been inquiries from the patient or their family about palliative
care or where the patient has expressed a wish to
acknowledge that sometimes there will be disagreements
between the treating team and the patient and their family about the care
treatment that should be provided. The
suggest that a number
of approaches are available to resolve there disagreements. These include where
it is possible, having further
discussions with the family and giving them time
to come to terms with the impending death of the patient. Offering a second
may be appropriate if the family members have anxieties or uncertainties
treatment, provided
the trial is in the patient’s best interests may help clarify uncertainty
or resolve disagreement about
prognosis of the patient. Involving a third party
may assist in clarifying and addressing the concerns of the patient or family
or in finding agreement where an impasse has occurred between the
family and the treating team.
If none of these steps resolve the situation, the practicality of
transferring the care of the patient to another institution or another
treating clinician within the same institution may have to be investigated with
those involved.
The final two suggestions for dealing with disagreements involve going to the
Supreme Court or the Guardianship Tribunal. The powers
of the Supreme Court have
already been considered, but the role of the Guardianship Tribunal, persons
responsible and guardians,
whether an enduring guardian appointed by the patient
or by the Guardianship Tribunal or the Supreme Court, if it chooses to exercise
latent jurisdiction, in relation decision-making about medical treatment at the
end of life must now be considered.
14. 4. 1. 1. Substitute decision-making about medical treatment for an
incapable person at the end of their life, by a person responsible,
or the NSW Guardianship Tribunal
While the consensus approach set out in the
appropriate way to deal with the medical treatment and care of an incapable
person at the end of their life, situations can
arise in which the incapable
person’s substitute decision-maker, whether they be their person
responsible, their personally
appointed enduring guardian or their Tribunal
appointed guardian, is called upon to make decisions about the nature of the
the incapable person should receive. Can they do this under the
regime for substitute decision-making in relation to the medical
treatment established by
Guardianship Act
One of the objects of
is to ensure that any medical or dental
treatment that is carried out on an incapable person is carried out for the
purpose of promoting
and maintaining their health and
well-being.
that before a person responsible, including a guardian, may give substitute
consent to the carrying out of (major or minor)
medical treatment on the
incapable, they must have regard to that object and the other object of the
Even if the person
responsible, including a guardian, gives substitute consent to the carrying out
of certain medical treatment that
consent is of no effect if that treatment is
to be carried out for any purpose other than that of promoting and maintaining
and well-being of the incapable
also provides that doctors may give minor medical treatment to an
incapable person if their person responsible cannot be contacted
or is unable or
unwilling to make the decision either to give or refuse consent to the proposed
treatment. However before the doctors
give the treatment, they must certify in
writing in the person’s clinical record that not only was the treatment
but also that it is the form of treatment that will most successfully
promote the patient's health and
well-being.
If the Tribunal is called upon, under
, to give consent, before it may
give that consent, it must be satisfied that:
1. it is appropriate that the treatment to be consented to be carried out,
2. the treatment to be consented to is the most appropriate form of treatment
for promoting and maintaining the patient's health and
well-being.
These provisions all indicate that treating doctors should not propose
treatments unless they are necessary and also will promote
and maintain the
health and well-being of the incapable person. Furthermore, even if the proposed
treatment met those criteria when
it was commenced, it may, because of the
changes in the circumstances or condition of the incapable person, no longer
criteria; in which case the treatment should be discontinued.
Medical treatment is appropriately defined in
to include any medical
or surgical procedure, operation or examination and any prophylactic, palliative
or rehabilitative care normally
carried out by or under the supervision of a
medical practitioner.
Consequently, any form of treatment normally carried out by or under the
supervision of a doctor ranging from the most intense of
intensive care through
to palliative care where a person is kept as comfortable and pain free as
possible, is medical treatment and
subject to the substitute consent regime
established in
What is the appropriate treatment and care of a person at the end of their
life is constantly changing. Sometimes a particular treatment
appropriate for weeks or even months. Sometimes the need to change treatments,
or at least to reconsider what is the most
appropriate form of treatment occurs
over a short period, even hours, where the person suddenly or unexpectedly
deteriorates and
more active treatment can no longer be said to be promoting or
even maintaining the incapable person’s health and well-being.
As previously discussed, it is clear from both clinical practice and the
decisions of the courts that there is a distinction between
promoting and
maintaining health and well-being and delaying death with active interventions.
This point has been made in the decided
cases. As already noted, the Supreme
Court of New South Wales has pointed out the distinction between ordinary
reasonable and appropriate
medical treatment, sustenance and support as opposed
to that which is extra-ordinary, excessively burdensome, intrusive or
The Family Division of
the High Court of Justice in England has also allowed hydration to be stopped as
it was doing no more than
As noted earlier in this chapter, numerous studies have shown that PEG
feeding tubes are seldom effective in minimizing suffering,
improving functional
status or extending life in terminal illness. While PEG tubes can play a role
in promoting and maintaining
health and well-being, there is also evidence to
show that there are situations in which treating an incapable person by
to provide them with nutrition and hydration through a PEG tube is
burdensome and inconsistent with good clinical
At other times
continuing with such treatment is inconsistent with good clinical
does not state in terms that it applies to the withdrawal of
treatment, it is structured to ensure that incapable people are either
commenced on or not continued on medical treatment that does not have the
purpose of promoting and maintaining the incapable
person’s health and
well-being.
Death is an inevitable consequence of being born alive. There is nothing in
to indicate that it was not to operate in relation to incapable people
who had serious illnesses or a level of health that meant
that they could die or
were in a condition for which death was a likely outcome.
preclude decision-making about medical treatment at the end of life. There are
no words in the legislation indicating this.
To read such words into the
would not only be illegitimate but also would create problems that do
not otherwise exist, starting with the impossible to answer
question when does
the dying process begin and the operation of
Furthermore, there is nothing in
to indicate that it is to operate so
that medical technology is to keep incapable people alive no matter what their
condition is
and what their chances of recovery are. To read such an approach
into the legislation would be to deny the reality of death and to
unnecessary prolongation of the dying process with the attendant discomfort,
pain and suffering of the incapable person.
can and does operate in a way that is consistent with the Department
of Health’s guidelines for end-of-life care and decision-making.
formal substitute decision-maker, the person responsible (meaning the guardian
if there is one) works in with the treating team
and the significant others in
the incapable person’s life to develop and to continue to change the
incapable person’s
treatment plan as the changing circumstances require.
Appropriate end-of-life care should intend to provide the best possible
for an individual at that particular time. This will be a dynamic
process and accordingly, the consent of the person responsible
will need to be
sought accordingly. There will come a time when active treatments are neither
promoting nor maintaining the incapable
person’s health and well-being,
but merely prolonging the dying process. In such circumstances the goals of care
shift to accommodate
primarily comfort and dignity, and withholding or
withdrawing burdensome life-sustaining interventions may be the most appropriate
form of treatment for promoting and maintaining the dying patient's health and
well-being.
In March 2006 the Public Guardian of New South Wales consented to the
following treatment plan in relation to a 73 year old man who
was under his
guardianship and who had end stage kidney disease, dementia and a number of
other conditions:
1. Ultrafiltration and medications to manage his cardiac and renal conditions
and prevent pulmonary oedema
2. Medications to control pain, anxiety and agitation and excessive oral
3. Full nursing care to assist with personal care, bowel care, bladder care
and pressure care
4. Withdrawal of dialysis treatment.
5. No further aggressive treatments, including cardio-pulmonary resuscitation
or intubation when he dies.
6. Regular review by the Renal Team and Palliative Care Teams to ensure
optimal symptom control.
The Administrative Decisions Tribunal of New South Wales has jurisdiction to
review the decisions of the Public Guardian. On application,
that tribunal
reviewed the Public Guardian’s decision, made under the functions given to
him by the Guardianship Tribunal.
These included the health care function and
the function of what major or minor medical treatment the person under
guardianship may
receive. The Administrative Decisions Tribunal held that the
Public Guardian cannot make a decision to withdraw medical treatment
life-sustaining. Sitting as a Deputy President of the Administrative Decisions
Tribunal, Magistrate Hennessy stated that:
The health care function … allows the Public Guardian to determine what
health care and major and minor medical and dental
treatment [the person under
guardianship] may receive. The decision to consent to the withdrawal of dialysis
treatment is not a decision
person under guardianship] may receive. The term "health care" is a general
While it is possible that it could include consenting to "end-of-life"
decisions, I am reluctant to give it such a broad interpretation
in the absence
of some clear indication that that is what the Guardianship Tribunal
Without the advantage of any medical evidence relating to what was
appropriate treatment for the person under guardianship or legal
argument about
the operation and effect of
and without reference to the clear
prohibition in
to the carrying out of medical treatment that is carried
out for any purpose other than that of promoting and maintaining the health
well-being of the incapable
and without considering
whether dialysis treatment was still the most appropriate treatment to promote
and maintain the health and
well-being of the person under guardianship,
Magistrate Hennessy went on to state that:
A decision to withdraw life sustaining medical treatment is not a decision
carried out for the purpose of promoting and maintaining
the health and well
And to hold that:
[A] power to consent to palliative care does not include a power to consent to
withholding treatment which would, if administered,
prolong life. If Parliament
had intended to give the Guardianship Tribunal (and the Public Guardian) such a
significant power, it
would have done so
After doubting that the health care function regularly given to guardians
included consenting to “end-of-life decisions”
and finding that
medical treatment does not encompass the withdrawal of life-sustaining
treatment, Magistrate Hennessy remitted the
decision to the Public Guardian for
reconsideration and recommended that the Public Guardian seek clarification of
the scope of his
powers from the Guardianship
The Public Guardian
followed that recommendation but the person under guardianship died before that
tribunal could complete hearings
into that matter.
If this decision was treated as the law, the effect would be that once
doctors had embarked on a course of life prolonging treatment
on a person who
was or subsequently became under the guardianship of the Public Guardian they
could not then approach the Public
Guardian for his consent to change to a more
appropriate treatment even though it was clear that the life prolonging
treatment was
not the most appropriate treatment for promoting and maintaining
the health and well-being of the person under guardianship. They
would then be
in the position of carrying out that life prolonging treatment without consent
contrary to the provisions of the
Guardianship Act
committing a criminal offence in the
The decision fails to appreciate that life prolonging treatment is not always
treatment that is capable of either promoting or maintaining
health or well-being and that such treatment can be burdensome, painful,
undignified and no more than death delaying.
This fact is well recognised in
both the USA and the UK in many cases, some of which are set out in Chapter 11
in relation to the
best interests tests developed in those countries. It is also
recognised in both those countries that many times every day decisions
be made to change the treatment being provided to a person at the end of their
life from active to more passive treatment
because that active treatment is no
longer capable of promoting or even maintaining health and that it is acting
adversely to well-being
because it is prolonging the dying process.
In a 2007 case in which the Public Guardian sought directions as to the scope
of his powers under a medical consent function and a
health care function, the
Tribunal stated the following:
The Tribunal considers that end of life care is one aspect of palliative care
and palliative care must be given a purposive definition.
Its purpose is
symptomatic treatment rather than curative treatment. It is care which is aimed
at symptom management rather than
at curing an underlying medical condition.
Palliative care usually includes a regime of different treatments. It can
involve active
treatment to manage pain and discomfort. Given that the aim of
palliative care is not curative treatment, it can also involve the
withdrawal of
treatment and the non provision of treatment, depending on the individual
patient’s circumstances and clinical
The Tribunal considers that in accordance with
can be given (or refused) for medical treatment, which includes palliative care.
Palliative care, as defined above, can
include treatment limitations, such as
the non-provision of treatment. Accordingly under
, requests or
applications to a substitute consent giver for consent to treatment limitations
can be made in relation to palliative
care. However, in making a decision about
such a request, a substitute consent giver must give proper consideration to the
and provisions of
The Tribunal went on to note that New South Wales Supreme Court has
acknowledged that the withdrawal of treatment in an end of life
situation, where
that treatment is futile, burdensome and intrusive, is appropriate and
consistent with a patient’s welfare
The Tribunal also
noted that not only in New South Wales and elsewhere in Australia but also in
the United Kingdom and the United
States Ireland, New Zealand, Canada and other
welfare and best interests can justify treatment limitation at
the end of life and that the
decision is not easily reconciled with
those decisions.
The Tribunal then noted that people with disabilities should be able to
access the same medical care, including palliative care at
the end of life, as
is available to people without disabilities and that there is no definition of
health, well-being or what constitutes
the promotion and maintenance of health
and well-being in the
Guardianship Act
The Tribunal stated
that, consistent with
Interpretation Act
, those terms should be given their customary meaning and a purposive
construction and that ‘health and well-being’ should
broad interpretation, to include not only physical health but also emotional,
psychological and other wider aspects of
health. The Tribunal continued:
These terms must also be understood in the light of the
principles in
, the primary principle being that the welfare and interests of
people with disabilities should be given paramount consideration.
In much of the
case law discussed above, a person’s well-being is considered as
synonymous with their welfare and best
The Tribunal’s opinion was that health and well-being should not be
given a rigid or inflexible meaning and that the promotion
of health and
well-being at the end of life will involve very different considerations to the
promotion of health and well-being
for a person with a curable condition. This
led the Tribunal to conclude that:
[T]reatment limitation can also promote and maintain a person’s health and
well-being. The nature and circumstances of the
particular individual’s
state of health must be considered. Giving treatment which is futile does not
promote a patient’s
health and well-being, particularly when that
treatment is also burdensome and intrusive. At the end of life a decision which
health and well-being may be a decision which allows a person to die in
comfort and with dignity.
The Tribunal noted that the guardianship system is not designed to allow
guardians, as substitute decision makers, to create or authorise
directives on behalf of a person under
guardianship.
That remains the
case after the Supreme Court’s decision in
Hunter and New England Area
Health Authority v A
The Guardianship Tribunal also addressed the question of advance care
planning, which is promoted by the New South Wales Department
of Health and
discussed in Chapter 11, and issued some cautions. One of these was that while
advance care plans can provide guidance
and support to patients, their families
and treating professionals and be important mechanism for acknowledging the
views and wishes
of the patient, they cannot operate as a form of substitute
consent, particularly in situations where there is a dispute about care.
Tribunal noted that in the context of end of life palliative care, consent can
be given for treatment limitations in accordance
and in situations of dispute, should be sought from the Guardianship Tribunal or
a properly appointed guardian.
While obtaining formal consent may well be necessary in situations in which
disputes cannot be resolved by the treating team using
full disclosure of the
now incapable patient’s condition and prognosis as the basis for
discussion and consensus building with
their family, in most cases the obtaining
of consent should be the by-product of the consensus reached rather than the
central purpose
of the discussion.
Nevertheless, it is now clear that the health care function is adequate to
support decisions by guardians relating to the withdrawal
of medical treatment
provided that guardians made such decisions consistently with the principles set
out in the legislation and
Consequently, the
Guardianship Tribunal now occasionally appoints guardians with the function of
making end of life health care decisions,
including advance care planning
A second caution is that an advance care plan is not a substitute for ongoing
clinical assessment. The Tribunal states that such plans
must be thoughtfully
prepared and carefully worded. Their limitations should also be acknowledged
because they do not operate as
a form of substitute consent or surrogate
clinical evaluation, a point which is particularly relevant if the patient has
medical needs.
Another caution was that about a substitute decision-maker giving consent to
treatment or the non-provision of treatment in relation
to an illness or
clinical condition which the incapable person does not have. This is because the
substitute decision-maker whether
they be a person responsible or the Tribunal,
they have a statutory obligation to consider the particular treatment proposed
the condition that the incapable person has and the risks of and
alternatives to that treatment.
It is extremely difficult, if not impossible, to assess these factors properly
when the incapable person does not have the condition
for which treatment is
proposed or does not have the condition to such a degree that treatment is not
currently proposed.
is important advice for serious conditions, particularly conditions that may
threaten life, it should not preclude the
development of treatment plans and the
giving of consent for planned treatments for such things as chronically
recurring conditions
or regular prophylactic treatments such as influenza
injections or the on-going medication, subject to regular reviews, for
psychiatric
conditions.
The Tribunal concluded that a general health care function was not sufficient
authority to allow a guardian to make end of life health
care decisions,
including advance care planning. However, the Tribunal considered that it was
able to give a guardian an end of life
health care function, if it was satisfied
that the incapable person was in an ‘end of life’
The Tribunal then
gave directions to the effect that the Public Guardian may consent to the
provision or non provision of treatment
but only if the requirements of
Guardianship Act 1987
were satisfied and the purpose of the
treatment or treatment limitation was to promote and maintain the health and
well being of
the person under guardianship. The Tribunal also directed that it
was possible and may be appropriate for the Public Guardian to
make end of life
health care decisions, including advance care planning decisions, but only if
the Public Guardian has been given
specific authority, such as through an end of
life health care function, to do so by the Guardianship
The views of the Tribunal in that case are consistent with the way the
Tribunal had interpreted Part 5 of the
Guardianship Act
in order to deal with medical consent matters in the past.
The Tribunal is occasionally called upon to give consent to the amputation of
a gangrenous leg of a person incapable of giving a valid
consent to their own
treatment, but who is objecting to the treatment. Usually the choice is between
the amputation and its risks
and consequences and a slow and painful death. The
Tribunal usually gives consent in these circumstances, overriding the objection
of the incapable person, unless death is imminent and the amputation unlikely to
promote the health and well-being of the incapable
Nevertheless, the Tribunal has always operated on the basis that both it and
any guardians appointed by it can make medical decisions
according to the
objects and other provisions of Part 5 and not to prolong life no matter what.
In 1996 the Tribunal noted that it
did “not expect heroic efforts to
prolong life in all circumstances” and that it recognised that death could
be preceded
by a dying process and that people should be allowed to die with
In that case the mother of a young woman with a severe intellectual
disability was appointed her guardian with a special condition
on her medical
consent function of ensuring that the level of nutrition provided to her
daughter was as determined by a specialist
In 1996 the Tribunal appointed a daughter who was a nurse as guardian to
ensure where there were differences in view between an incapable
family and her treating doctors as to what was the appropriate treatment for
her. The Guardianship Board (as the Guardianship
Tribunal was still then known)
noted that the nurse daughter was appointed guardian because she:
[W]as able to give an informed view as to the treatments that would be necessary
for her mother taking into account both the medical
and the other considerations
of promoting her mother’s well-being and not providing treatments which
could be considered burdensome.
The Board therefore considers that s 32 …
is clearly to ensure that a guardian appointed acts in accordance with the
of [Part 5].
The Tribunal has also appointed the Public Guardian as guardian for a person
clearly at the end of their life where there is strong
disputation in the family
as to the treatment the elderly incapable person should
Mrs GG, was a 74
year old woman in hospital in a persistent vegetative state as a result of a
devastating brain stem stroke. The
medical evidence was that it was most
unlikely that Mrs GG would ever recover her capacities. Three of her adult
children and her
brother wanted her treated conservatively while two of her
adult sons wanted aggressive medical treatment, one of them wanted this
treatment indefinitely. The Tribunal accepted that Mrs GG had expressed “a
solemn view” that she did not want to be maintained
by life support
systems were she in a state of extreme
dependency.
The Tribunal
rejected submissions that the provision of palliative care was tantamount to
initiating or hastening Mrs GG’s
death and noted that:
[P]alliative care is an appropriate treatment option for people who are
terminally ill and people in a situation such as [Mrs GG]
where there is almost
no prospect of regaining consciousness or significant quality of
The Tribunal appointed the Public Guardian because Mrs GG’s children
were unlikely to be able to agree on an appropriate course
of treatment for
their mother, but in circumstances in which palliative rather than
life-prolonging treatment may be consented to
by the Public Guardian, after
consideration of the views of Mrs GG’s treating doctors on those of her
family members.
Consistent with the developments in the common law the Tribunal has refused
to intervene to override a decision of a wife, as person
responsible” not
to reinstate nutrition for her 55 year old husband after he suffered severe
hypoxic brain damage as a result
Mr CC had been
receiving hydration, except for one week, and no nutrition for the 10 weeks
between his heart attack and the application
to the Tribunal was for its consent
to the reintroduction of nutrition through either a naso-gastric or PEG tube
overriding his wife’s
refusal to agree to that course of treatment.
Mr CC was not unconscious but his level of consciousness was very low and
had not changed. He could do nothing for himself. His prognosis
for recovery was
very guarded or very poor and he was being managed as a palliative care patient.
His wife, sister-in-law and adult
children all gave evidence of Mr CC stating,
on different occasions to each of them in different ways, that he did not wish
if he suffered serious brain injury. The Tribunal refused to give
consent to the proposed treatment, leaving Mrs CC in her role as
responsible. The Tribunal did this knowing that Mr CC would not be resuscitated
if he had another heart attack and would be
treated not with anti-biotics but
conservatively to keep him comfortable and pain-free if possible if he got
pneumonia or other infections.
In another case in 2002, the Tribunal was asked to make guardianship and
financial management orders for Mr EE and to give consent
to medical treatment
on his behalf.
In July 1995
he was diagnosed as having a large brain stem arterial venous malformation.
After operations to excise this malformation
and other procedures by November
1996, Mr EE’s diagnosis was that of, “locked-in syndrome post repair
of arterio-venous
malformation and haemorrhage of mid brain”. By 2002 he
had needed full assistance with all activities of daily living for some
could communicate only by indicating “yes” or “no” or by
spelling out words on as very slowly on
a board. He was fed through a PEG tube,
but this fell out in April 2002 and Mr EE refused to have it reinserted.
This led to the applications for a guardianship order and consent to medical
treatment, as well as for a financial management order.
The Tribunal made the
financial management order because, while MR EE could express views, he was
totally reliant on others to manage
his financial affairs for him. However, the
Tribunal made neither the guardianship order nor the medical consent order
sought. This
was because it was satisfied that Mr EE had not lost the capacity
to make and communicate personal, including medical treatment,
decisions about
himself. Mr EE understood the consequences for him of the PEG tube not being
reinserted.
Another obligation imposed by Part 5 on substitute decision-makers whether
they be persons responsible or the Guardianship Tribunal
is to have regard to
the views of the incapable person, if they have
In the case of the
Tribunal, it must also consider the views of the person or persons
responsible.
A 2009 case in the Supreme Court of New South Wales McDougall J noted
A person may make an “advance care directive”: a statement that the
person does not wish to receive medical treatment,
or medical treatment of
specified kinds. If an advance care directive is made by a capable adult, and is
clear and unambiguous, and
extends to the situation at hand, it must be
respected. It would be a battery to administer medical treatment to the person
kind prohibited by the advance care
It is suggested that it is now clear that both persons responsible and the
Tribunal would be bound by such an advance directive and
would have to give
effect to its terms. In the absence of such an advance directive, it is
suggested that while persons responsible
and the Tribunal must have regard to
the views of the incapable person, they are not bound by them and have a
discretion to take
other matters into account when determining what is the most
appropriate treatment for promoting and maintaining the health and well-being
the incapable person.
religious views of the incapable person, for example, can be relevant in
determining what is the most appropriate treatment for
them to receive at a
particular time in order to promote and maintain their health and well-being.
It is suggested that these cases apply to the interpretation of the relevant
Tasmanian provisions.
14. 4. 2. Victoria
While Morris J was in no doubt that the Supreme Court of Victoria has parens
patriae jurisdiction, he held that it does not apply
in the areas covered by
that State’s guardianship legislation and the
Medical Treatment Act
Gardner re BWV
Although the parens patriae jurisdiction of the Court is of considerable
historical interest, I doubt if it should play any current
role in the day to
day administration of guardianship matters. Victoria has comprehensive laws in
relation to guardianship and administration
matters. These laws have established
the statutory office of Public Advocate, with roles and responsibilities
somewhat akin to those
which might once have been adopted by the Court. A wide
to resolve disputes concerning guardianship matters and to consider applications
where there is some perceived threat to the integrity
of the guardianship
system. The
Medical Treatment Act
sets out parliament's intent in
relation to the procedure whereby a person may refuse medical treatment; and,
further, the procedure
whereby an agent may make a decision about medical
treatment on behalf of an incompetent person.
In my opinion, the Court would be failing to give effect
to the will of parliament if it refused to make the declarations sought by
Public Advocate in this case by reference to some discretionary consideration.
The fact that a type of reserve power exists provides
no logical justification
for bypassing the
Guardianship and Administration Act
Treatment Act
In Morris J’s view the Victorian parliament has set in place a
statutory scheme, namely the
Medical Treatment Act
deal with the withholding or withdrawal of a life-sustaining treatment from a
now incompetent person. Under that
, an agent appointed under an
enduring power of attorney (medical treatment) by a now incapable person or a
guardian appointed for
them by the Victorian Civil and Administrative Tribunal
(VCAT) could refuse either particular medical treatment or all medical treatment
for them. However, the agent or guardian may do this only by way of a form of
substituted judgment. First the treatment must be such
that would cause
unreasonable distress to the patient and second there has to be reasonable
grounds for believing that, if competent,
the patient would, after giving
serious consideration to their health and well-being, consider the treatment
unwarranted. The agent
or guardian must then make a certificate to that
Significantly, but also consistently with decisions of courts in England,
Ireland and the US, Morris J held that the provision of
nutrition and hydration
via a PEG tube constitutes medical treatment within the meaning of the
Medical Treatment Act 1988
He also held that
refusal of further nutrition and hydration, administered via a PEG tube,
constitutes refusal of medical treatment,
rather than refusal of palliative care
Palliative care includes “reasonable provision of food and water”,
which Morris J interpreted as reference to “ordinary
mouth”, carried out by the patient or non-medical personnel. Morris J
noted that the purpose of the legislation
was to ensure provision of food and
water if desired, but not to force the consumption of food and water onto dying
The decision by Morris J that the provision of nutrition and hydration via a
PEG tube constitutes medical treatment is consistent
with the definition of
medical treatment in the
Guardianship Act 1987
and would appear to
apply to the
Guardianship and Management of Property Act 1991
In 2003, through the use of the
Medical Treatment Act
Guardianship and Administration Act
the wife of a man who was unable to communicate and who was receiving nutrition
and hydration through a PEG tube and who had no
prospect of recovery was
appointed his guardian so that she could make a decision to refuse antibiotics
in the event of him developing
a chest infection.
As a result of traffic accident
in 1999 when he was 40 and had a wife and young children, Mr RCS became a
quadriplegic with substantial
cognitive impairment, no ability to communicate,
dysphagia and double incontinence. He was receiving nutrition and hydration
a PEG tube. There was no prospect that his condition would improve.
His wife wanted to be appointed as his guardian so that, by applying the
Medical Treatment Act
, she could make a decision to
refuse antibiotics in the event of him developing a chest infection. Morris J
sitting as President
of VCAT was willing to appoint her as her husband’s
joint guardian, with her husband’s brother. In appointing them, Morris
noted that:
It is true that if (Mr RCS’s wife and brother) are appointed as guardians
they may decide, in accordance with section 5B of
Medical Treatment
, to refuse medical treatment, with the consequence that Mr RCS dies. But
it does not follow that the appointment would not be in
Mr RCS’s best
interests. The contrary argument is predicated upon the proposition that it is
always in a person's best interests
to live on. I cannot accept this. Death is
an inevitable consequence of life on this earth. When death stares one in the
when life is futile, the person concerned, or the trusted agent or
guardian of that person, may conclude that it is in the best interests
person to refuse medical treatment and to allow the person to pass
Morris J also noted:
Mr RCS’s wife has given evidence that, prior to Mr RCS's accident, he had
generally indicated that if he was in a position
such that he was now in he
would not want to be kept alive by the application of medical science.
Understandably, the details of
such discussions are vague. However I have no
hesitation in finding that such general discussions did take place and that Mr
did make statements to that general effect. This finding is supported by
evidence from Mr RCS's brother and also from his mother.
But even if such discussions had not taken place, I am satisfied that the
circumstances
Mr RCS now finds himself in are such that his guardian could reasonably conclude
that if Mr RCS was competent, and after giving serious
consideration to his
health and well-being, he would consider that certain medical treatment was
unwarranted.
In all the States and in the ACT, it often falls to the lot of
the Public Guardian (NSW and Tas), the Public Advocate (Vic, SA, WA
and the ACT)
and the Adult Guardian (Qld) to make decisions about the care and treatment an
incapable person should receive at the
end of their lives. This responsibility
usually arises because they have been appointed the person’s guardian, but
Guardian of Queensland can be invested with this responsibility as the
ultimate statutory health
In Victoria, the Public Advocate has been appointed an incapable
person’s guardian in circumstances where decisions would have
as to whether to continue to provide medical treatment to the person under
guardianship. In the 2003 case,
Gardner; re BWV
, VCAT appointed the
Public Advocate as Mrs BWV’s guardian with powers limited to making
decisions about her medical
Mrs BWV, who was then 68, suffered from a progressive and fatal form of
dementia. She had neither appeared conscious nor to have
had any cortical
activity, for approximately three years. She appeared to have no cognitive
capacity at all and had no bodily functions,
other than those which are
reflexive. She received hydration and nutrition through a PEG tube and this kept
her alive. She was doubly
incontinent and required full nursing care. Although
her brain stem of continued to function normally, the damage to her cortex is
irreparable. There was no prospect of any recovery, or improvement of any kind
in her condition.
Advocate went to the Supreme Court seeking declarations that the provision of
nutrition and hydration via a PEG tube constituted
"medical treatment" within
the meaning of the term in the
Medical Treatment Act
and that refusal of further nutrition and hydration administered via a PEG tube
constituted a refusal of "medical treatment", rather
than refusal of "palliative
care", within the meaning of the
Medical Treatment Act
The evidence of the three medical witnesses who examined Mrs BWV was that the
provision of nutrition and hydration via the PEG tube
was futile, in that there
was no prospect whatever of that treatment improving her condition. Morris J
made the findings noted above
and granted the declarations.
Another case involved the murder of Mrs Maria Korp. On 13 February 2005, she
was admitted to hospital after being found unconscious
in the boot of a car. She
had been there for four days. Mrs Korp was diagnosed with a severe hypoxic brain
injury. She never regained
consciousness. In hospital Mrs Korp received
artificial nutrition and hydration via a PEG tube. She did not respond to visual
stimulation,
nor did she blink with visual threat. She showed no detectable
response to verbal command and did not turn towards an auditory stimulus.
showed no evidence of a cognitive interaction with others or the environment.
Her husband and his lover were charged with a number
of serious criminal
offences relating to how Mrs Korp acquired her brain injury.
An application was made to VCAT for the Public Advocate to be appointed as
her guardian. The Tribunal received evidence that if the
artificial hydration
and nutrition were withdrawn, Mrs Korp would die within several weeks. VCAT was
satisfied that Mrs Korp was
in a persistent vegetative state as a consequence of
anoxic cerebral injury, which also resulted in widespread cortical and deeper
subcortical damage and, in April 2005, appointed the Public Advocate as Mrs
Korp’s with powers and duties limited to making
decisions concerning
accommodation, access by persons and medical treatment.
The Public Advocate then had to decide what to do. Extensive inquiries were
made to discover if she had made known her wishes about
medical treatment. She
had not made her wishes known.
Numerous meetings were held with Mrs Korp’s treating team to examine
the medical evidence and explore treatment options. A second
opinion from an
independent neurologist was obtained. Her treating team advised that it had not
been possible to stabilise Mrs Korp’s
condition, that she was dying and
that further medical treatment other than palliative care was futile and
burdensome for her. The
Public Advocate decided to have artificial hydration and
nutrition withdrawn from Mrs Korp. Her husband was allowed to visit her.
tube was removed and she died nine days later, on 6 August
As Gillard J pointed out, an inquest into her death was held and the Deputy
State Coroner formally found that on 6 August 2005, Mrs
Korp died from
complications of hypoxic brain injury, and that her death was caused by her
husband Joseph William Korp and his lover,
Tania Lee-Anne Herman. The coroner
also found that Mr Korp took his own life by hanging on 12 August 2005, with
prior indication
In Queensland the withholding or withdrawal of life-sustaining measures for
incapable adults is the subject of complex statutory arrangements.
incapable adult has made an advance health directive, under the
Attorney Act
, to withhold or withdraw one or more
life-sustaining measures, that direction cannot operate unless at least one of
the following
situations applies:
1. the maker has a terminal illness or condition that is incurable or
irreversible and as a result of which, in the opinion of a doctor
treating the
maker and another doctor, the maker may reasonably be expected to die within 1
2. the maker is in a persistent vegetative state, meaning that they have a
condition involving severe and irreversible brain damage
which allows some or
all of the maker’s vital bodily functions to continue, including, for
example, heart beat or breathing,
3. the maker is permanently unconscious, meaning that they have a condition
involving brain damage so severe that there is no reasonable
prospect of them
regaining consciousness,
4. the maker has an illness or injury of such severity that there is no
reasonable prospect that they will recover to the extent that
their life can be
sustained without the continued application of life-sustaining measures;
In addition, if the direction is to withhold or withdraw artificial nutrition
or artificial hydration, the commencement or continuation
of the treatment would
be inconsistent with good medical practice; and the maker had no reasonable
prospect of regaining capacity
If there is no such advance directive then the decision-making devolves upon
whoever is first in the following hierarchy:
1. a guardian appointed by the Queensland Civil and Administrative Tribunal
(QCAT) (but only if empowered to make health care
decisions),
2. an attorney under an enduring power of
3. the incapable person’s spouse,
4. the adult person who has care of the incapable person,
5. the adult person who is the a friend or relation but not a paid carer of
the incapable person,
6. the Adult Guardian.
The relevant one of these, namely the first reached in the hierarchy above,
may give their consent to the withholding or withdrawal
of a life-sustaining
measure, but that consent may not operate unless the person’s health
provider reasonably considers that
the commencement or continuation of the
life-sustaining measure would be inconsistent with good medical practice. The
health provider must certify in the person’s medical
records as to the various things enabling the life-sustaining measure
withheld or withdrawn.
In addition QCAT has the function of consenting to the withholding or
withdrawal of life-sustaining measures for incapable adults
if an application is
made to it. It may also make declarations, orders or recommendations, or give
directions or advice, in relation
QCAT may give this
consent only after consideration of an array of criteria which it has set out
with detailed clarity in a number
While applications have been made to QCAT’s predecessor tribunal, the
Queensland Guardianship and Administration Tribunal, for
its consent to stop
artificial nutrition and hydration or not to commence it in the first place,
that Tribunal tried to make it clear
that such decisions were ones for the
person’s family. In a 2003 decision that Tribunal said:
[T]he Tribunal would like to make it quite clear that these decision as to the
withholding and withdrawing of life sustaining measures
are decisions which are
appropriately made within the realm of the family and it would be of
considerable assistance to families
and in particular to nursing homes if the
Australian Medical Association produced a comprehensive set of Guidelines along
of the BMA Guidelines to assist families and health providers to make
appropriate decisions in circumstances such as
the Tribunal consented to the withholding of artificial
nutrition and the withdrawing of artificial
In that case HG at
58 had already developed both Wernicke’s encephalopathy and
Korsakoff’s psychosis which caused him
memory deficits, ataxia, peripheral
neuropathy and double incontinence. He then had a brain stem stroke which left
him unable to
swallow and completely paralysed except for the ability to move
his eyes up and down. As he had no one in his life except concerned
and involved
paid carers, his substitute decision-maker was, as the “default”
statutory health attorney, the Adult Guardian.
After consultation with
HG’s medical team, the Adult Guardian consented to the withdrawal of
artificial hydration and the withholding
of artificial nutrition. Later the same
day, workers who had been involved with HG’s “in home” care
for many years
requested a review of that decision on the basis that they
believed HG could communicate and could make his own decisions about health
care. The Adult Guardian consented to the resumption of subcutaneous artificial
hydration and lodged an application with the Tribunal.
The Tribunal sought the opinions of three expert medical witnesses. They came
to the view that any trial of nutrition would be for
the benefit of the carers
and not HG. They were also unanimous in their view that it would be inconsistent
with good medical practice
to commence artificial nutrition for HG and that the
current subcutaneous hydration should be withdrawn at some time in the
Armed with that
evidence, the Tribunal had to make its own determination. It set out its opinion
of how the test for a life-sustaining
measure being inconsistent with good
medical practice must be satisfied in Queensland. It said:
Before a decision to withhold or withdraw a life-sustaining measure will be a
‘health matter” for which consent can be
given, the commencement or
continuation of the measure must be inconsistent with good medical practice.
This test will not be satisfied
just because the withholding or withdrawal of
the measure is consistent with good medical practice. More must be demonstrated.
must be evidence that the provision of the measure is inconsistent with
good medical practice. Therefore, if there was evidence that
there were two
medically and ethically acceptable treatment options, one being the provision of
the measure, the test in the legislation
is not satisfied and consent could not
be given to the withholding or withdrawal of the
The Tribunal was satisfied that the commencement of artificial nutrition and
the continuation of artificial hydration would be inconsistent
with good medical
practice. However, before consenting to the withholding of artificial nutrition
and the withdrawing of artificial
hydration from HG, as it is obliged by the
legislation to do, the Tribunal considered the relevant General Principles and
Care Principle set out in the
One element of
the Health Care Principle was that a guardian, the Adult Guardian or the
Tribunal should not “exercise power
for a health matter” unless it
was, in all the circumstances, in the incapable person’s best interests to
The Tribunal was of
the opinion that determining what was in an incapable person’s best
interests included considering:
1. the seriousness of their condition;
2. their prospect of recovery;
3. whether the proposed treatment is of therapeutic value to them;
4. the benefits against the burdens of treatment;
5. the effect of treatment on the incapable person’s dignity; and
6. the views and wishes of the incapable
The Tribunal referred to the
noting that in it the House of
Lords had held that the object of medical treatment was to benefit the patient
but that if the body
of the medical evidence was that the treatment was of no
benefit to the patient then the principle of the sanctity of life, which
absolute, was not violated by ceasing to give treatment which involved invasive
manipulation of a person’s body and
which conferred no benefit on
The Tribunal also
placed reliance on the British Medical Association Guidelines noting that they
state that medical treatment that
does not provide a net benefit to a patient
beyond mere existence may ethically and legally be withdrawn and the goals of
should shift to the palliation of symptoms. Those guidelines also state
that it is not an appropriate goal of medicine to prolong
life at all costs with
no regard to its quality or the burdens of
The Tribunal gave its consent and recommended that the implementation of its
decision be facilitated by the Adult Guardian as statutory
health attorney in
consultation with HG’s health providers and those people who were part of
his support network.
In 2002, an application was made to QCAT’s predecessor tribunal because
of a dispute between family members as to whether a
PEG tube should be inserted
in Mrs TM in order to provide her with nutrition and
diagnosed with younger onset Alzheimer’s Disease in 1996. Her care needs
were increasing all the time and by late
2001 she was having difficulty
swallowing. She was cared for in a nursing home. By the time the matter came to
the Tribunal there
were two clear sides in the matter. Mrs TM’s five
children and her sister did not want a PEG tube inserted in Mrs TM because
treatment was recommended against by some practitioners. Mrs TM’s brother
supported PEG feeding suggested by a general
practitioner and supported by a
nursing home which made the application to the Tribunal.
The Tribunal took evidence on a range of ethical and medical issues,
including evidence relating to PEG feeding. In its reasons for
decision, the
Tribunal referred to a study that indicated feeding people with advanced
dementia with a PEG tube, may instead of promoting
the comfort of the person,
not only fail to prevent suffering but may actually cause it. The Tribunal also
referred to another study
which showed that tube feeding in patients with
dementia may not necessarily have the beneficial outcomes for which the tubes
The Tribunal
also noted the evidence that “dehydration is not an uncomfortable way to
After a consideration of the General Principles and the Health Care
Principle, the Tribunal was satisfied that Mrs TM was dying and
underlying cause of her death would be the pathology that rendered her incapable
of eating and drinking in the first place.
She would not die because artificial
hydration and nutrition had not been supplied to
The complex legislation, and the decided cases, relating to the withholding
and withdrawal of life-sustaining measures in Queensland
have been considered
14. 4. 4. Northern Territory
As noted in Chapter 13, in the Northern Territory the
Natural Death
provides that anyone who is 18 years or over and who
desires not to be subjected medical or surgical measures that prolong or are
intended to prolong life in the event of them suffering from a terminal illness
may make a direction, but in the prescribed form.
They must be of sound mind when
they make the direction.
such direction becomes operational only if its maker has a terminal illness.
The term “terminal illness” is defined
in a limiting way as an
illness, injury or degeneration of mental or physical faculties in relation to
which death would be imminent
if extraordinary measures were not undertaken and
that even if no extraordinary measures were taken there was no reasonable
of either a temporary or permanent
If all these
requirements are met then it is the duty of the doctor treating the person to
act in accordance with the
Doctors are protected from liability if they refuse to act in accordance with
the direction on the grounds that the person is or is
not suffering from a
terminal illness, that the person had revoked or intended to revoke the
direction or that the person was not
capable of understanding the nature and
consequences of the direction at the time they made
14. 5. Care, treatment and decision-making at the
end of life in all the Australian States and Territories
As it can be seen from this chapter and earlier chapters, the developing
common law and the developing policies and practices relating
professionals play key roles in how care, treatment and decision-making at the
end of life is dealt with in Australia.
The interaction between the common law
and relevant statute law, where it exists, is also important. Consequently, the
set out earlier in this chapter, including where it operates with
legislation, is relevant to all the States and Territories and
applies in all of
them except to the extent that its operation is limited by the legislation.
R (Burke) v General Medical
[2005] EWCA Civ 1003
[2005] EWCA Civ 1003
[2006] QB 273.
“End-of-life decisions in Australian medical practice”
(1997) 166(4):191-6
van Thiel GJ
van Delden JJ
“Retrospective study of doctors' end of life decisions" in caring for
mentally handicapped people in institutions in The Netherlands”.
315(7100):88-91.
Sidhu N, Dunkley ME, Egan MJ.
“Not-for-resuscitation” orders in Australian public hospitals:
policies, standardized order
forms and patient information leaflets”
(2007) 186; 72-75.
Caplan GA, Meller A, Barbara
Squires B, Stella Chan S, Willett W. “Advance care planning and hospital
in the nursing home”
Age and Ageing
2006; 35(6):581-585.
Abbey J. “Palliative Care
and dementia.”
Alzheimer’s Australia Discussion Paper 7
February 2006. Alzheimer’s Australia.
. “Do-not-resuscitate and do-not-hospitalize directives of persons
admitted to skilled nursing facilities under the Medicare
Am Geriatr Soc.
(2005) Dec;53(12):2060-8
of do-not-resuscitate orders on hospitalization of nursing home residents
evaluated for lower respiratory infections”
Am Geriatr Soc.
2004 52(1):51-8
Chernoff R. “Tube
feeding patients with dementia” Nutr
2006; 21(2) :
Ashby MA Mendelson D.
Gardner; “Re BWV: Victorian Supreme Court makes landmark Australian
ruling on tube feeding”
(2004) 181;(8) ;442-445
Abbey J. “Severe
dementia- Nursing, palliative care” Paper presented at Master Class
Alzheimer’s Disease March,
2007, Gold Coast.
. “Tube feeding patients with dementia”
Clin Pract.
2006 Apr;21(2):142-6.
. “To PEG or not to PEG: a review of evidence for placing feeding
tubes in advanced dementia and the decision-making process”
Geriatrics.
(2006) 61(6):30-5.
Ashby and others, op cit
(footnote 11)
. “The use of advance care planning to guide decisions about
artificial nutrition and hydration”
Clin Pract.
2006 Apr;21(2):126-33.
, op cit (footnote 13) 142-6.
. “To PEG or not to PEG: a review of evidence for placing feeding
tubes in advanced dementia and the decision-making process”
Geriatrics.
(2006) 61(6):30-5.
South Eastern Sydney
Illawarra Area Health Service,
Working party on Guidelines for End of Life
Care and Decision-making & Use of Not for CPR & Advance
Clarnette RM
Kellehear A
“Treatment decision-making at the end of life: a survey of Australian
doctors' attitudes towards patients' wishes and euthanasia”
1996 165(10):540-4
Onwuteaka-Philipsen B
van der Wal G
“Withholding the artificial administration of fluids and food from elderly
patients with dementia: ethnographic study.”
7;325(7376):1326
Onwuteaka-Philipsen
, “End-of-life decision making in Europe and Australia: a physician
Intern Med.
(2006) 24;166(8):921-9
Onwuteaka-Philipsen
van der Wal G
“Attitudes of physicians, nurses and relatives towards end-of-life
decisions concerning nursing home patients with dementia”
Educ Couns.
2006 Jun;61(3):372-80.
“Family decision making at end of life”
Support Care.
2005 3(2):131-42..
Eggenberger SK Nelms TP
“Artificial hydration and nutrition in advanced Alzheimer's disease:
facilitating family decision-making.”
2004 13(6):661-7
Garrett-Mayer
. “The accuracy of surrogate decision makers: a systematic
Intern Med.
(2006) 13;166(5):493-7.
, “Families' and physicians' predictions of dialysis patients'
preferences regarding life-sustaining treatments in Japan.”
J Kidney Dis.
2006 Jan;47(1):122-30
. “Concordance of preferences for end-of-life care between
terminally ill cancer patients and their family caregivers in Taiwan”
Pain Symptom Manage.
(2005) 30(6):510-8
. And others, op. cit. (footnote 27).
Winzelberg GS, Hanson L,
Tulsky JA. “Beyond autonomy: diversifying end-of-life decision-making
approaches to serve patients
and families”
J Am Geriatr Soc
53, 1046-150.
Hertogh CMPM. End-of-life
care and medical decision making in patients with dementia. In: Burns A (ed)
Standards in dementia care – European Dementia Consensus Network
, London/New York, Taylor & Francis, 2005, 339-54.
Sands LP, Ferreira P,
Stewart AL, Brod M, Yaffe K. “What explains differences between dementia
patients’ and their caregivers’ratings
of patients’ Quality of
Am J Geriatr Psychiatr 2004
; 12: 272-80.
Hertogh CMPM. op. cit.
(footnote 32) .
Tang, op. cit. (footnote
NSW Health,
for end-of-life care and decision-making
Winzelberg GS, Hanson L,
Tulsky JA. “Beyond autonomy: diversifying end-of-life decision-making
approaches to serve patients
and families”
J Am Geriatr Soc
53, 1046-150.
Weijer C, Singer P., Dickens
BM., “Workman S Bioethics for clinicians: 16 Dealing with demands for
inappropriate treatment”
Canadian Medical Association Journal
(1998) 159, 817-21, p 818
Ibid., p 818
Ibid, p 820.
Tang, op. cit. (footnote 29)
Supreme Court Act
Constitution
Gardner re BWV
[2003] VSC 173
Supreme Court Act
s 9 (and also
Supreme Court Act
Supreme Court Act
s 17(2)(a)(i)
Supreme Court
Supreme Court Act
Supreme Court Act
MAW v Western Sydney Area
Health Service
[2000] NSWSC 358
(1999) 49 NSWLR 231
v Central Sydney Area Health Service
[2000] NSWSC 1241
(2000) 50 NSWLR 549
Northridge v Central
Sydney Area Health Service
[2000] NSWSC 1241
, [19]-[20]
[2000] NSWSC 1241
(2000) 50 NSWLR
Ibid. [23].
Ibid. [24].
Ibid. [125].
Isaac Messiha v South
East Health
[2004] NSWSC 1061
, [28]. The analysis in that case was approved
Krommydas v Sydney West Area Health Service
[2006] NSWSC 901
Melo v Superintendent of Royal Darwin Hospital
[2007] NTSC
Ibid. [26] and [28].
Skene, L, “The Schiavo
and Korp cases: Conceptualising end-of-life decision-making” (2005) 13
Ibid. 227 and 228.
Ibid. 228-229.
[2009] NSWSC 761.
Ibid. [40].
www.health.nsw.gov.au/pubs.
NSW Health,
for end-of-life care and decision-making
Guardianship Act
NSW Health,
for end-of-life care and decision-making
The operation of
Guardianship Act
is discussed in detail in Chapter
12. 4. 5 and 12. 4. 6.
Guardianship Act
s 40(3)(c).
s 46(2)(b).
Northridge v Central
Sydney Area Health Service
[2000] NSWSC 1241
NHS Trust v D
(unreported, Family Division, 10 November, 2000), 4.
[20006] QGAAT
NHS Trust A v H
[2001] 2 FLR 501
South Eastern Sydney
Illawarra Area Health Service,
Working party on Guidelines for End of Life
Care and Decision-making & Use of Not for CPR & Advance
WK v Public Guardian (No
[2006] NSWADT 121
Guardianship Act 1989 (NSW)
s 46(2)(b).
WK v Public Guardian (No
[2006] NSWADT 121
Ibid. [15].
Ibid. [22].
Guardianship Act
(NSW) ss 35(1) and 46(2).
[2007] NSWGT 1
Ibid. [64]. See
Messiha v South East Health
[2004] NSWSC 1061.
Ibid. [72].
Ibid. [76].
Ibid. [78].
Ibid. [103].
[2009] NSWSC 761.
[2007] NSWGT 1
Ibid. [51]-[52]. The case
law includes,
Northridge v Central Sydney Area Health Service
[2000] NSWSC 1241
Messiha v South East Health
[2004] NSWSC 1061.
For an example see,
and LF v Public Guardian
[2009] NSWADT 78.
[2007] NSWGT 1
Guardianship Act
ss 40, 42 and 44.
[2007] NSWGT 1
Ibid. [128].
Ibid. Direction 1, p
(unreported,
Guardianship Tribunal Matter No. 2000/3642, 18 July 2004).
(unreported,
Guardianship Board Matter No: 94/3876, 22 November 1994), 5.
(unreported,
Guardianship Board Matter No: 96/4655, 24 December 1996), 5-6.
(unreported,
Guardianship Tribunal Matter No: 2001/1204, 10 April 2001).
(unreported,
Guardianship Tribunal Matter No: 2002/250, 21 January 2002).
(unreported,
Guardianship Tribunal Matter No: 2002/161, 2002/1977 and 2002/1978, 1 May
Guardianship Act
ss 40(3) and 44(2(a)(i).
46(2)(a)(iii).
Hunter and New England
Area Health Service v A
[2009] NSWSC 761
See, for example,
(unreported, Guardianship Board, C/5887, Matter No: 94/1858, 22 June
1994), 5-7; a matter involving a Christian Scientist.
Gardner re BWV
[2003] VSC 173
[99]-[100].
Medical Treatment Act
Gardner re BWV
[2003] VSC 173
, [90]-[91]. As to the importance of this decision in relation to
understanding the dying process see, Mendelson, D and Ashby, M “The
medical provision of hydration and nutrition: Two different outcomes in Victoria
and Florida” (2004) 11
282, 285-286.
Ibid. [104].
Ashby MA Mendelson D.
Gardner; “re BWV: Victorian Supreme Court makes landmark Australian
ruling on tube feeding”
(2004) 181;(8) ;442-445.
Guardianship Act
Guardianship and Management of Property Act
Public Advocate v
[2004] VCAT 1880.
Ibid. [28].
Ibid [25]-[26].
Powers of Attorney
[2003] VSC 173.
For a detailed
description of this matter and the Public Advocate’s role in it see,
Office of the Public Advocate - Annual Report 2005
www.publicadvocate.vic.gov.au.
Korp v Deputy State
[2006] VSC 282
Powers of Attorney
Guardianship and
Administration Act
of that Act may also
apply to add further complexity to the situation.
Guardianship and
Administration Act
attorney is assumed to have the maximum powers that can be given to an attorney,
unless the enduring document states otherwise.
Powers of Attorney
Consequently, an attorney under an enduring
power of attorney will usually be empowered to make health care decisions.
Guardianship and
Administration Act 2000
Powers of Attorney Act
and Sch 3. Note that where the substitute decision-maker
is being sought from statutory health attorneys who are relations, the first
found who qualifies under the
Powers of Attorney Act
and Sch 3 can act as the substitute decision-maker.
Guardianship and
Administration Act
Powers of Attorney
Guardianship and
Administration Act
See for example,
[2006] QGAAT 26
[2002] QGAAT 1
[2003] QGAAT
[2000] QGAAT 2..
[2003] QGAAT
[2006] QGAAT 26.
case involving the withholding of cardiac pulmonary resuscitation see,
[2000] QGAAT 2.
Ibid. [58].
Ibid. [64].
QCAT’s obligation
to consider the principles is found in
Guardianship and Administration
while the principles themselves are in
Schedule 1 of the
Ibid. Item 12.
[2006] QGAAT
Ibid. [95].
NHS Trust v Bland
[1993] AC 789.
Ibid. [95]-[96].
[2002] QGAAT
Ibid. [100]-[101].
Ibid. [124].
Ibid. [162].
Willmott,L and White, B,
“Charting a course through difficult legislative waters: Tribunal
decisions on life-sustaining measures”
Natural Death Act
1988 (NT), s 4(1).
Ibid. s 4(1).
Ibid. s 4(3).
Ibid. s 5(3).
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (493 KB)
PDF format (232 KB)
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter