URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/journals/AUIndigLawRpr/2006/85.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 14:27:25
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Cunneen, Chris --- "Evaluation of the Queensland Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander Justice Agreement - Digest" [2006] AUIndigLawRpr 85; (2006) 10(4) Australian Indigenous Law Reporter 96
Evaluation of the Queensland Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander Justice Agreement
Executive Summary
Assessment of Government Effectiveness in Reducing Incarceration
Juvenile Detention
Juvenile Remand and Custodial Sentences
Adult Imprisonment
Assessment of Government Effectiveness in Meeting Commitments: Some Strategies are in Place
Additional and Alternative Strategies Need Serious Consideration
Some Strategies are Important for Reasons other than their Impact on Over-Representation
What Have Been the Greatest Failing of Each Department?
Realism, Urgency and Resources
Evaluation of the Queensland Aboriginal and Torres
Strait Islander Justice Agreement
Professor Chris Cunneen
Institute of Criminology, Sydney
21 November 2006
Executive Summary
The Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander Justice Agreement was developed by
the Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander Advisory Board
(ATSIAB) and the
Queensland Government. It was signed by the Premier, four Ministers and the
Chair and members of ATSIAB on 19 December
2000. The Agreement lasts until
In December 2004 the Queensland Government invited tenders for an independent
evaluation of the Queensland Aboriginal and Torres Strait
Islander Justice
Agreement in terms of its outcomes and possible future directions. The
consultant (Professor Chris Cunneen) was
contracted to undertake the evaluation.
The governance arrangements for the consultancy were a Steering Committee, a
Reference Group
and a Project
The evaluation is designed to meet strategic requirements which provide
An assessment of the effectiveness of the Agreement in meeting its reduced
incarceration goals;
An assessment of government agencies in meeting their commitments to the
Justice Plan;
The identification of positive initiatives (best practice) and blockages or
shortcomings which need to be addressed;
The identification of additional or alternative strategies that will assist
in meeting the outcomes of the Justice Agreement.
Assessment of Government Effectiveness in Reducing
Incarceration
Juvenile Detention
By national standards Queensland has relatively low Indigenous and
non-Indigenous rates of detention. Quarterly detention rates fluctuate,
the lowest rate for Indigenous detention over the 18 quarterly periods from 31
March 1999 to 30 June 2003 was in December
2000 at the time the Justice
Agreement was signed. Since then quarterly rates of Indigenous detention have
been consistently higher.
However, average annual detention rates (based on four days of the year) do
show a decline over the period. Thus despite fluctuations,
based on this
measure, there has been a reduction in the rate of Indigenous youth
incarceration, with the 2003 rate some 39% lower
than the 1999 rate. (4.2.1
National Comparisons)
The juvenile admissions data shows there has been neither a drop in the rate
of Indigenous detention nor a reduction in the level
of over-representation of
Indigenous young people in detention during the first four years of the Justice
Agreement. In fact, based
on admissions data, the Indigenous detention rate and
level of overrepresentation was higher in 2003-04 than in 2000-01 when the
Justice Agreement was signed (4.2.2 Queensland Admissions Data on Juvenile
Detention).
Juvenile Remand and Custodial Sentences
The most significant impact on Indigenous detention rates will be achieved
through programs and policies aimed at reducing the remand
population. Specific
further research needs to be done on the reasons for remand for Indigenous young
people, so that programs can
be developed to target these causes. Preliminary
data suggest that only a small proportion of those who are remanded in custody
receive a custodial sentence.
In terms of the Justice Agreement measures of success, there has been a
reduction in Indigenous young people
to detention between
2000-01 and 2003-04. However, this is overshadowed by the growing numbers in the
remand population. (4.2.3 The
Impact of Remand on Indigenous Young People)
Adult Imprisonment
Queensland has a rate of Indigenous over-representation in adult prison which
is among the lowest in the nation. In terms of the Justice
Agreement, there are
positive signs that a steady increase in the rate of Indigenous imprisonment in
Queensland has been halted and
there has been a decline in the rate since 2002
until the most recent prison census data (2004).
Admission data also reflects a decline in Indigenous numbers from a high
point in 1999-2000. However, there has been an upward spike
in 2004-05 over the
previous three years. (4.3.1 National Comparisons)
Assessment of Government Effectiveness in Meeting
Commitments: Some Strategies are in Place
Each of the relevant Departments have made progress in some areas and are
limited in others in their response to the Justice Agreement.
Some of the key strategies which will reduce over-representation are already
in place, but need substantial and immediate resourcing
for any hope of
achieving the outcome of reducing Indigenous incarceration rates by 50% by 2011.
These strategies include:
Youth justice conferencing and police cautioning;
Conditional bail and bail support;
Crime prevention programs in remote communities like the PCYC and
Community-Based Officers;
Diversionary programs for homeless and alcoholics, and the assistance of
Indigenous offender programs;
Community-based supervision in remote and rural areas for adult and juvenile
Driver licensing project;
CJGs, Murri Courts, JP (Magistrates Courts).
To say that these
strategies are in place is not to say that the current level of support is
adequate. For example, we do not know
whether the expansion of Youth Justice
Service Centres will go anyway near what is needed to provide a proper set of
community-based
sentencing alternatives for the Childrens Court.
Additional and Alternative Strategies Need Serious
Consideration
Other areas need serious consideration if the goal of reducing incarceration
rates it to be met, including
More targeted crime prevention programs;
Drug and alcohol courts and diversion designed to enhance Indigenous
participation;
The abolition of short term prison sentences;
Release of offenders to Indigenous-run programs;
Development of Indigenous-specific residential alternatives;
Law reform in relation to alcohol restrictions.
Some Strategies are Important for Reasons other
than their Impact on Over-Representation
Some strategies are important to ensure that the criminal justice system is
fair, equitable and just in its application to Indigenous
people in Queensland.
These strategies may not have the largest impact on over-representation, but
they are intrinsically important
for societies guided by the rule of law. These
QATSIP in remote communities;
Cross cultural training;
Indigenous employment in justice agencies;
Mechanisms for recognising customary law;
Indigenous legal representation and provision of interpreters.
What Have Been the Greatest Failing of Each
Department?
In terms of meeting the outcomes of the Justice Agreement the most
significant failures can be identified as following.
The failure by the Department of Communities and Department of Corrective
Services to ensure the availability of supervision for non-custodial
options in Indigenous communities;
The failure of the QPS to ensure alternatives to arrest are used for
Indigenous juveniles and adults and the failure to develop the
QATSIP program
beyond the pilot communities;
The failure of DATSIP to properly train and resource the Community Justice
The failure of DJAG to resource and support the Murri
Some of the most important initiatives like CJGs and Murri
Court began as local initiatives. While on the one hand they can be seen
successes, they also represent a failure of government response.
Realism, Urgency and Resources
Perhaps the greatest failure of implementation in relation to the Justice
Agreement is the least tangible: there appears to be little
sense of urgency in
meeting the primary goal set by the Justice Agreement.
The failure to resource justice initiatives means that it is unlikely that
the target of reducing Indigenous incarceration rates will
be met by 2011.
However, the target should not be abandoned.
Perhaps the example of the Murri Court shows the missed opportunity in
resourcing, expanding and developing an alternative to traditional
Although very approximate, we can estimate that currently the Murri Courts deal
with about 0.2% of adult Indigenous court
matters, and about 1.5% of juvenile
Indigenous matters. Not every matter involving an Indigenous offender should go
before the Murri
Court, nor should it over-ride other initiatives involving CJGs
and JPs (Magistrate Courts).However, we can gauge the level of expansion
if the courts are to impact on Indigenous offenders.
A similar example might be drawn with the lack of funding to the CJGs
comparative to their responsibilities. Some $3.4 million was
allocated to all
the CJGs in the 2004/05 financial year. That is only slightly more expensive
than, for example, the cost of building
one PCYC in a remote community.
Providing for proper supervision of orders in Indigenous communities will
also require resources. However the longer term savings
in reducing the costs of
imprisonment are likely to be significant. For Department of Corrective
Services, the daily cost of offenders
in the community is $8.73 per offender
compared to $167.24 per prisoner.
Finally it should be noted that not all strategies require significant
resources. For example the greater use of diversionary options
and alternatives
to arrest by police is likely to be cost neutral in terms of decision-making,
and have longer term savings in relation
to fewer court appearances.
The full text of this Evaluation, together with the response of the
Queensland Government, is available online at
http://www.cjrn.unsw.edu.au/news_and_events/index.asp#evaluation
The Steering Committee was the
CEO Sub-Committee on the implementation of the Justice Agreement chaired by Ms
Rachel Hunter, Director
General, Department of Justice and Attorney-General. The
Reference Group comprised the Senior Officers’ Group of the CEO
Sub-Committee,
chaired by Mr David Schultz, and later, Mr Terry Ryan, the
Executive Director, Research and Executive Services, DJAG. The Project
was Mr Kevin Childs, Manager, Policy Directorate, DATSIP.
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (24.8 KB)
PDF format (412 KB)
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter