URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/journals/UMonashLRS/2010/15.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 15:42:25
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Davison, M --- "Reputation in trade mark infringement: why some courts think it matters and why it should not" [2010] UMonashLRS 15
REPUTATION IN TRADE MARK INFRINGEMENT: WHY SOME COURTS THINK IT MATTERS
AND WHY IT SHOULD NOT
This article was first published in 2010 in Vol.
38 of the Federal Law Review, at p. 231.
Mark Davison
Australian case law on infringement of registered trade marks has placed an
increasing emphasis on the reputation of the owner of
the registered trade mark
in determining whether infringement has occurred. Consideration of the trade
mark owner's reputation has
been included in determining whether the sign used
by the defendant is deceptively similar to the registered trade mark and, more
recently, in determining whether the defendant has used its allegedly infringing
sign 'as a trade mark'. Neither development is consistent
with either the law
relating to registered trade marks or the underlying policy reasons for the
system of registration. This article
discusses the case law which has introduced
the tendency of the courts to consider the reputation associated with an owner
of a registered
trade mark in determining infringement proceedings, the reasons
why such an approach is not consistent with the legislation nor with
rationale underlying our registered trade mark system.
In particular, one of the objectives of the registered trade mark system is
to provide a bright line that delineates the property
rights of the registered
owner. The bright line is publicly available information as to who has the
rights in a trade mark and what
those rights
These rights are
defined by reference to the act of registration, not by reference to the rights
to protection of the reputation of
the registered owner conferred by a passing
off action which are independent of the rights flowing from registration.
Consequently,
if the rights conferred by registration are diminished or enhanced
by reference to the trade mark owner's reputation, the exercise
of delineating
the rights of the owner in advance would be rendered nugatory to the extent that
they are so diminished or enhanced.
For that reason alone considerable caution
should be exercised before introducing evidence of a trade mark owner's
reputation in
the process of determining whether its trade mark has been
PASSING OFF: THE NATURE OF THE LEGAL PROTECTION
While the trade mark registration system grew out of the original tort of
passing off, there are fundamental differences between the
way in which the
registered system confers protection on trade marks and the way in which the
tort of passing off
Professor, Faculty of Law, Monash
University and Special Counsel, Knightsbridge Lawyers.
indirectly confers protection on trade
Under the tort
of passing off, protection is not conferred on the trade mark per se. Instead,
the protection is conferred on the reputation
associated with the trade mark.
This fundamental proposition was the cause of some debate for many years but is
now an entrenched
and irrefutable proposition. The leading English authority on
the point is the House of Lords decision in
Spalding and Brothers v AW
Gammage Ltd
decided soon after the turn of the 20
The facts of the seminal case exemplify the point. The plaintiff, Spalding,
produced various types of balls. Each was described as
an 'Orb' with various
epithets such as 'Improved Orb' or 'Improved 1910 Orb' or 'Improved Sewn Orb'
being ascribed to different types
of the Orb ball. As a consequence, Spalding
acquired a significant reputation with the public that was associated with 'Orb'
The balls described as 'Improved Orb' or 'Improved 1910 Orb' were moulded
and regarded as inferior balls to the 'Improved Sewn Orb'
which, as the name
suggests, was sewn together. Spalding discontinued the manufacturing and sale of
the moulded balls in order to
make and sell the 'Improved Sewn Orb'. The
defendant obtained a supply of the moulded balls but advertised them for public
the description of 'Improved Sewn Orb'.
Consumers were misled by the defendant's conduct. Spalding had acquired
independent reputations for both of its Orb balls and consumers
were generally
aware of the two types of balls and the respective qualities and prices of each.
The defendant's conduct passed off
the moulded balls as the sewn, higher quality
balls. The House of Lords held that the nature of the property owned by Spalding
not in the name itself but in the goodwill of the trader.
There appears to be considerable diversity of opinion as to the nature of the
right, the invasion of which is the subject of what
are known as passing off
actions. The more general opinion appears to be that the right is a right of
property which naturally demands
an answer to the question — property in
what? Some authorities say property in the mark, name, or get up properly used
defendant. Others say, property and business or goodwill likely to be
injured by the misrepresentation. If the right invaded is a
right of property at
all, there are, I think, strong reasons for preferring the latter view. In the
first place, cases of misrepresentation
by the use of a mark, name, or get up do
not exhaust all possible cases of misrepresentation. If A says falsely, 'These
selling are B's goods,' there is no mark, name or get up infringed
unless it be B's name, and if he falsely says, 'These are B's
particular quality' where the goods are in fact B's goods, there is no name that
is infringed at all. Even in the case
of what are sometimes referred to as
common law trade marks the property, if any, of the so-called owner is in its
nature transitory,
and only exists so long as the mark is distinctive of his
goods in the eyes of the public or a class of the public. Indeed, the necessity
of proving this distinctiveness in each case as a step in the proof of the false
representation relied on was one of the evils sought
to be remedied by the
Trade Marks Act 1875
(UK), which conferred a real right of property on
the owner of a registered
Consequently, the issue is whether the defendant has engaged in misleading
conduct that involved wrongly associating it or its product
with the plaintiff's
reputation. In order to determine that question, the totality of the defendant's
conduct must be weighed against
the reputation associated with the plaintiff's
The full details of the nature and extent of the plaintiff's reputation must
be determined in each case, as stated by the House of
. As also pointed out by the House of Lords, the evidentiary
implications of such a requirement in every case are significant for
parties, particularly the plaintiff which must establish the nature and extent
of its reputation. Indeed, the more important
the reputation of the plaintiff,
the more likely that it will incur greater legal costs in proving that
reputation. A large and extensive
reputation will usually be the product of many
years of business and marketing of that business. The plaintiff will have to
evidence of how long it has been in business, the geographical extent of
it business, its distribution network, the volume of its
sales over time,
details of its marketing and promotion activities, including details of the
forms of media in which it has advertised
and the nature of the advertising.
The latter may well be the very basis of the passing off action as the
defendant's alleged passing off may be based on the adoption
of a similar
marketing approach. For example, in the iconic Australian passing off case of
Cadbury Schweppes v The Pub Squash Co Ltd
the major features of the case was the plaintiff's claim that it had established
a reputation for its soft drink Solo that
was associated in the minds of
consumers with its advertising theme which, in turn, associated Solo with the
kind of lemon squash
that country pubs used to make. In making out its case,
Cadbury Schweppes provided detailed information about its advertising and
sales that was both commercially sensitive information and time consuming to
gather and collate. It gave a breakdown of how much
it had spent on television
and radio advertising in each state as well as details of its spending on
billboards and cinema
advertising.
each of these categories of advertising, it needed to establish what amount of
the advertising related to the pub theme and
what amount related to other themes
such as that of the Solo man, a macho individual who engaged in rugged outdoor
activities before
slamming down a can of Solo. Precise details of its sales in
1974 and 1975 were provided with the all of its competitors then knowing
sold two million seven hundred and eleven thousand dozen cans of Solo in 1974
and the breakdown of those sales by state and
After establishing the extent and nature of the plaintiff's reputation, the
full details of the defendant's conduct must also be examined.
All manner of
facts might influence the final decision. For example, in the
, one of the issues was whether the defendant intended to pass off its
Pub Squash lemon squash as being associated with Solo. Intention
consumers was relevant to the issue of whether deception had in fact occurred
because if such an intention exist, it is
a relatively small step to conclude
that the defendant had achieved its objective. Consequently, considerable energy
was devoted
to the discovery of documents relating to the timing of the
defendant's decisions about issues such as its packaging and its advertising
program, analysis of those documents and cross-examination of the defendant's
officers about the processes and discussions that took
place in the course of
putting its Pub Squash lemon squash on the Australian
considerable time and money were invested in this inquiry and it is worth noting
that Cadbury Schweppes won this battle and
lost the war. Powell J concluded that
while the defendant had intended to pass off its products as being associated
with Solo, it
had not actually done so and the small step from intention to
actual outcome had not been taken by the
Other aspects of the defendant's conduct had to be examined in the light of
previous practice. For example, one of the claims made
by the plaintiff was that
the defendant's use of a yellow can for its lemon squash was part of its
deceptive conduct as the plaintiff's
Solo can was yellow. In turn, this required
consideration of the practice in the Australian soft drink industry about the
yellow cans for lemon flavoured soft
these issues of minutiae meant that the trial itself went for 26 days with 64
witnesses and 65
In some circumstances, such as the
Pub Squash Case
itself, it is
impossible to avoid the forensic technicalities of passing off actions and their
statutory equivalents. However, if
such actions can be avoided by the use of
bright legal lines that clearly delineate the rights of the respective
transaction costs of expensive litigation and the costs of the uncertainties
surrounding such litigation can be avoided or at
least dramatically reduced. It
is precisely for this reason that the registered trade mark system was created.
Yet the advantage of such a system is seriously eroded if considerations such
as the reputation of a registered trade mark are introduced
determination of questions such as whether the registered trade mark has been
REGISTERED TRADE MARKS
The relationship between common law trade marks that are protected indirectly
via passing off which protects the owner's reputation
and registered trade marks
is often difficult to determine with precision. Those difficulties are
exacerbated by the fact that many
trade marks might be protected by both actions
for passing off and actions for infringement of the registration of that trade
One distinction between the two causes of action is clear. In contrast to the
position in passing off where property exists only in
the reputation associated
with a business, a registered trade mark is property in itself. In addition, the
legislation clearly defines
the bundle of rights that constitute that property
and what conduct will contravene the registered owner's property
Infringement of registered trade marks
The basic starting point for consideration of infringement of registered
trade marks is
Trade Marks Act 1995
Section 120(1)
states that:
A person infringes a registered trade mark if the person uses
as a trade mark a sign that is
substantially identical with, or deceptively similar to, the trade mark in
relation to goods
or services in respect of which the trade mark is registered.
There are two key aspects of this subsection. The first is that the defendant
must be using a sign as a trade mark. The second is
that the sign used by the
defendant and the plaintiff's registered trade mark must be substantially
identical or deceptively similar.
Neither need nor should involve a
consideration of the reputation of the owner of the registered trade mark, yet
Federal Court decisions
have managed to introduce the concept into consideration
of infringement proceedings on a regular basis.
Use as a trade mark
The concept of use as a trade mark is fundamental to infringement of
registered trade marks. Without use of the trade mark as a trade
mark, none of
the infringement sections of the legislation apply.
The concept takes its
meaning from the definition of a trade mark in s 17 of the Act which states
is a sign used ... to distinguish goods or
services ... provided in the course
of trade by a person from goods or services ... provided by any other person.
In the context of trade mark infringement, this means that the question is
whether the defendant is using its trade mark (the allegedly
infringing trade
mark, not the registered trade mark) as a means of differentiating its goods
from other goods.
The circumstances in which a defendant uses its allegedly infringing sign
would be relevant. For example, if the defendant uses a
word in a manner which
gives it greater prominence than other words on the packaging of the product,
this may suggest that the word
is being used as a trade mark whereas the use of
the same word in a less prominent manner may suggest the opposite. An example of
this is the decision in
Re Johnson and Johnson Australia Pty Limited v
Sterling Pharmaceuticals Pty
applicant in that case had registered the word CAPLETS in respect of its
paracetamol product. The shape of the drug in question
was that of a capsule but
it was in tablet form, without the usual slick coating of a capsule, and so the
word CAPLETS had both a
distinctive aspect to it and a descriptive aspect. On
its packaging, the appellant used the word prominently together with the well
known ® symbol to indicate that CAPLETS was the name of its product rather
than a word describing the shape of the pharmaceutical
in the box. The
respondent used the word 'CAPLETS' on its packaging but in a very different
manner. The word was 'one-third the height
and much thinner than the word
used in conjunction with the name of the generic drug, paracetamol, in such a
way as to emphasis its descriptive nature. 'At
the bottom of the front panel of
the packet in small blue print appear the words: "Each caplet contains
PARACETAMOL 500 mg." The
word "paracetamol"
predominates.'
respondent was found not to be using CAPLETS as a trade mark.
The concept of using a sign as a trade mark has no relationship whatsoever to
the reputation of the owner of the trade mark that has
allegedly been infringed.
The only consideration is what the defendant has done with its sign.
As the Full Federal Court decision in
Coca-Cola Co v All-Fect Distributors
Coca-Cola Case
') demonstrates, the appropriate inquiry is to
identify what is the sign that the defendant is using so as to distinguish its
or services from those of other
inquiry is divorced from any consideration of what is the plaintiff's trade mark
or a comparison of the defendant's mark and
the plaintiff's trade mark. Nor, in
this inquiry, is there any consideration of the plaintiff's reputation or any
conduct of the
defendant that may be perceived as riding on that reputation. The
focus is exclusively on identifying what words, graphics, shapes,
sounds, scents
or combination of them have been used by the defendant and whether they have
been used to distinguish its goods or
services from other goods or services.
In that case, the
black, cola flavoured lolly that was folded and then wrapped in paper. When
unwrapped and unfolded, the lolly had a shape that
physically resembled the
shape of the well known Coca-Cola bottle. It also had the word 'Cola' in the
middle of the lolly. Coca-Cola
had registered since 1934 the two dimensional
drawing of its bottle
and it alleged that the cola flavoured lolly infringed its trade mark.
The matter was brought under s 120(2) of the legislation but
the issue of 'use
as a trade mark' is identical to the issue under s 120(1).
At first instance,
Merkel J found for the defendant on the basis that it had not used the
shape of its confectionery as a trade mark. But in doing so,
he conflated the
issues of use 'as a trade mark', the similarity of the defendant's sign and the
plaintiff's registered trade mark
and the issue of whether consumers were or
would be confused by the defendant's conduct.
The 'use' of a mark is actual use as a trade mark indicating origin, in the
sense of a 'badge of origin': see
Johnson v Johnson
at 335 per Lockhart J
and the cases there referred to. The 'badge of origin' concept is reflected in s
17 which defines 'trade mark'
as a sign used or intended to be used to
distinguish goods or services dealt with 'in the course of trade' by a person
or services dealt with or provided by any other person. A trade mark
for the purpose of infringement if the mark is presented to
actual or potential consumers in a manner which has the likely effect
indicating in their minds a connection between the goods in question and the
goods protected by the trade
On appeal, the Full Court pointed out that the issue of use as a trade mark
was quite separate from the issue of whether consumers
would perceive any
connection between the defendant's goods and the plaintiff's goods. In
expressing its views, it drew upon the
seminal High Court decision on the point
The Shell Co of Australia v Esso Standard Oil (Aust) Ltd
Shell had screened television advertisements that used an oil drop
depicted as a cartoon character that changed its shape during the
course of the
advertisement. At one or two points in the advertisement, the oil drop took on a
shape similar to Esso's registered
trade mark. The similarity between that shape
and Esso's registered trade mark was not relevant to the question of trade mark
that is, whether Shell's cartoon character was being used to indicate a
connection between Shell's oil products and Shell.
With that decision firmly
in mind, the Full Court had this to say about use as a trade mark: The
authorities provide no support for
the view that in determining whether a sign
is used as a trade mark one asks whether the sign indicates a connection between
alleged infringer's goods and those of the registered owner. ... the question
the sign used indicates origin of goods in the user of the sign; whether
there is a connection in the course of trade between the
goods and the user of
the sign. Thus in
at 424-425 Kitto J, with whom Dixon CJ, Taylor
and Owen JJ agreed, said:
Was the appellant's use, that is to say its television presentation, of those
particular pictures of the oil drop figure which were
substantially identical
with or deceptively similar to the respondent's trade marks a use of them 'as a
trade mark'?
With the aid of the definition of 'trade mark'
6 of the Act [the
Trade Marks Act 1955
(Cth)], the adverbial
expression may be expanded so that the question becomes whether, in the setting
in which the particular pictures
referred to were presented, they would have
appeared to the television viewer as possessing the character of devices, or
which the appellant was using or proposing to use in relation to petrol
for the purpose of indicating, or so as to indicate,
a connection in the
course of trade between the petrol and the appellant
. Did they appear to be
thrown on to the screen as being marks for distinguishing Shell petrol from
other petrol in the course of
And later his Honour said: ... no viewer would ever pick out any of the
individual scenes in which the man resembles the respondent's
trade marks,
whether those scenes be few or many, and say to himself: 'There I see something
that the Shell people are showing me
as being a mark by which I may know that
any petrol in relation to which I see it used is theirs.'.
(Emphasis in
are two fundamental propositions that flow from the Full Court's restatement of
the position in the
Shell Oil Case
and the application of that position
Coca-Cola Case
. The first is that 'use as a trade mark' has
absolutely nothing to do with whether consumers have been confused or deceived
likely to be confused or deceived by the defendant's conduct. For that
reason alone, the reputation of the owner of the allegedly
infringed registered
trade mark is necessarily irrelevant to the inquiry.
The second and related proposition is that even if a consideration of
substantial identity or deceptive similarity involves the reputation
owner of the registered trade mark (and it is argued that they do not), trade
mark use is an entirely separate concept from
substantial identity or deceptive
similarity.
The point is being made here because some recent case law has suggested that
determining whether a defendant has used its sign use
as a trade mark may be
related to the reputation of the owner of the registered trade mark. In
Inc v Bausch & Lomb (Australia) Pty Ltd
Alcon Case'
the plaintiff
objected to the defendant's use of the plaintiff's registered trade mark 'BSS'
on its small bottles of ophthalmic irrigation
products. The trade mark
infringement issue focussed almost exclusively on whether the defendant had used
the plaintiff's trade mark
'as a trade mark' because, quite obviously, the sign
used by the defendant and the plaintiff's trade mark were identical. The
claimed that it was using 'BSS' to describe its products or an aspect
of the products. In particular, it claimed that 'BSS' stood
for Balanced Salt
Solution and, consequently, that it was only seeking to use a shorthand
expression on its labelling to indicate
that its products were a balanced salt
The case revolved primarily around the issues of whether Bausch & Lomb
had used the trade mark as a trade mark and related issues
as to whether the
trade mark should remain registered, primarily on the grounds that it was not
distinctive.
The actual label used by the defendant on its 19 ml bottles read as follows:
BAUSCH & LOMB 4010000
Whether the defendant was using the letters 'BSS' as a trade mark required a
detailed analysis of the context of that use. Set out below are some of the
facts relied upon by Foster J in forming the conclusion
that the defendant was
using 'BSS' as a trade mark:
The following factors are relevant to the present question:
(a) The letters 'BSS' appear in block white letters in the top section of the
label with the royal blue background. The trade mark
'AQSIA™' appears in
the same part of that label. The letters used to form 'AQSIA™' are larger
than those used to form
'BSS'. This part of the label is intended to be separate
from and more prominent than the rest of the label. The impression created
the positioning of 'AQSIA' and 'BSS' is that this part of the label is dealing
with branding of the product;
(b) The word 'sterile' appears immediately underneath the blue backgrounded
top part of the label. It is a description, at least to
some extent, of the
contents of the bottle.
(c) The name 'BAUSCH & LOMB' appears on the bottom half of the label in
block blue letters against a white background;
(d) There is no other indication on the bottle or on the plastic sachet as to
the contents of the bottle;
(e) The sachets are supplied in the cardboard box described at [5] above.
That box is a dispenser. Importantly, in a number of places,
the words 'balanced
salt solution' appear on the box but the letters 'BSS' do not;
(f) The trade mark 'AQSIA™' and the corporate name 'BAUSCH & LOMB'
also appear prominently on the box;
(g) The Product Information Leaflet in the box does not mention 'BSS' but
does refer to 'balanced salt solution'.
(h) The letters 'BSS' have brand significance in the relevant trade in
Australia. They are known to be the applicant's trade mark.
The applicant has a
reputation in the product identified by reference to the mark (Alcon BSS).
(Emphasis added.)
Points (a)-(g) above have a clear and direct connection to the issue of trade
mark use. In addition, they involve a relatively limited
and simple inquiry. The
evidentiary costs of establishing this information are small. They also focus
exclusively on the defendant's
conduct and whether it constitutes conduct
designed to distinguish its ophthalmic irrigation products from other such
products by
use of the sign 'BSS'.
The last point is vastly more problematical. The introduction of the
relevance of the reputation of the plaintiff for 'BSS' immediately
the evidentiary complexities that arise in passing off actions, the limitation
of which is one of the purposes of the
registered system. Further, the
comparison of the defendant's conduct in using 'BSS' on its labels together with
a reference to the
reputation of 'BSS' implies that some analysis of confusion
of consumers, actual or likely, is taking place. At this point in the
consideration of infringement of the registered trade, such an analysis is
inappropriate as explained by the Full Court in the
Coca-Cola Case
There are some arguments for considering the trade mark owner's reputation in
this case which can be seductive. The defendant's basic
argument was that 'BSS'
was a generic term within the relevant industry that was shorthand for balanced
salt solution. It gave considerable
evidence based on various articles in trade
journals in an attempt to establish the point but that evidence was ultimately
Instead, the plaintiff both questioned the defendant's evidence of the
descriptive use of 'BSS' in Australia and provided evidence
of its use of 'BSS'
as a trade mark in Australia. Foster J accepted the plaintiff's evidence that
BSS was not a descriptive term
within the industry in Australia but one which
was distinctive of its products.
The difficulty for a judge faced with determining whether use as a trade mark
has occurred is that he or she needs to assess the meaning
of the sign that has
been used by the defendant as part of the process of deciding whether the use
was use as a trade mark or some
other use such as a descriptive use. In the case
of word signs, some decision has to be made as to the meaning of the word.
Consequently,
the approach of Foster J was to consider the evidence of the trade
usage of BSS and decide whether BSS meant balanced salt solution
or whether it
was considered to be distinctive of the plaintiff's goods. As the defendant was
arguing that it was using the term
descriptively, there is no doubt that the
defendant's evidence of the descriptive meaning of the sign had to be
considered. The case
is somewhat unusual in that the defendant had to justify
its claim that the sign was 'descriptive' in nature. Usually, when the sign
descriptive or has a descriptive meaning that may be attributable to it in the
context in which it is used, its descriptiveness
or, at least, its potential
descriptiveness will be obvious. In rare circumstances, such as these, it may be
necessary for the defendant
to adduce evidence on the point.
Yet the consideration of that evidence of the descriptive nature of the sign
at that point in the infringement inquiry did not mean
that it was appropriate
to consider the evidence of the reputation of the trade mark
sign is descriptive according to its primary meaning, it may still be used as a
trade mark. If the situation were otherwise,
a sign that is devoid of inherent
distinctiveness within the meaning of
Trade Marks Act 1995
(Cth) could never acquire distinctiveness via use and registration as a
trade mark. In fact that is not the case as
and (6) permit registration
of signs that either have a small degree of inherent distinctiveness or none at
all. It is only by the
use of such a descriptive sign as a trade mark (as
opposed to other non-trade mark use) that it can become distinctive for the
and registration.
Similarly, an inherently distinctive
trade mark may be used in a manner which is not use as a trade mark as well as
being used as
a trade mark. Again, if it were otherwise, the test of
infringement under the previous legislation would not have needed the implied
requirement of use as a trade mark that was imposed by the High Court in the
Hence, any sign is potentially distinctive and may potentially be used as a
trade mark. It is true that descriptive signs are more
likely to be used
descriptively and inherently distinctive signs are more likely to be used as
trade marks than in a descriptive
reason, evidence as to whether the letters BSS were capable of being descriptive
in nature, that is whether the letters BSS
had any meaning, was relevant to the
question of use of a trade mark. However, evidence of the reputation of the
plaintiff's trade
mark was not relevant because the issue was whether BSS was
being used by the defendant as a trade mark, not whether there had been
extensive use by the plaintiff of BSS as a trade mark. There is no need for an
inquiry into whether the plaintiff's registered trade
mark is distinctive, that
is, whether it is capable of distinguishing its goods or services from other
goods or services. By definition,
the plaintiff's registered trade mark is
distinctive and capable of being used as a trade mark. If it were not, it would
not be entitled
to registration or to continuing
registration.
lack of distinctiveness is the allegation then that is a separate inquiry to be
made when considering any claim for rectification
of the register. It is not
relevant to the inquiry into 'use as a trade mark' by the defendant which should
focus exclusively on
the defendant's conduct and not engage in any comparison
between the defendant's conduct and the plaintiff's reputation.
While such a result may seem counter-intuitive, the contrary view generates
even greater difficulties. The compartmentalisation of
the different elements of
infringement (and, if relevant, the validity of the registration) is critical to
the integrity of the registration
system. To do otherwise invites a descent into
a generalised consideration of whether consumers were confused or likely to be
by the defendant's conduct, assessed in its entirety, having regard to
the trade mark owner's reputation. Once that point is reached,
the value of
registering a trade mark is significantly diminished as too are the general
advantages associated with the system of
registration.
In addition, if the reputation of the registered trade mark is to be
considered in the question of use, the defendant's reputation
for any signs it
uses in conjunction with its allegedly infringing signs should also be
considered. For example, in the
, if the trade mark 'AQSIA' had
a strong reputation, its presence on the label next to or above 'BSS' would be
even more relevant
to whether the former was the sole trade mark being used by
the defendant and may support the proposition that 'BSS' was being used
descriptively. Such evidence of the defendant's reputation for a trade mark used
by it in conjunction with the allegedly infringing
sign should also be ignored
in the context of trade mark infringement.
Philips Case
An example of how the Full Federal Court
correctly addressed the issue of reputation in the context of trade mark
infringement is
the decision in
Koninklijke Philips Electronics NV v
Remington Products Australia Pty Limited
Philips claimed that its two-dimensional trade mark, a drawing of its
triple-headed rotary razor, was infringed by Remington's sale
of triple-headed
rotary razors.
Philips' claim of trade mark infringement was denied on the basis that
Remington had not used its (Remington's) triple headed rotary
razors as a trade
mark. It used them to shave faces, not to distinguish its goods from other
goods. The conclusion that Remington
had not used the shape as a trade mark,
both at first instance and on appeal, did refer to the fact that the word
'Remington' was
displayed prominently on the shavers in question. However, both
assiduously avoided pointing out the fact that Remington was a well
known trade
mark with a large reputation for electrical goods and no suggestion was made
that the defendant's reputation for its
trade mark Remington reduced the
likelihood that consumers would regard the shape as being used as a trade
Yet on the issue of passing off and s 52 of the
Trade Practices Act
the reputation of Remington was relevant to the more general question of whether
Remington's conduct was likely to mislead or
first instance and on appeal, reference was made to the reputation of
'Remington' as being relevant to dispelling any suggestion
that the use of the
shape of the triple-headed rotary razor misled or deceived consumers. In the
consideration of passing off, it
was not just the prominence of the word
'Remington' on the packaging but also the extent of its pre-existing reputation
relevant to the manner in which consumers would make their decision as
to which razor they might buy. The word 'Remington', especially
reputation, acted as a disclaimer which said to consumers: 'This triple headed
rotary razor is supplied by the well known
company of which you are already
aware rather than any other company'.
Again, the initial view may be that it is counter-intuitive to ignore
Remington's reputation when considering 'use as a trade mark'
for infringement
purposes but to consider it when determining whether passing off has occurred.
Yet, again, a contrary view would
lead to a situation where the plaintiff's
statutory property rights could be trumped by alleging that no deception of
consumers had
If the view had been formed that Remington had used the triple-headed rotary
shape as a trade mark, the reputation of Remington may
have overcome or
countered any deception arising from such use. For that reason, a finding of
passing off would not have been available
but the lack of deception of consumers
is not a defence to trade mark infringement, at least for the purposes of s
120(1). The registered
owner has an absolute right to prevent the use of signs
as trade marks in relation to goods or services for which it has registration
those signs are substantially identical or deceptively similar to its registered
trade mark. It does not have to prove deception
of consumers and, equally, even
if the defendant disproves deception, it does not avoid infringement.
Even for the purposes of s 120(2), a lack of actual deception of consumers in
the particular context of the defendant's conduct is
only of limited use to the
defendant. Section 120(2) reads as follows:
A person infringes a registered
trade mark if the person uses as a trade mark a sign that is
substantially identical with, or deceptively similar to, the trade mark in
relation to:
(a) goods of the same description as that of goods (
registered goods)
in respect of which the trade mark is registered; or
However, the person is not taken to have infringed the trade mark if the
establishes that using the sign as the person did is not likely to deceive or
The defence contained within s 120(2) is not satisfied simply by
demonstrating that in the particular circumstances of use by the
defendant there
was not likelihood of deception or confusion. The defendant must prove that its
use 'is' not likely to deceive or
cause confusion. It is not enough to prove
that the particular use 'was' not likely to deceive or cause confusion. This
the consequence of the nature of the rights conferred by
registration. The registered owner is entitled to protection on the basis
scope of its permitted use of its registration, not the actual reputation
flowing from that use. Consequently, the defendant
must prove that its use would
not be likely to cause deception or confusion under any circumstances where that
use is compared to
the plaintiff's potential use of its
registration.
In other words, the effect of both s 120(1) and s 120(2) is that it is
entirely possible to have a situation where passing off has
not occurred but
trade mark infringement has occurred. It is also possible to have the reverse
situation where passing off has occurred
but no registered trade mark has been
infringed. Such possibilities point away from the relevance of the reputation of
either party
in determining trade mark infringement issues.
Substantial identity and deceptive similarity
Once it has been established that the defendant has used its sign as a trade
mark, the next issue to determine is whether that sign
is substantially
identical with or deceptively similar to the plaintiff's trade mark. Substantial
identity requires a side-byside
comparison of the sign and the trade
There is no
suggestion in the case law that the comparison will in any way take into account
the reputation of the trade mark or the
trade mark owner. The purely physical
comparison provides no opportunity for a consideration of such matters.
When it comes to the issue of deceptive similarity, the courts have, from
time to time, asserted that the reputation of the registered
trade mark owner
may be relevant to determining whether the defendant's sign is deceptively
similar to that trade mark. If that approach
is correct, precisely the same
difficulties are introduced into trade mark infringement proceedings as those
that would be introduced
if the issue were introduced into the consideration of
trade mark use. Those cases will be analysed below. However, before beginning
that analysis, some general discussion of the concept of deceptive similarity in
the context of s 120 is necessary.
The legislation defines deceptive similarity as follows:
A trade mark is taken to be deceptively similar to another trade mark if it
resembles that other trade mark that it is likely to deceive or
Some case law suggests that resemblance between trade marks may be affected
by the reputation of one or other of the trade marks.
Yet the statutory
definition makes no reference to the likelihood of deception or confusion
arising as a consequence of that reputation.
It refers exclusively to a
comparison between two trade marks and the likelihood of deception or confusion
as a consequence of their
resemblance.
Imperfect recollection
The most commonly cited test of deceptive similarity that is applied by the
courts in determining deceptive similarity is known as
the imperfect
recollection test. Whereas in considering substantial identity, the two trade
marks are placed side by side and physically
compared, imperfect recollection
involves a hypothetical test. In the hypothetical test, the court considers the
impact on consumers
of exposure to the two trade marks at different times. The
question then becomes whether consumers who are exposed to one of the
marks at one time and the other on a later occasion would, as a result of
imperfect recollection, be likely to be deceived
into thinking that the two
trade marks were the same. This is particularly the case where the idea of the
two trade marks is similar
and the two trade marks look and/or sound alike in
some respects, even though those visual and/or aural similarities are not
to establish substantial
The issue is explained by this quote from Latham CJ in
Jafferjee v
is important to consider what has been described as the 'idea of the mark, '
that is, the idea which the mark will naturally suggest
to the mind of one who
sees it. Lord
Herschell's
committee (quoted in
, 6th ed. (1927), at p. 270) put the point very clearly in the
following passage:— 'Two marks, when placed side by side, may
exhibit many
and various differences, yet the main idea left on the mind by both may be the
same; so that a person acquainted with
the mark first registered, and not having
the two side by side for comparison, might well be deceived, if the goods were
to be impressed with the second mark, into a belief that he was dealing
with goods which bore the same mark as that with which he
was acquainted. Take,
for example, a mark representing a game of football; another mark may show
players in a different dress, and
in very different positions, and yet the idea
conveyed by each might be simply a game of football. It would be too much to
that persons dealing with trade-marked goods,
and relying, as they frequently do, upon marks, should be able to remember
the exact details of the marks upon the goods with which
they are in the habit
of dealing.
Again, in keeping
with the theme of this article, the similarities in ideas of the two
trade marks can be assessed without evidence on the point about the
reputation of either of the two trade marks in question. Yet the
become somewhat complicated by the reference to the idea or ideas of the two
trade marks. Once reference is made to the
meaning of the two trade marks as
opposed to simply the visual and aural similarities between them, the temptation
exists to argue
that the reputation of either of the trade marks is relevant in
considering what is the 'idea' of that trade mark.
Woolworths Case
One of the first cases to introduce the reputation of a trade mark into the
consideration of deceptive similarity was the decision
Registrar of Trade
Marks v Woolworths
Woolworths Case
'). The particular context of the consideration
was not an infringement action but an application by Woolworths for registration
a trade mark that was alleged by the Registrar to be deceptively similar to a
pre-existing registration. The Registrar declined registration
under s 44 on the
grounds that Woolworths trade mark was deceptively similar to a pre-existing
trade mark that was registered in
respect of goods closely related to the
services for which Woolworths was seeking registration. Woolworths' trade mark
of the words 'Woolworths Metro' together with a device mark consisting
of some wavy lines. The pre-existing mark was the word 'Metro'.
contention of Woolworths was that its well known brand name so differentiated
its trade mark from Metro that the two trade
marks were not deceptively similar.
At first instance,
Wilcox J took the view that when comparing the totality of the Woolworths
trade mark with the totality of the Metro trade mark, the
presence of the word
'Woolworths' in front of 'Metro' was so significant as to be the element of the
mark most likely to be remembered.
It would therefore dispel any deceptive
similarity between the marks and the problem created by having the word 'Metro'
in both marks:
One must come back to the critical question posed by s 44(2) of the Act:
mark, considered as a whole, is deceptively similar to
a mark consisting merely of the word 'metro' (or 'metro 22') printed in block
letters or cursive writing in a rectangular box.
similar, to the extent it includes the word 'metro'. But it also includes the
' and a pattern of wavy lines. I place little weight on
the latter feature; it is something a purchaser might fail to notice or recall.
However, it is impossible to brush aside the word '
'. The word
appears in smaller script than 'metro', but it is printed in solid bold
capitals. It constitutes a strong visual element
of the mark, to my eye an
element at least as strong as the word 'metro'. Moreover, it is a word
inherently likely to be noted and
remembered.
The word is familiar to all
Australians, as the name of an Australia-wide chain of stores that has existed
for generations
[emphasis added]. Although I take Ms Baird's point about
imperfect recollection, I cannot accept that viewers of the mark would overlook
or forget that it refers to '
metro', not merely 'metro'. The
word that is unique to this mark, as against each of the cited marks,
constitutes a major feature
of it. Applying the
Australian Woollen Mills
test, the impression or recollection of the subject mark a viewer would
carry away and retain is quite different from that which he
or she would retain
in respect of any of the cited marks. To put the matter in terms of s 10 of the
current Act,
' mark does not so nearly resemble any of the
cited marks as to be likely to deceive or cause confusion.
Similar comments may be made about the fourteenth cited mark, for
distribution services. There is likely to be some similarity between
services in respect of which registration of that mark is sought and the
services offered by
. As the name would not be displayed on
goods, the aural impression may here be more important than the manner of visual
presentation.
But it is only possible to say the oral use of the term
metro' is deceptively similar to 'metro' if one ignores or
discounts the word '
'. In comparing the marks, it is not
legitimate to ignore a major element in one of them; and, for the reasons I have
given, I do
not think that word should be discounted. On the contrary, having
regard to its aural prominence
and familiarity to Australians
[emphasis added], it is the element of the mark most likely to be
noticed and
remembered.
There are a couple of points about Wilcox J's judgment worthy of note before
considering the Full Court decision which, by a majority,
affirmed his decision.
The first is that it appears that there was no evidence actually given to the
Registrar of the reputation
of Woolworths. It appeared that the nature and
extent of Woolworths' reputation was accepted as a matter of judicial notice. If
relevance of a trade mark's reputation is restricted to circumstances where
judicial notice can be and is taken of that reputation,
the evidentiary
implications of considering reputation are considerably reduced. By definition,
in such circumstances, no evidence
is led or expected to be led on the point.
However, some difficulties still remain with such an approach and maintaining
the integrity
of the registration system. Those difficulties are addressed later
in this article.
The second point is that the same result may have been arrived at without any
reference to Woolworths' reputation. The lengthy quote
above demonstrates the
extent to which Wilcox J focussed on the visual and aural differences between
the Woolworth's trade mark as
negativing a finding of deceptive similarity. The
reputation of the brand Woolworths was a relatively minor part of the findings.
It may have been better if the case had simply been decided as it was without
reference to that reputation.
The appeal decision in the
Woolworths case
On appeal, a majority of the Full Court affirmed the decision of Wilcox J
with Branson J writing a dissenting judgment. In a wide
ranging judgment dealing
with a number of conceptual issues relating to s 44, French J, as he then was,
said this about Wilcox J's
reliance on the familiarity of Australians with the
Woolworths brand:
His Honour's reference to the familiarity of the name of Woolworths in
Australia was appropriate. Where an element of a trade mark
has a degree of
notoriety or familiarity of which judicial notice can be taken, as is the
present case, it would be artificial to
separate out the physical features of
the mark from the viewer's perception of them. For in the end the question of
resemblance is
impact of the name 'Woolworths' cannot be assessed without a recognition
notorious familiarity to
Tamberlin J, who agreed with the reasons of French J, added: An important
distinguishing feature of the mark is to be found in the
impact on the
perception of a viewer of the widely-known name 'Woolworths' as part of it. The
name is widely understood in the Australian
community to refer to a well-known
chain of retail stores, such that it would play an important part in the
perception of a
Again, the importance of the reputation of Woolworths to the issue of
deceptive similarity was a relatively small part of the majority
particularly that of French J.
Branson J dissented and rejected the relevance of the notoriety of
Woolworths: The question, for example, of whether or not a particular
familiar to all Australians is irrelevant to the question of whether two marks
resemble one another. The question of resemblance
is to be answered by judging
the appearance and the sound of the respective marks. Having regard to the fact
that quite the largest
part of the respondent's trade mark consists of the word
'metro', it would almost seem irresistible that any confusion likely to
from its use would be a confusion arising out of its resemblance to trade marks
consisting of the word 'metro', or consisting
principally of the word 'metro'...
[I]t was not, in my view, open to his honour to place weight on his
appreciation of the familiarity of all Australians with the word
'Woolworths'.
... I accept the submission of the Registrar that, if it is appropriate to
have regard to the wide recognition accorded to the word
'Woolworths' in
Australia, that recognition is a factor tending to increase, rather than
diminish, the risk of
One of the major differences between the majority judgments and the
dissenting judgment revolves around the different interpretation
of 'resembles'.
The majority judges were of the view that 'resemblance' required an
understanding of the idea or information conveyed
by Woolworths. The dissenting
judgment did not accept that proposition and wished to focus on the visual and
aural similarities between
the marks only. The former approach has some appeal
in light of the preceding and accepted tests of deceptive similarity. In
particular,
if imperfect recollection is an important test of deceptive
similarity and that, in turn, depends, in part, on the idea or meaning
trade marks, then there is some reason to consider the meaning or the idea of
either of the trade marks being compared. Yet,
there are still considerable
potential difficulties with such an approach. This point is discussed in more
detail later under the
heading 'The nature of the reputation'.
Another major difference between the majority and dissenting judgments is
that in her dissent Branson J made the point that if the
reputation of
Woolworths is to be taken into account, it is just as likely to increase the
prospects of confusion as it is to diminish
those prospects. Placing the well
known brand in front of 'Metro' may well make our hypothetical consumers with
their imperfect recollection
think that the well-known grocery and department
store now owned the Metro mark that they had previously seen.
In the context of the Woolworths decision, it was the relevance of the
reputation of the 'defendant's' trade mark that was considered
by the court. The
majority effectively decided that the statutory rights of the pre-existing mark,
'Metro', were to be confined because
Woolworths had a reputation for its trade
There are problems with such an approach. In particular, the limitation of
the rights flowing from registration due to another's reputation
undermines the
value of registration vis-à-vis common law rights derived from use. As
pointed out in other writings, such
an approach is inefficient and leads to less
transparency.
There is also a lack of logic behind the approach which can be demonstrated
by considering a different fact scenario involving the
same trade marks. The
scenario is this. Imagine that the priority of the trade marks had been reversed
and the question was whether
'Metro' should be registered in spite of a
pre-existing registration of 'Woolworths Metro'. Woolworths Metro would rely on
the Act to oppose the registration of Metro. Taking the approach of the
majority in the
Woolworths Case
, the decision would have had to be that
'Metro' was not deceptively similar to 'Woolworths Metro'. One of the reasons
would be that
Woolworths was so well known that consumers would not be deceived
by seeing Metro alone. The absence of the well known Woolworths
sign from Metro
would clearly differentiate the two trade marks in the minds of our consumers
with imperfect recollections and abundant
familiarity with that national icon
Woolworths. In other words, Woolworths would be better off not having such an
extensive reputation
as the existence of that reputation allows a competitor to
register a trade mark that is closer to it.
Having failed under s 44,
Woolworths might also seek to oppose registration under s 60 of the Act. Section
60 provides that:
The registration of a trade mark in respect of particular
goods or services may be
opposed on the ground that:
(a) another trade mark had, before the priority date for the registration of
the first-mentioned trade mark in respect of those goods
or services, acquired a
reputation in Australia; and
(b) because of the reputation of that other trade mark, the use of the
first-mentioned trade mark would be likely to deceive or cause
this example, the relevant reputation would be that of 'Woolworths'. On the
reasoning of the majority in the Full Court and the first instance judge,
that reputation would reduce the likelihood that 'Metro'
would be confused with
'Woolworths Metro'. The effect would be that the rights of Woolworths pursuant
to its registration would be
reduced as a consequence of the reputation of its trade mark. If it did not
have such an extensive reputation, the position would
be different.
Malteser Case
A case analogous to the scenario posited above has come to just that
conclusion. In
Mars Australia Pty Ltd v Sweet Rewards Pty Ltd
extensive reputation of the plaintiff's trade mark was held to be a reason for
not finding that an allegedly infringing sign was
deceptively similar. The owner
of the registered trade mark 'Maltesers' objected to the defendant's use of
'Malt Balls'. There are
many reasons why 'Malt Balls' is not deceptively similar
to 'Maltesers'. Prominent among those is that they do not sound or look
significantly alike. In addition, while both have 'malt' in them, one has
'balls' and the other does not, even though a Malteser
is in the shape of a
round ball. The idea of the two trade marks, as opposed to the goods in relation
to which they are used, are
quite different. To the extent that the ideas are
similar by referring to 'malt', those ideas are descriptive of the goods in
as both had a malt flavour. Consequently, the commonality of ideas was
not particularly relevant to the issue of deceptive similarity
as the ideas were
merely descriptive of the goods.
Perram J decided that there was another reason why the plaintiff's trade mark
and the defendant's sign were not deceptively similar.
It was stated as follows:
The Maltesers marks are very famous. Consumers generally must be taken to be
familiar with them. That is relevant to assessing a consumer's
recollection of the mark. So viewed, a comparison between the impression held in
the consumer's mind and the direct impression
of Sweet Rewards' mark is one
which, in this case at least, occurs in a context in which the chances of the
average consumer having
forgotten the Maltesers
mark are vanishingly small. ... [C]onsumers are so familiar with Maltesers
could not possibly be confused by the Malt Balls packaging — more
formally, there is no
likelihood of imperfect recollection by them of the Maltesers mark leading to
confusion ...
So the better known a trade mark is, the more precise will be the
recollection of it by consumers. Therefore, any other sign used
by any other
party that has any differences between it and that trade mark will be less
likely to be deceptively similar to the well
known trade mark than if the trade
mark were not so well known. In such circumstances, a defendant may well be
advised to adduce
evidence designed to demonstrate that the plaintiff's trade
mark is extremely well known. The plaintiff, on the other hand, may be
off downplaying the success of its trade mark and its marketing strategy.
Alternatively, prior to litigation, but with restricting
the operation of one's
competitors in mind, the trade mark owner may be better off either registering a
number of different but similar
trade marks or creating a smaller reputation for
a number of different but similar trade marks. The objective would be to
further imperfections in the recollection of consumers than if the
trade mark were very well known. And such an objective would be
antithesis of what trade mark protection is intended to do. Elimination or at
least minimisation of confusion in the minds
of consumers is the means by which
trade marks reduce search costs and, by so doing, they justify the private
rights conferred on
trade mark owners by the state which uses its resources to
protect those rights.
Coca-Cola Case
Yet despite these cases that suggest that the reputation of the registered
trade mark owner may reduce the rights acquired by registration,
there are cases
in which the reputation of the plaintiff's trade mark either did or could have
increased the possibility of a finding
that a defendant's sign was deceptively
similar. In other words, there are cases that contend that the reputation of the
owner increases its chances of proving infringement and therefore
increases the rights flowing from registration.
The best known of these is the Coca-Cola decision discussed above in the
context of use as a trade mark. In that case, after deciding
that the defendant
had used its bottle shaped confectionery as a trade mark, the Full Court also
decided that the lolly was deceptively
similar to Coca-Cola's registered trade
mark of a two dimensional drawing of its well known bottle shape.
The Full Court had this to say on the issue of deceptive similarity: Taking
into account the 'imperfect recollection' that customers
may have of the contour
bottle mark, and the fact that the 'idea' suggested by the mark is more likely
to be recalled than its precise
details, the factors that have led us to
conclude that the features of the confectionary are likely to cause confusion in
that is to say, caused them to wonder whether it might be the case
that the confectionary comes from the same source as Coca-Cola,
[include]: the
contour bottle is extremely well-known
The Full Court then went on to identify the physical similarities between the
trade mark and the confectionary. It also added a couple
of other facts that
seemed to relate to Coca-Cola's reputation for its product rather than the
physical characteristics of its registered
trade mark. In particular, it noted:
the word 'Cola'
on the confectionary, though not itself a mark, reinforces the link between the
confectionary and Coca-Cola that is
conveyed by the shape of the confectionary.
when fresh, the
lower half of the confectionary is the same colour as Coca Cola, again
reinforcing the link referred
are a few points to be made about the Full Court's comments. First, the
reputation of Coca-Cola contributed to a finding of
deceptive similarity, the
exact opposite conclusion reached in the
Woolworths Case
Malteser Case
where the trade mark owner's reputation contributed to a
finding that there was no deceptive similarity. There is no indication in
these cases of when the existence of a reputation will enhance a registered
trade mark owner's position and when it will diminish
that position.
So how does a registered owner know when it is in its interests to point out
that its trade mark is well known and in its interest
to argue that it is not so
well known? The answer appears to be that it cannot know and, if that is the
case, there is something
seriously wrong with the state of the law.
Second, the references to the defendant's use of the word Cola and the colour
of its confectionary are clear references to parts of
Coca-Cola's reputation as
a vendor of a well known cola flavoured soft drink that is black in colour.
However, neither the word Cola,
nor the colour black, form a component of the
registered trade mark in question which was the two dimensional shape of the
Coke bottle
without any reference to any words or any
reference to these two aspects of the defendant's reputation may be very
relevant to a passing off action. They have no relevance
whatsoever to
infringement of the registered trade mark in issue and, in particular, the issue
of deceptive similarity. The problem
here is that not only did the Full Court
take into account the trade mark owner's reputation, it took into account
aspects of that
reputation unrelated to the registered trade mark.
Henshcke Case
— the limitations of the
Since the Coca-Cola decision, the Full Court has provided some further
commentary on this issue of the relevance of a trade mark owner's
reputation in
the context of infringement. It attempted to clarify the scope of the
Woolworth's decision in
CA Henschke & Co v Rosemount Estates Pty Ltd
that case, Henschke claimed that its trade mark 'Hill of Grace' for wine was
infringed by Rosemount's Hill of Gold. It claimed
that the reputation of Hill of
Grace was relevant to the issue of deceptive similarity. The Full Court held
that while there was
considerable evidence of the reputation of Hill of Grace
for wine it was of no assistance in the trade mark infringement
In commenting on the point, the Full Court said this about the aspect of the
decision in Woolworths relating to the reputation of
Woolworths: in assessing
the nature of a consumer's imperfect recollection of a mark, the fact that the
mark, or perhaps an important
element of it, is notoriously so ubiquitous and of
such long-standing that consumers generally must be taken to be familiar with
and with its use in relation to particular goods or services is a relevant
consideration. It is unnecessary to consider whether
the cases are authority for
precisely that proposition. All that is necessary for present purposes is to
hold, as we would, that
they are authority for no wider proposition in relation
to the relevance, on a question of deceptive similarity in proceedings where
is alleged under s 120(1) that a registered mark has been infringed, of evidence
as to the reputation attaching to the mark. A
wider proposition would not, in
our view, be consistent with the earlier, and binding, authority to which we
have referred. It is
unnecessary, in order to decide this case, to go
The Full Court went on to state that while Hill of Grace had a significant
reputation, it was not a notorious or ubiquitous mark like
Woolworths or the
Coca-Cola bottle shape.
Perhaps more importantly, the Full Court made it clear what is the widest
possible interpretation of the Woolworths and Coca-Cola
decisions and it left
the door ajar to a narrowing of the proposition.
Notorious and ubiquitous
In any event, the Woolworths and Coca-Cola decisions are, at best, authority
for the proposition that some trade marks are so well
known that judicial notice
may be taken of them. In turn, this requires some resort to the notion of
judicial notice and its relevance
in the context of considering the reputation
of a trade mark.
Some insight into judicial notice is provided by Cross on Evidence which,
among other things makes the following comments: 'The proposition
that judicial
notice may be taken of a notorious fact after inquiry is self-contradictory: the
fact cannot be notorious if inquiry
necessary.'
Very few trade marks will fall into the category of being notorious and
ubiquitous. For example, 'BSS' for ophthalmic irrigation products
falls very far
short of being notorious and ubiquitous. One may also have cause to pause before
concluding that 'Maltesers' fits
into the necessary category. In any event, one
cannot claim judicial notice of a trade mark's reputation and simultaneously
to adduce evidence that the trade mark is notorious and ubiquitous. In this
regard, the narrow interpretation applied by the Full
Court in the
is consistent with the objectives of the registered trade mark system
which is to restrict, if not eliminate, the need for evidence
of reputation in
order to protect registered trade marks.
The nature of the reputation
Even if a trade mark is notorious and ubiquitous, there are important issues
to consider about the precise nature of that notoriety
and ubiquity that impact
on trade mark infringement issues. 'Judicial knowledge is the knowledge of the
ordinary wide-awake man [sic],
used by one who is trained to express it in terms
of precision.'
It is the precision of expression of the nature of the allegedly notorious
reputation that needs to be interrogated by a court that
is going to go down the
path of considering the reputation of a trade mark owner in determining
deceptive similarity. The difficulty
with relying on a trade mark owner's
reputation when it is notorious and ubiquitous lies in defining what aspects of
that reputation
are notorious and ubiquitous and whether those aspects of the
reputation actually form part of the assessment of whether the defendant's
is deceptively similar to the plaintiff's trade mark that has the reputation in
In the end, the contribution that the reputation can make, if anything, is to
the issue of imperfect recollection which, in turn,
is influenced by the
similarity in the ideas of the defendant's sign and the plaintiff's trade mark.
If the reputation of the trade
mark is to be relevant, it must make a
contribution to the idea of the trade mark. It is not relevant that the
reputation may add
to the likelihood that the
of the defendant's sign
might be likely to deceive or cause confusion. Deceptive similarity involves a
comparison of the sign and
the trade mark, not the uses of either.
An example of the difficulty might be provided by the facts in the Coca-Cola
decision. A significant part of Coca-Cola's reputation
is the manner in which it
uses the three-dimensional bottle version of the shape, namely to contain a
black, cola flavoured soft
drink called Coca-Cola. Consequently, the application
of a similar but not identical shape to a cola flavoured, black confectionary
with the word Cola added to the confectionary increases a likelihood that the
defendant's conduct is likely to deceive or cause confusion
as a consequence of
the reputation. But that is an analysis of the plaintiff's use of its trade mark
and the defendant's use of its
sign, not the analysis required for trade mark
infringement.
A narrower part of the reputation is the actual shape itself without regard
to the context in which it has been used and the circumstances
in which it has
become known, that is, without regard to its use in containing a black coloured
soft drink of a cola flavour. It
is this shape which is the registered trade
mark. The 'idea' of the trade mark is only that shape. Little is added by
referring to
the reputation of the shape itself other than to note that the
precise details of the bottle are, perhaps, likely to be etched into
of consumers. Even then, there may be some question as to precisely what
physical features are recalled by the ordinary
consumer. Does everyone recall
the fluting on the Coke bottle or, like some such as the writer, is it only the
general outline or
silhouette that is recalled?
In the end, while it might
be the case that the statement of the Full Court in the
Henschke Case
Woolworths Case
is technically correct, the actual application of the
statement is both difficult to perform and, if done correctly, highly unlikely
to add significantly to the analysis undertaken when comparing the ideas of the
competing trade mark and sign. If anything, the application
of the statement is
likely to lead to errors such as consideration of the wrong aspects of the trade
mark owner's reputation and
muddying the distinction between deceptive
similarity of a trade mark and a sign on the one hand and the likelihood that
the defendant's
use of its sign is likely to deceive or cause confusion.
The above analysis leads to several conclusions.
First, the reputation of
a registered owner is never relevant to the question of use of a sign as a trade
mark by a defendant. The
decisions to the contrary are simply wrong.
the only circumstance in which the reputation of the registered owner may be
relevant to the issue of deceptive similarity
is where judicial notice of that
reputation is, and can be taken. Consequently, evidence on the point is neither
required nor even
permissible for this purpose. The circumstances in which such
judicial notice will be taken will be very limited.
Third, extreme care must
be taken to identify which aspect of the trade mark owner's judicially noticed
reputation will be taken into
account. In particular, the relevant reputation
must be the reputation of the registered trade mark, not other aspects of the
mark owner's reputation. Otherwise, the inquiry becomes a general one
relevant to passing off actions but not relevant to trade mark
infringement
proceedings.
Fourth, the extremely limited circumstances in which reputation
may be relevant and the tendency to incorrectly rely on aspects of
not based on components of the registered trade mark, coupled with the far
greater importance of other aspects of the
comparison of the allegedly
infringing sign and registered trade mark, suggests that the starting point of
courts should be to ignore
reputation altogether in considering trade mark
infringement issues. At best, reference to reputation should be an extremely
Fifth, all of the above conclusions are not only consistent
with, but required by, both the wording of the trade marks legislation
underlying policy objectives. The act of registration alone should define the
rights of a registered owner. By doing so,
there is both an incentive to
register and a corresponding incentive to contribute to a system which is more
transparent than the
protection of common law trade marks. The introduction of
considerations of reputation into determining trade mark infringement
unnecessarily
complicates litigation and understanding of the positions of trade
mark owners.
Robert Burrell
and Michael Handler, 'The Intersection between Registered and Unregistered Trade
Federal Law Review
For the purposes
of this article, passing off and related statutory causes of action such as
those relying on
Trade Practices Act 1974
(Cth) will be
treated as identical. See Mark Davison, Kate Johnston and Patricia Kennedy,
Shanahan's Australian Law of Trade Marks and Passing Off
(4th ed, 2008)
(1915) 84 LJ Ch
(1915) 84 LJ Ch 449
Australian law, the relevant inquiry is whether the plaintiff has a reputation
associated with the trade mark in question rather
than a goodwill. The former
does not require the
plaintiff to have traded in the relevant jurisdiction.
Conagra Inc v McCain Foods (Aust) Pty Ltd
(1992) 33 FCR 302.
(1980) 2 NSWLR
(1980) 2 NSWLR 851
Andrew Griffiths, 'A Law and Economics Perspective on Trade Marks' in Lionel
Bently, Jennifer Davis and Jane Ginsburg (eds),
Trade Marks and Brands: An
Interdisciplinary Critique
(2008), 241, 255. See also the comments of Gummow
J (then of the Federal Court) in
Wingate Marketing Pty Ltd v Levis Straus
(1994) 49 FCR 89
, [11]–[17].
In particular,
Trade Marks Act 1995
[1991] FCA 310
(1991) 30 FCR
[1999] FCA 1721
(1999) 96 FCR
Most of the
decisions considered in this article are Federal Court decisions and, as such,
the correct terms are 'applicant' and
'respondent'. For the sake of consistency,
the terms 'plaintiff' and 'defendant' are used to refer to the 'applicant' and
the 'respondent'.
Trade Mark No 63697.
Co v All-Fect Distributing Co trading as Millers Distributing Co
1638 (Unreported
, Merkel J, 18 December 1998).
[1963] HCA 66
(1963) 109 CLR
[1999] FCA 1721
(1999) 96 FCR
example of the point may be the decision in
Pepsico Australia Pty Ltd
(trading as
Frito-Lay Australia) v The Kettle Chip Co Pty Ltd
(1996) 135 ALR 192
where evidence was led
that the term 'kettle' in respect of potato crisps referred to a particular
style of cooking of
crisps resulting in a particular texture and flavour. Evidence as to the
descriptive use of
'kettle' was relevant to determining whether the defendant was using 'kettle'
mark or in its descriptive
Trade Marks Act 1955
(Cth) which was the relevant legislation for the
, a trade mark could not be registered unless it
had at least some inherent
distinctiveness.
Koninklijke
Philips Electronics NV v Remington Products Australia Pty Ltd
[1999] FCA 816
(1999) 91 FCR
Trade Marks
See generally
Burrell and Handler, above n 1.
[2000] FCA 876
(2000) 100 FCR
other allegations that part of Remington's packaging also infringed the trade
mark but these are not relevant for present
eg, the first instance decision,
Koninklijke Philips Electronics NV v
Remington Products
Australia Pty Ltd
[1999] FCA 816
(1999) 91 FCR 167
eg, ibid 204 [111] and 206 [117], and the appeal decision
Koninklijke Philips
Electronics
NV v Remington Products Australia Pty Limited
[2000] FCA 876
(2000) 100 FCR 90
& J Gallo Winery v Lion Nathan Australia Pty Limited
[2009] FCAFC 27
(2009) 175 FCR 386
(Aust) Ltd v Esso Standard Oil (Aust) Ltd
[1963] HCA 66
(1961) 109 CLR 407
Trade Marks Act 1995
Cooper Engineering Co Pty Ltd v Sigmund Pumps Ltd
[1952] HCA 15
(1952) 86 CLR 536
[1937] HCA 36
(1937) 57 CLR
[1999] FCA 1020
(1999) 93 FCR
Ltd v Registrar of Trade Marks
[1998] FCA 1268.
of Trade Marks v Woolworths
[1999] FCA 1020
(1999) 93 FCR 365
, 386 [61].
[98]–[100].
Burrell and
Handler, above n 1.
[2009] FCA 606
(Unreported
, Perram J, 5 June 2009).
See, eg, William Landes and Richard Posner,
The Economic Structure of
Intellectual Property
(2003) ch 7; Griffiths, above n 14,
246. 'Trademark law ... aims to promote rigorous,
truthful competition in
the marketplace by preserving the clarity of the language of trade':
Dogan and Mark Lemley, 'A Search-Costs Theory of Limiting Doctrines in
Trademark Law' in Graeme Dinwoodie and Mark Janis (eds),
Trademark Law
and Theory: A
Handbook of Contemporary Research
(2008) 65, 69.
[1999] FCA 1721
(1999) 96 FCR 107
See Registered
Trade Mark No 63697 which is a contour drawing of a bottle without any mention
of or reference to colour or words.
1539 (Unreported
, Ryan, Branson and Lehane JJ, 31 October 2000).
Cross on Evidence
(8th ed, 2010) [3025].
City Council v Attorney-General for Queensland
[1979] AC 411
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (254 KB)
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter