URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/journals/FedJSchol/2022/21.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 14:57:07
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Allsop, Justice James --- "Being a judge" (FCA) [2022] FedJSchol 21
aEURoeGeneral propositions do not decide concrete cases. The decision will depend on a judgement or intuition more subtle than any
articulate major premise.aEUR
As lawyers and judges we live in a society with social values, morals and expectations which have been built over time by forces of
history and circumstance. We also live and work in the shadow of great thinking and great thinkers. But we deal with the human and
practical (often prosaic) concrete problems. But the drift and content of philosophical and religious and customary thinking are
deep influences on the law, because they are deep influences on society.
aEURoeBlack letter lawaEUR is a phrase sometimes used that may be better seen, perhaps, as a metaphor for tightly constrained logical
positivism wedded to text and rejecting of values and morality as part of the law and rules. This approach tends to decontextualize
and place morality and values outside the legal structure as matters of personal choice aEUR" to be eschewed by the judge in strict
legal technique administering a self-contained and self-referential construct of rules free of personal idiosyncrasy and choice.
But the law aEUR" common law, equity, customary and statute is anchored in, entwined by, infused with and faithful to, fundamental
moral notions and values: a rejection of unfairness, an insistence on essential equality, respect for the dignity of the individual
and of the group, the rejection of unreasonable exercise of public power beyond its legitimate democratic source, the rejection of
unconscionable private power beyond societyaEURtms relational norms of decency, and a humanity that informs mercy and a sense of
All these are values and morals; all must be approached with the necessary restraint and respect for other repositories of lawful
power, using judicial technique, not mere declaratory fiat.
But all involve choice during the application of judicial technique aEUR" choice, which is contestable.
As the important English moral philosopher of the second half of the 20
century, Mary Midgley, once said, aEURoehuman thinking has two movements. There is the abstracting, critical process, which has always
been recognised as thinking: and there is another process of imaginative comprehension, of comparing and balancingaEUR|aEUR. To similar
effect, last year, I discussed in an address to the Australian Academy of Law the work of British neuroscientist, practising psychiatrist
and polymath Dr Iain McGilchrist about how our bi-hemispheric brains approach all problems abstractly and deconstructed (by the left
hemisphere) and relationally and wholly (by the right hemisphere). MidgleyaEURtms two movements and the bi-hemispheric approach to
legal problems are vital for the law and its healthy development and application. The imaginative comprehension of comparing and
balancing, or the balance of, abstracted deconstruction and definition, and of relational wholeness ties abstract thought to practical
human reality in the resolution of concrete problems.
Public power is restrained by the need for fairness in its exercise. Such is an irreducible requirement in judicial power. AristotleaEURtms
Nicomachean Ethics
is as relevant to the common law principle of parity in criminal sentencing (
Green and Quinn
) and to understanding the very nature of equity, as it is to moral philosophy and ethics.
It is no accident that the horrors of the 20
century spawned or encouraged a desire to move away from the intrinsically human, in the face of the capacity for evil of the human,
to urge that philosophy (and law) were separate from morals (which were personal), whether manifesting in some forms of logical positivism
or in existentialism.
But the same horrors also encouraged a revival in moral philosophy and an insistence on objective good of some values common to all
sentient beings that give us a larger ethical and metaphysical structure, without which we become disorientated.
Any examination of the common law and equity sees rule, principle, human values or morals deeply intertwined. This is no more powerfully
expressed than in the fibre of the criminal law. A great lawyer and brave soldier, Sir Victor Windeyer said, about statutory construction
in the context of mandatory sentencing, that a capacity in special circumstances to avoid the rigidity of the law is the very essence
of justice. This is so because mercy is a mark of equality, dignity and fairness encapsulated in the human response to wrong, to
the individual, and to life itself that raises and enhances the humanity both of the grantor and grantee. In so expressing himself
Sir Victor echoed what Aristotle said in
The Nicomachean Ethics
, that the nature of equity was the correction of the universality of the law.
But judicial technique owes its legitimacy to the disinterested, impartial and fair expression of meaning and rule from text and context
born of the appropriate focal length of appreciation and of an understanding of the relevant values to be brought to bear on the
Law is not just command or rule: It is societal will amenable to rational and general expression, engendering loyalty and consent
through its utility and practicality and through its characteristics of requisite certainty and fairness and justice, recognised
as taking its place in the protection of the individual, of the group, and of society as a whole.
No system of law can engender loyalty and consent without an inhering justice aEUR" some intuitive response from acceptable and accepted
values, not necessarily by reference to each individual provision within the system, but by reference to its whole, including its
defects and its shining examples. Each gives content to the whole. Nothing is perfect. Further, no system of law can engender a sense
of security without an acceptable degree of certainty. The need for balance of, and the inevitable complexity of the relationship
between, rules, values, certainty and justice and their interconnectedness should be recognised as a central feature of the law and
the administration of justice. There is no point pretending that such complexity can be addressed by eliminating values and textually
expressing more or simple rules. That process is just to create other values, and likely darker ones, masquerading as rules.
We should accept that any system of law worthy of being called just must be founded on fundamental values. Part of that acceptance
is the recognition that sometimes rules can only be expressed by reference to values or general concepts and cannot (unless incoherence
is to be courted) be reduced to abstractly expressed defined propositions. We live with this every day; we are familiar and comfortable
with rules that lack case-specific precision, but which have meaningful content, and which provide for acceptable, if contestable,
application: for example, the common sense and evaluative conclusion of causation depending upon the question being asked or the
relevant rule of responsibility; the requirement of subjective and objective honesty; the requirement of a reasonable time for conduct
in all the circumstances in various situations; the expectation of a reasonable response to risk created by oneaEURtms own conduct
when concepts of duty of care are examined. Essential to our being comfortable with these rules expressed by reference to values
or general concepts is the existence of a stable contextual framework and a relevantly organised body of values (explicit or implicit)
for the resolution of the question.
In a remarkable address to the law students in Boston in 1897, Oliver Wendell Holmes, then a judge of the Supreme Judicial Court of
Massachusetts, spoke of the infinity of law from its timeless, but human, character. Holmes could sometimes seem brutal in his expression,
but he saw a form of beauty in the law from the place of theory and humanity intertwined. If this beauty exists, it does not come
from the sounds of tongues, talking of grand ideas, so often making them seem physical, limited and prosaic by superficial language,
taxonomical arrangement and metallic repetition. Rather, it is in the daily application of life that the dignity of the individual
and of the group, the mercy of the soul, and fairness as part of the human condition inform the exercise of lawful power. In lifeaEURtms
small, selfish and mundane intersections, these values assume a daily modesty in expression, and in context. But that modesty in
expression and in context reaches back towards essential humanity and towards what Holmes referred to as the echo of the infinite
and a hint of the universal law. This human beauty of the law (if it be beauty) does not come from grand expression, but from its
modest application to the humans in question, to the conflicts in resolution, to the pages of the lives of people aEUR" in fairness
required, in dignity expressed and accepted, and in mercy given.
This is the calling that we, as bench and bar, share.
Chief Justice Allsop of the Federal Court of Australia. This address is a modified version of the Twelfth Sir Harry Gibbs Memorial
Oration at the 32
Annual Conference of the Samuel Griffith Society in Sydney in 2022.
[1905] USSC 100
Mary Midgley aEURoeA Letter to PosterityaEUR
The Listener
27 March 1952 at 510, cited in Benjamin Lipscomb
The Women are up to Something
(Oxford University Press 2022) at 213.
James Allsop aEUR~Thinking about Law: The importance of how we attend and of contextaEURtm (Speech, Australian Academy of Law Tenth
Annual PatronaEURtms Address, 21 October 2021).
Green v The Queen; Quinn v The Queen
[2011] HCA 49
(2011) 244 CLR 462.
Cobiac v Liddy
(1969) 119 CLR 257
The Path of the Law
Collected Legal Papers of Oliver Wendell Holmes
(Constable and Company London 1920) at pp166-202 see also
Harvard Law Review
Vol X at 457
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
No downloadable files available
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter