URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/journals/SydUPLawBk/2011/17.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 15:40:54
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
O'Neill, Nick; Peisah, Carmelle --- "Chapter 15 - Sterilisation" [2011] SydUPLawBk 17; in O'Neill, Nick; Peisah, Carmelle (eds), "Capacity and the Law" (Sydney University Press, 2011)
15. 1. Introduction
15. 2. Sterilisation as a societal issue in the 19th and 20th centuries
15. 3. The enactment of legislation to protect incapable people from unnecessary sterilisations in Australia
15. 4. The High Court’s authorisation of the Family Court
15. 5. Who may consent to sterilising treatments for incapable people in Australia?
15. 5. 1. State and ACT tribunals
15. 5. 2. State and Territory Supreme Courts
15. 5. 3. Family Court
15. 6. The jurisdiction of State and Australian Capital Territory tribunals in relation to the sterilisation of people unable to give
a valid consent to their own treatment
15. 6. 1. South Australia
15. 6. 2. New South Wales
15. 6. 3. Australian Capital Territory
15. 6. 4. Western Australia
15. 6. 5. Tasmania
15. 6. 6. Victoria
15. 6. 7. Queensland
15. 6. 8. Northern Territory
15. 7. How the State tribunals exercise their jurisdiction
15. 7. 1. Most appropriate treatment and necessary to save life or prevent serious damage to health – New South Wales
15. 7. 2. Best interests – Australian Capital Territory, Western Australia, Tasmania, Victoria, the Family Court and Supreme
15. 7. 3. Three circumstances, medical necessity, no contraception applicable or problems with menstruation – South Australia
and Queensland
Chapter 15 – Sterilisation
15. 1. Introduction
The sterilisation of intellectually incapable children and adults has been a
controversial matter because it was, for a period, justified
on eugenics
arguments. What controversy that remains in Australia is centred on whether
sterilisation is a matter of last resort
or a matter of best interests.
Sterilising treatment must be approved by a tribunal or a court and according to
differing statutory
or common law tests. Whether a tribunal or a court is the
decision-maker depends in significant part on which State or Territory
tribunal or court is in as well as on the age of the person for whom substitute
consent is sought.
This chapter contains a brief discussion of the development of the law
relevant to sterilisation. It sets out the law currently used
by tribunals or
courts when deciding whether or not to approve sterilisations of people unable
to give a valid consent to their own
treatment as well as the legal tests they
use for that purpose.
15. 2. Sterilisation as a societal issue in the
By the end of the 19
century a theory of eugenics had been
derived from the work of scientists like Charles Darwin and Gregory Mendal.
Under that theory,
the complex traits in human beings were seen as hereditary
and like with plants and animals could be selectively bred in or out.
and popular literature of the time attempted to document the hereditary factors
in pauperism and crime. Reports written
in the early 20
asserted such things as “Every feeble-minded person, especially the
high-grade imbecile, is a potential criminal needing
only the proper environment
and opportunity for the development and expression of his criminal
tendencies” and “All feeble-minded
lack self control….Their
moral tendencies and lack of self-control make the birth-rate among them
unusually high”.
Sterilisation seemed a simple and long-range answer to the dangers posed by
feebleminded and other defectives. By not allowing the
defectives to renew
themselves, society would soon be rid of
In 1907 Indiana was the first US State to enact legislation authorising
sterilisation. In 1924 Virginia made a law which provided
that whenever the
superintendents of certain State institutions were of the opinion that it was
for the best interest of the patients
of that institution and of society
generally “that an inmate should be sexually sterilized”, the
superintendant could
arrange for the operation performed upon “any patient
afflicted with hereditary forms of insanity, imbecility, etc., on complying
the very careful provisions by which the act protects the patients from possible
The Virginia law was
tested in the US Supreme Court in 1927. The facts of the case were, paraphrasing
the words of Holmes J who gave
the decision of the Court, as follows. Carrie
Buck was a feeble-minded white woman who was committed to the State Colony [a
State institution]... She was the daughter of a feeble-minded mother in
the same institution, and the mother of an illegitimate feeble-minded
the time of the trial of her case in the Circuit Court in the latter part of
1924, she was eighteen years old.
Giving the decision of the Court soon after World War I and with the American
Civil War not far in the past, Holmes J said:
We have seen more than once that the public welfare may call upon the best
citizens for their lives. It would be strange if it could
not call upon those
who already sap the strength of the State for these lesser sacrifices, often not
felt to be such by those concerned,
in order to prevent our being swamped with
incompetence. It is better for all the world, if instead of waiting to execute
offspring for crime, or to let them starve for their imbecility,
society can prevent those who are manifestly unfit from continuing
their kind.
The principle that sustains compulsory vaccination is broad enough to cover
cutting the Fallopian tubes. Three generations
of imbeciles are
After that decision a further 20 States enacted sterilisation legislation. In
all 31 US states enacted such legislation.
An article in the March 1934 part of the American Journal of Public Health
noted that on 1 January 1934, Germany began to put in force
a program to
sterilize those of her citizens legally adjudged unfit for parenthood and that a
government announcement had stated
that approximately some 400,000 people were
to be sterilized in a short time.
Using the euphemisms of the time, those who were “hereditarily sick”
were to be made “unfruitful” (sterilised)
through surgical
intervention when, “following the experience of medical science, it may be
expected with great probability
that their offspring may suffer severe physical
or mental inherited damages”. The hereditarily sick, were defined in the
as those who suffered from one of the following conditions: “inborn
feeblemindedness, schizophrenia, circular insanity, hereditary
hereditary Huntington's chorea, hereditary blindness, hereditary deafness,
severe hereditary physical deformity”.
Further, those who suffered from
severe alcoholism could be made
“unfruitful”.
Applications were to be made to Hereditary Health Courts, 1700 of which were to
be established around the country. The article also
noted that:
If the objective of eliminating parenthood by those unfit is actually achieved
in a thorough but legally and scientifically fair
way, Germany will be the first
modern nation to have reached a goal toward which other nations are just
looking, or approaching at
a snail's pace. What will actually happen remains to
What was seen was the death of millions of Jews as well as many gypsies,
homosexuals, people with intellectual disabilities and the
political opponents
of the Nazis. Goldhar reports that “In 1939 'euthanasia' was given to
70,000 mentally ill and disabled
Goldhar also notes that there was a long history of sterilisation legislation
in Canada, especially in Alberta and British
Goldhar suggests that
while there was a decline in the movement for eugenic sterilisation because of
the German experience:
Sterilization reappeared in the USA in the 1960s under another guise. It became
a punishment for illegitimacy, poor parenting and
fiscal irresponsibility. If
federal funds were used to pay for sterilizations, consent was required. This
pre-condition was ignored
in the sterilization of some thousands of native
Kittrie noted that the US sterilisation legislation was “typically true
to the eugenic arguments” and made applicable
to three classes of
individuals; “the mentally ill, the mentally deficient and the
epileptic”. He also noted in his book
published in 1971 that “[t]his
pattern is still carried today in most sterilization
However by 1982
Sparks J giving the judgment of the California Court of Appeal noted:
Over half a century ago it was believed that sterilization of the unfit would
promote the general health and welfare of our society.
In recent times, there
has been a growing realization that sterilization procedures may be greatly
abused. Although
Buck v. Bell
has not been explicitly overruled, we agree
with the assessment of the Colorado Supreme Court that “[t]oday,
compulsory sterilization
of incompetents based on eugenic theories can no longer
be justified as a valid exercise of governmental authority....” Courts
recognize that the constitutional rights at stake, a woman's right to freedom
from unwarranted governmental intrusion and to
choose whether to bear children,
fundamental
As Goldhar points out, even though the issue was discussed in journals and
the press and debated in the parliaments, no legislation
was enacted in either
England or Australia. Nevertheless, sterilisations took place in both countries
both before World War II and
after, most likely without the consent of the women
involved. The arguments given to justify them were summarised by Goldhar as
In Australia, as in other countries, sterilizations on women with an
intellectual disability were rationalised on the basis that
the operation was in
their best interests. The woman would not have to be informed about
menstruation. She would not have to experience
the discomfort and inconvenience
of monthly periods. There would be no danger of pregnancy with all its attendant
pain and trauma;
no need for abortions; no wasting time and energy on sex
From the late 1970s the concept of normalisation was beginning to develop
along with a realisation that people with an intellectual
“should be able to enjoy the same rights and privileges as other members
of society and be able to maximise the
enjoyment of rights, while simultaneously
balancing their freedom against their
vulnerability”.
Nevertheless, Golhar reported that sterilisations continued and that girls were
required to have sterilisations as a pre-condition
to staying in institutions or
living in home-type
accommodation.
He also claimed that:
The reason why sterilizations have continued is
Hysterectomies, tubal ligations and, to a much lesser
extent, vasectomies, have been used as an alternative to education and
independence
training by parents unable to come to terms with their children's
In their book, “Mental Retardation” published in 1982, Hayes and
Hayes noted that research showed sterilisations were
carried out on women with
an intellectual disability in News South Wales in the 1970s. They expressed the
view that “there
is no reason to believe that sterilisation is an unlawful
operation in Australia” setting out their reasons for
They also noted that
sterilisation as a medical procedure occupied a special position in that it was
rarely lifesaving or performed
under emergency conditions. Instead it was an
elective procedure which was to all intents and purposes
irreversible.
They then went on
to categorise the justifications advanced for the sterilisation of people with
an intellectual disability under
the following headings, and to show the defects
of those justifications:
1. Benefits to society and the State
2. Benefits to the person with the intellectual disability
3. Benefits to future
generations.
After further consideration of the research and debate concerning
sterilisation and of some of the cases, Hayes and Hayes, who were
then academics
at two different universities in Sydney, went on to state:
Legislators, courts and experts in mental retardation appear to be heading in
the direction of making sterilisation pursuant to consent
by parents or
guardians more difficult to obtain. Nearly 90 per cent of the mentally retarded
population is moderately to mildly
retarded and therefore potentially capable of
giving informed consent. Sterilisation of severely or profoundly patients is
unnecessary because physical of genetic abnormalities render them
incapable of intercourse or procreation and most live in protected
environments
where sexual intercourse is unlikely. Therefore the number of patients needing
to be sterilised and lacking the ability
to consent is extremely small. Hygienic
“reasons” for sterilisation appear to reflect the medical
professions inadequate
knowledge of training in social and self-help skills for
retarded people, as well as general coyness about menstruation. No reasonable
practitioner would undertake an operation for colostomy because the patient
smeared faeces around the house – why is the smearing
of menstrual blood
considered so much more abhorrent and untreatable by education, conditioning and
behaviour modification techniques?
The application of the principle of least
restrictive alternative seems tragically ignored in the area of
sterilisation.
15. 3. The enactment of legislation to protect
incapable people from unnecessary sterilisations in Australia
The observations of Hayes and Hayes about direction of the debate and of
policy development were proven right fairly quickly when
in 1985 the South
Australian parliament amended the
Mental Health Act
make it clear that where a person had a mental illness or a “mental
handicap” their parents could not consent to a
sterilisation procedure on
their behalf. An application had to be made to the South Australian Guardianship
Board which could consent
to the carrying out of the procedure only if it was
“therapeutically necessary” or if it wasn’t therapeutically
necessary, the Board was satisfied that:
1. there was no likelihood of the person acquiring the capacity to give an
effective consent at any time,
2. the person was physically capable of procreation,
3. the person was, or was likely to be, sexually active, and there was no
method of contraception that could, in all the circumstances,
reasonably be
expected to be successfully applied or
4. the cessation of the woman’s menstrual cycle would be in her best
interests and would be the only reasonably practicable
way of dealing with the
social, sanitary or other problems associated with her
menstruation.
In addition the Board had to have no knowledge of any refusal on the part of
the person to consent to the carrying out of the sterilisation,
being a refusal
that was made by the person while capable of giving effective consent and that
refusal was communicated by the person
In his second reading speech introducing the amendments, the Minister for
Health quoted from the Second Bright Report on the Law and
Persons with
Handicaps as follows:
Sterlisation, both of children and adults, certainly appears to have occurred
without a clear knowledge of the law relating to sterilisation,
which casts
doubt on the right of a parent or caregiver to consent to non-therapeutic
sterilisations on behalf of another. And it
seems clear that such action is
often taken to relieve parents or caregivers of concern for the future, rather
than for the benefit
of the person
The Minister then on to describe the legislation and the requirements that
had to be met before the South Australian Guardianship
Board could give its
consent to the carrying out of a sterilisation
Hayes and Hayes’ observations were further proved in November 1987 when
the then Minister for Youth and Community Services in
New South Wales, John
Aquilina, introduced the bill for what is now called the
Guardianship Act
in to Parliament and said in the second reading speech:
Special medical treatment is defined in clause 33 as being "any medical
treatment that is intended, or is reasonably likely to have
the effect of
rendering permanently infertile the person on whom it is carried out, or any
other medical treatment that is declared
by the regulations". The principal
purpose of this definition is to make it unlawful to carry out sterilization,
except in a case
where it is necessary to save the life of the patient or to
prevent serious damage to the patient's health, or unless the Guardianship
has held a hearing concerning the matter and has given its consent. There have
been allegations over a number of years that
intellectually disabled people in
particular have been improperly sterilized as a means of social control and this
practice was condemned
by the Anti-Discrimination Board in a report which it
produced in 1981. There would be few people in a civilized community who would
condone such a thing and it is a principal purpose of this bill to outlaw the
The relevant provisions of the
Guardianship Act
not come into force until 21 August
However, in 1988 the
Family Court dealt with two cases involving sterilisation for non-therapeutic
reasons. In November 1988 Cook
J refused to grant an injunction to stop the
sterilisation of a 15 year old girl who had not yet begun to menstruate. He held
the decision about the operation was not one for the Court. There was
nothing exceptional “about this case which warrants the
Court interfering
with or usurping the parents’ right to decide that a hysterectomy on their
child should be carried
The next month
Nicholson CJ refused a similar injunction. However, he held that the Family
Court had parens patriae jurisdiction
to grant or refuse consent to
sterilisations of children and that parental consent was insufficient. He held
that the test was that
the child’s welfare was the paramount
consideration.
15. 4. The High Court’s authorisation of the
Family Court
In 1992 the High Court dealt with a sterilisation case from the Northern
Territory (
The majority held
that the Family Court and not child’s parents or guardians could authorise
the sterilisation of a child.
In dissent Brennan J was of the opinion that the
power to authorise the sterilisation of a child with an intellectually
extended to therapeutic sterilisations, “and no
The majority
did not want to use the terms “therapeutic” and
“non-therapeutic” because of their uncertainty.
They noted that
sterilisation required major surgery that was invasive and irreversible. They
considered that court authorisation
was required in order to ensure the best
protection of the interests of the child and because of the significant risk of
decision being made about the child’s present or future capacity
to consent and because of the grave consequences of a wrong
decision. The
majority judges then expanded on the factors that could contribute of a wrong
decision being made.
After noting that the welfare jurisdiction conferred on the Family Court was
similar to the parens patriae jurisdiction (of Supreme
Courts), the majority
went on to describe what was involved in the Family Court authorising
sterilisation and set out how best interests
of the of the person for whom the
sterilising operation was proposed were confined by the notion of the operation
being a step of
last resort. They said:
The function of a court when asked to authorise sterilisation is to decide
whether, in the circumstances of the case, that is in
the best interests of the
child. We have already said that it is not possible to formulate a rule which
will identify cases where
sterilisation is in his or her best interests. But it
should be emphasised that the issue is not at large. Sterilisation is a step
last resort. And that, in itself, identifies the issue as one within narrow
In the context of medical management, "step of last resort" is a convenient way
of saying that alternative and less invasive procedures
have all failed or that
it is certain that no other procedure or treatment will work... The objective to
be secured by sterilisation
is the welfare of the disabled child. Within that
context, it is apparent that sterilisation can only be authorised in the case of
a child so disabled that other procedures or treatments are or have proved
inadequate, in the sense that they have failed or will
not alleviate the
situation so that the child can lead a life in keeping with his or her needs and
capacities.
It is true that the phrase "best interests of the child" is imprecise, but no
more so than the "welfare of the child" and many other
concepts with which
courts must grapple. As we have shown, it is confined by the notion of "step of
last resort", so that, for example,
in the case of a young woman, regard will
necessarily be had to the various measures now available for menstrual
management and the
prevention of pregnancy…. And, if authorisation is
given, it will not be on account of the convenience of sterilisation as
contraceptive measure, but because it is necessary to enable her to lead a life
in keeping with her needs and capacities. With
the range of expertise available
to them, judges will develop guidelines to give further content to the phrase
"best interests of
the child" in responding to the situations with which they
will have to deal.
Re Marion (No 2)
, decided days before the High Court
gave its decision in
Marion’s Case
, Nicholson CJ set down what he
considered to be the relevant factors in that case to determine whether the
proposed hysterectomy
was in the best interests of the child. These were:
1. the particular condition of the child which required the procedure or
2. the nature of the procedure or treatment proposed,
3. the reasons for which it is proposed that the procedure or treatment be
carried out,
4. the alternative courses of treatment that are available in relation to
that condition,
5. the desirability of and effect of authorising the procedure or treatment
proposed rather than the available alternatives,
6. the physical effects on the child and the psychological and social
implications for the child of authorising, or not authorising,
the proposed
procedure or treatment,
7. the nature and degree of any risk to the child of authorising, or not
authorising, the proposed procedure or treatment, and
8. the views (if any) expressed by the child, their guardian, the person
entitled to their custody and the person responsible for
their daily care and
control about the proposed procedure or treatment and to any alternative
procedure or
Nicholson CJ’s approach has been applied in sterilisation of children
cases in the Family Court and is useful for any court
or tribunal which has to
deal with sterilisation cases under a “best interests”
1994, the High Court held that the marriage, divorce and matrimonial causes
powers in the
Constitution
were wide enough to allow the Commonwealth Parliament
to legislate for the authorisation of medical treatment for an incapable child
of a marriage.
The effect of the
case was that while it confirmed the welfare jurisdiction of the Family Court as
corresponding with the traditional
parens patriae jurisdiction of the Supreme
Courts, there was no indication that State law had been fettered so that State
legislation,
insofar as it related to the sterilisation of incapable children,
continued in operation.
15. 5. Who may consent to sterilising treatments for
incapable people in Australia?
15. 5. 1. State and ACT tribunals
Each of the States and the Australian Capital Territory has empowered a
tribunal to act as the consent authority for sterilising operations
adults, and
in some cases also children, who cannot give a valid consent to such an
The role of each of these tribunals is discussed below at 15. 6.
15. 5. 2. State and Territory Supreme Courts
All Australian State and Territory Supreme Courts have, as part of their
inherent jurisdiction, parens patriae jurisdiction to authorise
sterilising
treatment for incapable children or
While their jurisdiction
in relation to this matter may not have been removed either by express words or
necessary implication in
legislation giving this jurisdiction to tribunals, they
may prefer to adopt an approach like that taken by Morris J of the Supreme
of Victoria in relation to guardianship and administration matters and consider
that they do not have a current role in exercising
their jurisdiction preferring
to deal with sterilisation matters on appeal, by way of judicial review or by
filling gaps that the
legislation does not
15. 5. 3. Family Court
The Family Court has jurisdiction to deal with applications in relation to a
child of a marriage before they reach 18 years of age
as part of its welfare or
parens patriae jurisdiction. This was settled by the High Court’s decision
Court’s jurisdiction may be exercised regardless of whether the State or
Territory has given its own courts or tribunals
applications in relation to the same children.
It is as yet undecided whether the Family Court’s jurisdiction applies
to children who are not children of a marriage. However,
it is unlikely that the
Court’s jurisdiction would extend that far. Comments on the extent of the
marriage power made by Brennan
J in his dissenting judgment in
indicate this.
It is also undecided, and similarly unlikely, that such jurisdiction will be
held to apply to adults who are incapable of giving a
valid consent to their own
treatment. In both cases the connexion between the person the application is
and “divorce and matrimonial causes;
and in relation thereto, parental rights, and the custody and guardianship of
powers of the Commonwealth Parliament set out in the
Constitution
is tenuous at
In a 1995 case, decided after
and after the NSW Guardianship
Tribunal had refused consent to the proposed treatment, the Family Court allowed
a hysterectomy to
proceed on an incapable young woman who was about to turn 18.
It was clear from his judgment that Chisholm J considered that the
Court’s jurisdiction ended at 18 years for a child of a marriage and that
the treatment approved should take place before
the young woman’
15. 6. The jurisdiction of State and Australian
Capital Territory tribunals in relation to the sterilisation of people unable to
a valid consent to their own treatment
The tribunals are dealt with in the order in which they were given
Guardianship Board was given jurisdiction to consent to sterilisations by 1985
amendments to the
Mental Health Act
. New South Wales,
the Australian Capital Territory, Western Australia, Tasmania, Victoria and
Queensland follow in that order.
15. 6. 1. South
As noted above, South Australia was the first Australian State to enact
legislation to clarify who may consent to sterilising treatment.
Guardianship and Administration Act
provides that,
except where emergency medical treatment is necessary, it is only the
State’s Guardianship Board that may consent
to sterilising
treatments.
However, the Board
cannot consent to a sterilisation unless it is satisfied as to one of three
different reasons. The first is that
it is therapeutically necessary for the
sterilisation to be carried out on the person. It is assumed that the
Board’s consent
is required only if the person cannot give a valid consent
to their own treatment because of mental incapacity as defined in the
Guardianship and Administration Act
The second and third reasons allow for non-therapeutic sterilisations in
limited circumstances. Before it may give its consent for
a sterilisation based
on either of those reasons, the Board must be satisfied that:
1. the person was physically capable of procreation, that is had begun to
menstruate and was otherwise physically capable of having
children and had not
ceased to be fertile or had otherwise become incapable of having children,
2. there was no likelihood of the person ever having the capacity to give a
valid consent to the treatment, and
3. there was no evidence that the person, if they previously had had
capacity, had during that time refused consent to the carrying
sterilisation and had communicated that refusal to a doctor.
If the Board is satisfied that the person is, or is likely to be, sexually
active, and there is no method of contraception that could,
circumstances, reasonably be expected to be successfully applied to the person,
then the Board may consent to the sterilisation.
The third reason relates only
to women and requires the Board to be satisfied that cessation of her menstrual
cycle would be in her
best interests and would be the only reasonably
practicable way of dealing with the social, sanitary or other problems
with her menstruation.
15. 6. 2. New South Wales
In New South Wales, the Guardianship Tribunal has had jurisdiction, under the
Guardianship Act
, to determine whether or not to
consent to the giving of sterilising treatment to persons 16 years and older
since before the High
Court decided
The Tribunal deals
with a number of applications each year. The Mental Health Review Tribunal also
has jurisdiction under the
Mental Health Act
to sterilising treatment, but only on an involuntary patient detained a mental
health facility and only on the application
of the medical superintendent or a
doctor attached to that facility nominated by the medical
superintendent.
Sterilising treatment means any treatment that is intended, or is reasonably
likely, to have the effect of rendering the person on
whom it is carried out
permanently
Except in relation to involuntary patients detained a mental health facility,
Guardianship Act 1987
makes the Guardianship Tribunal the only
consent authority for this form of “special medical
treatment”.
However, the
Tribunal must not give its consent unless it is satisfied that:
1. the treatment is the most appropriate form
of treatment for promoting and maintaining the patient’s health and
well-being,
2. the treatment is necessary to save the patient’s life or to prevent
serious damage to the patient’s
Where the Mental Health Review Tribunal is the consent authority, it must be
satisfied that the sterilising treatment is necessary
to prevent serious damage
to the health of the involuntary
Since July 2001, the Guardianship Tribunal
has had jurisdiction to deal with applications for consent to the carrying out
of sterilisations
on children up to the age of 16
In this context
sterilisations are any medical treatment that is intended, or is reasonably
likely, to have the effect of rendering
permanently infertile the child on whom
it is carried out. However, treatments that are intended to remediate a
life-threatening
condition or treatments from which permanent infertility, or
the likelihood of permanent infertility, is an unwanted consequence,
for example
treatment for some kinds of cancer, can be carried out with relevant consents
and no involvement of the Guardianship
Before it may give its consent to the carrying out of the treatment, the
Tribunal must be satisfied that it is necessary to carry
out the treatment on
the child in order to save the child’s life or to prevent serious damage
to the child’s psychological
or physical
This test means that
only therapeutic sterilisations may be carried out on children up to 16 years of
age. The requirement that the
treatment be the most appropriate form of
treatment for promoting and maintaining the patient’s health and
well-being that
applies to those 16 and above who are incapable of giving a
valid consent to their own treatment is omitted from the test in relation
A selection of the New South Wales cases dealing with applications for
consent to the sterilisation of children and incapable adults
are set out in 15.
15. 6. 3. Australian Capital Territory
In the Australian Capital Territory, if a person, 18 years or above, is not
competent to give consent to the treatment and is not
likely to become competent
in the foreseeable future, the ACT Civil and Administrative Tribunal (ACAT) must
give its consent before
a medical treatment that meets the description of
reproductive sterilisation or hysterectomy may be carried out on
However, before ACAT may
do this it must first appoint a guardian for the person and make a declaration
that the person is not competent
to give a valid consent for the proposed
reproductive sterilisation or
hysterectomy.
The Tribunal may then, at the hearing of an application of which the person
under guardianship, their guardian and any other person
whom the Tribunal
considers should have notice, consent to the proposed reproductive sterilisation
or hysterectomy for the person
under guardianship if it is satisfied that:
1. the procedure is otherwise lawful; and
2. the procedure would be in the person’s best
When it is deciding whether a reproductive sterilisation or hysterectomy
would be in the person’s best interests, the matters
the Tribunal must
take into account include:
1. the wishes of the person, so far as they can be ascertained,
2. what would happen if the treatment was not carried out,
3. what alternative treatments are available, and
4. whether the treatment can be postponed because better treatments may
become available.
The relevant part of the judgment of the majority of the High Court in
Marion’s Case
dealing with best interests as confined by the notion
sterilisation being a step of last resort is set out in 15. 4. above while
“best interests” in the context of sterilisation is further
discussed in 15. 7. below.
15. 6. 4. Western Australia
The sterilisation provisions of the
Guardianship and Administration Act
came into force in 20 October 1992. They have been amended
since. Like the provisions in the Australian Capital Territory, they require
person for whom the sterilisation is proposed first to be the subject of a
guardianship order.
that the State Administrative Tribunal (WASAT) has already made a formal finding
that the person is incapable of looking
after his own health and safety or is
unable to make reasonable judgments in respect of matters relating to their
person or is in
need of oversight, care or control in the interests of their own
health and safety or for the protection of others, and is in need
It also means that
this jurisdiction of WASAT applies only to those who are 18 years and
WASAT may then consent to the sterilisation of such a person but only if it
is satisfied that the sterilisation is in the best interests
of the person for
whom it is proposed.
September 2008, it has been a requirement that a Full Tribunal of WASAT make
such decisions.
The guardian
must then give their consent before the proposed sterilisation may be carried
Sterilisation is not defined in the
, but it must be intended to
cover a number of procedures because the term “procedure for the
sterilization” is defined
so as not to include a lawful procedure carried
out for a lawful purpose other than sterilisation but that incidentally results
may result in sterilisation.
Only the person for whom consent to a procedure for sterilisation is sought,
their guardian or the Public Advocate may apply to the
Tribunal; however the two
of these who are not the applicant together with the person’s nearest
relative and anyone else who
the executive officer of WASAT considers has a
sufficient to the application will be given notice of the
If both consents to the sterilising treatment are given, all rights of appeal
in relation to them have to have lapsed or been exhausted
sterilisation may proceed.
A selection of Western Australian cases dealing with applications for consent
to the sterilisation of incapable adults is set out
in below in 15. 7.
15. 6. 5. Tasmania
Guardianship and Administration Act
assume the common law position that courts or tribunals must give consent to
sterilising treatments and not
Following the New South
Wales definition, it describes sterilisation as, “any treatment that is
intended, or is reasonably
likely, to have the effect of rendering permanently
infertile the person on whom it is carried out” and makes it a special
The Tasmanian
Guardianship and Administration Board’s jurisdiction to deal with
applications to consent to special treatment
may be implied from the
Guardianship and Administration Act
Also, while the
Board’s guardianship jurisdiction commences at 18 years, it exercises it
sterilisation jurisdiction in relation
sets out the criteria that the Board must apply when deciding
whether or not to give its consent to a special treatment. There are
no separate
criteria that apply only to special treatments. The three criteria which the
Board must be satisfied about before it
may give its consent to proposed
treatment are that:
1. the treatment is otherwise lawful,
2. person is incapable of giving consent,
3. the treatment would be in the best interests
of that person.
In deciding whether the proposed treatment would be
in the best interests of a person, the Board must take into account the
1. the wishes of the person the application is
2. the consequences to that person if the
proposed treatment is not carried out,
3. any alternative treatment available to that
4. whether the proposed treatment can be
postponed on the ground that better treatment may become available, and
5. whether that person is likely to become capable of consenting to the
Also when dealing with these applications, the
Board must observe the principles in the
The Board is of the
view that it must be satisfied “upon convincing evidence that the
procedure is justified” before
it may consent to a special
A Tasmanian case dealing with applications for consent to the sterilisation
of an incapable 14 year old girl set out in 15. 7 below.
15. 6. 6. Victoria
In Victoria sterilisation is one of the “special procedures” that
only the Victorian Civil and Administrative Tribunal
(VCAT) may give its consent
Persons responsible and
similar substitute decision-makers cannot give consent to these treatments. In
Victoria sterilisation is
defined the same way as it is in New South Wales
namely as, “any procedure that is intended, or is reasonably likely, to
the effect of rendering permanently infertile the person on whom it is
carried out”.
Before VCAT may consent to the carrying out of sterilising treatment, it must
be satisfied that the:
1 person the subject of the application is incapable of giving a valid
consent to the proposed treatment,
2 person is not likely to be capable, within a reasonable time, and
3 sterilisation would be in their best
When VCAT is deciding whether or not sterilisation is in the best interests
of the person the subject of the application, it must
take the following matters
into account:
1. the wishes of the person the subject of the application, so far as they
can be ascertained,
2. the wishes of their nearest relative or any other family
3. the consequences to the person if the treatment is not carried out,
4. any alternative treatment available,
5. the nature and degree of any significant risks associated with the
treatment or any alternative treatment; and
6. whether the treatment to be carried out is only to promote and maintain
the health and well-being of the
Applications to VCAT for it to consent to the carrying out of a sterilising
treatment may be made by the person responsible for the
incapable person or any
person who, in the opinion of the Tribunal, has a special interest in the
affairs of the patient.
“person responsible” for an incapable person in Victoria is
described at Chapter 12. 6. 5. The incapable person
is an automatic party to the
proceedings, but VCAT must give notice of the application and of the hearing to
the Public Advocate;
and any other person whom VCAT considers has a special
interest in the affairs of the incapable
Also, VCAT must
commence to hear the application within 30 days after the application has been
15. 6. 7. Queensland
The Queensland Civil and Administrative Tribunal (QCAT) is the consent
authority in Queensland for the sterilisation of an adult who,
impaired capacity, cannot make that decision for themselves or a child with an
impairment.
As in New South
Wales, Tasmania and Victoria, sterilising treatment in Queensland is treatment
carried out on a person who is or
is likely to be fertile that is intended, or
reasonably likely, to make the person permanently
QCAT may give its consent, in relation to adults with impaired capacity, only
if it is satisfied, following the approach first taken
in South Australia, that
one of three differing kinds of circumstance exists. The first is that the
sterilisation is medically
The second circumstance is that the adult is, or is likely to be, sexually
active and there is no method of contraception that could
reasonably be expected
to be successfully applied.
third circumstance applies only to female adults and only if they have problems
with menstruation. The Tribunal must be satisfied
that ending their menstruation
by sterilisation is the only practicable way of overcoming those
These grounds for
sterilisation also relate to children with an impairment but as part the
legislative description of what is in
the child’s best
Furthermore, in the case of both sets of circumstances in which
non-therapeutic sterilisations may be allowed by QCAT, it has also
satisfied that the sterilisation cannot reasonably be postponed and that the
adult is unlikely, in the foreseeable future,
to have capacity to make decisions
also requires QCAT when dealing with these matters to take
into account:
1. alternative forms of health care, including other sterilisation
procedures, available or likely to become available in the foreseeable
2. the nature and extent of short-term, or long-term, significant risks
associated with the proposed procedure and available alternative
forms of health
care, including other sterilisation
procedures.
specifically states that sterilisation is not medically
necessary, or not in the child’s best interests, if it is for eugenic
reasons or to remove the risk of pregnancy resulting from sexual
There are other detailed
provisions about what has to be taken into account when deciding whether the
proposed sterilisation is in
the child’s best
also requires any person or other entity that performs
functions under the
to apply the general principles set out in the
and when dealing with an application for consent to sterilising
treatment, the health care principles as
A selection of Queensland cases dealing with applications for consent to the
sterilisation of incapable adults is set out in 15. 7
15. 6. 8. Northern Territory
There is no tribunal in the Northern Territory with jurisdiction to consent
to sterilising treatment on an incapable person. However,
the Supreme Court has,
and may exercise, its inherent parens patriae jurisdiction to deal with
applications for authorisation to
carry out a sterilising operation on a person
who has not yet become fertile or who remains fertile. As is apparent from
, the Family Court may exercise the same jurisdiction in relation to a
child of a marriage while they are still under 18 years of
The test to be applied by
either court is the best interests of the person for whom a sterilising
operation was proposed were confined
by the notion of the operation being a step
of last resort.
That test is set
out in 15. 4. and further discussed in 15. 7.
15. 7. How the State tribunals exercise their
As already noted, the New South Wales Guardianship Tribunal deals with a
number of sterilisation cases each year. It is required to
provide written
reasons for every decision. VCAT deals with very few sterilisation cases and
produces written reasons only on request
of a party or when VCAT considers the
particular application has a point of interest warranting written reasons. The
South Australian
Guardianship Board has not produced any publically available
decisions so far, nor has the Guardianship and Management of Property
of the Australian Capital Territory nor has its successor, ACAT.
15. 7. 1. Most appropriate treatment and
necessary to save life or prevent serious damage to health – New South
When exercising its jurisdiction under the
Guardianship Act
to deal with applications for consent to sterilising treatment,
Guardianship Tribunal has an established practice of having the person
hearing is about separately represented, unless the case is a clear one in which
the order sought is almost inevitable. The Tribunal
relies on the reports
provided by the applicant rather than seeking a separate report of its own and
takes oral evidence from the
person’s family carers and other carers as
well as from the doctors proposing the treatment or supporting the application.
The person the hearing is about attends the hearing unless that is either
impractical or inappropriate. In any event the Tribunal
seeks the views of the
person, unless the person cannot express views.
The Tribunal first decides whether or not the person has the capacity to give
a valid consent to the proposed treatment. Only if the
person cannot give a
valid consent to the treatment does the Tribunal have jurisdiction to deal with
the application.
The next step is to decide whether the proposed treatment is the most
appropriate form of treatment for promoting and maintaining
the person’s
health and well-being. This is the first part of the two part test and involves
a consideration of the alternative
treatments to see whether they have been
tried and if not, why they have not been
Such treatments may
include contraceptive pills, oral progestogens, Depo Provera, Implanon and no
treatment at all. If reversible
treatments have been tried and not been
successful or it is found to be inappropriate to try them, the Tribunal will
move on to the
second part of the test.
If the proposed treatment is necessary to save the person’s life,
approval will be given without delay as a result of an urgently
hearing. Usually the question is whether the treatment is necessary to prevent
serious damage to the person’s
This involves a
consideration of both the person’s physical and their psychological health
together with the form of sterilising
treatment proposed. Matters that will be
considered include evidence about anaemia and its effect on the person, the
nature and extent
of any bleeding and if the bleeding is heavy and prolonged and
its effect on the person’s physical and psychological health.
relevant is any evidence of the negative consequences of the use of particular
reversible treatments as well as behavioural
problems that appear related to the
person’s menstruation and the nature and extent of those problems. Again,
evidence of the
consequences of no treatment is relevant.
An example of these matters being considered is a 1996 case in which the
Tribunal gave its consent to a hysterectomy for a 17 year
old woman who had a
severe level of intellectual disability and who had heavy and prolonged periods
which appeared to have significant
impact on her behaviour. Medications had
either been unsuccessful or were unlikely to assist
Prior to July 2001, the Supreme Court had the jurisdiction to deal with
applications for consent to the carrying out of sterilisations
on children up to
the age of 16 years under the
Children (Care and Protection) Act
In 1996 the mother
and sole carer of a 14 year old girl who was severely disabled both physically
and mentally applied to the Supreme
Court for consent to a hysterectomy being
carried out on her daughter so as to render her permanently infertile and to
prevent from
continuing to
menstruate.
The girl had been
having menstrual periods for two years and had been experiencing extremely heavy
and prolonged bleeding with each
cycle. At least two of these periods were
associated with extreme terror on her part. Treatment with oral Progesterone
control because it caused nausea and vomiting. Depo Provera was also
tried and that had not achieved cyclical control; however the
neurological problems appeared to have worsened. She had more epileptic seizures
and fatigue. She also had fluid retention,
rash and acne, dizzy spells and
sudden vomiting, disruption of sleep, long periods of bleeding, leg cramps,
depression and other
unusual symptoms.
Bryson J noted that the test was stringent but that the effects of her
menstruation constituted serious damage to the girl's health.
Consequently,
there was a necessity to carry out the operation because the other available
measure of control has been tried and
had not been
Nevertheless, in
his view this did not mean that the court should decide to consent to the
proposed treatment. It had a discretion
in that regard which it should exercise
by reviewing, “the available material relating to the interests of the
child, which
are paramount, and other relevant interests, and come to a
conclusion on the question whether or not consent should be
While he considered that it was necessary to carry out the proposed
treatment, he noted:
The surgery under consideration is drastic and final; irreversible. It has to be
brought under attention that the result of the court's
consent will be that the
child will permanently lose her reproductive capacity. The result is an extreme
one. However the child's
mental retardation and manifold disabilities are so
great that it is in my judgment not possible that, if the operation does not
take place, the child could ever exercise her reproduction capacity with any
understanding of what was taking place, still less with
self-realisation which comes with such
understanding.
Bryson J went on to note that the burden of looking after any child would
fall in the girl’s mother and that the interests of
the girl required the
Court to consent to the treatment. He also stated that the interests of the
mother required this as well and
then came back to the interests of the girl
with the following:
The interests of the child which are involved are not only those closely related
to her medical condition. Her interests and well-being
will also be enhanced by
reduction or containment of the degree of difficulty of the management of her
life, including the basic
tasks of daily living, and the availability to her of
assistance in such management, provided as they now are by her mother but a
lifelong necessity to be provided for her by some
It is respectfully suggested that while in some cases not only must the
necessity for the treatment to be carried out be shown, but
also that the Court
should exercise it discretion to give its consent, it is going beyond the
provisions of the legislation to build
in a best interests test which is not
provided for in the legislation.
For an example of the NSW Guardianship Tribunal exercising its jurisdiction
Children and Young Persons (Care and Protection) Act 1998
[2009] NSWGT 8.
15. 7. 2. Best interests – Australian
Capital Territory, Western Australia, Tasmania, Victoria, the Family Court and
In a 2004 case involving an application for consent to a hysterectomy for a
14 year old girl who had begun menstruating approximately
two years before, the
Tasmanian Guardianship Board set out the processes for investigating and hearing
such applications including
the collection of reports and the appointment of a
separate representative for the person the hearing was
The Board considered
the evidence relating to the various alternatives to hysterectomy and applied
the relevant criteria among those
set out above. In deciding between the
proposed treatment and the only viable alternative, it applied a least
restrictive alternative
approach and decided it could not consent to a
hysterectomy until it was shown that the alternative treatment did not work or
inappropriate. It also applied the view of the majority of the High Court in
Marion’s Case
that is applicable when the legislation under which
the Tribunal is operating does not contain a statutory test. This is that the
function of a court or tribunal when asked to authorise sterilisation is to
decide whether, in the circumstances of the case, sterilisation
is in the best
interests of the child. The Tasmanian Board noted the opinion of the High Court
Marion’s Case
that the best interests of the person for whom the sterilising operation was
proposed were confined by the notion of the operation
being a step of last
resort and took the view that it had to be certain that no other procedure or
treatment would work before it
could consent to a
sterilisation.
In the Australian Capital Territory, Western Australia and Tasmania the test
is “best interests” of the incapable person,
which is also the
common law test applied by the Family Court and the Supreme Courts. The
Tasmanian Guardianship and Administration
Board has already noted the fact that
sterilisation is a step of last resort confines the scope of “best
interests”.
the decisions of the Family Court have assisted the tribunals in coming to their
decisions. The Family Court cases are also
referred to as they show the approach
followed by that court in dealing with sterilisation applications.
Re Marion (No 2)
, decided days before the High Court gave its
decision in
Marion’s Case
, Nicholson CJ of the Family Court set
down what he considered to be the relevant factors in that case to determine
whether the proposed
hysterectomy was in the best interests of the child. These
1. the particular condition the child had which required the procedure or
2. the nature of the procedure or treatment proposed,
3. the reasons for which it is proposed that the procedure or treatment be
carried out,
4. the alternative courses of treatment that are available in relation to
that condition,
5. the desirability of and effect of authorising the procedure or treatment
proposed rather than the available alternatives,
6. the physical effects on the child and the psychological and social
implications for the child of authorising, or not authorising,
the proposed
procedure or treatment,
7. the nature and degree of any risk to the child of authorising, or not
authorising, the proposed procedure or treatment, and
8. the views (if any) expressed by the child, their guardian, the person
entitled to their custody and the person responsible for
their daily care and
control about the proposed procedure or treatment and to any alternative
procedure or treatment.
Nicholson CJ’s approach was approved by the Full Court of the Family
P and P and Legal Aid Commission of NSW
and applied in
sterilisation of children cases in the Family
In a 2007 case WASAT led by its then president, Barker J, considered
P and Legal Aid Commission of NSW
and other cases in which Nicholson CJ had
set out matters to be considered when dealing with sterilisation cases. In a
form of summary
of those cases Tribunal outlined a framework for the inquiry it
would conduct into whether the proposed sterilisation was in the
best interests
of the incapable person, as follows:
1. that consent may be given by WASAT if consent is in the best interests of
the person under guardianship,
2. because of the seriousness of the decision to be made, WASAT must be
convinced by clear and compelling evidence that a procedure
is necessary in the
best interests of that person,
3. in the context of sterilisation, "best interests" means that such a
procedure should be one of last resort although it is not necessary
possible procedures have been tried to come to a view that a procedure is one of
last resort and that no other treatment
4. WASAT needs to weigh up the factors in the particular circumstances of the
person under guardianship in support of the procedure
and against it, including
the disability of that person,
5. the best interests of the person under guardianship are separate to those
of her carers and her mother. The views and wishes of
the mother are not
determinative of the best interests of the person but are of considerable
importance in assessing the person's
best interests in light of her role as
guardian and [the mother’s] involvement in the life of the person.
The case was an application for consent to sterilisation of a 22-year-old
woman with intellectual disability brought to WASAT by her
mother, who was also
her guardian.
The medical
evidence did not support the need for a hysterectomy on either psychiatric or
gynaecological grounds. The psychiatric
treatment the young woman was receiving,
including the use of medications, had settled her extreme agitation which her
mother believed
was associated with her menstruation. The evidence of the
gynaecologists and others confirmed that the young woman’s menstrual
was suppressed so that a hysterectomy was not indicated for contraceptive
purposes or for menstrual
management.
While WASAT
acknowledged the mother’s anxiety for her daughter’s safety, it held
that the proposed sterilisation was
not necessary from a medical or behavioural
point of view and could not be justified for menstrual
management.
In a 1998 case, the Guardianship and Administration Board of Western
Australia, the predecessor of WASAT, used the approach Nicholson
CJ had adopted
determine the best interests of the incapable person and held that it was in the
best interests of the 27 year old woman that
the case was about that the
sterilising treatment be carried
The Board gave its
In a 1994 case the Western Australian Board formed the view, applying the
same approach from
, that it was in the best interests of the
young woman the hearing was about to have the proposed tubal ligation, but held
presumption that the young woman was capable had not been rebutted, so
could not appoint a guardian for her. Consequently, the Board
dismissed both the
application for a guardian to be appointed and the application for the
sterilisation by way of tubal
In a 2009 case in which there was ample gynaecological and psychological
evidence to justify consent to a hysterectomy to be carried
out on a 23 year old
woman who had a whole of life intellectual disability on either a best interests
tests or on the tests that
apply in New South Wales and South Australia and
Queensland, WASAT accepted the argument that the proposed hysterectomy was not,
in the circumstances of the case, a “procedure for sterilization”
because it was, “proposed as a last resort and
that its sole purpose is to
stop her menstruating in order to put an end to her continuing bleeding and
Consequently the
consent of WASAT was not required. WASAT appointed the young woman’s
parents, as her guardians for the purpose
of consenting to the hysterectomy and
any other treatment and health care.
Guardianship and Administration Act
provides that:
[A] procedure for sterilization does not include a lawful procedure that is
carried out for a lawful purpose other than sterilization
but that incidentally
results or may result in sterilization.
In justifying its decision, WASAT said:
Unlike legislation, such as in New South Wales, which focuses on the
effect of proposed treatment,
Guardianship and
Administration Act
] focuses on the purpose of the
procedure. A procedure that 'incidentally results or may result in
sterilisation' is specifically
excluded. Treatment which is not for the purpose
of sterilisation, even if it results in sterilisation, does not require the
of the Tribunal.
does focus on the purpose of the procedure, the purpose of
the section is to make clear that treatment such as for cancer that as
unintended or undesirable consequence “incidentally results or may result
in sterilization” is not intended to be
subject to the consent procedure
for sterilising procedures. It is respectfully suggested that extending
to hystectomies which will have the effect of sterilising any fertile woman
is going far beyond not only the intention of the section
but also the purpose
and intention of the legislation which is to protect incapable women from being
sterilised without proper reasons.
As already noted the evidence in this case
clearly justified WASAT giving its consent, on the grounds of best interests,
limits imposed by
Division 3 of the
15. 7. 3. Three circumstances, medical necessity,
no contraception applicable or problems with menstruation – South
and Queensland
In a 2000 case the then Queensland Guardianship and Administration Tribunal
dealt with an application for consent to a hysterectomy
for a for a 31 year old
woman who had had an intellectual disability and epilepsy since birth. The
Tribunal considered that the case
fell into the third circumstance in which
sterilising treatment could be considered, namely problems with menstruation and
that all the statutory criteria relating directly to sterilisation had
The Tribunal then proceeded to consider a number of the general principles
and the health care principle. The Tribunal took the view
that while the health
care principle did not strictly apply to sterilisations, the principle was,
“in effect a restatement
of the common law principles which are applicable
in cases of this nature namely that the treatment must be in the persons best
interests”.
Tribunal then considered some elements of the majority’s judgment in
Marion’s Case
, but did not refer to the majority’s view that
the best interests of the person for whom a sterilising operation was proposed
were confined by the notion of the operation being a step of last
It concluded
[A]ll the criteria set out in the
have been satisfied and that the
proposed [sterilisation] is in [the woman’s] best interests and is the
most appropriate treatment
to promote and maintain [the woman’s] health
In a 2004 case the Queensland Tribunal took a similar approach in a
menstruation case in relation to a 23 year old woman with significant
life intellectual and physical disabilities. Again the Tribunal found that all
the statutory criteria relating directly
to sterilisation had been met, but then
went on to apply the general principles and the health care principle and
concluded that,
“taking into account all the available evidence the
hysterectomy is overall in [the young woman’s] best
interests”.
The evidence in both cases justified the Tribunal consenting to the proposed
hysterectomies based on the statutory criteria relating
to sterilisations.
Having considered and applied those criteria, and formed the opinion that, by
sterilisation, ending their menstruation
was the only practicable way of
overcoming the problems of those women, the Tribunal has also met the
requirement of acting in their
best interests. No separate consideration of that
matter was required in either case. While separate consideration of some or all
the general principles may be required in particular and difficult case, it will
not be required in most cases. If separate consideration
of general principles,
particularly of the “best interests” principle unlimited by the
confining influence of sterilisation
being a step of last resort becomes the
accepted approach, the risk is that “best interests” will becomes
the controlling
criterion. The result would be that the statutory criteria
applicable to sterilisation would become relegated to a secondary position.
an outcome would be contrary to the intention of Parliament. Nevertheless, that
approach appears to have been taken in the
Kittrie, N,
The Right to be
different – deviance and enforced therapy
, Baltimore, The Johns
Hopkins Press, 1971, 310-311.
Buck v Bell
[1927] USSC 105
206 (1927).
Peter, W W,
“Germany’s Sterilization Program”, 24
American Journal of
Public Health
, No 3, March 1934, 187.
Golhar, J, “The
Sterilization of Women with an Intellectual Disability”
[1991] UTasLawRw 4
(1991) 10(2)
University of Tasmania Law Review
Kittrie op cit (footnote 1
Maxon v Superior
135 Cal App 3d 626
, 632 (1982). See also
In re Grady
, 472-474 (1981).
Goldhar op cit (footnote 8),
Hayes, S and Hayes, R,
Mental Retardation
, Sydney, Law Book Company, 1982, 76-79.
Ibid. 74-76.
Mental Health Amendment
ss 28c and 28e(1) and (2).
Ibid. s 28e(2)(b)
Parliamentary Debates
South Australia 45
, 1985 Vol. 1, 1162.
Ibid. 1163-1164.
NSW Parliamentary
Debates, Third Series
, Vol 199, (12 November, 1987), p 15939.
Guardianship
In re a Teenager
(1989) FLC 92-006
[1988] FamCA 57
Fam LR 662.
Secretary, Department of
Health and Community Services v JWB and SMB
[1992] HCA 15
(1992) 175 CLR
218 (Marion
Ibid. 250-253.
Ibid. 259-260.
(1992) 17 Fam LR 336
See for example,
(unreported, Family Court of Australia, Chisholm J, 10 April 1995).
[1994] HCA 20
Constitution
Commonwealth
(xxi) and (xxii).
(unreported,
Powell J, NSW Supreme Court, 2 May 1986) BC8601063. See also
[1984] 1 NSWLR 694.
Gardner; re BWV
[2003] VSC 173
[99]. However, it should be noted that the
Guardianship and
Administration Ac
s 3A specifically preserves the inherent
[1994] HCA 20
Ibid. 624-626.
Constitution
Commonwealth of Australia
and (xxii).
(unreported,
Family Court of Australia, Chisholm J, 10 April 1995) 21.
Guardianship and
Administration Act 1993
(1). Doctors may carry out a
sterilising treatment under
Consent to Medical Treatment and
Palliative Care Act
if the patient is unable to consent and
the doctor is of the opinion that the treatment is necessary to meet an imminent
the life or health of the patient and another doctor who has personally
examined the patient has given a written, supporting opinion.
Guardianship and
Administration Act 1993
s 61(2)(b).
Guardianship Act
Secretary, Department of Health and Community
Services v JWB and SMB
[1992] HCA 15
(1992) 175 CLR 218.
Mental Health Act
Guardianship Act
This is the effect of
Guardianship Act
Mental Health Act
Children and Young
Persons (Care and Protection) Act
s 175(5)(a).
Guardianship and
Management of Property Act
Dictionary. The relevant provisions of the
commenced 7 January
Ibid. ss 7 and 69.
Ibid. s 70.
Ibid. s 70(3).
Guardianship and
Administration Act
s 43(1)(a).
Guardianship and
Administration Act 1995
came into force 1 September 1997.
ss 44(1)(a)
(Sterilisation) 26-8-2004
, (Tasmanian Guardianship and Administration
There were no
other matters the Board had to take into account set out in the
Guardianship
and Administration Regulations
MG (Sterilisation)
, (Tasmanian Guardianship and Administration Board) [75]. See also
Briginshaw v Briginshaw
[1938] HCA 34
[1993] FamCA 124
(1993) 17 Fam LR 357.
Guardianship and Administration Act
dealing with
medical and other treatment, including sterilisations, commenced 1 January 2000.
Guardianship and
Administration Act
Guardianship Act
Guardianship and
Administration Act
Ibid. s 38(2) provides a
complication about the involvement of such family members in limited
circumstances.
Ibid. s 38(1). Other matters
to be taken into account may be prescribed in the regulations, but none have
been. S 38(2) provides
for a further complication in the
Ibid. s 42B(1).
Guardianship and
Administration Act
s 42B(2) and (3)..
Ibid. s 42D.
Guardianship and
Administration Act
(1). Impairment in a child
is defined as a cognitive, intellectual, neurological or psychiatric impairment
The provisions in relation to the sterilisation of adults commenced 1
July 2000. Those in relation to children commenced 18 November
Ibid. Schedule 2,
and 9for and adult and
for a child.
s 70(1)(a)(i).
s 70(1)(a)(ii).
s 70(1)(a)(iii).
and (c) and
(3)(c)(iii) and (iv).
and Schedule 1
[1994] HCA 20
Ibid. 259-260.
Guardianship Act
Matter No 96/0717
(unreported, Guardianship Tribunal, 21 August 1996)
Children (Care and
Protection) Act 1987
20 Fam LR 485.
MG (Sterilisation)
, (Tasmanian Guardianship and Administration Board) [2].
Secretary, Department
of Health and Community Services v JWB and SMB
(Marion’s Case)
(1992) 175 CLR 218
MG (Sterilisation)
, (Tasmanian Guardianship and Administration Board) [76].
MG (Sterilisation)
, (Tasmanian Guardianship and Administration Board).
(1992) 17 Fam LR 336
(1995) 19 Fam LR 1.
for example,
(unreported, Family Court of Australia, Chisholm J, 10
April 1995).
[2007 WASAT 123
Ibid. [100]-[101].
[1988] FamCA 57
12 Fam LR 662.
In turn, Nicholson CJ had adopted his approach from the standards
developed by Pashman J of the Supreme Court of New Jersey in
In re Grady
426 A 2d 467
(1998) 24 SR
SR (WA) 24.
Ibid. [68].
[2000] QGAAT
Ibid. [45].
[2000] QGAAT 4
[46]-[53] with
Secretary, Department of Health and Community
Services v JWB and SMB
[1992] HCA 15
175 CLR 218
[2000] QGAAT
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (400 KB)
PDF format (134 KB)
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter