URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/journals/MqJlBLaw/2008/5.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 15:20:57
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Jensen, Neil --- "Creating an Environment in Australia Hostile to Money Laundering and Terrorism Financing: A Changing Role for AUSTRAC" [2008] MqJlBLaw 5; (2008) 5 Macquarie Journal of Business Law 93
Creating an Environment in Australia Hostile to Money Laundering and Terrorism Financing:
A Changing Role for AUSTRAC
Closing the Net: Australia’s Anti-Money Laundering and Counter-Terrorism Initiatives
Broadening the Scope: Introduction of Global Standards
Evaluating Australia’s Initiatives: The FATF’s Mutual Evaluation Processes
The Mutual Evaluation Findings: Australia’s Legislative Response
The AML/CTF Act: The Nature of the Legislation
The Specifics of the Legislation and its Implementation
The AML/CTF Program
AUSTRAC’s Expanding Role as Industry Regulator
AUSTRAC’s Principles for Compliance, Monitoring and Enforcement
AUSTRAC Tools to Assist Industry Compliance with the AML/CTF Act
Appendix 1: Australia’s MER Compliance ratings (October 2005)36
Creating an Environment in Australia Hostile to Money
Laundering and Terrorism Financing:
Role for AUSTRAC
NEIL JENSEN
The implementation of the
Anti-Money Laundering and Counter-Terrorism
Financing Act 2006
(Cth) heralded Australia’s long anticipated adoption of
modern and robust legislation to deal with the increasing and dangerous
of money laundering and terrorism financing not only in Australia, but globally.
It was a journey which began in the late
1980s, and continues to this day. As
part of the journey, the Australian Transaction Reports and Analysis Centre
(AUSTRAC), the organisation
entrusted to implement the new legislation, has
acquired new regulatory powers, in addition to its role as a specialist
intelligence unit. AUSTRAC has embraced these challenges diligently,
collaboratively and intelligently. It continues to provide guidance
and support
to regulated entities, industry and law enforcement, national security and
revenue partner agencies. It is a journey
which AUSTRAC has just begun.
The introduction of the
Anti-Money Laundering and Counter-Terrorism
Financing Act 2006
(Cth) (AML/CTF Act) provides Australia with a
“principles-based” legislative response to the Financial Action Task
(FATF) 40 + 9 Recommendations and the 2005 Mutual Evaluation
Report (MER) of Australia. This new legislative framework not only aims
create an environment hostile to money laundering and terrorism financing in
Australia, but also aims to ensure the increased
competitiveness and security of
financial markets in general, both now and in the future. Its guiding principles
provide a risk-based
framework of governance aimed at achieving the overall
objectives of the AML/CTF Act, which are to combat financial crime and terrorism
financing in Australia. The framework is also designed to enable the Australian
Transaction Reports and Analysis Centre (AUSTRAC),
and the regulated sector, to
be responsive to the changing environment and techniques used in money
laundering and terrorism financing.
Implementation of the AML/CTF Act is to be introduced over two years. The
AML/CTF Act builds upon existing obligations under the
Financial Transaction
Reports Act 1988
(Cth) (FTR Act) but it also applies to a wider range of
industries and businesses in response to the global standards. These businesses
are defined as ‘reporting entities’, and they are required inter
alia to implement an AML/CTF program which identifies,
minimises and manages the
risk of any of their products and/or services being utilised for money
laundering and terrorism financing.
In response to industry consultation, the Australian Government has given
AUSTRAC the dual role under the AML/CTF Act of both AML/CTF
industry regulator
and financial intelligence unit (FIU). This is a unique world approach to
implementing the FATF’s 40 + 9
Recommendations as these roles and
functions have been separated in many countries. In its role as an FIU,
AUSTRAC’s primary
responsibility is to provide intelligence obtained from
transaction reports to designated partner agencies and certain international
counterparts. As Australia’s AML/CTF regulator, AUSTRAC’s primary
responsibility is to ensure reporting entities comply
with their obligations
under the AML/CTF Act.
AUSTRAC’s approach to industry regulation promotes ‘voluntary
compliance’ guided by persuasion or education, and
applies the themes of
consistency, proportionality and accountability. The AML/CTF regulatory
environment adopted by AUSTRAC is one
in which a general preference is to
initially engage in a collaborative approach with reporting entities by
negotiating voluntary
rectification and promoting and encouraging deterrence, as
opposed to moving quickly to formal intervention and statutory sanctions.
policies, actions, regulatory toolkit and guidance notes AUSTRAC has developed
and applied to date are focused on collaboration.
In expanding AUSTRAC’s role as the AML/CTF regulator, the principles of
the AML/CTF Act have been utilised to further Australia’s
response to the
FATF’s 40 + 9 Recommendations. This is aimed at ensuring an increased
competitiveness and security of our financial
markets both now and into the
future. It is also aimed at enabling AUSTRAC (and the regulated sectors) to be
responsive to the changing
environment and techniques used in the processes of
money laundering and terrorist financing and prosecute and penalise those
in such criminal activities.
INTRODUCTION
The acts of money laundering and terrorism financing inconspicuously and
innocuously pervades the very fabric of modern society. They
enable those
involved or seeking to involve themselves in criminal activity with an avenue to
finance their criminal objectives.
Both money laundering and terrorism financing
are financial crimes with far reaching consequences. Such activities enable
to either profit from, or to cause widespread damage through, their
illegal activities. Money launderers and terrorism financiers
use the legitimate
financial system to destabilise economies, and ultimately disrupt society
through a variety of methods which may
not be immediately evident as money
laundering or terrorism financing.
It is difficult to quantify the extent and reach of money laundering and
terrorism financing. In Australia the figure has been estimated
at between AUD
2.8 to AUD 6.3 billion with the most likely figure being in the vicinity of AUD
4.5 billion dollars.
effects of terrorism financing are often difficult to directly calculate, it is
clear that such activities undermine and
impose substantial costs that may have
devastating effects on nation states or the global economy. It is also clear
that the social
and economic costs
of an act of terrorism are significantly higher than the cost of
Australia’s AML/CTF program.
Closing the Net: Australia’s Anti-Money
Laundering and Counter-Terrorism Initiatives
Money laundering has been on the Government’s agenda in Australia since
the 1980s when a number of royal commissions uncovered
links between tax
evasion, fraud, organised crime and money laundering
techniques.
Concurrently, there was
growing concern within the international community about the threat posed by
money laundering to the world’s
financial institutions and the banking
system. These issues led Australia to subsequently introduce appropriate federal
legislation
in the 1980s: the
Proceeds of Crime Act 1987
Mutual Assistance in Criminal Matters Act 1987
(Cth) and the
Transaction Reports Act 1988
(Cth) (later renamed the FTR Act).
The FTR Act was the primary mechanism for Australia’s anti-money
laundering initiatives. The legislation was enacted to address
the growing
concerns of the potential impact of money laundering in Australia, with a focus
on detecting tax evasion and other serious
criminal activity.
To deter money laundering and terrorism financing, the primary aims of the
FTR Act were to facilitate the administration and enforcement
of taxation and
other laws.
This was demonstrated
in practice by:
requiring cash dealers to report suspicious transactions, significant cash
transactions, and international funds transfer instructions
monitoring of currency movements within Australia and into/out of
aiming to eliminate false name accounts, tax evasion, money laundering and
other financial crimes through customer identification
requirements.
The Cash Transaction Reports Agency (CTRA), established in 1989, was given
the primary responsibility for monitoring and analysing
suspicious transactions
and large cash transactions which had been reported to it. It was subsequently
renamed the Australian Transaction
Reports and Analysis Centre (AUSTRAC) in 1991
to reflect the broadening of the agency’s functions to include the receipt
analysis of international wire transfers. A major focus of AUSTRAC was on
monitoring and identifying transactions of interest and
reporting them to
relevant law enforcement and revenue agencies, and ensuring cash dealers’
compliance in relation to the reporting
and identification requirements under
the FTR Act.
Prior to the attacks in the United States of America on the World Trade
Center in New York and the Pentagon building in Arlington,
Virginia on 11
September 2001, terrorism financing was considered ancillary to
counter-terrorism initiatives. However, in the weeks
following the attacks, the
international efforts to subsequently freeze the funds of known terrorist
organisations throughout the
heightened the need for a more focused response by Australia to the issue of
terrorism financing.
Australia implemented a multi-faceted response to the issues of increased
terrorism risk. This resulted in the expansion of
AUSTRAC’s mandate on
money laundering to extend to transactions related to terrorism financing.
Throughout the 1990s and into the 2000s, AUSTRAC operated primarily as an FIU
and became recognised and respected globally as an innovative
technologically advanced leader in the fight against money laundering. With its
significant database of over 70 million transaction
reports, AUSTRAC has been
able to develop technology solutions to monitor, evaluate, analyse and
interrogate its data holdings. Resultant
extensive intelligence has been
provided to AUSTRAC’s domestic and international partner agencies. This
intelligence in many
cases has initiated or been of vital importance in many of
the criminal and taxation investigations and enquiries. Over the past
more than 6,000 law enforcement investigations, and half a billion dollars in
tax assessments and penalties, have resulted
directly from AUSTRAC’s
intelligence products. Assistance with technological solutions, such as the
building of the Canadian
FIUs Information Technology
and ‘FIU in the
which was developed by
AUSTRAC and implemented in a number of South Pacific nations FIUs - has enhanced
the capability of Australia’s
international counterparts. In 2005, during
a visit to Australia, the Financial Crimes Enforcement Network (FinCEN)
Director, William
Fox, said: “AUSTRAC is the gold standard among financial
intelligence units. We, and others throughout the world, consider
AUSTRAC to be
a model of how a financial intelligence unit should
During this time much effort was also invested by AUSTRAC in fostering
relationships with cash dealers and building partnerships with
law enforcement,
national security, revenue collection, and social justice agencies.
Broadening the Scope: Introduction of Global
Subsequent to Australia’s introduction of the FTR Act and other
initiatives to combat money laundering, the FATF was established
in 1989 at the
Group of 7 Summit in Paris.
FATF defines its aims as “…development and promotion of policies,
both at national and international levels, to combat
money laundering and
terrorist financing…and working (
) to generate the necessary
political will to bring about national legislative and regulatory reforms in
these areas”.
Initial membership of the FATF comprised the Summit participants, namely,
Canada, France, Germany, Italy, Japan, United Kingdom, United
States and the
Commission of the European Communities. It also included eight additional
countries: Australia, Austria, Belgium,
Luxembourg, Netherlands, Spain, Sweden
and Switzerland.
In 1990 the FATF issued 40 Recommendations to guide the development of a
comprehensive plan of action to combat money laundering worldwide.
Recommendations were completely revised in 1996 and 2003. The FATF issued 8
Special Recommendations to address the issues
of terrorism financing in 2001
following the September 11 terrorist acts in the United
The FATF then issued a
ninth Special Recommendation on terrorism financing in October 2004.
Collectively, these recommendations are
known as the “40 + 9
Recommendations”. Australia’s involvement in the development of the
FATF 40 Recommendations
assisted to ensure the Recommendations were generally
consistent with the FTR Act and Australia’s AML program.
Evaluating Australia’s Initiatives: The
FATF’s Mutual Evaluation Processes
A key role of the FATF has been to conduct mutual evaluations of countries
throughout the world in order to impartially evaluate the
effectiveness and
efficacy of anti-money laundering and counter-terrorism financing (AML/CTF)
frameworks and initiatives. Ranking
countries against the FATF’s 40 + 9
Recommendations, a mutual evaluation aims to highlight areas of compliance,
partial compliance
and notably, where improvement is necessary within each
country in comparison to the set international standards.
Australia has been the subject of three mutual evaluations, with the first in
1992 and the second in 1996. In 2005 the FATF conducted
its third mutual
evaluation of Australia. This evaluation was the first to measure
Australia’s compliance with the revised
FATF 40 + 9 Recommendations. The
was published in
October 2005 and highlighted a number of strengths in Australia’s system.
In addition, it identified a number
of areas in which work was necessary to
ensure Australia’s full compliance with the FATF’s Revised 40 + 9
Recommendations.
A table of findings from the FATF MER has been included in Appendix 1.
The Mutual Evaluation Findings: Australia’s
Legislative Response
Many of the findings in the MER echoed what had already been identified by
the Australian Government’s own review of the AML/CTF
initiatives in
Australia. The review, announced by the Minister for Justice and Customs on 8
Australia’s AML/CTF system in the light of the revised FATF standards.
While the FTR Act had last been updated by the
Proceeds of Crime Act 2002
Suppression of the Financing of Terrorism Act
(Cth), the review clarified that in order for Australia’s
financial industry to maintain its internationally respected position,
action to implement the revised recommendations was necessary. Further,
interpretative notes to the FATF Recommendations clearly
stated that basic
AML/CTF obligations were required to be set out in law or by
regulation.
Comprehensive consultation with the relevant industry sectors was undertaken
to establish a number of in-principle agreements regarding
the approach to
reforms for Australia’s AML/CTF program. From January 2004, the
Attorney-General’s Department has progressively
issued five
industry-specific “Issues Papers” outlining AML/CTF regulatory
options. These “Issues Papers”
and the 46 submissions received in
response to them formed the basis of a paper outlining the Australian
Government’s policy
on implementing the
FATF’s AML/CTF standards.
From January 2004 until mid-2005, the Attorney-General’s Department,
supported by AUSTRAC, also conducted a series of presentations
to a wide range
of industry groups based on the issues papers and the policy principles.
Numerous bilateral meetings took place and
public consultation forums were held
in Sydney and Melbourne. Further, the Minister for Justice and Customs
established a Ministerial
Advisory Group comprising representatives of selected
industry associations to engage in high level discussion of AML/CTF
implementation
options for each of the affected industry sectors. This advisory
group, which also included representatives from the Attorney-General’s
Department, Treasury, AUSTRAC and the Office of Small Business, met on a number
of occasions throughout the development of the legislation.
The Minister also conducted a series of round table meetings with industry
between July and September 2005. These meetings included
the financial services
sector, the gambling sector and the accounting and legal professions, and
highlighted industry concerns and
approaches in progressing AML/CTF
legislation.
On 11 October 2005, the Government announced it would proceed with a package
of reforms, which would be implemented in a two tranche
approach. On 16 Dec
2005, the Government released the
Anti-Money Laundering and Counter-Terrorism
Financing Exposure Draft Bill 2005
(Cth) and sample AML/CTF Rules for a four
month public consultation period.
The Exposure Draft Bill was referred to the Senate Legal and Constitutional
Committee in February 2006. Submissions were called for
and several public
hearings were held by the Senate Committee. On 9 May 2006, a report resulting
from the submissions and the public
hearings was tabled in
Parliament.
It was noted in the report that “…during the course of the
inquiry, the committee learned that most industry groups have
been largely
satisfied with the extent and nature of their ongoing engagement with the
Minister and/or the Department in terms of
preliminary discussion and a
consultation process”.
During the consultation process with industry it was clearly articulated that
industry preferred AUSTRAC to take carriage of the dual
role as regulator and
FIU. This ultimately was captured in the legislative package and constituted a
unique and innovative approach
to implementing the FATF’s Recommendations.
Following this initial consultation period, a markedly revised Draft AML/CTF
Bill and Rules were released on 13 July 2006 for a second
public consultation
period. This draft Bill and Rules resulted from the demand for a less
prescriptive and more risk-based legislative
package. The revised AML/CTF Bill
was introduced into the Commonwealth Parliament on 1 November 2006, and was
again referred to the
Senate Legal and Constitutional Legislation Committee for
further inquiry and review. Public hearings on the Bill were held during
November 2006, with the Committee reporting on its inquiry on 28 November
The Bill passed through both Houses of Parliament in early Dec 2006 and the
Anti-Money Laundering and Counter-Terrorism Act 2006
received Royal
Assent on 12 Dec 2006.
The AML/CTF Act: The Nature of the
Legislation
The AML/CTF Act allows a risk-based approach to AML/CTF minimising the extent
of prescription in the legislation. More accurately,
the legislation is
principles-based and those guiding principles provide a risk-based framework of
governance in achieving the overall
objectives of the AML/CTF Act. The
overarching objectives of the legislation are to combat money-laundering and
terrorism financing
in Australia and are outlined in s 3 of the AML/CTF Act.
The objectives include:
fulfilling Australia’s international obligations, including
obligations to combat money laundering and the financing of terrorism
addressing matters of international concern, including the need to combat
money laundering and the financing of terrorism, and
addressing those matters of international concern to affect beneficially
Australia’s relations with foreign countries and international
organisations.
The guiding principles used to meet these objectives are set out in s 212 of
the AML/CTF Act and include:
retaining, compiling, analysing and disseminating eligible collected
information
providing advice and assistance, in relation to AUSTRAC information, to the
persons and agencies who are entitled or authorised to
access AUSTRAC
information
advising and assisting reporting entities in relation to their obligations
under the AML/CTF Act, the Regulations and the AML/CTF
advising and assisting the representatives of reporting entities in relation
to compliance by reporting entities with the AML/CTF
Act, the Regulations and
the AML/CTF Rules, and
promoting compliance with the AML/CTF Act, the Regulations and the AML/CTF
Underpinned by the principles is the framework of governance
adopted in the AML/CTF Act, which has its foundation in a risk-based
approach. In the context of AML/CTF, that risk-based framework:
assumes that industry is best-placed to know its own business
recognises that industry will best understand their individual exposure to
is adaptable in a rapidly changing environment
places responsibility on industry and the regulator to keep up-to-date with
global changes
is broad enough to cover a wide range of industries
allows industry to focus on real risks which promote better risk mitigation
and better cost benefit
minimises inconvenience for the majority of customers, who are low-risk,
avoids a single blueprint for criminals to discover and
The Specifics of the Legislation and its
Implementation
Implementation of the AML/CTF Act is to be undertaken over two
The implementation
schedule for obligations arising from the AML/CTF Act are set out in Appendix 2.
The AML/CTF Act builds upon existing obligations under the FTR Act, but also
applies to a wider range of businesses. For example,
the FTR Act applied to
banks and other ‘cash dealers’, but the AML/CTF Act applies to the
services of a greater range
of financial services, bullion and gambling
entities. Obligations are based on specific activities, known as
‘designated services’.
Designated services are listed in section 6,
Table 1 of the AML/CTF Act.
Financial institutions or businesses which provide designated services have
obligations under the AML/CTF Act and are referred to
as ‘reporting
entities’. Those obligations are set out under the Act and include:
verification of identity of new customers, including ongoing customer due
implementation and maintenance of an AML/CTF program
record keeping
reporting of specified transactions and suspicious matters, and
monitoring of customers and their transactions.
The AML/CTF Program
Each reporting entity with obligations under the AML/CTF Act is required to
identify the level of AML/CTF risk posed by its products,
services and business
activities. In broad terms, AML/CTF risks are related to:
customer types
ways in which services are delivered
foreign jurisdictions dealt with, and
permanent operations/establishments overseas.
A reporting entity is required to implement an AML/CTF program to minimise
and manage the risk of their products and/or services being
utilised for
The AML/CTF program can
be implemented using a risk-based approach, but must take into account the
nature, size and complexity of
the business and the risk that business might
reasonably face of money laundering and terrorism financing. The program must
be applicable to all areas of a business which provide designated services.
The AML/CTF program adopted should comprise two parts – Part A and Part
Part A of an AML/CTF program should include, amongst other things:
a method for risk rating services, products and customer types
a process for initial screening and ongoing monitoring of employees
a staff training program that makes sure staff are kept up to date with
issues such as risks posed by new products and services the
business offers,
training and monitoring of agents and third parties, including obligations
to ensure that agents are aware of ML/TF risks and reporting
requirements.
Part B of an AML/CTF program should include, amongst other things:
methods for identifying customers and risks they may pose in relation to
ongoing customer due diligence (including monitoring transaction behaviour
and being aware of any changes in customer behaviour),
a process for re-identification and verification of existing customers as
required. For example, if an existing customer is offered
a new product or
service they may need to be re-identified or if a suspicious matter is raised in
regard to an existing customer
then re-verification procedures would need to be
In order to assist businesses in designing and implementing their AML/CTF
programs, the AUSTRAC CEO has made AML/CTF
to provide greater detail
regarding the requirements of Part A and Part B of an AML/CTF program.
Minimum standards have been identified within the AML/CTF Rules to assist
reporting entities in identifying low and medium risk customers
providing a designated service. These minimum requirements include (for
individuals) collecting the customer’s full
name, the customer’s
date of birth and the customer’s residential address. Businesses must also
have in place as Part
B of an AML/CTF program a verification process for
identification information. For a low-risk individual customer, at a minimum,
the customer’s full name and either the customer’s date of birth or
the customer’s residential address must be
verified using reliable and
independent documentation, reliable and independent electronic data or a
combination of the two. Additional
identification and verification requirements
exist for companies, partnerships, trustees, incorporated and unincorporated
associations,
registered cooperatives, government bodies and high risk
AUSTRAC’s Expanding Role as Industry
Under the AML/CTF Act, AUSTRAC has a dual role of industry regulator and FIU.
As an FIU, AUSTRAC’s primary responsibility is
to provide intelligence
from information gained from transaction reports to designated partner
Information is also
provided to certain international counterparts such as Italy’s UIC/SAR,
Lebanon’s SIC, Singapore’s
STRO and the US’s
AUSTRAC’s regulatory approach is one which promotes ‘voluntary
compliance’ guided by education and persuasion, consistency,
proportionality and accountability. AUSTRAC’s objectives for industry
supervision of the AML/CTF regime are to promote ‘good
ML/TF risk management and regulation across industry, rather than adopting a
prescriptive approach to industry regulation.
This market-oriented approach has
the benefits of placing a compliance burden on industry that is not excessive,
designed to promote
a level playing field and contributing to an economic
climate that remains conducive to innovation, competition and efficiency.
In implementing the regulatory requirements of the AML/CTF Act, AUSTRAC has
adopted a phased approach to its deliverables. This phased
approach generally
accords with the implementation timeline of the legislation from late 2006 until
The AML/CTF regulatory environment adopted by AUSTRAC is one in which a
general preference for negotiating voluntary rectification
and promoting
deterrence is encouraged, as opposed to moving quickly to formal intervention
and statutory sanctions. AUSTRAC has
encouraged similar treatment of like
entities, and has tailored its regulatory approach to distinctive groups so that
it can more
intensively supervise high risk entities. It has acknowledged that
remedies are required that fit their purpose and are commensurate
gravity of the problem being addressed, while also being realistic and
practical. Ultimately, as a regulator, AUSTRAC has
adopted measures to ensure
that compliance and enforcement activity is conducted professionally,
objectively, fairly and reasonably.
AUSTRAC’s Principles for Compliance,
Monitoring and Enforcement
Under the AML/CTF Act, primary responsibility for ML/TF risk management and
statutory compliance rests with the financial, bullion
and gambling sectors at
the level of each reporting entity’s board and senior management. Well
managed and suitably prudent
entities will be arranging to implement sound ML/TF
risk management systems without waiting for guidance from AUSTRAC as the AML/CTF
In conducting monitoring and enforcement, AUSTRAC is mindful of promoting a
number of key factors, including, for example:
allowing ample opportunity for voluntary compliance with the new regime
a preference in the first instance for solving problems rather than applying
similar treatment of like entities, but not ‘one size fits
remedies that fit their deterrent purpose and are proportionate to the
problem, and
strict internal governance to ensure that its actions are not capricious or
In the first 15 months from each of the staggered commencement dates, AUSTRAC
will facilitate compliance by reporting entities through
awareness raising,
education, advisory visits and inspections. In that period civil penalty action
will only be initiated where a
reporting entity has failed to take reasonable
steps towards compliance with its obligations.
AUSTRAC’s monitoring activities will include onsite inspections, desk
reviews, annual consultations, thematic studies, systematic
data gathering and
liaison with other regulators to coordinate regulatory oversight. Monitoring of
entities will be undertaken using
a risk-based approach to ensure a level
playing field in relation to compliance, and monitoring will take place
according to the
staggered implementation timetable. In other words, as
obligations come into effect, compliance with those obligations will be
The type of monitoring conducted (for example onsite visits or desk top
assessments) as well as the frequency and the focus of the
monitoring will be
determined by AUSTRAC. This will be carried out having regard to the potential
impact of the identified risk on
the integrity of the financial system and the
likelihood of that impact materialising in practice.
The AML/CTF Act provides AUSTRAC with increased monitoring and information
gathering powers. For example, if AUSTRAC wished to access
the premises of a
cash dealer under the FTR Act, a notice had to be issued to the business
requesting access. However, the business
was not compelled by the legislation to
grant that access. This is no longer the case with the introduction of the
AML/CTF Act. If
an entity refuses to grant access, AUSTRAC can now enter the
premises under a monitoring warrant issued by a magistrate for the purposes
exercising its monitoring
AUSTRAC’s monitoring powers enable an authorised officer to search the
reporting entity’s premises for any:
compliance records
systems used by a reporting entity at the premises for record keeping
reports under the AML/CTF Act that are retained at, or accessible from the
premises, and
systems used by a reporting entity in connection with preparing, sending or
retaining reports under the AML/CTF Act, the Regulations
During the search of a premises, AUSTRAC may:
examine any activity conducted on the reporting entity’s premises that
may relate to information provided under the AML/CTF
Act, Rules or
Regulations
examine any thing on the reporting entity’s premises that may relate
to information under the AML/CTF Act, Regulations and
take photographs or make video or audio recordings on the reporting
entity’s premises of any such activity or thing
inspect documents and take extracts from or make copies of documents
secure items for a 24 hour period
operate equipment and use facilities such as computers, scanners and
photocopiers, and
remove from the premises a disk, tape or other storage device to which the
information has been transferred.
Under s 150 of the AML/CTF Act an authorised officer entering premises,
either by consent or under a monitoring warrant, can ask the
occupier of the
premises questions and ask them to produce relevant documents, with civil and
criminal penalties existing for non-cooperation.
AUSTRAC’s formal policies for enforcement are outlined in two
documents: AUSTRAC’s Enforcement Policy and Enforcement
AUSTRAC is committed to
ensuring that decisions relating to enforcement are based on fact, with due
regard for process and natural
It is expected that the large majority of reporting entities will be well
intentioned, open to negotiation, and willing to comply
with AUSTRAC’s
rectification recommendations. In the case of the few which may prove to be
unresponsive and/or recalcitrant,
AUSTRAC will look to take formal enforcement
action. It is expected that formal enforcement action will be relatively
infrequent,
particularly in the early years of the AML/CTF Act and Rules, and
particularly for entities prepared to deal with the regulator in
an honest, open
and cooperative manner.
AUSTRAC Tools to Assist Industry Compliance with the
AML/CTF Act
AUSTRAC has developed a regulatory toolkit to assist reporting entities in
complying with their obligations under the AML/CTF Act.
For the most part these
have been developed in partnership with industry, and this work will continue.
This includes the following:
The following instruments containing AML/CTF Rules have been made and
registered:
Anti-Money Laundering and Counter-Terrorism Financing Rules Instrument
2007 (No. 1)
This Instrument contains the majority of the registered AML/CTF Rules. The
current compilation comprises matters including:
'designated business group' definition
correspondent banking
customer identification
AML/CTF programs
gambling services
AML/CTF compliance reports (reporting and lodgement periods)
electronic funds transfer instructions (involving use of a credit card)
'approved third-party bill payment system' definition
monetary thresholds for certain designated services in tables 1 and 3
ongoing customer due diligence
international funds transfer instruction reportable details
• suspicious matter reportable details, and
• threshold transaction reportable details.
Anti-Money Laundering and Counter-Terrorism Financing Rules Instrument
2007 (No. 2)
This Instrument contains AML/CTF Rules relating to paragraph (e) of the
definition of 'correspondent banking relationship' in section
5 of the AML/CTF
Anti-Money Laundering and Counter-Terrorism Financing
This Instrument contains AML/CTF Rules relating to:
movements of bearer negotiable instruments
movements of physical currency into or out of Australia
receipts of physical currency from outside Australia, and
Register of Providers of Designated Remittance Services.
There will be ongoing consultation with industry on the drafting of any new
The following Guidance Notes have been published and are available from the
AUSTRAC website:
Correspondent banking
Designated business groups
Register of Providers of Designated Remittance Services
Exemptions and modifications under the AML/CTF Act
Opening an account, and
Risk Management and AML/CTF programs.
AUSTRAC will continue to assist industry and reporting entities with further
Guidance Notes.
Self Assessment Questionnaire
The SAQ contains questions for organisations that allow a self-assessment of
the systems, procedures and organisational arrangements
in place for the
effective management of AML/CTF risks. The SAQ assists the reporting entity to
assess their own levels of risk,
compliance, preparedness and effectiveness.
Regulatory Policies have been developed to provide reporting entities with
further insight into AUSTRAC’s approach to its regulatory
task. These
policies include a Supervisory Framework outlining AUSTRAC’s guiding
principles, statutory objectives and approach
to working in partnership with
other Australian regulators. Other policies developed include the Education,
Exemptions, Monitoring
and Enforcement Policies.
Regulatory Guide
The Regulatory Guide provides an overview of reporting entities’
obligations and includes links to other relevant information
and guidance notes.
Created through consultation with industry it is a complex, long term project
which is envisaged to be an iterative
document that will endure over a number of
Publication of materials for the public and industry on AUSTRAC’s
website has continued. These include Frequently Asked Questions,
a specialised
Business Section, links to the AML/CTF Act, any consequential amendments to the
AML/CTF Act, Rules and media releases.
Latest additions include “AUSTRAC
Online”- an information portal which provides a simple and effective means
the latest AML/CTF information, and “e-learning” which
will assist regulated entities better understand their obligations
AML/CTF legislation. Information on the site will be regularly updated to
reflect legislative and other changes.
Underpinning the support materials created by AUSTRAC, is an education
strategy aimed to facilitate reporting entity compliance with
the AML/CTF Act.
By implementing the
Anti-Money Laundering and Counter-Terrorism Financing
and expanding AUSTRAC’s role to incorporate responsibilities as
the AML/CTF regulator, the Australian Government has demonstrated
its commitment
to a progressive legislative response to global AML/CTF issues. The full
introduction of the AML/CTF legislative reforms
will bring Australia closer to
full compliance with the FATF’
+ 9 Recommendations. This in turn will
ensure the increased competitiveness and security of our financial markets. It
will also lead
to a safer Australian society in general. It cannot be progressed
by the Government alone, it must be a partnership between the Government,
agencies and the private sector to be most effective.
The author acknowledges the contribution to this paper by Monika Fratric, Ana
Constantinou and Christine Bryant at AUSTRAC.
Appendix 1: Australia’s MER Compliance ratings
(October 2005)
• A Compliant (C) rating is a finding that the assessment criteria of
the particular recommendations are fully observed.
• A Largely Compliant (LC) rating indicates that there are only minor
shortcomings, with a large majority of the assessment
criteria being fully
• A Partially Compliant (PC) rating indicates that some substantive
action has been taken which complies with some of the assessment
• A Non-Compliant (NC) rating indicates that there are major
shortcomings, with a large majority of the assessment criteria
Forty Recommendations
ML offence – mental element and corporate liability
Confiscation and provisional measures
Secrecy laws consistent with the Recommendations
Customer due diligence
Politically exposed persons
Correspondent banking
New technologies & non face-to-face business
Third parties and introducers
Record keeping
Unusual transactions
DNFBP – R.5, 6, 8-11
Suspicious transaction reporting
Protection & no tipping-off
Internal controls, compliance & audit
DNFBP – R.13-15 & 21
Shell banks
Other forms of reporting
Other NFBP & secure transaction techniques
Special attention for higher risk countries
Foreign branches & subsidiaries
Regulation, supervision and monitoring
DNFBP - regulation, supervision and monitoring
Guidelines & Feedback
Law enforcement authorities
Powers of competent authorities
Supervisors
Resources, integrity and training
National co-operation
Legal persons – beneficial owners
Legal arrangements – beneficial owners
Conventions
Mutual legal assistance (MLA)
Dual criminality
MLA on confiscation and freezing
Extradition
Other forms of co-operation
Nine Special Recommendations
SR.I Implement UN instruments
SR.II Criminalise terrorist financing
SR.III Freeze and confiscate terrorist assets
SR.IV Suspicious transaction reporting
SR.V International co-operation
SR VI AML requirements for money/value transfer services
SR VII Wire transfer rules
SR.VIII Non-profit organisations
SR. IX Cash couriers
APPENDIX 2: IMPLEMENTATION TIMETABLE OF THE AML/CTF ACT
Part of the Act
Division Titles
Date of Commencement
Part 1, Sections 1 and 2
Introduction
Commencement
12 Dec 2006
Part 1, Sections 3 to 26
Introduction
Designated Services and Definitions
13 Dec 2006
Reports about cross-border movements of physical currency and bearer
negotiable instruments
13 Dec 2006
Electronic funds transfer instructions
13 Dec 2006
Register of providers of designated remittance services
13 Dec 2006
Countermeasures
13 Dec 2006
Part 10, Divisions 1, 2, 4 and 7
Record-keeping requirements
Records of transactions, funds transfer instructions and exemptions
13 Dec 2006
Secrecy and access
13 Dec 2006
13 Dec 2006
13 Dec 2006
Information-gathering powers
13 Dec 2006
Enforcement
13 Dec 2006
Administration
13 Dec 2006
Vicarious liability
13 Dec 2006
Miscellaneous
13 Dec 2006
Alternative constitutional basis
13 Dec 2006
Part 3, Division 5
Reporting obligations of reporting entities
AML/CTF compliance reports
12 June 2007
Correspondent banking
12 June 2007
Part 10, Division 6
Record-keeping requirements
Records about due diligence assessments of correspondent banking
relationships
12 June 2007
Part 2, except for Division 6
Identification procedures etc
- Identification procedures for certain pre-commencement customers
- Identification procedures for certain low-risk customers
- Identification procedures etc
- Verification of identity etc
- General provisions
12 Dec 2007
Anti-money laundering and counter-terrorism financing programs
12 Dec 2007
Part 10, Division 3
Record-keeping requirements
Records of identification procedures
12 Dec 2007
Part 10, Division 5
Record-keeping requirements
Records about AML/CTF programs
12 Dec 2007
Part 2, Division 6
Identification procedures etc
Ongoing customer due diligence
12 Dec 2008
Part 3, Division 1, 2, 3, 4 and 6
Reporting obligations of reporting entities
- Suspicious matters
- Threshold transactions
- International funds transfer instructions
12 Dec 2008
Chief Executive Officer,
Australian Transaction Reports and Analysis Centre (AUSTRAC); Research Fellow,
Department of Business Law
and Taxation, Monash University. This article is
based on a presentation given at the Monash/Macquarie University Financial
Reform Third Anniversary Conference, 13 July 2007.
Walker, J. et al ,
‘Money Laundering in and through Australia, 2004’, Report,
Australian Institute of Criminology, August
Abuza, Z., “
Terrorism in South East Asia: The Financial Network of Al Qaeda and Jemaah
”, NBR Analysis, Vol 14(5), Dec 2003, p 4,
http://www.apgml.org/frameworks/docs/7/Z Abuzer - TF in SE Asia
These Commissions were set up
inter alia to ascertain the extent of criminal activity and tax avoidance in
certain industries. See,
Australian Royal Commission of
Inquiry into Drugs
(Williams, AGPS, 1980); the
Royal Commission of
Inquiry into Drug Trafficking
(Stewart, AGPS, Canberra, 1983) and the
Royal Commission on the Activities of the Federated Ship Painters and Dockers
(Costigan Report, 26 October 1984).
Financial Transaction
Reports Act 1988
http://www.comlaw.gov.au/ComLaw/Legislation/ActCompilation1.nsf/all/search/70C31AE547261470CA2573010082BFD7.
See United Nations Security
Council Resolution No 1373(2001)
http://www.un.org/News/Press/docs/2001/sc7158.doc.htm, European Union Council
Common Position 2001/931 CFSP (Dec 2001)
http://europa.eu/scadplus/leg/en/lvb/l33208.htm,
Australian Government:
Department of Foreign Affairs and Trade – Australia’s Terrorist
Asset Freezing Regime
http://www.dfat.gov.au/icat/freezing_terrorist_assets.html.
In the USA a number of
measures occurred, most notably, the formation of the Department of Homeland
This was built by Canadian
technology experts who were based temporarily at AUSTRAC and shipping it back to
“FIU in the box”
is a computer system designed by AUSTRAC to assist developing FIUs in the
collection, storage, analysis
and dissemination of financial intelligence.
AUSTRAC Media Release,
“Australia and United States’ Financial Intelligence Units
strengthen efforts in counter terrorist
(sic) financing”, 18 November
The “G7Summit" was
formed in 1975 to provide an informal forum for coordination of economic policy
among prominent industrialised
nations. It comprised, Canada, France, Italy,
Germany, Japan, UK and the USA.
‘What is the
www.fatf-gafi.org/document/57/0,3343,en_32250379_32235720_34432121_1_1_1_1,00.html.
Recommendations’, www.fatf-
gafi.org/document/28/0,3343,en_32250379_32236930_33658140_1_1_1_1,00.html#40recs.
‘The Third Mutual
Evaluation Report’, www.fatf-gafi.org/dataoecd/60/33/35528955.pdf.
Minister for Justice and
Customs, Media Release,
www.ag.gov.au/www/agd/agd.nsf/Page/Anti-moneylaundering_Mediareleases.
The FATF Interpretative
www.oecd.org/document/53/0,3343,en_32250379_32236947_34261877_1_1_1_1,00.html.
Policy Principles for
Anti-Money Laundering Reform, June 2004,
http://www.ag.gov.au/agd/WWW/rwpattach.nsf/personal/7D725051B1171EE2CA256EAF00015A89/$FILE/Policy+0+Principles+Paper+for+Anti-Money+Laundering+reform.PDF.
Enquiry into the Exposure
Draft of the Anti-Money Laundering and Counter-Terrorism Financing Bill 2005,
(April 2006)
www.aph.gov.au/senate/committee/legcon_ctte/anti-money_laundering/index.htm.
Inquiry into the Exposure
Draft of the Anti-Money Laundering and Counter-Terrorism Financing Bill 2005,
(April 2006) chapter 3.6,
www.aph.gov.au/senate/committee/legcon_ctte/anti-money_laundering/index.htm.
Inquiry into the Anti-Money
Laundering and Counter-Terrorism Financing Bill 2006, (November 2006),
http://www.aph.gov.au/Senate/committee/legcon_ctte/aml_ctf06/index.htm.
Anti-Money Laundering
and Counter-Terrorism Financing Act 2006
www.comlaw.gov.au/comlaw/legislation/act1.nsf/asmade/bytitle/AD9D7C024DC9E300CA257244001003BF?OpenDocument.
Policy (Civil
Penalty Orders) Principles 2006
(Cth) set a period of 15 months following
each provision’s commencement date during which the AUSTRAC Chief
Executive Officer(CEO)
may apply for a civil penalty order against a reporting
entity for contravening a provision if the CEO is satisfied that the entity
failed to take reasonable steps to comply with the provision.
AML/CTF Act s 83.
AML/CTF Act s 84.
www.austrac.gov.au/aml_ctf_rules.html
(at 13 March 2008).
AML/CTF Act s 212.
The full names of the FIUs
are: Italy-Ufficio Italiano dei Cambi/Servizio Antiticiclaggio, Lebanon-Special
Investigation Fighting
Money, Singapore- Suspicious Transaction Reporting Office
and the United States- Financial Crimes Enforcement Network.
AML/CTF Act s 147.
Relevant AML/CTF Rules and
regulations are yet to be drafted.
Relevant AML/CTF Rules and
regulations yet to be drafted
www.austrac.gov.au/enforcement_policy.html
www.austrac.gov.au/aml_ctf_rules.html.
www.austrac.gov.au/guidance_notes.html.
www.austrac.gov.au/saq.html.
www.austrac.gov.au/policies.html.
www.austrac.gov.au/index.html
http://www.fatf-gafi.org/dataoecd/22/38/35509034.pdf.
http://www.austrac.gov.au/faqs.html.
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (433 KB)
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter