URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/journals/UNSWLawSocCConsc/2024/14.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 15:47:30
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Ailwood, Sarah --- "Defamation Law Reform in the #metoo Era" [2024] UNSWLawSocCConsc 14; (2024) 18 UNSW Law Society Court of Conscience 97
DEFAMATION LAW REFORM IN THE #METOO ERA
Sarah Ailwood
I Introduction
The ignition of ‘MeToo’ as a hashtag in October 2017 transformed
a phrase that Tarana Burke originated in a grassroots
support movement for girls
and women of colour who were victim-survivors of sexual violence, into a
movement driven by the mass publication
and witnessing of stories of violence
against women and calls for justice for victim-survivors. #MeToo has developed
into a global
movement that continues to provoke and influence law and policy
responses in myriad diverse ways that continue to unfold.
In the Australian context, the #MeToo movement triggered a string of
defamation threats and cases against media publishers who published
stories, and victim-survivors who spoke publicly about their alleged experiences
of sexual violence. This trend began in December
2017 when Geoffrey Rush
launched defamation proceedings against Nationwide News, publishers of the
Daily Telegraph
, for publishing stories alleging sexually inappropriate
conduct by Rush in the context of a Sydney Theatre Company production of
Since then, defamation
proceedings have been threatened or pursued by a series of high-profile men in
response to publications alleging
they engaged in sexually inappropriate
behaviour towards women, including Craig McLachlan, Chris Gayle, Luke Foley,
Christian Porter
and Andrew Laming.
Victim-survivors of gender-based violence, academics, advocates and media
publishers argue that the threat and reality of defamation
proceedings have
exerted a ‘chilling’ effect on the publication of #MeToo stories in
Australia and hampered their capacity
to publicise stories of violence against
women, particularly where an alleged perpetrator is or may be
identifiable.
The possibility of reforming defamation law to reflect the changing times of
the #MeToo era has been raised in the context of a number
of law reform
processes, including the Australian Human Rights Commission’s
Respect@Work:
National Inquiry into Sexual
Harassment in Australian Workplaces
Report (2020) (‘
Respect@Work
’) and Stage 2 Part B of the Defamation Law Working Party
(‘DLWP’) Review of the Model Defamation Provisions (‘MDP
Review’) overseen by the Standing Council of Attorneys-General
(‘SCAG’) and its
predecessors.
Defamation law and
debates surrounding its reform are frequently pitched as a contest between the
interests of media publishers,
the values of freedom of speech and, in the
#MeToo context, the desirability of publicly identifying alleged perpetrators of
violence on the one hand, and protecting the reputation of alleged
perpetrators and holding publishers to account on the other. Yet
this division
of interests implies that it is only parties who fall into one of these
categories who are affected by or have a stake
in defamation law. The position
and interests of victim-survivors of gender-based violence within defamation law
have been overlooked
within law reform processes, regarded as concomitant with
the interests of media publishers or, at best, marginalised within law
proposals. Yet the #MeToo movement has shed light on how defamation law
intersects with the experiences, needs and interests
of victim-survivors of
gender-based violence beyond the media and its capacity to publish #MeToo
This article analyses the ways in which defamation law intersects with
victim-survivors’ experiences of gender-based violence
and outlines recent
law reform processes, legislative changes and their potential consequences in
the context of the #MeToo movement.
The article begins by considering the
structure of the tort in Australian law and how the presumption of falsity works
victim-survivors, before turning to consider the defences of absolute
and qualified privilege and the public interest. The article
concludes with
reflections on the use of defamation trials as a proxy for sexual violence
trials and the need for protection of victim-survivor
witnesses within the trial
II The Structure Of The Tort
In Australian law, there is no requirement for a defamation plaintiff to
prove that a publication is false; all that is required is
proof of the elements
of publication, identification, defamatory meaning and, as of 1 July 2021,
serious harm.
In this respect
Australia resembles the United Kingdom and differs from the United States, where
a plaintiff is required to prove
that the publication is false, and where the
publication of #MeToo stories has triggered fewer defamation claims. In
Australia, by
contrast, it is relatively straightforward for a
publicly-identified alleged perpetrator of sexual violence to commence
proceedings
against a victim-survivor or a media publisher. As Michelle
Harradine argues, Australian law contains an implicit ‘presumption
falsity’ – an assumption that the defamatory publication is false
– which benefits the plaintiff and ‘places
the burden of proof on
defamation defendants to establish the substantial truth of the matters
complained of as a defence’.
Reliance on the ‘truth
makes defamation
claims against victim-survivors and media publishers who publicly identify
alleged perpetrators particularly difficult
to defend because the subject matter
of the publication – sexual violence – is notoriously difficult to
prove within
the adversarial process.
The structure of the tort within Australian law makes it easy for
publicly-identified perpetrators of gender-based violence to commence
claims, and difficult for victim-survivors and media publishers who publish
#MeToo stories to defend them. For many media
publishers and victim-survivors,
the publication of #MeToo stories identifying perpetrators within this legal
matrix represents an
unacceptable risk, and the effect of this is the silencing
of victim-survivor voices and a ‘chilling’ effect on the trajectory
of the #MeToo movement in
It is worth noting in
this context that the success of the truth defence in the highly-publicised case
Lehrmann v Network Ten
unlikely to give comfort to either victim-survivors or media publishers in the
publication of #MeToo stories. In that case, the
plaintiff, Bruce Lehrmann,
brought a claim against Network Ten in relation to a television interview in
which Brittany Higgins alleged
that she had been sexually assaulted in
Parliament House. Lehrmann successfully argued that he was identifiable within
the interview
and that it was defamatory. A range of factors underpinned the
success of Network Ten’s truth defence, including the quantity
of evidence
available to the defence (including extensive audio-visual evidence and the
testimony of multiple third parties), the
failure of the plaintiff to offer a
plausible alternative, Higgins’ credibility as a witness in her account of
the sexual assault,
and the uniquely trauma-informed approach to victim-witness
credibility taken by Lee J. In terms of the risk matrix that confronts
publishers and victim-survivors in deciding whether to publish #MeToo stories,
reinforces the very high standard that media publishers must
meet to establish the substantial truth of a publication in which an
perpetrator of sexual violence is identified or identifiable.
III Defences
Absolute and Qualified Privilege
Beyond cases that have attracted media attention, the #MeToo movement has
exposed in new ways defamation law’s silencing effect
on victim-survivors
of gender-based violence because of its wide application to a range of
situations where they may disclose their
experience to another person, including
where they may seek protection from violence or the use of a legal process
designed to provide
a remedy or redress. A complete and indefeasible defence of
absolute privilege is available to publishers of otherwise defamatory
publications within parliamentary and litigation contexts, and to persons and
bodies specified by state and territory legislatures
in a Schedule to the
in these circumstances, any
defamation claim is likely to be summarily
Absolute privilege
does not protect victim-survivors from defamation claims in relation to their
communications to workplace managers
and colleagues, frontline support service
workers, bodies empowered to investigate human rights
complaints,
or, until recently,
police officers:
all people to
whom victim-survivors of gender-based violence are known – and indeed
encouraged – to turn to for support,
in addition to family, friends and
wider social networks.
defamation claim is brought against a victim-survivor in relation to a
disclosure made in these contexts, the defence of absolute
privilege is not
available. It is likely that the victim-survivor would need to argue the truth
defence, which presents the challenges
outlined above, or alternatively the
defences of qualified privilege or the public interest (discussed below). Each
of these defences
requires a full trial, with the concomitant costs in terms of
time, money and personal stress.
The threat of defamation, the complexity of the defences available to
victim-survivors (if known)
the burdens and costs presented by such litigation, may deter many
victim-survivors from reporting their experiences to employers,
the police and
complaints-handling agencies. Research by Featherstone and Bargon reveals that
legal professionals representing victim-survivors
of workplace sexual harassment
report a rising trend in ‘their clients receiving vexatious defamation
concerns notices when
sexual harassment is raised with
employers’,
which often
leads to the withdrawal of the complaint. The destructive effects of defamation
litigation for victim-survivors are evident
in the case of
A victim-survivor of
coercive control in a relationship that had recently ended reported the violence
to a police officer and was
successfully sued for defamation by the perpetrator
at trial. Jarro DCJ denied the defence of qualified privilege because aspects
the victim-survivor’s report to police concerned conduct that is not an
offence, because ‘police have no interest
in or a duty to receive gossip
or adverse commentary’,
and because his Honour found that the victim-survivor’s report was
malicious. All of these findings were overturned on
but by then the costs of
the litigation had forced the victim-survivor to declare bankruptcy.
The ‘chilling’ effects of defamation law in cases of gender-based
violence have been acknowledged and analysed in law
reform processes covering
both sexual harassment and defamation law reform. In its
Respect@Work
the AHRC noted that
in ‘consultations and submissions, the Commission heard that the manner in
which Australia’s defamation
laws play out, are a contributing factor to
discouraging sexual harassment victims from making
complaints’.
noted, however, that the operation of defamation provisions was beyond the scope
of its Terms of Reference and urged the
then Council of Attorneys-General
(‘CAG’), which was then reviewing the Model Defamation Provisions,
to consider their
operation ‘as they relate to workplace sexual harassment
Part B of Stage
2 of the MDP Review, announced by CAG in March 2021 with the release of a
Discussion Paper prepared by the DLWP,
takes up the AHRC’s invitation by
considering the adequacy of the existing defence of qualified privilege and the
possibility
of extending the defence of absolute privilege to statements made to
police and statutory investigation agencies, and to complaints
of unlawful
conduct made to employers and professional disciplinary
In the resulting ‘Review of the Model Defamation Provisions Stage 2
Part B – Policy Options’ paper released in August
the DLWP proposed
extending the defence of absolute privilege to disclosures made to police
officers where they are acting in an
official capacity. Citing
, the extension of the defence of absolute privilege to reports to
police officers should prevent victim-survivors of gender-based
violence from
being sued in defamation or having defamation threats made against
This measure was agreed to
by SCAG in September 2023 and is in the process of being implemented across
State and Territory
The DLWP also
recommended that absolute privilege be extended to the reporting of unlawful
personal conduct (such as sexual harassment)
to complaints-handling
Guidelines have been
published to assist State and Territory jurisdictions, but legislation is yet to
be introduced to extend absolute
privilege to complaints-handling
Further, SCAG and the DWLP declined to extend the protection of absolute
privilege to victim-survivors of workplace sexual harassment
reporting the
harassment to their employers.
In so doing, SCAG and the DWLP failed to support the key constituency the AHRC
raised as in need of protection in the
Respect@Work Report
Victim-survivors and bystanders seeking to report sexual harassment internally
within their workplaces remain susceptible to threats
and actions for
defamation.
Public Interest Defence
In addition to the truth defence and absolute and qualified privilege, the
other defence potentially of relevance to victim-survivors
of gender-based
violence is the ‘public interest’ defence, which commenced on 1 July
This defence requires a
publisher to establish that the publication concerns an issue of public interest
and that they reasonably
believed that the publication is in the public
interest. David Rolph argues that the efficacy of defences of this kind
in part upon judicial approaches to their application. They can
be applied strictly or beneficially, with the latter approach being
preferable,
being more consistent with their beneficial intent in allowing greater freedom
of speech’.
As the #MeToo
moment increasingly makes gender-based violence, and particularly sexual
violence and harassment against women, a matter
public interest, as
well as a matter the reporting of which is increasingly regarded as
public interest
, this defence may in the future be deployed by victim
survivors or media publishers seeking to publish #MeToo stories, including
they seek to identify alleged perpetrators.
Such a potential liberation to publish #MeToo stories is arguably a two-edged
sword. On the one hand, it may liberalise the capacity
of media publishers to
propel the #MeToo moment through public interest reporting of sexual violence,
harassment and other forms
of misconduct. Additionally, the public interest
defence may also assist victim-survivors of gender-based violence to publish
own #MeToo stories. In a 2023 UK case, a similar defence was successfully
used by a victim-survivor of sexual abuse who published
an account of her
experience and identified the perpetrator on a blog, in an email and on social
media, to defend a libel claim brought
against her by the alleged
perpetrator.
The judge accepted
that the need to protect women from sexual abuse was a matter of public
interest, and that in the light of the
inadequacy of the police response to the
defendant’s complaint and the #MeToo moment, the publication was also in
However, it is also possible that, in potentially making it easier for media
publishers to publish #MeToo stories, the introduction
of the public interest
defence could also increase the risk that #MeToo stories will be published
without the knowledge, involvement
or consent of the victim-survivors at the
centre of the allegations. As I have argued elsewhere, in the Australian context
has been weaponised – mostly by men seeking to inflict reputational
damage on other men – through the publication of
allegations of sexual
misconduct without the knowledge, involvement or consent of the victim-survivor,
in ways that inflict personal
harms on victim-survivors for which law provides
Although the defence is yet to be tested in the context of a #MeToo
publication, early indications are that the judiciary will set
a high bar for
media publishers in determining whether the publication is in the public
interest. The defence has been applied by
Russell v Australian
Broadcasting Corporation (No
’) and discussed in obiter, also by Lee J, in
. Although his Honour noted the intention of the legislature to
expand the scope of defences available to publishers, and particularly
publishers, he set particularly high journalistic standards in both cases. In
, his Honour found that the ABC’s journalistic standards
were insufficiently rigorous to found a reasonable belief that the
publication
was in the public interest, and in
his Honour set a similarly
high standard, evaluating decision-making by journalists and media publishers
according to the
Media, Entertainment and Arts Alliance Journalist Code of
. In the #MeToo context, this close attention to journalistic rigour
and ethics could protect victim-survivors who do not want their
experiences
broadcast before the public, with or without identification, but may also
operate as a barrier to an increased publication
of #MeToo stories and so do
little to address the ‘chilling’ effect of defamation law.
IV The Victim-Survivor As Witness:
Defamation As Proxy For Sexual Violence Trials
Rush v Nationwide
were defamation cases that,
because of the structure of the tort and operation of the truth defence, acted
as a form of proxy for
sexual harassment and sexual assault cases. Yet the
victim-survivors who acted as witnesses in those trials enjoyed none of the
protections, such as giving evidence via a remote room, audio-visual
recording of evidence and having a support person present that,
victim-survivors of alleged sexual violence, they would be entitled to in
criminal proceedings. The brutality with which the adversarial
system inflicts
additional harm on victim-survivors within defamation cases was starkly revealed
, in which the victim-survivor endured two days of
examination-in-chief and cross-examination. Her allegations about Mr
behaviour, her motivation for testifying, her professionalism as an
actress and her mental health were openly challenged by both
counsel and the
presiding judge, Wigney J. As I have argued elsewhere, Wigney J then went on to
shred her credibility in a
laden with assumptions and myths about victim-survivors of sexual harassment and
the men who perpetrate
In Recommendation 39 of the
Respect@Work Report
, the AHRC recommended
that the CAG ‘consider how best to protect alleged victims of sexual
harassment who are witnesses in
civil proceedings, including but not limited to
defamation proceedings’ and cited measures including confidentiality and
suppression
of witness identity as well as safeguards such as a closed
courtroom, giving evidence from a remote room, audio-visual recording
evidence, having a support person present and being protected from
cross-examination by a self-represented
These issues were
incorporated within the DLWP’s Stage 2 Part B review of the
The Working Party
ultimately found that protections were thin and inconsistent across the
not a clear evidence base to demonstrate
the extent to which issues have arisen relating to the availability of
procedural protections
in civil proceedings for victims and survivors of sexual
harassment ... other than the findings of the Respect@Work Report and several
high profile cases’.
evidence alone apparently being insufficient, State and Territory governments
are now at liberty to implement or ignore protections
for sexual harassment
victim-witnesses as they see fit. The NSW Judicial Commission Civil Trials
Defamation Bench Book, last updated
in June 2024, contains no advice to judges
regarding courtroom protections for victim-witnesses of sexual
harassment.
The allocation of Recommendation 39 to an ad-hoc Working Party under the
direction of SCAG, rather than incorporating this reform
in the Review of Model
Defamation Provisions, will likely result in variable reforms across State and
Territory jurisdictions if,
indeed, any are enacted. This means that the
possibility of defending a defamation claim by giving evidence and being
cross-examined
to be a deterrent for victim-survivors who might otherwise speak
up about and
report their experiences.
V Conclusion
Reforms to Australia’s defamation laws in the changing times of the
#MeToo movement have been piecemeal attempts to protect
the speech of
victim-survivors of gender-based violence wishing to speak either privately or
publicly about their experiences. The
Australian Human Rights Commission noted
the harmful effects of defamation law on victim-survivors of workplace sexual
and presented the Standing Council of Attorneys-General with an
opportunity to address that harm through both the Defamation Law
Working Party
and the wider implementation of the
Respect@Work Report
recommendations.
The latter extended the defence of absolute privilege in only the limited
circumstances of reporting to police and
complaints-handling agencies in ways
that most jurisdictions are yet to legislate, and declined to act to extend
protections to victim-survivors
in defamation trials. Communications between
victim-survivors and employers, colleagues, frontline support workers and others
may turn to for support and assistance remain subject to defamation claims.
The consequence of these scant reform efforts is that
many victims of
gender-based violence have little more liberty to speak, or protection when they
do speak, than before these processes
were initiated. The lack of progress in
this area begs the question of when will the law meaningfully change, if not
with the changing
times of the #MeToo era?
Dr Sarah Ailwood is a Senior Lecturer and Academic Program
Director for the School of Law, University of Wollongong.
Rush v Nationwide
Pty Ltd (No 7)
Rush v Nationwide News
Nationwide News Pty
Limited v Rush
[2020] FCAFC 115
(2020) 380 ALR 432.
McLachlan v Whelan
[2019] NSWSC 514
Gayle v Fairfax Media Publications Pty Ltd (No
[2018] NSWSC 1838
; Christopher Knaus and Michael McGowan, ‘NSW
Labor Sources Shocked by Luke Foley’s Decision to Sue for
Defamation’,
(online, 9 November 2018)
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2018/nov/09/nsw-labor-sources-shocked-by-luke-foleys-decision-to-sue-for-defamation>;
Porter v Australian Broadcasting Corporation
[2021] FCA 863
Nine Network Australia Pty Ltd
[2022] FCA 63.
Lehrmann v Network Ten
(Trial Judgement)
[2024] FCA 369
Australian Human Rights
Commission,
Respect@Work: National Inquiry into Sexual Harassment in
Australian Workplaces
(Report, 5 March 2020) (‘
Respect@Work
’); Australasian Parliamentary Counsel’s Committee,
Model Defamation Amendment (Absolute Privilege) Provisions 2023
of Amendment Provisions, 22 September 2023); see ‘Review of Model
Defamation Provisions’,
New South Wales Government
(Web Page, 29
August 2024)
<https://dcj.nsw.gov.au/about-us/engage-with-us/public-consultations/statutory-reviews/review-model-defamation-provisions.html>.
<https://dcj.nsw.gov.au/about-us/engage-with-us/past-consultations/statutory-reviews/review-model-defamation-provisions.html>
for details on the Stage 2 reforms of the MDP’s overseen by the DWP and
SCAG. The Standing Council of Attorneys-General was
preceded by the Meeting of
Attorneys-General and the Council of Attorneys-General.
Defamation Act 2005
Note that Western Australia and the Northern Territory are yet to
introduce legislation implementing the serious harm requirement.
Michelle Harradine,
‘Defamation Law and Epistemic Harm in the #MeToo Era’ (2022) 48(1)
Australian Feminist Law Journal
Defamation Act 2005
Karen O’Connell,
‘The #MeToo Movement in Australia: Silenced by Defamation and
Disbelief’ in Ann Noel and David
Oppenheimer (eds),
The Global #MeToo
Movement: How Social Media Propelled a Historic Movement and the Law
(Full Court Press, 2020) 259.
Lehrmann v Network Ten Pty Limited
[2024] FCA 369.
Defamation Act 2005
s 27(2)(d).
Attorney-General (NSW),
Review of Model Defamation Provisions – Stage 2 Discussion Paper
(Discussion Paper, 31 March 2021)
<https://dcj.nsw.gov.au/documents/about-us/engage-with-us/public-consultations/review-model-defamation-provisions/discussion-paper-stage-2.pdf>
Model Defamation Discussion Paper
’). Note that only New
South Wales, the Australian Capital Territory and South Australia have scheduled
additional persons and
Note that only New South
Wales and the Australian Capital Territory extend absolute privilege to human
rights complaint-handling
bodies. Also note that absolute privilege is extended
to complaints to the Australian Human Rights Commission under the
Discrimination Act 1984
Note that SCAG has agreed to
extend the defence of absolute privilege to publications to police officers.
This reform is in various
stages of implementation in the States and
Territories, discussed below.
Regina Featherstone and
Sharmilla Bargon,
Let’s Talk About Confidentiality: NDA Use in Sexual
Harassment Settlements Since the Respect@Work Report
(Report, 6 March 2024)
Attorney-General (Vic),
Review of the Model Defamation Provisions Stage 2 Part B – Policy
(Discussion Paper, 12 August 2022) 33 (‘
MDP Policy Options
Featherstone and Bargon (n
Sherman v Lamb
Bill Karageozis as
trustee for the bankrupt estate of Siobhan Lamb v Sherman
Respect@Work Report
Model Defamation
Discussion Paper
MDP Policy Options
Parliamentary
Counsel’s Committee, Parliament of Australia,
Model Defamation
Amendment (Absolute Privilege) Provisions 2023
(Explanatory Note, 25
September 2023) 2.
Standing Council of
Attorneys-General,
(Public Communique, 22 September 2023). The
defence has been extended to reports to police in New South Wales (
s 27(2)(b1))
and the Australian Capital Territory (
Law (Wrongs) Act 2002
s 137(2)(ba)).
At the time of writing, a Bill to
extend the defence is before the Victorian parliament (Justice Legislation
Amendment (Integrity,
Defamation and Other Matters) Bill 2024 (Vic)).
MDP Policy Options
Standing Council of
Attorneys-General,
Guiding Principles for Jurisdictions to Determine Whether
to Extend Absolute Privilege to Matter Published to a Complaints-Handling
(Guiding Principles, 22 September 2023).
MDP Policy Options
Defamation Act
Note that the public interest defence has not been
legislated in Western Australia or the Northern Territory.
David Rolph, ‘Freedom
of Speech and Defamation Law’ (2022) 96(10)
Australian Law Journal
Hay v Cresswell
[2023] EWHC 882 (KB)
Hay v Cresswell
Hay v Cresswell
Sarah Ailwood,
‘“Collateral Damage”: Consent, Subjectivity and
Australia’s #MeToo Moment’ (2020) 46(2)
Australian Feminist Law
Russell v Australian
Broadcasting Corporation (No 3)
(2023) 303 FCR 372.
Rush v Nationwide
Sarah Ailwood,
‘Performance, Credibility and #MeToo Testimony in Rush v Nationwide News
Pty Ltd’ (2023) 49(2)
Australian Feminist Law Journal
Respect@Work Report
Attorneys-General,
Communique: Extraordinary Meeting of Attorneys-General
(Public Communique, 9 June 2021); Meeting of Attorneys-General, Meeting of
Attorneys-General
(Public Communique, 12 November 2021).
Standing Council of
Attorneys-General,
Executive Summary: Procedural Protections Available to
Victims of Sexual Harassment as Witnesses in Civil Proceedings in Australia
(Executive Summary, December 2022), 2.
Judicial Commission of New
South Wales, ‘Defamation’,
Civil Trials Bench Book
(Web Page, June 2024) <
https://www.judcom.nsw.gov.au/publications/benchbks/civil/defamation.html
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (101 KB)
PDF format (323 KB)
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter