URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/journals/SydUPLawBk/2011/5.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 15:39:42
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
O'Neill, Nick; Peisah, Carmelle --- "Chapter 3 - Incapacity and Contracts and Gifts During Lifetime" [2011] SydUPLawBk 5; in O'Neill, Nick; Peisah, Carmelle (eds), "Capacity and the Law" (Sydney University Press, 2011)
3. 1. Introduction
3. 2. The starting points
3. 3. Determining capacity
3. 3. 1. The test for capacity
3. 3. 2. How do doctors and psychologists determine capacity?
3. 3. 3. Implied obligation of an incapable person to pay for necessaries
3. 3. 4. Entitlement to payment for services rendered - quantum meruit
3. 3. 5. “Escaping” from obligations under contracts and similar transactions on the grounds of incapacity to enter them
3. 4. Capacity to execute deeds
3. 5. Setting aside lifetime gifts on grounds of undue influence or unconscionability where gift-maker has “special disadvantage”
3. 5. 1 Undue influence
3. 5. 2. Unconscionability
3. 5. 3. Undue influence and unconscionability – similar but different – both may be available in a particular case
3. 6. Liability of lawyers and others who fail to protect the interests of their clients
Chapter 3 – Incapacity and contracts and gifts during lifetime
3. 1. Introduction
In this chapter we will deal with capacity to enter contracts and similar
transactions and the issues arising when an incapable adult
appears to enter
into a contract. The law has had to respond to the need to ensure that incapable
people are provided with necessary
goods and services and that those who provide
those goods and services are fairly compensated on the one hand and, on the
other hand,
the need for mechanisms by which incapable people can avoid being
liable for the consequences of contracts or other similar transactions
apparently entered when they have no capacity to understand what they have
undertaken.
The chapter also considers the law relevant to the recovery of gifts given,
during their lifetime, by elderly, frail or physically,
sensorily or
intellectually limited or disabled people on the grounds of incapacity, undue
influence or unconscionability.
3. 2. The starting points
If a person enters into a transaction or executes a document at a time when
they lack the mental capacity to understand the nature
or effect of the
document, the transaction entered into or document executed is not effective at
law. However, all persons who have
reached the age of majority (18 years) are
presumed to have the capacity to enter into contracts and other transactions and
documents that have legal effect. The onus of proving that they lack
legal capacity lies with the person alleging the lack of capacity.
starting points have been long established in the common
However, there needs to be and
are a number of exceptions to those basic and sometimes conflicting rules.
3. 3. Determining capacity
3. 3. 1. The test for capacity
The test for capacity is not a fixed standard of capacity to be applied to
all transactions. The current and long established law
on this matter was set
out by Dixon CJ, Kitto and Taylor JJ in the 1954 case,
The law does not prescribe any fixed standard of sanity as requisite for the
validity of all transactions. It requires, in relation
to each particular matter
or piece of business transacted, that each party shall have such soundness of
mind as to be capable of
understanding the general nature of what he is doing by
his participation.... [O]ne test of the requisite capacity … [is] whether
the person concerned was capable of understanding what he did by executing the
deed, when its general purport was explained to him.
The principle...appears to
us to be that the mental capacity required by the law in respect of any
instrument is relative to the
particular transaction which is being effected by
means of the instrument, and may be described as the capacity to understand the
nature of that transaction when it is
What the judges considered it was necessary for the two sisters to understand
in that case, if the matter had been explained to them,
was complicated and
somewhat abstract. They had to be able to appreciate that:
[B]y executing the mortgages and the memorandum of transfer they would be
altering the character of their interests in the properties
concerned, so that
instead of the last survivor of the three joint tenants becoming entitled to the
whole, each of them would be
entitled to a one-third share which would pass to
her estate if she still owned it at her
The judges considered that they would not have been found to have understood
these matters, so that the transactions they had entered
into were merely
voidable. However, a transaction that was voidable by reason of the incapacity
of a party is valid unless and until
it is avoided by that party or the
representative of that party (including an administrator). The judges pointed
out that it was
not open to others, particularly those claiming adversely to the
incapable party to get out of the transaction.
The judges noted an important exception to the rule that transactions entered
into by incapable persons were voidable only. Where
the property and affairs of
a person are placed under the under management by a tribunal or court because of
that person’s
incapacity to manage their property and affairs, the
control, custody and power of disposition of that property passes to the
administrator
and any dealing or disposition of that property by the person is
void and of no effect. This is because their capacity to manage
their affairs is
suspended by the administration
This exception is dealt
with further in 3. 3. 5. 3. below.
Gibbons v Wright
the High Court has developed the concept of
“non est factum” by which persons with certain kinds of incapacities
be freed their obligations under a contract on the grounds that they brought
“no consenting mind” to the contract when
they signed
3. 3. 2. How do doctors and psychologists
determine capacity?
When determining capacity to understand a transaction, the general principle
or ‘formula’ of decision-maker versus task
must be applied. That is,
the assessor must take into account both the abilities of the decision-maker and
the demands of the decision-making
task. The nature and effect of some
transactions are simple and require less cognitive ability to understand, while
others have complex
and far reaching consequences. Complex decisions require a
fairly high level of cognitive functioning to assimilate all of the relevant
information and to form a clear and consistent decision
Accordingly,
contractual capacity relates to the specific contract, not to contracts in
Property sales or gifts are probably the most common transaction in which
assessors are asked to assess the capacity of the person
making the transaction.
These are also two of the most common situations in which older, cognitively
impaired people are exploited,
by virtue of their inability to understand the
nature and effect of what they are doing. Yet requests for contemporaneous
assessments
of capacity to enter into contracts are rare. This is due to the
common law presumption that a contracting party has the requisite
capacity to enter into the contract and the onus of proving that this is not the
case and that the contract should be voided
lies with the person that alleges
the incapacity.
Consequently, requests for assessment usually come some time after the
transaction has been made, often because an advocate for the
impaired person
becomes aware that the transaction has taken place and challenges the validity
of the contract. In such cases, the
assessor is asked to perform a retrospective
assessment based on the person’s likely functioning at the time the
transaction
When asked to assess such a person, as with other types of capacity, it is
usually helpful to perform a general mental status and
cognitive examination
first to gain an estimate of the person’s general cognitive abilities, the
severity of any cognitive
decline and their functioning in specific frontal
cognitive abilities such as judgment, reasoning and insight. It is then
to assess the person’s understanding of the nature and effect of
what they are doing. It is the understanding of the effect
of a transaction
which has the broadest interpretation and probably requires a fairly high level
of cognitive function, particularly
frontal lobe functions of planning,
judgment, reasoning and working memory. Darzins and others have outlined some of
the cognitive
and functional tasks involved which include: weighing risks and
benefits in choosing purchases and investments, remembering assets,
obligations, detecting and avoiding fraud and performing calculations necessary
to carry out the transaction.
Using the example of property transaction suggested above, it is helpful to
ask the following questions:
1. Does the person have an understanding in general terms of the value of the
property they are selling or giving away?
2. Do they have an understanding of the risks, benefits and consequences of
selling or gifting their property in terms of their lifestyle
and accommodation
e.g. if they reside in the property do they understand that they will have to
leave and find alternative accommodation?
3. Do they have an understanding or can they comprehend advice regarding the
financial implication of what they are doing, both in
terms of their future
needs and their estate?
4. Can they understand the document/s they are being asked to sign?
As always, the person needs to articulate their understanding in their own
words, not just give affirmative answers to closed questions.
Because contracts can only be voided if it can be proven that the other party
was aware that the impaired person lacked capacity,
experts are sometimes asked
to comment whether the person’s incapacity should have been obvious to the
other party when the
contract was made. This is a very difficult issue.
International experience suggests that minimal enquiry of the client’s
understanding is not unusual amongst lawyers whose often cursory interactions
with clients during the execution of documents may
allow them to miss even
severe dementia.
Even health
care professionals dealing with the client may miss the diagnosis. Studies have
shown that family doctors, many of whom
rely on passive identification rather
than active screening of dementia for diagnosis, often fail to identify
It is thought that somewhere between 25-90% of cases of dementia are missed in
clinical practice.
The same is
often true for nursing staff in nursing homes and in hospitals.
One of the reasons lawyers, doctors and nurses alike miss the diagnosis of
dementia is the attribution of observed changes or abnormalities
“normal ageing”.
Ignorance and ageist attitudes still predominate. For example, in one study of
aged care nurses the word “old” most commonly
prompted negative
responses (e.g. “feeble”, “dependent”
“incapable”) or at best, neutral responses
“glasses”, “walking sticks”,
when abnormalities in physical appearance are observed lawyers may not make
links between these observations and cognitive
impairment or dementia.
3. 3. 3. Implied obligation of an incapable person
to pay for necessaries
The common law recognizes that there is an implied obligation on a person who
lacks capacity to consent to a contract to pay for necessaries
provided to
The judges try to avoid
calling this implied obligation an implied contract because of the incapacity of
the receiver of the necessaries
to make a contract. Ipp AJA of the New South
Wales Court of Appeal noted the preference to describe the implied obligation as
quasi-contractual
or restitutionary in
If the necessaries are provided by family members, there is a presumption
that the services are being provided out of affection without
there being a
contractual arrangement or an intention to recoup their
However, that presumption
is rebuttable and was held to have been rebutted by the evidence in a 2002 case
in which a mother took
care of her seriously brain damaged adult daughter
injured in a horse-riding accident. The daughter was entitled to claim, on
of her mother, the cost of the services she provided to her daughter on a
daily basis and to the interest she did not receive during
the time she was
deprived of the use of the money she spent providing services to her daughter.
In that case there was no dispute
that the mother’s services were
necessaries and the evidence showed that the mother had, from an early stage,
sought to be
compensated.
The term “necessaries” has been treated as a broad term by the
judges. It includes the provision of, at least, meat, drink,
apparel, medicine,
medical services, education and transportation services. In a 1908 case
involving a man who had been declared
insane by the Supreme Court of New South
Wales who wished to have that order set aside, and consulted a lawyer for that
Griffith CJ of the High Court said:
Now, it is settled that work done for the benefit of an insane person, although
he is incompetent technically to make a contract,
may nevertheless be regarded
as something in the nature of necessaries. Consequently an action will lie
against him, as it will in
some other cases, for
necessaries.
This broad approach to the term necessaries both raises questions and
provides answers. It raises questions as to whether, in the
century, some things that are used on a daily basis by many people such as
mobile phones and television sets are necessaries for
all people or only some
people or not necessaries at all. It provides the answer to the question of the
entitlement of service-providers
for compensation they provide to people
incapable of entering contracts for the provision of such services. The
provision of services
to assist an incapable person to stay in their own home or
the provision of care services to them in an aged care facility creates
obligation in that person to pay for the services being supplied to them even
though they were totally unaware of what was happening.
The same applies to an
incapable person being provided with services in a hospital.
However, despite 1903 authority to the contrary, it is unlikely that State or
Territory instrumentalities would succeed in seeking
payment for services
provided to those admitted to State run psychiatric facilities, particularly
involuntary patients.
case Sholl J of the Supreme Court of Victoria dismissed a claim brought under
the common law and the Victorian mental health
legislation by the State of
Victoria for reimbursement of the money spent on the maintenance of a patient
1924 to 1948 because the
legislation did not show an intention to create an
obligation to pay and because of the compulsory detention element of the
legislation
and its analogy with the prison
There has been some statutory
codification of the common law in this area, but it is arguable that the common
law in relation to necessaries
operates more broadly than envisaged in the sale
of goods legislation and remains in full effect as implied by the recent case
In New South Wales, the
Sale of Goods Act 1925
that the capacity to buy and sell is regulated by the general law (the common
law) concerning capacity to contract and to
transfer and acquire property.
However, where necessaries are sold and delivered to a person who, by reason of
mental incapacity
or drunkenness, is incompetent to contract, that person must
pay a reasonable price for those necessaries. The term “necessaries”
is defined to mean goods suitable to the condition in life of the person, and to
the person’s actual requirements at the time
of the sale and
Legislation in all the
other States and the two Territories is in the same terms or to the same
3. 3. 4. Entitlement to payment for services
rendered - quantum meruit
Another approach that may be available where a person provides personal
services to an incapable person or carries out work on their
behalf or for their
benefit where it is clear that work is not to be gratuitous, is that the person
who carries out the work is entitled
to payment on the basis of quantum meruit
and be paid a reasonable sum given the nature of the services provided or work
3. 3. 5. “Escaping” from obligations
under contracts and similar transactions on the grounds of incapacity to enter
Where adults who are incapable of understanding the nature of the transaction
they are entering, and it is in their interests to cease
to be bound by or to
have any of the benefits of the contract, they have at least two options
available to them if an informal exit
from the contract cannot be arranged for
them by negotiation. These are to take court action to have the contact declared
to raise the defence of “non est factum” in any action to
against them to have the contract carried out.
In Queensland the Supreme Court is empowered by the
Powers of Attorney
to make a declaration about a person’s capacity.
Any declaration it makes about whether a person has capacity to enter a contract
is binding in a subsequent proceeding in which the validity of the contract is
The Queensland Civil
and Administrative Tribunal also has power to make a declaration about a
person’s capacity to make a contract.
Such a declaration is evidence of a
person’s capacity in any proceedings in which the validity of the contract
is an issue.
3. 3. 5. 1. Taking action to have a contract declared void
As the High Court noted in
Gibbons v Wright
, the common law developed
over time to establish the principle that where a person who lacks the capacity
to make a contract goes
through the process of making one, but then seeks to be
freed from their obligations under the contract, the contract is treated
being voidable by them and not void.
This means that they will be bound by the contract until a court or tribunal
with power to do so declares the contract to be void.
It is the incapable
person, or others authorised to act on their behalf, who may seek to have the
contract declared void, and not
the other parties to the contract or third
parties. However, the incapable person will not be able to have the contract
1. it is a contract for necessaries as perceived in relation to the person
challenging the contract;
2. if the other part to the contract believed that the person with whom they
were dealing was not incapable.
Consequently, in order to succeed in avoiding a fair contract on the ground
of incapacity, the incapable person must be able to prove:
1. their mental incapacity, and
2. that their mental incapacity was known to the other contracting
These requirements also apply if incapacity to make a contract is raised as a
3. 3. 5. 2. The defence of non est factum
A second defence emerged in Australia in 1975 when a unanimous High Court
allowed the extension of the defence of non est factum to
cases in which a
defendant has actually signed the instrument on which they are being sued.
The Court noted that the principle was not easy to formulate because it
must. accommodate two policy considerations which pull in
opposite directions.
The first principle is the injustice of holding a person to a bargain to which
they have not brought a consenting
mind. The second is the necessity of holding
a person who signs a document to that document, particularly so as to protect
persons who rely on that signature when there is no reason to doubt its
validity. The High Court also noted that the principle must
necessarily be kept
within narrow limits, but that:
1. it was available to those who are unable to read owing to blindness or
illiteracy and who must rely on others for advice as to
what they are signing,
2. it was also available to those who through no fault of their own are
unable to have any understanding of the purport of a particular
3. to make out the defence a defendant must show that they signed the
document in the belief that it was radically different from
what it was in fact,
4. at least as against innocent persons, their failure to read and understand
it was not due to carelessness on their part, and
5. there is a heavy onus on a defendant who seeks to establish the
The case in which the principle was adopted involved a man who spoke little
English and who could not read English and who though
that the document he was
signing was his receipt acknowledging money loaned to him when it was an
extension of an option to buy his
land. However, it has been applied in a case
in which the defendant was a 75-year-old woman who had suffered a stroke, was
and unable to maintain a train of thought and who had signed, when
asked to sign, a mortgage and guarantee as part of a complex financial
transaction.
The trial judge
doubted, after she gave evidence, that the woman had anything more than a
transient appreciation of those questions
she answered or had any real
understanding of her involvement in the
proceedings.
The principle has also been applied in a case in which a man, who had a whole
of life intellectual disability and who was functionally
illiterate but could
sign his name, mortgaged the property in which he lived, which he had inherited
from his mother, at the behest
of his son so that his son could buy a business.
The trial judge considered that the man was in no real sense a participant in
scheme but rather a hapless victim of his son's manipulation and that the
man in fact had no positive belief at all about the nature
and effect of the
documents he was signing.
trial judge set the mortgage aside so that it no longer encumbered the
man’s property. However, the trial judge ordered
the man to repay the loan
money because to retain the money would have unjustly enriched
The New South Wales Court of Appeal upheld the trial judge’s findings
to restore to the lender
only the approximately $25,000 he benefitted from out of the $200,000
The Court of Appeal
considered that the man was a manipulated intermediary with no understanding of
any aspect of the overall transaction.
He received no benefit from the loan,
beyond the receipt and retention in his account of the approximately $25,000. He
did not know
what he was signing. Looking at the matter as one of substance, he
was the innocent, mentally incapable dupe of his son. Except for
approximately $25,000, “in no real or substantive sense did he receive and
retain benefits such that it would be unjust
for him not to repay the
The Court of Appeal noted that the following matters reinforced this
conclusion. The loan was not for necessaries. The lender made
no enquiry of the
borrower who in fact was deeply intellectually impaired and the subject of
manipulative influence. Instead, it
was prepared to lend on the basis of
documentation that requested the loan be assessed without documentary evidence
of the financial
position of the borrower. The Court said these were relevant
considerations in assessing whether or not it was unjust for the man
to repay the whole of the loan money. Furthermore, because the defence of non
est factum had been made out and the loan
contract was invalid, it was contrary
to public policy for a party to obtain restitution and so obtain the same result
invalid and void contract was in fact valid and
enforceable.
3. 3. 5. 3. Contracts and transactions entered into by those whose estates
are under administration
As already noted in 3. 3. 1., the right of a person whose estate is under
management to deal with their property and affairs in any
way is suspended and
any transaction they enter into is void and of no
This is an exception to
the rule that contracts and other transactions entered into by an incapable
person are valid until avoided
by them in certain limited circumstances. All
contracts and other transactions entered into involving a person whose estate is
management should be entered into by their administrator at least in
relation to that part of their estate that is under management
in situations
where the whole of their estate is not covered by the order.
While that is the proper practice, does the exception operate to allow a
person whose estate is under administration who purports
to enter a contact to
avoid having to meet their side of the bargain? The cases in which the exception
was established may have been
cases in which the incapable person needed their
interests protected or were trying to avoid having their property controlled by
the legislatively established processes. In
the incapable
person executed a deed poll giving significant elements of her property to her
“executors and administrators”
in trust for her benefit for her life
when her affairs were being controlled under a court
Re Marshall
incapable person signed a deed in the form of a charge on his property
acknowledging a loan of 30 pounds and repayment of it
and any further advances
at 30% interest per annum.
Case, Mrs David purported to transfer a property to a company
which was effectively her family’s discretionary trust after
had been placed under an administration
While administrators would negotiate with other the parties to contracts that
those whose estates they are managing entered into and
decide which contracts
should be continued in the best interests of the person whose estate they were
administering, they would be
able to treat as void contracts for certain goods
and services, such as a mobile phone and attendant phone service contract, if
person whose estate they were managing could not use a mobile phone or who
was at financial risk because of their inability to control
the use of the phone
by themselves and others.
Administrators would be obliged, as part of their responsibility to act in
the best interests of those whose estates they were managing,
to get back into
their control any property of the person that the person had purported to
transfer to others or to recover the value
of that property.
Nevertheless, the issue is addressed, to some degree, in the legislation of
all the States and Territories except Tasmania. The
NSW Trustee and Guardian
restates the common law to the effect that the power
of a person whose estate is under administration to deal with that estate is
suspended during the currency of the administration
However, the person may
be authorized to deal with part of their
In Queensland if the Supreme Court, in the exercise of its jurisdiction under
Public Trustee Act 1978
, appoints the Public Trustee to
administer the estate of an incapacitated person who is under 18 years of age,
that person is not
capable, of making any transfer, lease, mortgage, or other
disposition of any part of the estate under management, or of entering
contract (other than for necessaries) without the leave of the Court. However,
any such transaction or contract is voidable
by that incapacitated person or the
Public Trustee on the incapacitated person’s
Nevertheless, the Court
may give leave to an incapacitated person to enter any such transaction or
contract, if it is satisfied that
the transaction or contract is for the benefit
of the incapacitated person and that the incapacitated person consents to the
transaction
or contract with adequate understanding of its
Public Trustee Act
also adopts the common law
position in relation to incapable people set out in
Gibbons v Wright
providing that no contract, transfer, lease, mortgage or other disposition
entered into or made by
an incapacitated person can be invalidated if the other party to the contract
or other transaction proves that they acted:
1. in good faith,
2. for adequate consideration, and
3. without knowledge that the other party was an incapacitated
There are no similar provisions under the
Guardianship and Administration
, consequently the common law, as set out above,
applies in relation to adults in Queensland. However, the Queensland
Guardianship
and Administration Tribunal has the power to make a declaration of
capacity for a matter in relation to any adult and also a declaration
person had capacity to enter a
In South Australia the
Guardianship and Administration Act
provides that while the property of a person is the subject of an
administration order made by the Guardianship Board, a disposition
of property
or contract made by them is voidable at the option of the administrator.
However, the administrator cannot avoid the
transaction if the other party to
the transaction did not know and could not reasonably be expected to have known
that the person
they were dealing with had a mental incapacity. Nevertheless, if
the Guardianship Board is satisfied that the person had an adequate
understanding of the nature of the transaction and that it would be for the
benefit of the person, the Board may make an order allowing
the person to make a
disposition of property or enter contract which cannot be made voidable by the
administrator.
Infirm Persons Act
has the same provision in relation to
protection orders made by the Supreme
In Tasmania the
Guardianship and Administration Act
provides that the Tasmanian Guardianship and Administration Board may direct
that the person whose estate is the subject of an administration
continue to be responsible for part of their
As to that part of their
estate that is covered by the administration order, the common law as set out
above applies.
In Victoria the
Guardianship and Administration Act
provides for a variation of the common law. It states that while the property of
a person is the subject of an administration order
made by VCAT that person is
“deemed” incapable of dealing with, any part of their property or of
becoming liable under
any contract without an order of VCAT or the written
consent of the administrator. Any transaction entered into by the person without
such order or consent is void and of no effect, and the money or property the
subject of the transaction is recoverable by the administrator
in any court of
competent jurisdiction. However, the legislation does not render invalid any
transaction by the person made for adequate
consideration with or to or in
favour of any other person who proves that they acted in good faith and did not
know or could not
reasonably have known that the person was the subject of an
administration order.
The Western Australian
Guardianship and Administration Act
is very similar to, but not identical with, the Victorian
It also provides for a variation of the common law. It states that while the
property of a person is the subject of an administration
order made by the State
Administrative Tribunal, that person is incapable of entering any contract or
dealing with, any part of their
property except to the extent that their
administrator or the State Administrative Tribunal authorises them to do so. Any
property the subject an unauthorised transaction is recoverable by the
administrator in any court of competent jurisdiction. However,
the legislation
does not render invalid any contract for necessaries or any transaction by the
person made for adequate consideration
with or to or in favour of any other
person who proves that they acted in good faith and did not know that the person
was the subject
of an administration
In the Australian Capital Territory
Guardianship and
Management of Property Act
states that if a person whose
property is the subject of an administration order purports to enter into a
transaction in relation
to the property, the transaction is not void on the
ground that the person was
not legally competent to enter into the transaction. However, if an
application is made to it within 90 days of the date of the transaction
guardian, the manager or some other person concerned in the transaction, ACAT
the Supreme Court or the Magistrates Court may,
as is just:
1. confirm the transaction,
2. declare the transaction void, or
3. adjust the rights of the parties to the transaction.
The section appears to invoke an application of the law as laid down in
Gibbons v Wright
by which transactions entered into by incapable people
are voidable and provide a 90 day period in which such transactions may be
It does not appear to
exclude the possibility of a defence on non est factum in circumstances in which
the facts required to ground
that defence can be
In the Northern Territory where guardians are appointed administrators by the
Local Court under the
Adult Guardianship Act
of those whose estates are under administration are suspended and the common law
set out above applies. However, the effect
of the Supreme Court making a
protection order is that the person to whom the order relates loses the capacity
to deal with as much
of their estate as is covered by the order and any
transaction they enter is void, unless it is a contract for necessaries or the
Supreme Court gives them leave to deal with their estate. Another exception is
that a transaction relating to part of the estate
under administration that is
for valuable consideration and the other party to the transaction acted in good
faith and without actual
notice of the protection order relating to the
3. 4. Capacity to execute deeds
As has already been noted in
, gifts during lifetime (inter
vivos) and sales of property well below market value are probably two of the
most common situations
in which older, cognitively impaired people are
exploited, by virtue of their inability to understand the nature and effect of
they are doing. When such gifts or sales are made between parents who are
elderly and frail and lack the capacity to execute the
deed making the gift and
their adult children, parents can be left in a difficult position financially
and relations between them
and other members of the family whose expectations
are disappointed by such transactions can be disrupted or destroyed.
Nevertheless,
gifts of real property between family members, particularly from
parents to adult children during the lifetime of the parent, are
occurrence.
Where real property, such as a house or land, is transferred from a parent to
a child as a purely voluntary act or where love and
affection is the only
consideration, there will be no presumption of undue influence or that the
transaction was improper unless
there is evidence to raise such matters. In the
United States, the parent is presumably the dominant party even where the parent
is aged, or aged and infirm.
There will be situations in which a transfer of property has been obtained by
an adult child where the parent had no idea what they
were doing and so no
capacity to carry out the transaction. In Australia, the cases brought to
retrieve such property either for
the gift-giver or their estate, have been
argued on the basis of undue influence or unconscionability or
As non est factum is a
defence, it has not been used as a basis for a claim. Whether provable
incapacity becomes a basis for action
seeking a retransfer of property emerges
or whether the established rules of equity continue to be relied upon is a
matter is a matter
to be determined by future developments in the case law.
5. Setting aside lifetime gifts on grounds of undue influence or
unconscionability where gift-maker has “special
disadvantage”
3. 5. 1 Undue influence
This area of equity law is evolving with some parts of it more clearly
established than others. In 2007 in the Supreme Court of New
South Wales, Biscoe
AJ noted that undue influence cases fall into two classes. These are:
1. cases where undue influence will be presumed from a relationship (presumed
undue influence), and
2. cases where undue influence must be affirmatively proved (actual undue
influence).
In cases of presumed undue influence, the party benefiting from the
transaction has the burden of rebutting the presumption. This
reversal of the
onus of proof is of practical importance in many cases, particularly where the
circumstances in which the transaction
occurred are peculiarly within the
knowledge of the party benefitting and the gift-giver is under a
disability.
The cases of presumed undue influence themselves divide into two categories.
First, those in which certain types of relationships
per se give rise to the
presumption, without any need to prove more. These include relationships between
solicitor and client, physician
and patient, parent and child, guardian and
ward, and religious advisers and their
They may also include
the relationship between express trustee and
beneficiary.
The second category
is where it is proved that the party benefiting from the transaction occupies or
assumes towards the other person
a position naturally involving an ascendancy or
influence over that other person, or a dependency or trust on that other
It has been suggested, by Ridge, that the current state of English equity law
is that actual and presumed undue influence have been
conflated so that if it
can be shown that:
1. one party to a transaction had such strong trust and confidence in the
other party, that the other (the trusted party) had the
power significantly to
influence (the trusting) party's decisions in relation to the transaction,
2. the transaction entered into by the parties was not readily explicable
according to the ordinary motives by which people act (thereby
suggesting that
influence was exercised by the trusted party),
then a factual inference
undue influence, rather than
just a presumption of it, is raised. The evidential burden is then on the
trusted party (and third parties
who receive the benefit of the transaction, if
affected by notice or agency principles) to show that the gift or contract was
spontaneous act of the donor or grantor acting in circumstances which
enable him to exercise an independent will and which justify
a court in holding
that the gift or transaction was the result of a free exercise of his
That position appears on its face to be more favourable to the weaker party
who may have been taken advantage of and compensates for
the difficulty such
persons have proving their case. It is also consistent with the legal policy
behind the Australian position that
actual undue influence does not have to be
proved before the person who benefits from the transaction has to rebut the
presumption
that they gained their benefit though undue influence. Asprey JA
pointed out in
Whereat v Duff
that in cases of presumed undue influence,
the court sets aside the gift unless the person who benefits from it rebuts the
presumption.
The court does not act on the ground that any wrongful act has been
committed by that person, but on the ground of public policy
and to prevent the
relations which existed between the parties and the influence arising from that
relationship being abused.
In an article published in 2002, Burns has suggested that notions developed
in English law in the 19
century made it clear that old age in
itself was not a sufficient ground for setting aside a contract or gift because
the ability
to make a valid transaction was not necessarily impaired with age.
Secondly, that elderly parents were unable to rely on an automatic
established relationship of influence to set aside contracts and gifts made in
their lifetimes for the benefit of their children,
even as adults because there
was a strong expectation that parents would make gifts of property to their
children as it was incumbent
on parents to care for them and to advance their
interests. Consequently, the relationship of parent and child would justify
of property from a parent to a
Burns argued that the assumption that parents make gifts to their children
has become deeply entrenched in the legal system (as it
has in the United States
system) so that property transactions in favour of children, during the lifetime
of the parents, are considered
to be natural and
She also argues that, as
a result of these 19
century developments, courts have not
considered that the advanced age of the person entitles them to any special
protection or treatment
under the doctrine of undue influence and that the
courts maintain a healthy scepticism about the frailty of the elderly.
Furthermore,
she argues, this has had a significant impact on the application of
the doctrine of “undue influence inter vivos” because
illness and
feebleness will not necessarily be sufficient to persuade a court that a
transaction ought to be set aside because ‘experience
teaches us to be
astute to vulnerability and inequality’ and in some cases elders have been
considered to be quite shrewd.
Also, courts have not been persuaded that, where
elders and their relatives are involved, transactions should be subject to
scrutiny or that adult relatives (or third parties acting through them)
should automatically be subject to specific
obligations
In a 2009 case, Ward J of the New South Wales Supreme Court noted that
contrary to what was noted by Biscoe J, that the relationship
between parent and
child did not automatically give rise to a presumption of undue influence where
a gift was given by a parent to
a child and that there was a rebuttable
presumption that money given by a parent to a child was advanced by way of a
However, she went on to
note: “That said, undue influence is presumed where there is a sufficient
relationship of dependency
upon (or ascendancy exercised by) the
[gift-giver]”.
However, it is clear that Johnson v Buttress remains a leading authority in
this area of the law. In that 1936 case, a 67 year old,
who was wholly
illiterate, of low intelligence and devoid of experience in business affairs,
transferred his home by way of a gift
to a relative of his wife. He had become
reliant on her in many ways, was constantly in her company, relied upon her
advice and depended
on her kindness after the death of his wife. The transfer
was executed in the office of the gift-receiver’s solicitor. The
gift-giver did not have independent advice. It was held that, because of the
special relationship of influence that was shown by
the circumstances to have
arisen, there was a presumption of undue influence that arose from that
relationship. Dixon J explained
the basis of the jurisdiction Supreme Courts had
to deal with this matter:
The basis of the equitable jurisdiction to set aside an alienation of property
on the ground of undue influence is the prevention
of an unconscientious use of
any special capacity or opportunity that may exist or arise of affecting the
alienor’s will or
freedom of judgment in reference to such a
Using the language of and examples from the time, Dixon J noted that where
the parties stand in a relation that gives to one an authority
or influence over
the other, it is proper that the latter should be protected from any abuse of
that relationship. In these circumstances,
the party in the position of
influence cannot retain as a gift the beneficial title to property of
substantial value given to them
by the other person, unless they satisfy the
court that they took no advantage of the gift-giver, and that the gift was the
independent
and well-understood act of a person in a position to exercise a free
judgment based on information as full as that known by the gift-receiver.
burden is imposed upon one of the parties to certain well-known relationships as
soon as it appears that the relationship existed
and that they had obtained a
substantial benefit from the other person. Consequently, a solicitor must thus
justify the receipt of
such a benefit from their client, a physician from their
patient, a parent from their child, a guardian from their ward, and a man
the woman he has engaged to
Burns referred to that case but claimed that:
In practice, courts in Australia and New Zealand have set a high standard for
proof of an antecedent relationship of trust and confidence
where elders are
concerned. Generally elders have had to demonstrate a physical, emotional and/or
financial dependence on the defendant.
An elder will be dependent upon a
relative or caregiver if the elder relies on that person for the basic
necessities of life, leaves
the management of their financial affairs in that
person's hands and/or is incapable of looking after himself or herself without
the intervention of the relative or caregiver. Severe physical or mental
impairment can be an important factor leading to the conclusion
that the elder
While those who claim that they have gifted away their property under undue
influence have to make their claims in the Supreme Court
and have to go through
the psychological stress and the financial risk of running a court case, cases
decided since Burns wrote her
article suggest that proving undue influence that
elderly parents should be protected from is not as difficult as she
In a 2008 case,
Barrett J of the New South Wales Supreme Court held that a mother’s
transfer of half her home to her daughter
and creating a joint tenancy through
which it was almost certain that the daughter would become the sole owner of the
property on
her mother’s death could not stand because of presumed undue
influence. The mother had moderate dementia at the time the transfer
took place.
The daughter paid off the balance of the mortgage on the property, but did not
pay anything for her half interest in
it. Just before the transfer the daughter
took her mother out of an aged care facility and brought her back to her home
for her there.
Barrett J noted that the circumstances in at the time of the transfer were
such that the mother’s dementia based incapacity,
combined with her
gratitude towards her daughter for having brought her home from Queensland and
restored her to her home environment,
consolidated both dependence and trust on
the mother’s part and ascendancy and influence on the part of the
daughter. He continued:
This situation was a natural one in the circumstances. An old lady with failing
mental powers and in deteriorating health was cared
for diligently and with
affection by her daughter. The [daughter] is to be commended for the way in
which she looked after her mother.
But the fact that the [daughter] acted
towards her mother as she did out of respect and affection does not change the
legal conclusion
that the [daughter] stood in a position of undue influence
towards [her mother].
That being so, the law requires that the [daughter] positively justify the
retention of the benefit conferred upon her by [her
After considering the evidence Barrett J concluded:
In the circumstances, it is not possible to conclude that the transfer was the
independent and well-understood act of a woman in
a position to exercise a free
judgment based on information as full as that of the [gift-receiver]. The
freedom of the mother’s
will, her understanding and her decision-making
were affected by the dependence on her daughter that was, in part at least, the
of her mental deterioration. And the evidence provides no basis for
concluding that the [daughter] has positively justified the retention
benefit conferred on
The 2009 case
Barkley v Barkley Brown
In that case a
childless woman raised her niece, her nearest relative, from childhood. Later in
life she became dependent on her
niece after a period when the niece was away.
Ward J found that the woman’s vulnerability or susceptibility to her
influence was clear. Her niece cared for her and spent a
considerable time with her. The woman’s health was deteriorating and
delight in her niece’s return was manifest. The fact of the woman’s
physical dependence on and emotional attachment
to her niece and the position of
trust and confidence in which her niece was placed, in which the niece
acknowledged obliged her
to act in best interests of her aunt, and not her own
best interests, led Ward J to conclude that the niece (without being conscious
of any impropriety) benefited from her aunt’s disadvantageous position, by
taking for her own benefit or for that of her family
gifts and money in
accordance with what she understood to be her aunt’s instructions and
ordered her to repay at least some
Ridge has claimed that is regarded as settled law that the equitable doctrine
of undue influence does not apply to gifts given in
wills despite the fact that
the factual scenarios involving a gift in a will may be virtually
indistinguishable from a
gift given during
Undue influence in
relation to wills is dealt with in Chapter
3. 5. 2. Unconscionability
In a speech given in 2007, Gleeson CJ of the High Court of Australia referred
to the use of the concept of unconscionability as a
basis for giving equitable
relief to one party to a transaction where that person, because of some special
disadvantage, was unable
to act in their own best
He referred to
a 1948 case in which the High Court upheld the decision of a trial judge to set
aside a deed in which an uneducated
man of dull intellect and defective hearing
was bustled into making a gift of his share of his wife’s estate to his
In that case Latham CJ
noted that courts of equity can set aside a transaction and cancel a document on
various grounds, such as
fraud, undue influence, mistake, lunacy, duress,
non-disclosure of material facts when there is a duty to disclose, abuse of
confidential
relationship, or, in some cases, failure to show that there had
been no such abuse. However, Latham CJ also noted that this was
not such a case
and, specifically, that there had been no confidential relationship between the
parties. He also noted that this
was not a business transaction where different
considerations might apply. Nevertheless, although he didn’t use the term
“unconscientious”
that his colleague judges used, he noted that
where a gift was not a business transaction, the gift-receiver was the moving
in the transaction, the gift was all or most of the person’s
property and the gift-giver is “of weak will or of poor
mentality”,
a court of equity will set aside the gift unless it is shown that the gift-giver
understood the substance of what
Rich J, with whom Dixon J agreed, noted that, in this case:
1. the contents of the deed and its implications were not explained to the
gift-giver and that, although he executed it, he did not
know he was making a
gift of his share in his late wife's property,
2. the gift-giver did not know the extent of the share of his wife’s
property to which he was entitled or its value,
3. he was bustled into executing the deed with unseemly haste,
4. a copy of the deed was not left with him, and
5. the gift-receiver made no attempt to explain the nature of the transaction
to the gift-giver beyond some reading of the deed which,
even if the gift-giver
had heard it, he would not have been able to
understand.
Rich J stated that the jurisdiction of courts of equity is based upon
unconscientious dealing and continued:
It has always been considered unconscientious to retain the advantage of a
voluntary disposition of a large amount of property improvidently
alleged donor who did not understand the nature of the transaction and lacked
information of material facts such as the
nature and extent of the property
particularly if made in favour of a donee possessing greater information who
nevertheless withheld
He concluded by stating that the transaction was “neither fair nor
righteous and in the view of a court of equity it must be
regarded as
unconscientious for the [gift-receiver] to take the gift or retain
In a 1992 case which shows that the unconscionability principle can be
applied in a broad range of situations, Deane J noted that
it has long been
established that the jurisdiction of courts of equity to relieve against
unconscionable dealing extends generally
to circumstances in which:
1. a party to a transaction was under a special disability in dealing with
the other party to the transaction with the consequence
that there was an
absence of any reasonable degree of equality between them, and
2. that special disability was sufficiently evident to the other party to
make it prima facie unfair or "unconscionable" that that
other party procure,
accept or retain the benefit of, the disadvantaged party's assent to the
impugned transaction in the circumstances
in which he or she procured or
accepted it.
Deane J noted that where such circumstances are shown to have existed, an
onus was cast upon the stronger party to show that the transaction
just and reasonable in order to obtain or retain the benefit of
He also noted that the adverse circumstances which may constitute a special
disability for the purposes of the principle may take
a wide variety of forms
and are not susceptible of being comprehensively catalogued. However, he listed
some established examples
of special disability as poverty or need of any kind,
sickness, age, sex, infirmity of body or mind, drunkenness, illiteracy or lack
of education, lack of assistance or explanation where assistance or explanation
is necessary and noted that the common characteristic
of such adverse
circumstances seemed to be that they had the effect of placing one party at a
serious disadvantage vis-a-vis the
Deane J and the other majority judges were of the view that the gift-giver
was under a special disability in dealing with the gift-receiver
at the time the
gift-giver gave the impugned gift to the gift-receiver. That special disability
arose not merely from the gift-giver’s
infatuation with the gift-receiver
but that it extended to the extraordinary vulnerability of the gift-giver in the
false "atmosphere
of crisis" in which he believed that the woman with whom he
was "completely in love" and upon whom he was emotionally dependent was
eviction from her home and suicide unless he provided the money for the purchase
of the house. The gift-receiver was aware
of that special disability which, to a
significant extent, she had deliberately created. She manipulated the situation
to her advantage
to influence the gift-giver to make the gift of the money to
purchase the house. When asked for restitution she refused. Also, from
gift-giver's point of view, the whole transaction was plainly a most improvident
3. 5. 3. Undue influence and unconscionability
– similar but different – both may be available in a particular
In a 1983 case, Deane J noted that the equitable principles relating to
relief against unconscionable dealing and the principles relating
influence while closely related were distinct. Undue influence, like common law
duress, looked to the quality of the consent
or assent of the weaker party,
while unconscionable dealing looked to the conduct of the stronger party in
attempting to enforce,
or retain the benefit of, a dealing with a person under a
special disability in circumstances where it was not consistent with equity
good conscience that they should do so. He also noted that the adverse
circumstances, which may constitute a special disability
for the purposes of
relief against unconscionable dealing, may take a wide variety of forms and are
not susceptible to being comprehensively
catalogued.
In that case a
majority of the judges held that it would be unfair and unconscientious for a
bank to rely on a guarantee obtained
from the elderly migrant parents of a
customer, who were unfamiliar with written English.
In a 2007 case a father and son had owned a farm together as tenants in
common in equal shares. In 1981, when the son was faced with
the prospect of
criminal charges and, acting on advice, transferred his interest in the property
to his father. In 2002, the father
conveyed the entire interest in the property
to his son. The father understood that the documents he had signed were to
return interests
in the property to what they had been in 1981when father and
son were tenants in common in equal shares. At the time of the 2002
conveyance,
the father was 79 years old. The son knew that his father had difficulty with
English and that he was partially deaf.
He also knew that his father trusted him
and, in particular, that his father was prepared to do whatever he asked him to
do in relation
to the property and he knew that his father was relying upon him
to accurately convey to the solicitor the terms of any agreement
that had been
reached between them as to how the title should be
The father did not raise a case of non est factum, but put it on two bases:
undue influence and unconscionable conduct. Gzell J found
that both had been
made out. He found that the father was under a special disability in dealing
with his son. He was partially deaf
following his heart by-pass operation and
his son knew that his father had difficulty reading English and placed his
complete trust
in his son. The relationship between them was that the son had
such influence over his father that the father’s decision to
documents without taking independent advice, without having them read to him and
without explanation was not voluntary but
was overborne by his son’s
instruction to him to sign the documents. The father’s decision to sign
the documents did
not arise from an independent and well-understood act on his
part. Gzell J also found that when the father signed the documents the
relationship between him and his son was such that his son was in a superior
position to his father. The son was aware that his father
trusted him and that
that trust was such that his father would do anything his son asked him to do
with respect to the property.
Gzell J found that the son made unconscientious
use of his superior position to the detriment of his father and that the
was caused by the undue influence of the son over the
Gzell J ordered the son
execute all documents and do all the things that were necessary to return the
interests in the property to
what they were before the 1981
3. 6. Liability of lawyers and others who fail to
protect the interests of their clients
Recent cases in New South Wales show that lawyers can be held to be liable to
pay damages for losses made by their clients if they
do not act prudently to
protect their client’s interests. In a 2004 case, a son forged the
signatures of his parents on a power
of attorney and then used that forged power
of attorney to obtain a loan to buy a home unit for himself. The son instructed
the solicitor
who obtained the certificate of title to the parents’
property, and with the solicitor’s help obtained the loan. The
parents knew nothing about either the power of attorney or the mortgage. They
brought claims against their son and the
solicitor. They settled the claim
against their son and pursued the solicitor for the balance of their loss. Young
J upheld their
claim against the solicitor and also held that his insurance
policy did not cover his conduct so that he was personally liable for
clients’ loss.
Young J noted the argument that the point of a power of attorney is that
people deal with the maker and do not consult the donor and
that people must be
able to treat attorneys under power of attorney as prima facie having authority
to do what they have to do, but
However, especially for solicitors, red lights should flash when certain factors
exhibit themselves, one red light flashes when one
can see that the donor of the
power of attorney is to receive no benefit at all from a transaction yet the
donee is to receive a
considerable benefit. One can rationalise that this is
because it is a family dealing, but a prudent solicitor when he or she sees
red light, makes enquiries. Furthermore, a prudent solicitor is extremely
careful about documents to which he or she puts his
or her signature and
professional reputation and takes precautions against misleading anyone else.
Unfortunately, Mr Murphy, whilst
probably not dishonest in the criminal sense,
fell short of the standard here and is liable to indemnify the mortgagee for its
without recourse to his
A 2006 case,
Graham v Hall
, extended the liability to both justices of
the peace and ordinary witnesses attesting documents.
In that case both the solicitor
who drew up and registered a mortgage and the justice of the peace who attested
to the signing of
the mortgage and the statutory declaration relating to the
mortgage were held to be liable in damages because of their part in the
by which a fraudulent mortgage was obtained.
Mr and Mrs Hall were joint owners of the family home. When Mr Hall found
himself in financial trouble, he decided to re-mortgage the
family home without
telling his wife. He instructed a solicitor, to act for both him and Mrs Hall
in effecting and registering the
mortgage. Mr Hall told the solicitor that his
wife was dying of cancer and therefore the solicitor could not see her or visit
Mr Hall said that he would take the papers to his wife and arrange for her
to sign them.
The solicitor knew that, after payment of the existing mortgage and some
business debts, the rest of the money from the new mortgage
was to be paid to Mr
Hall alone. Nevertheless, he did not investigate why a woman dying of cancer
would want to enter into a new
mortgage. In fact, Mrs Hall did not have cancer
and was not aware of either her husband’s financial difficulties or his
to the solicitor. The solicitor got Mr Graham, a justice of the peace,
attested a mortgage document and a statutory declaration related
to the mortgage
both of which appeared to have been signed by Mrs Hall as co-mortgagor. In fact
her signature had been forged by
Mr Hall. However, by signing the mortgage
document Mr Graham attested that it was “signed in my presence by the
mortgagor who
is personally known to me.” In fact, Mrs Hall had never met
The new mortgage was registered in 2001. Mr Hall died in 2003. After his
death Mrs Hall discovered the existence of the new mortgage.
She sued both the
solicitor and the solicitor and Mr Graham. Both were found liable in damages
apportioned 60% to the solicitor and
40% to Mr Graham as justice of the peace.
On the appeal by Mr Graham The Court of Appeal held that the risk of harm to Mrs
interests in the property that arose from the fact that the falsely
attested mortgage was likely to be registered was clearly foreseeable
not only a justice of the peace but also an ordinary witness owes a duty of care
in these circumstances.
Gibbons v Wright
Imperial Loan Company, Limited v Stone
[1891] UKLawRpKQB 215
, 602-3; Re Cumming
[1852] EngR 427
(1852) 42 ER 660
Masterman-Lister v Brutton
[2002] EWCA Civ 1889
Dalle-Molle by His Next Friend
Public Trustee V Manos
[2004] SASC 102
[2004] SASC 102
88 SASR 193.
[1954] HCA 17
91 CLR 423.
Ibid. 437-438.
Ibid. 438-439.
Ibid. 438-439.
[1904] UKLawRpCh 150
[1905] 1 Ch 160
Re Marshall
[1920] 1 Ch 284
David by her tutor
the Protective Commissioner v David
(1993) 30 NSWLR 417
, 437-440. See also
Protected Estates Act 1983
Petelin v Cullen
[1975] HCA 24
132 CLR 355.
British Medical Association and
The Law Society,
Assessment of Mental Capacity – Guidance for doctors
and lawyers
, London, BMJ Books, 2
. ed. 2004, p. 84
Cockerill J., Collier B.,
Maxwell K. Legal requirements and practices In Ed. Collier B., Coyne C.,
Sullivan K. Mental Capacity 2005,
Federation Press: Leichardt, p 38.
Darzins P., Molloy DW,
Strang D. Who Can Decide? Memory Australia Press: Adelaide, 2000. p73
Succession of Mary Louise
Helen Leda De La Vergne St. Paul
No. 2000-CA-0660 Court of Appeal Fourth
Circuit State of Lousiana
Brodaty H, Howarth GC, Mant
A, Kurrle SE. “General practice and dementia. A national survey of
Australian GPs.”
The Medical Journal of Australia
160(1):10-4.
Ashford W., Borson S.,
O’Hara R. et al., Should older adults be screened for dementia? It is
important to screen for evidence
of dementia!
Alzheimer’s &
. 2007; 3: 75-80
Freund B. Office
–based evaluation of the older driver
J American Geriatric Society
2006; 54:1943-4
Sorensen L., Foldspang, A.,
Gulman, N & Munk-Jorgensen P. “Assessment of dementia in nursing home
residents by nurses and
assistants: criteria validity and determinants.”
International Journal of Geriatric Psychiatry
, 2001; 16: 615-621.
McDonald AJ Carpenter GI.
The recognition of dementia in “non-EMI” Nursing home residents in
south East England
Int J Geriatric Psychiatry
2003; 18(2) ;105-108.
Maslow K., Mezey M.
Recognition of dementia in hospitalized older adults
Am J Nursing
Knopman D., Donohue JA.,
Gutterman EM . Patterns of care in the early stages of Alzheimer’s
disease: impediments to timely
J American Geriatric Society
2000; 48: 300-4.
Peisah C. Caring for the
institutionalised elderly: how easy is it?
Aust J Public
1991; 15(1):37-42.
Manby v Scott
[1714] EngR 440
In re Rhodes
[1890] UKLawRpCh 32
(1890) 44 Ch D 94
McLaughlin v
[1908] HCA 15
(1908) 5 CLR 858.
Northern Rivers Charity
Racing Association v Lloyd
[2002] NSWCA 129
Ibid. [23]-[26]. See also,
In re Rhodes
[1890] UKLawRpCh 32
(1890) 44 Ch D 94
Balfour v Balfour
[1919] 2 KB
Northern Rivers Charity
Racing Association v Lloyd
[2002] NSWCA 129.
Mc Laughlin v
[1908] HCA 15
, 861. See also
Stedman v Hart
[1854] EngR 518
(1854) 69 ER 258.
In re Brooks
WN (NSW) 4.
Victoria v Public
[1961] VR 81
Northern Rivers Charity
Racing Association v Lloyd
[2002] NSWCA 129.
Sale of Goods Act
Sale of Goods Act
Sale of Goods Act
Sale of Goods Act
Sale of Goods Act
Sale of Goods Act
Way v Latilla
3 All ER 759
Kellar v Williams
[2004] UKPC 30.
Powers of Attorney
Guardianship and
Administration Act
Gibbons v Wright
[1954] HCA 17
Imperial Loan Company, Limited v Stone
[1891] UKLawRpKQB 215
[1892] 1 QB 599
Molton v Camroux
(1848) 154 ER 548
[1849] EngR 659
Bevan v M’Donnell
[1854] EngR 101
Drew v Nunn
[1879] UKLawRpKQB 48
(1879) 4 QBD 661and
Dalle-Molle by His Next Friend Public Trustee v Manos
[2004] SASC 102
[2004] SASC 102
88 SASR 193.
Gibbons v Wright
[1954] HCA 17
Imperial Loan Company, Limited v Stone
[1891] UKLawRpKQB 215
[1892] 1 QB 599.
Petelin v Cullen
[1975] HCA 24
[1975] HCA 24
132 CLR 355.
v Maradona Pty
(1992) 25 NSWLR 643
Perpetual Trustees
Victoria v Ford
[2008] NSWSC 29.
Ibid. [126].
Ford by his tutor
Watkinson v Perpetual Trustees Victoria
[2009] NSWCA 186.
Ibid. [127].
Ibid. [129]-[131].
Gibbons v Wright
[1954] HCA 17
[1904] UKLawRpCh 150
[1905] 1 Ch 160
[1920] 1 Ch 284
David by her tutor the Protective
Commissioner v David
(1993) 30 NSWLR 417
[1904] UKLawRpCh 150
[1905] 1 Ch 160.
[1920] 1 Ch 284.
David by her tutor the
Protective Commissioner v David
(1993) 30 NSWLR 417.
NSW Trustee and Guardian
Public Trustee Act
[1954] HCA 17
91 CLR 423.
Guardianship and
Administration Act
Guardianship and
Administration Act
Aged and Infirm Persons
s 27(1)-(3).
Guardianship and
Administration Act
Guardianship and
Administration Act
s 52(1)-(3).
Guardianship and
Administration Act
Gibbons v Wright
[1954] HCA 17
See 3. 3. 5. 2.
Aged and Infirm Persons
s 20(1)-(3)
In re Estate of Lane
930 So. 2d 421
, 425 (2006) and
Holmes v O’Bryant
, 371 (1999).
As an example see,
Sleboda v Sleboda
[2007] NSWSC 361.
Janson v Janson
[2007] NSWSC 1344
[71]. This approach seems to have been followed in
Winefield v Clarke
[2008] NSWSC 882
Barkley v Barkley Brown
[2009] NSWSC 76.
Johnson v Buttress
[1936] HCA 41
, 119 (Latham CJ) and 143 (McTiernan J);
Fidelity Trustee Co v Gibson
[1971] VicRp 69
[1971] VR 573
Louth v Diprose
[1992] HCA 61
175 CLR 621
Janson v Janson
[2007] NSWSC 1344
Ridge, P, “Equitable
undue influence and wills”
Law Quarterly Review
Allcard v Skinner
[1887] UKLawRpCh 151
(1887) 36 Ch. D. 145
Goldsworthy v Brickell
[1987] Ch. 378
Royal Bank of Scotland Plc v Etridge (No.2)
[2002] 2 AC 773.
[1972] 2 NSWLR 147
Burns, F, “Undue
Influence Inter Vivos and the Elderly”
Ibid. 511-512.
Barkley v Barkley
[2009] NSWSC 76
[140]-[141].
Ibid. [142].
Johnson v Buttress
[1936] HCA 41
(1936) 56 CLR 113
Burns op cit (footnote 70)
See for example
[2004] QSC 443
Sleboda v Sleboda
[2007] NSWSC 361.
Winefield v Clarke
[2008] NSWSC 882
Ibid. [43]-[44].
Ibid. [50].
[2009] NSWSC 76.
Ibid. [170], [171] and
Ridge op cit (footnote 57)
See 4. 7, 4. 7. 2 and 4. 7.
3 in particular.
Gleeson, M,
“Australia’s contribution to the common law”
Wilton v Farnsworth
(1948) 76 CLR 646
[1948] HCA 20.
Louth v Diprose
[1992] HCA 61
(1992) 175 CLR 621
[1992] HCA 61.
Ibid. 637-638. See also
Blomley v Ryan
(1956) 99 CLR 365,
[1956] HCA 79.
Commercial Bank of
Australia v Amadio
[1983] HCA 14
(1983) 151 CLR 447
, 474. For a case in which
unconscionability and undue influence pleas were made our, but not non est
factum, see
Johnson v Johnson
[2009] NSWSC 503.
Sleboda v Sleboda
[2007] NSWSC 361.
Ibid. [51]-[52].
Ibid. [54].
Yaktine v Perpetual
Trustees Victoria Ltd
[2004] NSWSC 1078.
Ibid. [65].
[2006] NSWCA 208
Ibid. [68]. See also
Re: Dr Athanasios Gouras
[2004] MPBV 10 about the professional
responsibilities of doctors witnessing the making of a document by incapable
persons [69-[79].
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (367 KB)
PDF format (131 KB)
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter