URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/journals/ANZCompuLawJl/2022/6.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 14:13:32
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Nousiainen, Katri; Keski-Rahkonen, Joonas; McDonald, Tim; Feldmann, Sascha --- "Towards Society of Quantum Tomorrow" [2022] ANZCompuLawJl 6; (2022) 94 Computers & Law, Article 6
I INTRODUCTION
II AWARENESS: FUTURE IS QUANTUM
III ANALYSIS: QUANTUM ROADMAP
B Inclusiveness
C Balancing Regulatory Activities
D Safeguarding Individual Rights and Liberties
E Innovating by Design
IV ACTION: STEPS TOWARDS A FUTURE QUANTUM SOCIETY
V CONCLUSION
TOWARDS SOCIETY OF QUANTUM TOMORROW
NOUSIAINEN,
KESKI-RAHKONEN,
Quantum technologies encompass a wide and ever-growing field of applications
which leverage unique quantum-mechanical properties for
performing tasks that
existing, classical technologies could not. To benefit all of society optimally,
it is a linchpin that we are
aware of not just the potential of these emerging
technologies, but also of the risks involved, to analyze them thoroughly, and to
take political action accordingly – an A-cubed approach. Here, we follow
this approach by first depicting a picture of the
future quantum society. We
then present a five-point roadmap to examine social, ethical and economical
dimensions of quantum technologies,
with a call for further discussions on the
prospective legal and policy framework. Finally, we look over possible steps we
on the path towards a bright society of quantum
I INTRODUCTION
The brave new world of quantum technologies is upon us. As we are entering
into the new era of quantum technologies, the sovereign
states, institutional
and organizational operators, as well as businesses should reflect upon the
social and legal relevance of this
technological progress. Towards this goal, we
propose the A-cubed approach - awareness, analysis, and action - being employed
socio-economic framework construction (visualized in Fig. 1).
. A-cubed approach to
integrate new emerging quantum technologies into a part of future society: Raise
awareness, analyze the environment,
and take appropriate action.
First, it is of crucial importance that we are aware of these new
technologies; secondly, their implications and ramifications must
be carefully
analyzed within their respective environments, and lastly appropriate actions
should be taken to work for their development
but also to safeguard for
individual and social rights. In the international arena, the path dependency
process plays a crucial role
in finding balance with various rights and
obligations. In the quantum-technological environment, we see that the legal
design approach,
which aims to empower within improving, supporting, and
demonstrating, can pave the way towards a legal framework that is transparent,
human-centric, efficient, and comprehensible as well as foster equality and
nondiscrimination. We recognize that it is better to
be proactive than
II AWARENESS: FUTURE IS
To take full social benefit of new emerging quantum technologies, we should
first be aware of what they encompass. Based on the economic
theories on path
dependency,
knowledge is prevalent
in society and learning is considered as gradual. We encounter the same dilemma
with quantum technologies:
we have the golden opportunity to embrace learnings
from the past, to enhance, and build on the understanding that we have today.
a matter of exemplary incident, we may study the policy frameworks of the
1990’s for the internet.
more modern reference point for the embodiment of quantum technologies is an
envisaged social-legal-ethnic framework for
nanotechnology.
Though, just
reflecting the past is not enough, and a new point of view on quantum matters is
a linchpin, even when the learning
process comes with a cost. At the end of the
day, comprehensive understanding and knowledge are pivotal for successful
innovation,
development, and competition. In this respect, we should raise
quantum awareness – there is a new game in town.
The topic of “quantum” has attracted a lot of attention in recent
years, starting from science and media until it now
has reached every part of
society through the first applications coined “quantum” in the
consumer market. Yet, for the
majority of people it is not actually clear what
“quantum” really means, leave alone what implications quantum
technologies
might have for society in the future. Right now, we find ourselves
in the midst of a quantum revolution – however, not in the
first, but the
second one in the history of quantum physics.
The first quantum evolution began with the discovery of quantum mechanics and
its laws in the beginning of the 20
century, pioneered by
physicists like Planck, Einstein, Bohr, Heisenberg, to acknowledge only a few of
the most notable ones. Following
the initial observations on the quantized
nature of our underlying reality and the dualism between waves and particles,
the understanding
of these principles has by now enabled inventions that have
had a lasting impact on the development of civilization. Examples include
transistor or laser - essential building blocks in modern computers and
telecommunication, thus forming the backbone of our digitalized
society and the
motor of globalization.
The second quantum evolution is currently underway, and most scientific
efforts in the present focus on building, fully controlling
and taking advantage
of quantum systems. One widely anticipated embodiment of emerging quantum
technologies is a functional quantum
computer. In a nutshell, a quantum computer
is a device that harnesses the properties of quantum mechanics to store data and
computational tasks.
Although conventional computers have been present in some form since the 20th
century, the possibility of a computer operating exclusively
with quantum
mechanical principles was put forward in the
, which has led to the current
rise of the quantum computing and information
, onside stimulating the
evolution of other quantum technologies.
Even though any computational challenge with a classical computer can also,
in principle, be targeted by a quantum computer, there
are mathematical problems
where a quantum computer outshines its classical counterparts
spectacularly.
Whereas classical
computers, such as modern laptops and smartphones, encode information in binary
, as either zeros or ones, the fundamental element of a quantum
computer is a qubit, which in a simplified picture can be a zero and
same time. These quantum bits are nowadays realized in various physical
Over the last decade,
significant progress has been made, and real-life quantum computers exist. For
the time being, classical computers
seem to handle most daily computational
tasks with which a quantum computer is challenged, with a similar efficiency. On
hand, based on some companies, such as IBM and Google, we are on the
verge of achieving a genuine quantum
. However, current
devices are early examples of noisy intermediate-scale quantum computers, and
these have just begun to find important
applications in quantum simulation and
The biggest adversary
for the triumph of quantum computing has been the fragile nature of its building
blocks, qubits, that will
be rendered into an old-fashioned classical computer
employing zeros and ones, i.e., bits, by unwanted disturbance, colloquially
decoherence. A future challenge is to design devices with an ability to
shield their quantum nature from decoherence, while remaining
easy to operate.
Whether it will be more robust, error-tolerant quantum
or better ways to
correct and mitigate errors
both - only time will show us.
It is the peculiar nature of qubits that gives a quantum computer an edge to
solve certain complex problems better than the best conventional
supercomputers.
gives an overview of potential future applications which could harness this
“quantum advantage”. For completeness,
we want to emphasize that
there are also many situations where a quantum computer will always be inferior
to a classical one, or
where the quantum-boost will be
Most likely, the
supercomputers of the future are a
; a quantum computer and a
classical computer working in symbiosis to tackle hard computational problems
more efficiently. In other
words, there will be no future extinction of
classical computers, at least not due to quantum computing!
. The future is quantum -
Potential applications related to quantum technologies that could enter the
consumer market within the next
decade. Examples include drug and materials
discovery, quantum computing and cryptography as well as boosts towards a more
sustainable
energy consumption and production.
The sought-after quantum
, sometimes called
quantum supremacy
, stems from
the ability of a qubit array to represent and analyze a very large set of
information
. In fact, a few
hundred entangled qubits are sufficient to describe all atoms in the whole
Universe, whereas no classical computer
would have enough available memory for
this task. More precisely, a quantum computer excels in computational tasks
which require
going through a myriad of possible combinations to find the
solution. For instance, the quantum advantage over classical computers
achieved in solving mathematical optimization issues such as the prime number
factorization problem
closely linked to modern encryption methods, and the traveling salesman
, which is in turn, for
example, to the optimization of parcel delivery routes. Even though this casts
a shadow on the widely employed
encryption protocols, quantum can also be an
: quantum information
processing and quantum cryptography are thus promising applications leveraging
the laws of quantum mechanics
in the future. Furthermore, the quantum
enchantment is shown to pay dividends in both machine learning and artificial
intelligence
that are valuable tools to utilize the ever-increasing mountain of
available data.
In addition to
the computational speed-up, quantum computers are a natural platform to test the
fundamental principles of
, as well as to simulate
the behavior of (complex) physical
, which could act as a
new catalyst to material science and chemistry.
Quantum computers could also assist to map out and benchmark future
pharmaceuticals, and thus dramatically accelerate the discovery
therapeutics or other useful drugs, while screening the highly multidimensional
chemical space with classical methods is almost
impossible.
Indeed, most total
synthesis of target drug molecules to date still relies on the chemical
intuition and experience of chemists in
envisioning potential synthesis routes,
which ultimately need to be tested in cost-extensive trial and error
In addition, quantum
sensing can be utilized, for example, to make structures and functions of
individual biomolecules visible under
physiological
conditions.
Likewise, materials discovery could be dramatically improved using a
combination of machine learning approaches based on existing
data bases and the
highly parallelized nature of quantum simulations to find new material
compositions. Examples and pressing challenges
to tackle here include building
material that could substitute concrete with its extreme carbon and energy
footprint, while being
more light-weight and versatile to manipulate,
high-performance polymers, or highly efficient semiconductors that could
silicon in solar cells or electronics components with enhanced energy
efficiency.
Aside from directly using quantum systems in quantum simulation and quantum
information, there exists also a plethora of applications
already in use today,
which could see a dramatic “quantum boost” in efficiency in the near
future. Examples here include
the use of charges or light with a precise control
over multiple quantum properties, such as the spin, momentum and
polarization
. Controlling the
spin of electrons in optoelectronic devices could result in a reduction of
scattering losses for enhanced solar
cell performance, or significantly improve
the rate of catalyzed chemical reactions, while in a spinLED (LED =
light-emitting diode)
the emitted circularly polarized light could double
light-outcoupling efficiencies and thus the energy efficiency in most existing
LED displays currently featuring anti-glare
. This would dramatically
enhance the battery life or conversely reduce the energy consumption in most
digital consumer products.
As such, quantum-boosted technology improvements
could enable a more sustainable energy
Other potential quantum advantages could lie in the energy-consuming nature
of computing itself: This occurs currently almost exclusively
transistors based on electronics, meaning information can be transmitted through
electrical current either flowing or not
flowing. As such, a bit of information
(a “1” or a “0”) relies on permanent consumption of
electrical energy.
In contrast, employing a quantum-mechanical property of an
electron called its “spin” would enable spintronics applications
which would be by far more energy-efficient than electronics, as preserving a
specific state of information would not consume energy
and switching it would
consume much less energy than switching in
electronics
. As such, quantum
applications would highly enable energy efficient information processing in the
future. In particular, quantum
technologies could help reaching multiple
Sustainable Development Goals set out by the United Nations, including
Affordable and Clean
Energy (#7), Industry, Innovation and Infrastructure (#9),
Sustainable Cities and Communities (#11), and Responsible Consumption
Production (#12)
For the most part, new quantum technologies at the moment are still in the
early stage of pioneering and commercialization, but the
race for quantum
resources has nevertheless clearly begun. There are high expectations and hopes
that new emerging quantum technologies,
like quantum computers, may assist us to
tackle some of today’s acute issues, thereby providing a means towards a
greener and
brighter society. A step into this direction is to remember that
there should still ideally be no great knowledge and information
between all the relevant operators. Furthermore, knowledge on quantum
technologies should also be disseminated in understandable
terms to the general
audience to achieve a wide social comprehension. In particular, the academy and
education system has a central
role to play in raising public quantum awareness,
and to generate “quantum-skilled workforce” which is a necessary
prerequisite
to sustain and to drive a quantum ecosystem.
In order to learn from best interdisciplinary practices and to create
awareness and the most value, it is crucial to bridge more between
academia and society. We see it is worthy of increasing knowledge and
information between different operators, such as
the academy, policy makers and
industry, regarding interests, incentives, and objectives supporting the
creation of standardization
and best practices within quantum technologies.
Thus, the goal is to thrive the technological development and its social
embodiment,
and to create a flourishing quantum ecosystem in the future. A
pivotal aspect in quantum awareness is to acknowledge that the employment
possession of new technologies create possibilities but also bring
responsibilities. As we are now ushering into the next era
of quantum, time is
ripe to dissect the social-legal-ethical situation of today, and then to act in
preparation for the quantum leap
III ANALYSIS: QUANTUM
As briefly discussed above, the quantum way of thinking has reshaped our
worldview about the Universe but has also led to significant
applications our modern society relies on in the past century. A current trend
is to innovate more efficient and greener
materials or components for future
nanoelectronics by taking a better advantage of quantum
, as it is getting
harder to push the boundaries of Moore’s
, i.e., doubling the
transistor density on a microchip every second year. In addition to this
evolutionary development, we are now
experiencing a new wave of novel quantum
technologies that are promising in terms of social impact and commercial
applications
communication
. Furthermore,
different technologies affect each other, especially when combined. For
instance, quantum technologies may influence
the survival and evolution of other
technologies, such as artificial intelligence and big data applications, but
this kind of interactions
may vice versa increase the power and employment of
the quantum technologies.
Although the emerging quantum technologies, such quantum computing, are still
at the initial stage of utilization – transiting
from the pilot phase to
the commercial sphere, they have already begun to influence the structures and
functions of society in a
spectrum of ways. Sovereign states, institutions,
organizations, and corporations should be prepared for the emergence of these
technologies, with the constant goal of improving the current legislative
framework and initiating new ones. The upcoming technological
shift will take
place gradually, thus continuing efforts to stay updated on this development is
crucial in order to provide for meaningful
legislation initiatives.
The application and possession of new technologies involve harmonizing
different rights but also taking account of rising obligations.
In anticipation
of the social embodiment of quantum technologies, we address this regulatory
dilemma within a legal design framework
which comes together in our guideline
– Quantum Roadmap.
analyzes the emerging legal and ethical responsibilities into five basic
principles that are ethics, inclusion, balancing regulatory
activities,
safeguarding individual rights, and innovating by design (see fig. 3).
. Quantum roadmap suggested
by the authors. It has been motivated by the desire to raise quantum awareness
and to encourage further
debate on the topic. The roadmap charts the social
landscape into five interconnecting areas which each is supplemented with a
guiding principle for the integration of quantum technologies into our
daily life.
Equal access, public good, and transparency
are the guiding ethical principles.
What ethical risks does quantum technology create, and how can we mitigate
those risks? To what extent has quantum technology become
a military asset, and
what kind of role should international organizations play in governing
quantum-based weapon technology?
Law and ethics frequently interrelate, but ethical standards are never a
supplementation or replacement to legal measure. In particular,
ethics alone is
not adequate when regulating high-risk technologies. Nevertheless, ethical
provide a valuable direction to construct a legal framework
for society. For example, the development or employment of new technologies
should not create or aggravate inequalities. It should neither create a
different level of standing through its design nor should
it leave room for
hidden discriminatory practices. Primary calls for the benefit of humankind
should be recognized together with
commercial incentives.
When it comes to the ethical issues regarding the uprise of new technologies
in a society, we do not start ex nihilo. There has been
a lot of discussion on
ethical rules for different technologies, which has paved the way to modern
generic ethical guidelines. Nevertheless,
every field has its own special
traits; surprisingly the society has relatively recently woken-up to consider
the ethical aspects
circumstances.
However, for the
authors' knowledge, there is no well-established quantum-specific legal-ethics
at the current state of affairs.
Therefore, we herald for opening a discussion
and constructing a legal-ethical framework to cover the emerging quantum
technologies.
Furthermore, since society is in a constant flux, the ethical
norms are thus expected to be dynamic and contextual: the exact quantum-tech
regulations will always be a product of their time following the current trend
of the applications and implications of the given
technology. Consequently, the
legal-ethical framework has to be agile and updated with regular intervals.
An exemplary, near-future ethical issue is the dual-usage of quantum
technologies.
“dual-usage” term refers to the aspect that technology can be
employed in both military and in the commercial sphere.
In fact, at the end of
2018, the Commerce Department’s Bureau of Industry and Security announced
that certain quantum technologies,
such as quantum computing, sensing as well as
quantum encryption, should be added to a list of blocking U.S exports due to
dual-usage character.
Subsequently, the United States has included some quantum technologies on
the list of goods whose export is being
restricted.
There is surely a
call for a more extensive and legally binding regulatory framework to address
quantum technologies and their export
restrictions based on the ethical point of
views and the common-good practice.
On the other hand, we must ensure that regulations and export restrictions
will not hinder the development of new
technologies
or cause excessive
barriers for their financing, other investments, or slow down scientific
dialogues. In general, we see that equal
access and transparency lie at the
heart of ethics. For this purpose, we suggest following the dogma of legal
design approach when
approaching the legal-ethical conundrum of quantum
technology.
By definition, the legal design is
to apply a user-centered approach to
judicial information, services, products, and processes to design them to be
more comprehensible
approach aims to generate a systemic impact via empowering lay people with law:
by supporting equality, creating and building
value, increasing tools and
products, reducing knowledge and information asymmetry in society, and enabling
better access to law
and legal information. Within this approach, all actors in
the legal field as well as people outside of it are empowered by employing
means, such as, design methods, interdisciplinary best practices, and
technology.
The legal design operates at least in four prominent ways: empowering,
improving, supporting, and demonstrating. It builds on the
design thinking
process in reaching these
The design thinking
process determines the challenges and then executes solutions that take
end-users' needs into account. These
needs are at the essence of solutions and
concept development. The design thinking process centralizes understanding,
thinking, need-finding,
creating, and
Here the legal design
approach may transform law and legal practice related to quantum technologies
becoming more transparent,
human-centric, efficient, and comprehensible as well
as to foster better quality and the values of non-discrimination. Nonetheless,
further research is required to demonstrate and to support the expectations on
benefits derived from the legal design approach in
the quantum technology
Inclusiveness
Democratic involvement and the sharing of knowledge and
are the guiding inclusive principles.
How will quantum technology affect international trade, trade relations, and
trade organizations, and what kind of regulatory challenges
does it raise? What
kind of positive and negative effects will export and import restrictions have
on the quantum-technology industry
from a social, economic and innovation
perspective? What role should the public and the private sector play, and at
which stages?
How can or should we fund quantum infrastructure?
We see that the development or employment of new technologies should be
inclusive and provide benefits to be utilized for the good
of the whole of
humankind. The ambition of the inclusiveness is to prevent various risks of
increased inequality, e.g., stemming
from the monopolization through immaterial
property patents, and a quantum division during the commercialization phase,
which holds
both companies as well as countries. Furthermore, it aims to
integrate our democratic values into the social-ontogenesis of new quantum
technologies, which, for example, requires educating the general public on
quantum-related technologies. For commercial players,
a further motivation to
this direction is that technology which has gained the trust of the people has a
significant market advantage.
From the standpoint of our principle, equal access and openness could, to
some extent, help to impede, or at least restrict, the first
operators from
dominating the field. One concrete future software-level solution could be a
cloud-based service enabling researchers
and companies to fully tap into the
benefits of quantum computers on an equal footing. This cloud-based quantum
computing could be
either provided by a commercial actor or organized by
government authorities. Indeed, the current key actors of the quantum computing
market, such as IBM, Google, Microsoft, and Amazon, are on pace to establish
their quantum clouds, thus allowing the quantum computing
experience to a
broader audience.
In contrast to quantum-software design, the situation is more challenging on
the hardware level, i.e., designing and manufacturing
quantum-computer
architectures. Whereas we are on the software level, the hardware progress lacks
behind, but it is catching up at
an accelerating speed. However, unlike
quantum-algorithms such as the quantum Fourier-transformation that commonly
belong to the
public domain, the hardware development is currently strongly led
by the private sector so that the corresponding technological breakthroughs
under immaterial protection rights and corporational trade secrets. At some
level, this aspect is problematic for the evolution
of quantum computing, e.g.,
in respect to the openness and further development of the technology. Due to a
major innovation or to
the early-bird advantage, there may occur a
winner-takes-all scenario in the quantum game where one actor begins to dominate
market and the technological development in an unhealthy fashion. In
general, it raises a question what role the public and the private
sector should
play, and at which stages. For instance, there might be a reason for
governmental institutes to prohibit or to restrict
access to some part of the
technology, e.g., because of dual-usage and mitigating security risks.
Some countries have already taken export restriction actions at their
national level regarding quantum technologies. These actions
have been realized
in the form of export controls. It is even expected that we will witness the US
and China technology war in the
However, similarly to
the usage of technology, export policy also has a dual character: it can be
channeled for good and evil. States
should be prudent to goals they aim to
achieve through export restrictions. We recognize that the exportation also
offers great opportunities
collaborate,
learn from each
other, and it also provides transparency in the development of new technologies.
As the quantum technologies get
commercialized, it is a linchpin to find the
right balance to safeguard security, and peace, as well as to improve
technological
development. In particular, we call for international influencers
such as the United Nations (UN) or World Trade Organization (WTO)
bigger role in addressing these issues.
Balancing Regulatory
Innovativeness, common good, effectiveness and being
technology-friendly
are the guiding regulatory principles.
What type of institutions and governance structures does the emerging quantum
technology require? To what extent can we rely on current
and emerging
regulatory frameworks? What can we learn from the history of technological
governance and regulatory restrictions?
The development or employment of new technologies should not be hindered by
regulatory measures. In other words, the goal of the regulatory
route is to
maximize benefits to the whole society and mitigate risks of applied quantum
technology. At the same time, the legislative
actions should be cohesive and
respectful towards the principles of proportionality and subsidiarity while
providing a stable and
predictive regulatory environment, which is a key element
for commercial players. The regulatory actions should be guided by the
Aristotelian-like philosophy on the excess and deficiency: balancing legal
development, legal rights and obligations, public good,
and incentives to
innovate as well as to safeguard a fertile soil to develop technologies further.
Although some initial steps have been
contemporary legal
frameworks are inadequate to cover quantum technologies. We want to emphasize
that there is particularly a pressing
demand for an international regulatory
framework for the employment of quantum technologies in the society-wide global
context. For
example, WTO could be a prominent and connecting entity between
different nations for addressing the commercial usage of future quantum
technologies. Overall, it is of the utmost importance to find the regulatory
With quantum technologies maturing rapidly, it will be seen whether the
current incentives are enough for different operators to come
together to take
precautionary actions. Despite being better to be proactive than reactive, a
cynical prediction is – by reflecting
on the past – that a major
incident often needs to occur before appropriate measures are set in place.
Safeguarding
Individual Rights and Liberties
Prioritizing individual autonomy, fundamental rights and
equality and fairness are the guiding principles.
How will quantum technology affect digital surveillance, privacy, fairness,
trust, access to information, and human rights? What are
recommendations for the
private sector to collaborate with the government?
The development or employment of new technologies should not interfere with
recognized individual rights and liberties, exclude individual
access without
good cause unreasonably, create or aggravate inequalities between individuals,
interfere within individual autonomy,
create barriers to access to justice or
other recognized democratic fundamental principles. Safeguarding equal standing,
non-interference
on individual rights, and safeguarding for taking larger
frameworks into account when making justified decisions affecting
individual’s
rights and obligations.
For instance, the future quantum applications and innovations can be expected
to comply with the legislation on data protection, governance
and privacy.
However, it is currently unknown to what extent can we rely on current and
emerging regulatory frameworks such as General
Data Protection Regulation
,The California Consumer
Proposal for a regulation
of the European parliament and of the council laying down harmonized rules on
artificial intelligence (Artificial
Intelligence Act) and amending certain union
legislative acts (AI Act),
Digital Markets Act
, The Digital Services Act,
Arrangement
to mention a few.
This privacy issue culminates in the matter of cybersecurity where one must
switch eventually to new quantum-proof
encryption standards as quantum computers
scale up. Like with balancing the regulatory actions, it remains to be seen
whether the
current incentives are enough for the field itself to take the
precautionary step, or if a governmental nudge is required to motivate
reformation.
Currently, we are living in the age of information. In fact, we are almost
drowning in the sea of data, but a quantum way of thinking
may give us an
ability to efficiently process enormous data sets. In the coming decades,
synergies of quantum technology and AI may
open a new chapter in data science.
As regards, for instance, quantum-boosted artificial intelligence can be
employed to categorize
data, to track patterns, to benefit process development,
and to make more accurate forecasts. Moreover, it is speculated that
quantum-enhanced
AI will play a major role in the rise of autonomous decision
making. Nevertheless, quantum data utilization should not violate human
including human dignity, agency and oversight with the right to an explanation,
and the rights of humans with respect to
artificial intelligence. This core
principle should be methodically embedded in existing and future regulatory
structures. To ensure
human-centricity, one can employ the design methods
mentioned previously above as one possible solution, e.g., for designing and
generating data sets according to the principle.
Innovating by
A steered innovation design towards human centricity,
transparency,
openness and sustainability is the guiding principle.
What type of innovation should we want? How can and should governments and
public entities shape innovation in quantum technology,
and what path
dependencies might the corresponding actions and inactions create?
A fundamental question is what type of innovations we want in the future. The
governments, public and private entities, like different
institutions, and other
players, such as the developers and investors, have a possibility – and
responsibility – to shape
innovation in quantum technology, but at the
same time keeping track of the path dependencies that the corresponding actions
inactions create in respect to the other four guidelines above. The
development or employment of new technologies should be designed
in accordance
with equality, transparency, ethics, and human centricity. The design of the
technology should help provide an equal
access to technology, designing
technologies to foster non-discriminatory practices, transparency, and
sustainability.
First of all, when we investigate, develop and design quantum technology,
academia plays a central role and is a good medium to initiate
the quantum
debate. Researchers do have the duty to steer research and innovation; various
risks, legal gaps, ethical questions,
societal implications and other unknown
ramifications associated with quantum technologies should be factored in.
Prospective practices
should be designed and tested. Subsequently, insights
should be shared and disseminated openly within and outside of the academic
Side by side with academia, a public sector needs to step in. For example,
governments and governmental institutions can bring the
quantum community
together, which instead can forecast future trends of quantum technology
evolution for the service of the public.
With this information, the public
sector can become more aware of risks and engage in potential benefits related
to quantum technologies.
Moreover, it enables the public sector to set up
quantum-targeted strategies and policies to steer the progress into the right
to maximize the social benefit of the technology. This also enables
governments to found new specialized public institutes to offer
legal-ethical
guidance on the current possibilities associated with the development and usage
of quantum technologies from the public
point of view. The public sector should
also have healthy dialogue with the private sector to establish a pathway for
innovations.
Basic research conducted by academia through public funding is usually a
precursor for commercial incentives. For example, quantum
computing is rapidly
evolving field whose the basic research funding still mostly comes from public
resources, where the European
with 7,2 billion and China
with 15 billion have a clear leadership on funding. The
has announced a planned
governmental funding for 1.3 billion dollars. However, the private funding has
also significantly increased
during the recent years, in 2021 quantum computing
start-ups raised 1,7 billion (Fig. 4). It is expected that the private
will just further increase as the commercial applications gain
attraction. Operators such as IBM, Amazon, Alibaba, Microsoft, and
Google have
already launched their quantum computing services in the commercial
. Governmental funding in
billion US-dollars in China, EU, and the US.
In consequence, we can ask what type of governmental and public ties the
emerging technology requires to achieve a bright quantum
future. For example, if
the development of such basic research is carried out or supported by public
funding, the fruits could be
then shared accordingly. This could mean that the
fundamental research results should be announced as open access to be utilized,
and the commercialization could take place via licensing to prevent the
centralization of the crucial quantum innovations on one
player. This kind of
proactive involvement of the public sector could be also a precursor to
establish industry-wide hardware standards
which further stimulate technological
evolution on a broader front, e.g., to lure smaller, new players into the
quantum play. Therefore,
along with the legislational route, an effective
regulatory tool is to control the flows of (public) funding in order to design
and ethically equitable quantum infrastructure without sacrificing the
evolution and integration of the technology.
IV ACTION: STEPS TOWARDS
A FUTURE QUANTUM SOCIETY
By knowing the “bigger picture”, we can take steps to ascertain
the functionality and gain of society, while not smothering
the evolution and
integration of quantum technologies. In practice, success, most likely,
requires a strategy plan with concrete
steps for how to incorporate these
technologies in order to fully capture the commercial opportunities, and to
deliver maximum benefit
to society at the same time. For example, one of these
measures can be to launch a fleet of mission-driven flagships to solve
and societal challenges related to the embodiment of quantum
technologies. Naturally, our legislational environment needs to be ready
upcoming quantum change. For instance, the immaterial property right framework
could encourage commercialisation as well
as accessibility. In the long run,
there may be a necessity for an international framework to ensure the coherence
and the optimal
functionality of the global quantum community in respect to the
values presented in Quantum Roadmap. To support the advancement of
technologies while mitigating risks for destructive conflict, there need to be
frameworks and new institutions that address
legal, economic, political, and
security issues. This will require institutional innovation, as quantum
technologies exist in terms
of the “tri-sector” of government,
industry, and non-governmental
organizations.
Quantum technologies present challenges in terms of both shared development
and governance. Companies and nations are cooperating
and in competition, or
what has been described as “co-opetition,” referring to when
stakeholders can gain through working
together, but are also in fierce
competition and must balance the risks of over-exposure, protecting security or
trade secrets.
In contrast to
the Cold War, when Western and Soviet-aligned nations had entirely different
economic, political, and security institutions
– such as the European
Economic Community and NATO, or the Soviet-aligned Council for Mutual Economic
Assistance (Comecon)
and Warsaw Pact – nations today are closely linked,
even when they have extensive divisions. The new competition between the
States, Europe, and China for example is fundamentally different, with
integration. Economies have much more integration,
there are more exchanges of
citizens, and many shared interests.
Co-opetition is possible when both parties can gain without putting critical
factors at risk, or the two parties together can gain
an advantage over others.
The key is in how partnerships are structured. The task is to manage these
tensions and be proactive, to
ensure benefits and manage risks. and we may need
new institutions and processes. Naturally, our legislational environment needs
to be ready for the upcoming quantum change. For instance, the immaterial
property right framework could encourage commercialisation
accessibility. An international framework will be required to ensure the
coherence and the optimal functionality of the
global quantum community in
respect to the values presented in Quantum Roadmap.
This can be done by creating an architecture of the
Currently legal,
economic, political, and security issues are negotiated through international
bodies like the United Nations, World
Trade Organization, regional bodies like
the European Union, academic societies, and Non-Governmental Organizations such
These are voluntary, and their formation is led often by a smaller
group of powerful actors.
Regulations need to cover data privacy, and access for government authorities
such as law enforcement, shared governance of quantum
internet, managing norms
around cyberattacks, developing solutions to shared challenges such as climate
change, and establishing
a common language and terms among all three sectors.
These have been significant challenges for the United States and China, and
quantum computing provides an opportunity to form new institutional arrangements
for a fundamentally new technology. These could
take the form of new voluntary
bodies modeled after the World Trade Organization which have governed
challenging economic issues,
or the Internet Corporation for Assigned Names and
Numbers which has facilitated cross-national governance of the internet.
Quantum-safe data transfers and storage is closely entangled with the
security and defense field. Most likely, there will be a demand
intergovernmental legal rule framework and surveillance in certain research
areas of quantum computing to ensure worldwide
security. The possession and
employment of new technologies creates opportunities but also responsibilities.
A great part of decision
power is often vested and employed by public
authorities and governments. Furthermore, there will be questions of a deeper
collaboration and legal rule framework between sovereign states to
prevent abusing quantum technologies, such as employing it for
purposes to
produce war materials.
A solution could be to establish a legal collaborative framework for
“Mandatory Reporting and Supervision” to ensure international
and security. For instance, this could be realized as a form of a Security
Council or of a Union of Sovereign States - committing
to the same goals on
security and sustainability. The operations and accomplishment of the goals
should be overseen equally by all
the coalition members, and the power should
not be centered upon a few selected parties. Ideally, these member states should
comprehensively sovereign states - not just a few powerful ones - but
more equally the sovereign states of the world. The more equal
standing of the
sovereign states in this possible “Mandatory Reporting and Supervision
Body” would allow actions to be
taken with less political and historical
impact, that is quite the opposite, for instance, to the unfortunate situation
United Nations Security Council (that is mostly comprised of the War
winning countries). The historical burden and political impact
have frequently
caused the United Nations Security Council to be toothless in taking appropriate
measures and actions in reply to
threats on international peace and security.
Often, a mere “condemn” is insufficient to resolve the incidents
at the international arena. The former challenges with international
organizations and supervisory bodies should be converted into
knowledge for
anticipatory and precautionary practices. Therefore, we could learn from the
past to ensure the future peace and security.
According to economic theory, it
should be in the interest of operators to collaborate as without collaboration
the stakes are extremely
high and can lead in the worst scenario, a full-scale
mutual destruction. Thus, the game theory advises that it is best to
collaborate.
In general, our vision about a bright society of tomorrow is established upon
broad scientific capabilities in a coordinated symbiosis
with the tech industry
to push the cutting-edge quantum technologies forward. At the same, we see an
importance to deepen the dialogue
within the “Tri-Sectors” of
industry, academia and government so that social-level actions are taken in the
direction. In the process, a virtuous circle may be set up.
Public and private funding stimulates basic research yielding blooming
hubs and eventually connecting into a thriving quantum ecosystem. On the other
hand, some money will flow back into research
to generate more knowledge we can
transform into further advantageous innovation, and into more benefits to
V CONCLUSION
A new quantum revolution is underway, with innovation enabling the building
and controlling of quantum systems in areas of computing,
cryptography and
cybersecurity, sustainable energy, pharmaceuticals, and materials.
To conceptualize the changes, we propose an A-cubic approach of awareness,
analysis, and action to organize legal design. Awareness
provides for knowledge
of quantum to the general public and to regulators and specialists, bridging
between business, academia, and
society. To assist in the analysis of quantum
capabilities we propose creation of standardization and best practices that
cross national
and sectoral boundaries. This can be supported through a Quantum
Roadmap regulatory framework organizing emerging legal and ethical
relating to quantum technologies into five categories of ethics, inclusion,
regulatory activities, safeguarding individual
rights, and innovating by
The ethical principles to guide a regulatory framework include equal access,
public good, and transparency. The inclusiveness principles
include democratic
involvement and sharing of knowledge and resources. The principles for balancing
regulatory activities are supporting
innovativeness and the common good. The
principles behind safeguarding individual rights are prioritizing individual
autonomy, and
fundamental rights such as equality and fairness. Innovating by
design means steering innovation design toward human centricity,
openness, and
sustainability.
Quantum technologies are “tri-sector” and impact industry,
academia, and government, mirroring the tensions of both cooperation
competition. New institutions will be needed for this regulation. We propose the
establishment of a legal collaborative framework
for mandatory reporting and
supervision, reflecting a type of Security Council or a Union of Sovereign
States, to coordinate across
these boundaries and ensure that the development of
quantum technologies advances, rather than inhibits or destructs, the betterment
of society.
Teaching Faculty at
Harvard University and Postdoctoral Research Fellow, Program on Negotiation,
Harvard Law School.
Postdoctoral
Researcher and Teaching Fellow, Department of Physics, Harvard University.
Policy Researcher, RAND Corporation.
Research Group
Leader and Rowland Fellow, The Rowland Institute, Harvard University.
See for instance FA Hayek,
New Studies in Philosophy, Politics, Economics, and the History of Ideas
(University of Chicago Press, 2018).
Andrew Chadwick and Christopher
May, ‘Interaction between States and Citizens in the Age of the Internet:
“E-Government”
in the United States, Britain, and the European
Union’ (2003) 16(2)
271; Jan Van Dijk,
The Deepening
Divide: Inequality in the Information Society
(Sage Publications, 2005).
See for instance, Barry L
Shumpert et al, ‘Specificity and Engagement: Increasing ELSI’s
Relevance to Nano–Scientists’
(2014) 8(2)
Antonio G Spagnolo and Viviana Daloiso, ‘Outlining Ethical Issues in
Nanotechnologies’ (2009) 23(7)
394; Tsjalling Swierstra
et al, ‘Converging Technologies, Shifting Boundaries’ (2009) 3(3)
There are a myriad of text
books on quantum computing and information, see for example Masahito Hayashi,
Quantum Information Theory
(Springer, 2016); David McMahon,
Computing Explained
(John Wiley & Sons, 2007); Michael A Nielsen and
Isaac L Chuang,
Quantum Computation and Quantum Information
University Press, 2019); Venkateswaran Kasirajan,
Fundamentals of Quantum
(Springer Nature, 2021); John Watrous,
The Theory of Quantum
Information
(Cambridge University Press, 2018); Mark M Wilde,
Information Theory
(Cambridge University Press, 2017); Noson S Yanofsky and
Mirco A Mannucci,
Quantum Computing for Computer Scientists
University Press, 2008).
Richard P Feynman,
‘Simulating Physics with Computers’ (1982) 21(6-7)
International
Journal of Theoretical Physics
467; Paul Benioff, ‘The Computer as a
Physical System: A Microscopic Quantum Mechanical Hamiltonian Model of Computers
as Represented
by Turing Machines’ (1980) 22(5)
Journal of Statistical
563; D Deutsch, ‘Quantum Theory, the Church-Turing Principle
and the Universal Quantum Computer’ (1985) 400(1818)
Proceedings of the
Royal Society A: Mathematical, Physical and Engineering Sciences
TD Ladd et al, ‘Quantum
Computers’ (2010) 464(7285)
45; Antonio Acín et al,
‘The Quantum Technologies Roadmap: A European Community View’ (2018)
New Journal of Physics
See, for instance, Takashi
Yamakawa and Mark Zhandry, ‘Verifiable Quantum Advantage without
Structure’ (2022)
2204.02063.
TD Ladd et al, ‘Quantum
Computers’ (2010) 464(7285)
45; S Lloyd, ‘A
Potentially Realizable Quantum Computer’ (1993) 261(5128)
1569; Colin D Bruzewicz et al, ‘Trapped-Ion Quantum Computing: Progress
and Challenges’ (2019) 6(2)
Applied Physics Reviews
021314; Sergei
Slussarenko and Geoff J Pryde, ‘Photonic Quantum Information Processing: A
Concise Review’ (2019) 6(4)
Applied Physics Reviews
Kjaergaard et al, ‘Superconducting Qubits: Current State of Play’
(2020) 11(1)
Annual Review of Condensed Matter Physics
Therefore, the field is
accumulating more and more attention and resources from industrial players: not
only broad-interests corporations
such as Google and Microsoft, but also from
companies linked to the area of hardware development, like Intel and IBM.
Besides commercial
actors, the field has also piqued the wide interest of
various universities, international organizations and non-governmental
John Preskill,
‘Quantum Computing in the NISQ Era and Beyond’ (2018) 2(2)
79; Kishor Bharti et al, ‘Noisy Intermediate-Scale Quantum
(NISQ) Algorithms’ (2022) 94(1)
Reviews of Modern Physics
Matteo Ippoliti et al, ‘Many-Body Physics in the NISQ Era: Quantum
Programming a Discrete Time Crystal’ (2021)
PRX Quantum
Earl T Campbell, Barbara M
Terhal and Christophe Vuillot, ‘Roads towards Fault-Tolerant Universal
Quantum Computation’
(2017) 549(7671)
Iulia Georgescu, ‘25
Years of Quantum Error Correction’ (2020) 2(10)
Nature Reviews
519; Simon J Devitt, William J Munro and Kae Nemoto, ‘Quantum
Error Correction for Beginners’ (2013) 76(7)
Reports on Progress in
See, for instance, Ethan
Bernstein and Umesh Vazirani, ‘Quantum Complexity Theory’ (1997)
SIAM Journal on Computing
1411; Daniel R Simon, ‘On the Power
of Quantum Computation’ (1997) 26(5)
SIAM Journal on Computing
1474; Peter W Shor, ‘Polynomial-Time Algorithms for Prime Factorization
and Discrete Logarithms on a Quantum Computer’
(1997) 26(5)
Journal on Computing
See, for example, Dorit
Aharonov et al, ‘A Polynomial-Time Classical Algorithm for Noisy Random
Circuit Sampling’ (2023)
2211.03999.
Alberto Peruzzo et al,
‘A Variational Eigenvalue Solver on a Photonic Quantum Processor’
(2014) 5(1)
Nature Communications
4213; Abhinav Kandala et al,
‘Hardware-Efficient Variational Quantum Eigensolver for Small Molecules
and Quantum Magnets’
(2017) 549(7671)
242; Nikolaj Moll et
al, ‘Quantum Optimization Using Variational Algorithms on Near-Term
Quantum Devices’ (2018) 3(3)
Quantum Science and Technology
Jarrod R McClean et al, ‘The Theory of Variational Hybrid
Quantum-Classical Algorithms’ (2016) 18(2)
New Journal of Physics
023023; Ying Li and Simon C Benjamin, ‘Efficient Variational Quantum
Simulator Incorporating Active Error Minimization’
(2017) 7(2)
021050; D Zhu et al, ‘Training of Quantum Circuits on a
Hybrid Quantum Computer’ (2019) 5(10)
Science Advances
Ryan R Ferguson et al, ‘A Measurement-Based Variational Quantum
Eigensolver’ (2021) 126(22)
Physical Review Letters
220501; Bela
Bauer et al, ‘Hybrid Quantum-Classical Approach to Correlated
Materials’ (2016) 6(3)
Physical Review X
Yulin Wu et al,
‘Strong Quantum Computational Advantage Using a Superconducting Quantum
Processor’ (2021) 127(18)
Physical Review Letters
180501; Han-Sen
Zhong et al, ‘Quantum Computational Advantage Using Photons’ (2020)
Frank Arute et al,
‘Quantum Supremacy Using a Programmable Superconducting Processor’
(2019) 574(7779)
505; Aram W Harrow and Ashley Montanaro,
‘Quantum Computational Supremacy’ (2017) 549(7671)
203; Adam Bouland et al, ‘On the Complexity and Verification of Quantum
Random Circuit Sampling’ (2018) 15(2)
Nature Physics
See, for example, Lov K
Grover, ‘Quantum Mechanics Helps in Searching for a Needle in a
Haystack’ (1997) 79(2)
Physical Review Letters
Peter W Shor,
‘Polynomial-Time Algorithms for Prime Factorization and Discrete
Logarithms on a Quantum Computer’ (1997)
SIAM Journal on
Charles H Bennett et al,
‘Strengths and Weaknesses of Quantum Computing’ (1997) 26(5)
Journal on Computing
1510; Lov K Grover, ‘Quantum Mechanics Helps in
Physical Review
See, for instance, Dustin
Moody et al,
Status Report on the Second Round of the NIST Post-Quantum
Cryptography Standardization Process
(US Department of Commerce, NIST,
Vedran Dunjko and Hans J
Briegel, ‘Machine Learning & Artificial Intelligence in the Quantum
Domain: A Review of Recent
Progress’ (2018) 81(7)
Reports on Progress
074001; Vojtech Havlícek et al, ‘Supervised Learning
with Quantum-Enhanced Feature Spaces’ (2019) 567
Yunchao Liu, Srinivasan Arunachalam and Kristan Temme, ‘A Rigorous and
Robust Quantum Speed-up in Supervised Machine Learning’
(2021) 17(9)
Nature Physics
1013; Vicente Moret-Bonillo, ‘Can Artificial
Intelligence Benefit from Quantum Computing?’ (2014) 3(2)
Progress in
Artificial Intelligence
89; V Saggio et al, ‘Experimental Quantum
Speed-up in Reinforcement Learning Agents’ (2021) 591(7849)
229; Andreas Trabesinger, ‘Quantum Computing: Towards Reality’
(2017) 543(7646)
Shruti Dogra, Artem A
Melnikov and Gheorghe Sorin Paraoanu, ‘Quantum Simulation of
Parity–Time Symmetry Breaking with
a Superconducting Quantum
Processor’ (2021) 4(1)
Communications Physics
26; Simanraj Sadana,
Lorenzo Maccone and Urbasi Sinha, ‘Testing Quantum Foundations with
Quantum Computers’ (2022) 4(2)
Physical Review Research
Scott E Smart, David I Schuster and David A Mazziotti, ‘Experimental Data
from a Quantum Computer Verifies the Generalized
Pauli Exclusion
Principle’ (2019) 2(1)
Communications Physics
Ehud Altman et al,
‘Quantum Simulators: Architectures and Opportunities’ (2019) 2(1)
PRX Quantum
017003; Bruce M Boghosian and Washington Taylor,
‘Simulating Quantum Mechanics on a Quantum Computer’ (1998) 120(1-2)
Physica D: Nonlinear Phenomena
30; Richard P Feynman, ‘Simulating
Physics with Computers’ (1982) 21(6-7)
International Journal of
Theoretical Physics
467; Francesco Tacchino et al, ‘Quantum Computers
as Universal Quantum Simulators: State‐Of‐The‐Art and
Perspectives’
(2020) 3(3)
Advanced Quantum Technologies
Nathan Wiebe et al, ‘Simulating Quantum Dynamics on a Quantum
Computer’ (2011) 44(44)
Journal of Physics A
445308; Christof
Zalka, ‘Simulating Quantum Systems on a Quantum Computer’ (1998)
Proceedings of the Royal Society of London. Series A: Mathematical,
Physical and Engineering Sciences
See, for instance, Carlos
Outeiral et al, ‘The Prospects of Quantum Computing in Computational
Molecular Biology’ (2021)
Wiley Interdisciplinary Reviews:
Computational Molecular Science
Tameem Albash and Daniel A
Lidar, ‘Adiabatic Quantum Computation’ (2018) 90(1)
Modern Physics
015002; Y Cao, J Romero and A Aspuru-Guzik, ‘Potential
of Quantum Computing for Drug Discovery’ (2018) 62(6)
IBM Journal of
Research and Development
See, for example, Bruno
Miranda et al, ‘Recent Advances in the Fabrication and Functionalization
of Flexible Optical Biosensors:
Toward Smart Life-Sciences Applications’
(2021) 11(4)
107; Antoine Reserbat-Plantey et al,
‘Quantum Nanophotonics in Two-Dimensional Materials’ (2021) 8(1)
ACS Photonics
85; Tongtong Zhang et al, ‘Toward Quantitative
Bio-Sensing with Nitrogen–Vacancy Center in Diamond’ (2021) 6(6)
ACS Sensors
Crassous, Jeanne et al,
‘Materials for Chiral Light Control’ (2023) 8(6)
Nature Reviews
Young Hoon Kim et al,
‘Chiral-Induced Spin Selectivity Enables a Room-Temperature Spin
Light-Emitting Diode’ (2021) 371(6534)
See, for instance, Jonathan
Ruane, Andrew McAfee and William D Oliver, ‘Quantum Computing for Business
Harvard Business Review
(1 January 2022)
<https://hbr.org/2022/01/quantum-computing-for-business-leaders>; Matthias
Möller and Cornelis Vuik,
’On the Impact of Quantum Computing
Technology on Future Developments in High-Performance Scientific
Ethics and Information Technology
269; Akshay Ajagekar and Fengqi You, ‘Quantum Computing and Quantum
Artificial Intelligence for Renewable and Sustainable Energy:
Prospect towards Climate Neutrality’ (2022) 165
Renewable and
Sustainable Energy Reviews
112493; Annarita Giani and Zachary Eldredge,
‘Quantum Computing Opportunities in Renewable Energy’ (2021) 2(5)
SN Computer Science
Igor Žutić,
Jaroslav Fabian and S Das Sarma, ‘Spintronics: Fundamentals and
Applications’ (2004) 76(2)
Reviews of Modern Physics
Transforming Our World:
The 2023 Agenda for Sustainable Development,
UN GAOR, 70
Agenda items 15 and 116 UN Doc A/RES/70/1 (21 October 2015).
See, for instance, Philip
Ball, ‘Materials Innovation from Quantum to Global’ (2022) 21(9)
Nature Materials
962; F Pelayo García de Arquer et al,
‘Semiconductor Quantum Dots: Technological Progress and Future
Challenges’
(2021) 373(6555)
G E Moore, ‘Cramming
More Components onto Integrated Circuits’ (1998) 86(1)
Proceedings of
See, for instance, Antonio
Acín et al, ‘The Quantum Technologies Roadmap: A European Community
View’ (2018) 20(8)
New Journal of Physics
See, e.g., C L Degen, F
Reinhard and P Cappellaro, ‘Quantum Sensing’ (2017) 89(3)
of Modern Physics
See, e.g., Omar S
Magaña-Loaiza and Robert W Boyd, ‘Quantum Imaging and
Information’ (2019) 82(12)
Reports on Progress in Physics
Paul-Antoine Moreau et al, ‘Imaging with Quantum States of Light’
(2019) 1(6)
Nature Review Physics
See, e.g., Vittorio
Giovannetti, Seth Lloyd and Lorenzo Maccone, ‘Advances in Quantum
Metrology’ (2011) 5(4)
Nature Photonics
222; Luca Pezzè et
al, ‘Quantum Metrology with Nonclassical States of Atomic Ensembles’
(2018) 90(3)
Reviews of Modern Physics
035005; Michael A Taylor and
Warwick P Bowen, ‘Quantum Metrology and Its Application in Biology’
Physics Reports
1; Géza Tóth and Iagoba
Apellaniz, ‘Quantum Metrology from a Quantum Information Science
Perspective’ (2014)
Journal of Physics A: Mathematical and
Theoretical
Nicolas Gisin et al,
‘Quantum Cryptography’ (2002) 74(1)
Reviews of Modern Physics
145; Nicolas Gisin and Rob Thew, ‘Quantum Communication’ (2007) 1(3)
Nature Photonics
165; H J Kimble, ‘The Quantum Internet’
(2008) 453(7198)
1023; Stephanie Wehner, David Elkouss and Ronald
Hanson, ‘Quantum Internet: A Vision for the Road Ahead’ (2018)
See, e.g., Michael A Nielsen
and Isaac L Chuang,
Quantum Computation and Quantum Information
(Cambridge University Press, 2019); T D Ladd et al, ‘Quantum
Computers’ (2010) 464(7285)
See also, Katri Nousiainen
and Joonas Keski-Rahkonen,
Quantum Computing Era: New Legal Order, Berkeley
Global Society: The Tech Book
(Europa Institute at the University of Zurich,
forthcoming 2023); Katri Nousiainen and Joonas Keski-Rahkonen,
Navigating in
a Post-Quantum Legal Design Landscape, in Legal Design Book
University Press, forthcoming 2023); ‘Katri Nousiainen and Joonas
Keski-Rahkonen on “Quantum Computing”’,
Berkeley Technology
Law Journal Podcast
(Seth Bertolucci and Isabel Jones, 23 August 2022)
<https://btlj.org/2022/08/berkeley-technology-law-journal-podcast-quantum-computing>.
See for instance, Mauritz
Kop, ‘Establishing a Legal-Ethical Framework for Quantum
Technology’,
Yale Journal of Law & Technology: The Record
Page, 30 March 2021)
<https://yjolt.org/blog/establishing-legal-ethical-framework-quantum-technology>.
See, for instance, Michal
Krelina, ‘Quantum Technology for Military Applications’ (2021) 8
EPJ Quantum Technology
See further on
Controls for Certain Emerging Technologies,
83 FR 58201 (2018). Note:
Commerce and Defense both are part of the U.S. Department of the Treasury /CFIUS
which makes decisions
related to export-control
‘CFIUS Overview’, US Department of the Treasury (Web Page, 25 August
<https://home.treasury.gov/policy-issues/international/the-committee-on-foreign-investment-in-the-united-states-cfius/cfius-overview>.
Export Controls for Quantum Computers
, 15 CFR 774
Implementation of Certain
New Controls on Emerging Technologies Agreed at Wassenaar Arrangement 2019
85 FR 62583 (2020).
On current technological
development,
for instance, Edward Parker et al, ‘An Assessment
of the U.S. And Chinese Industrial Bases in Quantum Technology’,
Corporation
(Web Page, 2 February 2022)
<https://www.rand.org/pubs/research_reports/RRA869-1.html>. Note: Although
China is leading on
quantum communications, the USA and EU are ahead on quantum
Katri Nousiainen,
‘Legal Design in Commercial Contracting and Business Sustainability New
Legal Quality Metrics Standards’
(2022) 6(2)
Journal of Strategic
Contracting and Negotiation
Katri Nousiainen,
‘What Have I Signed? Do I Really Understand the Contract?’,
Contracting Excellence Journal
(Web Page, 12 September 2020)
<https://www.worldcc.com/Resources/Blogs-and-Journals/Contracting-Excellence-Journal/View/ArticleID/10812>.
A Design Thinking
Stanford Education ME 113
(Web Page, 2 February 2022)
<https://web.stanford.edu/class/me113/d_thinking.html>. Note: there exist
also various paths as
regards the number and content of the design thinking
process stages.
See for instance, Katri
Nousiainen and Joonas Keski-Rahkonen,
Quantum Computing Era: New Legal Order,
Berkeley Global Society: The Tech Book
(Europa Institute at the University
of Zurich, forthcoming 2023); Katri Nousiainen and Joonas Keski-Rahkonen,
Navigating in a Post-Quantum Legal Design Landscape, in Legal Design Book
(Cambridge University Press, forthcoming 2023); ‘Katri Nousiainen and
Joonas Keski-Rahkonen on “Quantum Computing”’,
Technology Law Journal Podcast
(Seth Bertolucci and Isabel Jones, 23 August
<https://btlj.org/2022/08/berkeley-technology-law-journal-podcast-quantum-computing>.
for instance,
Davide Castelvecchi, ‘IBM's Quantum Cloud Computer Goes
159; Evan R MacQuarrie
et al, ‘The Emerging Commercial Landscape of Quantum Computing
(2020) 2(11)
Nature Reviews Physics
596, 598; Frederic T Chong, Diana
Franklin and Margaret Martonosi, ‘Programming Languages and Compiler
Design for Realistic
Quantum Hardware
Noah Barkin, ‘Export
Controls and the US-China Tech War Policy Challenges for Europe’,
Tendenz Blick
(Web Page, 18 March 2020)
<https://tendenzblick.net/wp-content/uploads/2020/08/merics_ChinaMonitor_US-CH-EU-Export-Controls_en_final.pdf>.
See for instance some
examples of intergovernmental friendly agreements and research partnerships on
quantum technologies; (FIN-USA)
‘Joint Statement of the United States and
Finland on Cooperation in Quantum Information Science and Technology’,
United States Department of State
(Web Page, 6 April 2022)
<https://www.state.gov/joint-statement-of-the-united-states-and-finland-on-cooperation-in-quantum-information-science-and-technology>;
(AU-USA) ‘Cooperation in Quantum Science and Technology’,
States Department of State
(Web Page, 17 November 2021)
<https://www.state.gov/cooperation-in-quantum-science-and-technology-aus>;
(SWE-USA) Thomas Wong,
‘The United States and Sweden Sign Quantum
Cooperation Statement’,
National Quantum Initiative
(Web Page, 11
April 2022)
<https://www.quantum.gov/the-united-states-and-sweden-sign-quantum-cooperation-statement>;
‘The United States and United Kingdom Issue Joint Statement to
Enhance Cooperation on Quantum Information Science and Technology’,
White House
(Web Page, 4 November 2021)
<https://www.whitehouse.gov/ostp/news-updates/2021/11/04/the-united-states-and-united-kingdom-issue-joint-statement-to-enhance-cooperation-on-quantum-information-science-and-technology>;
(UK-SWE) George Freeman, ‘New Joint Statement between UK and US to
Strengthen Quantum Collaboration’,
Department for Business, Energy
& Industry Strategy
(Web Page, 4 October 2021)
<https://www.gov.uk/government/news/new-joint-statement-between-uk-and-us-to-strengthen-quantum-collaboration>.
Ibid; See for instance,
National Quantum Initiative Act
, Pub L No 115-368, 132 Stat 5902-5103;
National Quantum Initiative Act
, HR 6227, 115
(2017-2018)
<https://www.congress.gov/bill/115th-congress/house-bill/6227/text>.
Regulation (EU)
2016/679 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 27 April 2016
on the protection of natural persons with regard to the processing of
personal data and on the free movement of such data, and repealing
95/46/EC (General Data Protection Regulation)
[2016] OJ L 119/1.
Cal Civ Code
1798.100-1798.199.100 (‘California Consumer Privacy Act of
European Commission,
Directorate-General for Communications Networks, Content and Technology,
‘Proposal for a Regulation of
the European Parliament and of the Council
Laying down Harmonised Rules on Artificial Intelligence (Artificial Intelligence
and Amending Certain Union Legislative Acts’,
Page, 21 April 2021)
<https://eur-lex.europa.eu/legal-content/EN/ALL/?uri=CELEX:52021PC0206>.
Digital Markets Act (DMA),
expected to be adopted in September or October 2022. ‘Digital Markets Act
European Commission
(Web Page, 8 July 2022), archived at
<https://web.archive.org/web/20220708202056/https://ec.europa.eu/competition-policy/sectors/ict/dma_en>;
‘Europe Fit for the Digital Age: Commission Proposes New Rules for Digital
European Commission
(Web Page, 15 December 2020)
<https://ec.europa.eu/commission/presscorner/detail/en/ip_20_2347>.
‘The Digital Services
Act Package’,
European Commission
(Web Page, 25 September 2023)
<https://digital-strategy.ec.europa.eu/en/policies/digital-services-act-package>;
Fit for the Digital Age: Commission Proposes New Rules for Digital
European Commission
(Web Page, 15 December 2020)
<https://ec.europa.eu/commission/presscorner/detail/en/ip_20_2347>.
Data Act: Commission
Proposes Measures for a Fair and Innovative Data Economy’,
(Web Page, 23 February 2022)
<https://ec.europa.eu/commission/presscorner/detail/en/ip_22_1113>.
Bureau of Nonproliferation,
US Department of State, ‘Wassenaar Arrangement on Export Controls for
Conventional Arms and Dual-Use
Goods and Technologies’ (Web Page, 22 March
2000), archived at
<https://1997-2001.state.gov/global/arms/np/mtcr/000322_wassenaar.html>.
For further reading
European Commission’s
Shaping Europe’s Digital Future
Quantum Technologies Flagship
, that intends to place the European Union
at front of the second quantum revolution in fostering long term research and
innovation,
‘Quantum Technologies Flagship’,
European Commission
(Web Page, 4 October 2022)
<https://digital-strategy.ec.europa.eu/en/policies/quantum-technologies-flagship>;
Council Regulation on Establishing the European High Performance Computing
Joint Undertaking and Repealing Regulation EU2018/1488
[2021] OJ L 256/3
(‘EuroHPC’). The regulation aims to foster making the EU the leading
actor in super computing. ‘The
European High Performance Computing Joint
Undertaking,’
European Commission
(Web Page, 30 June 2023)
<https://digital-strategy.ec.europa.eu/en/policies/high-performance-computing-joint-undertaking>.
National Quantum
Initiative Act
, Pub L No 115-368, 132 Stat 5902-5103;
National Quantum
Initiative Act
, HR 6227, 115
Congress (2017-2018)
<https://www.congress.gov/bill/115th-congress/house-bill/6227/text>;
‘National Quantum Initiative’,
National Quantum Coordination
(Web Page) <https://www.quantum.gov>; ‘National Quantum
Initiative Supplement to the President’s FY 2023 Budget’,
National Quantum Coordination Office
(Report, January 2023)
<https://www.quantum.gov/wp-content/uploads/2023/01/NQI-Annual-Report-FY2023.pdf>;
‘National Quantum
Initiative Supplement to the President’s FY 2022
National Quantum Coordination Office
(Report, December
2021) <https://www.quantum.gov/wp-content/
uploads/2021/12/NQI-Annual-Report-FY2022.pdf>. See further discussion
around quantum computing and cybersecurity: Christopher Monroe,
Michael G Raymer
and Jacob Taylor, ‘The U.S. National Quantum Initiative: From Act to
Action’ (2019) 364(6439)
National Quantum
Initiative Act
, Pub L No 115-368, 132 Stat 5902-5103; Arthur Herman,
‘At Last America Is Moving on Quantum’,
(Web Page, 20
August 2018)
<https://www.forbes.com/sites/arthurherman/2018/08/20/at-last-america-is-moving-on-quantum/#71eaa5d55327>;
Office of Science and Technology, The White House, ‘White House Office of
Science & Technology Policy and U.S. National
Science Foundation Host
“Quantum Workforce: Q-12 Actions for Community Growth” Event,
Release Quantum Workforce Development
Plan’ (Web Page, 1 February 2022)
<https://www.whitehouse.gov/ostp/news-updates/2022/02/01/white-house-office-of-science-technology-policy-and-u-s-national-science-foundation-host-quantum-workforce-q-12-actions-for-community-growth-event-release-quantum-workforce>.
See, for instance, Edwin
Cartlidge, ‘Europe’s Billion-Euro Quantum Flagship Hands out First
(Web Page, 29 October 2018)
<https://www.science.org/content/article/europe-s-billion-euro-quantum-flagship-hands-out-first-grants>;
Garrelt J N Alberts et al, ‘Accelerating Quantum Computer
Developments’ (2021) 8(1)
EPJ Quantum Technology
18; Jonathan
Ruane, Andrew McAfee and William D Oliver, ‘Quantum Computing for Business
Harvard Business Review
(1 January 2022)
<https://hbr.org/2022/01/quantum-computing-for-business-leaders>.
Nick Lovegrove and Matthew
Thomas, ‘Why the World Needs Tri-Sector Leaders’,
Business Review
(Web Page, 13 February 2013)
http://hbr.org/2013/02/why-the-world-needs-tri-sector
Adam Brandenburger and
Barry Nalebuff, ‘The Rules of Co-Opetition’,
Harvard Business
(January-February 2021)
http://hbr.org/2021/01/the-rules-of-co-opetition
Michael J Mazarr and Tim
McDonald, ‘Competing for the System: The Essence of Emerging Strategic
Rivalries’,
Rand Corporation
(Web Page, 10 November 2022)
http://www.rand.org/pubs/perspectives/PEA1404-2.html
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (23.4 MB)
PDF format (973 KB)
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter