URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/journals/LawTechHum/2025/14.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 15:12:57
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Pandos, Olga C --- "The Impact of Narratives on the Legal and Regulatory Discourse of Heritable Human Genome Editing" [2025] LawTechHum 14; (2025) 7(2) Law, Technology and Humans 27
The Impact of Narratives on the Legal and Regulatory Discourse of
Heritable Human Genome Editing
Olga C Pandos*
Deakin University, Australia
Heritable human genome editing; gene editing;
narrative theory; regulation; technology law; ethics
1. Introduction
We are the stories we are told and we are the stories we
tell ourselves. To change our circumstances, we need to change our story:
it, modify it, or completely rewrite
Harold R Johnson, an Indigenous Canadian lawyer
and writer, aptly captured the power of narratives on social discourse. Although
in a different context, these observations are relevant to a number of
areas, including the development of frontier technologies.
These technologies
are perceived to be at the precipice of the bounds of knowledge, generating new
ideas and expanding knowledge
understanding.
By their very
nature, frontier technologies emerge within ‘a diverse collection of
research programmes [and] forms of knowledge
techniques’.
Narratives are
the fundamental glue underpinning the interactions between science, law and
regulation. Specifically, with respect
to frontier technologies, their societal
acceptance and regulation, often manifested through legal sanctioning, are
reliant upon
the dominant narrative espoused within a society. Consequently,
over time, the role of narrative science has been explored, becoming
contributor to knowledge generation and regulatory discourse.
This article demonstrates the role and value of narratives in the ethical and
legal permissibility of a frontier technology: Clustered
Regularly Interspaced
Short Palindromic Repeats (CRISPR) technology. Narratives are perceived to be a
‘technology of
sense-making’,
enabling the
representation of knowledge and ideas to assist in navigating complex
subject-matter. Therefore, this article applies
narrative theory, specifically
through a case study, to argue for the ethical and legal sanctioning of
Heritable Human Genome Editing
certain circumstances
circumstances are limited to prevent, treat or correct fatal monogenic genetic
diseases. By applying the four principles of
– autonomy,
non-maleficence, beneficence and justice, this article argues an ethical
imperative exists to pursue HHGE to prevent
Tay-Sachs Disease (TSD) – a
fatal monogenic genetic disease.
Section 2 identifies the narrative of CRISPR technology as a means to
contextualise the sources of its legal and ethical concerns.
The dominant
narrative associated with CRISPR technology is accompanied by fear and
uncertainty, which has permeated to mainstream
media and the global community.
This raises the relevance of applying narrative theory as one means to explore
the possibility of
pursuing HHGE
certain circumstances
3 focuses on narrative theory, specifically the adoption of a case study, to
investigate the ethical and legal permissibility
of HHGE for a therapeutic use:
to prevent, treat or correct
fatal monogenic
genetic disease/s. For the
purpose of this argument, its therapeutic use has been limited to fatal (or
terminal) genetic diseases
that are caused by a known single
Their known genetic cause
and severity present compelling justifications to render them candidate diseases
to target therapeutically.
This also acknowledges the technology’s current
capability to edit one mutation precisely. Further, based on current research
and previous experiences in the context of transitioning somatic genome editing
to clinical trials, monogenic genetic diseases will
be the likely candidates
used in the first clinical trials for
This offers a constructive
transition to section 4, which presents the case study, formulating the basis of
this article. TSD was
selected as a therapeutic candidate because it is a fatal
monogenic genetic disease. The aetiology of the disease provides necessary
context and understanding about its genetic cause, inheritance and
symptomatology. Following this background, a hypothetical scenario
is proffered,
in which prospective parents who may be unable to conceive a genetically related
healthy child are confronted with
a decision to pursue HHGE as a means to
prevent TSD. The adoption of a case study approach enables the application of an
discourse to narrate the possibilities of pursuing HHGE in this
scenario. This discourse is interrogated in section 5, in which the
is narrated through the lens of the four principles of medical ethics. In
section 6, the article concludes that there
is a strong, ethically justified
argument to pursue HHGE to prevent TSD. The use of narrative theory illustrates
the power of reframing
the narrative and rhetoric attached to CRISPR
technology.
2. The CRISPR Narrative
Since its discovery in 2012, CRISPR technology in somatic and germline cells
has rapidly advanced within a very short timeframe. Notably,
significant potential for therapeutic application, with insurmountable
transformative potential. There are two cellular
contexts in which CRISPR
technology may be applied – in somatic and germline cells. Germline cells
refer to human gametes or
reproductive cells, such as the female egg and male
sperm. Germline genome editing can be further sub-categorised into
germline editing
. HHGE refers to the editing of germline cells using
CRISPR technology for reproductive
This means once an edit
is made, the edited embryo will be implanted to achieve a pregnancy. The union
of germ cells create a zygote
and subsequent genome modification of the zygote
is heritable. In contrast, germline editing refers to the editing of germline
not for reproduction.
indicates that germline editing is undertaken for a research purpose. The sole
focus of this article is HHGE for therapeutic
applications.
In Australia, the current legal and regulatory framework is highly
prohibitive.
This manifests as a
legislative blanket prohibition and criminalisation of
The underlying motivation
for this prohibitive legal and regulatory position is attributed, in part, to a
dominant narrative associated
with HHGE: fear and uncertainty. This narrative
was further compounded by the alleged birth of the first ‘CRISPR
in 2018, which was the catalyst prompting an immediate informal
global moratorium on HHGE. Described as a ‘reckless ethical
disaster’, the experiment, undertaken by He Jiankui, was an affront to
well-established ethical principles and practices in
The aim of the
experiment was to genetically modify the
gene, involved in HIV
infection. If successful, the offspring containing the edited
should be immune to HIV
This reflects the
potential therapeutic value of HHGE. However, in the absence of preclinical
evidence pertaining to its safety and
efficacy and ongoing societal debate with
respect to its application, HHGE should not be
undertaken.
The CRISPR babies experiment is arguably a predominant source for the fear
and uncertainty attached to HHGE. Further, it represents
an inviolable red line
that ought not to be crossed, especially in the absence of evidence to establish
its safe and effective use.
It is imperative to be cognisant of this dominant
narrative, which is shaping the regulation of HHGE. Notably, the adoption of a
moratorium is not indicative of an indefinite ban. Rather, it was enforced to
enable time for responsible research and development
of the technology in order
to improve understanding and data collation. Therefore, it is timely to consider
a pathway forward for
the ethical and legal permissibility of HHGE. The
application of narrative theory is one pathway lending support to this campaign.
3. Narratives, Stories and Discourse
This article advances the following argument: if applied in a therapeutic
context, HHGE should only be undertaken to prevent, treat
genetic disease/s.
These are diseases caused by a single mutation to a gene. Reliance upon
narrative theory through the presentation of a case study
on TSD will
demonstrate its valuable role in shaping future legal and regulatory discourse.
Importantly, it reinforces the power
of narratives within ethical and societal
deliberations of a frontier technology.
It is important to clarify the meaning of a narrative for the purpose of this
article. Narrative theory is a flourishing research
area and is vast in its
literature. Generally, the term ‘narrative’ is synonymous with
terms, narratives provide a means to describe developments and changes over time
or how different ‘things’
From the perspective of a
narratologist, a narrative is perceived as a ‘dynamic relation’
between a story (which communicates
events) and discourse (the way in which
these events are communicated).
This is particularly pertinent to HHGE, as the CRISPR babies experiment embodied
the discourse that confronted the global community.
The power of a narrative was
subsequently observed in the immediate condemnation of this experiment and
enforcement of the global
moratorium, which continues today. However, as the
technology inevitably matures, society ought to engage in a productive dialogue
to consider whether HHGE should be ethically and legally permissible and, if so,
under what circumstance/s.
This raises a key role of narrative theory: its ability to be used as a tool
to navigate these societal dialogues and shape future
legal and regulatory
discourse. Professors Mary Morgan and M. Norton Wise usefully described the
value of narrative theory and narrative
knowing. Especially in complex cases,
such as frontier technologies, the function of a narrative is clear – it
provides a mechanism
coherence-making.
This mechanism
refers to a narrative’s capability to discern pieces of information and
reveal the ways in which these various
interrelate.
Importantly, the
‘explanatory power’ of a narrative is premised in its ability to
‘chart a satisfactory path not
just through contingencies, possibilities
and alternatives, but to do so by making active use of those
This was also
reinforced by John Beatty, who noted that a ‘narrative indicates or
alludes to non-actualized possibilities,
and their consequences, by treating
events ... not just as points along the way to the outcome, but as
narratives are an effective mechanism to explore a variety of complex
subject-matter. This article relies on narrative
theory to elucidate the ethical
issues associated with HHGE, with a view to reconcile value pluralism, thus
enabling its legal permissibility.
Narratives serve a specific utility in conveying complex subject-matter (the
story) in a comprehensive way to provide solutions to
a given problem (its
subsequent discourse). In this way, a narrative may be perceived as a tool to
solving complex puzzles. In the
context of HHGE, this article adopts the
definition and purpose of a narrative as noted above to determine whether it can
to argue for the ethical and legal permissibility of certain
applications. Importantly, in providing the following case study, it
sufficient detail to identify alternative views and solutions to justify the
outcome of a decision or pathway
4. A Case Study: Tay-Sachs Disease
This case study investigates whether HHGE ought to be ethically and legally
permitted as a means to prevent Tay-Sachs Disease (TSD).
The utility of a case
study is clear: it provides a narrative of a hypothetical scenario and enables
critical evaluation of various
ethical arguments to determine permissible
applications of HHGE. If an ethical outcome permitting the application of HHGE
achieved, this provides a stronger grounding to argue for its legal
sanctioning. It is imperative to reinforce the dominant narrative
attached to
HHGE. In light of the CRISPR babies experiment, there is apprehension regarding
a repeat of this unethical experiment
and unscrupulous applications involving
genetic enhancement.
These fears
manifest as two dominant protagonists influencing perceptions of HHGE, namely
‘CRISPR babies’ and ‘superhumans’.
These concerns are
valid, and they ought to be considered when determining permissible applications
Importantly, this article reframes the dominant narrative for HHGE to a
lifesaving therapeutic treatment. Further, it applies a discourse
discussion, specifically the application of the four key pillars of medical
ethics: autonomy, non-maleficence, beneficence
and justice. This discourse was
selected as future proposed applications of HHGE will be deliberated within the
realm of medicine
and human medical research. These fundamental principles
underpin research and regulatory decision-making. In order to support this
reframing of narrative, the case study considers the application of HHGE solely
within a therapeutic context. Further, it is presumed
that the technology has
become safe to consider human clinical trials, supported by preclinical
4.1 Disease Aetiology
TSD is a fatal progressive neurodegenerative, autosomal recessive monogenic
genetic disease.
It is caused by
a mutation to the hexosaminidase A (
which is responsible for
the production of an enzyme that breaks down fatty substances in the
This mutation causes
neurones to stop producing this enzyme, leading to an accumulation of fatty
substances in the brain and spinal
This results in the damage
and death of cells
progressive dysfunction of the central nervous
Disease onset is early, within three to six months of birth, and death occurs
between three and five years of
Symptoms of TSD include
progressive muscle weakness, loss of motor skills (such as swallowing),
spasticity, blindness, seizures,
paralysis, hearing loss and cognitive deficits
(such as confusion, disorientation and intellectual
disability).
Death is often a
result of this progressive degeneration, such as respiratory failure caused by
aspiration pneumonia.
there are no available treatments or cures for
Treatments are targeted to
alleviate and manage symptoms as they arise and
4.2 The Hypothetical Scenario
Consider the following scenario:
Prospective parents have undergone IVF treatment, which has only produced
two viable embryos. This is their third and final attempt
of IVF, due to
financial and health constraints. Both parents are aware they are carriers of a
pathogenic mutation to the hexosaminidase
A (HEXA) gene, causing TSD. Due to
their difficulty in producing a larger quantity of viable embryos, they are
offered two options.
First, they may risk the fate of the embryos by undertaking
pre-implantation genetic testing (PGT), which will confirm whether the
will be affected by TSD. Second, they are informed of a preclinical treatment
option, which is yet to be approved. It uses
HHGE to modify and correct the DNA
of the embryo, to prevent TSD. If successful, this treatment will restore the
function of the
gene, which means their future
will no longer
carry a risk of having TSD. This option has been raised to the prospective
parents, along with the available information
regarding the nature of the
treatment, risks, benefits and costs, if it were to be approved.
In obtaining further information from their treating team and genetic
counsellors, they are informed that PGT requires the embryo
to undergo a few
cycles of cell division in order to genotype its DNA. If results show the embryo
will be disease affected, it would
be too late to pursue HHGE if it is made
available in clinical trials. They are also advised about TSD’s poor
prognosis and
health implications.
Under these circumstances, should HHGE be permitted as a therapeutic
treatment for TSD? This article advances a strong argument to
support the
lifting of Australia’s blanket prohibition on HHGE to enable its use in
this instance. Further, it will be shown
an ethical imperative exists to pursue
HHGE as a treatment for fatal monogenic genetic diseases similar to TSD.
Therefore, this argument
may apply to support the use of HHGE to treat a broader
range of fatal monogenic genetic diseases, such as cystic fibrosis and Duchenne
muscular dystrophy.
5. Ethical Discourse for Case Study Narration
In order to reframe the dominant narrative, the way this case study is
articulated is important. As noted earlier, this article will
show the influence
of a narrative through a case study, which concentrates on ‘the
exploration of puzzles [various views] within
To guide the
exploration of these views, the case study will be narrated through the lens of
the four principles of medical ethics.
At the conclusion of the
case study, this article will proffer an answer to the following question:
Should HHGE be permitted as a
therapeutic treatment for TSD, thereby supporting
a lift of Australia’s blanket prohibition?
5.1 Autonomy
The principle of autonomy broadly promotes self-governance in
decision-making, enabling the exercise of free choice without interference,
as coercion.
Consequently, the
two primary tenets of autonomy are agency (autonomous decision-making) and
liberty (freedom from external
influences).
This article argues
that another fundamental principle accompanying autonomy is
notion of respect is intricately related to respect for autonomy to make free
choices regarding reproduction and respect for
human dignity. Despite its
philosophical origins,
as a right is also reinforced in international conventions, including Article 1
of the United Nations Universal Declaration
of Human Rights. Further, the Oviedo
recognises the
importance of respecting human dignity, noting that its role represents
‘the essential value to be upheld. It
is at the basis of most of the
values emphasised in the
Convention’.
referring to human dignity, this article considers the ways in which, in this
scenario, HHGE could preserve the dignity of future
offspring. This may be
achieved by maximising welfare, by preventing the occurrence of a fatal
monogenic genetic disease. In applying
the principles of autonomy and respect, a
strong argument exists to support an ethical imperative to pursue HHGE in this
As mentioned, TSD is a fatal monogenic genetic disease that causes premature
death at the age of three to five years. In addition
to this poor prognosis, the
clinical features of the disease are severe, progressively deteriorating until
death. The neurodegenerative
symptoms significantly impact the quality of life
of the child, which diminishes over time. Although medical interventions are
to alleviate and manage symptoms, this deterioration is inevitable and
cannot be prevented. Therefore, any improvement to quality
of life will be minor
and short term. The severity of TSD presents a compelling argument to pursue
HHGE, given the high mortality
rate, significant clinical features and
diminished quality of life.
First, in order to exercise autonomy, it is paramount that the prospective
parents are harnessed with all relevant and necessary information
informed decision. This information must address many topics, including
benefits, risks (including those to the embryo),
economic considerations and
long-term management. To exercise their agency and decision-making capacity,
measures to enhance this
ability must be provided to prospective parents. These
measures may include guidance from genetic counsellors, communication tools,
presence of support persons and time to consider options in order to reach a
decision. In this scenario, there is a strong possibility
that the prospective
parents are unable to have a genetically related child without TSD. Their
personal cultural, ethical, religious
and social values will influence their
perception of parenthood and the priority attached to genetic parenthood.
Therefore, it would
be presumptuous to argue these parents can and should
consider alternative pathways to parenthood, such as adoption and foster care.
While these options should be communicated (if available), preserving autonomy
means respect for decisions, regardless of their merit
or motivation.
Second, if this scenario were viewed through the lens of respect for human
dignity, an ethical imperative would exist to pursue HHGE
to prevent this
disease and reduce its prevalence within the
population.
This argument also
applies to the dignity of the prospective parents in terms of exercising their
decision-making autonomy to undergo
HHGE. Respect for dignity does not
discriminate against the reason/s for a decision – whether it be to pursue
HHGE to maximise
the parents’ opportunity to have a genetically related
child, to ensure a future child does not inherit TSD or to avoid the
financial pressures associated with having a terminally ill child.
Alternatively, this may be a decision to refuse HHGE
due to religious or ethical
opposition/s, an acceptance that they cannot have a genetically related child or
to prevent future suffering
of the child due to the unknown health impacts of
HHGE. Regardless of the justification, respect for human dignity involves the
preservation
of individual choice. Therefore, the application of HHGE in this
case promotes reproductive autonomy and safeguards human dignity.
scenario, their lack of success in producing a large quantity of viable embryos
compounds the complexity of their decision.
A decision to undertake PGT carries
its own risks and, notably, eliminates the possibility of pursuing HHGE if it
were to proceed
to clinical trials. Therefore, in a society that values
individual choice, especially in the context of health and medicine, the
decision to pursue HHGE, should it become available, ought to remain at the
discretion of the prospective parents.
Human dignity also applies to the interests of future offspring. The
prospective parents have an opportunity to ensure their future
child does not
have TSD. Further, HHGE introduces a unique prospect to remove TSD from their
future genetic lineage, so no subsequent
generation will be faced with a
diagnosis or risk being a carrier. To refuse HHGE in this instance arguably
violates the dignity
of future offspring, who will endure suffering and
inevitable premature death.
If there is recourse to avoid a fatal monogenic genetic disease, why not
attempt HHGE? Where both outcomes are premature death (whether
caused by TSD or
a ‘worst-case scenario’ risk of HHGE), a decision to pursue HHGE is
ethically justified. This justification
is bolstered by a reliance upon the
preservation of human dignity, the pursuit of a future in which pathogenic genes
causing TSD
are corrected, prevention of suffering and death and maximising the
genetic health of future generations. While common ethical arguments
continue to
operate concerning naturalness and instrumentalization of an individual (by
intervening in the genome), these are arguably
A plethora of ways exist
in which naturalness may be compromised – such as through epigenetics,
gene interactions, environmental
exposures and social milieu. Further, the
purpose of HHGE is to correct and restore function of a disease-causing
mutation, which
aims to prevent future suffering, preserve the rights, interests
and welfare of offspring and maximise the welfare of
generations.
The means to
achieve these goals – whether a naturally occurring phenomenon such as
evolution or technological intervention
– should be embraced.
Adherence to the principles of autonomy and respect provide a strong argument
to support HHGE to prevent TSD. It promotes the dignity
of the prospective
parents and, importantly, dignity of risk – which recognises that an
individual is entitled to make decisions
that carry risk/s. If prospective
parents exercise their choice to undertake HHGE, should it become available,
understanding the
risks (both known and unknown) ought to be respected. This
highlights that each individual involved in this process brings their
ethical perspectives. To respect choice, provided it is informed and made
voluntarily, without coercion or interference, upholds
autonomy. Further, the
dignity of future offspring is also preserved. This can be achieved by removing
TSD for future generations,
avoiding suffering and premature death, reducing
and/or preventing terminations where TSD is diagnosed in an embryo via PGT and
a child to have an open future without the certainty of imminent death.
To refrain from using HHGE in this context undermines society’s
to upholding the fundamental right of autonomy.
5.2 Non-maleficence
This principle is often translated to ‘above all do no
In the context of
determining the permissibility of HHGE, this principle is mostly concerned with
the technology’s risk/s,
including the known/unknown side-effects,
toxicity, short- and long-term effects and uncertainty regarding data and
knowledge deficits.
Notably, the principle of non-maleficence carries greater
narrative power, as it requires active consideration of risks associated
HHGE. This inevitably perpetuates the current narrative of HHGE in relation to
fear and uncertainty. However, this narrative
need not dominate and prevail.
These considerations ought to shape future legal and regulatory approaches. The
utility of a case
study as a narrative provides a more holistic evaluation of a
proposed application of HHGE. Therefore, it requires the narrator to
various possibilities or arguments and importantly, offer a multifactorial
analysis of them. This may involve balancing
various considerations and
prioritising arguments.
Sensibly, in practice, non-maleficence is of particular significance. In
order to enforce this principle, HHGE for TSD must be safe
and efficacious. With
respect to regulatory decision-making, the universal evidentiary threshold
states that the benefits of a proposed
treatment must outweigh its
This threshold attempts
to mitigate premature approval of proposed treatments that carry risk/s to human
health. Therefore, regulators
are actively adhering to an ethical obligation to
by intentionally making regulatory decisions that seek to
avoid and/or manage risk/s and
Furthermore, the
overarching aim of a regulator is to foster a regulatory environment that is
legitimate, responsive and proportionate.
This enables responsible development
and innovation of frontier technologies that pose a threat to human health.
5.2.1 Risks
Consistent with the purpose of a case study, the primary risks associated
with HHGE for TSD should be identified. First, one must
consider the context in
which this technique would be administered. Heritable Human Genome Editing will
likely be undertaken in conjunction
with an Assisted Reproductive Technology
(‘ART’) – which increases the risks to the affected embryo.
associated with an ART include, but are not limited to, multiple
gestations, birth defects, genetic abnormalities, possible damage
manipulation of oocytes and embryos, preterm birth, perinatal mortality rate,
infection and bleeding.
Consequently, prospective parents must consider the cumulative risks of both an
ART and HHGE.
implications for risk tolerance in discerning an acceptable threshold of risk
for both the ART and HHGE. Second, it is important
to note that PGT cannot be
undertaken at this stage, as the
has developed. This
indicates that prospective parents must decide to refuse or pursue HHGE at an
early stage, prior to genetic testing
for known genetic diseases. Third, the
delivery and nature of this treatment raises unique considerations. The
treatment would be
administered as a blind injection of the CRISPR system into
all cells, which targets the mutated
gene. The success of HHGE
cannot be ascertained until the embryos are cultured and screened, akin to the
process of PGT. While HHGE
will restore function of the
approach does not cater for
mutations. These are new mutations
arising during development, which may confer disease or predisposition to
disease. The likelihood
of the occurrence of a
mutation is
unknown. Fourth, the technical limitations of the technology give rise to risks
of on- and off-target events and mosaicism.
These are changes to the DNA that
are prompted by CRISPR technology. The severity, type, duration and probability
of these events
is unknown. In addition to these technical limitations, the
short- and long-term health consequences of HHGE are unknown. The
intergenerational
impact cannot be foreseen or quantified prior to treatment.
This is a risk uniquely associated with germline editing, as the genetic
heritable to subsequent generations. Consequently, this further compounds the
fear and uncertainty attached to HHGE, as the
future impact of those edits
cannot be known prior to treatment. In light of its intergenerational impact,
long-term follow-up to
monitor individuals subject to HHGE will facilitate
rigorous oversight and ongoing data collection relating to its safety and
It will also facilitate ongoing developments in research, which will
provide much-needed understanding about the technique and its
Finally, in this circumstance, the
is yet to exist. As such,
the onus is upon the prospective parents to make an informed decision regarding
the fate of the potential
patient. The risk tolerance of the prospective parents
may be reduced, given that it is their final attempt at IVF to birth a
genetically
related child and only two viable embryos remain. It is a
possibility that the fate of those embryos is death if they are
disease-affected.
In this vein, it may be that acceptance of unknown risks
associated with HHGE is the ‘lesser of two evils’. Importantly,
where there is a foreseeable benefit of TSD prevention, this alone may be
sufficient to justify the decision of the prospective parents.
These are some of
the primary risks associated with HHGE. This article may not capture all the
possible risks. However, it has identified
four risks that dominate the
narrative of HHGE. It is clear there are uncertainties, many of which may result
in harm to the future
offspring – although, in the context of new
therapeutics, the concept of ‘zero risk’ does not exist. These
however severe, minor or remote, must be balanced against the benefits of
5.2.2 Benefits
Consistent with a decision-making process, one must consider the consequences
of a decision. In the context of this scenario, prospective
parents must weigh
and balance the risks of HHGE against its benefits. As such, it is integral to
consider some of the primary benefits
of HHGE. First, the intended and
foreseeable benefit of undertaking HHGE will result in a genetically related
child who does not
have TSD. This may be particularly pertinent to prospective
parents who seek genetic parenthood. For some, genetic parenthood may
possible. This treatment will enable this cohort of prospective parents to have
a genetically related child. Second, the genetic
cause of the disease is
relevant. TSD is monogenic, which alleviates the technical difficulties of
undertaking HHGE, as opposed to
polygenic genetic diseases (caused by more than
a single gene). Where a disease is caused by more than a single gene, this has
implications
on the complexity and efficacy of the technique. Third, the
permanent correction of the disease variant indicates that HHGE is capable
removing TSD from the future genetic lineage of this family (noting that the
parents remain carriers). This is a significant outcome
for families carrying
mutation. Where a treatment option exists that removes future
risk of this fatal disease, prospective parents may ascribe a greater
this benefit, thereby increasing their overall risk tolerance. Fourth, the
application of HHGE for this purpose promotes
intergenerational justice for
future generations, who will not inherit or be affected by TSD, preventing death
and alleviating disease
burden (and its accompanied economic benefits).
The application of non-maleficence necessitates an important exercise in
identifying the primary risks and benefits of HHGE in this
scenario. This is an
integral component enhancing the understanding of HHGE as a treatment and
ultimately informs decision-making.
Following the identification of these
primary risks and benefits – do the benefits outweigh risks? The benefits
this hypothetical scenario arguably outweigh its risks for two
reasons. First, this is an instance in which the risks of HHGE are
no worse than
the fate of the viable embryos, if affected by
As such, where there are no
effective treatments and death is inevitable, why not attempt to prevent this
fatal disease? To do so
prioritises the welfare of the future offspring,
preserving their human dignity. It also promotes the reproductive autonomy and
of prospective parents who are unable to otherwise conceive a
genetically related child without TSD. Second, HHGE provides an invaluable
opportunity to remove a severe, fatal genetic disease for this family. The
benefits of correction and disease prevention are significant
in magnitude, type
and duration. The implementation of long-term monitoring following HHGE will
enable risks to be identified and
managed. From an ethical and narrative
perspective, HHGE may be framed as a potential lifesaving treatment for
subsequent generations,
enhancing their welfare, by providing them with a future
free of TSD. For these reasons, the benefits of HHGE arguably outweigh its
5.3 Beneficence
Generally, this principle denotes an obligation to help others, to promote
the distribution of benefits and maximise welfare and
TSD is a rare
disease, with a frequency of approximately one in 25 Australians of Ashkenazi
Jewish descent.
Its status as a
rare disease, with a recessive inheritance, does not diminish its candidacy as a
disease target for HHGE. Rather,
where a treatment option exists that corrects
and alleviates disease burden and suffering, a strong ethical case is
established.
Further, in the absence of any effective cures or treatments,
prospective parents are tasked with balancing the risks of a new treatment
against potential benefits that are non-existent with current treatment
approaches. In this case, HHGE provides benefits of such
a great magnitude. For
this reason, an ethical imperative to pursue HHGE to prevent TSD exists. A
decision to permit HHGE upholds
the principle of beneficence, promoting the
future interests and welfare of offspring and subsequent generations.
5.4 Justice
With respect to equitable access and economic justice (cost of treatment), it
may be presumed that the costs of HHGE fall within the
ambit of Medicare
rebates. However, this is an assumption and does not reflect current or indicate
future approaches. This discussion
will be confined to intergenerational and
social justice. Intergenerational justice advocates for the betterment of
wellbeing for
future generations
– in this case, to prevent a specific fatal monogenic genetic disease. As
noted above, the ability to prevent and remove a
fatal monogenic genetic disease
from the future genetic lineage is significant. Over time, the reduction in
disease burden, suffering
and mortality are key endpoints that promote
intergenerational justice. In this context, intergenerational justice is
achieved by
taking steps to ensure TSD is prevented to maximise the future
welfare of generations.
Social justice concerns the need for prudent scientific progress to occur.
Françoise Baylis refers to this understanding of
social justice in the
context of ‘slow science’, which advocates for research to slow
down, enabling time to deliberate
ethical and social questions and
implications.
The application of
HHGE for TSD will result in the accumulation of valuable data, which will shape
and inform future research development
and capability. This promotes social
justice through the expansion of knowledge regarding the risks, benefits and
outcomes of HHGE.
A slow and cautious approach to its regulation and development
enables ethical deliberations to occur within a society. Greater knowledge
also inform public perceptions and the acceptance or refusal of HHGE. Notably,
this will contribute to a more informed, accurate
and descriptive narrative
concerning HHGE, which will likely shift its undertone away from fear and
uncertainty.
5.5 Should Australia Legally Sanction Heritable Human Genome Editing
for Tay-Sachs Disease?
The case study provides a strong argument that an ethical imperative exists
to pursue HHGE for the purpose of preventing TSD. Ethical
justification for this
conclusion is derived from the application of the fundamental principles of
medical ethics. These principles
served as a useful discourse to articulate this
narrative. When narrating this case study through the lens of these principles,
reframes arguments to actively consider and promote key rights, such as human
dignity and reproductive autonomy. Further, it shifts
the dominant narrative
away from fear and uncertainty by describing how HHGE can be a lifesaving
therapeutic.
This case study has offered a clear example of circumstances in which the
possible harms of HHGE are not, and cannot be, worse than
the fate of an
affected embryo with TSD. This is an integral distinction to highlight. If death
is perceived to be the gravest harm,
any attempt to prevent it gains ethical
legitimacy. For this reason, an ethical imperative exists. Notably, this
strengthens the
argument against a blanket prohibition on HHGE in Australia. To
refrain from lifting this prohibition under these circumstances would
be unethical. The ethical support underpinning this narrative advances the
argument for the legal permissibility of HHGE
certain circumstances
such as TSD. Therefore, the lifting of a blanket prohibition on HHGE ought to be
considered as the technology matures. This would
require legislative reform to
Australia’s current
in addition to greater
consideration for regulators tasked with approval of novel therapeutics using a
frontier technology.
Tay-Sachs Disease offers a clear example in which the case for ethical and
legal permissibility is highly persuasive. From a safety
perspective, its
narrative is certainly more palatable than polygenic genetic diseases, which are
more complex in their aetiology.
Such a clear-cut inviolable red line, as
observed with TSD, is not always encountered. The complexity of a case study
will be contingent
upon the specific application (disease candidate) targeted by
HHGE and the jurisdiction in which it is debated. The above analysis
exemplified the importance of societal consultation and participation in the
shaping of a narrative and possible outcomes. Societal
dialogue is critical to
better articulate and understand the various contingencies, possibilities and
alternatives associated with
HHGE for a specific application. Consequently, the
narrative will inevitably change depending on the jurisdiction in which it is
narrated. Differences in ethics, values, social structures, religiosity,
politics, language and culture will influence the discourse
used to narrate the
story of HHGE for TSD prevention. This is consistent with a known truism of
narratives presented as a case study:
the puzzle it seeks to examine is
generally resolved within existing community
A resolution is therefore
dictated by a narrative consistent with that community’s values and norms,
gaining legitimacy and
trust. Alternatively, Sharon Crasnow proposes
‘[d]ifferent narratives of the same case carry with them frameworks within
the story needs to make
In context, these
frameworks are representative of a community’s values and norms.
In light of the nuances associated with the ways in which a case study may be
narrated, it reveals an important attribute of narrative
theory. It is
sufficiently adaptable to cater for a specific jurisdiction’s
circumstances. While the discourse adopted to narrate
this case study reflects
universal ethical principles, their subsequent enforcement in practice may
differ according to the jurisdiction
in which they are applied.
6. Conclusion: The Path Not Taken
The advent of a frontier technology presents a myriad of untold
possibilities. Inevitably, there will be many forks in the road –
of time at which society must consider and decide the path to take. In the
context of frontier technologies and their application/s,
this decision is often
fraught and complex. Further, it requires ethical, legal and societal
deliberations to ascertain the appropriate
pathway forward. Narrative theory has
introduced itself as a valuable approach to forecast and navigate these
deliberations. Its
utility is reflected in its capacity to articulate the
subject-matter and investigate various possibilities, considerations and
This article argues that the framing and expression of ethical considerations
as a narrative guides the establishment of a legal and
regulatory approach to
HHGE. Public scrutiny and consultation often involve an interrogation of
relevant ethical and social considerations
accompanying a frontier technology.
Consequently, it is unsurprising that the dominant narrative propagated within a
particular society
may change, as it is context-specific and shaped by ethical,
social, cultural and political values. Currently in Australia, HHGE
criminalised and prohibited. This legal and regulatory position is fuelled by a
prevailing narrative concerned with unscrupulous
applications of HHGE and its
safety and efficacy. This is a very reasonable narrative to espouse in light of
the uncertainty attributed
to knowledge and data deficits. However, this article
has sought to advance a thought experiment through the case study, to prompt
discussions of an acceptable application of HHGE as it continues to mature.
Responsible development and refinement of the technology
will begin to fill
knowledge and data gaps, improving its safety and efficacy profile. Using a case
study as the form of narrative,
this article identifies one instance in which
HHGE ought to be legally permitted. The application of HHGE to prevent TSD, a
monogenic genetic disease, is accompanied by ethical support. This
argument was framed through the lens of the four key principles
ethics. These principles were selected as an appropriate discourse to narrate
the case study, as future legal and regulatory
decisions pertaining to HHGE will
be made within the realm of human medical research. Importantly, the case study
captured a variety
of viewpoints, possibilities and considerations in relation
to arguments supporting the use of HHGE in this circumstance. This provides
strong basis to justify the path taken – that is, to lift the blanket
prohibition on HHGE in Australia and the path not taken
– to support the
continued legal ban.
Often, risks associated with a frontier technology play the protagonists in
narratives commonly conveyed in the context of technology
regulation. To
progress as a society and change our circumstances, we must be open to editing
the narrative of HHGE as a potential
lifesaving treatment for fatal monogenic
genetic disease/s. This may be achieved by relying upon a regulatory discourse
that legally
authorises such applications, with necessary precaution that does
not hinder ongoing research and advancements. Narratives are the
impetus driving
ethical evaluation, whilst the law and regulation act as the gatekeepers and
facilitators of change. Heritable Human
Genome Editing provides an opportunity
to write an exciting new chapter in society’s history. Although not
unaccompanied by
risks, our future global society may look back upon this time
to learn about the importance of honest and accurate facts underpinning
CRISPR narrative. Prior to legal and regulatory reforms, case studies can be
used to investigate potential applications of HHGE,
as a litmus test to
determine acceptable and unacceptable use/s.
Acknowledgement
The author was a recipient of the Australian Government Research Training
Program Scholarship.
Bibliography
Primary Legal Sources
Gene Technology Act 2000
Prohibition of Human Cloning for Reproduction Act 2002
Research Involving Human Embryos Act 2002
Secondary Sources
The American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists. “Perinatal
Risks Associated With Assisted Reproductive Technology.”
https://www.acog.org/clinical/clinical-guidance/committee-opinion/articles/2016/09/perinatal-risks-associated-with-assisted-reproductive-technology
Baylis, Françoise.
Altered Inheritance: CRISPR and the Ethics of
Human Genome Editing
. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press, 2019.
Baylis, Françoise, Marcy Darnovsky, Katie Hasson and Timothy M Krahn.
“Human Germline and Heritable Genome Editing: The
Global Policy
Landscape.”
The CRISPR Journal
3, no 5 (2020): 365–77.
https://doi.org/10.1089/crispr.2020.0082
Beatty, John. “What are Narratives Good For?”
History and Philosophy of Biological and Biomedical Sciences
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.shpsc.2015.12.016
Beauchamp, Tom L. and James F. Childress.
Principles of Biomedical
, 7th ed. Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2013.
Birnbacher, Dieter. “Prospects of Human Germline Modification by
CRISPR-Cas9: An Ethicist’s View.” In
Between Moral Hazard and
Legal Uncertainty: Ethical, Legal and Societal Challenges of Human Genome
, edited by Matthias Braun, Hannah Schickl and Peter Dabrock,
53–66. Dordrecht: Springer, 2018.
Council of Europe.
Explanatory Report to the Convention for the Protection
of Human Rights and Dignity of the Human Being with Regard to the Application
Biology and Medicine: Convention on Human Rights and Biomedicine
. Brussels: Council of Europe, 1997.
Crasnow, Sharon. “Process Tracing in Political Science: What’s
the Story?"
Studies in History and Philosophy of Science
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.shpsa.2017.03.002
Drabiak, Katherine. “Untangling the Promises of Human Genome
The Journal of Law, Medicine & Ethics
https://doi.org/10.1177/1073110518822001
European Medicines Agency.
ICH Guideline E2C (R2) on Periodic Benefit-Risk
Evaluation Report (PBRER)
. The Hague: European Medicines Agency, 2013.
Food and Drug Administration
. Benefit-Risk Assessment for New Drug and
Biological Products: Guidance for Industry Guidance
. Washington, DC: US
Department of Health and Human Services Food and Drug Administration, 2021.
Grayling, A.C.
The History of Philosophy: Three Millenia of Thought from
the West and Beyond
. Harmondsworth: Penguin, 2019.
Greely, Henry T. “CRISPR’d Babies: Human Germline Genome Editing
in the “He Jiankui Affair.””
Journal of Law and the
Biosciences
6, no 1 (2019): 111–83.
https://doi.org/10.1093/jlb/lsz010
Gyngell, Christopher, Hilary Bowman-Smart, and Julian Savulescu. “Moral
Reasons to Edit the Human Genome: Picking up from the
Nuffield Report.”
Journal of Medical Ethics
45, no 8 (2019): 514–23.
https://doi.org/10.1136/medethics-2018-105084
Hajek, Kim M. “What is Narrative in Narrative Science? The Narrative
Science Approach.” In
Narrative Science: Reasoning, Representing and
Knowing Since 1800
, edited by Mary S. Morgan, Kim M. Hajek and Dominic J.
Berry, 31–57. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 2022.
Johnson, Harold R. “Harold R. Johnson on How We Tell Our Own
https://lithub.com/harold-r-johnson-on-how-we-tell-our-own-stories/
Lew, Raelia M., Leslie Burnett, Anné L. Proos, and Martin B.
Delatycki. “Tay-Sachs Disease: Current Perspectives from
Australia.”
The Application of Clinical Genetics
8 (2015): 19–25.
https://doi.org/10.2147/tacg.s49628
Lovell-Badge, Robin, David Baltimore, Françoise Baylis, Ewan Birney,
Alta Charo, George Daley, Javier Guzman, et al. Statement
from the Organising
Committee of the Third International Summit on Human Genome Editing.
https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/NBK593530
Morgan, Mary S. “Narrative: A General-Purpose Technology for
Science.” In
Narrative Science: Reasoning, Representing and Knowing
, edited by Mary S. Morgan, Kim M. Hajek and Dominic J.
Berry, 31–57. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 2022.
Morgan, Mary S. “Narrative Ordering and Explanation.”
in History and Philosophy of Science
62 (2017): 86–97.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.shpsa.2017.03.006
Morgan, Mary S. and M. Norton Wise. “Narrative Science and Narrative
Knowing: Introduction to Special Issue on Narrative Science.”
in History and Philosophy of Science
62 (2017): 1–5.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.shpsa.2017.03.005
National Academies of Sciences, Engineering and Medicine.
Human Genome
Editing: Science, Ethics and Governance Report
. London: National Academies
of Sciences, Engineering and Medicine, 2017.
National Academies of Sciences, Engineering and Medicine, and The Royal
Heritable Human Genome Editing Report
. London: National
Academies of Sciences, Engineering and Medicine, and The Royal Society,
National Commission for the Protection of Human Subjects of Biomedical and
Behavioral Research.
The Belmont Report: Ethical Principles and Guidelines
for the Protection of Human Subjects of Research
. Washington, DC: National
Commission for the Protection of Human Subjects of Biomedical and Behavioral
Research, 1979.
National Health Service. “Tay-Sachs Disease.” 2021.
https://www.nhs.uk/conditions/tay-sachs-disease
National Organization for Rare Disorders. “Tay Sachs Disease.”
https://rarediseases.org/rare-diseases/tay-sachs-disease
Nicol, Dianne. “Regulation of Human Germline Genome Modification in
Australia.” In
Human Germline Genome Modification and the Right to
, edited by Andrea Boggio, Cesare P.R. Romano and Jessica Almqvist,
543–567. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 2020.
Nuffield Council on Bioethics.
Emerging Biotechnologies: Technology,
Choice and the Public Good Report
https://cdn.nuffieldbioethics.org/wp-content/uploads/Emerging_biotechnologies_full_report_web_0.pdf
Nuffield Council on Bioethics.
Genome Editing and Human Reproduction
https://cdn.nuffieldbioethics.org/wp-content/uploads/Genome-editing-and-human-reproduction-report.pdf
Online Mendelian Inheritance in Man. “Tay-Sachs Disease (TSD).”
https://www.omim.org/entry/272800?search=tay%20sachs%20disease&highlight=disease%20sach%20tay#editHistory
Pandos, Olga C. “Heritable Human Genome Editing: Friend or Foe?
Navigating the Legal, Ethical and Regulatory Challenges in Australia.”
dissertation, University of Adelaide, 2025.
Pandos, Olga C. “Navigating the Ethics of Genome Editing and
Heritability.”
Medical Research Archives
12, no 5 (2024):
https://doi.org/10.18103/mra.v12i5.5336
Pandos, Olga C. “Traversing Uncharted Territory? The Legislative and
Regulatory Landscape of Heritable Human Genome Editing
in Australia.”
Federal Law Review
52, no 1 (2024): 75–102.
https://doi.org/10.1177/0067205X241236212
Rebar, Robert W. “What are the Risks of the Assisted Reproductive
Technologies (ART) and How Can They Be Minimized?”
Reproductive
Medicine and Biology
12, no 4 (2013): 151–158.
https://doi.org/10.1007/s12522-013-0156-y
Rheenen, Wouter van, Wouter J Peyrot, Andrew J Schork, S Hong Lee, and Naomi
R Wray. “Genetic Correlations of Polygenic Disease
Traits: From Theory to
Nature Reviews Genetics
20 (2019): 567–581.
https://doi.org/10.1038/s41576-019-0137-z
Savulescu, Julian, and Peter Singer. “An Ethical Pathway for Gene
33 (2019): 221–222.
https://doi.org/10.1111/bioe.12570
Therapeutic Goods Administration. “How the TGA Regulates.” 2023.
https://www.tga.gov.au/how-we-regulate/advertising/legal-framework/act-regulations-and-code-offences/how-tga-regulates
Victorian State Government Department of Health. “Tay-Sachs
Disease.” 2019.
https://www.betterhealth.vic.gov.au/health/conditionsandtreatments/tay-sachs-disease
WHO Expert Advisory Committee on Developing Global Standards for Governance
and Oversight of Human Genome Editing.
Human Genome Editing: A Framework for
Governance Report
. Geneva: World Health Organization, 2021.
*Dr Olga C Pandos is a Lecturer in Law at Deakin University, Victoria,
Australia. Olga has degrees in Law (Hons), Science (majors
in Biochemistry and
Genetics) and a Doctor of Philosophy (Law).
Johnson, “Harold R. Johnson.”
Nuffield Council on Bioethics,
Emerging Biotechnologies Report.
Nuffield Council on Bioethics,
Emerging Biotechnologies Report, xvii.
“Narrative,” 4.
National Commission for the
Protection of Human Subjects of Biomedical and Behavioral Research, The Belmont
Report; Pandos, Heritable
Human Genome Editing.
Pandos, Heritable Human Genome
The use of HHGE to prevent,
treat or correct polygenic diseases (those caused by more than a single
mutation) will not be explored,
due to the complexity of the edit and current
limitations in the technology’s capability.
National Academies of Sciences,
Engineering and Medicine and The Royal Society, Heritable Human Genome Editing
Report; van Rheenen,
“Genetic Correlations.”
Baylis, “Human Germline
and Heritable Genome Editing,” 365; WHO Expert Advisory Committee on
Developing Global Standards
for Governance and Oversight of Human Genome
Editing, WHO Framework, v; Lovell-Badge, Statement from the Organising
Baylis, “Human
Germline and Heritable Genome Editing”; WHO Expert Advisory Committee on
Developing Global Standards for
Governance and Oversight of Human Genome
Editing, WHO Framework.
Pandos, “Traversing
Uncharted Territory?”; Nicol, “Regulation of Human Germline Genome
Modification,” 565;
Pandos, Heritable Human Genome Editing.
Pandos, “Traversing
Uncharted Territory?”;
Gene Technology Act 2000
Prohibition of Human Cloning for Reproduction Act 2002
Research Involving Human Embryos Act 2002
“CRISPR’d Babies,” 113.
“CRISPR’d Babies,” 113–114.
Lovell-Badge, Statement from
the Organising Committee, 2.
Pandos, “Navigating
the Ethics.”
Hajek, “What is
Narrative?” 31.
Morgan, “Narrative
Science,” 2.
Hajek, “What is
Narrative?” 43–44.
Morgan, “Narrative
Science,” 2.
Morgan, “Narrative
Science,” 2.
Morgan, “Narrative
Science,” 2.
Beatty, “What are
Narratives Good For?” 36; Crasnow, “Process Tracing,” 10.
Crasnow, “Process
Tracing,” 11.
Please note that genetic
enhancement is not explored in this article.
Online Mendelian Inheritance
in Man, “Tay-Sachs Disease (TSD).”
Online Mendelian Inheritance
in Man, “Tay-Sachs Disease (TSD)”; Victorian State Government
Department of Health, “Tay-Sachs
Victorian State Government
Department of Health, “Tay-Sachs Disease.”
Victorian State Government
Department of Health, “Tay-Sachs Disease.”
Victorian State Government
Department of Health, “Tay-Sachs Disease.”
National Organization for
Rare Disorders, “Tay Sachs Disease.”
National Health Service,
“Tay-Sachs Disease”; National Organization for Rare Disorders,
“Tay Sachs Disease.”
National Organization for
Rare Disorders, “Tay Sachs Disease”; National Health Service,
“Tay-Sachs Disease”;
Victorian State Government Department of
Health, “Tay-Sachs Disease”; Online Mendelian Inheritance in Man,
Disease (TSD).”
National Organization for
Rare Disorders, “Tay Sachs Disease”; National Health Service,
“Tay-Sachs Disease.”
Victorian State Government
Department of Health, “Tay-Sachs Disease”; National Organization for
Rare Disorders, “Tay
Sachs Disease.”
National Organization for
Rare Disorders, “Tay Sachs Disease.”
The term ‘future
offspring’ is globally adopted by leading institutions, including the
National Academies of Sciences,
Engineering and Medicine and the Nuffield
Council on Bioethics, featuring in authoritative reports on this topic: National
of Sciences, Engineering and Medicine and The Royal Society, Heritable
Human Genome Editing Report; National Academies of Sciences,
Engineering and
Medicine, Science, Ethics and Governance Report; Nuffield Council on Bioethics,
Genome Editing and Human Reproduction
Morgan, “Narrative
Ordering and Explanation,” 90.
Beauchamp, Principles of
Biomedical Ethics, 101.
Beauchamp, Principles of
Biomedical Ethics, 102.
Grayling, The History of
Philosophy, 256–268.
Its formal name is the
Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Dignity of the Human Being
with regard to the Application
of Biology and Medicine: Convention on Human
Rights and Biomedicine.
Council of Europe,
Explanatory Report to the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and
Dignity of the Human Being with Regard
to the Application of Biology and
Medicine: Convention on Human Rights and Biomedicine, 3.
Pandos, Heritable Human
Genome Editing.
Birnbacher, “Prospects
of Human Germline Modification.”
Birnbacher, “Prospects
of Human Germline Modification,” 57–58.
Beauchamp, Principles of
Biomedical Ethics, 150.
Therapeutic Goods
Administration, “How the TGA Regulates”; Food and Drug
Administration, “Benefit-Risk Assessment
for New Drug and Biological
Products”; European Medicines Agency, “ICH Guideline E2C (R2) on
Periodic Benefit-Risk Evaluation
Report (PBRER).”
Beauchamp, Principles of
Biomedical Ethics, 150–153.
The American College of
Obstetricians and Gynecologists, “Perinatal Risks”; Rebar,
“What are the Risks?”
Drabiak, “Untangling
the Promises,” 999.
A diploid cell formed by the
complete fertilisation of a human egg and human sperm.
Savulescu, “An Ethical
Beauchamp, Principles of
Biomedical Ethics, 151, 202.
Lew, “Tay-Sachs
Gyngell, “Moral
Baylis, Altered Inheritance,
Gene Technology Act
Research Involving Human Embryos Act 2002
Prohibition of Human Cloning for Reproduction Act 2002
Morgan, “Narrative
Ordering,” 94.
Crasnow, “Process
Tracing,” 6.
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (309 KB)
PDF format (422 KB)
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter