URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/journals/WALawTRw/2024/5.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 15:58:15
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Lindley, Jade; Brown, Natalie; Quinn, Liam --- "What Makes a Great Hdr Supervisor in Law? Perceptions from Hdr Students & Their Supervisors" [2024] WALawTRw 5; (2024) 2 The Western Australian Law Teachers' Review 37
WHAT MAKES A GREAT HDR
SUPERVISOR IN LAW? PERCEPTIONS FROM HDR STUDENTS AND THEIR SUPERVISORS
JADE LINDLEY, NATALIE BROWN AND LIAM QUINN *
I INTRODUCTION AND BACKGROUND
The relationship between a supervisor and a Higher Degree by Research (HDR)
candidate for a Master’s degree by Research, Doctor
of Juridical Science
(SJD), or Doctor of Philosophy (PhD) qualification can contribute to the
candidate’s timely submission
of their thesis. The 2020 article by
Lindley, Skead and
identified this complex relationship as a contributing factor to HDR
students’ completion or
The present study builds on those research findings by exploring the
characteristics of the supervisory relationship that HDR students
supervisors identify as key to successful thesis completion. The results
presented in this article intend to assist HDR supervisions
Students’ socio-psychological wellbeing (also referred to simply as
wellbeing) is a complex phenomenon that requires further
research in the HDR
The students’ wellbeing is key to completing the intellectually and
emotionally challenging HDR journey and their success
thereafter.
The personal aspects of the supervisory relationship can impact positively or
negatively on the timely completion of the research
project. A supportive
supervision relationship is a vital component of the PhD
Emotional support is equally as important as academic guidance to develop a
constructive relationship and the students’
self-confidence.
A healthy mentor
relationship is a critical factor contributing to completion
because students are insulated within supervisory relationship, which will be a
source of resilience or a risk to the students’
well-being.
Stress, exhaustion,
anxiety, and lack of interest (or socio-psychological ill-being) may lead to
Students who have a positive HDR experience may be ‘empowered’
whereas those who have a negative HDR experience may feel
and experience exhaustion, insecurity and
Students experiencing
good wellbeing frequently cite feelings of satisfaction, support of learning,
inspiration, and engagement.
High quality supervision is an important contributing factor to the development
and fostering of students’
We submit that the
quality of support provided by supervisors in this relationship is key to
optimising supervision, as well as
empowering and inspiring the student during
the supervision process leading towards thesis completion.
Looking specifically at the PhD journey across any discipline, the
supervisory relationship is long; three years full-time at a minimum,
closer to four or five years. The supervisory relationship is even longer if
the candidate is completing the research
project part-time. As a side note,
many of us have embarked on this relationship with little consideration of
whether the personalities
and skills of the supervisor and candidate are a good
fit that will complement each other, or develop positively over the long term,
and ultimately, contribute positively to PhD completion. Supervisors and
candidates are paired often for academic reasons and may
potentially know each
other as colleagues or past students or other
association,
the compatibility
of personalities is an aspect often not discovered until well into the period of
supervision. Therefore, the success
of a supervisory relationship must depend
on the characteristics of the supervisor and the candidate, what the parties
consider important,
whether each deliver on expectations, and when conflicts
arise, whether the parties have the skills to resolve disputes, enabling
relationship to continue.
The parties’ relationship in law HDR supervisions may have a greater
impact on the candidate’s success in comparison to
other disciplines, such
as sciences, due to the nature of the research. For example, laboratory based
empirical research differs
from legal research that is largely desk-based and
Specifically, research suggests completion times are often quicker and more
collaborative in science-based disciplines than language-based
disciplines,
leading to correlatively, lower attrition rates than disciplines such as
Despite an upward trend in
other methods as aside from purely doctrinal in law, doctrinal researchers are
likely to experience greater
isolation than collaborative laboratory-based
researchers,
and are more likely to engage the subjective opinions of the supervisor and
than HDR students in
the sciences. These circumstances in law make the student/supervisor
relationship all the more important to
maintain the student’s wellbeing.
Some aspects of the supervisory role that may be important in the early
research phases, may be less important during the final push
to refine the
finished thesis. For example, timely feedback, encouragement, support, empathy,
and assistance refining the research
task may be more important to the
candidate’s achievement during the early stages of the project, while
attention to detail
is a relationship quality that is more useful for the
finalisation of the research task. Indeed, a supervisor who has completed
themselves may bring empathetic qualities to supervision because they understand
the early research challenges and can support
the candidate by normalising
common issues and setbacks through shared
experience.
The initial choice of supervisors and acceptance of candidates is primarily
based on academic acumen, appropriate knowledge and skills,
and a shared
interest in the research task.
Students rank competence and warmth as important qualities of a HDR supervisor,
however, interpersonal skills are not attributes
that can as easily be
ascertained as competence during this important decision-making
Supervisors and HDR
students may have had pre-existing association or students may reach out to a
potential supervisor based on
their research profile reputation or advice from
other students.
However, the
needs of individual students are not
homogenous,
supervisor’s personality that worked well for one student may not work for
Largely many
characteristics that will contribute to an optimal PhD supervision are unknown
and unknowable until the relationship
commences in earnest.
To understand and identify the important characteristics of the supervisory
relationship and contribute to successful and timely completion
theses, we conducted empirical research by surveying current and retired HDR
supervisors, and current students and those
who had completed, a PhD or SJD at
the University of Western Australia (UWA) Law School in the five years prior.
This article addresses
the knowledge gap identified by Lindley, Skead and
Montalto by answering the question, what relationship characteristics contribute
to optimal PhD supervision? This article answers that question in the following
sections: the methodology that describes the empirical
approach undertaken;
followed by the results of the perceptions surveys; and lastly, the discussion
drawing on results and literature
findings; and the conclusion. The intention
of the research is to confirm, through empirical findings, expectations to
support HDR
supervision at the institutional and personal levels to benefit both
students and supervisors. Key findings indicate the need for
continuing professional development (CPD) for supervisors, in particular,
conflict resolution and interpersonal skills.
We suggest that cross
institutional access to supervision CPD could address this deficit. The aim of
this article is to provide
a foundation of understanding that will both support
students and supervisors, and supporting institutions to identify factors that
lead to attrition and develop tools and resources to achieve optimal PhD
supervisions.
Two voluntary and anonymous surveys were developed on the online survey
platform, ‘Qualtrics’. Ethics approval was granted
for the research
project on 15 November 2021, by the UWA Human Research Ethics Office (REF:
2021/ET000682). The surveys were active
for completion from 26 November 2021 to
21 December 2021, during the period of the COVID-19 pandemic. As in previous
research of
this kind conducted by Lindley, Skead and Montalto in
non-random purpose
sampling was employed, whereby a sample of respondents were selected from a
population based on specific characteristics
— specifically, their status
as a past or present UWA PhD or SJD student or supervisor. Email invitations to
complete the
surveys were sent via internal mailing lists for enrolled UWA Law
School PhD or SJD students (at the time of survey completion) and
completed within the five years prior; and to UWA Law School supervisors and
those who had retired within the five years
prior. One survey was specific to
the experiences and perceptions of UWA Law School PhD and/or SJD supervisors,
and the other survey
was specific to the experiences and perceptions of UWA Law
School PhD and/or SJD students. The overall aim of both surveys was to
optimal supervision practices according to students and supervisors. The
student survey comprised eight questions, with
four questions containing
multiple parts; whereas the staff survey comprised 11 questions, with eight
questions containing multiple
parts. Questions included multiple choice, free
text, and ranking formats.
Descriptive analyses of the quantitative data were conducted in
Inductive thematic analyses of the free text survey data involved
systematically scanning, coding, and thematically grouping responses.
previous survey research of PhD program participants by Lindley, Skead and
Montalto in 2020, there were several limitations
of the present
Firstly, the student
and supervisor sample sizes were small. This is predominantly a reflection of
the small population of Law School
PhD or SJD students and supervisors at the
university. The study also relied on respondents self-selecting to complete the
survey. This may have skewed the results to reflect the experiences and
perceptions of respondents who had shared factors underpinning
their reasons to
self-select participation in the survey, for example, the student may have
experienced particularly positive or
negative student-supervisor interactions.
While this latter limitation cannot be entirely discounted, the nature of the
initial background
questions did allow some assessment of the diversity of
respondents within each sample according to experience. Moreover, given
exploratory nature of the survey (and the recognised lack of inferential
capabilities) we contend that the data still contributes
valuable insights to
the current knowledge on the topic, and provides a platform for future
III RESULTS
A total of 26 respondents completed the surveys; 15 respondents completed the
supervisor survey, and 11 respondents completed the
student survey. To provide
context, the median duration to complete the supervisor survey was 16 minutes,
and the median duration
to complete the student survey was 11 minutes.
It was first important to initially establish the diversity of the supervisor
and student samples with respect to the background of
supervisor-related and
student-related academic experience. The background experience characteristics
of supervisor respondents
are presented in Table 1.
Background personal experience characteristics of PhD or SJD
supervisor respondents
Number of respondents
Proportion of respondents (%)
Qualification
Academic work experience
Less than 1 year
Between 1 and 5 years
Between 5 and 10 years
Between 10 and 20 years
More than 20 years
Supervisory experience (to completion)
PhD – principal supervisor
PhD – co-supervisor
SJD – principal
SJD – co-supervisor
Ever discontinued PhD or SJD supervision
qualification and academic work experience proportions are
rounded and therefore may not sum to 100; supervisory experience proportions
not sum to 100 due to respondents having the option to choose multiple
The 11 supervisor respondents who had completed PhD or SJD studies all
indicated that they believe this qualification helped them
as a supervisor, for
reasons such as understanding the experience of students, understanding the
requirements of the qualification,
and learning supervisory techniques or tools
from their own experience of interacting with their PhD or SJD supervisor.
Conversely,
all four of the respondents who did not have a PhD or SJD indicated
that they do not believe this limited them as a supervisor, for
reasons such as
research output equivalence through other qualifications or work experiences,
and prior successful experiences in
a supervisory capacity.
As reflected in Table 1, the academic work experience of our sample of
supervisor respondents was skewed towards respondents who have
had a longer
academic career, compared to a junior academics, and having been a principal or
co-supervisor of PhD candidates rather
than SJD candidates. However, there was a
more pronounced variation amongst the supervisor respondents in terms of the
candidates they had supervised. For example, four respondents had
supervised only one candidate as a principal supervisor, one respondent
supervised two PhD candidates, one had supervised three PhD candidates, one had
supervised four PhD candidates, while three had
supervised five or more PhD
candidates, in this capacity.
Of the nine respondents who indicated that they had discontinued a PhD or SJD
supervision, five indicated in a free-text follow-up
that they had discontinued
supervisions at the student’s request, and five indicated that they had
discontinued supervisions
themselves, this result included students that did not
proceed beyond milestones such as confirmation of candidature. Student-related
reasons for discontinuing supervisions according to the supervisor respondents
included personal, family, and/or health-related issues
of the student, a
student changing their supervisory team to be more local to their living
situation, and the student’s work
commitments impacting their ability to
complete a PhD. Supervisor-related reasons for discontinuing supervisions
included changing
institutions, a breach of trust by a student, and students
failing to fulfil the requirements of a PhD to proceed past the initial
milestones.
The background experience characteristics of student respondents are
presented in Table 2.
Background personal experience characteristics of PhD or SJD
student respondents
Number of respondents
Proportion of respondents (%)
Enrolment status - temporal
Current PhD or SJD student
Previous PhD or SJD student
Enrolment status - workload
Enrolled full-time
Enrolled part-time
Progression status
Completed in the past 5 years
Less than 1 year
Between 1 and 2 years
Between 2 and 3 years
Between 3 and 4 years
Between 4 and 5 years
5 or more years
Whether on track to complete on time
Capacity worked with supervisor previously
Research assistant
proportions for the first four characteristics are rounded and
therefore may not sum to 100; capacity worked with supervisor previously
proportions may not sum to 100 due to respondents having the option to choose
multiple responses. Additionally, one respondent did
not provide details in
relation to the capacity worked with supervisor previously characteristic.
Some characteristics of the student respondents were relatively evenly
distributed among respondents (such as, current or previous
enrolment status,
and having worked with the supervisor previously), while other characteristics
were skewed more in one direction
(for example, most of the student respondents
were enrolled full-time, and most of the student respondents believed they were
track to complete their qualification on time).
Supervisor Training
To understand the factors contributing to optimal supervision, it was also
important to establish the perceptions and experiences
of supervisors with
respect to supervisor training. Table 3 presents a breakdown of supervisor
respondents’ supervisor training
experiences.
Perceptions and experiences of supervisor respondents with
respect to supervisor training
Number of respondents
Proportion of respondents (%)
Time since completing minimum induction training for supervisors (within
the past...)
Can’t recall
Whether feel adequate training and support is provided to
supervisors
Whether think further mandatory minimum training is necessary for all
supervisors
Whether think further mandatory minimum training is necessary for all
level 1 supervisors
Whether think further mandatory minimum training is necessary for all
level 2 supervisors
Whether think further mandatory minimum training is necessary for all
level 3 supervisors
proportions are rounded and therefore may not sum to 100.
One area of training and support supervisor respondents felt would be
beneficial to PhD or SJD supervisors was training relating to
issues that arise
in the process of supervision including conflict resolution strategies, for
‘[D]ealing with all the tangential and technical issues that arise in
the course of a candidature such as student behaviour
and misbehaviour, student
depressions, student accidents, illness, life problems such as family
‘Training in conflict resolution should be available to all
supervisors.’
‘It would also be helpful to reflect on how to manage different issues
that arise in the process of PhD supervision. Perhaps
this is more about sharing
experiences than formal training.’
While this is generally available, another area of training and support
supervisor respondents identified as potentially useful was
a comprehensive
training across all aspects of supervision for new supervisors, for example:
‘Definitely for early career supervisors, there needs to be
comprehensive, mandatory training across all aspects of supervision
choosing a student; dealing with student issues [both the students having issues
and problem students]; how to define &develop
the supervisor-student
relationship; supervisor expectations; dealing with different types of students
[e.g. those who are more independent
vs those who need more
guidance]).’
‘All supervisors should receive training on how to supervise a project
to completion including the different ways in which we
can support students
along the way - ie the stages of a PhD - commencing, drafting research
proposals, establishing the structure
and research design, drafting chapters,
completion etc—and how supervision must change to accommodate these
stages. This is
not as easy as it seems and indeed may differ with various
projects and students with some requiring quite nuanced supervision at
various stages and others less so.’
Other potentially useful areas of training and support that the supervisor
respondents identified were ongoing training relating to
the changing format of
law theses, training on the specific institutional policies, training on how to
support the professional development
of students, training on the completion
process for students nearing the end of their qualification, and training on how
PhD supervision
interacts with other structures at the university.
Optimal Supervision
Given the areas of training and support identified as potentially useful by
supervisor respondents, it is important to examine the
factors that supervisors
and students perceive as contributing to optimal supervision. Figure 1 shows
supervisor respondent average
rankings of supervisory characteristics by the
importance they perceive HDR students attach to them compared to actual student
average rankings.
Supervisor respondent average rankings of supervisory
characteristics by the importance they perceive PhD or SJD students attach
them compared to student respondent average rankings of supervisory
characteristics by importance at the start of their program
A rank of 1 indicates most important and a rank of 10 indicates
least important. As such, the smaller the average rank value, the
more important
respondents perceive the supervisory characteristic is to students/themselves.
Error bars represent standard deviation.
Two supervisor respondents were
excluded from analysis due to subsequent comments that indicated they felt the
rankings did not represent
their views. The sample sizes differ for the student
= 11) and supervisor (
= 13) respondent samples.
As depicted in Figure 1, supervisors estimated the relative importance of
different supervisory characteristics to students with a
reasonable degree of
accuracy. Although, there were two minor exceptions to this. Firstly, students
placed ‘kindness/empathy’
as slightly more important than
‘engagement/network in practice/the scholarly community’, whereas
supervisors estimated
the latter as slightly more important than the former,
when considering average ranks. Secondly, students placed ‘language
similarity/relatability’ as more important than ‘cultural
similarity/relatability’ and ‘gender similarity/relatability’,
while supervisors estimated the two latter characteristics as more important
than the former, when considering average ranks. Interestingly,
qualifications/training’ had the largest standard deviation in ranking for
both the student and supervisor samples,
indicating that the biggest difference
in rankings was for this supervisory characteristic. There was a greater range
of rankings
provided for this characteristic: some students/supervisors
perceived ‘formal qualifications/training’ as considerably
important to students than others, while the range of rankings for other
supervisory characteristics was more uniform.
Despite general similarities among student and supervisor respondents in the
average ranking of specific qualities perceived to contribute
supervision, there was considerably more variety in average rank between the two
samples across all qualities. Figure
2 shows a comparison of supervisor and
student respondent average rankings of qualities perceived to contribute to
optimal supervision
by importance.
Comparison of supervisor and student respondent average
rankings of qualities perceived to contribute to optimal supervision by
A rank of 1 indicates most important and a rank of 14 indicates
least important. As such, the smaller the average rank value, the
more important
respondents perceive the supervisory characteristic is. Error bars represent
standard deviation. Two supervisor respondents
were excluded from analysis due
to subsequent comments that indicated they felt the rankings did not represent
their views. The sample
sizes differ for the student (
supervisor (
= 13) respondent samples.
Particularly notable differences in the relative importance of qualities in
contributing to optimal supervision among student and
supervisor respondents
were ‘encouragement to venture beyond comfort zone’,
‘face-to-face time (or via Teams/Zoom/telephone
call)’, and
‘friendship’. Specifically, on average, students ranked
‘encouragement to venture beyond comfort
‘friendship’ as more important for optimal supervision than
supervisors. Conversely, on average, supervisors
ranked ‘face-to-face time
(or via Teams/Zoom/ telephone call)’ as more important for optimal
supervision than students.
Nevertheless, there were some important similarities
in the qualities students and supervisors felt were most important for optimal
supervision. Specifically, on average, both students and supervisors ranked
‘provision of timely manuscript/article/presentation
‘feeling of support’, ‘timeliness of email reply (not specific
to manuscript/ article/ presentation
‘organised’ as the four most important qualities for optimal
supervision.
It should also be noted that two supervisor respondents were excluded from
this analysis due to subsequent comments indicating that
they felt the ranking
format/options misrepresented their views on optimal supervision. It is
important to represent those views
here, though the Figures and Tables and
survey quotes, as they may have a bearing on the design and focus of future
research into
optimal supervision. Both respondents made comments that they
would rank many (or all) qualities as equally important, while one
respondents also stated that they perceived some of the options as logistical
issues that could be solved rather than ‘qualities’
contributing to
optimal supervision and that other options were subjective in meaning.
Given the exploratory nature of the research, it was also important to
identify other qualities beyond those presented in the survey
that students and
supervisors felt were important for optimal supervision. Supervisor respondents
identified encouraging passion
in their students for research, having an
interest in a student’s research topic, encouraging critical thinking in
normalising the PhD experience by explaining common challenges,
establishing and reviewing expectations of the student and supervisor,
adapting supervisory needs to the individual at various stages of the HDR
journey, as supervisory qualities important for optimal
supervision. Students
also identified qualities relating to inspiring a passion for the research, and
having an interest in a student’s
research topic, for example:
‘Genuine interest in PhD topic and taking the time to discuss it. I
think many of us have missed a “sparring partner”.
venture beyond the interest of my principal supervisor, so I understand a lack
of interest there, but, generally, I've
felt like my supervisor never really had
the time for an in-depth discussion due to competing demands.’
‘Appreciation of the shared nature, the dialogue, of
Other qualities identified by students as important for optimal supervision
were providing direct, honest feedback, and suggesting
alternative research
pathways where appropriate.
Another way in which qualities or characteristics of optimal supervision were
elicited from students and supervisors was by asking
the best advice they had
given students (supervisors), and the best advice they had received (students).
Four student respondents
mentioned technical advice including changing their
thesis title, writing more concisely, writing the thesis introduction early on
to frame and limit the topic, and suggesting a good document management system
with drafts organised by date. Two student respondents
made comments relating to
advice on time management, including trying not to work during the holidays and
to not over-prepare for
tasks to allow time for other important tasks. Finally,
four student respondents made comments about other more general advice received,
including learning to live with imperfection, encouraging deep reflection on
alternative points of view when assumptions were made
in their own writing,
encouraging participation in conferences, not give up, and to stay humble.
Furthermore, in a follow-up question,
one student respondent indicated that they
may have removed a supervisor that did not contribute sufficiently to the
supervisory
team, and another student respondent indicated that they would
include a supervisor in their supervisory team who had knowledge of
methodology applied in the PhD.
Some of the best advice given by supervisor respondents aligned with that
received by student respondents, such as advising students
to write early and
consistently, for example:
‘I get my students to write consistently and to submit that writing for
ongoing feedback. ie Stick to a regular writing and
timetable.’
‘Start drafting parts of your research (even small parts) as early as
you can, because this process reveals what you don't understand
or don't really
Other advice that aligned with student respondent comments was advising
students to avoid trying to achieve perfection in their work,
and the related
concept of keeping focussed on the task requirements, for example:
‘Don't let the right be the enemy of the good. It doesn't have to be
perfect - it needs to make a meaningful contribution to
the body of work in
their thesis field.’
‘There is research to be done after the PhD/SJD is completed. You
don't have to solve everything in the PhD/SJD.’
Other ‘best advice’ given by supervisors was not mentioned by the
student respondents, such as advising students to be
clear about their
motivation for doing the PhD, for example:
‘All students need to be sure, as they start their PhD, that they are
doing so for the right reasons and have chosen a topic
that aligns with their
personal and professional interests. They will need passion in their chosen
topic/area to carry them through
their research journey.’
As well as more specific law discipline-focussed advice for students to keep
up to date with current news events to contextualise
their research, offered by
one supervisor respondent:
‘Read the newspaper every day. You'll pick up all the legal literature
in the course of your research activities but it is
only of value if you place
your work in the context of real world events and pressures.’
The number of student respondents who indicated that they would supervise
future HDR students the way they had been supervised (
= 6) was similar
to the number who indicated they would not supervise future students in the same
In order to identify aspects of supervisor-student relationships that
significantly depart from optimal supervision practices, it
was important to
gauge student and supervisor perceptions and experiences of formal and informal
Most of the student
respondents indicated that they were aware they could make complaints about
supervision (82%;
= 9). Despite this, no student respondents had made a
formal complaint. However, four of the 11 student respondents indicated that
they had made an informal complaint. The informal complaints included the lack
of availability of a supervisor, unfair assertions
made by a supervisor, a lack
of understanding about personal circumstances, exploitation of the
supervisor/supervisee power imbalance,
harsh treatment, belittling verbal
communication, and ‘borderline bullying’. Three of the students who
made an informal
complaint indicated that the outcome of the complaints process
resolved the situation between them and their supervisor to enable
a continued
relationship. The remaining student who made an informal complaint, who cited
exploitation of power imbalance, harsh
treatment, and ‘borderline
bullying’ as the grounds of their complaint, indicated that the outcome of
the complaints
process did not resolve the situation between them and their
supervisor. Of the seven student respondents to indicate that they
had not made
any formal or informal complaints, two indicated that they had experienced
difficulties with supervision. The nature
of these difficulties included a lack
of substantive feedback on drafts from their secondary supervisor and having a
supervisor who
they regarded as sexist and inexperienced.
Two of the 15 supervisor respondents indicated that they had been involved in
a formal complaint. The persons making these two complaints
were a student and a
third party, respectively. The complaints related to the nature of
communication to a student that their candidature
was not confirmed, and
unfairness of process leading to the decision to reject a PhD thesis. In the
first case, it was identified
that the outcome of the complaints process did not
resolve the situation, which precluded ongoing supervision. Conversely, the
of the complaints process for the second complaint did resolve the
situation. Six of the 15 staff respondents indicated that they
involved in an informal complaint. The persons identified as making the
complaints were students (
= 3), and the supervisors themselves
= 3). Student complaints related to the timeliness and nature of
communication/feedback as well as the conduct of a co-supervisor,
and the nature
of communication to a student who was not recommended for confirmation of
candidature and advised to withdraw. The
third complaint was identified as
being obscure, with no specific details provided. Supervisor complaints related
to bullying and
aggression by a student; breach of trust by a student; and
complaints by students include, poor advice to, and support of, a student
informal complaints were identified as having been resolved
as an outcome of the
complaints process, while the remaining three were not resolved—precluding
ongoing supervision. Of the
seven supervisor respondents to indicate that they
had not been involved in either a formal or informal complaint, four identified
that they had experienced difficulties with a supervision. These difficulties
included crippling perfectionism and related mental
health issues of students;
students disengaging from the project or not making progress due to other
commitments or doubt about whether
they wanted to do a PhD; and students lacking
sufficient research and writing skills at the time they commenced the project
meeting the admission criteria.
When asked if they had any recommendations for improving the current Graduate
Research School (GRS)/Law School dispute resolution
system, five supervisor
respondents indicated that they had not had any experience with the dispute
resolution system; two indicated
that they did not have a detailed understanding
of the dispute resolution system but had past experiences where it worked
satisfactorily;
and one stated that outcomes appeared to be dependent on who the
GRS representative was, citing their experience of bullying and
aggression by a
student which was dismissed by one GRS representative but dealt with very
effectively by the next GRS representative.
IV DISCUSSION
The PhD experience has been compared to Rapunzel
isolated in the tower working diligently with the wicked witch supervisor
necessary sustenance but not much
However, HDR students are
more likely to complete and have a higher rate of satisfaction with the process
when they have a strong
positive relationship with their
supervisor.
The HDR process has
both intellectual and emotional
challenges,
which means the
supervisory role is multi-faceted requiring academic and interpersonal
which may need CPD to
ensure best practice teaching pedagogy for this specialised role.
Experience and Supervisor Training
All supervising academics must complete an induction course offered by the
GRS. While a majority of supervisor respondents considered
that the professional
development (training) and support provided by the institution were adequate,
results indicated a perception
that with greater academic experience attained
that there is a lesser need for ongoing training. Twenty six percent of
respondents had not engaged in training for over five years, and 60%
for over three years. In relation to the need for ongoing training,
that supervisor training was not necessary for all supervisors. Responses
indicated that the need for less training was
predicated on the level of
academic experience, 73% responding that further mandatory minimum training was
necessary for
supervisors compared to 60 percent responding it
was necessary for
supervisors (L3).
Currently, UWA requires L2 and L3 supervisors to read the Supervisor Refresher
Module or engage in some other
form of professional development at least once
The refresher module mandates CPD for all supervisors aligned with the 2021
Australian Council of Graduate Research supervision
guidelines.
These results raise
two questions. First, are supervisors perceiving academic acumen and experience
as correlating with best practice
teaching skills, and secondly, is the
institution providing professional development by updating the training and/or
providing additional
skills training in subjects necessary to maintain or attain
best practice supervision as teaching methodology evolves? In a nutshell,
the response reflective of the perception that a highly skilled academic does
not need teaching methodology CPD for their role
as a supervisor, or that the
CPD available does not provide suitable upskilling in teaching practice?
Tertiary teaching is unique in that tertiary teachers do not need and
generally do not have formal teaching qualifications. Currently,
a pre-tertiary
teaching qualification requires a four year undergraduate Bachelor of Education,
specialising in primary, secondary
or early childhood studies, or an equivalent
two year Masters of Education.
In disciplines such as teaching, law, psychology, physical and medical
professions, new methods of best practice are continually
evolving, and a
practitioner is required to undertake CPD to ensure they are employing the best
practice methods for their
discipline.
So, after qualifying, a Western Australian-based teacher is required to fulfil
20 hours of CPD per annum, and may specialise by completing
post-graduate
qualifications in areas such as special needs or learning
difficulties.
Because tertiary
teachers are not necessarily trained in higher education, there is potentially a
greater need for mandatory teaching
skills training and CPD, particularly if the
academic intends to specialise in a teaching area such as HDR supervision.
On the other hand, the supervisors’ response to the survey may indicate
that the institution is not offering adequate CPD opportunities.
For example,
the supervisor training may be static, geared towards science-based disciplines,
and not address developing personal
aspects, or dealing with difficulties or
disputes. Supervisors expressed a need for training in conflict resolution,
dealing with
student declining mental health and relationship development. The
UWA GRS supervisor refresher course is largely a recap of the supervisor
induction course, updating policy and services. In 2021, the GRS provide
optional online and in-person workshops establishing a
GRS Supervision
Professional Development
The eight online modules are designed to equip PhD supervisors specifically to
support their students’ development into independent
researchers through
comprehensive training in core principles and practices of Doctoral
supervision.
Optional CPD
offered by the GRS prior to 2022 included topics such as ‘Finding the
Right Student’, ‘Expectations,
Relationships and Wellbeing’,
‘Research Students and Mental Health’ as well more mainstream topics
to develop research,
writing and teamwork
One means of providing
a greater range of CPD opportunities may be by facilitating cross institution
access to supervisor training
modules. For example, Monash University offers CPD
modules and tools, such as a diagnostic tool to target specific aspects of
professional
development, and topics such as ‘Developing the Researcher
and Enabling Progress’, ‘Effective Feedback’,
‘Supporting your Candidate’, and ‘Developing your Supervisory
Practice’, which are CPDs not currently available
from the UWA
Supervisor CPD needs to be
targeted, it necessarily needs to include administrative practice but also needs
to be extended to provide
exploration of the emotional demands of supervision
and ‘to reflexively and investigate and contemplate their supervision
practices’.
The University of Otago in New Zealand recognises that a good supervisory
relationship is the key to a successful supervision, a successful
supervision is
both the desired end result (the award) and the process achieving that
In regard to the
process, ‘the key word is
relationship’.
relationship should be professional open and honest and based on mutual respect
In 2022, the
University of Otago provided 54 CPD workshops specifically designed to support
HDR supervisors and enhance supervision
methodology and practice because
research unequivocally indicates good supervisory practices are an essential
factor that effects
both the success and the quality of the research
experience.
The Otago program
offers a comprehensive range of in-person or online pedagogical workshops
throughout the year to develop supervisor
skills targeting key aspects and
processes, such as ‘Pastoral Care of Candidates; What doctoral supervisors
need to know’,
‘Mental Health, Well-being and Productivity’,
‘Supporting your Supervisee’, ‘Pedagogical Approaches
Supervisory Styles’, and ‘Providing Feedback in Postgraduate
Supervision’.
The complex and demanding role of a supervisor means that CPD (via workshops
and review of literature) is necessary to optimise and
However, uptake of
workshops for developing teaching or supervisory skills and methodology maybe
low even when provided; survey results
indicated 27% of supervisors had not
participated in training in five years or more and 60% in three or more years.
Introduction
of a mandatory CPD point system in conjunction with access to
programs similar to the University of Otago may ensure that supervisors
levels are acquiring or maintaining best practice teaching skills.
Optimising Supervision: Personal and Practical Aspects
Students ranked characteristics of a personal nature – such as support,
empathy, and encouragement to venture beyond their comfort
zone – as being
of higher importance than characteristics of a practical nature — for
example, career development and
networking opportunities — which were more
highly valorised by supervisors. ‘Feeling of support’ was ranked by
students as the second most important aspect of the relationship after timely
than supervisors, potentially
indicating that the quality, rather than the quantity of the contact time is the
most important form
of support. Both students and supervisors ranked timely
offer a sliding scale of how ‘timely’ is defined, nor did we delve
into appropriate timeliness for various tasks.
For example, expectations of
timeliness would differ for email replies compared to critical feedback on one
or more chapters. Oral
or written feedback will typically be the main form of
communication between the students and their supervisors, and thus feedback
should inherently incorporate the personal aspects identified by students such
as feeling supported, empathy, and encouragement.
For example, PhD students, who
have generally been successful in their prior academic pursuits, may be
unprepared for the first revisions
and criticisms — however
well-intentioned — which may lead to students feeling ‘isolated and
alone in the uncertainty’.
Supervisors can improve communication and minimise feelings of isolation by
going beyond feedback that critically analyses by providing
supportive feedback
that normalises this experience and offers
encouragement.
Supervisors play a vital role in providing support to students. Research
demonstrates that students are motivated when their early
efforts are encouraged
and criticism is initially withheld at the beginning of their PhD
Students are motivated by supportive, timely, meaningful, and encouraging
Indeed, feedback is an
‘intrinsically emotional
that may seek to support the student’s academic writing development. One
student survey respondent noted that one supervisor’s
focussing on grammar and sentence structure details left them feeling negative
and that the supervisor was not
seeing the ‘bigger
In contrast,
targeted critical feedback that was supportive and coupled with reassurance
work provided the necessary
motivational balance that allowed for thesis
completion.
Other research
indicates supervisors requiring ‘polished’ academic writing rather
than encouraging thesis completion
can lead to attrition, and that further
‘polishing’ did not contribute to better employment
opportunities.
The converse may
also apply — supervisors may require students to overcome their inherent
perfectionism, as one supervisor
survey respondent noted, ‘It doesn't have
to be perfect’.
There is a large body of literature considering effective feedback and how to
develop best practice feedback, the impact of poor teacher
student confidence and learning, and the role of emotion in
Currently, there are
limited resources available through the UWA GRS on the provision of effective
Students can receive feedback on written work from an academic (other than their
supervisors) through the
‘Studiosity’
service, however while a useful resource, it does not address feedback skills
development within the supervisory
relationship.
importance of feedback to the supervisory relationship, institutions may
consider providing links to further resources
for example, as part of
mandatory supervisor refresher courses.
Personal tools for coping with critical feedback can also be developed for,
and by students. One institution has introduced student
support programs for
first year PhD students.
focus of the program is how to survive and complete a PhD program, choose a
supervisor, and cultivate a constructive
relationship.
A main topic is
getting and giving feedback, and understanding what good feedback looks
Students have described
program as a ‘weekly therapy session’ that often revolves around the
stress of being critiqued.
many, the initial shock of seeing a first draft review may send them into panic
However, students comment
that professional academics normalising the process, often with examples of
their own earlier work, has
assisted them to accept the necessity of the
critical process, and rise to the
Students respond
well, even to harsh criticism, when they know the supervisor is acting in their
best interests and the process
of critique is mixed with sympathy and
understanding.
This observation
further reflects the need to develop a robust supportive supervisory
relationship in which the student can accept
and constructively incorporate
critical feedback.
Dispute Resolution
The supervisory relationship is subject to a power
so students are more
likely to be reticent about resolving issues early on and may decide to put up
with the problem rather than
potentially jeopardise the supervision, consistent
with our findings. Moak succinctly notes that ‘students feel subordinate
to faculty because they
More dominant
personality types may escalate and exacerbate the issue by not using a
safe-setting or having poor communication skills.
The student survey responses
indicated that while 82% of respondents were aware of the available GRS
complaints procedure, zero
students had made a formal complaint and 36% of
respondents had made an informal compliant. Of the students who made an
complaint, 75% of those were resolved and enabled the relationship to
continue. Of the total student participants, 18% indicated
that although they
had experienced difficulties with the supervision, they opted not to make a
complaint of any kind.
The results of the supervisor survey are indicative of the reticence of
candidates to engage in the complaints process to resolve
supervisory issues.
Collectively, the UWA Law School supervisors who participated in the survey have
been practicing academics for
over 250 years, however, during that time, the
supervisors had received only two formal complaints and six informal complaints.
resolution process for the informal complaints were split 50/50, that is 50%
continued with the supervision and 50% suspended the
supervision. The lack of
formal complaints and the variable results of the informal complaints procedure
raise the question of whether
suitable dispute resolution processes are
available, and/or whether supervisors have sufficient training to resolve
conflicts. The
supervisor survey respondents indicated that conflict resolution
is an area where additional resources or CPD would be welcomed.
Supervisors need to recognise the power imbalance in the relationship and
develop counselling and mediation
A novel approach to
developing the relationship may include engaging in social activities outside of
This approach may go
a long way in breaking down the power imbalance and could enable the parties to
constructively discuss issues
on a levelled platform, however, this method
requires well developed mentoring
Research indicates that
respecting and listening to the supervisee are key aspects of supervisors’
role as a mentor.
brings into focus the usefulness of the role of an HDR mentor, as highlighted by
Lindley, Skead and Montalto,
may be a junior academic on faculty and fills the support gap somewhere between
supervisor and peer. Supervisors will need to
develop conflict resolution and
mentoring skills through CPD or other training to achieve optimal supervision
relationships.
V CONCLUSION
Drawing on perceptions yielded from two online surveys targeting UWA Law
School current and recently completed HDR students, and current
and recently
retired HDR supervisors, this article provides insight into ways in which HDR
supervision can be optimised. Survey results
found both students and supervisors
shared four qualities they considered most important for optimal supervision,
namely timely feedback,
support, timely replies, and organisation. As these
qualities are subjective, establishing expectations early in the relationship
integral to develop an optimal supervisory relationship, which will contribute
to the timely completion of the PhD thesis. Supportive
and organised
supervisors require skill-building and resources specifically designed to assist
the relationship to develop positively
over the duration of the project, which
can be provided through CPD. While universities provide a range of
skill-building for supervisors,
there may be limitations as to the breadth of
offerings, particularly those relevant to law. As such, we conclude that
cross-institutional
supervisor CPD programs — particularly relating to
conflict resolution and interpersonal skills — will support law schools
share knowledge and skill-build their HDR supervisors to support the next
generation of law academics.
* Jade Lindley is an Associate Professor at the UWA Law School, the
University of Western Australia. Natalie Brown is a Lecturer at
the UWA Law
School, the University of Western Australia. Liam Quinn is a PhD graduate from
the UWA Law School, the University of
Western Australia.
Jade Lindley, Natalie Skead and Michael Montalto,
‘Enhancing Institutional Support to Ensure Timely PhD Completions in
(2020) 30(1)
Legal Education Review
J Stubb, K Pyhalto and K Lonka,
‘Balancing Between Inspiration And Exhaustion: PhD Students’
Experiences Socio-Psychological
Well-Being’ (2011) 33(1)
Continuing Education
Lorna Moxham, Trudy Dwyer and
Kerry Reid-Searle, ‘Articulating Expectations For PhD Candidature Upon
Commencement: Ensuring
Supervisor/Student “Best Fit”’
Journal of Higher Education Policy and Management
, 345, 347;
Kim Beasy, Sherridan Emery and Joseph Crawford, ‘Drowning in the Shallows:
An Australian Study of the PhD Experience
of Wellbeing’ (2021) 26(4)
Teaching in Higher Education 602; KM Barry et al, ‘Psychological Health of
Doctoral Candidates,
Study-Related Challenges and Perceived Performance’
(2018) 37(3)
Higher Education Research and Development
468; Susan Guthrie
et al, ‘Understanding Mental Health in the Research Environment: A Rapid
Evidence Assessment’ (2018)
Rand Health Quarterly
Moxham, Dwyer and Reid-Searle
Stacey C Moak and Jeffery T
Walker, ‘How To Be A Successful Mentor’
(2014) 30(4)
Contemporary Criminal Justice
Australian Council of Graduate
Mental Health and Wellbeing in Graduate Research Education
(Version 2: August 2021) [8]–[9].
Stubb, Pyhalto and Lonka (n 3)
34, 35, 44. See also, Ben Marder et al, ‘Impression Formation Of Phd
Supervisors During Student-Led
Selection: An Examination Of UK Business Schools
With A Focus On Staff Profiles’, (2021) 19
The International Journal of
Management Education
Stubb, Pyhalto and Lonka (n
Ibid 39–40.
Marder et al (n
Terry Hutchinson and Nigel
Duncan, ‘Describing and Defining What We Do: Doctrinal Legal
[2012] DeakinLawRw 4
(2012) 17(1)
Deakin Law Review
Lindley, Skead and Montalto
) 7. For comment on completion
rates specific to law see Hutchinson and Duncan (n
) 97. See also, completion times for
humanities in comparison to sciences, Ronald Ehrenberg et al, ‘Inside the
Black Box of
Doctoral Education: What Program Characteristics Influence Doctoral
Students Attrition and Graduation Probabilities?’ (2007)
Educational Evaluation and Policy Analysis
134, 134–5.
Ehrenberg et al (n
) 135, 147.
See Stubb, Pyhalto and Lonka
) 38, Table 1, which indicates that
93% of humanities PhD students worked alone in comparison to 43% in medicine and
78% in behavioural
For a comparison of
well-defined disciplines such as mathematics and chemistry (hard sciences) where
the level of agreement between
academics is higher than ill-defined disciplines
in which academics have several or sometimes opposing views on acceptable ways
approaching a research topic, see Stubb, Pyhalto and Lonka (n 3) 35.
For example, students’
perception that others do not struggle in the program, described as
‘academic imposter syndrome’
— see Moak and Walker (n
Marder et al (n
Ibid 2; Moak and Walker (n
Moxham, Dwyer and
Reid-Searle (n
) 346; Moak and Walker
Moak and Walker (n
) 436, 438.
Lindley, Skead and Montalto
may be via the Dean/Head of School, as compared to
which are through the Graduate Research School.
Melissa De Zwart and
Bernadette Richards, ‘Wi-Fi in the Ivory Tower: Reducing Isolation of the
Law PhD Student Through Social
Media Networks’ (2014) 14 (1)
University of Technology Law Review Special Edition: Wellness for Law
Moak and Walker (n
Stubb, Pyhalto and Lonka (n
Moak and Walker (n
) 430; Marder et al (n
University of Western
Australia Graduate Research School (‘UWA GRS’),
<https://www.postgraduate.uwa.edu.au/staff/supervisors/workshops#online>.
Ibid; Australian Council of
Graduate Research,
Good Practice Guidelines
(Guidelines, version 2,
August 2021) <https://www.acgr.edu.au/good-practice/best-practice/>.
Government of Western
Australia Teachers Registration Board,
Accredited Initial Teacher Education
Programs in Western Australia
<https://www.trb.wa.gov.au/Initial-Teacher-Education-Programs/Accredited-initial-teacher-education-programs>.
Teachers Registration Act
(WA) s 22(2)(c);
Teacher Registration (General) Regulations 2012
(WA) r 13; Government of Western Australia Teachers Registration Board,
Professional Learning
<https://www.trb.wa.gov.au/Teacher-Registration/Currently-registered-teachers/Renewal-of-registration/Professional-learning>;
Government of Western Australia Teachers Registration Board,
Professional
Standards for Teachers in Western Australia
<https://www.trb.wa.gov.au/DesktopModules/mvc/TrbDownload/PublishedDoc.aspx?number=D19/065548>.
20 hours CPD is the common
requirement for teachers in other Australian States. For example, see Victorian
Institute of Teaching,
Professional Practice and Learning Requirements
<https://www.vit.vic.edu.au/maintain/requirements>; Edufolios,
Professional Development Requirements by State and Territory
<https://edufolios.org/teacher-professional-learning-requirements-by-state-and-territory/>;
Edith Cowan University (ECU),
How can I become a Special Needs teacher?
<https://askus2.ecu.edu.au/s/article/000001392>.
UWA GRS (n 32).
Monash University Graduate
Research School,
Training and Development
<https://www.monash.edu/graduate-research/supervision/training#tabs__2326750-02>.
Moxham, Dwyer and
Reid-Searle (n
The University of Otago,
Graduate Research School PhD Supervision
<https://www.otago.ac.nz/graduate-research/current-students/otago703140.html>.
The University of Otago,
Higher Education Centre,
The Otago Doctoral Supervision Program
<https://www.otago.ac.nz/hedc/otago831677.pdf>.
Ibid. The examples selected
relate to this article’s theme of the importance of relationship, however,
the program also offers
support on practical procedures, such as preparing for
viva voce, and key administrative processes for supervisors.
Stan Taylor, ‘Good
Supervisory Practice Framework’, United Kingdom Council for Graduate
Education, (June 2019)
<https://supervision.ukcge.ac.uk/good-supervisory-practice-framework/>
Moak and Walker (n
Sian Lindsay, ‘What
Works For Doctoral Students In Completing Their Thesis’ (2015) 20(2)
Teaching in Higher Education
Elizabeth Molloy, Francesc
Borrell-Carrio, and Ron Epstein, ‘The Impact Of Emotions In
Molloy (eds),
and Professional Education: Understanding it and Doing It Well
(Routledge,
2013) chapter 4, 63.
Lindsay (n 50
Ehrenberg et al (n
) 147, 150.
Molloy, Borrell-Carrio and
Epstein (n 52
) 51–2; Clair Doloriert, Sally
Sambrook and Jim Stewart, ‘Power and Emotion in Doctoral Supervision:
Implications for
HRD’ (2012) 36(7
) European Journal of Training and
Development
732; David Carless and David Boud, ‘The Development of
Student Feedback Literacy: Enabling Uptake of Feedback’ (2018)
Assessment and Evaluation in Higher Education
1315; Elke Stracke and
Vijay Kumar, ‘Encouraging Dialogue in Doctoral Supervision: The
Development of the Feedback Expectation
Tool’ (2020) 15
International
Journal of Doctoral
Studies 265; Margot Pearson and Angela Brew,
‘Research Training and Supervision Development’ (2002) 27(2)
Studies in Higher Education
UWA GRS (n 32)
GRS provides the following supervisor resource handbook: Commonwealth
Government, Office of Learning and Teaching, ‘Supervision
of Higher Degree
by Research Students: Supervisor Resource Book’ (Supervisor Handbook). The
Supervisor Handbook deals with
relationships with the student’ that notes frustrations can occur in the
of the project in relation to timely or critical feedback (110) and
that a supervisor should give positive as well as negative feedback
rest of the advice in this section is by way of ‘case-studies’ under
various titles. For example, ‘Case
of a student apparently impervious to
supervision meetings’
G1.5 (116), and ‘Case of a student breaking
down’ G1.6 (116). The advice is not supported by references and does not
offer support resources by way of links. In general, the case studies appear to
focus on the student as having the issue and needing
to be managed by the
supervisor.
See the University of
Western Australia,
<https://www.uwa.edu.au/education/educational-enhancement-unit/Strategic-Projects/Studiosity>.
Supervision Professional Development Program
). See especially Unit 5, ‘HDR
Student Support’ slide 17/26
<https://www.postgraduate.uwa.edu.au/__data/assets/pdf_file/0006/3445611/SvisorInductionModule_Unit5.pdf>.
For example, literary
sources such as Molloy, Borrell-Carrio and Epstein (n 52
). See also the collaborative research
project between Monash University, Deakin University and the University of
Melbourne led by
David Boud and Michael Henderson,
Closing the Assessment Loop
<https://feedbackforlearning.org/>,
which offers a comprehensive staff resource for feedback strategies as well as
texts or articles and online resources including ‘Institute
Learning Designer’ to organise group workshops for teaching
upskill feedback and use of learning technologies. See also Federation
University,
<https://federation.edu.au/staff/learning-and-teaching/teaching-practice/feedback/feedback-learning>,
specifically the ‘Technologies
to enhance feedback’ and the
‘Resources, strategies or assistance’ sections.
Moak and Walker (n
Ibid 436; Moxham, Dwyer and
Reid-Searle (n
Moak and Walker (n
Catherine Manathunga,
‘Supervision as Mentoring: The Role of Power and Boundary Crossing’
(2007) 29(2)
Studies in Continuing Education
Vähämäki, Essi Saru and Lauri-Matti Palmunen, ‘Doctoral
Supervision as an Academic Practice and Leader–Member
Relationship: A
Critical Approach to Relationship Dynamics’ (2021) 19(3)
International Journal of Management Education
100510; Melinda Kirk and Kylie
Lipscombe, ‘When a Postgraduate Student Becomes a Novice Researcher and a
Supervisor Becomes
a Mentor: A Journey of Research Identity Development’
(2019) 15(2)
Studying Teacher Education
Moak and Walker (n
Ibid 430–2.
Lindley, Skead and Montalto
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (810 KB)
PDF format (911 KB)
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter