URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/journals/UTSLRS/2018/13.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 15:50:54
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Methven, Elyse --- "A Little Respect: Swearing, Police and Criminal Justice Discourse" [2018] UTSLRS 13; (2018) 7(3) International Journal for Crime, Justice and Social Democracy 58-74
A Little Respect: Swearing, Police and Criminal Justice
Elyse Methven
University of Technology Sydney, Australia
This article interrogates a commonly articulated idea in relation to the
criminalisation of offensive language: namely, that swearing
challenges their authority and thereby deserves criminal punishment. Drawing on
critical discourse analysis, the article
examines representations of swearing at
police officers in offensive language cases and parliamentary debates, including
constructions
of power, authority and order. It contributes to—but also
denaturalises—conceptions about police power and authority
in the context
of public order policing. The article argues that criminal justice discourse
plays a significant and often under‐acknowledged
role in naturalising the
punishment of swearing at, or in the presence of, police officers.
Offensive language; police; power; authority; criminal law; resistance.
Please cite this article as:
Methven E (2018) A little respect: Swearing, police and criminal justice
International Journal for Crime, Justice and Social Democracy
7(3): 58‐74. DOI: 10.5204/ijcjsd.v7i1.428.
This work is licensed under a
Creative Commons
Attribution 4.0 Licence
. As an open access journal, articles are free to
use, with proper attribution, in educational and other non‐ commercial
ISSN: 2202‐8005
© The Author(s) 2018
Introduction
But who suffers most from our increasingly contemptuous
youth, so ready to give a gobful to authority? ... Police will tell you what
rabble they must now deal with, and how they struggle to command the respect
that has been stripped from them by courts, lousy parents,
and the barbarians
behind the new up‐yours entertainment.
That’s why the NSW [New South Wales] Police Association is furious at
Williams’ judgment, and why the police force is
considering an appeal.
Their authority on the streets is being compromised. (Bolt 2010:
The use of offensive, indecent, obscene or insulting language in or near a
public place is a crime in all Australian states and territories.
Fines and charges for offensive language are often initiated by police in
response to their frustration with what police perceive
unacceptable occupational hazard’: being insulted, criticised or
undermined by persons using four‐letter
words (Brown et al. 2015:
Recent law reform and academic inquiries (for example, McNamara and Quilter
2013, 2014; Methven 2017a, 2017b; New South Wales (NSW)
Law Reform Commission
2012; NSW Ombudsman 2009) have questioned the legitimacy of offensive language
crimes, with the Australian
Law Reform Commission (ALRC) being the latest
government agency to pose the question: ‘Should offensive language remain
offence?’ (ALRC 2017: 13). This article also embarks on a
normative inquiry into the legitimacy of offensive language crimes.
by adopting the lens of critical discourse analysis (CDA) to analyse how these
crimes are represented and justified in
criminal justice debates. In particular,
the article examines how criminal justice discourse naturalises the notion that
police occupy
a position of authority in public space that should not be
challenged by swear words.
The idea that swearing at police deserves criminal punishment is constructed
through language
. Accordingly, an interdisciplinary approach to law,
which profits from critical linguistic theories, can unmask how language is used
to justify the criminalisation of persons and their behaviour (Coyle 2010: 19).
This article begins by providing an overview of laws
that criminalise swearing
in Australia. It theorises conceptions of power, authority and order, and
explains how these concepts pertain
to offensive language crimes. It then
examines judicial, media and political discourse to illustrate how swearing is
characterised
as an affront to a stratified order in which the public must show
deference to police. Finally, the article argues against using
the criminal law
to promote the maintenance of unequal power structures by punishing those who
swear at police. It highlights instances
where swear words have been used to
challenge unequal power relations between protesters and politicians, and
Indigenous Australians
and police officers.
Offensive language crimes
Various Australian states and territories have offensive
language crimes: laws that criminalise the use of offensive, indecent, obscene
or insulting words, in or near a public place. One example is
Summary Offences Act 1988
(NSW), which makes it an offence to ‘use
offensive language in or near, or within hearing from, a public place or a
The adjectives ‘offensive’, ‘indecent’,
‘obscene’, and so on, are not defined in legislation.
Instead, broad
definitions of these adjectives, many of which overlap, have been developed in
case law (Methven 2017a: 81‐87).
These definitions generally require
judicial officers to consider what would be offensive, indecent or obscene to
the ‘reasonable
person’ with regard to ‘contemporary community
standards’ (see, for example,
Del Vecchio v Couchy
McCormack v Langham
). The question of whether the crime of
using offensive language in NSW is a strict liability offence, or whether it
incorporates
(mental) elements remains unresolved
(McNamara and Quilter 2013: 555‐559).
Despite being characterised as ‘petty’ offences, offensive language
crimes can attract significant punishments ranging
from a fine of AU$660 in NSW
to up to six months’ imprisonment in the Northern Territory and in
Queensland (for example,
Summary Offences Act 2005
alternative to charging someone with offensive language, police officers in most
Australian jurisdictions can issue on‐the‐spot
fines (criminal
infringement notices (CINs), also known as penalty notices) for offensive,
obscene or indecent language (see, for
Criminal Procedure
Regulations
(NSW) reg 106 and sch 3;
Criminal Procedure Act 1986
; Methven 2014, 2017a: 110‐114).
The literature documents that offensive language CINs and charges are
‘part of an oppressive mechanism of control of Aboriginals’
1991: 184; see also Aboriginal Justice Advisory Council 1999; Brown et al. 2015;
Lennan 2006; Methven 2017a; NSW Ombudsman
2009; Walsh
2005; White 2002).
2009 study, the NSW Ombudsman found that, of those CINs issued for offensive
language to Aboriginal people between 2002 and
2007, 70 per cent of the language
used was directed at police only, and 23 per cent at police and others (NSW
Ombudsman 2009: 57).
In other words, the ‘victim’ of offensive
language is ‘almost invariably the police officer’ (White and
2005: 46). In the period April 2016‐March 2017, 2,770 adults were
proceeded against for offensive language in NSW, 1,609 (58
per cent) of whom
received a CIN for offensive language. Indigenous Australians accounted for 17
per cent of all adults and 22 per
cent of all juveniles proceeded against in NSW
for using offensive language (NSW Bureau of Crime Statistics and Research 2017),
comprising just three per cent of the NSW population (Australian Bureau
of Statistics 2017). The overwhelming majority of CINs and
charges for offensive
language are in response to the words ‘fuck’ and ‘cunt’
(NSW Anti‐Discrimination
Board 1982: 48‐49; NSW Ombudsman 2009:
CDA and criminal justice discourse
Having established that offensive language crimes are
commonly used by police in response to those who swear at or near them in public
space, this article considers how
naturalises the notion that
swearing at police disrespects authority and warrants criminal punishment. It
does so by using CDA as
its primary methodological tool with which to analyse a
number of offensive language case studies, focusing on the 2009 NSW Local
Police v Grech
and the 2007 Supreme Court of Western Australia case
Heanes v Herangi
. CDA is a form of discourse analysis which views
language as both shaping and shaped by society (Mayr and Simpson 2010: 51).
work from the premise that there is no neutral representation of
reality; reality is constructed and reconstructed through language
(Fowler 1987:
67). CDA scholarship aims to denaturalise ideologies and unequal power relations
that have become naturalised through
linguistic strategies (Pennycook 2001:
80‐81). There is no single method of ‘doing CDA’; scholars
have fashioned
their own approaches drawing from a range of linguistic ideas,
methods and tools (van Dijk 2001: 95; Wodak 2001: 4).
CDA has an ‘intense linguistic character’, relying on linguistic
categories like vocabulary, metaphor, transitivity,
agency and modality
(Martinez 2007: 127), many of which have been derived from Halliday’s
systemic‐functional grammar
(Halliday 1985: xvi–ii). The selection
of linguistic devices is a matter for each researcher to determine, based upon
relevance to the research question (Martinez 2007: 127). This article
focuses primarily on the linguistic techniques of metaphor,
collocation,
transitivity and presuppositions.
CDA can be distinguished from other critical linguistic approaches (for example,
Fowler et al. 1979) in that it identifies
as ‘the basic
unit of communication’ (Wodak 2001: 2). The article adopts
Fairclough’s (1989, 1992: 37‐61)
and van Leeuwen’s (2008)
conceptions of discourse, drawn from the more abstract approach to discourse
analysis of French philosopher
and historian Michel Foucault (1972, 1977,
1980a). Fairclough’s (1992) model of discourse consists of three
interconnected
dimensions:
practice (how texts are produced, interpreted and distributed); and
practice (how power relations and ideologies are reproduced, challenged or
transformed through discourse).
Fairclough has offered three corresponding descriptions of these dimensions:
description
— concerned with the formal properties of a text;
interpretation
—concerned with the relationship between text and
interaction (the processes of production and interpretation); and
explanation
— concerned with the relationship between interaction
and social context (Fairclough 1989: 26). Following this approach, this
considers not only the language of selected texts, including offensive language
case law, court transcripts, parliamentary
debates and newspaper articles, but
also their production, interpretation and relationship to society (Luke 2002:
In this model, discourse does not simply refer to an extended stretch of text;
it is also a way of signifying a particular social
practice from a particular
perspective (Fairclough 1989: 24; Wodak 2001: 66). Similarly, van Leeuwen
defines discourses as ‘socially
constructed ways of knowing some aspect of
reality’ (van Leeuwen 2009: 144). The phrase
criminal justice discourse
is used to refer to socially constructed ways of signifying reality in the
field of criminal justice. Criminal justice discourse is
not one consolidated,
homogeneous voice but a plurality of criminal justice perspectives. Consistent
with CDA’s aim to denaturalise
power structures, the article concentrates
on how ‘primary definers’ (Hogg and Brown 1998: 18‐19) in
criminal justice
debates—politicians, judicial officers, police officers,
lawyers and the media—represent swearing at police, and suggests
reality that they construct has been (or could be) resisted.
Conceptions of power, authority and order
The methodological approach undertaken in this study is
enhanced by a theorisation of three abstract concepts: ‘authority’,
‘order’ and ‘power.’ In criminal justice debates, each
of these words functions largely as a symbol, allowing
those who employ them to
supply part of their meaning (Cohen 1985: 15). Each term has a significant
meaning potential: a capacity
for ambiguous, heterogeneous, overlapping and
sometimes contradictory interpretations (Fairclough 1992: 75), and this
ambivalence
can be exploited by the user and the interpreter of the word in
The concept of ‘police power’ and its scope are by no means
straightforward. The law—in the form of statutory provisions
law rules—is a source and an ‘instrument’ of police power,
which is ‘at once complex and partial’
(Foucault 1980b: 141). In
NSW, for example, various powers, functions, discretions and responsibilities
of, and constraints on, police
are contained in the
Law Enforcement (Powers
and Responsibilities) Act 2002
(NSW) and the
Police Act 1990
among others. These statutes bestow upon police ‘powers’ to limit
and control others’ actions, but also contain
provisions that act as a
check on any irresponsible or excessive use of power.
The power of police is not only defined by statutes and common law rules (Dixon
1997; Hogg 1983: 13) but is also supplemented by
their ‘vast and largely
unscrutinised discretion’ (Hogg 1983: 6) to choose how, and whether or
not, to implement ‘the
law’. Police have at their disposal informal
and extra‐legal means to limit or restrain others’ behaviours and
liberty (McConville Sanders and Leng 1993: 112). These discretionary powers are
not ‘legal rules’ but ‘
rules’ (Neocleous
2006, emphasis in original): the choices that police make to either exercise, or
refrain from exercising,
their ability to caution, search, arrest, detain or
issue a CIN to an individual.
Alongside the laws and extra‐legal tools at police officers’
disposal, the concept of power as it pertains to police
officers can be
conceived of in a number of more abstract senses: power exercised by dominance
or coercion; power exercised routinely
by consent; and power as a form
of action or relation between people (Foucault 1977, 1980b; Gramsci 1971; Weber
1914). The first sense of power, power as
, has its origins in
sociologist and philosopher Max Weber’s (1914) study of authority in
modern and pre‐modern states.
Power in this sense resides within the State
and within other sovereign organisations, and
is power attained
by force (its imposition) or coercion. Power conceived of as dominance focuses
on the corrective power of the state
and its institutions (including the police
force) to secure the compliance of others, even in the face of resistance (Weber
cited in Mayr and Simpson 2010: 2).
The second sense of power, power exercised routinely
political theorist Antonio Gramsci’s concept of hegemony: the mechanisms
through which dominant groups in society
successfully persuade subordinate
groups to accept the former’s own moral, political and cultural values and
institutions.
These mechanisms include constructing alliances and integrating
(rather than purely dominating) subordinate classes through concessions
ideological means (Gramsci 1971 in Fairclough 1992: 92; Mayr and Simpson 2010:
3). The more that dominant individuals and institutions
such as Parliament, the
courts, and police build legitimacy by generating consent to their domination,
the less coercion they need
apply (see Cohen 1980: 102; Gramsci 1971; Mayr and
Simpson 2010: 3) In this second sense of power, authority is conceived of as
that has been accrued consensually, through naturalisation of its use over
time (Paletz and Harris 1975: 963). Linguists Mayr and
Simpson (2010: 2) have
acknowledged the integral role of language in legitimating power: power
‘needs to be seen as legitimate
by the people in order to be accepted and
this process of legitimation is generally expressed by means of language and
other communicative
systems’. This article draws on these ideas in
identifying how criminal justice discourse generates public consent to police
authority, by representing this unequal power relationship as natural, logical
and beneficial.
The final sense of power that informs the article is Foucault’s
theorisation of power as
theoretical model, power is not understood as a constraining or repressive force
(Foucault 1977, 1980a). Nor does Foucault
understand power ‘in an
instrumental sense, as something to be possessed and located at a central
point’ (Hogg 1983:
13); it is neither fixed nor objectively determined.
Rather, Foucault conceptualised power as productive: as a form of action or
relation between people that is negotiated and contested through interaction. As
Foucault stated: ‘In reality power means relations,
more‐or‐less organised, hierarchical, co‐ordinated cluster of
relations’ (Foucault 1980a: 198). Power is
a positive, productive force
with constitutive effects:
... [it] invests them [those who do not have it], is transmitted by them and
through them; it exerts pressure upon them, just as
they themselves, in their
struggle against it, resist the grip it has on them. This means that these
relations go right down into
the depths of society. They are not localised in
the relations between the state and its citizens (Foucault 1977: 27).
Foucault’s theorisation of power is useful in framing swearing at police
and the subsequent punishment of that act as a type
of power struggle. In this
power struggle, the appropriate way for a member of the public to behave around
and speak towards a police
officer is being negotiated and contested. From
Foucault’s theoretical analysis, we see police not simply as
authority. Rather, police powers and their authority
in public space are subject to contestation or resistance. Foucault advises
to understand power relations, ‘we should investigate the forms of
resistance and attempts made to dissociate these relations’
(1982: 780).
For Foucault, ‘forms of resistance’ are the ‘chemical catalyst
so as to bring to light power relations,
locate their position, and find out
their point of application and the methods used’ (1982: 780). Against this
theoretical
backdrop, the following section employs CDA to interrogate judicial,
media and political depictions of swearing at police. Case studies
swear words have been used to resist power are analysed in the final section of
the article to demonstrate how swearing
can be an important tool to contest
unjust, unequal power relations.
Case study:
Police v Grech
At around 4.40 pm on 5 November 2009, Adam Royds, a senior constable with the
City Central Commuter Crime Unit, was standing inside
the ticket barrier of
Bondi Junction railway station in Sydney, Australia. Royds was in full uniform
at the time. A young man, Henry
Grech (Grech), walked up to the gate next to the
ticket barrier and opened it. Royds asked Grech if he had a valid rail ticket.
replied that he was going to the toilet and he had just completed a
university exam. Royds told Grech that he was in a restricted
area and that he
needed a rail ticket. Grech stated: ‘I know my rights. I’m going to
take it to court’, to which
Royds replied: ‘Good. I’ll see you
there’. Royds said he would be sending Grech a ticket in the mail for
a restricted area without a ticket. According to Royds, Grech walked
away in a huff, gritting his teeth, clenching his jaw and shaking
his head. When
Grech was about five metres away, he uttered the word ‘prick’. The
following conversation took place:
Royds: What was that?
Grech: Nothing
Royds: You called me a prick. Grech: No, I said: ‘That’s
Royds: You’re a liar. They’ll be giving you a ticket for offensive
language as well. (Transcript of Proceedings 2010:
Grech’s offensive language charge was heard by Magistrate Robbie Williams
at Waverley Local Court in Sydney on 3 May 2010.
The police prosecutor submitted
that although the word ‘prick’ was at ‘the lower end of the
scale’ it was
nonetheless offensive in that ‘it was meant to raise
resentment and disgust and that it was calculated to annoy’. The
prosecutor stated that, although members of the community were on the platform
at the time, ‘the word used was offered for
offending the witness,
Constable Royd’ (Transcript of Proceedings 2010: 2).
Grech’s defence solicitor submitted that Grech did not say
‘prick’ with ‘any sexual overtone’, nor
‘referring to anything that would take it above and beyond the meaning of
a nasty person’. He further submitted
that police officers are more
accustomed to hearing offensive language and, while this might not justify the
use of the word ‘prick’
‘in a moral sense’, it was
relevant as a matter of law (Transcript of Proceedings 2010: 3‐4).
In delivering judgment on whether Grech had used offensive language, Magistrate
Williams asked what ‘a reasonable man’
(sic) would consider
offensive in the circumstances. His Honour noted the absence of any evidence
which suggested children or elderly
people were present when the word was used.
Magistrate Williams dismissed the charge, reasoning that ‘prick’ was
usage’ in the Australian community and that a reasonable
person would not be offended ‘due to its current everyday use’
(Transcript of Proceedings 2010: 6‐7).
Media and political responses
Members of the NSW Police Association, the media and
the NSW Parliament were quick to criticise Magistrate Williams’ decision
Police v Grech
. The Secretary of the NSW Police Association argued
that the legal system should not make police ‘second‐class
and ‘punching bags for society’ (Chambers 2010).
Conservative Australian media commentator Andrew Bolt (2010) lamented
increasingly contemptuous youth’ who were ‘so ready to give a gobful
to authority’. Bolt blamed the
courts for stripping respect from police
and compromising ‘Their authority on the streets’. He argued that
‘magistrates
and judges’ were guilty of double standards in
‘authorising an abuse of lowly police that they’d probably never
forgive if it were aimed at them’ (2010). When NSW Attorney‐General
John Hatzistergos was questioned in Parliament as
to why ‘verbal abuse of
police officers continue[s] to be treated as lesser offences by magistrates in
contradiction of community
expectations’, Hatzistergos responded (2010:
22649‐22650): ‘I believe that police officers are entitled to
As a community we must take
respect more seriously, and that includes ensuring that our children learn its
value at a very early stage of their lives’.
Political and media reactions to
case are examples of
recontextualisation
(van Leeuwen 2008, 2009) in criminal justice
discourse, in which swearing at police is transformed into the more intangible
‘disrespecting authority’. Recontextualisations can add
detail, transform persons and events, substitute elements, provide
legitimations, eliminate detail or shift focus (van Leeuwen 2008: vii). These
depictions of youth disrespecting ‘police authority’
and magistrates
as either supporting police (where magistrates convict an accused) or against
police (where they acquit an accused)
extend beyond
When NSW Magistrate Pat O’Shane, an Indigenous Australian magistrate,
dismissed an offensive language charge against 27‐year‐old
Richardson after he walked up to police patrolling The Rocks in Sydney,
‘gave them the finger’ and said ‘Youse
are fucked’,
media commentators questioned Richard’s acquittal. Commentator Ross
Eastgate lamented a supposed decline
in respect for police authority:
‘Whatever happened to good manners? ... the days when people were
temperate in their language,
were deferential to their elders and had respect
for the law and proper authority?’ (Eastgate 2005).
Politicians went further than this, questioning whether Magistrate O’Shane
should retain her office. Asked if Magistrate O’Shane
‘sacked’, then Liberal Opposition Member Peter Debnam replied:
‘I think the Attorney‐General does
need to start looking at the
performance, especially when you see ongoing campaigns such as hers’
(Australian Associated Press
2005). Then opposition police spokesman, Mick
Gallacher, said the decision ‘give[s] the green light to all those yobbos
there that they can simply abuse the cops, and the cops have got to cop it
on the chin’ (Australian Associated Press 2005).
Other Liberal opposition
members casted doubt on Magistrate O’Shane’s capacity to assume an
‘objective’ stance.
Malcolm Kerr stated ‘
of reasonable behaviour does not accord with what
the general public
expects on the streets’ (Kerr 2006: 22814, emphasis added) while
Shadow Attorney‐General, Andrew Tink, argued: ‘The
Pat O’Shane
decision on offensive language must not stand ... If we have to set out in a
bill what words are offensive for
some people on the bench to get the message,
let us do it’ (Tink 2005: 20628).
These reactions highlight a key assumption about offensive language crimes:
despite it not being written in Australian legislation
(Tasmania aside)
that swearing
is criminally offensive, members of the
police, the judiciary and the legislature presume that such crimes should punish
four‐letter
words. This article, however, focuses on the assumptions that
swear words disrespect or challenge police authority and, further,
criminal law is the appropriate means by which to enforce respect for police.
The following part continues to unpack these
assumptions by focusing on
parliamentary debates around the enactment of the
Summary Offences Act 1988
Representations of authority and power in political
In the lead up to the introduction of the
Offences Act 1988
(NSW), the NSW Liberal– National Party Coalition led
by soon‐to‐be Premier Nick Greiner had been embroiled in a
law‐and‐order campaign against the NSW Labor Party.
Coalition eventually ‘out‐bid’ the Labor party with its
promise to give ‘police full powers to deal with
behaviour’ which had allegedly been ‘taken away’ from police
by Labor’s repeal of the
Summary Offences Act 1970
Sydney Morning Herald
1988). The Coalition was duly elected in 1988. When
the Summary Offences Bill 1988 was debated in Parliament in June of that year,
both the Coalition and Labor parties agreed that more police with greater powers
were needed to clean up public streets, quell an
unruly youth and
re‐establish ‘order’ (Hogg and Brown 1998: 21). At the time,
Coalition member Bruce Jeffery argued
in the NSW Legislative Assembly that:
... the police have been hamstrung by their lack of power to deal with offensive
behaviour, and have been laughed out of court. If
a policeman lays a charge and
is dismissed, it does not look good for the police. If a policeman sees a group
of youngsters walking the streets, as I see quite
late at night when returning
not involved in crimes
such as stealing ...
Until police have adequate powers, there will be no respect for police on the
beat. The former Labor Government failed dismally to
take heed of the courts and
what people in the community were saying about police lacking powers to deal
with street crime ...
I reiterate that we must return to police the means to deal with offensive
behaviour in all circumstances. If police doubt their
authority, their position
is weakened and others will work on that weakness. The police need the backing
of the Parliament. (Jeffery
1988: 1154)
An analysis of linguistic techniques used in this excerpt—metaphors,
causality, collocation and transitivity—reveals
how discourse legitimises
police power and authority in public space. Jeffery
transformed
Leeuwen 2008: 17‐18) the crimes of offensive language and offensive
substituting
these offences with the phrase: ‘the means
to deal with offensive behaviour in all circumstances’, along with the
terms ‘power’ and ‘powers’. There is also a
collocation
of the words ‘police’,
‘power’ and ‘authority’, where collocation is the
routinised use of words
in association with each other (Fairclough 1989:
113‐115). This mirrors broader ‘law and order’ rhetoric, in
it is taken for granted that the words ‘police’ and
‘power’ should co‐occur (as in the common refrain
need more police with greater powers’: Hogg and Brown 1998:
Significantly, Jeffery conceptualised power in
metaphorical
terms: as a
physical object that police ‘have’, ‘need’ or
‘lack’. In the phrases ‘their
lack of power’,
‘police lacking powers’, ‘he needs power’ and
‘have adequate powers’, the
abstract noun ‘power’ occurs
as the object of the
transitive verbs
‘need’ and ‘have’—all verbs suggesting a physical
process (Lakoff and Johnson 2003:
26). In the final example, the presence of the
adjective ‘adequate’ before power depicts power as quantifiable.
and Johnson provide a similar illustration of how rising prices can be
viewed metaphorically as an entity via the noun ‘inflation’,
the examples: ‘
our standard of
living’ and ‘If there’s much
more inflation
we’ll never survive’ (Lakoff and Johnson 2003: 26, emphasis in
original). Viewing an abstract experience or concept
like rising prices or power
as an entity ‘allows us to refer to it, quantify it, identify a particular
aspect of it, and
perhaps even believe that we understand it’
(Lakoff and Johnson 2003: 26, emphasis in original). Through Jeffery’s
metaphorical representations, ‘power’ assumes
the character of
something that is concrete and identifiable: an object of which police need to
possess an ‘adequate’
amount. If that power is
‘lacking’, the obvious solution is that it must be
‘return[ed]’ to police. Jeffery’s
use of the transitive verb
‘return’ in the clause ‘we must
to police the
means to deal with offensive behaviour in all circumstances’ is also
ideologically significant in that to return
something is to restore a former
position. One can only have something returned to them if it previously belonged
to them. These
language choices naturalise the assumption that police inherently
need and possess power in public space.
Another aspect of Jeffery’s rhetoric is that it contains metaphors of
strength and weakness, evident in the phrases ‘police
by their lack of power’ and ‘[i]f police doubt
their authority, their position is
and others will work on that
’. These metaphors postulate not only power and authority
but also strength as inherent qualities of police. Significantly,
more concerned with the
, rather than the actuality, of police
strength: ‘it does not
for the police’ and
‘[police] have been
laughed out of court
’. Thus, an increase
in police powers is rationalised in terms of managing public perceptions and
expectations of police. Jeffery
did not specify the
clauses: we are not told who is
laughing police out of court, nor who perceives police as lacking power.
Instead, these ideas have been framed as objective truths.
An additional important ideological aspect of Jeffery’s characterisation
of the relationship between police, power and authority
(Fairclough 1989: 51). Many of his clauses begin with the subordinating
conjunctions ‘if’ and ‘until’, the
former being a
conjunction to express a condition and the latter, a conjunction to express
time. Jeffery represents cause and effect
as axiomatic in the examples:
a policeman lays a charge and it is dismissed, it does not look
good for the police’; ‘
a policeman sees a group of
youngsters walking the streets ... he needs power to be able to disperse
police doubt their authority, their position is
weakened’; and, ‘
police have adequate powers, there
will be no respect for police on the beat’. These representations of cause
and effect depict
the consequences of police lacking power—no respect,
more crime and the appearance of weakness—as obvious and inevitable.
The application of CDA to political rhetoric so far has demonstrated various
ways in which discourse can naturalise the ideas that
police possess power and
have authority in public space, and that such authority should not be
challenged. If one conceptualises
an abstract concept through a certain
metaphorical construction (for example, power is an object that police possess),
and that metaphor
is accepted as logical or natural, the metaphor can downplay
or hide other aspects of that concept: ‘To operate only in terms
consistent set of metaphors is to hide many aspects of reality’ (Lakoff
and Johnson 2003: 221). An important ideological
effect of conceptualising power
as an object that police possess is that such a metaphor suppresses alternative
ways of conceiving
power in relation to police. One alternative conception is
Foucault’s theorisation of power as constitutive: as a fluid form
action or relation between people, which is negotiated and contested in
interaction. For Foucault, relationships of power are
‘strategic games
between liberties’ (Foucault 1988: 19) where these relationships are
unstable and reversible, forms
of power are heterogeneous, and positions of
relative power are available not just to police, but to
discussion, see Hindess 1996: 98‐102). Within this framework, police could
not ‘lack’ power and one could not
‘return’ power to
police, for power could not be possessed to begin with. However,
Foucault’s fluid conceptualisation
of power would not serve the
ideological purpose of depicting a stratified public order in which police
possess power and command
Whose authority?
An important linguistic technique that depicts
authority as something police have by virtue of their occupation is the use of
presuppositions
, propositions that purport to tell people what they
already know. Because of this, presuppositions are an ‘effective means
manipulating audiences’ (Fairclough 1989: 153). An example of a
presupposition is Jeffery’s phrase ‘
authority’ in
‘[i]f police doubt
authority, their position is
weakened’. Here, the possessive pronoun ‘their’ cues the
operation of a presupposition
(Fairclough 1989: 153). The notion that police
have authority and are authority figures is also central to the reasoning in the
Supreme Court of Western Australia case
Heanes v Herangi
which Johnson J upheld the defendant’s disorderly conduct charge. This
case is doctrinally significant in that it
has been cited as authority for the
principle that disrespecting police authority, by means that include the use of
swear words,
may provide grounds for an offensive language conviction (Brown et
al. 2015: 526).
Case study:
Heanes v Herangi
In that case, Heanes’s charge of disorderly conduct by using offensive
language centred on his words, spoken to Constable Herangi:
‘I am on the
phone—I am on the phone. I’m fucking talking to my dad. Fuck
off’. Heanes had used this language
‘outside the Myers [department]
store’ in inner‐city Perth during ‘school holidays and there
were several
children around within hearing distance of the accused’.
Constable Herangi also stated: ‘There were a few people standing
around’, maybe 15 people in the vicinity’ (Transcript of Proceedings
In the hearing of Heanes’s appeal against his conviction in the Supreme
Court of WA, counsel for the respondent, Mr Lochore,
represented the
defendant’s words, ‘I am on the phone—I am on the phone.
I’m fucking talking to my dad. Fuck
off’, as ‘a challenge to
the authority’, a recontextualisation in which Lochore transformed
Constable Herangi by
substituting him with the abstract noun ‘the
authority’ (Transcript of Proceedings 2007: 69):
Lochore: ... there’s this appreciation of a physical sense of threat as
well as threat engendered in the words used to the
police officers. So
it’s a challenge to
the authority
in that sense. ...
Justice Johnson: It
challenges authority
, that was the word you used
before? Lochore: Yes, that’s what I’m building up to, your Honour
(emphasis added).
In the Supreme Court judgment, Johnson J adopted Lochore’s
characterisation of Heanes’s words and the context in which
used. Her Honour stated that a ‘theme’ in a number of offensive
language cases where police were involved is
that language that challenges
‘the authority of police officers’ is likely to be considered
disorderly because of its
potential ‘to incite others to involve
themselves in challenging the authority of the officers’ (
: 214). Further, Johnson J stated that ‘words which ordinary
decent‐minded people may consider acceptable if spoken in
private in very
limited circumstances, may not be considered acceptable if said ... to an
authority figure
’ (218, emphasis added).
In these extracts from
Heanes v Herangi
, swearing at police officers has
been transformed (van Leeuwen 2008) into the more abstract notions of
challenging authority or ‘inciting
others’ to challenge authority.
Like Jeffery’s political rhetoric above, there is also a collocation of
the words ‘challenge’
and ‘authority’;
‘disrespect’ and ‘authority’; and ‘respect’
and ‘police’.
This authority is not qualified; neither Johnson J nor
counsel for the respondent explained who or what police have authority
streets, those who occupy public space, the entire populace? Nor
did they outline possible constraints on police authority, including
legislation and at common law. They adopt and further entrench the presumptions
that police should go unchallenged in public
space, and that swearing at police
challenges their authority and warrants criminal sanction. With repetition in
criminal justice
discourse, these opinions become established truths, what Hogg
and Brown (1998: 18) call ‘law and order commonsense’.
This is not to ignore counter‐voices, like Gummow and Hayne JJ who argued
in the High Court of Australia that: ‘By their
training and temperament
police officers must be expected to resist the sting of insults directed to
Coleman v Power
Justice Harper similarly
stated in the Supreme Court of Victoria: ‘It is no offence simply to be
angry with the authorities
(including, of course, judicial authority)’
Ferguson v Walkley
2008: 303). Yet, against the backdrop of the
thousands of adults and children proceeded against each year for offensive
language in
NSW alone (NSW Bureau of Crime Statistics and Research 2017, see
above, and in light of the literature which suggests that, in many
language incidents, the addressee of the language is the police officer), it is
clear that these alternative judicial opinions
are having little impact on
everyday police practice. Further, while these judges call on police officers to
be more robust in the
face of insults, their language choices still reinforce
the assumptions that swear words ‘sting’ police and, also, that
police have authority—and, indeed, are ‘
authorities’—in public space.
Swearing, authority and discourse
Power gives a speaker the license to do things that the
powerless cannot do. Dominance legitimizes invasions of personal space, touching
others, engaging in eye contact, and addressing subordinates by their personal
names rather than by
title ... the boss can tell a dirty joke and the workers will laugh, but not
vice versa. (Jay 2000: 163)
This article has examined representations of the relationship between swearing,
power and authority in criminal justice discourse.
It has argued that the
dominant discourse in relation to offensive language crimes postulates police
officers as authority figures
and represents challenging that authority, by
using ‘four‐letter words’, as criminal. This position
one of the myriad pragmatic functions of swear words: as a verbal
tool available to marginalised individuals or groups to oppose
‘established structures of power’ (Eble 1996: 124; Jay 2000). Like
slang, profanities can function as an expression of
opposition, ‘showing a
range of attitudes from slight irreverence to downright subversiveness’
(Eble 1996: 124). Below,
the article examines situations where swear words have
been used to challenge unequal power relations, particularly between protesters
and politicians; and Indigenous Australians and police officers. It contests the
notion that the criminal law should promote the
maintenance of unequal power
structures by punishing swearing at police in public space.
Case studies:
Cohen v California
A noteworthy case in which swear words were used to challenge political power is
the 1971 United States (US) Supreme Court case
Cohen v California.
appellant, Paul Robert Cohen, had worn a jacket bearing the phrase ‘Fuck
the Draft’ when entering the Los Angeles
(LA) County Courthouse. Cohen did
so to protest US involvement in the Vietnam/American War and, principally, the
government’s
use of military conscription. After entering the courthouse,
Cohen removed the jacket and draped it over his arm. He was subsequently
arrested and eventually convicted and sentenced in the LA Municipal Court to 30
days’ imprisonment for violating a Californian
crime of malicious and
wilful disruption of the peace by offensive conduct.
Cohen appealed his conviction to the Court of Appeal of California, and then to
the US Supreme Court. The Supreme Court quashed his
conviction on the basis
that, consistent with the First and Fourteenth Amendments to the
Constitution
, the State may not ‘make the simple public display
... of this single four‐letter expletive a criminal offense’.
Justice Harland reasoned that (
Cohen v California
To many, the immediate consequence of this freedom [of expression] may often
appear to be only verbal tumult, discord, and even offensive
utterance ... That
the air may at times seem filled with verbal cacophony is, in this sense not a
sign of weakness but of strength.
An examination of freedom of expression as it pertains to swearing is beyond the
scope of this article (for discussion, see Fairman
2006, 2009; Gray 2012).
However, the example has been included here to highlight how the US
Supreme Court, like Jeffery’s second reading speech extracted
above, drew
on metaphors of strength and weakness, but to an altogether different end.
Rather than characterise challenges to established
power structures via
four‐letter words as criminally offensive, Harland J suggested that a
strong society is one that allows
for, and even protects, dissident voices.
A more contemporary example in which swear words were used to challenge those in
power was when ‘peace activist’ Danny
Lim was standing on a busy
Sydney road one morning in August 2015, wearing a sandwich board which displayed
the following message:
PEACE SMILE PEOPLE CAN CHANGE “TONY YOU
LIAR, HEARTLESS, CRUEL PEACE BE WITH YOU
The sign was directed at then Australian Prime Minister Tony Abbott. Although
initially convicted of offensive behaviour in the Local
Court proceedings,
District Court Judge Scotting overturned Lim’s conviction. Judge Scotting
noted that, due to the presence
of the apostrophe in
N’T’ as well as the strike through the
‘U’, the appellant had used the word equivocally, possibly as a play
on words for ‘can’t’.
Even if Lim had used the
word ‘cunt’ in the sign, the judge reasoned that this word was
‘not necessarily offensive’
and that criticism of politicians is an
‘essential and accepted part of any democracy’ (
, para 46‐48).
These examples highlight how swear words can function to challenge existing
power structures and those in powerful positions. Indeed,
the facts of many
offensive language cases can be (re)conceptualised in terms of acknowledgement
of, and resistance to, unequal power
relations, whether it be: a man uttering an
insult towards police in anticipation of ‘persecut[ion]’ in Lismore,
McCormack v Langham
); an Indigenous Australian’s resistance
to British invasion and occupation of Aboriginal land in Redfern, 1992
Conners v Craigie
); a homeless Indigenous woman’s rejection of
police power and control in Brisbane, 2000 (
Del Vecchio v Couchy
young man’s refusal to comply with police directions in Perth, 2006
Heanes v Herangi
); a man’s anger at being bitten by a police dog
in Sydney, 2007 (
Jolly v The Queen
); a young man’s frustration over
receiving punishment for a minor transport offence in Bondi, 2010 (
); or same‐sex marriage advocates protesting against the views of
‘traditional marriage’ advocates in Sydney, 2016
Perceiving these case facts through the lens of power relations raises the
question of whether resistance to those in power, or political
expressed through swear words, should be considered criminal? If we answer this
question in the affirmative, we accept
that a key function of offensive language
crimes is to enforce police and the state’s authority over others; and to
opposition to such authority. We reject the proposition advanced by
Harlan J in
Cohen v California
that a strong society is one that allows
for, and even protects, dissident voices. And we promote a system whereby
determine what is offensive according to their interests,
overlooking the legal framing of offensive language crimes as prohibiting
hypothetical
offence occasioned to the fictitious ‘reasonable
bystander’. In short, we accept the proposition that to challenge unequal
power relations within a public setting warrants criminal punishment.
Police swearing at members of the public
A corollary of this proposition is that, where police
swear at or otherwise insult those with relatively less power, the criminal
does not intervene. The blindness of the criminal justice system towards
injustices perpetrated
police and the state towards Indigenous
Australians is routine in Australia. The Aboriginal Legal Services (NSW/ACT)
regularly receives
complaints about swearing and racist language used by police
towards Indigenous people, a problem also identified by the Australian
Government’s Royal Commission into Aboriginal Deaths in Custody
(Australian Human Rights Commission 1996). In 1992, an ABC
documentary
filmed police arresting and charging an Indigenous man in Redfern for
swearing; the same police swore towards members of the public
without reprimand
(Brockie 1992).
The hypocrisy of police taking offence to swear words was further highlighted in
the 2016 coronial inquest into the death of Ms Dhu,
a young Indigenous woman. Ms
Dhu had died in August 2014 at the age of 22, after being taken into police
custody for unpaid fines
(many of which were for swearing at police) (Fogliani
2016). Shift supervisor Sergeant Rick Bond gave evidence at the inquest into
death that he had whispered into Ms Dhu’s ear: ‘You’re a
fuckin’ junkie’. He also said it was normal
practice in the Pilbara
for police officers to use the word ‘fuck’ to detainees (Wahlquist
2016). Ms Dhu’s fines
for swearing at police, her callous treatment in
police custody (she was mocked, ignored, dismissed and laughed at by police as
symptoms progressively worsened until she died of overwhelming stapphyloccal
infection),
and her subsequent death,
highlight the gross hypocrisy of a system that punishes members of the public
who swear at police, while police themselves swear
with impunity.
This article has examined the central place of
discourse in naturalising ideas about police power, authority and order; in
positioning
police at the apex of public space; and in sustaining unequal power
relations between police and (other) members of the public. Discursive
constructions of swearing at police in the criminal law have helped entrench a
number of ‘common sense’ assumptions including
that: police officers
inherently possess authority; police officers deserve respect in public space;
current unequal social structures
are desirable and worth preserving; and swear
words are undesirable because they subvert or destabilise this order. Within
this ‘order’,
police officers who swear at or otherwise disrespect
and degrade members of the public escape punishment. This research advances
strong argument that the maintenance of unequal—and often
unjust—power relations is not an appropriate end of criminal
punishment.
Its findings also point to a need to reconsider whether swearing at police
should remain a criminal offence.
Correspondence:
Dr Elyse Methven, Lecturer, Faculty of Law, University of
Technology Sydney, Broadway NSW 2007, Australia. Email:
elyse.methven@uts.edu.au
This editorial was written in response to the 2009
NSW Local Court case of
Police v Grech
, an offensive language case
examined in this article.
Crimes Act 1900
Summary Offences Act 1988
Summary Offences Act 1978
(NT) ss 47 and 53;
Offences Act 1966
Summary Offences Act 2005
Summary Offences Act 1953
Police Offences Act 1935
Police Offences Act 1935
makes it a crime
to ‘curse or swear’ in any public place, or within the hearing of
any person in that place.
In Australia, the Liberal–National Coalition is a
predominantly conservative party.
As a Queensland police officer said in 2008: ‘I can get
called names all day and I don’t arrest. But if members of the
public hear
someone swearing at me, then I arrest’ (Queensland Crime and Misconduct
Commission 2008: 116). Similarly, a NSW
police officer stated in 2009:
‘I’m not going to let anyone walk down the street and just swear at
me when I’m
off duty or on duty or whatever ... people see you and they
expect you to take action ... there’s expectations
... that you will enforce these minor things’ (NSW Ombudsman 2009:
Constable Herangi alleged that, approximately five minutes prior
to the defendant swearing at him, Heanes had bumped into the right
Constable Herangi’s partner, Constable Paul, with his right elbow, then
‘continued walking on’. Heanes gave
evidence that he had walked
between the two officers without bumping into them. It was this
‘incident’ that compelled
Constables Herangi and Paul to pursue
Heanes (Transcript of Proceedings 2006: 3‐5).
This echoes the sentiment in the English Divisional Court case
DPP v Orum:
‘words and behaviour with which police officers will be
wearily familiar will have little emotional impact on them save that
Relevantly, Amendment 1 of the Bill of Rights provides that
‘Congress shall make no law respecting an establishment of religion,
prohibiting the free exercise thereof; or abridging the freedom of speech, or of
the press; or the right of the people peaceably
to assemble, and to petition the
government for a redress of grievances’. Cohen’s words did not fall
into the US’s
‘fighting words’ exception of free speech
protection because there was no direct, provocative personal insult. The Court
also held it was not an obscenity case, as the use of the words was not
‘in some significant way, erotic’ (see Fairman
1733‐1736).
The relationship between swearing, power and freedom of speech
would benefit from further inquiry in the Australian context with regards
implied freedom of political communication in the Australian
Constitution
Anthony Gray (2012) has written on this subject, although not with regards to
the legitimacy of punishing challenges to or subversion
‘authority’; these aspects have been examined in a US context in
Robbins (2008).
The prosecution case was that the appellant had inverted a
rounded capital A in the word to refer to the Prime Minister as a
She was twice taken to Hedland Health Campus, and both times
returned to the police station. Officers and doctors testified they thought
Dhu was faking being sick and that she was merely suffering from drug withdrawal
symptoms (Wahlquist 2016).
Aboriginal Justice Advisory Council (1999)
Policing Public Order: Offensive Language and Behaviour, the Impact on
Aboriginal People
. Sydney, New South Wales.
Australian Associated Press
(2005) O’Shane faces fresh
criticism. 18 October.
Australian Bureau of Statistics (2017) Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander
population data summary. Available at
http://www.abs.gov.au/ausstats/abs@.nsf/Lookup/by%20Subject/2071.0~2016~Main%2
0Features~Aboriginal%20and%20Torres%20Strait%20Islander%20Population%20Data%
20Summary~10 (accessed 16 August 2017).
Australian Human Rights
Commission (1996)
Indigenous Deaths in Custody: A Report prepared by the
Office of the Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander Social Justice Commissioner
for the Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander Commission
. Available at
ights.gov.au/our‐
work/aboriginal‐and‐torres‐strait‐islander‐social‐
justice/publications/indigenous‐deaths‐custody
(accessed 20 November
Australian Law Reform Commission (ALRC) (2017) Incarceration rates of Aboriginal
and Torres Strait Islander Peoples.
Discussion Paper
84. Available at
https://www.al
au/publications
‐incarceration‐rates‐dp84
(accessed 28
August 2017).
Bolt A (2010) Judging by Magistrate’s words, this is a swearing‐in
, 5 May: 30.
Brockie J (1992)
. ABC Television.
Brown D, Farrier D, McNamara L, Steel A, Grewcock M, Quilter J and Schwartz M
Criminal Laws: Materials and Commentary on Criminal Law and Process of
New South Wales
Annandale, New South Wales: The Federation Press.
(2010) Judge condones student calling police a ‘prick’.
Available at
http://www.dailytelegraph.com.au/news/nsw/judge
‐condones‐abuse‐of‐
police/story‐e6freuzi‐1225861773410 (accessed 17 November
Cohen A (1985)
The Symbolic Construction of
. Chichester: Ellis Horwood.
Cohen P (1980) Policing the working‐class city. In Fitzgerald M, McLennan
G and Pawson J (eds)
Crime and Society: Readings in History
: 95‐108. London: Routledge.
Coyle M (2010) Notes on the study of language: Towards critical race
criminology.
Western Criminology Review
Dixon D (1997)
Law in Policing: Legal Regulation and Police Practices
New York: Clarendon Press.
Eastgate R (2005) A manner of speaking.
The Gold Coast Bulletin
October: 23.
Eble C (1996)
Slang & Sociability: In‐group Language Among
College Students
. Chapel Hill, North Carolina: The University of North
Carolina Press.
Fairclough N (1989)
Language and Power
. London: Longman.
Fairclough N (1992)
Discourse and Social Change
. Cambridge,
Massachusetts: Polity Press. Fairman C (2006) Fuck.
Cardozo Law Review
28(4): 1711‐1772.
Fairman C (2009)
Fuck: Word Taboo and Protecting our First Amendment
. Naperville, Illinois: Sourcebooks.
Fogliani R (2016)
Inquest into the Death of Julieka Ivanna Dhu
(11020‐14).
Perth, Western Australia: State Coroner of Western
Foucault M (1972)
The Archaeology of Knowledge.
London: Tavistock
Publications. Foucault M (1977)
Discipline and Punish: The Birth of the
. London: Allen Lane.
Foucault M (1980a)
Language, Counter‐Memory, Practice: Selected
Essays and Interviews
. Ithica, New York: Cornell University Press.
Foucault M (1980b) Gordon C (ed.)
Power/Knowledge: Selected
Interviews and Other Writings
New York: Pantheon.
Foucault M (1982) The subject and power.
Critical Inquiry
8(4): 777‐795.
Foucault M (1988) The ethics of care for the self as a practice of freedom. In
Bernauer J and Rasmussen D (eds)
The Final Foucault
Cambridge, Massachusetts: MIT Press.
Fowler R (1987) The
intervention of the media in the reproduction of power. In Zavala I, van Dijk T
and Díaz‐Diocaretz
Approaches to Discourse, Poetics and
: 67‐80. Amsterdam, Netherlands: John Benjamins
Publishing.
Fowler R, Hodge B, Kress G and Trew T (1979)
Language and Control
London: Routledge. Gramsci A (1971) Hoare Q and Nowell‐Smith G (eds)
Selections from the Prison Notebooks of
Antonio Gramsci
. New York: International Publishers.
Gray A (2012) Bloody censorship: Swearing and freedom of speech.
Alternative Law Journal
37(1): 37‐40. DOI: 10.1177/1037969X1203700109.
An Introduction to Functional Grammar
. Baltimore, Maryland:
Arnold. Hatzistergos J (2010) (Attorney‐General) Questions without notice,
Hansard, Legislative
Council, New South Wales Parliament, 13 May:
22649‐22650.
Hindess B (1996)
Discourses of Power: From
Hobbes to Foucault
. Oxford, England: John Wiley & Sons.
Hogg R (1983) Perspectives on the criminal justice system. In Findlay M,
Egger S and Sutton J (eds)
Issues in Criminal Justice Administration
3‐19. Sydney, New South Wales: Allen & Unwin.
Hogg R and Brown D (1998)
Rethinking Law and Order
. Annandale, New
South Wales: Pluto Press.
Jay T (2000)
Why We Curse: A Neuro‐Psycho‐Social Theory of
. Philadelphia, Pennsylvania: John Benjamins Publishing.
Jeffery B (1988) Second reading speech, Summary Offences Bill 1988. Hansard,
Legislative Assembly, New South Wales Parliament, 1
June: 1154.
Kerr M (2006) Second reading speech,
Appropriation (Budget Variations) Bill
. Hansard, Legislative Assembly, New South Wales Parliament, 9 May:
Lakoff G and Johnson M (2003)
Metaphors We Live By
, revised edn. Chicago,
Illinois: The University of Chicago Press.
Lennan J (2006) The ‘Janus faces’ of offensive language laws:
UTS Law Review
(2002) Beyond science and ideology critique: Developments in critical discourse
Annual Review of Applied Linguistics
22: 96‐110. DOI:
10.1017/S0267190502000053.
Martínez DF (2007) From theory to method: A methodological approach
within critical discourse analysis.
Critical Discourse Studies
125‐140. DOI: 10.1080/17405900701464790.
Mayr A and Simpson
Language and Power: A Resource Book for Students
McConville M, Sanders A and Leng R (1993)
The Case for the Prosecution:
Police Suspects and the Construction of Criminality
. London: Routledge.
McNamara L and Quilter J (2013) Time to define the cornerstone of public order
legislation: The elements of offensive conduct and
language under the
Offences Act 1988
University of New South Wales Law
36(2): 534‐562.
McNamara L and Quilter J (2014) Turning the spotlight on
‘offensiveness’ as a basis for criminal liability.
Alternative
Law Journal
Methven E (2014) A very expensive lesson: Counting the costs of
penalty notice for anti‐social behaviour.
Current Issues in Criminal
26(2): 249‐257.
Methven E (2017a) Dirty talk: A critical discourse analysis of offensive
language crimes.
Unpublished PhD thesis, University of Technology Sydney.
E (2017b) Offensive language crimes in law, media, and popular culture.
Oxford Research Encyclopedia of Criminology and Criminal Justice
Available from:
http://criminology.oxfordre.com/view/10.1093/acrefore/9780190264079.001.0001/acref
ore‐9780190264079‐e‐281 (accessed 23 August 2017).
Neocleous M (2006) From social to national security: On the fabrication of
economic order.
Security Dialogue
37(3): 363‐384.
DOI: 10.1177/0967010606069061.
New South Wales Anti‐Discrimination Board (1982)
Study of Street
Offences by Aborigines
(Report). Sydney, New South Wales: Anti‐Discrimination Board.
New South Wales Bureau of Crime Statistics and Research (BOCSAR) (2017)
Customised dataset: Persons of interest (POIs) proceeded
against by the NSW
Police Force for offensive language or conduct offences. Sydney, New South
Wales: BOCSAR.
New South Wales Law Reform Commission (2012)
Penalty Notices
. Sydney, New
South Wales: Law Reform Commission.
New South Wales Ombudsman
Review of the impact of Criminal Infringement Notices on Aboriginal
communities
. Sydney, New South Wales: Office of the Ombudsman.
Northern Territory Parliamentary Debates (2014) Legislative
Paletz D and Harris W (1975) Four‐letter threats
to authority.
The Journal of Politics
37(4): 955‐ 979.
Pennycook A (2001)
Critical Applied Linguistics: A Critical
Introduction
. New Jersey: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.
Queensland Crime and Misconduct Commission (2008)
Policing Public Order: A
Review of the Public Nuisance Offence
(Report). Brisbane, Queensland.
Robbins I (2008) Digitus impudicus: The middle finger and the law.
41(4): 1403‐1485.
The Sydney Morning
(1988) Libs’ tough stand on crime. 23 February: 1.
Tink A (2005) (Shadow Attorney General) Second reading speech,
Law Enforcement
Legislation Amendment (Public Safety) Bill 2005
Hansard. Legislative
Assembly, New South Wales Parliament, 15 December:
Transcript of Proceedings (2006)
Jonathan Stephen
Heanes v Western Australia Police Force
Perth Magistrates’ Court, PE 39693 of 2006, Magistrate
Transcript of Proceedings (2007)
Jonathan Stephen
Heanes v Western Australia Police Force
Supreme Court of Western Australia, SJA 1111 of 2006, Johnson J.
Transcript of Proceedings (2010)
Police v Grech
. Waverley Local Court,
Magistrate Williams. van Dijk T (2001) Multidisciplinary CDA: A plea for
diversity. In Wodak R and Meyer M
Methods of Critical
Discourse Analysis
: 95‐120. London: Sage.
van Leeuwen T (2008)
Discourse and Practice: New Tools for Critical
Discourse Analysis
. New York: Oxford University Press.
van Leeuwen T (2009) Discourse as the recontextualization of social practice:
A guide. In Wodak R and Meyer M (eds)
Methods of Critical Discourse
: 144‐161. London: Sage.
Wahlquist C (2016) Ms Dhu inquest: Officer was told of her condition six hours
before she died.
The Guardian
, 22 March. Available at https
.theguardian.com/australia‐
news/2016/mar/22/ms‐dhu‐inquest‐officer‐was‐told‐of‐her‐condition‐six‐hours‐before‐
she‐died (accessed 3 July 2016).
Walsh T (2005) Won’t pay or can’t pay‐exploring the use of
fines as a sentencing alternative for public nuisance
Queensland.
Current Issues in Criminal Justice
17(2): 217‐
Weber M (1914) Roth G and Wittich C (eds)
Economy and
Society: An Outline of Interpretive Sociology
, 1978 edn. Berkeley,
California: University of California Press.
White R (2002) Indigenous young Australians, criminal justice and offensive
Journal of Youth Studies
5(1): 21‐34. DOI:
10.1080/13676260120111742.
White R and Perrone S (2005)
and Social Control
, 2nd edn. Melbourne, Victoria: Oxford University
Wodak R (2001) What CDA is about: A summary of its history, important
concepts and its developments. In Wodak R and Meyer M (eds)
Critical Discourse Analysis
: 1‐14. London: Sage.
Wootten H (1991)
Report of the Inquiry into the Death of David John
. Royal Commission into Aboriginal Deaths in Custody. Canberra:
Australian Government Publishing Service.
Cohen v California
[1971] USSC 114
Coleman v Power
[2004] HCA 39
(2004) 220 CLR 1.
Conners v Craigie
(Unreported, Supreme Court of NSW, McInerney J, 5
July 1993).
Del Vecchio v Couchy
[2002] QCA 9.
[1989] 1 WLR 88.
Ferguson v Walkley
[2008] VSC 7
(2008) 17 VR 647.
Heanes v Herangi
[2007] WASC 175
(2007) 175 A Crim R 175.
Jolly v The Queen
[2009] NSWDC 212.
Lim v The Queen
[2017] NSWDC 231.
McCormack v Langham
(Unreported, Supreme Court of NSW, Yeldham J, 5
August 1988).
Police v Grech
(Unreported, Waverley Local Court, Magistrate Williams, 3
Police v Holcombe
(Unreported, NSW Local Court,
Magistrate Bradd, 25 October 2016).
Legislative matters
Crimes Act 1900
Criminal Procedure Act 1986
Criminal Procedure Regulation 2010
Law Enforcement (Powers and Responsibilities) Act 2002
Police Act 1990
Police Offences Act 1935
Summary Offences Act 1953
Summary Offences Act 1966
Summary Offences Act 1978
Summary Offences Act 1988
Summary Offences Act 2005
United States
Constitution
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (1.09 MB)
PDF format (387 KB)
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter