URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/journals/PrivLawPRpr/2005/21.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 15:30:20
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Cases + Complaints
Nz V Commissioner Of Police
[2005] Nswadt 35
Cases + complaints
Rivera v Australian Broadcasting Corporation
[2005] FCA 661
Federal Court of Australia, Hill J, 25 May 2005
Application of Privacy Act to broadcasting activities of ABC -
Mr Rivera was a citizen of the USA who arrived in Australia some time in
2002. He was accused of murdering a female co-worker in
the USA prior to his
arrival in Australia and in September 2002 he was arrested following the issue
of a warrant under the
Extradition Act
. In December 2002 a magistrate
ordered that Mr Rivera was eligible to be extradited to the USA. Various
appeals ensued. In late
2003 Mr Rivera sought assistance from Kingsford Legal
Centre, a community legal centre associated with the University of New South
Wales. A television production company, Hilton Cordell, was filming the
activities of Kingsford Legal Centre at that time, including
aspects of the way
in which students working at the Centre were involved in Mr Rivera’s case.
In February 2004 Hilton Cordell
and the ABC entered into a contract under which
the ABC commissioned Hilton Cordell to produce a documentary series. In
2004 the ABC broadcast an episode of the series produced by Hilton
Cordell featuring Kingsford Legal Centre and touching upon Mr
Mr Rivera claimed that the program broadcast by the ABC disclosed information
he had provided in confidence to 2 students working
at Kingsford Legal Centre on
the understanding that they were solicitors. Mr Rivera (who was not legally
represented) commenced
proceedings in the Federal Court of Australia and argued
that the ABC had contravened section 52 of the Trade Practices Act, breached
, defamed Mr Rivera and had breached an obligation of confidence.
The ABC moved to strike out the proceedings on the basis that the
Federal Court
had no jurisdiction to hear it.
Held, striking out the claim
1 The ABC was a “prescribed information provider” for the
purposes of the
Trade Practices Act
, and section 65A of that Act operated
so that section 52 did not apply to any representations made in a television
broadcast. Accordingly,
the court had no jurisdiction under the
Practices Act
2 The ABC is exempted from providing access to documents in relation to its
program material in response to a request made under the
Information Act
(Cth) by reason of Division 1 of
to Schedule 2
to that Act. Accordingly,
operated so as to
exempt any acts of practices of the ABC in respect of records in relation to its
program material, and the court
had no jurisdiction to grant relief under the
3 The court had no accrued jurisdiction to determine a claim in defamation or
for breach of an equitable obligation of confidence
because there was no federal
matter in respect of which the court had jurisdiction.
Fencott v Muller
(1982) 152 CLR 570
Stack v Coast Securities (No
[1983] HCA 36
(1983) 154 CLR 261
Comment. The application of the Act to the activities of agencies listed in
Division 1 of
to Schedule 2 to the FoI Act, such as the ABC, is very
complicated, and it appears that the Court’s attention was not drawn
all of the relevant provisions. The majority of the agencies appearing on the
list undertake commercial activities to some extent
(eg CSIRO commercialises its
research and development, and Australia Post provides postal and related
services on a commercial basis).
Section 7A provides that, despite s7(1)(c),
the Act applies to acts or practices of agencies listed in Division 1 of Part II
Schedule 2 to the FoI Act that relate to their commercial activities.
However, the effect of section 7A is to treat the agency as
“organisation” instead of as an “agency” (and therefore
subject to the NPPs instead of the IPPs) to the
extent their acts and practices
relate to their commercial activities and are not otherwise exempt.
Accordingly, the Court ought to have considered the effect of s7A, in
particular whether or not the acts and practices which were
the subject of Mr
Rivera’s complaints related to the “commercial activities” of
the ABC. No such analysis appears
in the judgment. If the commissioning and
broadcasting of the documentary series was not a “commercial
activity” of
the ABC, the operation of s7(1)(c) would not be affected by
s7A and the Act would not apply.
Alternatively, if the impugned activities did relate to the ABC’s
commercial activities, it would be necessary to consider whether
or not the ABC
had breached any obligations imposed on it as an “organisation”. In
this scenario, it would be necessary
to determine whether or not the conduct of
the ABC was exempted by reason of sections 7(1)(ee) and 7B(4). This exemption
to the conduct of a “media organisation” in the course of
journalism at a time when the media organisation is publicly
committed to
observe standards that (i) deal with privacy in the context of the activities of
a media organisation and (ii) have
been published in writing by the organisation
or a body representing a class of media organisations. It is interesting that
for the ABC argued that the Act did not apply as a result of section
7B(4), but Hill J dismissed that argument on the basis that
there was no
evidence before him of the standards to which the ABC was publicly committed
which dealt with privacy in the context
of the activities of a media
organisation. In fact, the ABC’s Editorial Policies, published at
http://www.abc.net.au/corp/edpol02.pdf
do address issues of privacy. Had those policies been in evidence, it seems
highly likely that even if the impugned activities
related to the ABC’s
commercial activities, section 7B(4) would have operated to exempt the ABC from
complying with the NPPs.
Patrick Gunning, Mallesons Stephen Jaques
NR and NP v Roads and Traffic Authority
[2004] NSWADT 276
NSW Administrative Decisions Tribunal, O’Connor P, 1 December 2004
Publicly available publication’ must be contemporaneous and have
nexus to subject person. Unactioned suppression request is
reason to believe
applicant would object to disclosure.
NR separated from his partner J, and moved house. He took one of two
vehicles registered in his name with him. NR later updated
his details with the
RTA, for both vehicles, noting the registration address as his new address, but
for the car left behind, the
garaging address remained the same. NR asked the
RTA to restrict his new address on their database, so that his address would not
be disclosed to anyone else. NR said the officer assured him no one other than
himself could obtain the address information.
The RTA did not suppress NR’s new address. NR was not informed of the
steps required in order to have his address suppressed
on their database.
At the time when annual registration of the vehicle fell due, the RTA sent
the papers to NR at his new address. J received insurance
papers from the
insurance company. J attended at the RTA and obtained a copy of the
registration renewal notice, which showed NR’s
new address.
NR alleged that J then came to his new address and assaulted his sister, NP.
NP sought compensation in relation to the assault, but
the Tribunal found there
was no causal link between the RTA’s disclosure and the assault, as there
was other evidence to suggest
that J already knew where NR lived.
Did the conduct involve “personal information”?
The respondent RTA argued that NR’s new address was not ‘personal
information’, on the grounds that it was information
contained in a
‘publicly available publication’ (s.4(3)(b) of the PPIP Act).
One basis for this was that the address was listed in the White Pages.
However the Tribunal found that as the address was listed
not against NR’s
name (or even that of his sister NP; it was in the name of NP’s de facto
partner, D) there was no sufficient
nexus with NR.
The second basis was that NR, as a licensed plumber, had his home address
listed as his registered business address on the website
of the licensing
authority, the Office of Fair Trading. However as the RTA did not produce
evidence demonstrating that this was
the case as at the date of the disclosure
by the RTA to J, O’Connor J rejected that argument.
He therefore found there had been a disclosure of NR’s “personal
information” to J by the RTA.
Was the disclosure authorised?
The respondent argued that the disclosure complied with IPP 11, in that it
was ‘directly related to the purpose for which it
was collected’,
and the agency ‘had no reason to believe that the individual concerned
would object to the disclosure’.
Given the Tribunal’s finding that NR had in fact asked for his address
not to be disclosed, the Tribunal did not accept that
the RTA had no reason to
believe NR would object to the disclosure, and therefore rejected the
RTA’s claim to have complied
with IPP 11.
As noted above, the claim for compensation by NP (the sister allegedly
assaulted) was denied on the basis of lacking a causal link.
Nonetheless
President O’Connor noted that it is possible that a “person
aggrieved” by conduct could be a person
other than the person who was the
subject of the personal information at issue, and thus a third party may be able
to seek a review
and a remedy for any breach.
A decision on other remedies was deferred, as was the RTA’s application
This case highlights the risk for agencies when staff make broad promises of
maintaining confidentiality or protecting privacy, and
then failing to note or
action a client’s request to have their personal information suppressed.
The failure to address a
client’s obvious concern could then render
unlawful any routine disclosures normally allowed under the “directly
Anna Johnston, Salinger & Co
GA v Department of Education and Training & NSW Police (No 2)
[2005] NSWADT 10
NSW Administrative Decisions Tribunal
Robinson JM, 20 January 2005
Who can be an “aggrieved person”? Concessions made at
planning meetings.
GA had been acting in a number of proceedings against these two respondent
agencies on behalf of himself, his three sons (GB, GC and
GD), and the
girlfriend of one of his sons (GE). The proceedings were originally commenced
by way of five separate applications
(i.e. one by each of the applicants).
During a series of planning meetings between December 2002 and February 2003,
the parties and the Tribunal identified three separate
components to these
applications:
• transaction 1: a conversation between police officers and the school
principal on 10 November 2000
• transaction 2: other, unspecific conversations between the school
principal and his staff
• transaction 3: a letter dated 23 October 2001 sent by the school
principal to a police officer
The Tribunal resolved to deal with transactions 1 and 3 first; both involved
both respondents. Transaction 2 was agreed at those
planning meetings to only
involve the respondent agency DET. The Tribunal has already held hearings in
relation to transactions
1 and 3, but final judgment has been reserved,
following two interim appeals requiring further consideration of some
In June 2004 the Tribunal made directions to commence the review of
‘transaction 2’. In July 2004 GA filed his submissions,
breaches by both respondent agencies. In September 2004 the Tribunal heard and
reserved its decision on whether or not
the ‘transaction 2’ issues
could be pursued against the respondent police.
Then later in September 2004 the Tribunal received a fax from GB, GC, GD and
GE, indicating that they did not wish their applications
to continue, and that
they had felt that way since June 2003. In October 2004 the Tribunal dismissed
the proceedings as they related
to GB, GC, GD and GE, and called for further
submissions on what remained of GA’s application in relation to
‘transaction
Who is a “person aggrieved”?
Only “a person aggrieved” may seek an internal review of conduct
under the PPIP Act, and subsequent review by the Tribunal.
GA asserted that he was “a person aggrieved” by the conduct of
both the respondents, in relation to their handling of
the personal information
of all five of the original applicants, and thus sought to continue the
proceedings with respect to all
the original conduct identified by the five
applications.
The Tribunal found that GA was limited to pursuing review of only that
conduct which he had previously identified as being his personal
application
(i.e. the conduct that affected his personal information), not the conduct
originally identified as being the subject
of the other four separate
applications by the other four parties. This was because in relation to the
latter four applications,
GA had only been acting as a “representative or
agent” of the persons aggrieved, and this role had now been stripped
him [23]. GA had not personally sought an internal review of any conduct other
than that which affected his personal information.
The Tribunal then reviewed the scope of the remaining application yet to be
heard – the ‘transaction 2’ matters.
The Tribunal determined
that GA could not seek to re-expand on the issues at the hearing, as he had
previously agreed to narrow
them at various planning meetings. Nor could he
seek to pursue allegations against the second respondent (NSW Police), given
Tribunal rulings on the issue.
Robinson JM noted “Applicants should not lightly be permitted to depart
from concessions (or directions) made at planning meetings”
The Tribunal found that the ‘transaction 2’ matters related to
conversations about GE, not GA, and thus not the subject
application. The Tribunal therefore dismissed the application as far as it
related to the ‘transaction 2’
The Tribunal then reviewed the remaining ‘transaction 3’ matters
(remitted following earlier appeals), and found that
three of the four pieces of
information at issue related to GE and one of the sons, not GA. Robinson JM set
a new hearing date to
hear submissions on the one remaining item which did
relate to GA.
Anna Johnston, Salinger & Co
KO & KP v Commissioner of Police, New South Wales Police
[2005] NSWADT
NSW Administrative Decisions Tribunal, Robinson JM, 4 February 2005
Exemption for Part 8A police complaints. Standing of father.
This matter is a re-determination of an earlier case (KO & KP v Police
[2004] NSWADT 4)
, following a successful appeal by the applicants (KO & KP v
[2004] NSWADTAP 21).
KO was arrested for smoking at a railway station. He made a complaint about
the police’s handling of his arrest, alleging,
amongst other things,
unlawful arrest, false imprisonment, and assault by police officers. In the
course of conducting the internal
investigation in that matter (known as a Part
8A investigation), the police disclosed information about KO to his employer.
KO subsequently
lost his job. KO’s father, KP, then financially supported
his son for a year.
KP lodged a privacy complaint (a request for an internal review) on behalf of
himself and his son KO, as “aggrieved persons”.
The inspector conducting an investigation into KO’s complaint about
police misconduct made a number of enquiries with KO’s
employer about
KO’s status as an employee, in order to establish his credibility as a
witness, since KO had alleged not only
police misconduct but also criminal
conduct by police officers.
The inspector told KO’s employer that he was investigating a complaint
made by KO about police conduct in relation to an incident
involving smoking at
a railway station. It appeared that the inspector also informed KO’s
employer that KO had been arrested
on the particular date.
KO’s employer subsequently checked his payroll records and discovered
that KO had claimed to have been at work on the day he
was actually arrested and
held in police custody throughout working hours. One week later KO was let go
from his job as a casual
trades assistant, although his employer claimed it was
because the work was complete, rather than because of the information about
arrest or the discovery about the payroll information.
However it was later discovered that KO had not claimed to have been working
on the day of his arrest; a combination of computer and
human error had caused
the payroll records to record the hours he had worked the previous day as if
they were the day of his arrest.
Scope of conduct at issue
KP’s internal review application mentioned IPPs 1, 2, 3, 4, 9, 10 and
11. However the only ‘conduct’ identified
in the application was
the transfer of information from a named police officer to KO’s
The Tribunal accepted the respondent’s view that the application did
not concern the collection or storage of the personal information.
Was the information “personal information”?
The Tribunal found the information at issue was not “personal
information” because it was information “arising out
of a complaint
Police Act 1990
” (s.4(h) of the PPIP Act).
Robinson JM found that the information was both “contained
within” the Part 8A complaint (the information about the arrest
“arose out of” the Part 8A complaint (the information that KO and KP
had complained about police misconduct)
[42]. Its disclosure was “a
necessary part of the investigation itself”, and thus “it plainly
of’ the said investigation” [42].
Thus the Tribunal found the information at issue was not “personal
information” as protected by the PPIP Act. The matter
was therefore
Although not necessary to determine the causation issue, the Tribunal noted
that he would have found that the alleged breach did not
result in the loss of
Standing of the father
Although not necessary to determine this matter, the Tribunal also noted that
it would have been mindful to find that KP had no standing
in the Tribunal. The
Tribunal noted that in order to have standing in the Tribunal, a person must
first have made a request for
an internal review. Although KP had lodged the
request for an internal review in this case, it was “on behalf of”
[54]. Thus only KO (or his agent) had standing to appear in the Tribunal,
not KP on his own behalf.
Perhaps not surprisingly, at the time of writing, this matter is pending a
further appeal.
In the earlier appeal decision about the Part 8A exemption from the
definition of “personal information”, KO & KP
NSWADTAP 21
, the Appeal Panel suggested at [30] that the information had to have
“resulted, proceeded or originated from a complaint made
The appeal may review whether or not the information that KO had been
arrested – a fact which in time preceded the making of
his Part 8A
complaint – could genuinely be described as having “resulted,
proceeded or originated from a complaint made
under Part 8A”, in the sense
of its original provenance being the Part 8A complaint.
Anna Johnston, Salinger & Co
NZ v Commissioner of Police [2005] NSWADT 35
NSW Administrative Decisions Tribunal, President O’Connor, 22 February
Dismissed because no internal review request lodged first. Jurisdiction
of Tribunal can include an agency’s inaction by refusing
to deal with a
request for an internal review.
Ms NZ lodged an application for review in the Tribunal prior to seeking an
internal review by the respondent police. Although the
respondent subsequently
launched an internal review, the Tribunal dismissed this application as lacking
President O’Connor noted that the Act requires a respondent agency
“to be given some opportunity to consider the matter
of concern and to
take action” [at para 8] before an applicant can take their complaint to
the Tribunal.
President O’Connor also noted that the particular trigger for
for internal
review, and that they be dissatisfied with the findings of the review or the
action taken by the agency. O’Connor
noted that “the action
taken” in this sense could include “inaction by refusing to deal
with the matter”,
and he referred to s.53(6) for support of his view [at
paras 7-8]. (Section 53(6) allows an applicant to approach the Tribunal if
than 60 days has lapsed since lodging their request for internal review with the
This statement would appear to address the confusion caused by previous cases
such as GA v Police
[2004] NSWADT 254
, in which Deputy President Hennessy
suggested that “the action taken” referred only to action taken
after findings have
been made by the respondent at the completion of an internal
review. Hennessy did not make any reference to the ’60 day rule’
her judgment; nor did she address the implication that respondents could thwart
every application by simply never conducting (or
at least never completing) an
internal review.
Anna Johnston, Salinger & Co
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
No downloadable files available
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter