URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/journals/IntJlRRuralRLawP/2021/1.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 15:03:48
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Moore, Cameron --- "The Myall Creek Massacre as Part of a Broader War: War and the Common Law of the Nineteenth Century" [2021] IntJlRRuralRLawP 1; (2021) 9(1) International Journal of Regional, Rural and Remote (RRR) Law & Policy, Article 1
International Journal of Regional, Rural and Remote (RRR)
Law and Policy
[ISSN: 1839-745X]
[Formerly known as International Journal of Rural Law and
The Myall Creek Massacre as Part of a Broader War:
War and the Common Law of the Nineteenth Century
Cameron Moore
This paper considers whether the Myall Creek Massacre of 1838 was a part of a
wider war according to the common law as it applied
at the time. It also
addresses the question of what the significance of this might be. It draws on
research into martial law in the
British Empire in the nineteenth century and
applies it to what is known of the violence between Aboriginal people and
colonists in New South Wales. It was not necessary for there to be
recognition of Aboriginal sovereignty for a war to exist. At the
time and still
today, the Crown can wage war against its own subjects when they are in open
revolt. The characterisation of Aboriginal
people as subjects rather than
foreign soldiers meant that the same rules of war did not apply, but not that
there was no war. The
significance of this is that we can consider the Myall
Creek Massacre as being a war crime within a broader war, and not an isolated
criminal action. This would suggest that Australia was taken by conquest, rather
than cession or settlement, which would have implications
for ongoing Aboriginal
sovereignty and continuation of Aboriginal law.
Introduction
The Myall Creek Massacre occurred on June 10
1838 at Myall Creek
Station, about an hour’s drive North West from Armidale, New South Wales.
The purpose of this paper is
to make a legal argument for the Myall Creek
Massacre being part of a broader war in the New England region during the
century. As well summarised by the National Museum of Australia on
its website, the Myall Creek Massacre followed an earlier massacre
of 40 to 50
Gamilaraay men at Waterloo Creek in January of that year. This occurred after a
series of deadly clashes between them
and police and settlers over many months.
It was at the hands of a NSW Mounted Police Expedition led by Major Nunn, who
site in reference to Napoleon’s last stand. A group of
Gamiliraay people had then sheltered on Henry Dangar’s Myall Creek
Station, receiving protection in exchange for working on the station. They
enjoyed warm friendship with the station hands, some of
them convicts. The
massacre occurred when a group of convict and free stockmen from another
property of Henry Dangar’s came
late in the day, tied up and slaughtered
approximately 28 people, men, women and children, old and young. The exceptional
of this episode is that seven men were hanged for it in Sydney in
December 1838.
It is important to
understand that these events occurred in a broader context of ongoing clashes
and massacres across the region,
on which Callum Clayton Dixon has compiled
accounts from contemporary records in
Surviving New England
Mugun & Gun
(2018), both published by the Anaiwan Language
Revival Program.
There are historical arguments for the existence of a war, and a strong
contrary sense in Australian society that there was no war
at all. The
Australian War Memorial does not accept it and the Myall Creek massacre memorial
has been defaced.
argues that, as a matter of the English law of the time as applicable in the
Colony of New South Wales, there was a war.
Part of the difficulty with arguing for the existence of a war is that
Captain Cook had claimed the eastern two thirds of this continent
for Britain.
English law did not acknowledge any conquest nor treaty of
Despite the single judge
decisions of
according to the NSW
Supreme Court decision in
Aboriginal people in
the Colony of New South Wales were then, as far as English law was concerned,
subjects of the Crown. They did
not have the status of being a foreign nation
nor, as individuals, enemy aliens. If one takes the view that war can only exist
nation states then there can have been no war in a legal sense. Whatever
fighting occurred was criminal activity and not resistance
to an invasion nor an
insurgency after the colonists occupied the land.
Even so, we are used to describing the conflicts in Afghanistan and Vietnam
as wars, as indeed they are or were. Australian and New
Zealand forces did not
fight against a foreign government in those wars but rather for a foreign
government against an insurgency
that conducted operations with a scale and
intensity and a level of organised command that amounted to a war. As a matter
international law of armed conflict today these wars are considered
non-international armed conflicts in accordance with the 1977
Geneva Conventions
The international law of the twentieth century may provide a guide but it
does not address the legal status of the conflict in this
region in the
nineteenth century. It is important to understand that then, and now, the Crown
may wage war against its own subjects
when they are in open
Dicey, perhaps the most
quoted English constitutional scholar, even while rejecting the concept of
martial law still recognised:
the common law right of the Crown and its servants to repel force by force in
the case of invasion, insurrection, riot or generally
of any violent resistance
to the law.
This occurred at the Eureka Stockade in 1854. The Victorian
Martial Law
Indemnity Act
followed the famous incident. On 3 December 1854, police and
soldiers had attacked a fortification built by miners protesting against
government taxes and the way they were collected. Twenty-two miners and four of
the troops died in the fighting.
With respect to the power to take this action, at clause II the
Nothing in this Act contained shall be construed to interfere with Her
Majesty’s Royal Prerogative or to abridge the right of
Her Majesty to do
any act warranted by law for the suppression of treason or rebellion.
Suppression of insurrection is what occurred here in the New England region
too. There is documentary evidence of widespread fighting
and loss of life,
white and black.
There are two
key difficulties with this argument however. The first is that the Myall Creek
massacre was prosecuted as a
This was a war crime, as
Mark Tedeschi and others have argued, and this paper will return to this point.
The other problem is that
the fighting that occurred in this region was not
covered by a declaration of martial law, as had occurred in other places in NSW
and the rest of the British
If there had been such a
declaration it would be more difficult to refute that there had been an
insurrection. In the absence of
such a declaration however it is still possible
to argue that there was an insurrection in terms of the common law of the time,
martial law declarations were made to cover exactly the same sorts of
violence in other parts of the colony. It is also important
to establish at this
point that a martial law declaration would not then in any way justify the
horrific brutality that occurred,
it just would have put much of it beyond the
is the key difference between what Henry Dangar’s
and Major Nunn and many
others did in this region
what occurred around Bathurst under martial law in
It was not the nature of
the violence but the jurisdiction of the courts to deal with it.
What is martial law then?
Martial law is a strange legal creature in that references to it date back
centuries yet it is still far from settled as to what martial
law actually is.
This is mainly because its nature meant that the courts did not ever get much of
a chance to clarify it, as it is
not the Crown’s prerogative to wage war
as such but actually a device to put military action beyond the jurisdiction of
courts. The
Petition of Right 1628
(Imp) purported to abolish the
practice of martial law in England yet proclamations of martial law continued to
occur after that
in many places where English law
The authorities for
martial law are limited and Lord Hale described martial law as ‘no Law,
but something indulged rather than
allowed as a
Martial law is
distinct from military law in that it describes a set of circumstances rather
than a body of law. There is no body
of martial law as such. If the imposition
of martial law results in the application of military law to civilians, then
a means of affording some sort of due process in a way familiar to
military officers. It is not because military law applies of its
own force by
virtue of a state of martial law.
One of the best examples of this is the Jamaica Rebellion. In 1865, a number
of districts in Jamaica saw an uprising by black plantation
workers and other
poor against white plantation owners and colonial authorities. Governor Edward
Eyre (already famous as the first
European to cross the Nullarbor
) declared martial law and
authorised the suppression of the rebellion with brutal force, summary
executions and floggings, as well
as courts martial followed by
executions.
Much of the
controversy arising from the Rebellion turned on whether martial law authorised
the court martial and execution in particular
of George Gordon, a coloured
Jamaican landowner and politician.
The Jamaica Committee, created in
England in response to the events by a group of reform minded public figures,
which included J
attempted a private prosecution of Governor Eyre. The Committee also attempted
the private prosecution of a British Army officer,
Brigadier Nelson, and a Royal
Navy officer, Lieutenant Brand, who had been members of a court martial which
had imposed death penalties.
neither case,
R v Nelson and Brand
did Chief Justice Cockburn’s
charge to the Grand Jury support fully the prosecution arguments, and the grand
juries did not
find that the prosecutions should proceed to trial.
Another authority is the Privy Council case of
arising from the
Boer War in 1902. Mr Marais was in military custody after his arrest and charge
for breaching martial law regulations.
He had appealed to the Privy Council from
a decision of the Supreme Court of the Colony of the Cape of Good Hope. The
Privy Council
took the affidavit evidence of Mr Marais himself as grounds for
determining that war was actually raging.
The Privy Council stated that where
actual war is raging, the actions of the military authorities are
non-justiciable:
It may often be a question whether a mere riot or disturbance neither so
serious nor so extensive as really to amount to a war at
all has not been
treated with an excessive severity and whether the intervention of the military
force was necessary but once let
the fact of actual war be established and there
is an universal consensus of opinion that the Civil Courts have no jurisdiction
call in question the propriety of the action of the military
authorities.
The Privy Council stated ‘the truth is, that no doubt has ever existed
that where war actually prevails the ordinary Courts
have no jurisdiction over
the military authorities’.
Notably the advice of the Privy Council closed with the words ‘the framers
Petition of Right
knew well what they meant when they made a
condition of peace the ground of the illegality of unconstitutional
procedure’.
Councillors, therefore, directly considered the
Petition of Right
not see it as applicable to situations of actual war, even an internal war.
The constitutional scholar Holdsworth stated of
This prerogative is quite different from the power which all citizens have at
common law of using the degree of force which is necessary
to prevent outrage.
That power merely provides the necessary means for quelling a riot. It merely
allows an amount of force exactly
proportioned to the necessities of the case.
It does not allow, as a proclamation of martial law allows, an absolutely
freehand in
dealing with the enemy.
An even more extreme view is that martial law is an instrument of state
terror. It knows very few bounds and authorises extreme measures
of brutality
against even innocent civilians in order to terrorise a subject population into
submission, ‘terror is of the
very nature of martial law, and deterrent
measures – that is measures deterrent by means of terror – are its
very essence’.
The limitations are that martial law can only be for the purpose of
maintaining or restoring governmental control and cannot be for
wanton purposes.
The procedure of courts martial must observe some sense of natural justice,
although summary executions may also
be permissible.
The leading proponent of this view
was Finlason. He wrote a number of books and letters on the subject of martial
law at the time
of the Jamaica controversy in the 1860s.
It is tempting to dismiss such
extreme views as the views of just one author, but Finlason appears to have
articulated a widespread
belief that this approach was necessary to maintain the
The use of such an
approach in so many parts of the British Empire, such as in the Indian Mutiny of
in General Dyer’s
ordering of the Amritsar massacre in
the government of the
African colonies,
the attempted
suppression of the Irish Republic between 1916 and
and in the Jamaica
Rebellion of 1865 itself, and with so little by way of legal consequences for
these actions, would suggest that
Finlason’s view reflects much of the
practice of martial law in the British Empire.
This leads us to the Myall Creek massacre, which did go before the courts.
The well-known and unusual aspect of the Myall Creek Massacre
is not that it
occurred but that it went to court. Men were charged with murder and
The reason we can
discuss it today is because we know about it, and that is mainly because of the
prosecution. However, it is entirely
consistent with the pattern of violence
around this region, all over the colony of New South Wales and the rest of the
British Empire,
much of which occurred under cover of martial law. The absence
of a declaration of martial law in this region, the prosecution and
the attempts
to hold Major Nunn to account are more to do with the fact that elements within
the government, even at that time, saw
these actions as wrong.
This was part of an ongoing tension
throughout the British Empire between brutal imposition of power and a belief in
the civilising
and restraining influence of English law, as seen in the Jamaica
prosecutions or the
Report of the Parliamentary Select Committee on
Aboriginal Tribes (British Settlements)
of 1837 from the parliament at
Westminster.
It does not change however that Aboriginal people were in open resistance to
the invasion and carried on an insurgency long
afterwards.
The lack of a
martial law declaration also does not change that military, police and civilian
armed groups conducted punitive campaigns
against this
resistance.
The violence was
there and it looked just like those situations covered by declarations of
martial law. This was no riot or mere
disturbance.
concerted effort to reject British sovereignty. It was a war. In this sense, the
significance is that we can consider
the Myall Creek Massacre as being a war
crime within a broader war, and not an isolated criminal action.
This has current significance for the state of the law in Australia. The
decision accepted de Vattel’s taxonomy for the reception of
English law by settlement, cession or
This case appeared to
overturn the doctrine of terra
did not accept that there was a treaty or a conquest, then it cannot really have
over turned terra nullius.
effectively only modified the doctrine by
recognising very limited property rights in the form of native
If instead the common law
recognised that there was a war, then it is possible to argue that English law
applied by way of conquest.
This would mean that all Aboriginal and Torres
Strait Islander law, not just native title, continued to apply until displaced
the new sovereign.
even be that the onus would be on those arguing for displacement, rather than on
those arguing for continuation of Aboriginal
and Torres Strait Islander law.
This could provide a very different basis for current state based treaty
negotiations and the Makarrata
Something of this
approach appears to have been underlying the successful arguments of the
plaintiff in
in the High Court of Australia in 2020, to the
effect that it is for traditional law to determine who is or is not an
or Torres Strait Islander. The power of the Commonwealth under the
Constitution
with respect to aliens must be interpreted by reference to
There are other reasons that the criminal trial of the Myall Creek Massacre
is important, as was the inquiry into Major Nunn and indeed
the British
Parliamentary Report into the treatment of Aboriginal Tribes in the British
Empire of 1837. They indicate that it was
the colonists who often perpetuated
this war against the efforts of parts of the British government. It is an
unfortunate part of
Australian culture to blame the British for atrocities
committed by Australians, particularly in our military history with the
Breaker Morant
story one of the best
To do that in this
case would be to whitewash our history. To say that the British did it would be
a way of trying to avoid responsibility.
It would ignore the attempts to
restrain the people who perpetuated this violence. In many cases those people
were the colonists
who were making their future in Australia. They may have seen
themselves as British but their descendants are Australians. It is
Australians then to accept that this is our history and take responsibility for
its ongoing consequences today.
With many thanks to Marcelle
Burns, Indigenous Pre-Doctoral Fellow, School of Law, UNE for her generous
provision of ideas and research.
This paper was originally presented as a
conference paper at the ‘Myall Creek Massacre 180
Anniversary
Symposium’ Oorala Centre, UNE, and then adapted for the 2020 Australia and
New Zealand Law and History Society
virtual conference. On a personal note, I
have spent my professional life dealing with armed conflicts one way or another
and my ancestors have been in this area since white people
came here. The
conflict we are discussing here today occurred in my homeland. As a boy I
witnessed some of it, but I did not realise
that there had been a war.
National Museum of Australia,
‘Myall Creek Massacre’,
https://www.nma.gov.au/defining-moments/resources/myall-creek-massacre
https://www.theage.com.au/national/vandals-deface-aboriginal-memorial-20050131-gdzgx3.html
31 January 2005.
Mabo v Queensland (No 2)
[1992] HCA 23
(1992) 175 CLR 1
, 77-78 (Deane and Gaudron JJ).
Proceedings of the
Supreme Court
, Vol 22, Archives Office of New South Wales, 2/3205, 98 and
discussed by Bruce Kercher in ‘
R v Ballard, R v Murrell
Australian Indigenous Law Reporter
Port Phillip Patriot,
September 1841, 1.
(1836) 1 Legge 72.
Particularly common article 3,
and Art I of
Additional Protocol II
. See Nils Melzer,
Interpretive
Guidance on the Notion of Direct Participation in Hostilities Under
International Humanitarian Law
(International Committee of the Red Cross,
See Cameron Moore,
Sword: Executive Power and the Use of Force by the Australian Defence Force
(ANU Press, 2017)
https://press.anu.edu.au/publications/crown-and-sword
Introduction
to the Study of the Law of the
Constitution
(Macmillan, 10
See Philip Lynch,
‘Juries as Communities of Resistance: Eureka and the Power of the
[2002] AltLawJl 29
(2002) 27(2)
Alternative Law Journal
Callum Clayton-Dixon
Surviving New England: A History of Aboriginal Resistance and Resilience
Through the First Forty Years of the Colonial Apocalypse
and Gun: Resisting New England: Frontier Wars
Edition 1, (2018), both
published by Anaiwan Language Revival Program, Armidale; Roger Milliss,
Waterloo Creek: The Australia Day Massacre of 1838, George Gipps and the
British Conquest of New South Wales
(McPhee Gribble, 1992); Michael Organ,
‘Secret Service: Governor Macquarie’s Aboriginal War of 1816’,
Proceedings of the National Conference of Royal Australian Historical
, Mittagong, 25-26 October 2016; Tim Rowse, ‘The Moral World of
the Native Mounted Police’ [2018] 5:1
Law & History
Tedeschi, ‘Speech at the Annual Myall Creek Memorial Ceremony on 11 June
2017 for Those Who Died in the Myall Creek
Massacre’ [2018] 5:1
R v Kilmeister
(NSWSC, 1838), see Milliss, ibid, ch 17, and Tedeschi, ibid.
See Moore, above n 9, ch
Marais v General Officer
Commanding the Lines of Communication
[1901] UKLawRpAC 52
[1902] AC 109.
Milliss, above n 12, ch
Ibid, ch 7.
Proclamation of Martial
, Governor Brisbane, 14 August 1824
https://trove.nla.gov.au/newspaper/article/2183147
See Moore, above n 9.
Charles Clode,
Administration of Justice Under Military and Martial Law: As Applicable to the
Army, Navy, Marines and Auxiliary Forces
(John Murray, 1872) 179 quoting
History of the Common Law
Military Board,
Australian Edition of Manual of Military Law
(Commonwealth Government
Printer, 1941) 5; See discussion of this point in Clode,
Military and Martial
, ibid, 183-186; W S Holdsworth ‘Martial Law Historically
Considered’
Law Quarterly Review
, 128; H Erle
Richards,‘Martial Law’ (1902) 18
Law Quarterly Review
133-134; R W Kostal,
A Jurisprudence of Power: Victorian Empire and the Rule
(Oxford University Press, 2005) 331-338.
Peter Handford,
‘Edward John Eyre and the Conflict of Laws’
[2008] MelbULawRw 26
(2008) 32(3)
Melbourne University Law Review
Kostal, above n 21,
Ibid 14-17.
Handford, above n 22,
Cockburn’s Special Report
of the Charge of the Lord Chief Justice
of England to the Grand Jury at the Central Criminal Court in the Case of The
Queen Against
Nelson and Brand
Frederick Cockburn’s Special Report
’). [This was the
report of the case as such and is cited in
Re Tracey; Ex parte Ryan
[1989] HCA 12
(1989) 166 CLR 518
Being a charge to a Grand
Jury and not a judicial decision as such, W F Finlason,
Report of the Case of
The Queen v Edward Eyre on his Prosecution in the Court of Queen’s Bench
containing the Charge of Mr Justice
(Stevens, 1868). See Kostal,
above n 20, 395-404.
(1867—68) LR 3 QB 487 is a report of
the earlier decision on whether this matter was triable in England, as distinct
Phillips v Eyre
(1870) LR 6 QB 1
, which was a civil proceeding
against Governor Eyre arising out of the same rebellion and supported by the
Jamaica Committee.
Being a charge to a Grand
Jury and not a judicial decision as such,
Frederick Cockburn’s Special
, above n 26.
Each charge differed on this
question, Cockburn LCJ in
R v Nelson and Brand
was equivocal on the
Frederick Cockburn’s Special Report
, above n 25, 159, and
Blackburn J focused more on Jamaican colonial statutory authority, Finlason,
above n 26, 81; Kostal, above
n 20, 336-341, 395-404. See Moore,
, above n 9, 134-136.
Marais v General Officer
Commanding the Lines of Communication
[1901] UKLawRpAC 52
[1902] AC 109.
[1901] UKLawRpAC 52
[1902] AC 109
5; see also Charles Clode,
Military Forces of the Crown: Their
Administration and Government
(John Murray, 1869) 157, on
The Petition of
only applying during time of peace.
Holdsworth, above n 21, 127,
129-130; See Moore,
Crown and Sword
, above n 9, 141-143.
W F Finlason,
Treatise on
Martial Law as Allowed by the Law of England in Time of Rebellion: With
Illustrations Drawn from the Official Documents
in the Jamaica Case, and
Comments Constitutional and Legal
(Stevens, 1866) quoted in Kostal, above n
See Kostal’s
discussion of Finlason, Kostal above 21, 235-236; see Clode,
Military Forces of the Crown
, above n 4, 159-162; See Moore,
Sword, above n 9, 149-150.
Kostal above 21,
Kostal above 21, 455-456
citing the British
Manual of Military Law
(1899) and C E Calwell
Wars: Their Principles and Practice
ed 1899), as well as the
sadistic slaughter of Kooka prisoners in the Punjab in 1872, 451-453; see the
Manual of Military Law,
above n 18, 197, stating that the laws
of war do not apply to ‘uncivilised states and tribes’; see also G J
The Soldier’s Dilemma: When to Use Force in Australia
(AGPS Press, 1992), 155-158.
See eg Captain Thomas
Spankie, ‘The Siege of Delhi - 1857’ in William Robson,
Sieges of History
(Routledge, Warne & Routledge, 1859) 633, 655-656;
Kostal, above n 21, 206.
Nasser Hussain,
Jurisprudence of Emergency
(University of Michigan Press, 2003) 99-101.
Bernard Porter,
Lion’s Share: A Short History of British Imperialism 1850-1983
(Longman, 2
ed 1984) 180-181.
Mark Neocleous,
‘Whatever Happened to Martial Law? Detainees and the Logic of
Emergency’ (2007) 143
Radical Philosophy
See Tedeschi, above n
Milliss, above n 12,
chapters 19 &20.
Above n 12.
Mabo v Queensland (No 2)
[1992] HCA 23
, 32 (Brennan J).
Ibid 40, 58.
Ibid 50-51. See Kiefel CJ in
Love v Commonwealth
[2020] HCA 3
[25], [31],
[35], [37]-[36].
See Daniel McKay,
Statement: A Quick Guide
, Law and Bills Digest Section , Parliament of
Australia, 19 June 2017,
https://www.aph.gov.au/About_Parliament/Parliamentary_Departments/Parliamentary_Library/pubs/rp/rp1617/Quick_Guides/UluruStatement
For a summary of state based treaty processes, see
https://antar.org.au/campaigns/time-treaty
[2020] HCA 3
Breaker Morant
Australian Film Corporation, 1980), and also
(Associated
R&R Films, 1980)
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (53.8 KB)
PDF format (419 KB)
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter