URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/journals/CICrimJust/2018/10.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 14:50:14
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Cale, Jesse; Burton, Melanie --- "Factors Associated with Breaches of Home Detention and Returns to Custody Post-Home Detention in South Australia" [2018] CICrimJust 10; (2018) 30(1) Current Issues in Criminal Justice 35
Factors Associated with Breaches of Home Detention and Returns to Custody
Post-Home Detention in South Australia
and Melanie
In 2016, the South Australian Government proposed expanding the use of Home
Detention (‘HD’) sentences. A key concern
of government and
community alike regarding HD sentences has to do with the eligibility of
prisoners for the sanction and, more specifically,
the likelihood that
individuals serving HD sentences will pose a threat to public safety when they
are serving their sentences in
the community. The aim of the current study was
to establish baseline empirical evidence about: (a) the profile of prisoners
HD sentences in the state; (b) factors associated with breaches of HD
sentences; and (c) the nature and extent of reoffending by
prisoners serving HD
sentences. The sample consists of a cohort of prisoners released to HD in South
Australia between June 2014
and June 2015 who were followed until June 2017. The
results show that the most robust predictors of breaches of HD orders and
to custody were risk assessments while prisoners were in custody.
Furthermore, prisoners convicted of violent offences who received
a HD sentence
were less likely to return to custody compared to those who committed
non-violent offences. Finally, the vast majority
of offences for which prisoners
returned to custody following a HD order were administrative offences.
– prisoner profiles –electronic monitoring – recidivism
South Australia – Australia
Introduction
Until 2016 in South Australia (‘SA’), home detention
(‘HD’) was applied only as a ‘back-end’ sentencing
option (referred to as ‘Release Ordered Home Detention’
(‘ROHD’)) available only to certain prisoners who
had served at
least half of the non-parole period of their sentences in prison. In mid-2016,
there were a number of legislative,
policy and program changes to expand current
HD provisions, which included the expansion of the existing ROHD scheme under
Correctional Services Act 1988
the introduction of Court Ordered Home Detention (‘COHD’) under the
Criminal Law (Sentencing) Act 1986
Similar to other Australian states (for example, New South Wales
(‘NSW’), Northern Territory (‘NT’)), HD orders
available for the most serious/violent offences such as homicide, sexual, or
terrorist offences. Home detention is also not
typically available in SA for
‘low-risk’ individuals who would not be eligible for a custodial
sanction for their offence
to avoid potential net-widening effects. Typical
conditions for HD include: suitability of residence; regular contact and
with parole officers; and movement restriction conditions of HD
orders. Additional conditions can also be imposed, such as drug testing
certain program attendance, on a case-by-case basis.
A common concern for governments and communities alike surrounding HD has to
do with public safety and the likelihood that individuals
serving HD sentences
will commit offences while they are in the community. To investigate this issue,
the current study provides
empirical evidence on: (a) the profile of prisoners
on HD orders; (b) the nature and extent of reoffending patterns of prisoners
HD orders; and (c) factors associated with breaching HD orders and reoffending
post HD, in the state of SA.
Principles of home detention
Although non-custodial alternative sanctions to prison sentences are gaining
increasing popularity in Western nations, due in large
part to inflating prison
populations and associated increasing costs in corrective services, they are far
from novel in theory or
practice. In the early-to-mid 20
key focus of early non-custodial alternative sanctions was based on a shift away
from punishment as a key goal of sentencing
towards rehabilitation-oriented
sanctions that promote community reintegration (Ball & Lilly 1986). This
represented the first
generation of contemporary alternatives to custody in the
modern criminal justice system and involved the increased application of
probation sentences where an offender avoids prison and is closely monitored in
the community. Another example is parole, where an
offender spends a portion of
his or her sentence in prison and, if eligible, the rest in the community to
promote reintegration.
Suspended sentences involve a prison sentence, but one
that is suspended so that, like probation, an offender can remain in the
to promote reintegration but if the offender commits any other offence
in the interim, the original jail term is immediately applied.
established that alternatives to custody such as these are substantially less
costly than prison (for example, see Byrne,
Lurigio & Petersilia 1992).
Despite promoting community reintegration of ex-prisoners and offenders,
alongside the economic benefits, alternatives to custody
are a particularly
divisive issue that draw largely on the perception among the public of the
appropriate balance between retribution,
rehabilitation and public safety. Like
most criminal justice issues, the issue of alternatives to custody is highly
politicised and,
in conservative political climates, is often framed as being
too lenient or ‘soft’ on crime (for example, see Bartels
Martonivic 2017; Robinson, McNeill & Maruna 2013). This was particularly
evident in the late 1970s in the United States
(‘US’) and other
Western and industrialised nations when Martinson (1974) published his scathing
critique of rehabilitative
practices in criminal justice entitled
Nothing Works
. In the context of alternatives
to custody, one of the effects of the 1970s/1980s shift toward more retributive
criminal justice
policies involved supplementing these sanctions with mechanisms
aimed to promote accountability on the part of the offender. Therefore,
generation of alternatives to custody emerged that sat somewhere between
alternative sanctions, such as probation, and incarceration
(see Beck &
Klein-Saffran 1989) typically referred to as
intermediate sanctions
(Roberts 2004). One of
the most significant practices along these lines was the introduction of HD.
1980s as an alternative to incarceration amid prison overcrowding and increasing
justice costs that would also promote offender accountability (Clear
& Braga 1995; Doherty 1995; Martinovic 2007; Morris &
Tonry 1990). This
coincided with the introduction of electronic monitoring (‘EM’)
technology that created the ability
to monitor the whereabouts and presence of
convicted offenders in certain places at specific times (Vanhaelemeesch, Beken,
Vandevelde 2014). Following from this, United Nations Congresses adopted
resolutions for implementing
non-custodial
alternatives to incarceration, resulting in the increasing application of HD
since the 1980s around the world (Joutsen
& Zvekic 1994). As other countries
trialled and implemented HD programs, they typically have been designed and
uniquely tailored
to specific jurisdictions. While HD was, in part, intended to
promote offender accountability, it is also commonly accepted as a
more humane
alternative to imprisonment with less harmful side effects (Black & Smith
2003; Worrall 2006).
Since the widespread
implementation of HD since the 1980s, several jurisdictions have tailored HD
programs to suit their respective
criminal justice systems. Home detention is
also referred to as: home detention curfew; home confinement; house arrest; EM;
electronically
monitored home confinement; electronic detention house arrest;
and home confinement and EM, to name a few (Martinovic 2013). These
terms all describe very similar sanctions that essentially restrict the offender
to his or her home as a form of incapacitation
and punishment (Nellis 2013). The
US Sentencing Commission defines HD as ‘a program of confinement and
supervision that restricts
the defendant to his place of residence continuously,
except for authorised absences, enforced by appropriate means of surveillance
the probation office’ (US Sentencing Commission 2013, p. 427).
contemporary rationale for HD is that it provides a cost-effective alternative
to imprisonment that also avoids many of the negative
consequences associated
with incarceration in correctional facilities. Here, a key policy view is that
allowing the offender to remain
in the community promotes successful
reintegration because it allows for individuals to retain connections with
employment, family
relationships and housing (see, for example, Ball, Huff,
& Lilly 1988). At the same time, HD avoids the known criminogenic aspects
incarceration, such as the loss of human capital/personal agency,
stigmatisation, and accumulation of criminal capital (Grogger
1995; LeBel 2012;
Lopoo & Western 2005; Pager 2003; Petersilia 1987). Therefore, HD has the
potential to address different sentencing
objectives in the criminal justice
in Australia
Similar to Western
nations, HD first emerged in Australia in the 1980s as an alternative to
incarceration amid prison overcrowding
and increasing criminal justice costs
that also promotes offender accountability through routine monitoring (Palmer,
Dalton 2015). Home detention takes different forms and can be
utilised at various stages of the criminal justice process. In the
process, HD can be used as a component of bail designed to ensure the
defendant’s appearance at trial and non-interference
with witnesses. In
Australia this is typically referred to as
detention bail
. The use of HD in sentencing is intended as a sanction
following an individual’s conviction and is applied either as a
‘front-end’ or ‘back-end’ alternative to
incarceration. ‘Front-end’ or ‘primary sentencing’
occurs when offenders have their sentences of imprisonment fully suspended and
are instead sentenced to serve their time at home.
In effect, an offender is
sentenced to imprisonment, and then, if deemed suitable (for example, low risk
and suitable conditions),
the term may be served through HD. More commonly, HD
is available for eligible offenders on the ‘back end’ of sentences
after a specific period of incarceration, as part of parole or a distinct stage
in the sentence. Here, post-trial HD is most frequently
targeted to
low-to-medium risk, non-violent offenders. In some jurisdictions, offenders who
have completed a specified non-parole
period in custody and meet eligibility
criteria can apply for HD. This is referred to as ‘pre-release’ or
‘court-ordered’
HD in some Australian states.
The application of HD in Australia varies from state to state. Four states
(NSW, NT, Western Australia, SA) have legislative provisions
for the use of HD
in different contexts (for example, pre-trial, front-end, back-end). The
remainder of the states do not have specific
legislative provisions for the use
of HD, although they use EM in different capacities with offenders on community
orders. The state
of Victoria abolished the use of HD as a sentencing option in
2012, and currently Tasmania is considering phasing out suspended sentences
lieu of other intermediate sanctions, including HD.
In NSW, HD is primarily used as a front-end sentencing option where it can be
used as a substitute for a sentence of imprisonment.
It is available for
offenders sentenced to a maximum of 18 months imprisonment who meet specific
suitability criteria (for details,
see NSW Justice State Parole Authority 2015).
Generally, offenders who have committed the most serious crimes (for example,
sexual assault, armed robbery) are not eligible. Having certain prior
convictions along these lines also precludes eligibility for
HD. Offenders
serving HD orders in NSW are monitored using EM devices and there are general
conditions applicable to all orders such
as abstinence from drugs and alcohol.
of risk. This
means that ‘higher-risk’ offenders on a HD order
typically should receive more conditions and priority for certain treatment
programs compared to ‘lower-risk’ offenders who are only monitored.
Breaches of conditions can result in an offender
being placed back into custody,
but also may involve warning depending on the nature and extent of the breach.
In 2013, the NSW Law
Reform Commission noted that use of HD in NSW has
substantially declined since 2005 in the state (NSW Law Reform Commission
Similar to NSW, HD in the NT is used as a front-end sentencing option (for
details, see Northern Territory Government 2017). In the
NT, HD orders are not
available for sentences with mandatory minimum terms of imprisonment or for
certain serious and violent offences.
It is available as a back-end sentencing
option in some cases, where the court can partly suspend a sentence and impose a
in the front-end context, they can only be imposed in cases
where the total term
of imprisonment on is 12 months or less, and the court specifies where the
offender can live while on HD. General
conditions that apply to all HD orders in
the NT include: regular contact and compliance with probation or parole officers
and movement
restriction conditions of HD orders; wearing an EM device; and
regular drug and alcohol testing.
In SA, until 2016, HD was applied primarily as a
‘back-end’ sentencing option for individuals who have served at
half of the non-parole period of their sentence, referred to as COHD.
These HD orders were not available for the most serious/violent
offences such as
homicide, sexual, or terrorist offences, nor was HD a sentencing option for
individuals convicted of minor offences
and considered to be
‘low-risk’. Typical conditions for HD included: suitability of
residence; regular contact and compliance
with parole officers; and movement
restriction conditions of HD orders. Additional conditions could also be imposed
as drug testing and certain program attendance — on a
case-by-case basis. Legislative changes in 2016 provided an expansion
eligibility criteria removing the requirement that offenders complete half of
their non-parole period and have less than 12 months
to serve to their parole
eligibility date. In addition, SA has recently funded the implementation of a
wraparound support program
that seeks to address the causes of offending and
support an offender’s successful rehabilitation and/or reintegration into
the community (see Hilferty et al. 2018). While certain Australian states have
adopted the use of HD in sentencing, the implementation
of HD also varies from
state to state. Critically, no recent studies have examined the effectiveness of
HD in Australia.
Effectiveness of home detention
In international studies that have examined the effectiveness of HD, key
outcome measures include program cost, rates of program completion,
reoffending. Not surprisingly, although the costs of HD vary by program and
that HD is substantially less
costly than incarceration (see, for example, Dodgson et al 2001; Dodgson,
Mortimer & Sugg 2000;
Fox 1987). There is less consensus when it comes to
the impact of HD on reoffending (see Renzema 2003; Renzema & Mayo-Wilson
2005 for reviews). One of the key reasons for this is that outcome measures vary
across studies (for example, program completion,
breaches on HD, reoffending
during and post HD, length of time to reoffending and how long individuals are
followed post-HD). There
is also substantial variability across programs in
terms of conditions (that is, who is eligible for HD), implementation (for
EM or EM with supervision) and, when HD is implemented through the
sentencing process (for example, pre-trial, post-trial), and how
versus back-end) (Gibbs & King 2003). In line with the aims of the current
study, below we review the empirical evidence
on the effectiveness of
‘back-end’ HD on reoffending.
Evaluations of the effectiveness of HD in the back-end context on
reoffending outcomes have produced mixed results. Dodgson et al.
conducted a large-scale evaluation of a back-end HD program utilising EM in
England and Wales that was introduced in 1999.
In this program, offenders who
received short term custodial sentences (that is, anywhere between three months
and four years) and
considered to be minimal risk of reoffending upon release
were eligible for early release from prison on electronic monitored HD.
first 16 months of the program, more than 21,000 offenders were released to
serve the remainder of their sentences on HD in
the community. Of those
released, only five per cent were returned to prison and the main reasons were
due to breaches in curfew
conditions (that is, just over
two-thirds of offenders).
Marie, Moreton and Goncalves (2011) examined data on 63,384 offenders
discharged from prison receiving HD between 2000 and 2006 in
England and Wales.
quasi-experimental evaluation design, they reported that ten per cent of the
sample were recalled to prison while they were on HD;
eight per cent were
recalled for breaching the terms of their HD, and two per cent were recalled for
reoffending while on HD. The
specific index offence an individual was convicted
of, number of previous offences, and the number of previous breaches, were key
factors associated with recalls to prison.
In the US, Padgett, Bales and Blomberg (2006) examined the impact of EM on
75,661 offenders placed on HD in Florida between 1998 and
2002. In addition to
individuals serving ‘back-end’ HD sentences, the study also included
front-end HD placements. Their
results also showed that EM was effective at
reducing the likelihood of reoffending and absconding while on HD for violent
and property,
and drug offenders, among those under EM. Similarly, Marklund and
Holmberg (2009) examined the effects of an early release from prison
that used EM and HD with offenders in Sweden. They compared participants in the
program with a control group that was not
eligible for early release. Electronic
monitoring participants were required to have a daily occupation and were
subjected to regular
drug testing. Examining three-year post-sentence recidivism
rates between the two groups, they found that those on EM were significantly
less likely to be reconvicted and sentenced to a term of incarceration and/or
probation. However, it was not possible in their study
to assess the extent to
which differences in recidivism rates were associated with EM specifically or
other elements of the program.
In contrast, looking at medium-to-high-risk offenders, Finn and
Muirhead-Steves (2002) examined the effectiveness of EM by comparing
offenders on parole with EM to a random sample of offenders on parole not on EM.
In this sample, placement on EM required
parolees to remain at home except
during scheduled activities. They examined returns to prison over a four-year
period post-release
from custody. The results showed that there was no direct
effect of EM that differentiated the two groups. In addition, drug problems
low parole success likelihood scores were associated with an increased
likelihood of returning to custody. However, the results
did suggest that
offenders on EM remained in the community longer before returning to custody
than those who were not on EM. In a
meta-analysis of recidivism studies of the
effects of EM on reducing crime among moderate-to-serious offenders, Renzema and
Mayo-Wilson
(2005) also concluded that there was no evidence that EM had
positive impact on recidivism up to three years across the studies they
included. However, their stringent inclusion criteria for the meta-analyses
meant that this conclusion was based on only three studies.
More recently, Giess and colleagues (2012, 2013) reported positive impacts of
GPS monitoring in two separate studies of parolees who
committed serious crimes:
one examining high-risk sex offenders and another examining high-risk gang
offenders in the US. In the
first, Giess et al. (2012) examined parole
compliance and reoffending outcomes (that is, re-arrests, reconvictions, returns
to custody)
of high-risk sex offenders placed on EM compared to matched
offenders in the community who were not between 2006 and 2009 in the
California. Their findings indicated that high-risk sex offenders on EM
supervision displayed significantly better outcomes
in terms of both compliance
with parole conditions and recidivism measures compared to those not monitored
on EM. Using the same
outcome measures, in the second study, Giess et al. (2013)
found that high-risk gang offenders placed on EM were less likely to be
rearrested for any offences and violent offences, but were more likely to breach
parole conditions compared to matched controls not
Taken together, studies on the effectiveness of HD from international
on recidivism.
Research is needed in the Australian context as expanding HD is being explored
as an intermediate sanction in some
states. With this in mind, the aim of the
current study is to provide a baseline picture of a cohort of prisoners released
in SA between June 2014 and June 2015, prior to legislative changes
described earlier. First, this involves a statistical profile
of the cohort of
prisoners detailing their demographic characteristics, offence history and index
offence characteristics, risk assessment
data, and program participation in
custody. Next, this cohort was tracked for breaches of HD orders, as well as
returns to custody
post-HD orders up to June 2017. Finally, a statistical
profile of factors associated with breaches of HD orders and returns to custody
is outlined.
Methodology
The current study was based on all prisoners released to HD in SA from June
2014 to June 2015. Up until 2016, prisoners in SA could
only receive ROHD,
meaning they have all served a period of time in custody prior to being released
to serve part of their sentence
on HD. Between June 2014 and June 2015 this
included a total of 317 prisoners who were approved for HD following assessment
Australia Department for Correctional Services (‘DCS’) HD
Committee, were released onto a HD order and either completed
their HD order or
breached conditions of the order.
The research protocols for the current study were conducted according to the
ethical guidelines stipulated by the Research Ethics
Board of the University of
New South Wales and the SA DCS. Data for the current study were obtained from
the DCS of SA. These data
were de-identified by DCS and included: demographic
characteristics, current and historical offence information, risk assessment
scores, information about involvement in different programs while in custody,
sentence details, and information about breaches while
on HD orders and returns
to custody up until June 2017.
In the current study, five demographic covariates included: (1) age; (2) sex
(0=female, 1=male); (3) Aboriginal or Torres Strait Islander
(0=no, 1=yes); (4)
level of education (0=less than high school and 1=high school or greater); and
(5) employment status prior to
incarceration (0=unemployed, 1=employed). Offence
history variables included the type of offence (based on most serious offence in
cases of multiple charges) for which they were serving the current sentence were
coded as a: violent (0=no, 1=yes); theft (0=no,
1=yes); drug related (0=no,
1=yes); administrative (0=no, 1=yes); or fraud (0=no, 1=yes). The number of
prior sentences was also
included as well as the number of non-parole period
days that were part of the initial sentence, and the number of days sentenced
HD. Initial and final security rating assessments (that is, level of security
environment while in custody) were coded as: 0=low,
1=medium, 2=high, and risk
assessment information (Risk of Reoffending (‘RoR’) and Offender
Risk Needs Inventory-Revised
Scores) were
also included. Finally, participation in programs in custody was coded as:
prison employment (0=no, 1=yes); prison education
(0=no, 1=yes); behavioural
change programs (0=no, 1=yes).
Two different outcome variables were measured in the current study. The first
was whether prisoners’ records indicated they
had breached their HD
conditions (0=discharged from HD, 1=breached HD). The second was whether
prisoners returned to custody for
a new offence (that is, with a new sentence)
at some point following the actual discharge date associated with their sentence
included a HD order (0=did not return to custody by June 2017, 1=returned
to custody by June 2017).
Analytic strategy
First, bivariate analyses were used to provide a description of the sample
according to demographic characteristics, covariates and
outcome variables.
These analyses were conducted comparing males and females. Next, two sets of
logistic regression models were estimated,
the first predicting breaches of HD
orders, the second predicting returns to custody by June 2017. Variables for
prediction models
were selected based on their bivariate association with the
respective outcomes (that is, if they were significantly associated with
breaches of HD or returns to custody) to determine the value of adjusted odds
ratios identifying which variables predicted breaches
and returns to
Descriptive profile of individuals on HD from June 2014–June 2015
Table 1 (below) provides a bivariate description of the sample
characteristics stratified by gender. The vast majority of the sample
(84.2% male, 15.8% female). The average age of the entire sample at the time
they were released to HD was 37.5 (sd=11.5)
years, and there were no differences
in age between males and females. Approximately nine per cent of the sample were
or Torres Strait Islander, and again there were no differences
between the proportions of males or females who were Aboriginal or
Torres Strait
Islander. Just over one-quarter of the sample (28.8%) had high school education
or above, with a significantly higher
proportion of females (40.5%) compared to
males (27.0%) having high school education or above. In contrast, more than
one-third of
the sample (38.2%) reported being employed prior to their most
recent custody episode, and here the proportions were reversed: nearly
many males (40.4%) reported employment prior to custody compared to females
(20.7%). Approximately one-third of the sample
(29.0%) had more than one prior
sentence. The average number of prior sentences in the entire sample was 1.8
(sd=1.8, range=1–13)
and there were no statistical differences between
males and females.
Table 1 also displays risk assessment information and involvement in prison
programs. Approximately one-quarter of the entire sample
(26.5%) received an
initial security rating of ‘high’ upon arrival into custody.
However, females were four times more
likely to receive a ‘high’
initial security rating compared to males (72.0% compared to
In contrast, a minority of
the sample had a ‘high’ risk rating upon release to HD (1.9%). The
average RoR score for a
sample of 254 prisoners for which data were available
was 12.2 (sd=5.8,
range=1–20).
Males scored
significantly higher on the RoR compared to females (x=12.7, sd=5.6 compared to
x=9.4, sd=6.5), and the effect size
of this difference was moderate (d=0.53). In
contrast, there were no differences in ORNI-R scores between males and females
the 113 prisoners for which ORNI-R assessment data were available.
Finally, most of the sample (91.2%) had at some point been involved
employment programming in their custodial histories: 100 per cent of females
compared to 89.5 per cent of males had prior involvement
in these programs. Far
fewer had prior involvement in education programming in custody (45.7%) and
behavioural change programming
(30.3%), and there were no statistical
differences in the proportions of male or female involvement in these two types
of programs.
Table 1: Demographic and criminal justice related characteristics of
sentenced to a HD order in SA between June 2014–June 2015
Demographics
Total sample (
Age at release to HD
37.5 (11.5)
37.3 (11.6)
38.4 (10.7)
Aboriginal or Torres Strait Islander
≥ High school education
Employed prior to most recent custody
Offence history
Multiple prior sentences (yes)
Average number of prior sentences
Risk ratings
Initial security rating (high)
Final security rating (high)
(50.2)=-2.9
ORNI-R Score
Prison programs (ever)
Behavioural change
p<.10+, p<.05*, p<.01**, p<.001***
Non-parametric bivariate comparison for average number of prior sentences:
Mann-Whitney U.
a. (n=301) d. (n=254)
b. (n=267) e. (n=113)
c. (n=251) f. low expected cell counts
Table 2 (below) displays sentencing information, HD characteristics, breaches
of HD and returns to custody following HD. The types
of offences for which the
sample were incarcerated for at the time of data collection were: drug related
offences (30.9%) (for example,
drug trafficking, manufacturing, and one
individual for possession of drugs); violent offences (21.8%) (for example,
assaults, robbery);
administrative offences (19.2%) (for example, offences
against justice procedures, licence and registration offences); theft (11.7%)
(for example, theft, break and enter, receiving stolen goods); and fraud
(11.4%) (for example, fraud and extortion). Here, males were
more than twice as
likely as females to have been incarcerated for a violent offence (24.3%
compared to 8.0%), whereas females were
more than three times more likely than
males to have been incarcerated for a fraud related offence (28.0% compared to
Table 2: Sentence and HD characteristics, breaches of HD, and returns to
Index offence (HD sentence)
Total sample (
Administrative/driving
Public order/property
Sentence characteristics
Non-parole period (days)
542.8 (483.5)
562.1 (492.9)
439.9 (418.8)
Average length of HD Sentence (sentenced days)
148.4 (105.8)
149.8 (103.7)
141.3 (117.5)
Average length of HD Sentence (actual days)
143.2 (106.7)
144.4 (105.4)
134.7 (114.4)
HD breaches
Breached HD conditions
Average time to breach of HD (days) (
103.7 (94.3)
103.4 (91.2)
107.5 (142.6)
Returns to custody (‘RTC’) post-HD
RTC (re-offence) by June 2017
Average time to RTC (days) (
295.7 (172.9)
308.7 (168.0)
228.3 (191.5)
Administrative offence
Non-violent (not including administrative)
Violent offence
p<.05*, p<.001***
a. Administrative offences include: offences against justice procedures.
b. Offences include: theft, break and enter, fraud, offences against good
order, and ‘other’.
c. Offences include: sexual assault, assault, unlawful possession of a
The average length of the non-parole period attached to HD sentences was
542.8 (sd=483.5) days, and males had significantly longer
non-parole periods
compared to females (562.1 days compared to 439.9 days). The average number of
sentenced HD days was 148.4 (sd=105.8)
and there were no differences in the
lengths of HD sentences received between males and females. Accounting for
breaches/early terminations
of HD sentences, the number of actual HD days served
for the entire sample was 143.3 (sd=106.7) and again there were no differences
between males and females.
In terms of breaches of HD, only 15.8 per cent of the sample breached a HD
order. While this reflected 17.2 per cent of males and
8 per cent of females,
this difference was not statistically significant. A slightly higher proportion
of the sample (19.6%) returned
to custody by June 2017 following their discharge
from a HD sentence. Similarly, there were no differences in the proportion of
and females who returned to custody by June 2017. In terms of the types of
offences for which individuals returned to custody, the
vast majority were for
new administrative offences (82.3%) followed by non-violent offences, and only
8.1 per cent of those individuals
who returned to custody by June 2017 committed
a violent offence. Again, there were no statistical differences between males
females in terms of the type of offences they committed that resulted in
their return to custody.
Statistical profile of individuals who breached HD orders
Table 3 (below) displays bivariate comparisons between individuals who
breached HD orders compared to those who did not. In total,
individuals who received a HD order between June 2014 and June 2015, 52 (16%)
breached the conditions of the order. In
terms of demographic characteristics,
individuals who breached HD were significantly younger on average than those who
did not breach
their HD order (34.4 years old compared to 38.0 years old) and
the effect size of this difference was low to approaching moderate
Individuals who did not breach their HD order were nearly twice as likely to
have more than high school education compared
to those who did (31.3% compared
to 16.3%). There were no statistical differences in the demographic profile of
individuals who breached
their HD order compared to those who did not in terms
of gender, whether they were Aboriginal or Torres Strait Islander, or whether
they had been employed prior to their most recent custody episode. Similarly,
there were no statistical differences between individuals
who breached HD in
terms of the number of prior sentences in their history.
There were no statistical differences between individuals who breached HD
orders and those who did not in terms of initial security
ratings they received
upon entry into custody. However, a larger proportion of individuals who
breached HD had received a final security
rating (that is, upon release to HD)
of high (8.0%) compared to those who did not (0.7%). However, these differences
should be interpreted
with caution due to the low base rate of individuals who
received a ‘high’ final security rating (1.9%). In contrast,
sample of 254 individuals for whom RoR assessment data were available, those who
breached HD had a significantly higher RoR
score (15.7, sd=3.3) compared to
those who did not (11.4, sd=6.0) and the effect size was strong (d=0.90). For
the subsample of individuals
for whom ORNI-R assessment data were available,
there were no statistical differences between ORNI-R scores of individuals who
HD and those who did not.
There were no differences in participation in employment or education
programs while in custody between individuals who breached HD
orders and those
who did not. However, half of individuals who breached HD orders had
participated in behavioural change programs
in custody at some point (50.0%)
compared to only one-quarter of individuals who did not breach HD orders
Table 3: Bivariate comparisons: breaches
Total sample (
No HD breach
Breached HD
Demographics
Male gender
Age at release to HD
37.5 (11.5)
38.0 (12.0)
Aboriginal or Torres Strait Islander
≥ high school education
Employed prior to most recent custody
Offence history
Multiple prior sentences (yes)
Average number of prior sentences
Risk ratings
Initial security rating (high)
Final security rating (high)
(120.8)=-6.8
ORNI-R Score
Prison programs (ever)
Behavioural change
Index offence (HD sentence)
Administrative/driving
Public order/property
542.8 (483.5)
535.1 (506.3)
584.1 (336.9)
(87.5)=-2.7
Days Sentenced to HD (days)
148.4 (105.8)
142.2 (105.9)
181.6 (100.1)
(78.4)=-3.1
p<.10+, p<.05*, p<.01**, p<.001***
note. Non-parametric bivariate comparison for average number of prior
sentences: Mann-Whitney U.
=251) f. low expected cell counts
Finally, in terms of the offences for which individuals were incarcerated,
those incarcerated for violent offences were almost twice
as likely as those who
were not to breach their HD order (36.0% compared to 19.1%). However, the
reverse pattern was true in cases
where individuals were incarcerated for fraud
related offences: only 4 per cent of individuals who breached HD were in custody
fraud-related offences compared to 12.7 per cent of individuals who did not
breach HD. While these two patterns were statistically
significant, the effect
sizes were relatively low (φ=0.19 and φ=0.10 respectively). There were
no other differences between
individuals who breached their HD order and those
who did not in terms of whether they were incarcerated for theft, drug, or
administrative/driving
related offences. However, individuals who breached HD
had significantly longer non-parole periods compared to those who did not
HD orders (584.1 days compared to 535.1 days), as well as significantly longer
HD order sentences (181.6 days compared to
142.2 days).
Table 4: Logistic regression predicting HD breaches
Demographics
(0.97–1.05)
≥ high school education
(0.19–1.34)
Risk rating
Final security rating (med-high)
(1.44–8.38)
(1.07–1.36)
Index offence
(0.61–3.96)
(0.08–6.02)
(1.00–1.00)
Prison programs
Behavioural change
(0.41–2.60)
Days sentenced to HD
(1.01–1.02)
(9) = 48.5,
Cox & Snell
% Correct class. = 83.0%
p<.01**, p<.001***
Given these bivariate differences, next logistic regression models were
estimated to determine the relative contribution of covariates
to the likelihood
of an individual breaching their HD order. Table 4 (above) displays a logistic
regression model predicting breaches
of HD based on differences in the profiles
identified in Table 3 (above). The results show that net of other factors, a
final security
rating (coded as 0=low, 1=medium/high) and RoR score, and the
length of the HD sentence significantly predicted the likelihood of
HD. More specifically, individuals who received a final security rating of
medium or high were 2.6 times more likely to
breach HD than those who received a
final security rating of low. In addition to this, for every unit increase in
RoR score an individual
was approximately 15 percent more likely to breach a HD
order, and for every unit/day increase in the length of the HD sentence handed
down there was a one percent increase in the likelihood of individuals breaching
HD. These multivariate findings regarding risk level
also explain why at the
bivariate level, individuals who engaged in behavioural change programs were
more likely to have breached
HD. In effect, once risk level is controlled for,
the association between participating in behavioural change programs and
of HD disappears.
Description: Individuals who returned to custody post-HD orders by June
Table 5 (below) displays bivariate comparisons between individuals who
returned to custody following the discharge date of their HD
order compared to
those who did not return to custody by June 2017. Out of 317 individuals who
received a HD order between June 2014
and June 2015, 62 returned to custody by
June 2017. Similar to individuals who breached HD, those who returned to custody
were younger
on average (34.0 years old, sd=12.0) compared to those who did not
(38.9 years old, sd=12.0) and the effect size of this difference
was moderate
(d=0.44). Aboriginal or Torres Strait Islanders were over-represented in terms
of returns to custody: 14.8 per cent
of individuals who returned to custody were
Aboriginal or Torres Strait Islander compared to 7.5 per cent of those who did
to custody. The effect size of this difference was in the low range
(φ=0.10). There were no other differences in terms of demographic
characteristics (gender, level of education, employment prior to previous
custodial episode) between individuals who returned to
custody and those who did
not. However, more than twice as many individuals who returned to custody had
multiple prior sentences
(53.2%) compared to those who did not (23.1%) and the
effect size of this difference was low approaching moderate.
There were no statistical differences between individuals who returned to
custody and those who did not in terms of initial security
ratings they received
upon entry into custody. However, similar to those who breached HD orders, a
larger proportion of individuals
who returned to custody had received a final
security rating (that is, upon release to HD) of high (3.2%) compared to those
not (1.6%). Again, these differences should be interpreted with caution
due to the low base rate of individuals who received a ‘high’
security rating (1.9%). In contrast, in the sample of 254 individuals for whom
RoR assessment data were available, those who
returned to custody had a
significantly higher RoR score (15.8, sd=3.6) compared to those who did not
(11.2, sd=5.9) and again the
effect size was strong (d=0.93). In addition, for
the subsample of individuals for whom ORNI-R assessment data were available, the
average score of those who returned to custody was 26.7 (sd=3.3) compared to an
average of 23.3 (sd=5.4) for those who did not and
this association was also
strong (d=0.75).
Table 5: Bivariate comparisons: RTC post-HD by June 2017
Total sample (
No RTC by 2017 (
RTC by 2017 (
), Cohen’s d
Demographics
Male gender
Age discharge from HD
37.9 (11.6)
38.9 (12.0)
34.0 (12.0)
Aboriginal or Torres Strait Islander
≥ high school education
Employed prior to most recent custody
Offence history
Multiple prior sentences (yes)
Average number of prior sentences
U=5281.0***
Risk ratings
Initial security rating (high)
Final security rating (high)
(132.9)=-7.1
ORNI-R Score
(99.8)=-4.1
Prison programs (ever)
Behavioural change
Index offence (prior HD sentence)
Administrative/driving
Public order/property
NPP (days/prior HD-related sentence)
542.8 (483.5)
567.1 (517.9)
442.9 (285.0)
Breached prior HD order
p<.10+, p<.05*, p<.01**, p<.001***
note. Non-parametric bivariate comparison for average number of prior
sentences: Mann-Whittney U.
=251) f. low expected cell counts
A similar pattern to HD breaches also emerged in terms of custodial program
involvement: nearly half of individuals who returned to
custody had prior
involvement in behavioural change programs (46.8%) compared to just over
one-quarter of those who did not return
to custody (26.3%). No differences were
evident between individuals who returned to custody and those who did not in
terms of prior
participation in employment or education programs.
Compared to individuals who breached their HD orders, a slightly different
profile emerged for individuals who returned to custody
in terms of their prior
offences. First, individuals who returned to custody were less likely to have
previously committed a violent
offence (12.9%) compared to those who did not
the effect size was low (φ=0.11). In contrast, more than twice as many
individuals who returned to custody had previous theft
offences (21.0%) compared
to those who did not return to custody (9.4%). Similarly, twice as many
individuals who returned to custody
had previous administrative/driving offences
compared to those who did not return to custody (16.5%). Finally, individuals
who breached
their prior HD order (32.3%) were nearly three times more likely to
Table 6: Logistic regression predicting RTC by June 2017
Demographics
Age at discharge from HD
Aboriginal or Torres Strait Islander
Number of prior sentences
Risk rating
Final security rating (med-high)
Prison programs
Behavioural change
Index offence (prior HD sentence)
Administrative/driving
Breached prior HD order
2(10) = 62.08, p < .001
Nagelkerke R2 = .35
Cox & Snell R2 = .23
% Correct class. = 78.5%
p<.05*, p<.01**, p<.001***
Given the bivariate differences between individuals who returned to custody
and those who did not, Table 6 (above) displays a logistic
regression model of
the variables associated with returns to custody. A different profile for
returns to custody emerged than variables
predicting breaches of HD orders.
Given that ORNI-R data were available for less than half of the sample, it was
not possible to
include this variable in the models. The number of prior
sentences, RoR score, a prior non-violent offence, and breaching the previous
order were associated with a
higher likelihood of returning to custody post-HD. More specifically, each prior
sentence in an individual’s
history was associated with a 50 per cent
increase in the likelihood of a return to custody. RoR score was marginally
with returns to custody net of other factors. In terms of the prior
offence, those individuals who committed a violent offence were
79 per cent less
likely to return to custody compared to those individuals who did not commit a
violent offence. Finally, individuals
who breached their previous HD order were
2.75 time more likely to return to custody than those who did not breach their
A reduced form logistic regression model is presented
in Table 7 (below). The results are consistent with those in Table 5 (above),
when removing the non-significant variables from the equation RoR also predicts
results in a 19% increase of
the likelihood of a return to custody.
Table 7: Logistic regression predicting RTC by June 2017 reduced form
Number of prior sentences
Index offence = violence (prior HD sentence)
Breached prior HD order
(4) = 57.8,
Cox & Snell
% Correct class. = 79.1%
p<.05*, p<.01**, p<.001***
The findings from the current study provide a statistical profile of a cohort
of 317 prisoners sentenced to HD between June 2014 and
June 2015 in SA. The
proportion of males compared to females serving HD orders in 2014–15
reflects the over-representation
of males in crime and the proportion of male
and female involvement in the justice system more broadly (approximately
males compared to 20–25% females). Aboriginal and Torres
Strait Islander individuals were slightly over-represented in HD relative
proportion of the general population they make up, but far lower than the
proportion of Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander
individuals involved in the
justice system more broadly.
In total, less than one-fifth of all prisoners sentenced to HD in this time
frame breached the conditions of their HD order. Only
a slightly higher
proportion of individuals (approximately one-fifth) returned to custody at some
point by June 2017 following the
conclusion of their HD order. The latter figure
falls far below overall recidivism rates of released prisoners returning to
in South Australia (36.2%) and across all Australian jurisdictions
(36.2% to 57.1%) over the same time period (Australian Productivity
Commission,
2018). Less than ten percent of returns to custody (that is, five individuals)
were for a violent offence. This contrasts
with the fact that approximately
one-fifth of the cohorts’ HD orders in 2014–15 (21.8%) were
associated with a violent
index offence. In fact, the multivariate analyses in
the current study indicated that those individuals whose HD sentence was
with a violent offence were less likely to return to custody by 2017
compared to those individuals whose HD order was associated
with a non-violent
or administrative offence.
Prior studies have shown that EM and HD can be implemented effectively even
high-risk offenders (see, for example, Giess et al. 2012; Giess et al. 2013).
In the current study, comparable ‘high-risk’
offenders were not
eligible for HD (for example, sex offenders). In effect, for those who received
a HD sentence for a violent offence,
such as an assault, the offence likely was
not part of a broader pattern of violence in their history. To add to this, the
of non-parole period was not associated with breaches of HD or returns to
custody by 2017 net of other factors considered. This points
important pattern — the vast majority of offences for which individuals
returned to custody post-HD order were administrative
offences (that is,
offences against justice procedures). In other words, while the prevention of
serious and violent offences committed
by individuals on HD orders should be a
paramount concern for policymakers and those working in the criminal justice
system, in the
current cohort they would constitute rare exceptional cases.
This then raises the question of what are the key factors associated with
non-compliance of HD orders, be it breaches of HD conditions
or reoffending? The
length of the HD sentence was a significant predictor (in addition to a high
security rating and RoR score) of
breaches of HD and for those who breached, the
average amount of time from HD sentence commencement to breach for those who did
just over three months. This suggests that, not surprisingly, the longer
someone is on HD the more likely they are to breach. When
breaches did occur,
they typically happened in the latter portions of HD sentences.
Given the low base-rate of violent recidivism, it was not possible to look at
this outcome specifically. Nonetheless, different profiles
emerged pertaining to
individuals who breached conditions of their HD order and those that returned to
custody following a HD order.
In short, the key predictors of HD breaches were
the length of the HD sentence, custodial security ratings, and risk assessment
This is in line with prior studies that have found risk scores are
important determinants of eligibility for HD (for example, Dodgson
et al. 2001),
in this case even in ‘lower risk’ samples (that is, those eligible
for HD in SA). Net of the other factors
considered (that is, demographic
characteristics, index offence associated with the HD sentence, programs in
custody), the results
show that the practice of risk assessment in the current
context provides knowledge about the likelihood of who succeeds (or not)
on HD orders. Final security custody ratings were associated with breaches of HD
in addition to risk assessment scores. This
suggests that, at least to some
extent, security ratings in custody that are administered prior to release into
the community provide
some information about whether or not individuals are
likely to breach conditions of their HD order.
In terms of returns to custody for new offences following the completion of
a HD order, a slightly different profile emerged. The
number of prior sentences,
risk assessment score, a prior non-violent index offence, and prior HD breach
were all associated with
returns to custody. Again, the majority of returns to
custody were for administrative offences, and it is possible that some
individuals
may have been returned to custody for breaching their HD order.
These findings parallel those of Marie et al. (2011) and others,
who found that
most of their sample on HD who were returned to custody had committed
administrative offences
(for example, breaches). However, the profile stands that returns to custody
were not predicted by violent index offences.
Taken together, these findings suggest that, rather than the nature of the
index offence for which an individual received a HD sentence,
chronicity or, in
other words, the frequency of prior offending (here measured as number of prior
sentences) is a more robust predictor
of reoffending, in addition to risk
assessment scores. Given that most returns to custody following HD orders were
for administrative
offences, this may also be indicative of difficulties faced
by ex-prisoners meeting on-going requirements associated with community
The findings from Marklund and Holmberg’s (2009) Swedish study suggest
that monitoring and support (for example, stable
employment) while on HD likely
have a positive impact on success. Padgett et al. (2006) showed that using EM
with HD also had a positive
impact on reoffending rates. In effect, the use of
EM technology in addition to other support mechanisms can help ex-prisoners
the requirements of HD and reduce the likelihood of reoffending. While
this is a likely possibility, this relationship could not
be assessed directly
in the current study.
In Australia, there has been some reluctance to adopt HD programs compared to
other Commonwealth and European jurisdictions (Bartels
& Martinovic 2017).
The findings from the current study provide the first baseline evidence of the
nature and extent of reoffending
of individuals sentenced to HD orders in SA, as
well as factors associated with breaches of HD orders and returns to custody.
findings suggest that violent reoffending by individuals on HD was rare, and
that security and risk assessment tools utilised by
corrective services were
among the best predictors of who breached HD orders as well as who returned to
custody, based on the variables
available for analysis. Furthermore, the results
also showed that the vast majority of returns to custody were for administrative
offences — specifically, breaches of justice orders — suggesting the
possibility that ex-prisoners face challenges meeting
requirements placed on
them by the justice system while in the community. Future research needs to
explore this critical question
more closely.
Importantly, this study suffered from methodological limitations. First, it
is based on a relatively small sample of prisoners which
limited the scope of
analysis. Nonetheless, it also reflected the population of prisoners sentenced
to HD in 2014–15 in the
state of SA. Second, the scope of independent
variables was limited, and missing data characterised some of the demographic
assessment variables, which in addition to the small sample size
limited the power of the statistical analysis conducted. Despite
limitations, the findings provide some insights into the profile of individuals
sentenced to HD in SA, and factors associated
with breaches and reoffending of
prisoners sentenced to HD orders. Future studies examining the impact of HD on
reoffending in Australia
should include matched control/comparison groups where
possible, as well as details pertaining to supervision on HD orders to allow
tests of potential net-widening effects of the sanction.
Legislation
Correctional Services Act 1988
Criminal Law (Sentencing) Act 1986
Australian Productivity Commission 2018,
Report on Government Services,
Part C, Table CA.4
viewed 21 July 2018,
http://www.pc.gov.au/research/ongoing/report-on-government-services/2018/justice#
attachtables.
Ball, RA, Huff, CR & Lilly, JR 1988,
House arrest and correctional
policy: doing time at home
, Sage Publications, Newbury Park.
Ball, RA & Lilly, JR 1986, ‘A theoretical examination of home
incarceration’,
Federal Probation
, vol. 50, pp.
Bartels, L & Martinovic, M 2017, ‘Electronic monitoring: the
experience in Australia’,
European Journal of Probation
no. 1, pp. 80–102.
Beck, JL & Klein-Saffran, J 1989,
Community control project: interim
, United States Parole Commission, Washington.
Black, M & Smith, RG 2003,
Electronic monitoring in the criminal
justice system
, Australian Institute of Criminology, Canberra.
Byrne, JM, Lurigio, AJ & Petersilia, J 1992,
Smart sentencing: the
emergence of intermediate sanctions
Thousand Oaks.
Clear, T & Braga AA 1995, ‘Community corrections’ in JQ
Wilson & J Petersilia (eds.),
twenty-eight leading experts look at the most pressing problem of our
, Institute for Contemporary Studies, San Francisco.
Dodgson, K, Goodwin, P, Howard, P, Llewellyn-Thomas, S, Mortimer, E, Russell,
N & Weiner, M 2001,
Electronic monitoring of released prisoners: an
evaluation of the Home Detention Curfew scheme
, Home Office Research,
Development and Statistics Directorate, London.
Dodgson, K, Mortimer, E & Sugg, D 2000,
Assessing prisoners for Home
Detention Curfew: a guide for practitioners
, Home Office Research,
Development and Statistics Directorate, London.
Doherty, D 1995, ‘Impressions of the impact of the electronic
monitoring program on the family’ in K Schulz (ed.),
monitoring and corrections: the policy, the operation, the research
Simon Fraser University, Canada, pp. 129–39.
Finn, MA & Muirhead-Steves, S 2002, ‘The effectiveness of
electronic monitoring with violent male parolees’,
vol. 19, no. 2, pp. 293–312.
Fox, RG 1987, ‘Dr Schwitzgebel’s machine revisited: electronic
monitoring of offenders’,
Australian & New Zealand Journal of
Criminology
, vol. 20, no. 3, pp. 131–47.
Geis, SV, Gainey, R, Cohen, MI, Healy, E, Duplantier, D, Yeide, M, Bekelman,
A, Bobnis, A & Hopps, M 2012,
Monitoring high-risk sex offenders
with GPS technology: an evaluation of the California Supervision Program
final report
Development Services Group Inc, Bethesda.
Geis, SV, Gainey, R, Cohen, MI, Healy, E, Yeide, M, Bekelman, A & Bobnis,
high-risk sex offenders with GPS technology: an evaluation of the
California Supervision Program
final report
, Development Services
Group Inc, Bethesda.
Gibbs, A & King, D 2003, ‘The electronic ball and chain? The
operation and impact of home detention with electronic monitoring
Australian & New Zealand Journal of Criminology
vol. 36, no. 1, pp. 1–17.
Grogger, J 1995, ‘The effect of arrests on the employment and earnings
of young men’,
The Quarterly Journal of Economics
no. 1, pp. 51–71.
Hilferty, F, Lafferty, L, Valentine, K, Cale, J & Zmudski, F 2018,
‘Changes to home detention in South Australia: evaluation
design and early
implementation findings’,
Advancing Corrections
, vol. 5, pp.
Joutsen, M & Zvekic, U 1994, ‘Noncustodial sanctions: comparative
overview’ in U Zvekic (ed.),
Alternatives to imprisonment in
comparative perspective
, Nelson-Hall Publishers, United States.
LeBel, TP 2012, ‘Invisible stripes? Formerly incarcerated
persons’ perceptions of stigma’,
Deviant Behavior
vol. 33, no. 2, pp. 89–107.
Lopoo, LM & Western, B 2005, ‘Incarceration and the formation and
stability of marital unions’,
Journal of Marriage and Family
vol. 67 no. 3, pp. 721–34.
Marie, O, Moreton, K & Gonclaves, M 2011,
The effect of early release
of prisoners on home detention curfew (HDC) on recidivism
, Ministry of
Marklund, F & Holmberg, S 2009, ‘Effects of early release from
prison using electronic tagging in Sweden’,
Journal of Experimental
Criminology
vol. 5, no. 1, pp. 41–61.
Martinovic, M 2007, ‘Home detention: issues, dilemmas and impacts for
detainees’ co-residing family members’,
Current Issues Criminal
vol. 19, no. 1, pp. 90–105.
Martinovic, M 2013,
The evolution of home detention based sanctions
frameworks in the USA and Australia up to 2013: a comparative case study
RMIT University, Melbourne.
Martinson, R 1974, ‘What works? Questions and answers about prison
The Public Interest
vol. 35, pp. 22–55.
Morris, N & Tonry, M 1990,
Between prison and probation: intermediate
punishments in a rational sentencing system
, Oxford University Press, New
Nellis, M 2013, ‘Surveillance, stigma and special constraint: the
ethical challenges of electronic monitoring’ in M Nellis,
K Beyens & D
Kaminski (eds.),
Electronically monitored punishment: international and
critical perspectives
, Routledge, London.
New South Wales Law Reform Commission 2013,
, viewed 15 July
http://www.lawreform.justice.nsw.gov.au/Documents/Publications/Reports/Report-139.pdf.
New South Wales Government State Parole Authority 2015,
, viewed 15 July 2018,
http://www.paroleauthority.nsw.gov.au/Pages/Function/home-detention.aspx.
Northern Territory Government 2017,
, viewed 15 July
2017, https://nt.gov.au/law/
prisons/home-detention.
Padgett, KG, Bales, WD & Blomberg, TG 2006, ‘Under surveillance: an
empirical test of the effectiveness and consequences
of electronic
monitoring’,
Criminology and Public Policy
vol. 5, no. 1,
Pager, D 2003, ‘The mark of a criminal record’,
Journal of Sociology
vol. 108, no. 5, pp. 937–75.
Palmer, D, De Lint, W & Dalton, D 2015,
Crime and justice: a guide to
criminology
5th edn., Thomson Reuters, Pyrmont.
Renzema, M 2003,
Electronic monitorings impact on reoffending
Campbell Collaboration,
Renzema, M & Mayo-Wilson, E 2005, ‘Can electronic monitoring reduce
crime for moderate high risk offenders?’,
Journal of Experimental
Criminology
, vol. 1, pp. 215–37.
Roberts, JV 2004,
The virtual prison: community custody and the evolution
of imprisonment
, Cambridge University Press, Cambridge.
Robinson, G, McNeill, F & Maruna, S 2013, ‘Punishment in society:
the improbable persistence of probation and other community
santions and
measures’ in J Simon and R Sparks (eds.),
Handbook of Punishment and
, Sage, London.
United States Sentencing Commission 2013,
United States sentencing
commission guidelines manual
, Government Printing Office, Washington.
Vanhaelemeesch, D, Beken, TV & Vandevelde, S 2014, ‘Punishment at
European Journal of Criminology
, vol. 11, no. 3, pp. 273–87.
Worrall, A 2006, ‘Community sentences’ in E McLaughlin & J
Muncie (eds.),
The sage dictionary of criminology
, 2nd edn., Sage,
Senior Lecturer in Criminology, School of Social Sciences, UNSW,
The University of New South Wales NSW 2052, Australia. Email:
j.cale@unsw.edu.au.
PhD Candidate, Faculty of Law, UNSW, The University of New
South Wales NSW 2052, Australia. Email: melanie.burton@unsw.edu.au.
ORNI-R scores are typically
assessed only for those individuals who receive high RoR scores.
While these differences are
statistically significant, they are due, at least in part, to DCS procedural
differences in how females
and males are processed upon entry in custodial
facilities.
This approximately reflects a
‘medium’ risk level.
It was not possible to
determine with absolute certainty if an individual returned to custody as a
result of breaching their HD order.
Of all individuals who breached a HD order,
32.3% also returned to custody. It is possible that some of these individuals
to custody because of breaching their HD order, which is also why this
is included as a covariate in the current model.
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (601 KB)
PDF format (387 KB)
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter