URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/journals/AdminRw/2010/7.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 14:44:35
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Metcalfe, Andrew --- "Administrative Law Evolution: An Administrators' Point of View" [2010] AdminRw 7; (2010) 59 Admin Review 42
Administrative law evolution: an administrator’s point of view
Benefits of review and accountability bodies
The Australian Human Rights Commission and international law
The Ombudsman
An agency case study: Centrelink
An agency case study: the Australian Tax Office
Organisational culture
Administrative law evolution:
an administrator’s point of view
Immigration policy has always been at the forefront of administrative
justice. In one way or another the immigration portfolio has
some of the most important innovations in administrative law in Australia. My
brief is to discuss the question of
whether administrative justice remains
‘alive and kicking’ from an administrator’s point of view.
This year, being
anniversary of the establishment of the
Department of Immigration and Citizenship, is a fitting time to reflect on these
While discussing this largely from an immigration perspective, I also
refer to the experiences of the Australian Taxation Office
and Centrelink,
which, with the Department of Immigration and Citizenship, account for a high
proportion of administrative decision
making and review in the Commonwealth
The migration program plays a vital role in Australia’s prosperity and
in our country’s compliance with international
obligations. The Department
of Immigration and Citizenship makes decisions that affect human rights and the
very foundations of many
people’s lives. For this reason DIAC has a legal,
moral and economic obligation to be fair and just in all its dealings.
It is often said that Australia is a country of immigrants. Over 44 per cent
of the population was born overseas or has at least one
parent born overseas. In
2008–09 DIAC did the following:
• processed more than 26 million
• administered a humanitarian
covering 13 507
individuals
• made over 86 000 grants of Australian citizenship at ceremonies
• approved over 118 000 people as Australian citizens by descent,
conferral and resumption.
In decision making of this importance
and scale, administrative justice in immigration is obviously crucial to the
bigger picture
of an orderly migration program.
In this paper I briefly examine the history of administrative justice in
Australia, attempt to define this somewhat amorphous concept,
and consider some
of the wider benefits gained in the 40 years since the establishment of the
Kerr Committee.
I also outline the
roles of the Australian Human Rights Commission, international law and the
Commonwealth Ombudsman for the purpose
of discussing their impact on
DIAC’s operations. I conclude with a discussion of the importance of
organisational culture in
achieving administrative justice.
In 1968 a single officer constituted the entirety of the Department of
Immigration’s legal clearing-house. On secondment from
Attorney‑General’s Department, Mr Ernst Willheim was ordered to
certify the legality of deportation orders before
they were sent to the
minister’s office. He found that all the documents in his in-tray were
unlawful in one way or another
and, not unnaturally, he refused to certify them.
Mr Willheim remembers the deportation unit’s protest: ‘You
seem to understand that it’s your job to initial these. If you
don’t … the Minister won’t sign
Administrative justice in the 1960s was uncoordinated, full of
, fragmented and
Tribunals and review
processes were idiosyncratic, and each operated within its own limited mandate.
Public servants were sometimes
unaware of the legal basis for their decisions,
occasionally subordinating the law to internal manuals and government
Also in 1968 Attorney-General Nigel Bowen established an inquiry into
Australian administrative law that paved the way for today’s
administrative justice. The inquiry committee’s chairman, Sir John Kerr,
handed down the committee’s report
in 1971. The main findings in the
report were that ‘access to review was blocked by cost, official secrecy
and privative clauses’
that ‘the basic fault of the entire structure’ was that merits
review was unavailable.
recommended many reforms, including a general merits review tribunal, an
obligation to disclose relevant documents, and
an administrative review council
to monitor and recommend improvements to the administrative law system.
Administrators’ responses to the report were not entirely positive. As
Sir Anthony Mason recalled, ‘The mandarins were
irrevocably opposed to
external review because it diminished their
Since the report of the Kerr Committee, bureaucrats’ thinking on
administrative justice has evolved. The system that has emerged
is, in the words
of Justice Deirdre O’Connor, ‘in many ways, an example of
world’s best
Administrative Appeals Tribunal, the Commonwealth Ombudsman, the Administrative
Review Council, the
Administrative Decisions (Judicial Review) Act 1977
freedom of information legislation and legislatively mandated provision of
reasons have irrevocably changed the environment in which
administrative
decisions are made throughout the Commonwealth.
The nature of administrative law changed in the early 1990s, expanding from
its focus on judicially defined principles in the limited
classes of cases that
came before the courts and tribunals to encapsulate agency-level decision making
and internal review processes.
According to Associate Professor Pamela
It was recognised that the decisions which are changed on external review by a
court, tribunal or Ombudsman are only the tip of the
iceberg. For the
administrative law system to become an
administrative justice
needed to demonstrate its contribution to the quality of the vastly greater
volume of decisions made at agency
Commissioner of Taxation, Michael D’Ascenzo, makes a similar point.
Referring to changes in public sector thinking from
the late 1990s to the
present day, he stated:
While a focus remains on lawfulness, effectiveness and efficiency, talk is now
also of the ethical obligations on the public and
private sector as well. The
rhetoric is now ‘effectiveness, efficiency and ethicality’. At a
structural level, compliance
is to be managed through a fourth, integrity branch
of government.
relation to managing compliance, the Commissioner recognises a reliance by
departments and agencies on ‘soft
—a term I am
pleased to adopt.
‘Soft law’ means non-legislative materials such as codes and
guidelines, which are increasingly being used by government
regulatory agencies.
Soft law is not binding by force of statute but can be influential in other
ways. Its aim is to have some practical
effect or impact on the behaviour of
administrative decision makers.
The Administrative Review Council has previously noted that soft law can, in
practice, have a more substantial effect on administrative
decision making than
the legislation itself.
particularly the case for the migration portfolio given the number of decisions
made and the speed with which they are made.
Benefits of review and accountability bodies
External oversight offers to an organisation many benefits beyond reaching
the correct or preferable decision in individual cases.
DIAC has benefited from
the openness and accountability provided by its merits review system and the
extensive external oversight
to which the department is subjected. The Migration
Review Tribunal and the Refugee Review Tribunal oblige DIAC decision makers to
uphold high standards and provide a crucial safety valve for errors or
oversights.
External inquiry can inspire or necessitate effective communication in large
organisations. Some years ago in two areas of DIAC each
believed the other had
reasons for continuing a policy that was, on its face, unjust. It was not until
an oversight body’s
inquiries about the policy prompted communication
between the two areas that the policy was revised.
improving the quality of agencies’ decisions.
Having decisions overturned
is not easy for officials, though, especially when an external body is
criticising them publicly. The
relationship with individual decision makers must
be carefully managed to avoid resentment of the review process.
Undoubtedly, however, review decisions in the migration sector, from both the
tribunals and the courts, are of high quality and make
a positive contribution
to departmental decision-making practices. DIAC has a multi-layered process for
establishing which tribunal
and court decisions are significant. Decisions are
assigned to one of several policy or legal areas for a process (including a risk
assessment) referred to as ‘triage’. The resulting advice is then
handed to a policy unit further up in the organisation
to assess whether the
department is required to alter its practices in response.
In the past DIAC has at times adopted too defensive a stance and maintained
an overly antagonistic relationship with review bodies.
Remembering that the
idiosyncrasies of the migration portfolio can lead to review decisions that have
sometimes frustrated DIAC officials—indeed,
ministers—I believe DIAC
has now made considerable progress in opening itself up to review. This is in
the context that, rightly,
the department is highly accountable for its
The Australian Human Rights Commission and
international law
The Australian Human Rights Commission has a central role in delivering
administrative justice for detainees and has contributed to
major improvements
in the management of detention centres. For example, the commission’s
recommendations have played an important
part in improving mental health
monitoring and care.
Australia is also a party to optional protocols to several human rights
treaties that allow for the hearing of individual complaints
by international
committees. Although Australia does not always agree with the legal
interpretations or findings of these committees,
DIAC has always fully
cooperated with the examination of the complaints.
International law further influences administration by providing minimum
standards to be met (and exceeded) and a process whereby
which world’s
best practice can be established and emulated. Australia takes its international
obligations seriously. Monitoring
developments in human rights law is an
essential part of DIAC’s work: it forms a basis for many of the
department’s decisions
and policies.
The Ombudsman
The Commonwealth Ombudsman originally advertised in 1977 that the office was
created to help those “trampled underfoot by officialdom”,
“strangled by bureaucratic red tape”, or having their problems
“swept under the
The Ombudsman has provided invaluable feedback and advice to DIAC, especially
since 2005, when the office was given the additional
title of Immigration
Ombudsman. The Immigration Ombudsman’s investigations of individual cases
and systemic matters provide
detailed and focused insights into administrative
problems in DIAC.
In 2005 and 2006 the Government asked the Ombudsman to investigate the cases
of 247 people detained by DIAC ‘and later released
[because] they were
not, or were no longer, unlawful
non‑citizens’.
recommendations arising from the Ombudsman’s reports continue to have a
practical and positive influence on DIAC’s
practices. Drawn together in a
summarising report
that DIAC has
nicknamed ‘Ten Lessons’, the recommendations included measures for
good governance, case management and
quality control.
Since 2005 the Ombudsman has investigated all the cases of people held in
immigration detention for two or more years. DIAC hopes
that with this increased
vigilance past mistakes will not be repeated and that it can concentrate on
continuing to build better and
more robust internal practices.
At time of application to the courts around 73 per cent of applicants for
judicial review of migration decisions are self-represented.
DIAC has been
successful in 94 per cent of defended matters. This very high success rate shows
that the system is delivering administrative
justice. Efficiency is increasing,
too: there has been a reduction of over 3000 in the number of active cases on
the courts’
books at any one time.
For two decades the executive and judicial branches of government have
maintained a sometimes tense and conservative relationship.
Occasionally,
judgments are made that seem out of step with policy makers’ views and
have major impacts on management of the
migration program. Conversely,
governments have sought to restrict judicial review—for example, by trying
to codify natural
justice and creating a restrictive and separate judicial
review scheme for most visa‑related decisions.
At times legislative measures such as the privative clause have been quickly
read down and their impact softened by the constitutionally
Migration Act’s code of procedure—have
been a continuing source of
novel interpretation.
Although the administrative justice system provides an important check on
administrative action, it also extends our clients’
stay in Australia by
up to two years. This incentive can lead some of our clients to remain in the
review system even when they do
not believe the handling of their case was
flawed. Currently 1 per cent (although previously up to 5 per cent) of all new
visa‑related
applications in the Federal Magistrates Court seek review of
a decision already reviewed and upheld by the courts. There is no denying
importance of review in providing fair outcomes, but the reality is that
delaying tactics are a factor in the migration portfolio.
A corollary to this is that agencies fear the delays caused by the review
process. Unfortunately, this fear can contribute to inertia
in administrative
reform and can hinder the development of new initiatives. The courts have
recognised this problem and have worked
hard to resolve it by ensuring
efficiency in the review of immigration matters. Some members of the judiciary
have sought to resolve
the problem by dispensing with full hearings in cases
where there is no apparent merit to the litigant’s review application;
others have declined to do so.
Some of our clients seem to feel they must take every available step in the
review process in order to achieve administrative justice.
Because the judicial
review process is concerned with the lawfulness of decisions rather than their
merits, however, this course
of action might not actually resolve the matter at
the forefront of applicants’ minds. Educating individuals about the review
process might help to remedy this.
It is possible that a review process prescribed in legislation for decision
makers to follow can in some cases increase the potential
for the system to
generate delay rather than administrative justice. In overturning some tribunal
decisions, courts have called the
outcome ‘rather absurd’ and noted
that ‘in fact, no unfairness or prejudice was visited upon any of the
appellants’.
Although this
was overturned on appeal, such decisions can be frustrating for administrators,
it does serve as a reminder of the
need to adhere to the requirements of
procedural fairness.
On the other hand, the courts have rejected some extremely quibbling
arguments—for example, that substituting ‘2000’
‘2010’ in the postcode of a letter that reached its destination
breached the code of procedure. The court noted ‘the
clear absence in this
case of any practical injustice or even inconvenience to the
appellant …’
another case Justice Madgwick declined ‘to allow the triumph of mere
technicality over
substance …’
An agency case study: Centrelink
As a comparatively young agency, Centrelink has emerged into a well-developed
administrative justice system, with some known parameters.
On its creation
Centrelink inherited an administrative justice approach somewhat different from
that applying in DIAC; the Centrelink
approach interposes a detailed internal
review stage between the original decision and the Social Security Appeals
Tribunal (internal
review was abolished in immigration in
The incentive to appeal,
which is such a factor in the migration sector, is also at play in the social
security context, although
to a lesser extent.
Centrelink allows for both own-motion and customer-initiated review. The
own-motion power is enlivened when the Secretary is satisfied
sufficient reason to review a decision. When a customer applies for review the
case must be reviewed by the Secretary. In
practice this means an authorised
review officer, who is a ‘senior and experienced [person] in Centrelink
who will have had
no involvement in [the]
A review can
affirm, vary or set aside and substitute a new
No time limit is
imposed, but payments can be backdated only 13
Centrelink also expressly affords its clients the option of review by the
original decision maker—known as an ‘ODM
reconsideration’—which
allows ‘… a chance to
correct misunderstandings, present new information or evidence, and get an
incorrect decision changed
Following an ODM
reconsideration, a customer can still proceed to seek review by an authorised
review officer.
In the context of Centrelink’s business, the internal review by an
authorised review officer might have reduced the need to
go on to other forms of
review. In 2007–08 authorised review officers dealt with 55 761
internal reviews; only 11 060 (under
20 per cent) went to the Social
Security Appeals Tribunal and 1937 (3.5 per cent) to the Administrative Appeals
Tribunal. This is
65 per cent of original decisions being upheld at the internal review
It appears, therefore,
that not only is the scheme correcting 35 per cent of decisions efficiently, but
that it could also be reducing
the number of unmeritorious claims progressing
through the system. Reform, however, continues. Like the rest of the Australian
Government,
Centrelink strives to balance administrative justice, speedy
decision making and efficient use of the public purse.
An agency case study: the Australian Tax
The Australian Taxation Office has differing review options available,
depending on the subject matter to be reviewed and which review
options have
already been exercised.
As with Centrelink, the ATO has a layer of internal review that provides for
review of a decision by a tax officer who did not make
the original
External review is
conducted by the Administrative Appeals Tribunal or the Federal
The Small Taxation Claims Tribunal is part of the Administrative Appeals
Tribunal and provides an inexpensive, quick and independent
review if the amount
of tax in dispute is less than
Judicial review is also
available. Clients are helped to meet the costs of litigation in test cases.
Additionally, clients can also
complain to the Taxation Ombudsman, who can
investigate the fairness and reasonableness of ATO actions, decisions and
procedures.
The ATO’s highly developed complaints system could be contributing to
the decrease in complaints to the Ombudsman about the
ATO in this
The ATO’s efforts to achieve administrative justice are further
enhanced by the formalisation of its integrity framework. The
Commissioner of
Taxation has stated, ‘This framework, complemented by our governance and
planning processes, makes our integrity
visible and measurable, and assists us
to deliver on our commitment of being an open and accountable
organisation’.
As with other agencies, various external review bodies scrutinise the
ATO’s performance.
Organisational culture
Relying primarily on review mechanisms to achieve administrative justice does
not make for effective decision making. Outcomes based
on law and policy are
really just the minimum standard for competent decision making. The values of
fairness and ethical behaviour
are more difficult to instil and promote. They
are, however, just as important if an organisation is to make the high-quality,
and appropriate decisions that we should strive for.
We should not underestimate the role of organisational culture in
administrative justice. Developing an internal culture of accountability
openness to review is a crucial aspect of managing a decision-making process and
litigation caseload. No benefit ensues if officers
see review as an obstacle to
be overcome, rather than an essential part of providing administrative
It is well known that the Palmer and Comrie reports in 2005 have led DIAC to
work towards a higher standard of internal governance.
We have made much
progress in promoting a new culture through extensive training programs and by
changing our focus, which is more
clearly directed at people—the
foundation of our business. In the past few years in particular this focus has
greatly improved
administrative justice for our clients. It is, however, vital
to constantly reinforce and revisit good governance.
In 2005 I established a Values and Standards Committee to help ensure that
the people with whom DIAC deals are treated fairly, reasonably
and lawfully. The
committee also helps to ensure that DIAC staff are well supported in their work
and that they are aware of their
ethical obligations and the departmental and
Australian Public Service values. The committee consists of a number of senior
departmental
staff as well as some external members. The Deputy Ombudsman, the
Deputy Public Service Commissioner and two independent members
play a major role
in ensuring that we are outwardly focused and aiming for very high standards in
our values and ethics.
Decision makers and policy formulators need to be aware of good governance
principles and turn them into good governance practices.
Management must ensure
that staff are well informed about their duties under the
Public Service Act
and departmental policy, rules of conduct, standards of
professionalism, and ethical obligations.
Is administrative justice being pursued within Australian public
administration? I submit that it is, not only in comparison with
Willheim’s 1960s but also by modern standards of government
accountability. The Australian system has proved effective
in ensuring that
administrative justice is ultimately achieved, or is achievable, in virtually
I do not pretend, however, that the system is without problems, either in
DIAC or in a wider context. The Comrie and Palmer reports,
the Commonwealth
Ombudsman and the Australian Human Rights Commission have shown that
administrative injustice can still occur, albeit
as the exception rather than
the rule. DIAC’s ability to confront the difficult questions raised by the
shocking treatment
of Cornelia Rau and Vivian Alvarez, and the
enormous improvement in the department’s practices that resulted, are
to the vitality and robustness of modern administrative justice as
part of our democracy. In fact, even when considering obviously
decisions—such as the highly publicised ones made some years ago by the
Department of Immigration—it is evident
that the administrative justice
system is working. Has there ever before been this level of scrutiny of
administrative decisions
in Australia?
Of course, administrative justice cannot give everyone the decision they
want. This does not, however, mean the system has failed,
provided that decision
making is not only lawful but also fair, just and humane.
Today we have a migration law system that is very different from the system
in which a single officer worked and sought reform. Today’s
system is more
transparent, strong guidance is available for decision makers, and there are
many more mechanisms for identifying
and remedying problems. Coupling modern
migration law with an open approach to decision making, accountability and the
rule of law
has given us a system that is more administratively just than ever
Andrew Metcalfe is the
Secretary of the Department of Immigration and Citizenship and a member of the
Administrative Review Council.
He acknowledges the contribution to this paper of
Nadine Deakin and Charles Gascoigne of DIAC’s Legal Policy Section. He
acknowledges the assistance provided by Associate Professor Pamela
O’Connor of Monash University.
‘Movements’ refers
to the number of arrivals and departures of Australian residents or overseas
visitors, including the
crews of vessels, through Australian sea ports and
The humanitarian program
provides for migration to Australia of refugees and others in humanitarian need
from all parts of the world.
The Kerr Committee comprised
the Hon. Mr Justice Kerr, the Hon. Mr Justice Murphy, Mr RJ Ellicot, and
Professor Whitmore.
Ernst Willheim 2001,
‘Recollection of an Attorney-General’s Department lawyer,’
Australian Journal of Administrative Law
, no. 8, 151, 152.
Administrative Review Council,
Overview of the Commonwealth System of Administrative Review
www.ag.gov.au/agd/WWW/archome.nsf/Page/Overview_Overview_of_the_Commonwealth_System_of_Admin_Review
viewed 9 July 2008.
Sir Anthony Mason ‘The
Kerr report of 1971: its continuing significance’, Inaugural Whitmore
Lecture delivered at the
AGM of the Council of Australasian Tribunals, NSW
Chapter, 19 September 2007.
Commonwealth of Australia 1971,
Report of the Commonwealth Administrative Review Committee
, Parliamentary
Paper no. 144, 237.
Sir Anthony Mason ‘The
Kerr report of 1971: its continuing significance’, Inaugural Whitmore
Lecture delivered at the
AGM of the Council of Australasian Tribunals, NSW
Chapter, 19 September 2007, 151.
Justice Deirdre
O’Connor, ‘Administrative decision-makers in Australia: search for
best practice’ Paper delivered
to the 2nd International Conference on
Administrative Justice, Quebec, 17–20 June 2001.
Associate Professor Pamela
O’Connor, ‘Measuring the quality of administrative justice’,
Paper delivered to the
Council of Australasian Tribunals, NSW Chapter, Annual
Conference, 11 May 2007, 2.
Michael D’Ascenzo
2008, ‘Effectiveness of administrative law in the Australian Public
Service’, Speech delivered
at the Australian Institute of Administrative
Law Forum, 7.
Administrative Review
Council 2007, ‘Soft law’, Attachment E to paper 22306,
Business Regulation Project
, ARC, Canberra, 18 May, 1.
Commonwealth Ombudsman 2006,
Annual Report 2005–2006
, Commonwealth Ombudsman, Canberra, 1.
Commonwealth Ombudsman 2007,
Lessons for Public Administration: investigation of referred immigration
Report no. 11, Commonwealth Ombudsman, Canberra.
SZIZO v Minister for
Immigration and Citizenship
[2008] FCAFC 122
SZKGF v Minister for
Immigration and Citizenship
[2008] FCAFC 84
SZJSP v Minister for
Immigration and Citizenship
[2007] FCA 1925
Centrelink’s internal
scheme is enacted in Part 4, Division 2, of the
Social Security
(Administration) Act 1999
and appeals’,
www.centrelink.gov.au/internet/internet.nsf/legal/review_appeal.htm
viewed 28 July 2008.
Social Security
(Administration) Act 1999
‘Reviews and
www.centrelink.gov.au/internet/internet.nsf/legal/review_appeal.htm
viewed 28 July 2008.
Centrelink 2008,
Report 2007–2008
, Centrelink, Canberra, 35–6.
‘Taxpayer’s Charter—if you’re not satisfied’,
Australian Taxation Office, Canberra, January,
Commonwealth Ombudsman
www.ombudsman.gov.au/commonwealth/publish.nsf/AttachmentsByTitle/
special_tax/$FILE/tax.pdf
, viewed 28 July 2008.
Commonwealth Ombudsman
Taxation Ombudsman Activities 2007
, Commonwealth Ombudsman,
Canberra, 20.
Michael D’Ascenzo
Integrity Framework—how we ensure we are an integrity‑based
organisation
, Foreword, Australian Taxation Office, Canberra, January,
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (75.5 KB)
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter