URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/journals/MelbJlIntLaw/2023/13.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 15:17:40
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Casalin, Deborah --- "Internal Displacement and the Law" [2023] MelbJlIntLaw 13; (2023) 24(2) Melbourne Journal of International Law 328
BOOK REVIEW
Book Reviews
Internal Displacement and the Law
by Walter Kälin (Oxford
University Press, 2023) 384 pages. Price GBP110.00 (Hardback) ISBN
9780192899316.
Well into the 20
century, the fact of people being uprooted from
their homes was largely viewed as an unfortunate consequence of war and other
of state. While the field of international refugee law developed rapidly
after the Second World War to address the situation of people
forced to flee
across borders, the situation of those who had to leave their homes but remained
within the borders of their own country
— namely, internally displaced
persons (‘IDPs’) — was mostly neglected by international law
until the 1990s.
Amid a growing recognition that the global phenomenon of internal displacement
could no longer simply be viewed as an internal matter
for states, the
Guiding Principles on Internal Displacement
— a seminal soft law
document which effectively acts as an international bill of rights for IDPs
— was adopted in 1998.
This influential
instrument provided inspiration for numerous domestic laws in countries affected
by internal displacement, as well
as several progressive decisions by regional
human rights courts and the development of binding regional and subregional
on displacement in Africa.
Twenty-five years later,
Internal Displacement and the Law
Professor Walter Kälin — one of the architects of the
Principles on Internal Displacement
— is as timely and relevant as
global numbers of IDPs continuing to break records in recent years, the number
of those who have not yet found a durable
solution to their situation has only
continued to grow.
This state of affairs has
significant impacts not only on IDPs themselves but on entire societies
worldwide. Addressing internal
displacement therefore remains as pressing an
issue as when the
Guiding Principles on Internal Displacement
adopted, if not more. This book outlines and assesses the often understated role
of law in addressing various phases and aspects
of internal displacement. It
encompasses both introductory and in-depth thematic chapters, interspersing
primarily legal discussions
with practice-oriented insights drawn from the
author’s vast experience, most notably as representative of the United
Secretary-General on the human rights of IDPs from 2004 to
As such, this book will have broad
appeal to researchers, practitioners, lecturers and students seeking an
introduction to internal
displacement from a legal perspective, as well as
specialists in a range of fields who are already active in internal displacement
research, practice and/or policy.
The central problem highlighted by the book is termed as the
‘[f]ourfold [c]risis’
of internal
displacement outlined by the UN Secretary-General’s High-Level Panel on
Internal Displacement (which Professor
Kälin supported as a member of the
expert advisory group).
This crisis entails:
(1) the rapidly increasing numbers of internally displaced people; (2) a
humanitarian and human rights crisis
characterised by high levels of suffering;
(3) the exacerbated fragility of affected communities and countries; and (4) the
response by states and the international
The main questions addressed by the book are centred around the role and
potential of law in addressing this fourfold crisis. In Professor
Kälin’s words, the book seeks to investigate the following:
To what extent does law contribute to more effective action to prevent,
respond to, and resolve internal displacement? What are the
weaknesses of the
present legal regime governing internal displacement and what can be done to
improve it?
As hinted at in the title, the book does not limit itself to any one branch
of law, whether international or domestic. It rather examines
applicable to internal displacement as an ‘emerging legal regime’
which encompasses both international and
domestic legal orders and entails their
interaction.
This regime is not strictly
limited to binding legal instruments but covers all international and domestic
norms which may influence
the behaviour of the actors
It draws from areas such as human
rights law, humanitarian law and criminal law, as well as other norms from
fields intersecting
with internal displacement issues, such as development,
peacebuilding, disaster management, climate change and international
institutional
As such, the scope of
the analysis is impressive, as it aims to examine the established and emerging
norms at different levels which
address the issue of internal displacement.
Although the legal regime in question is not presented in these terms, this
to examining applicable norms makes a highly pertinent contribution to
discussions on the development of a body of ‘IDP
The holistic approach to the
legal regime also ensures that the book goes beyond an account of positive law,
as it also examines
the role of the processes and institutions involved in
implementing legal norms.
In particular,
attention is paid to the operational aspects of international humanitarian
action and durable solutions in two more
practice-oriented
The ten chapters of the book are structured as such: an introductory chapter
(Chapter 1) is followed by three overview chapters (Chapters
2–4), which
outline the legal and conceptual landscape around internal displacement. Five
core chapters (Chapters 5–9)
then delve into further detail on the legal
regime applicable to internal displacement situations in the various stages of
the displacement
cycle, as well as related operational questions. The primarily
legal chapters focus on protection from displacement (Chapter 5),
during displacement (Chapter 6) and resolving displacement or durable solutions
(Chapter 8). In order to ground the legal
and conceptual discussions in
practice-oriented perspectives, the chapter on protection during displacement is
complemented by a
chapter on international humanitarian assistance (Chapter 7),
while the chapter on the concept of durable solutions is enriched by
a companion
chapter on the practice of durable solutions (Chapter 9). The final chapter
(Chapter 10) sets out the conclusions of
The first chapter, ‘Internal Displacement and the Role of Law’,
sets out the central question and objectives of the book,
as well as the context
of the fourfold crisis.
It also outlines
key concepts such as the notion of displacement, categories of displacement and
the displacement cycle.
In line with the
legal focus of the book, and crucially for readers who are not already familiar
with international legal norms on
internal displacement, this chapter also
offers background on ‘the emerging international legal regime’
relating to internal
displacement,
including its origins and recent normative and institutional developments.
The second chapter, ‘The Primary Responsibility of the State’,
focuses on and outlines the state’s primary responsibility
for addressing
and resolving internal displacement, especially in terms of international human
rights law.
This primary responsibility is
based on the premise that IDPs — unlike refugees — are habitual
residents and often citizens
of the state in which they have been
Therefore, in principle, they
have the same rights as the rest of the population. This chapter further
examines the implications
of this traditional focus on the primary role of the
state in IDP situations.
The third chapter, ‘A Category of Special Concern?’, explores
arguments over whether it is justified for IDPs to be viewed
as a particular
category of people of concern, who require the protection of a specific legal
Their situation is juxtaposed with
that of other people who may also be impacted by the situation causing
displacement, eg a conflict
or disaster.
The chapter argues that considering IDPs as a special category of concern is
indeed warranted, as IDPs have specific needs and vulnerabilities
based on their
situation of internal displacement.
The fourth chapter, ‘Treaties, Laws, and Other Standards’,
identifies and analyses the relevant legal sources that guide
action aimed at
preventing, addressing and resolving internal displacement at the international
and domestic levels.
The fifth chapter, ‘Protection from Displacement’, discusses the
legal norms applicable to the prevention of displacement
The sixth chapter, ‘Protection During Displacement: The Law’,
conducts a similar analysis of the legal norms relating
to the protection and
assistance of displaced persons during their
displacement.
The seventh chapter, ‘International Humanitarian Action’, follows
on from the chapter on protection and assistance by
exploring how these concepts
are operationalised in practice.
The eighth chapter, ‘Durable Solutions: The Concept’ returns to
an examination of the legal norms applicable to various
phases of the
displacement cycle, by covering the conceptual and normative aspects of the
resolution of internal displacement.
The ninth chapter, ‘Durable Solutions in Practice’, adds to the
previous corresponding conceptual chapter by examining
some of the operational
issues, which come to the fore in efforts to resolve displacement by working
towards durable solutions for
Finally, the tenth chapter, ‘Conclusions: Adequate Norms but Weak
Governance’, responds to the central questions posed
in the book by giving
an overall assessment of the role of law in preventing, responding to and
resolving internal displacement,
as well as appraising the existing legal regime
and recommending improvements.
message is that while there has been significant normative development on
internal displacement at various levels, the implementation
of these norms in
practice is hindered by weaknesses in the governance of internal displacement
The main problems are diagnosed as coordination difficulties among various
governance levels; a continuing humanitarian focus despite
growing recognition
of the need for a development-oriented approach; the lack of a clear
institutional ‘home’ for matters
of internal displacement among
international organisations; and weak systems to ensure accountability of actors
causing forced displacement,
as well as of humanitarian organisations towards
the displaced people they are meant to
Recommendations include
strengthening the capacities of national authorities to fulfil their primary
responsibilities towards IDPs;
reinforcement of international governance
structures on internal displacement and the nexus between actions in different
as well as re-orientation towards an overall development approach;
greater internalisation and operationalisation of IDPs’
citizens/habitual residents of the state where they live; and stepping up action
to ensure accountability of actors at
any level which fail in their
responsibilities towards IDPs.
diagnostics and detailed recommendations, rooted in the book’s
comprehensive analysis, will no doubt make a crucial,
agenda-setting
contribution to policy debates, research and action on addressing internal
displacement in the years to come.
Overall, this book offers a wide-ranging and nuanced view of the legal
aspects of preventing displacement, protecting and assisting
IDPs, and resolving
displacement, as well as a more practical view of the operation of related
processes and institutions. The examination
of internal displacement beyond the
traditional focus on situations of conflict and violence to explicitly consider
situations of
displacement related to environmental factors and the negative
impacts of climate change is much needed. It also aligns with the
broad promise
Guiding Principles on Internal Displacement
, which aims to set out
the rights of people forced or obliged to leave their homes by a range of
factors. In this sense, if there
is one aspect which could be developed in
future editions, it would be the inclusion of at least some further discussion
of development-induced
displacement. There is an explicit acknowledgement in the
first chapter that development-induced displacement falls beyond the scope
the book ‘given its legal and institutional
peculiarities’.
Nevertheless, similar
arguments may be made about the complexity of examining conflict-related
internal displacement alongside environmental
displacement. Greater
acknowledgement and examination of development-induced displacement as one of
the situations addressed by the
Guiding Principles on Internal Displacement
(and the internal displacement legal regime more broadly) would be more than
welcome and necessary. However, this is only a minor
point in a book of
otherwise magisterial scope, in which difficult choices certainly had to be
Internal Displacement and the Law
sets out a comprehensive picture of
how far the legal regime on internal displacement has come in the past
quarter-century, as well
as questions, challenges and recommendations in
relation to its role going forward. As such, it makes an invaluable contribution
to a range of current discussions and reflections in the fields of internal
displacement research, practice and policy. It is likely
to become an
indispensable legal reference for specialists already engaged in these
endeavours and will also be of great benefit
to those encountering the issue of
internal displacement through other thematic and disciplinary lenses. At the
same time, the first
few chapters in particular are still very accessible to
readers in the legal field making a first acquaintance with the topic of
internal displacement. Law lecturers developing courses on this subject will
find that the introductory chapters offer a user-friendly
basis for teaching on
internal displacement, while students embarking on independent research will be
inspired by the engaging combination
of legal and practical insights.
Deborah Casalin
Walter Kälin,
Displacement and the Law
(Oxford University Press, 2023) 10.
Commission on Human Rights,
the Representative of the Secretary-General, Mr Francis M Deng, Submitted
Pursuant to Commission Resolution 1997/39 —
Addendum: Guiding Principles
on Internal Displacement
sess, Provisional Agenda Item
9(d), UN Doc E/CN.4/1998/53/Add.2 (11 February 1998). See also ibid
‘Mr Walter Kälin,
Representative of the Secretary General (2004–2010)’,
the United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights
(Web Page) <
https://www.ohchr.org/en/special-procedures/sr-internally-displaced-persons/mr-walter-kalin-representative-secretary-general-2004-2010
archived at <
https://perma.cc/9RTW-5JLX
(‘Mr Walter Kälin’).
Ibid 17; ‘Mr Walter
Ibid 302 n 122.
Ibid 2 (emphasis omitted).
See, eg, David James Cantor,
‘“The IDP in International Law?” Developments, Debates,
Prospects’ (2018) 30(2)
International Journal of Refugee Law
See Kälin (n
Ibid chs 7, 9.
Ibid 17–20.
Ibid 47–50.
Ibid 55–62.
Ibid 69–70.
Ibid 104–6.
Ibid 141–3.
Ibid 194–5.
Ibid 236–7.
Ibid 285–6.
Ibid 320–2.
Ibid 322–3.
* Principal Research Fellow, Law and Development Research Group, Faculty of
Law, University of Antwerp (Belgium).
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (43.6 KB)
PDF format (190 KB)
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter