URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/journals/MarStudies/2008/19.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 15:16:48
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Editors --- "In Brief" [2008] MarStudies 19; (2008) 160 Maritime Studies 30
World Maritime Day 2008
Cook Islands joins IMO
International Seabed Authority elects new Secretary-General
Piracy crisis in Somalia
Offshore platforms destroyed by Hurricane Ike
by Mikhail Kashubsky
World Maritime Day 2008
25 September 2008 marks the 31
celebration of World Maritime
Day, the annual occasion when the International Maritime Organization (IMO)
leads the world in honouring
World Maritime Day, which is usually celebrated during the last week of
September, is used to focus attention on the importance of
shipping safety,
maritime security and the marine environment and to emphasise a particular
aspect of IMO’s work. This year,
the theme for World Maritime Day is
IMO: 60 years in the service of shipping
The year 2008 contains a number of key milestones and anniversaries for the
IMO. For instance, 6 March 2008 was the 60
anniversary of the
adoption of the
Convention on the International Maritime Organization
(IMO Convention) by a conference held in Geneva in 1948 under the auspices of
the United Nations.
17 March 2008 was the 50
anniversary of entry into force of the
IMO Convention. In June 2008, the IMO Council, the executive organ of IMO
responsible for
supervising the work of the Organization in between sessions of
the Assembly, held its 100
In his World Maritime Day message to the international maritime community,
IMO Secretary-General Efthimios E. Mitropoulos said:
Globalization has transformed international commerce, new powers have emerged in
shipping and the plethora and thoroughness of measures
established by IMO during
its 60 years in the service of shipping has provided the bedrock from which a
safer and cleaner industry
has emerged, one that can continue to develop and
flourish. Furthermore, IMO’s work has demonstrated, beyond doubt, that
international
standards – developed, agreed, implemented and enforced
universally – are the only effective way to regulate such a diverse
truly international industry as shipping.
Mr Mitropoulos assured
that IMO’s standards are now ‘firmly embedded in shipping’s
consciousness and practice worldwide
and they shape the industry of
He further added that
[it] is because of the extensive network of global regulations that IMO has
developed and adopted over the years that shipping is,
nowadays, a safe and
secure mode of transport; clean; environmentally-friendly; and very
energy-efficient. And so, IMO stands united,
focused on the challenges ahead and
continuously relevant to the industry it has been serving for so long. Shipping
is, par excellence,
a significant contributor to, and facilitator of, economic
growth on a worldwide basis. As such, the mission of IMO (that of promoting
safety and security, its efficiency and its environmental credentials) is one
that reaches out far beyond the Organization’s
immediate constituency and
touches the life of nearly everyone on the planet.
‘parallel event’ to celebrate World Maritime Day formally and
officially outside of the IMO’s London
headquarters was held in Greece on
19 and 20 September 2008.
On 19 September, Athens was the location for a seminar and panel discussion
on the theme of ‘IMO: 60 years in the service of
shipping’, in which
leading figures from the maritime community took the opportunity to outline,
from their perspective, their
views on the past, present and future of IMO and
the shipping industry.
On 20 September, the International Memorial to the Wife of the Seafarer was
unveiled in the town of Galaxidi, by the IMO Secretary-General,
Greece’s Minister of Mercantile Marine, the Aegean and Island Policy, Mr
Anastasis Papaligouras.
IMO Press Briefing 41/2008
, 24 September 2008;
Briefing 42/2008
, 24 September 2008.
Cook Islands joins IMO
Following the deposit of an instrument of acceptance of the
Convention on
the International Maritime Organization
on 18 July 2008, the Cook Islands
has become the latest Member of the International Maritime Organization (IMO).
It was a long road to IMO membership for the Cook Islands. It applied to join
IMO in 1999. Its application required the approval of
two-thirds (112 members)
of current IMO membership because the Cook Islands is not a Member State of the
United Nations.
The final, 112
, letter of acceptance was received by the IMO on
15 July 2008. With the accession of the Cook Islands, the number of IMO Member
stands at 168, with a further three Associate Members.
UN Atlas of the Oceans Newsletter
, September 2008;
Press Briefing 38/2008
, 11 August 2008.
International Seabed Authority elects new
Secretary-General
On 5 June 2008, the Assembly of the International Seabed Authority (ISA), at
meeting in Kingston, Jamaica elected by acclamation Nii
Allotey Odunton of Ghana as Secretary-General of the Authority for a four-year
term commencing on 1 January 2009.
The decision was made in accordance with article 160, paragraph 2(b) of the
United Nations Convention on the Law of the Sea 1982
Mr Odunton, currently Deputy to the Secretary-General, succeeds Satya N.
Nandan of Fiji, the Authority’s first Secretary-General,
who is retiring
on 31 December 2008 after serving three consecutive four-year terms.
Speaking after his election, Mr Odunton commended Mr Nandan for the
innovative steps he had taken to increase the Authority’s
knowledge base.
He assured the Assembly that he would continue in that vein. He noted that with
the ever improving economic conditions
for nickel, copper, cobalt and manganese,
the ISA would have to work towards adopting a code for exploitation or mining of
polymetallic
nodule deposits in a timely fashion.
Representative of the various regional groups congratulated Mr Odunton on his
election, paying tribute to his experience and expressing
confidence that there
would be continuity and innovation under his leadership.
Source: International Seabed Authority
, 6 June 2008
http://www.isa.org.jm/en/node/431
at 15 September 2008.
Piracy crisis in Somalia
The international shipping community has made a ‘crisis call’ and
immediate action
from the governments to suppress pirates
operating out of Somalia.
On 29 September 2008, the international shipping industry, represented by the
Baltic and International Maritime Council (BIMCO), the
International Chamber of
Shipping and International Shipping Federation (ICS/ISF), the International
Association of Dry Cargo Shipowners
(INTERCARGO), the International Association
of Independent Tanker Owners (INTERTANKO), and the International Transport
Federation, issued a joint statement in which they called on the
governments to take action to address the piracy problem in Somalia
and the Gulf
The statement included the following remarks:
Pirates in Somalia threaten lives of seafarers and the security of world trade.
Inadequate response by governments and their naval
forces is unacceptable says
international shipping community… Since 9/11, the international shipping
industry has spent billions
of dollars to comply with stringent new security
requirements, agreed by the international community to address concerns about
Yet when merchant ships – which carry 90% of world trade
and keep the world economy moving - are subject to attack by violent
the response of many governments is that it is not their
The International Chamber of Commerce (ICC) has
also condemned Somali pirate attacks in its statement released on 22 September
The ICC also called on governments to take ‘immediate, strong and
effective action’.
This year, so far, there had been over 60 pirate attacks on vessels in Somali
waters. The International Maritime Bureau (IMB) advised
all vessels transiting
the area to take additional precautionary measures and maintain strict 24-hour
radar and anti-piracy watch
using all available means. Vessels not making
scheduled calls to ports in Somalia are advised to keep as far away as possible
the Somali coast.
The IMB warned that the Somali pirates are now attacking vessels in the
northern Somali coast in the Gulf of Aden. The IMB noted that
Somali pirates are
very dangerous and they do not hesitate to fire automatic weapons at ships (and
occasionally Rocket Propelled
Grenades) in order to stop them.
Once the attack is successful and the vessel hijacked, the pirates sail towards
the Somali coast and thereafter demand a ransom for
the release of the vessel
Among the latest piracy attacks in the region is the
hijacking of Ukrainian dry cargo ship
on 25 September 2008
carrying 33
battle tanks, almost 1,000 tonnes of ammunition as well
as other weapons and military hardware.
The crew consisting of 17 Ukrainians, three Russians, and one Latvian, is
being held hostage. Pirates initially demanded $35 million
dollars ransom, but
later reduced it to $5 million.
The situation is still developing, but recent reports confirmed that the
ship’s captain, Russian national, Vladimir Kolobkov,
died from a heart
attack. The vessel is currently located some 300 km off the Somali coast. The US
and Russian navy ships are closely
monitoring situation near
ensure that these weapons do not get passed on to the local militants in
Pirates are suspected to be using ‘mother ships’ to launch
attacks far from the coast. These ‘mother ships’
proceed far out to
sea and launch smaller boats to attack and hijack passing ships.
According to intelligence sources there are now three suspicious vessels in
the Gulf of Aden believed to be pirate mother ships. They
are Russian-made stern
trawlers with names
Burum Ocean
(shown below) and
), and an unknown blue-coloured tug.
Fishing trawler
Burum Ocean
suspected pirate mother ship
Source: International Maritime Bureau,
http://www.icc-ccs.org/main/all_piracy_al.php
at 1 October 2008.
The recent assessment of the US Office of Naval Intelligence (ONI) suggests
that ships are only being attacked during the day, and
ships with low freeboard
and slow speed are the most vulnerable to an attack.
The shipping organisations have indicated that some major shipping companies
are already refusing to transit the Gulf of Aden while
many others are
considering similar steps.
The Mandab Strait between the Red Sea and Gulf of Aden is defined by the US
Energy Information Administration as the ‘world
oil transit
chokepoint’, critical to global energy security. Lloyd’s Maritime
Information Services records that a total
of 3,418 tankers transited the Gulf of
Aden westbound in 2007 and 2,956 tankers transited eastbound.
According to INTERTANKO, that is on average 17 tankers every day in the Gulf
of Aden carrying almost six million barrels per day of
crude oil and other
petroleum products (seven per cent of total world oil consumption).
INTERTANKO stresses that it is essential that this flow of oil is not
disrupted. If tankers were to be routed via the Cape of Good
Hope, instead of
Suez and the Gulf of Aden, the distance from the Middle East to the US is more
than 30 per cent longer.
Source: International Maritime Bureau,
Gulf of Aden Warning,
2008; International Transport Workers’ Federation, Press Release, 29
September 2008; INTERTANKO
http://www.intertanko.com
at 30 September
2008; NTV News
http://www.ntv.ru
at 5 October 2008.
Offshore platforms destroyed by Hurricane
It was reported that despite safety measures and initiatives undertaken after
earlier hurricanes such as Katrina and Rita, the recent
Hurricane Ike still had
substantial impact on the offshore petroleum industry this September.
The United States Minerals Management Service (MMS) has confirmed that as of
17 September 2008, 49 of more than 3,800 offshore oil
and gas production
platforms have been destroyed in the Gulf of Mexico by Hurricane Ike.
By contrast, three years ago, Hurricane Katrina destroyed 44 platforms and
shortly after that Hurricane Rita destroyed 64 platforms
in the region.
Fortunately most of the platforms destroyed were older platforms with
relatively low production volumes.
For instance, out of 49 platforms, 44 produced less than 1,000 barrels of oil
per day (bpd) and just 5 produced between 1,000 and
In total, the 49 destroyed platforms are estimated to have been producing
just about 1% of the total Gulf of Mexico daily petroleum
production.
Map of offshore rigs damaged by Hurricane Ike in the Gulf
of Mexico as of 16 September 2008
Source: Rig Zone (2008)
http://www.rigzone.com/news/hurricanes/map.asp?s=Ike & m=RigDamage
30 September 2008.
In addition, as oil companies evaluate their offshore assets and continue to
report on their findings, it is quickly becoming apparent
that Hurricane Ike has
delivered a harsh blow to the Gulf of Mexico drilling rig fleet.
So far, twelve offshore rigs have been reportedly affected by hurricane. This
includes three jack-up rigs and one platform rig, which
have apparently been
lost, four moored semi-submersibles, which sustained damage to their mooring
systems, and submersible rig, pushed
off of its pre-storm location. The map
below shows nine of those twelve damaged rigs.
MMS is still analysing damage reports submitted by oil companies and full
damage statistics will be released in October 2008.
MMS has also been conducting helicopter fly-overs to investigate reports of
oil spills or sheens, and so far there are no reports
of oil impacting the
shoreline or affecting birds and wildlife from releases in the Gulf of Mexico
federal waters.
Source: Rig Zone News,
After the Storm Ike
(2008) Rig Zone
http://www.rigzone.com/news/hurricanes/ike.asp
at 30 September 2008.
The information and material used to
compile this section often come from other sources. Every effort has been made
to acknowledge
such sources and, where possible, to contact copyright
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
No downloadable files available
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter