URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/journals/UTSLRS/2018/4.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 15:51:14
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Appleby, Gabrielle; Le Mire, Suzanne; Lynch, Andrew; Opeskin, Brian --- "Contemporary Challenges Facing the Australian Judiciary: An Empirical Interruption" [2018] UTSLRS 4; (2018) Melbourne University Law Review
Contemporary Challenges Facing the Australian
An Empirical Interruption
, Suzanne Le
The structures that regulate and support the Australian judiciary reflect
and serve the traditional judicial values of independence,
impartiality and the
rule of law. Yet modern society places emphasis on an additional range of values
that are expected of government
and public institutions. These contemporary
values include diversity, transparency, accountability and efficiency. Reforms
to introduce
regulatory and support structures that prioritise and facilitate
these values in the judicial arm has proved challenging, sometimes
contentious.
This article reports on a survey of Australian judicial officers (n=142) from
across different jurisdictions. Participants
were asked what they considered to
be the most pressing challenges that face the various levels of the Australian
judiciary, and
whether the current regulatory and support environment achieves
international best practice. The responses provide a nuanced picture
state of the modern Australian judiciary as it appears to those within it. The
study facilitates an understanding of the degree
to which judicial officers are
satisfied with the current legal and regulatory framework, and, where they are
dissatisfied, the nature
of their disquiet. While not seeking to offer complete
resolutions to the many issues canvassed, the data and analysis presented
this article serve as an interruption to regulatory and academic studies of the
Australia judiciary, with the potential to illuminate
and re-orientate the
reform conversation in light of the judicial perspective on these various
I. INTRODUCTION
Judges are more open to public scrutiny than ever
before. Their work is generally conducted in open court, sometimes with
proceedings
broadcast or digitally streamed. Their decisions, conduct and
attitudes are widely reported and critiqued. In the words of Professor
Williams, ‘exponential commentary and criticism is the new
In the United
States, websites rank and comment on judicial
performance.
Similarly, in New
Zealand a ranking of judges claims to be ‘the “go to” resource
for lawyers and the broader
Some courts have
adopted a proactive approach, hiring media officers to assist in the
communication of their work, occasionally making
public comment and permitting
media interviews with judicial
A few judges and courts
have taken the plunge into social
Researchers are also gaining
increasing access to judicial officers, in efforts to learn more about the
judicial role.
The Judicial
Conference of Australia, a professional association for judicial officers, has
taken on the role of defending the judiciary
from comment that is perceived to
be inaccurate or unfair, or responding to proposals for
In some jurisdictions,
judges have appeared and given evidence before parliamentary
committees.
Yet, despite this
increased activity in the public realm, there is much about the judicial
experience of judging and the court system
that is not well understood.
Judicial officers rarely speak candidly about being a judge or about the
strengths and shortcomings of the judicial
Instead, on the occasions
that those in senior positions in the judiciary do give speeches or interviews,
they tend to offer reflections
upon matters of high principle, frequently from
the vantage point of legal history. Yet, the experiences and views of judges on
judicial system, and judicial support and regulation are matters of real
moment: understanding how judicial officers experience challenges
in their role
can assist in crafting appropriate reform as well as indicating where greater
research and regulatory efforts are most
Academic and regulatory debates in Australia over judicial reform are
presently insufficiently tested against judicial experience
and perspective. To
date, judicial perspectives are predominantly gained through the public
statements of current or former judges,
confidential consultations between the
government and the heads of jurisdiction, or limited empirical work. In this
latter respect,
the most important work is that undertaken by Professors Sharyn
Roach Anleu and Kathy Mack, who have conducted extensive empirical
research on
the Australian judiciary, including two magistrate experience surveys (2002 and
2007) and a judicial experience survey
This article reports on quantitative and qualitative survey research carried
out by the authors, which follows in the path forged
by Roach Anleu and Mack in
the Australian judicial sphere but seeks to complement it in two key ways. The
first is by shifting the
focus of the empirical questions to regulatory
challenges, and the second, by seeking to understand the judicial perspective a
after Roach Anleu and Mack undertook their multi-jurisdictional
and in the wake of some
significant developments affecting the
These include the
controversy that attended the appointment of Chief Justice Tim Carmody in
Queensland,
experimentation with
reform of the process for making appointments to the federal
and the adoption of
judicial complaints mechanisms in a number of
All these, as
well as other less discernible influences, such as technological innovation or
familiarity with developments in comparable
foreign jurisdictions, may plausibly
have affected the way Australian judicial officers understand and experience
their role.
Our intention in this article is to use the data to disrupt the current
scholarly and regulatory debate in relation to key aspects
of judicial support
and regulation. In doing so, we will explore how this data calls for a
reorientation of these debates, or where
it demonstrates the need for further
research to be undertaken. We do not purport to proffer full and concrete
solutions to the regulatory
challenges that we consider; rather we highlight the
need for reassessment, further study and research.
The article opens in Part II with a description of the methodology
employed in the survey, and offers some general comments about
its efficacy and
limitations. Part III outlines in brief the demographics of the survey
participants. The article then moves on to
consider the substantive data
organised into three broad themes: appointment (Part IV); the working life
of the judge (Part V); and
complaints, discipline, tenure and removal
(Part VI). In each area some contextual background is provided before the
data are presented;
and a thematic discussion and analysis then follows.
Part VII concludes by highlighting the key themes that emerge from the data
and suggesting some further research directions signaled by the empirical
disruption offered by the data.
II. METHODOLOGY
In 2016 we conducted a survey to investigate the
views of Australian judges across different federal, State and Territory
regarding the regulatory and working challenges they face. The
survey, in which a total of 142 judicial officers participated, was
conducted on
the following bases:
completion of
the survey was voluntary;
all data were
collected anonymously and, while a small amount of demographic information was
requested to assist with analysis, this
portion of the survey was optional;
the survey was
administered online, although a Word version was available on request which
participants could complete and return
by post or email;
the research
team sought the approval of Heads of
to survey the
judicial officers of their court and the survey was not distributed to the
judicial officers of any court where prior
approval had not been obtained;
conclusion of the project, Heads of Jurisdiction who granted approval for the
judicial officers of their court to participate
were provided with a short
summary of the results, which could be distributed to judges in their court at
the Head of Jurisdiction’s
discretion.
The questions
corresponded with the lifecycle of judges by looking at appointment issues,
challenges throughout the working life of
a judge (such as education, ethical
support, workload, remuneration, and staffing and support), and matters relating
to discipline
and removal. The survey was divided into three sections. The first
section (Part A) asked participants the extent to which they believed
thirteen listed challenges confront the judiciary in their jurisdiction. The
second section (Parts B, C and D) took its design
from a 2015 report of the
United Kingdom’s Bingham Centre for the Rule of Law,
The Appointment,
Tenure and Removal of Judges under Commonwealth Principles: A Compendium and
Analysis of Best Practice
That report details ‘best practice’ in the areas of judicial
appointment, tenure, discipline and removal across all Commonwealth
including the Australian federal, state and territory court systems. In the
second section of the survey, participants
were asked the extent to which they
agreed that the current arrangements in their jurisdiction satisfied the Bingham
explanations of best practice. In this section of the survey, as
in the first, each question presented the judicial officer with
a Likert scale,
from which the respondent could select a response (strongly agree, agree,
neutral, disagree, strongly disagree),
and participants were given an
opportunity to explain or comment on their responses to each
The third section of the survey asked participants to provide specific
demographic information. This included information about gender,
judicial service, jurisdiction (NSW, Victoria, Tasmania, Western Australia,
South Australia, Queensland, Northern Territory,
and court level
(Magistrates/Local; District/County/Federal Circuit; or
Supreme/Federal/Family).
Parts IV–VI of this article, when quoting from the open responses of
participants, we generally stipulate these demographic
data to provide the
context of the comment. However, this information is omitted where there is a
real risk that it would identify
the respondent.
In some courts, the Head of Jurisdiction granted us permission to email each
judicial officer individually (sometimes using a list
of contact details
provided by the Head of Jurisdiction) with a letter of invitation, information
on the survey and an embedded link
to the online survey. In other courts, the
Head of Jurisdiction offered or agreed to distribute the survey internally on
our behalf.
Heads of Jurisdiction and individual judicial officers to whom the
survey had previously been sent were contacted with a reminder
and notice of
when the online survey portal would close. Only three of 142 respondents
submitted their responses via a hardcopy of
the survey, having requested a Word
The only court that expressly declined to participate was the Federal Circuit
Court of Australia, although no response to the request
for approval to contact
judicial officers was received from the Heads of Jurisdiction of the Supreme
Court of Victoria, the District
Court of South Australia, and the Magistrates
Court of Queensland and Local Court of the Northern Territory. Our assumption
judicial officers in those courts were not sent the survey is supported by
the demographic data collected.
III. DEMOGRAPHIC SNAPSHOT
The values of independence and impartiality have been
a critical influence, and indeed an important constraint, upon the development
of mechanisms for the regulation and accountability of the judicial arm of
government. They are also of personal importance across
the ranks of the
judiciary, regardless of individual characteristics or the level and
presides. However, those latter
considerations may assume a more variable significance in respect of efforts to
regulate the judiciary
in order to promote other values, such as diversity or
efficiency. Accordingly the survey administered by the authors sought some
demographic data from participants in order to explore associations between
those data and the responses provided. Participants
were asked about their
gender, length of service, jurisdiction and court level.
Tests were conducted to determine whether there was a statistically
significant relationship between pairs of discrete variables using
chi-squared test. These revealed a number of associations with gender. Female
respondents were significantly more likely than
males to provide responses
indicating that
quality of appointment
of part-time judges
adequacy of disciplinary and removal
were challenges facing the judiciary. Court level also
revealed some interesting associations. Respondents from superior and lower
courts were significantly more likely than those from intermediate courts to
as a challenge. Lower court judicial officers were also
significantly more likely to see
judicial pensions and remuneration
as a challenge, and were less satisfied with the
ethical support
available to them.
Although 142 individuals responded to the survey, some chose not to answer
all questions (in the presentation of the data below, the
number of responses
for each question is indicated). The demographic questions were answered by 130
respondents, of whom 58 per cent
were men and 42 per cent were women. Given that
women presently comprise only 35 per cent of the Australian
this reflects a
proportionately higher response from female judicial officers than male judicial
officers. The profile of the respondents
by length of judicial service,
compared to the judiciary
these reveal that our
respondents were more likely to be from superior and intermediate courts than
would be expected of the general
population of judicial officers. However, the
geographical spread of the Australian judiciary.
Figure 1: Length of Judicial Service
Figure 2: Jurisdictional
Affiliation
Figure 3: Level of Court Hierarchy
IV. JUDICIAL APPOINTMENT
The process of judicial
appointment in Australia has largely retained its traditional form. That is, it
remains the gift of the executive,
exercised with ‘unfettered
discretion’
relevant Attorney-General recommending judicial candidates to Cabinet, with
appointment formally made by the Governor, the
Governor-General or the
Administrator of the jurisdiction. In several jurisdictions, changes have been
introduced with the intention
of enhancing process and transparency. For
instance, in 2008, the federal Attorney-General, Robert McClelland, introduced
to the process of appointment of judicial officers in the Federal Court
of Australia, Family Court of Australia and the Federal Magistrates
Court, since
renamed the Federal Circuit Court This initiative included setting out criteria
against which judicial candidates were
to be evaluated, setting up a public
process calling for expressions of interest and convening an advisory panel to
assess candidates.
The professed
aim of these changes was to ‘seek to increase the diversity of the federal
judiciary’ in relation to gender,
residential location, professional
background and experience, and cultural
background.
Appointments to the High Court were exempt from these reforms, except for the
Attorney-General’s stated intention to consult
more broadly about
potential candidates for that body than is required under
Court of Australia Act 1979
McClelland’s reforms operated for a number of years, they ‘slipped
from the departmental website’ after
the election of the conservative
government in September 2013,
and no longer reflect federal practice.
Reform has also been instigated at the State and Territory level, and while
this has been varied, it has proven thus far to be more
enduring in those
undertaken.
For example, in 2005
in Victoria, Attorney-General Rob Hulls indicated he was seeking to
‘secure both the best and the brightest
a judiciary that
reflects the community it
He introduced a
broader consultation process, the identification and use of specific criteria
and advertising for expressions of
The system remains in
place today, with potential candidates being able to apply on online for
judicial office.
The changes described above have been publicly justified by a desire to
enhance diversity. This responds to the relative homogeneity
of the judiciary,
especially in the superior courts across
Taking gender as one
example of the various dimensions of diversity, as of 3 March 2017, the
percentage of female judicial officers
in Australian courts was 35 per
The highest percentage can
be found in the Australian Capital Territory at 46 per cent; the highest
percentage for a superior court
is in the High Court at 43 per cent. However,
the average percentage of women judges serving in other superior courts is 28
In some superior courts the percentage of women is markedly low. In
the Western Australian Supreme Court women make up only 14 per
cent of the
bench, and in the NSW Supreme Court (including the Court of Appeal) the
percentage of female judges is 21.5 per cent.
There is still a considerable way
to go before women in the judiciary reflect their prevalence among law graduates
or in the general
population.
Judicial diversity obviously extends beyond gender to include many other
attributes and experiences – including ethnic background,
professional
experience, education, socio-economic background, and sexuality. Although there
are some data on other background characteristics
of the Australian judiciary,
this has traditionally been very
Lee and Campbell
acknowledged that it may be ‘impossible to assemble relevant and reliable
data’ on such questions ‘without
seeking answers from individual
judges to questionnaires which many judges would most probably regard as
intrusive and perhaps even
impertinent’.
reliable statistics are hard to come by, it remains fair to assume that many
Australian judges conform to the ‘judicial
norm’ described by
English jurist Sir Terence Etherton. He described the English judiciary as
dominated by ‘the life
experience of middle-class, white, heterosexual
men, whose entire pre-judicial career has been as barristers in private
While most judicial appointments are received with professional approbation
and public indifference, from time to time an Australian
judicial appointment is
greeted with considerable controversy. This has generally been due to concern
that political considerations
have been influential in the selection of
particular candidates, or whether the candidate in question has the appropriate
and experience for the office. The appointment of Murphy J to the High
Court and, more recently, in 2014, Carmody CJ to the Supreme
Queensland are notable examples.
The appointment and tenure of Carmody CJ was particularly notable in that
we saw current and former members of the Queensland judiciary
speak out about
his appointment.
While rare, there have been a number of occasions when current and former
members of the judiciary have entered the debate about appointments.
instance, the Australasian Institute of Judicial Administration released, in
2015, a set of ‘Suggested Criteria for Judicial
Appointment’, which
it sent to all Attorneys-General and Shadow Attorneys-General. Individual judges
have also expressed their
Stephen Gageler, before he was appointed to the High Court, wrote on judicial
appointments, noting particularly that merit alone
would be unlikely to be a
sufficient criteria and that ‘considerations of geography, gender and
ethnicity all can, and should,
legitimately weigh in the
He articulated
his own ideal judicial appointments process:
I would have one method for identifying the pool of potential judicial
candidates and another for choosing amongst them. Both stages
transparent. The first stage would be solely concerned with identifying persons
having what I have described as the essential
judicial attributes. At the second
stage, I would be happy to see the broader considerations to which I have
referred openly brought
to the fore and
Nonetheless, we have limited understanding of the wider judiciary’s
views on the current system and possible reform of the appointments
is against this background of traditional practice, modest reform, recent
controversy and limited understanding of the
judicial perspective that we sought
judicial views of the existing appointments processes across Australia.
B. Survey Data
Figure 4 illustrates the responses to questions
asking first to what extent the respondent agreed that various aspects of the
appointments system were a challenge facing the judiciary in their
upon the Bingham Report discussion of this topic across its survey of
Commonwealth countries (Qs 2-5). The graphs show the
percentage of respondents
to that question who answered strongly agree (SA), agree (A), Neutral (N),
Disagree (D) or Strongly Disagree
(SD). Discussion on each follows Figure 4.
Figure 4: Appointments Process
1 Integrity of Appointments Process
The responses to the proposition that the
‘integrity of appointments process’ is a challenge showed that
judicial officers
remain concerned about current appointments processes. Of the
142 respondents, 56 per cent agreed or strongly agreed with the proposition,
per cent were neutral and only 22 per cent disagreed or strongly disagreed with
it. A number of participants expressed satisfaction
with the integrity of the
current appointments process:
Canvas, interview, recommend, appoint; all good (Male,
5–9 years’ service, NSW, District/County/Federal
In my experience judicial appointees possess outstanding integrity (Male,
10–14 years’ service, NSW, Magistrates/Local).
Those who agreed integrity of appointments presented a challenge gave a
variety of reasons. For some it was about the potential for
politics to creep,
inappropriately, into the process:
In all jurisdictions I observe appointments being made,
some of which do not appear to be addressing the needs of a particular court,
rather the appointment of people who are simply mates of the current attorney,
or who are appointed as a political favour designed
to repay past obligations,
or to open up that person’s previous position for future advantage. Even
if only 25% of appointment
are made in this way, the reputation and efficiency
of the court concerned is severely compromised. (Female, 25+ years’
NSW, District/County/Federal Circuit). Indeed, for a number of
respondents from Queensland, the Carmody appointment was front of
The premier’s determination to appoint a partisan, under-qualified Chief
Justice, with the boast that the appointee had the
full support of the editor of
the Courier Mail shortly after a recent change in editor was gravely worrying.
(Demographic data omitted)
Several judicial officers explained their negative views of the integrity of
appointments by referring to a lack of transparency and
consistency:
Appointments are still entirely in the gift of the AG
[Attorney-General], and are shrouded in mystery. The process changes from
to government and Attorney to Attorney, leaving governments and
appointees alike subject to criticism for lack of transparency, favouritism,
bias and ‘stacking’ (Female, 10–14 years’ service, Vic,
District/County/Federal Circuit).
Articulating the complexity of
the judicial appointments
system, one respondent said:
The more that arguments are advanced for any criteria
for appointment outside of apparent independence and merit (based on intellect,
personality and experience) the greater the challenge – those who would
have diversity or ‘representative’ appointments
bring the soft
corruption of those who would appoint political favourites with them, because
appointment can be justified on grounds
other than merit. Look at the recent
Queensland fiasco [referring presumably to the appointment of Chief Justice
Carmody] (Male,
0–4 years’ service, Qld,
Supreme/Federal/Family).
2 Quality of Appointments
The responses to the proposition that ‘quality
of appointments’ was a challenge showed that judicial officers are also
concerned about the quality of appointments resulting from the current processes
(Figure 4). Of the 142 respondents, 58 per cent
agreed or strongly agreed
with the proposition, 24 per cent were neutral and only 18 per cent disagreed or
strongly disagreed with
These responses revealed a correlation with gender, with female respondents
more critical of the quality of appointments. Some 71
per cent of female
respondents agreed or strongly agreed that the quality of appointments was a
challenge, compared to only 47 per
cent of male respondents. Male respondents
were more likely to be neutral (29 per cent) or disagree or strongly disagree
cent) than female respondents (14.5 and 14.5 per cent respectively).
One respondent focused on qualities that they thought were currently
overlooked:
Courtroom experience is underrated as a prerequisite.
Trial courts have big reserve lists and it is important to have judges who can
hit the ground running. There should also be more court of appeal appointments
from experienced trial lawyers rather than those practising
primarily in the
rather artificial environs of the court of appeal. We get far too many trials
overturned on overly technical bases,
or sentences trifled with due to a lack of
trial experience in court of appeal judges. It is a flaw in our system, where
practitioners
specialise, that appeal judges often sit on cases in areas of law
where they are entirely inexperienced leading to overly technical
and stilted
decision making. (Female, 10–14 years’ service, Vic,
District/County/Federal Circuit).
Two respondents were interested in the extent to which judicial roles
appealed to potential candidates, particularly in light of the
benefits that apply at different jurisdictional levels:
I think most appointments are, by and large, sound.
However there are clearly some excellent candidates who are not appointed. It
has to be accepted that some of these may have declined for reasons best known
to them. It cannot be said that the bench is for everyone.
It is better if those
qualified who hold that view vis-a-vis themselves decline appointment.
Nevertheless it would be worth studying
what discourages some apparently
eminently qualified practitioners from accepting appointment. (Female,
10–14 years’
service, NSW, Supreme/Federal/Family).
While well paid, the absence of medical retirement, the poor leave entitlements
and restrictions around superannuation contributions
make it [an appointment to
a lower court] less attractive than other jurisdictions. (Female, 15–19
years’ service, NSW,
Magistrates/Local).
Another respondent expressed concern as to the consequences of appointment of
variable quality candidates:
We have had a number of appointees who are not skilled
to perform their role in this jurisdiction which creates a corresponding burden
on colleagues. (Female, 10–14 years’ service, Federal,
Supreme/Federal/Family).
3 Judicial Diversity
Responses to the proposition that ‘judicial
diversity’ was a challenge again showed that judicial officers are
(Figure 4). Of the 142 respondents, 53 per cent agreed or
strongly agreed
with the proposition, 30 per cent were neutral and only 18 per cent disagreed or
strongly disagreed with it.
The responses to this question also revealed a correlation with gender, with
female judges again emerging as more concerned about
diversity. Female
respondents were more likely than male respondents to indicate that diversity
was a challenge: 71 per cent of female
respondents agreed or strongly agreed
with the proposition, while only 47 per cent of male judicial officers did so.
At the other
end of the scale, 5 per cent of male respondents strongly disagreed
that diversity posed a challenge, compared with no female judicial
Some participants who agreed that diversity was a challenge cited ongoing
barriers to appointing diverse candidates:
People advising and making appointments tend to like and
recommend people who are similar to themselves. Insufficient regard is had
all jurisdictions to the appointment of qualified, experienced people, but with
a non-standard background, or even gender!!! (Female,
25+ years’ service,
NSW, District/County/Federal Circuit).
Others noted that diversity was not simply a gender issue:
Gender diversity is far from the only problem. Diversity
in terms of socio-economic background and racial and ethnic diversity also
attention. The effect that longevity in the legal profession (and rising into
its senior ranks) seems to have an increasing
conservatism of outlook, work
practices, attitudes to activities outside the law, attitudes to family
responsibilities generally
needs to be addressed. These things cannot really be
addressed without addressing diversity in the legal profession generally - that
is, the pool of quality and experienced candidates coming through. (Female,
0–4 years’ service, Federal,
Supreme/Federal/Family).
Several of those who did not view diversity as a challenge expressed doubts
unconvinced by the
arguments that have been made in favour of it:
I do not agree with diversity for its own sake. Judges
make individual decisions, rather than collective decisions. What is more
is balance possessed by each judge, not balance across the court.
(Male, 10–14 years’ service, Qld, District/County/Federal
The intelligent experienced judicial officer is better equipped to implement
Parliament’s social agenda than an inexperienced
officer from a
“diverse” social background. (Male, 0–4 years’ service,
Vic, District/County/Federal Circuit).
There is no doubt that governments both say that they are appointing on
diversity grounds and are doing so. Diversity is not merit.
Who asks if their
surgeon or engineer comes from a diverse background? Or is law no longer a
learned profession? (Male, 0–4
years’ service, Qld,
Supreme/Federal/Family).
4 Compliance with Best-Practice Appointment
The next question with respect to appointments
explored what a best-practice
version of an executive-only
appointment model might look like. It suggested that such a model should be
buttressed by a number of
safeguards in order to be ‘reliable and
legitimate’. The question was prefaced by the following passage from the
Executive-only appointment systems... require a combination of legal
safeguards and settled political conventions in order to be a
reliable and
legitimate means of appointing judges. The precise mix may differ between
transparency regarding the criteria
for appointment and the procedures followed, a requirement of consultation with
senior judicial
officers and possibly also opposition politicians, and ideally
the existence of an independent body to provide oversight and deal
complaints.
Respondents were then asked to indicate the extent to which they agreed that
the current arrangements for appointing judicial officers
in their jurisdiction
satisfied the Bingham Report’s description of minimal ‘best
practice’. Some 47 per cent of
judicial officers disagreed or strongly
disagreed that their jurisdiction complied with the Bingham’s reports
description of
best practice; 22 per cent were neutral and 31 per cent agreed or
strongly agreed that their jurisdiction met best practice.
Several respondents took issue with the Bingham Report’s description of
best practice:
I do not accept that that report describes best
practice. While there is scope for improving transparency in appointments, all
measures proved in practice to be a waste. Applicants for judicial office
writing essays is ridiculous. The bureaucratic process
leads to long delays in
appointments. (Male, 0–4 years’ service, NSW,
Supreme/Federal/Family).
I do not agree with the proposition that the quoted passage is appropriately
regarded as “... a minimal best practice.”
It is not. I strongly do
not agree with the proposition that opposition politicians should be consulted,
nor that an independent
body should provide some undefined
“oversight”. (Male, 5–9 years’ service, NSW,
Supreme/Federal/Family).
I mostly agree, but I am not sure about the independent body to provide
oversight. That could turn easily into a second-guessing
of appointments, by a
group of people who themselves have been appointed. As I said, I think the best
modifier of extremities in
the appointment process is a strong and respectful
working relationship between the Chief Justice of the jurisdiction, and the
and Attorney of the day. Too much ‘oversight’ can lead to
compromise appointments and actually be a dampener on diversity.
0–4 years’ service, Federal,
Supreme/Federal/Family).
5 Alternative Modes of Appointment
The possibility of adding an additional process
incorporating a judicial commission or some form of legislative responsibility
explored in the next three questions of the survey. The Bingham Report had
stated that just 18.7 per cent of Commonwealth jurisdictions
appoint all
judicial officers using an ‘executive-only’ model (though a greater
percentage employ this method for highest
courts and/or the position of Chief
In other Commonwealth
legislature, or a judicial appointments
commission’.
Respondents
were initially asked to indicate the extent to which they agreed that it is
appropriate that the executive retain sole
decision-making responsibility for
appointing judicial officers.
The responses to this question showed a
remarkable degree of symmetry, with 40 per cent agreeing or strongly agreeing
that the executive
should retain sole-decision making power while 40 per cent
disagreed or strong disagreed (Figure 4). Twenty per cent indicated
neutrality.
Comments from those who disagreed with the retention of unadorned executive
discretion over judicial appointments focused on the potential
‘manipulation’ of the
and a concern
that the ‘motivation to
appoint a person who will act independently
without fear or favour is decreased in this
While there was no statistically significant association between gender and
response for the question, there was some indication that
female respondents
were more likely than males to disagree with the executive holding sole
decision-making power: 49 per cent of
females disagreed or strongly disagreed,
compared with 32 per cent of males. It is possible that this reflects the
greater female
concern about diversity, which some comments referenced. Several
female judicial officers who disagreed saw the shift away from an
‘executive only’ model as providing an opportunity to enhance
An independent judicial appointments body is vital if
gender balance and diversity is to be achieved at all levels of the judiciary.
(Demographic data omitted)
The remaining two questions on appointments processes tested the
acceptability of two possible additions to the executive-only model.
judicial officers were asked about whether involving the legislature would be
appropriate or desirable. Second, participants
were consulted about the addition
of a judicial appointments commission (Figure 4). Judicial officers did not
find legislative involvement
appealing: 64 per cent of respondents disagreed or
strongly disagreed that this would be appropriate or desirable, while only 17
per cent agreed or strongly agreed.
Not unexpectedly, several comments reflected a fear that such a process would
increase the likelihood that politics would intrude:
Politicises the process. Governments of the day (the
executive) are elected to make decisions such as appointments. The balance is
struck by the democratic process of changing governments and therefore changing
appointment decision makers from time to time. (Female,
15–19 years’
service, Vic, Magistrates/Local).
Others couched this concern more expressly in terms of a diminishment of the
separation of powers:
Umm. Separation of powers? (Female, 15–19
years’ service, NSW, Magistrates/Local)
This sounds risky. It might work if the Bingham safeguards existed but it is not
institutionally desirable in terms of separation
of powers - could lead to
populism and elected judges by default (Female, 25+ years’ service, Qld,
Supreme/Federal/Family)
Respondents were also asked whether it is appropriate or desirable that an
independent judicial appointments commission be established
and conferred with
some decision-making responsibility (including the preparation of a shortlist of
candidates from which the government
must appoint) in the process for appointing
judicial officers. There was a majority view of 55 per cent that a judicial
would be desirable, with 29 per cent disagreeing.
Few comments were made to elaborate these responses. Those who agreed and
commented saw a judicial commission as a significant step
towards a more
appropriate appointments process:
This provides a greater likelihood of a fair,
transparent selection and vetting process. It will enable candidates who
“look like” their predecessors to be considered, and
give greater confidence in the independence from the government
of the day from
the selection and vetting process. (Female, 10–14 years’ service,
Vic, District/County/Federal Circuit)
Several who disagreed expressed concern about the likely composition and
effect of such a body:
An independent judicial appointments commission would be
reflective of the elite of the profession making judgements based upon their
particular worldviews. They are not elected therefore they are not reflective of
any particular base. It would be similar to
allowing the Bar Councils to make
appointments. Same old boy bent. (Female, 15–19 years’ service, Vic,
Magistrates/Local).
C. Discussion
Integrity of appointments process, quality of
appointments and judicial appointments were all identified by 50 per cent or
more respondents
as current challenges in their jurisdiction. This flies in the
face of the easy trope that the judges themselves are, of course,
satisfied with
the appointments system; after all, they were appointed under it.
This level of concern may reflect the high profile controversy that ensued
from the elevation of Tim Carmody to the position of Chief
Justice of Queensland
that was recent at the time the survey was put into the field. But even so, the
survey results offer a clear
affirmation that the topic of judicial appointments
remains a fertile area for debate and further research. This is despite the
sustained academic and judicial comment that the issue of appointment
processes has received over the last few decades. While some
taken steps to increase the transparency and rigor of the appointment process,
these remain the exception and
there does not appear to be much political
appetite in Australia for further or more widespread reform. Indeed, in the case
Commonwealth, the enhanced consultation processes implemented in 2008
appears to have been used since the change of government in
2013. This lack of
political will stands in contrast to what this survey reveals about judicial
interest in reform. With the data
indicating that a majority of judicial
officers (55 per cent) were in favour of the creation of an independent
commission, it seems
that this issue is far from exhausted.
The survey also reveals a significant correlation between those judges
concerned about the issue of integrity, quality and diversity
of appointments,
and gender. This provides us with a reminder of the importance of reflecting on
the way different judicial officers
experience their role and that, as other
academic work has found, women experience the judicial life
differently.
It suggests that
the current appointments process, with all its focus on increasing
representativeness of the judiciary, still remains
of acute concern to the group
which is supposed to have benefited from that focus. It also suggests that
progress to a more diverse
judiciary might be advanced with greater
understanding of the challenges and experiences of women judicial officers
themselves.
The responses in relation to the reform of the appointments process also
provide a salutary reminder of how complex reform can be
in this area, the
myriad factors that need to be considered, and the potential unintended negative
consequences of a particular reform,
such as an independent commission.
Finally, the data generate a note of caution about relying too heavily on
judicial perceptions and ideas in relation to judicial regulation
and reform.
While they might provide an illuminating and important perspective, they should
be supplemented with other evidence.
For instance, the suggestion by one
respondent that an independent appointments body might increase diversity, has
been disproven
in other jurisdictions by longitudinal study. The experience in
England and Wales suggests that a reform of this type may not produce
dramatic change for which this particular respondent is hoping. Since the
inception of the Judicial Appointments Commission in
England and Wales in 2006
the ‘diversity deficit’ in England and Wales has proved to be
stubbornly persistent, with only
modest advances in the percentage of women, and
minimal change in the numbers of judicial officers identifying as ‘black,
or minority
Significantly, the upper echelons of the English court structure have been
especially impervious to any broadening in the diversity
These results have
led one commentator to argue that this should be addressed by returning power to
the executive.
V. JUDICIAL WORKING LIFE
Once appointed, there are
myriad dimensions to a judge’s working life. These undoubtedly differ
depending on the particular
court to which they have been appointed, and also
their occupancy of any special position within that institution. So much is
true of any attempt to compare different work environments in a
particular profession. Accordingly, it is important to refer to the
demographic
information accompanying survey responses on this broad topic so as to
appreciate these differences between jurisdiction
and seniority.
In this section, we consider the judicial working life in six respects:
- the impact of
judges in an acting (or ‘temporary’) capacity;
- the impact of
part-time judges;
- the education
and ethical support provided to judges;
- the judicial
workload, staffing and support;
remuneration and pensions; and
- retirement
B. Survey Data
The responses to the relevant survey questions are
illustrated in Figure 5.
Figure 5: Judicial Working Life
1 Acting Judges
A reliance on acting judges to perform the work of
the courts can arouse strong opinions, particularly in relation to the perceived
threat that their appointment may pose to the principle of judicial
independence. In the 2006 High Court case of
Forge v Australian Securities
and Investments Commission
, Kirby J, when considering whether New South
Wales legislative provisions allowing the appointment of acting judges to the
NSW Supreme
Court were constitutional, asserted in his dissenting opinion that
the ‘time has come ... to draw a line and forbid the practice’
least so far as he appreciated its operation in the particular context of that
At the same time such
appointments can assist the courts, and hence serve the public interest, in
significant ways. They may allow
for the appropriate management of conflicts of
interest, strengthen a bench that is depleted due to temporary illness or
unavailability,
and provide a cost effective way to manage short-term workload
In Australia, while all states and territories provide for some form of
acting appointment (they are prohibited in federal courts
pursuant to
Constitution
), the regulatory arrangements are highly varied and there is
often little transparency around the use of acting judges. There are
horizontally across the states and territories and vertically between courts
within a jurisdiction. Victoria is the only
approach to regulation, applying the same clear legislative rules for all acting
positions across
all court levels with respect to appointment; eligibility;
terms of office; renewal; mandatory retirement age; salary and entitlements;
outside work; and security of tenure. This Australia-wide variability reveals
that there is little principled consideration underpinning
the different
arrangements relating to the appointment, conditions, remuneration and
termination of acting
It is against this backdrop that we sought judicial views on their use.
The responses to the proposition that the use of acting judges was a
challenge showed that judicial opinions were mixed. Of the 142
respondents, 34
per cent agreed or strongly agreed that this is a challenge, 37 per cent
indicated neutrality and 29 per cent either
disagreed or strongly disagreed.
These responses, together with the associated comments, support the
proposition that arguments can be marshalled both in favour and
against the use
of acting judges, but that some disquiet existed among the judicial officers
surveyed about the appropriateness of
the current approach.
Two demographic variables were correlated with different responses: gender
and level of court. Female respondents were slightly more
likely to indicate
that the use of acting judges was a challenge. By court level, those respondents
from superior courts (the Supreme,
Federal and Family Courts, n=34) were more
likely not to see the use of acting judges as a challenge when compared with
those respondents
appointed to either the lower courts (Magistrates, Local,
n=48) or the intermediate courts (District, County, Federal Circuit, n=48).
However, care must be taken due to the fact that federal judges are not exposed
to temporary judicial appointments, and their concomitant
challenges, due to the
constitutional prohibition on such appointments.
Comments indicated that the predominant perceived advantage of using acting
judges was that they provided assistance with the management
of workload
demands. Typical comments were:
As the appointment of acting judicial officers are made
from the ranks of recently retired judicial officers the usual concerns about
tailoring outcomes to ensure political favour is maintained does not occur.
Without acting judicial officers, the efficient operation
of the court during
times of illness and the provision of out of hours services would be
compromised. (Female; Magistrates/Local;
NSW; 15-19 years’ service).
Appointment of appropriate acting judicial officers may be an efficient way to
deal with case backlogs. (Male; District/County/Federal
Circuit; NSW; 10-14
years’ service).
For another respondent the opportunity to ‘try before you buy’
was appealing:
Trialling proposed new appointees for say 3 months is
similarly not objectionable. Both the Court and appointees should have the
opportunity
for an obligation free fixed term trial.
District/County/Federal Circuit; NSW; 25+ years’
A number of negative responses focused on the threat to independence that was
seen as accompanying temporary appointments:
Easily perceived as not independent and not part of the
body of permanent judicial officers ... also golf or surfing 3-4 days a week
one day work and to ensure full days salary string out the hearing of cases or
get part heard to ensure more work. (Demographic
data not provided).
It is of concern when Acting JO’s [Judicial Officers] are used in
substitute for permanent appointments. I am also concerned
that acting
appointments are subject to renewal at the instance of the AG and also the head
of the court and this is a problem in
terms of any potential impact upon
independence of decision making. (Female; Magistrates/Local; Vic; 15-19
years’ service).
They may feel constrained, because of lack of tenure, in acting entirely
independently.
(Male; Magistrates/Local; WA; 5-9 years’
The State Government has been making use of Acting Magistrates over the past 5
years, instead of appointing additional magistrates.
That has enabled the AG to
select retiring magistrates whose approach, particularly to sentencing is
consistent with the Government’s
law and order agenda. At a time when
magistrates have been forced to retire on their 65th birthday certain favoured
retiring magistrates
have been appointed as Acting magistrates up to their 70th
birthday, whilst others who would like to continue working have not received
such a commission. (Female; Magistrates/Local; WA; 10-14 years’
Others noted the impact of drawing on the banks of retired judges, for
There is some discussion, maybe even concern about the
number of retired appeal judges returning to the Court of Appeal. Given the
small number of appeal judges, and the capacity of a small number of them to
exercise a disproportionate influence on appellate decisions,
there is concern
by the 8-year window post retirement
for appointment as an acting judge.
(Female; District/County/Federal Circuit; Vic; 10-14
A few responses demonstrated empathy for the acting judges and indicated that
drawing on acting judges could raise concerns about
the degree to which such
judges were being appropriately managed and supported:
Ok provided that they are given the same resources such
as bench books, lap tops etc to keep them up to date with the changes in the
law. (Female; Magistrates/Local; NSW; 15-19 years’ service).
It’s unfair of the government to appoint acting Judges 5 or 6 times and
then not appoint them to the position.
(Male; District/County/Federal
Circuit; WA; 5-9 years’ service).
Subject to continuity of work to keep up to date. (Male; Magistrates/Local; NSW;
25+ years’ service).
2 Part-time Judges
The survey also explored judicial perceptions of the
use of part-time judges. The judicial role has, like most professions,
traditionally
been conceived of as a full-time one. The Council of Chief
Justices wrote in 2007:
[J]udicial office is a full-time occupation and the timely discharge of
judicial duties must take priority over any non-judicial
As the Chief Justices note, this view is arguably informed by the need to
ensure the efficient administration of justice, and for
judges to largely remove
themselves from non-judicial commitments while holding office so as to avoid
real and apprehended conflicts
or the danger of
bringing themselves or the judicial institution into disrepute. The Law Council
of Australia has expressed concerns
that part-time appointments may be used by
governments to avoid meeting their obligations to staff the judiciary
adequately.
This seems to
anticipate that government may establish part-time judicial positions,
effectively imposing them on the courts, rather
than such an appointment being
at the election of those judges seeking flexible working conditions. Today, the
need for flexible
and part-time working arrangements is an important part of
achieving greater diversity across all workplaces, and the judiciary is
different. However the concerns about how part-time arrangements might affect
the judiciary suggest that there is a need for some
regulation of part-time
appointments.
In 2009, the
Senate’s Legal and Constitutional Affairs References Committee concluded
part-time working arrangements ‘will
be an issue of increasing importance
in attracting and retaining many talented appointees’ and recommended the
development
of a protocol to encourage such arrangements in a manner that did
not compromise the independence of the
To date, part-time judges
have been allowed only in lower courts across Australia, with New South Wales
leading the charge in allowing
part-time magistrates in 1999. Only in Victoria
are part-time appointments allowed across all levels of the judiciary. Despite
allowance for part-time judicial appointments, there has been little
appetite for actually making such appointments. In New South
Wales, between the
time that part-time magisterial appointments were permitted in 1999 and 2014,
only 4 of the 121 appointments (3.3
per cent) made were
This is consistent
with the national figure recorded by Mack and Roach Anleu over a decade ago of
only 8 part-time Magistrates out
of 242 (3.3 per cent).
It is against this backdrop that we sought judicial views on the use of
part-time judicial officers
in their jurisdictions
(Figure 5). In the survey, the responses to the proposition that the use of
part-time judicial officers
was a challenge showed that judicial
opinions were mixed. Of the 142 respondents, more than a third (39 per cent) of
respondents were
neutral about the proposition, with a third (32 per cent)
agreeing and less than a third (29 per cent) disagreeing.
Only one demographic variable – gender – was associated with
different responses. Female respondents were slightly more
likely to indicate
that the use of part-time judges was a challenge in their jurisdiction, with
almost half of male respondents indicating
that they were neutral on the
proposition. That the challenge of part-time appointments is more keenly felt by
female judicial officers
is perhaps explained by the largely gendered foundation
that underpins the need for greater workplace
flexibility.
Only a small number of comments articulated substantive concerns around
part-time appointments:
Fully tenured positions are critical to a robust and independent judiciary,
as is stamina, focus and immersion in one’s judicial
task. I don’t
really see a role for part time judges. (Female; 0-4 years’ service;
Federal; Supreme/Federal/Family).
Most of the comments against part-time appointments focussed on the
difficulty it would create for the administration of the Court:
Difficulties in management. By way of example, dealing with matters that have
to be adjourned. Also raises concerns about the ability
to ensure (as far as
practicable) independence through tenure. (Male; 10-14 years’ service;
Qld; District/County/Federal Circuit).
This does not work as they never share the load of work claiming that they
cannot hear lengthy cases due to not sitting full time.
(Female; 15-19
years’ service; NSW; Magistrates/Local).
While ... flexibility is desirable for the judicial officer, managing
listings and the allocation of cases becomes problematic. Fulfilling
commitments is also difficult when more and more judicial officers are seeking
part time appointments. (Female; 15-19 years’
service; NSW;
Magistrates/Local).
Other respondents supported the arguments in favour of part-time judicial
appointments. For instance:
Yes! This would result in more experienced and worthy judicial officers
staying on longer, or happy to fill in once they have retired.
A flexible work
place is a quality work place. (Female; 10-14 years’ service; Qld;
District/County/Federal Circuit).
Scope for part time judicial officers would make judicial appointment more
available to persons with primary responsibility for the
care of family. It
would also avoid the early and unnecessary retirement of some individuals.
(Male; 5-9 years’ service; Qld;
Supreme/Federal/Family).
3 Judicial Education
To qualify for appointment, a judge must be of
standing in the legal profession for a specified number of years, and,
therefore, must
have achieved minimum standards of education and experience.
However, once appointed, there were traditionally no continuing educational
requirements. Today, a number of national and state institutions provide
continuing judicial education: the National Judicial College
of Australia, the
Australasian Institute of Judicial Administration, the Judicial Commission of
NSW, the Judicial College of Victoria
and the Judicial Conference of Australia.
There is now a National Curriculum for Professional Development for Australian
Officers (developed by the National Judicial College in 2005 in
consultation with the courts and other judicial education bodies).
national standard (albeit still voluntary) for judicial education of five days
per year per judicial officer was prepared
by the National Judicial College, and
endorsed by the Council of Chief Justices of Australia, Chief Judges, Chief
Magistrates, and
other judicial representative and education
A 2010 review revealed
that, while only one jurisdiction had formally adopted the standard, 68 per cent
of judges met or exceeded
It is against this backdrop that we sought judicial views on the education of
judicial officers. In the survey, the responses to the
proposition that the
education of judicial officers
was a challenge were overwhelmingly
in agreement, with 54 per cent of respondents agreeing or strongly agreeing with
the proposition,
23 per cent neutral and only 24 per cent disagreeing or
strongly disagreeing (Figure 5).
For some respondents, gains that have been made in recent years had meant
judicial education was no longer a ‘challenge’,
although it should
be an ongoing commitment. One respondent indicated the question of judicial
education ‘no longer arouses
passions, but was now “just part of the
landscape”’.
these comments came from those jurisdictions with established local judicial
education institutions:
I think there is a strong system of judicial education in Australia and a
positive approach to undertaking programs. (Female, 15-19
years’ service,
Qld, District/County/Federal Circuit)
This issue has improved dramatically since I was appointed in 1994 with the
advent of the NCJA and a much greater recognition of the
need for on-going
education of judicial officers in all aspects of their role. When I was first
appointed, the focus was on the law
- fascinating papers on Mareva injunctions
and the like, but now issues such as court room conduct, personal stress, and
other disciplines (psychology, sociology, criminology etc.) are part
of most education programmes. (Male, 20-24 years’ service,
District/County/Federal Circuit).
However, a number of responses indicated that some judicial officers
appreciated the importance of structured, organised ongoing judicial
which they saw as lacking in some jurisdictions:
I think education is done better in those jurisdictions with a Judicial
College. I think in the other jurisdictions, education is
more ad hoc. At leave
time, it is often difficult to find conferences that are truly educational.
(Female, 0-4 years’ service,
Qld, District/County/Federal Circuit).
Resourcing and time constraints were identified by a number of respondents as
undermining judicial education:
Very little time made available for continuing education (Male, 5-9
years’ service, WA, District/County/Federal Circuit).
Funding of education is inadequate. (Male, 0-4 years’ service, WA,
District/County/Federal Circuit).
Magistrates get the short straw being required to pay for their own textbooks
to keep up to date. It’s an absolute disgrace.
(Female, 15-19 years’
service, NSW, Magistrates/Local).
Others doubted the adequacy of what was being provided, which may be
attributable to the lack of funding:
Judicial Education with respect to magistrates is very poorly resourced. In
recent years the Chief Magistrate has increased the number
of days per year to 4
days however magistrates themselves, unlike other jurisdictions are expected to
fund education themselves with
minimal contribution from the Department of the
Attorney General. Consequently CLE consists mainly of magistrates doing
presentations
for the group, or a judge delivering a paper on an issue, or
organizations who deliver services to offenders, or other court users,
face time with magistrates presenting their programme or service. This does not
engender fresh ideas, or new approaches
or innovation. (Female, 10-14
years’ service, WA, Magistrates/Local).
While there is a large investment in judicial education in NSW, I doubt the
efficiency with which judicial education is delivered
and the usefulness of much
of what is delivered. The main problems are (a) judges and magistrates are not
well-trained in delivery
of adult education and (b) the approach taken is
largely “one size fits all”. Thus much of the effort is either
ill-directed
or of very limited use to the recipients. Like much CPD in the
legal profession generally. (Male, 20-24 years’ service, NSW,
Magistrates/Local).
Finally, one respondent expressed his concern about the voluntary nature of
current judicial education standards:
The real problem has always been there, and that is, the small number of
people who would most benefit from such programmes do not
attend! (Male, 20-24
years’ service, Qld, District/County/Federal Circuit).
4 Ethical Support for Judges
The ethical standards of judicial officers have
traditionally been perceived as a matter for individual judges to determine for
themselves.
The more contemporary approach has been to develop a set of
standards that can guide judicial conduct, such as the
Guide to Judicial
, published for the Council of Chief Justices of
Beyond these
standards, judges are left to consider ethical dilemmas with little formal
institutional support. As the judiciary,
and the legal profession from which it
is drawn, becomes larger and, albeit slowly, more diverse – in terms of
gender, race,
ethnicity, religion, sexuality, class, education, age and
geographic region – it becomes less likely that there will be common
understandings as to the way the judicial role should be
This may extend to
shared, implicit ethical values to difficult dilemmas. Questions thus arise as
to whether this traditional approach
remains adequate.
The question relating to ethical support asked judicial officers to indicate
the extent to which ‘ethical support’ was
a challenge in their
strongly agreeing, 37 per cent
neutral, and 28 per cent disagreeing or strongly
disagreeing with the proposition. Only one demographic factor was correlated
different responses, namely, the level of court. Those respondents from
lower courts (Magistrates, n=48) or the intermediate courts
(District/County/Federal Circuit, n=48) were more likely to see the lack of
ethical support as a challenge when compared with respondents
appointed to
superior courts (Supreme/ Federal/Family Courts, n=34).
Some comments described the ‘traditional’ model and indicated
their high level of comfort with it:
Ethical support is informal, via discussions with other judges and head of
service, Qld,
District/County/Federal Ct)
The collegiate nature of most judicial bodies is one of the great strengths.
(Male, 0-4 years’ service, Qld, Supreme/Federal/Family).
In addition to the informal support of colleagues and heads of jurisdiction,
one respondent referred to the soft law ethical support
for judges:
The AIJA Guide on behalf of the Council of Chief Justices of Australia, is an
invaluable resource in this area, and I would consult
it at least once a month.
(male, 20-24 years’ service, Qld, District/County/Federal Ct).
Some respondents revealed concerns about the management of ethical support at
the senior level within the judiciary. It appeared that
this was dependent on
the individual filling the role of head of jurisdiction. For example:
I think it depends on your court. We have a Chief Judge who is very
supportive and provides good counsel. (Female, 15-19 years’
service, Qld,
District/County/Federal Ct).
One respondent noted possible consequences of a growing and more diverse
judiciary on the traditional ethical advisory model. This
respondent believed
that growing diversity ought to be viewed as a positive development:
This tends to come informally through colleagues, which works well - as it
also does, for example, at the Bar, in my experience. But
such practices depend
on like minded people being able to confide in each other, which in turns means
you need a sufficiently diverse
and approachable judiciary for everyone to find
their ‘buddies’ (female, 0-4 years’ service, Federal,
Supreme/Federal/Family).
Some respondents explained that they would like to see more formalised
systems of ethical support in place. A number of respondents
made comments to
this effect, with suggestions for possible models:
I think a more structured mentoring system would help in this area. As a
relatively new judge, whilst my court is extremely collegiate,
nevertheless quite isolating and others give the impression of being very self
sufficient. (Female, 0-4 years’ service,
Qld, District
Court/County/Federal Ct).
Each Court should designate a retired Judge who is available to assist in
this regard. (Male, 5-9 years’ service, WA, District/County/Federal
There needs to be a federated group of judicial commissions, with one
secretariat to provide guidance and if needed investigation
and recommendation
for removal applying to all judges and magistrates. The standards need to be
consistent Australia wide. (Male,
10-14 years’ service, Federal,
Supreme/Federal/Family).
Evidencing why some judges may feel reluctant to seek ethical support and
counsel from colleagues, one respondent commented:
If you need ethical support you shouldn’t be in the job. (Female, 15-19
years’ service, NSW, Magistrates/Local).
5 Judicial Workload, Staffing and Support
There is an increasing trend to measure the
productivity of the courts by reference to various metrics. Since 1995, the
Productivity
Commission’s annual Report on Government Services has
contained a chapter on the work of the
This provides annual
statistics on the budget and staffing of courts across the Federation, as well
as their annual caseloads –
including cases lodged and finalised. It also
contains an assessment of the ‘key performance indicators’, which
judicial numbers (relative to population), backlog and clearance of
cases. These indicators have been subject to robust criticism
by academics and
members of the judiciary. Indeed, in relation to judicial workload, we probably
have our most developed sense of
the judiciary’s views. Former New South
Wales Chief Justice James Spigelman has said ‘the most important aspects
work of the courts are qualitative and cannot be
Opeskin has
observed that the Productivity Commission ‘has not yet found a suitable
indicator of the quality of courts for
its annual review of government
Mack and Roach Anleu’s 2007 judicial survey revealed a number of
aspects of working conditions that judicial officers identify
as a cause of
dissatisfaction, including policies and administration, control over amount of
work, scope for improving the court
system, court facilities, and availability
of adequate support.
research, many judges were also reported as regarding the volume of work as a
source of stress.
Anne Wallace,
Mack and Roach Anleu have also conducted significant studies into the more
specific question of judicial workload allocation
– including allocating
cases to lists or cases to judicial officers – across
They argue that the
task of judicial workload allocation requires a delicate balancing of competing
principles relating to efficiency,
fairness, impartiality and independence,
which will often contain implicit evaluation of judicial
performance.
The proper funding
of courts in Australia is fundamental to addressing concerns over judicial
workload, staffing and support. In
Australia, it is the executive and the
legislature who have final say over judicial funding levels. As former Chief
Justice of the
High Court, Robert French, pointed out, profound issues are at
stake when court funding is considered:
It is difficult because it must respect the independence of the judicial
branch and because it requires judgments about needs and
efficiency where
criteria to guide such judgments are difficult to define with
Wayne Martin, the Chief Justice of Western Australia, warned that the effect
of reduced or stable judicial numbers, and freezes on
the employment of support
staff, in the face of rising demand is that ‘delays compounded the losses
suffered by victims and
corrupted the judicial
As Sir Gerard
Brennan has explained:
[T]he courts are not an Executive agency ... The courts cannot trim their
judicial functions. They are bound to hear and determine
cases brought within
their jurisdiction. If they were constrained to cancel sittings or declined to
hear the cases that they are
bound to entertain, the rule of law would be
immediately imperilled. This would not be merely a problem of increasing the
it would be a problem of failing to provide the dispute resolving
mechanism that is the precondition of the rule of
In the survey, respondents were asked in two separate questions about the
extent to which they agreed that ‘workload’
and ‘staffing and
a challenge in their jurisdiction. The
responses were overwhelmingly in agreement, with 77 per cent of respondents
agreeing or strongly
agreeing that workload posed a challenge, and 73 per cent
agreeing or strongly agreeing that staffing and support also did so
Only one demographic factor was correlated with different responses, namely
the level of court. Those respondents from superior courts
(Supreme/Federal/Family Courts, n=34) and lower courts (Magistrates/Local, n=48)
were more likely to see workload as a challenge
(82 per cent and 87 per cent
respectively agreed or strongly agreed with this proposition), compared to the
intermediate courts (District/County/Federal
Circuit, n=48) (60 per cent).
Only a small number of comments reflected the position that judges’
workloads were not a challenge. For instance, one respondent
Judges work hard, but so they should - it is an important public office, and
a privilege. The workload is manageable, and our court
is well resourced.
However, it is another reason why judges shouldn’t work on too late in
life - it is demanding. (Female;
0-4 years; Federal;
Supreme/Federal/Family).
Another indicated that they thought the current processes for distributing
workload, at the least, were fair:
Those judges who are responsible for overseeing listing of matters make a
conscious effort to be fair in the spread of matters amongst
the judges.
(Female; 15-19 years’ service; Qld; Supreme/Federal/Family).
Some comments in relation to workload revealed high levels of stress and
concerns over judicial health:
It is recognized across the board that caseloads are high, (and higher than
in the past), there is a pressure to keep taking more
work to keep up with
demand, and a resultant feeling the work is unremitting and judges have no
control over their lives. (Female;
10-14 years’ service; Vic;
District/County/Federal Circuit).
Cut backs on judicial appointments affecting mental health and quality of
life for judicial officers. (Female; 15-19 years’
service; NSW;
Magistrates/Local).
Some respondents expressed concern with workload, and presumably stress, of
working in areas beyond their expertise:
I would like to see the option of judges being able to work only in the areas
in which they have had experience. e.g., crime only.
(Female; 10-14 years’
service; Qld; District/County/Federal Circuit).
Other respondents who were concerned about workload indicated the variety of
factors that had contributed to it, including lack of
adequate resources, the
introduction of new performance measures and the changing nature of legal
Courts expect too much from judges. Bodies such as the Productivity
Commission which produce statistics purporting to assess judicial
“productivity” as if judges were making widgets rather than engaging
in a difficult process of evaluating a number of
different factual and legal
propositions, nevertheless agitate heads of jurisdiction (who should know
better) to demand faster “turn
around” from judges so their court
“looks” better. They impose immense stress in what is an already
stressful environment.
(Female; 10-14 years’ service; NSW;
Supreme/Federal/Family).
Presently and hitherto the solution to increasing workloads appears to have
been to exact greater efficiency from judicial officers
“transacting” more matters in a shorter time per matter. This
damages the integrity of the proper and fair consideration
of each case on an
individual basis and inherently the quality of justice administered. (Male; 5-9
years’ service; Vic; Magistrates/Local).
There is an ever increasing quantity of work combined with increasing
complexity and frequently changing legislation with ever reducing
(Male; 25 + years’ service; WA; Magistrates/Local).
As mediation and other alternative dispute resolution continue to impact, the
residue of hearings are more complex and need more reflection
and writing time.
(Male; 10-14 years’ service; Federal; Supreme/Federal/Family).
Others expressed their understanding that workloads differed depending on a
variety of factors, particularly experience, level of
court and type of
I think this depends on the area in which you are working and the length of
time on the bench. As a new judge, the load is undoubtedly
greater as you
develop systems to ensure you stay on top of reserve decisions. (Female; 0-4
years’ service; Qld; District/County/Federal
This is an enormous challenge. Magistrates have no control, or indeed input
into how their courts function, unless based in a country
location where there
is some measure of control/influence. Over time volume has significantly
increased, the jurisdiction of magistrates
has increased significantly.
Magistrates do not have their own staff, are now expected to do data entry which
was the work of the
Judicial Support Officer (Associate) without recognition of
the impact on the role of the judicial officer, and justice. (Female;
years’ service; WA; Magistrates/Local).
Respondents took an opportunity in their comments to elaborate on the exact
nature of the staffing and support challenges facing their
among these were inadequacy of IT support:
We are very badly resourced. For e.g. this week I am in a court which has no
audio visual link and so I have to swap courts to conduct
the court case
requiring that link. Also this week the prime exhibits in my trial are DVDs. I
have just discovered the jury are in
a room without the ability to watch them.
(Female; 5-9 years’ service; NSW; District/County/Federal Circuit).
This is generally good but as I sit in a regional court, it inevitably
follows that we do not have the same level of technical support
available to a
Brisbane judge. ... (Male; 20-24 years’ service; Qld;
District/County/Federal Circuit).
The staffing for the judges directly is adequate, but we should have better
technological assistance (e.g. we are not provided with
smart phones or with
iPads). Court resources more generally are a problem. My court has 1 person
providing free ADR services to the
whole of the State, doing a job which is done
by multiple people in other jurisdictions. It took much effort to get minor
for creating and then extending e-search facilities and we still
can’t get e-filing. These are just examples. (Male; 10-14
service; Qld; District/County/Federal Circuit).
Another concern identified was the level of support for judges who are
subject to online trolling or attack:
There is no support for judges who are threatened, trolled, or the subject of
sustained attack. (demographics not provided)
Others expressed their views about lack of and reducing staff support, a
comment that was made particularly often by respondents working
in the lower
The move to get rid of tipstaves worries me. As a criminal trial judge
regularly on circuit my tipstaves’ role is very important.
(Female; 10-14
years’ service; Vic; District/County/Federal Circuit).
Cuts to public sector employees mean the courts are dealing with more cases,
more outcomes need to be processed, courts are sitting
for longer periods of
time and there are less court staff available to process the work generated by
the court. There are simply
some tasks such as entering offenders into good
behaviour bonds, issuing warrants for remand prisoners by way of example which
under any circumstance, be postponed to another day. (Female; 15-19
years’ service; NSW; Magistrates/Local).
Registry staff more than decimated under previous government, not rectified
or likely to be. (Female; 15-19 years’ service;
Supreme/Federal/Family).
There is no support at all for magistrates. We type our own judgements, we do
our own research and generally have the privilege of
paying for the latter also.
(Female; 15-19 years’ service; NSW; Magistrates/Local).
Other concerns were that the judicial officers did not have sufficient
autonomy over the hiring and supervision of support staff:
The court staff is employed by the department rather than the court and there
are too few of them. (Female; 15-19 years’ service;
Supreme/Federal/Family)
As with workload, many respondents identified their concerns with staffing
and support as directly attributable to funding cuts and
productivity
expectations:
Staffing is constantly being reduced in order to meet the ludicrous and
arbitrary “productivity” percentage which has
no place in the
delivery of justice in a democracy. (Male; 5-9 years’ service; Federal;
Supreme/Federal/Family).
6 Judicial Remuneration and Access to Pensions
Judicial remuneration and pension arrangements has
been the cause of ongoing tensions between the judiciary and the executive, and
adequacy of remuneration can cut to the heart of judicial
independence.
For example, there
was a successful challenge to the federal attempt to charge state judges a
surcharge on their pensions,
an unsuccessful challenge by Federal Magistrates (now Federal Circuit judges) to
their contributory superannuation
At the federal level,
there is a constitutional guarantee that remuneration will not be reduced during
a judge’s tenure under
Constitution
is otherwise silent
remuneration is generally set by
independent tribunals, such as the
Commonwealth’s Remuneration Tribunal, subject to disallowance by the
Parliament.
In a broader sense,
the sufficiency of remuneration may also adversely affect the administration of
justice by its impact upon the
attraction and retention of high quality
candidates for appointment to the bench.
In their 2007 survey of judicial officers, Mack and Roach Anleu reported high
levels of satisfaction with the rate of salary and benefits
(69.4 per cent and
76.3 per cent respectively).
However, just under one-third of judges (30.9 per cent) agreed that
‘considering all the factors associated with my work, my
remuneration is
low’. One third (33.6 per cent) were neutral and just over one third (35.6
per cent) disagreed with the statement.
With the exception of many lower courts and Tasmania, which operate
contribution-based superannuation schemes, the general pension
scheme that
operates in Australia is a non-contributory, non-capped
entitlement.
Subject to certain
conditions related to age and prior service, the judicial pension is generally
set at 60 per cent of the current
judicial salary. If a judge dies in office or
retirement before his or her spouse, the spouse retains an entitlement to a
of the judicial
While judicial pensions
are generally considered one of the most important attractions of judicial
office, the current scheme is
not without its critics. For instance, Opeskin has
warned, at a time of population ageing, the resulting increase in the
government’s
unfunded liability for the current judicial pension system
poses a significant strain on resources and ultimately the system
The survey asked respondents whether they thought ‘judicial
remuneration and pensions’ were challenges in their jurisdiction.
was little disagreement with this proposition (only 19 per cent of respondents
disagreeing or strongly disagreeing), with 49
per cent of respondents agreeing
or strongly agreeing and 32 per cent neutral (Figure 5).
Only one demographic factor was correlated with different responses, namely
the level of court. Judicial officers working in the lower
courts (Magistrates,
Local n=48) were significantly more likely to see judicial remuneration and
pensions as a challenge (71 per
cent of respondents agreed or strongly agreed
with this proposition). In contrast, respondents from the intermediate courts
County, Federal Circuit, n=48) appeared less concerned (42 per cent
of respondents agreed or strongly agreed with this proposition;
and superior
courts (the Supreme, Federal and Family Courts, n=34) even less (26 per cent of
respondents agreed or strongly agreed
with this proposition). This reflects the
current arrangements in which magistrates are not given the same pension
entitlements as
other judicial officers, and was evident again in the commentary
provided by respondents.
A number of judges expressed their satisfaction with the current levels of
remuneration, and the pension scheme featured prominently
in this consideration,
for instance:
Very good public sector salary and regular review. (Male; 5-9 years’
service; NSW; District/County/Federal Circuit).
Judges focus too much on their remuneration and benefits and not enough on
their responsibilities. When one of the world’s most
generous pensions is
taken into account, we are very well looked after. (Male; 5-9 years’
service; Federal; Supreme/Federal/Family).
Others, however, were very concerned about the current remuneration and
pension arrangements, with a particular eye to the need to
attract appropriate
candidates:
It’s absurd that Judges do not even receive CPI increases over a 2-year
period. (Male; 5-9 years’ service; WA; District/County/Federal
Pension rules are complex and arbitrary. (Female; 0-4 years’ service;
Vic; District/County/Federal Circuit).
Our remuneration is linked to decisions of the federal tribunal. Those
determinations of late have made judicial remuneration less
attractive to those
leading practitioners who would make the best appointees. Further, our
“entitlements”, including
travel allowances are not linked to the
federal determinations or to anything, have not been reviewed in more than a
decade, are
very low and there is no plan for review. (Male; 10-14 years’
service; Qld; District/County/Federal Circuit).
One respondent expressed their concern over remuneration as explicitly tied
to their workload:
[G]enerally happy remuneration is tied to federal increases, but a general
sense the increase in workload and complexity means remuneration
higher. (Female; 10-14 years’ service; Vic; District/County; Federal
There were also other concerns expressed because of disparity of remuneration
and pensions across jurisdictions within the federation:
There is dissatisfaction with those Victorian provisions which affect us
adversely, comparative to interstate counterparts: minimum
retirement age is 65,
not 60, and pension is suspended if a practicing certificate is taken out. ...
(Female; 10-14 years’
service; Vic; District/County; Federal Circuit).
Div. 293 tax
only applies to
NT SC judges - Fed Ct judges & SCt judges from other States are exempt.
(Male; 0-4 years’ service; NT;
Supreme; Federal/Family).
There was some dissatisfaction about the current processes for setting
remuneration, and interestingly this spanned jurisdictions
that used government
and tribunal mechanisms. For instance:
This process should be independent of government and not determined by
political expediency. There is no effective mechanism to support,
advocate for proper conditions and remuneration for Victorian Judicial Officers,
particularly Magistrates. (Female; 15-19
years’ service; Vic;
Magistrates/Local).
Too much time is taken up in the federal sphere making submissions to the
Remuneration Tribunal. (Female; 15-19 years’ service;
Supreme/Federal/Family).
There was some specific concern around the move in some jurisdictions to a
contributory superannuation scheme in lieu of the traditional
entitlement:
The position of magistrates having no access to either a pension or at least
support for medical retirement is critical. (Male; 5-9
years’ service;
NSW; Magistrates/Local).
In contrast, another respondent was in favour of a broader move to the
contributory model:
In my view, it would be better to pay people a larger salary from which they
make savings into super funds like everyone else in the
community. The salary
package would also be far more transparent. (Male; 20-24 years’ service;
NSW; Magistrates/Local).
Some suggestions for reform were made to improve the current pension scheme,
particularly in light of concerns around the ageing of
judicial retirees:
Given longevity of judges, pension should in fairness not commence until 15
years of service or attaining 65 or more. (Male; 10-14
years’ service;
Federal; Supreme/Federal/Family).
7 Mandatory Retirement and Capacity Testing
It is only a short distance from the topic of
remuneration and pensions to that of judicial retirement. Indeed, financial
considerations
are made particularly acute by the fact that, in all Australian
is constitutionally entrenched for members of the federal judiciary following
the 1977 amendment by referendum of s 72
of the Australian
Constitution
The introduction
of mandatory retirement from judicial office at the federal level followed the
earlier imposition of age limits
upon the length of judicial service in the
Supreme Courts of all states – with New South Wales being the first to do
At the federal level, the mandatory judicial retirement age is set at 70
expressly empowers the Parliament to prescribe a lower
maximum age for federal judicial officers other than High Court judges. Seventy
years is also the age limit for state and territory judicial officers with just
a few exceptions. The mandatory retirement age in
New South Wales and Tasmania
for all judicial officers is set two years higher at age
and the mandatory retirement
age for Magistrates in Western Australia and the ACT is 65
The appropriateness of
the current age limits has been questioned, particularly in light of medical
advancements that have greatly
increased life expectancy, and some have argued
that the age of 70 years is too low. At the federal level, any upward change to
limit would require a constitutional referendum.
Arguments have been made in favour of, and against, the use of judicial age
limits. In 1976 a report of the Senate Standing Committee
on Constitutional and
Legal Affairs examined the judicial retirement age. It argued that mandatory
judicial retirement would maintain
vigorous and dynamic courts, provide greater
opportunity for younger, able legal practitioners to serve on the bench, and
the likelihood that judges who lack capacity would continue in office. It
also saw mandatory retirement as consistent with a growing
acceptance of a
mandatory retirement age across the world.
these have been added the social benefits that can be gained from retired judges
applying their experience in other roles, such
commissioners.
However, some have argued that mandatory retirement ages are ‘an
arbitrary, discriminatory and outdated feature of Australian
constitutional
that results in the premature loss of judicial
More recent reviews, while accepting the limitations and problems associated
with mandatory age limits, have considered them nonetheless
necessary. In 2012
the United Kingdom’s House of Lords Select Committee on the
Constitution
acknowledged that ‘age is undoubtedly a blunt tool by which to assess
whether someone is no longer fully capable of performing
their job’ but
was resigned to its use because ‘the principle of judicial independence
necessarily makes it very difficult
to force a judge to retire on the grounds of
declining capacity to
Judicial officers were asked to ‘indicate whether or not you think
there should be a mandatory retirement age for judicial officers’.
who answered ‘Yes’ were then asked to ‘indicate at what age
retirement from the judiciary should be mandated’.
Of the 135 respondents,
only 9 per cent (n=12) gave ‘No’ as their answer, reflecting
overwhelming support amongst the
judiciary for the current system of age limits
determining judicial service in all Australian jurisdictions.
There were 120 responses to the follow up question asking for an indication
of the age at which retirement should be mandated (Figure
6). Excluding the
ages of 60, 65, 78 and 80, which each had a very small number of adherents,
there were three ages that received
substantial support for mandatory
retirement. These were 70 years (42 per cent), 72 years (17 per cent) and 75
years (25 per cent).
A small number of respondents (7 per cent indicated age
ranges, such as 70–72 or 70–75 years, which are indicated in
Figure 6 as ‘Other Range’.
Figure 6: Age of Mandatory Retirement
As New South Wales and Tasmania currently have an age limit of 72 years, one
might have expected this to be apparent in a decomposition
by jurisdiction.
Interestingly, of the 32 respondents from New South Wales, only 8 favoured the
existing age limit, while 9 favoured
70 years and 13 favoured 75 years. Only
three judicial officers from Tasmania responded to this question, two favouring
that state’s
existing retirement age limit of 72 years and one preferring
Few respondents commented on this question explaining their view of the
appropriate age limit, but a sample includes the following:
I think 70 works well. The legal profession is cumulative in terms of
knowledge and experience and I think many people do their best
work in their 50s
and 60s. (Female, 0-4 years’ service, Federal, Supreme/Federal/Family)
I believe 70 is about right. I would make an exception for the High Court of
(Female, 15-19 years’ service, Federal,
Supreme/Federal/Family)
Around 70 is acceptable as long as service for at least 10 years is also a
criterion eg to receive a full pension. (Female, 10-14
years’ service,
NSW, Supreme/Federal/Family)
80 but subject to earlier declaration of incapacity (Male, 0–4
years’ service, NSW, Supreme/Federal/Family)
One comment addressed the question of retirement age by reference to
different types of appointment, pointing out the need for two
age limits upon
judicial service, namely 72 years for permanent judicial officers and 75 years
for acting appointments.
comment highlighted an issue that was the subject of a separate survey
Respondents were asked to indicate ‘the extent to which you agree that
post-retirement age limits on the use of acting judicial
officers are
appropriate’ (Figure 5). The response was largely positive and
indicates that a majority either agreed or strongly
agreed with existing
arrangements (64 per cent), or were neutral (18 per cent). Some 19 per cent had
concerns about the appropriateness
of the post-retirement age limits.
The main thrust of the comments on the question of age limits for acting
judges focused on capacity, for instance:
There are some judges who need to retire early while
others are forced to retire when they are still perfectly capable. A good
experienced
competent judge is a really valuable asset and as long as
appropriate capacity checks are in place I don't see the need for an age
People are far more healthy and vigorous than in the past so expecting a person
to be less able at a particular age is not
necessarily a reliable indicator. In
the community generally people are expected to work longer, the age pension is
expected to be
lifted to 70 years, which although not totally on all fours with
my argument, there is no reason why people's increased capacity
to work to a
later stage should not be reflected among judges. (Female, 10-14 years’
service, Vic, District/County/Federal
One respondent noted that capacity problems could be easier to manage in the
context of an acting appointment:
As the positions are acting only, there can be more
discretion and an easier termination if a person is no longer acute enough to
fill the role. (Female, 15-19 years’ service, Qld, District/County/Federal
Judicial officers were also asked to ‘indicate the extent to which you
agree it would be appropriate for judicial officers to
be asked to undergo
capacity checks at the request of a Head of Jurisdiction or a relevant body
constituted by judges’ (Figure
5). Of the 135 respondents, just 12
per cent expressed any form of disagreement, while 11 per cent were neutral on
the question.
Those in agreement constituted 77 per cent of respondents with 56
per cent selecting ‘agree’ and 21 per cent selecting
Comments in favour indicated that, although rare, the problem of judicial
officers serving while at less than full capacity was not
a theoretical one and
a better response system was required. The more pointed comments included the
This is a very vexed issue and would require
extraordinary sensitivity and safeguards, but the reality is that every head of
would say that most of their “pastoral” time with
members of their court is taken up with a small number and the rest
just get on
with the job. I think that there is much more understanding of depression and
other debilitating health issues and certainly
my experience is that if the
individual asks for help it will be given generously and without judgment. The
problem is the judicial
officer who has problems (which are reflected adversely
in her work) and they are not prepared to seek help. It is then that I think
that the head of jurisdiction (perhaps after consulting senior colleagues)
should have the capacity to compel such tests. (Male,
20-24 years’
service, Qld, District/County/Federal Circuit)
Although comparatively rare, senile judges present real problems. The existence
of a formalised structure would make it easier to
deal with. (Male, 5-9
years’ service, Federal, Supreme/Federal/Family)
Several responses emphasized the importance that any such power of request be
accompanied by ‘safeguards’ (Male, 10-14
years’ service, Qld,
Magistrates/Local) or ‘a proper and fair procedure’ (Female, 10-14
years’ service, Vic,
District/County/Federal Circuit).
C. Discussion
In the work cycle of the judge, 50 per cent or
more respondents to the survey identified education of judicial officers,
and staffing and support services as current challenges in their
very near to
inclusion in this list, with 49 per cent of respondents agreeing or
strongly agreeing that it was a current challenge.
It might have been expected that workload and staffing and support services
would be identified as such. These issues, implicating
as they do the resourcing
of the judicial arm, have been identified in other research as matters of
concern for judicial officers.
Despite the persistence of these results, there is no indication that these
concerns are being systematically addressed. What our
survey responses indicate
is that, from the judicial perspective, the failures of support often manifest
themselves in prosaic ways
similar to those shared in other government
departments and business, for instance, lack of adequate IT support, or
insufficient
direct control over support staff. The survey also provides a
revealing inside perspective on the stress that workload and under-resourcing
causes. This ranged from the additional stress that Productivity Commission
reporting has caused for the judiciary, the stresses
and mental health issues
flowing from unmanageable workloads, to the inadequate resourcing of support
services to judges who might
suffer harassment. The significance of jurisdiction
and court level also provided some guidance in relation to this issue. The
of workloads in the superior and lower courts suggests that these
areas warrant particular attention. This likely reflects the ‘churn’
factor of a large volume of smaller matters in the lower courts; and in the
superior courts the burden of lengthy judgment writing
is perhaps the factor at
The significant concern among respondents that education of judicial officers
remains a challenge for the judiciary is, on the one
hand, somewhat surprising
given the recent advancements in the provision of continuing education to
judicial officers. On the other
hand, it reflects a growing consensus around the
importance of judicial education, and a more critical perspective on the
of the efforts to achieve it to date. The comments reveal criticisms of
the availability of education programs, the resources that
support them, and
their quality. The variability of education between the different jurisdictions
was also a matter for comment that
might suggest further investigation of ways
to support education opportunities across jurisdictions is warranted.
The divided response to whether the use temporary judicial officers is a
challenge reflects an ongoing division amongst the judiciary
appointments, with some openly expressly concern, and others happily accepting
temporary appointment after retirement
(often adding to the disquiet of
others!). The judges are actively attempting to address this division and
unresolved tension, for
instance, in the Judicial Conference of Australia
commissioning a report into the
It demonstrates the
complex nature of such appointments, which deliver significant benefits for the
efficient administration of justice
while simultaneously raising real concerns
The high proportion of neutral responses to the question of whether part-time
appointments represent a challenge perhaps reflect the
underdeveloped use of
part-time judges even in those jurisdictions that permit them, and the
prohibition on part-time appointments
at the higher levels, so that judicial
officers have not had sufficient experience of these appointments to have formed
a view. The
otherwise mixed responses are likely to reflect the fact that, in
the judicial sphere, it is not yet clear whether the arguments
in favour of
part-time and flexible working arrangements outweigh the perceived costs. The
correlation of gender with greater concern
regarding part-time appointments is
likely explained by the largely gendered foundation that underpins the need for
greater workplace
flexibility.
This question of whether sufficient ethical support is being provided is one
in which the individual judicial perspective is particularly
pertinent. The
responses reveal that it is considered a challenge, at least for a significant
percentage of judges (35 per cent).
The introduction of new ethical support
systems, including consideration of more formalised support, should not require
the agreement
of a majority of judges before its introduction, and the data
provide an important intervention in this area to prompt further consideration
of how better to formalise and institutionalise reform. The suggestions of the
judges themselves as to how this might be achieve
provide jurisdictions with a
solid starting point.
The responses to the question of judicial retirement ages represented a
significant intervention in this issue. While there was no
clear consensus about
the most appropriate age for retirement, the responses support the proposition
that there is little disquiet
amongst the judiciary about the prospect of
capacity testing for older judicial officers. This is a highly significant
finding, challenging
assumptions often made by those outside the judiciary about
the extent to which certain proposals for judicial accountability will
tolerated as compatible with the principle of judicial independence.
Finally, in relation to remuneration, it is unsurprising that a number of
judges found judicial remuneration a challenge. In this
dimension, judges are
perhaps self-interested but their concerns should not be so simply dismissed. If
governments take seriously
the stated objective of attracting the most qualified
individuals to the job (although this represents only one of many objectives
underpinning judicial remuneration), a number of comments reveal that the
current levels of remuneration may not be achieving this.
VI. COMPLAINTS, DISCIPLINE AND REMOVAL
The Australian judiciary
is, overall, dedicated, competent and acts with high levels of integrity.
Nevertheless there are occasions
when judicial officers fail to meet the
standards expected of them, either as a consequence of misconduct or incapacity.
instances, their conduct warrants a measured, transparent and
appropriate response. Regulation of judicial conduct has proved to
sensitive, with the major concern being crafting a system that provides
accountability without derogating from judicial
independence. The first
legislative reform occurred in 1986 in New South
and was followed by a
long hiatus before a number of jurisdictions introduced reforms this
As a result, the regulation in this area is in a period of transition.
Traditionally, concerns about judicial conduct are managed
in six key ways. The
first is by selecting judicial officers of appropriate character, who are less
likely to cause difficulties
during their tenure. The second is through the
appeal process. While this process primarily considers matters of professional
it can also raise conduct
For example, a
misogynistic comment may be both misdirection to a jury leading to an appealable
error and a conduct issue.
The third is through the transparency of open court procedures, which expose a
judge to public scrutiny. The fourth is through the
adoption and promulgation of
standards of judicial conduct. Fifth, there is an informal role for fellow
judges, in particular the
heads of jurisdiction, in counselling offending judges
and assisting them in remedying inappropriate behaviour. Finally, there is
‘nuclear option’ of removal of a judge from office in cases of
serious misconduct or incapacity.
Naturally the removal option can, and should, be rarely employed, and in
almost all Australian jurisdictions it requires the involvement
parliament. For example, the
Constitution
provides that
federal judges ‘shall not be removed except by the Governor-General in
Council, on an address from both Houses
of the Parliament in the same session,
praying for such removal on the ground of proved misbehaviour or
incapacity’.
In several of the jurisdictions that have introduced judicial complaints and
disciplinary reforms, little more has been achieved than
the codification of the
traditional approach.
Typically they provide some, mostly administrative power, to the Heads of
For instance, under
the federal system, Commonwealth legislation provides:
The jurisdictional head may take any measures that the jurisdictional head
believes are reasonably necessary to maintain public confidence
in the court
(including, but not limited to, temporarily restricting another judicial officer
to non-sitting duties).
This suggests the head of jurisdiction has the power to speak to the judge
involved, and, where necessary, use their administrative
powers to try to
resolve the issue. In New South Wales, the Judicial Commission has the power to
refer complaints to heads of jurisdiction
if ‘it does not justify the
attention of the Conduct
heads of jurisdiction have even more limited power than is provided by the
federal legislation.
Australia and Western Australia also rely on the head of jurisdiction to manage
complaints short of those, which, if established,
could warrant
An additional
procedure in the
Magistrates Court Act 2004
(WA), allows the Attorney
General to suspend magistrates where they have demonstrated a physical or mental
incapacity or engaged
misconduct.
The approaches that tend towards codification of the traditional system can
be contrasted with more comprehensive formal responses,
such as those in place
in England and Wales.
most recent effort in Victoria appears to move towards this by incorporating lay
voices in the disciplinary system, creating
a system for compulsory medical
testing in situations where there are concerns about capacity, and providing
support for heads of
B. Survey Data
This patchwork of regulation across Australia
provided the backdrop for a series of six survey questions about complaints,
and removal. The distribution of responses is illustrated in
Figure 7: Complaints, Discipline and Removal
1 Management and Investigation of Complaints
The first question asked judicial officers to
indicate generally the extent to which they agreed ‘management and
investigation
of complaints’ was a challenge in their jurisdiction
(Figure 7). The most frequent response was neutral (49 per cent)
35 per cent agreed or strongly agreed that that the complaints
processes constituted a challenge and 17 per cent disagreed or strongly
The respondents’ comments reflected the transition in arrangements in
several jurisdictions. Some explained that Victorian judicial
officers were
waiting to see how the new institutional approaches would work out. A number of
comments from New South Wales expressed
satisfaction with the judicial
commission model operating there:
NSW system is OK. Except that it could be more
efficient. (Demographic data omitted).
I am quite satisfied with the role of the Judicial Commission in NSW and believe
there should be a constitutionally acceptable complaints
process available to
the public for every court. Judicial office should not confer immunity from
investigation of complaints if undertaken
in an acceptable way. (Female, 0-4
years’ service, Federal, District/County/Federal Circuit)
The Judicial Commission is set up to handle such challenges and does so
admirably (Male, 10-14 years’ service, Magistrates/Local,
In other jurisdictions, there was a high level of satisfaction expressed with
the traditional system, with a wariness of judicial
commissions:
The internal process is thorough and, I think, fair. I
support the theory of a Judicial Commission, but beware (a) the bureaucracy
(b) effectiveness being impaired by dealing with the mad and sad. (Male, 5-9
years’ service, Federal, Supreme/Federal/Family).
Others were more critical of the traditional system:
In 21 years I have had very little reason to complain so
I am not qualified to comment. As far as complaints about judicial behaviour
court (and of course the major problem of delay in giving judgment) my opinion
is that the in-house method is out of date. That
is not in any way to reflect on
any head of jurisdiction in my time, but the reality is the lawyer writing to
the Chief Judge about
a judgment that is a year old, must feel at least a tiny
bit of concern that his or her complaint may affect the ultimate outcome.
NSW Judicial Commission system seems to work well so that is what I favour.
(Male, 20-24 years’ service, District/County/Federal
The existing system is entirely unsatisfactory. There is no established process
and no independent oversight of the head of jurisdiction’s
handling of a
complaint, should there be a difference of opinion between the magistrate and
head of jurisdiction. Magistrates have
been moved from one location to another,
involving very significant disruption to family life, with no avenue for review,
where there
has been a disagreement with head of jurisdiction. In WA relocation
can be up to 3000 kms having a significant impact on employment
of a partner and
schooling for children, etc. Fear of being directed to move to a country or
other location which would disrupt the
magistrate's family life operates to
constrain magistrates from raising issues regarding the operation of the court.
(Female, 10–14
years’ service, Magistrates/Local,
2 Discipline and Removal Procedures
The next question focused on the follow up to
complaints, or other instances of misconduct or incapacity. Judicial officers
to indicate the extent to which they agreed that ‘adequacy of
disciplining and removal procedures’ were a challenge in
per cent agreed or strongly agreed and 22 per cent
disagreed or strongly
The data indicate that only gender was correlated with different responses.
Female respondents were more likely to indicate that disciplinary
and removal
procedures were challenges: 37 per cent of female respondents agreed or strongly
agreed with this statement, in contrast
to 24 per cent of male respondents.
Correspondingly, 29 per cent of male respondents disagreed or strongly disagreed
in comparison
to 11 per cent of female respondents.
Several comments reflected dissatisfaction with the existing arrangements,
with typical comments pointing out the difficulties associated
with managing
poor performance and proceeding to removal.
There needs to be a moderate reassessment of how to
manage or remove judicial officers who are clearly bad appointments. (Female,
10–14 years’ service, Qld, District/County/Federal Circuit).
Peer group pressure is a strong disincentive to misbehaviour but a bad appointee
can stay for a long time and have a negative effect
on other judges and the
public. (Female, 15–19 years’ service, Qld,
Supreme/Federal/Family).
Some process is needed to ensure judges keep up to date with their work. (Male,
5–9 years’ service, Federal,
Supreme/Federal/Family).
Others put forward options for reform:
It is very hard (and appropriately so) to remove
judicial officers. In my view, appointments should be made independently through
a Judicial Appointments Commission as in the UK. Perhaps disciplinary procedures
and removals should also be conducted the same way.
So, for example, the NSW
Judicial Commission might be given the power to remove rather than merely to
recommend removal by Parliament.
(Male, 20–24 years’ service, NSW,
Magistrates/Local).
Judicial independence is required. Removal only after the 5 most senior judges
of the court vote by majority to remove the investigated
Judge and then such
removal approved by a majority vote of both houses of Parliament. (Male,
5–9 years’ service, WA,
District/County/Federal
But not everyone was convinced that enhanced discipline and removal processes
were the answer:
It is a mistake to think that there is a way of
“disciplining” a Judge other than removal in accordance with the
traditional
parliamentary process. Anything else fundamentally undermines
judicial independence, which is by definition individual and fundamental.
0–4 years’ service, Qld,
Supreme/Federal/Family).
3 Complaints Handling
The next question asked respondents to focus
specifically on the ‘extent to which you agree that the current mechanisms
handling complaints about judicial conduct are sufficient in your
(Figure 7). Some 47 per cent indicated their
agreement; 24 per cent were neutral, and 28 per cent either disagreed or
strongly disagreed
that current practices were sufficient. No demographic
variables were correlated with the different responses.
There were fewer comments in response to this
question. One respondent provided a strong critique of the uncertainty
associated with
the traditional approach.
There are no formal mechanisms currently, and informal
mechanisms are inadequate, and not transparent. There are not even customs
conventions, which can set a norm. If an individual HoJ [head of jurisdiction]
wanted to ignore past practice, or to introduce
changes, they are free to do so.
There is no enforceable mechanism to compel a judge to engage with a complaint
process, if they
choose not to or do not accept or respect the informal
authority of the HoJ. There is no guarantee of consistency of practice. There
nothing, which can give a member of the public who complains any sense a fair
and transparent process for dealing with complaints.
That is ironical, given the
role of the courts and judges as impartial, transparent and accountable arbiters
of disputes. (Female,
10–14 years’ service, Vic,
District/County/Federal Circuit).
4 Best Practice Removal Procedures
The next question drew on principles contained in
the Commonwealth Latimer House Principles to seek views on the fairness of those
same removal mechanisms.
Principle VII(b) relevantly states:
In addition to providing proper procedures for the removal of judicial
officers on grounds of incapacity or misbehaviour that are
required to support
the principle of independence of the judiciary, any disciplinary procedures
should be fairly and objectively
administered. Disciplinary proceedings which
might lead to the removal of a judicial officer should include appropriate
to ensure fairness.
Participants were asked to indicate the extent to which they agree that
‘the current arrangements for removing judicial officers
“best practice”’ (Figure
7). This was the first of the
questions relevant to complaints, discipline and removal where there was a
majority view. A majority
of respondents (56 per cent) indicated that they
agreed or strongly agreed that their jurisdiction was compliant with the Bingham
Report’s best practice; 25 per cent were neutral and 19 per cent disagreed
or strongly disagreed.
5 Judicial Tenure
The next question asked respondents to reflect on
the topic at a more general level by indicating whether they agreed that
tenure’ was a challenge in their jurisdiction
(Figure 7). This question allowed respondents to consider judicial tenure
and also provided the opportunity to use the comments facility to
reveal ways in which they understood the topic beyond the understandings
may be assumed by outsiders.
In sum, judicial opinions were mixed, although there was some consensus
against this proposition. Of the 142 respondents, 28 per cent
agreed or strongly
agreed that this is a challenge, 32 per cent indicated neutrality and 39
per cent either disagreed or strongly
Only one demographic factor—level of court—was correlated with
different responses. Respondents from superior courts (the
Supreme, Federal and
Family Courts) were more likely not to see judicial tenure as a challenge (59
per cent of respondents) when
compared with those respondents appointed to
either the lower courts (Magistrates, Local, 27 per cent) or the intermediate
(District, County, Federal Circuit, 40 per cent). The lower courts were
most strongly concerned with judicial tenure, with 46 per
cent indicating they
believed this to be a challenge (compared with 25 per cent in the intermediate
courts and 12 per cent in the
superior courts).
The comments supported the current protections for judicial tenure:
Courts and governments are often at odds, and judicial tenure is important to
ensure judicial independence. (Female; 10-14 years’
service; Vic;
District/County/Federal Circuit).
One respondent expressed concern about the ability of governments to
undermine tenure protections through removal mechanisms:
Tenure is fundamental to independence, but also linked to issues such as
pensions and disability/retirement entitlements. Tenure is
a meaningless concept
if a Judicial Officer can be removed for incapacity for example (illness) and
there is no disability pension.
(Female; 15-19 years’ service; Vic;
Magistrates/Local).
One respondent expressed concern not with the security of tenure offered to
her in her judicial capacity, but contrasted that with
when she sat as a
Tribunal member, where equivalent security of tenure is not provided:
In the tribunal jurisdiction in which I also work this is a real issue,
particularly tenure amongst senior members of that jurisdiction
responsible for reviewing government decisions. (Female; 0-4 years’
service; Qld; District/County/Federal Circuit).
6 Power of Removal
The final question sought judicial views on vesting
the power of removal in an independent disciplinary body, separate from both
and legislature, or retaining the status quo, with the legislature
retaining sole decision-making responsibility for determining
the removal of
judicial officers. The question again drew on the Bingham Report
(Figure 7).
Again the responses expose the diversity of opinion within the judiciary as
to the most appropriate way to manage judicial removal.
Some 44 per cent
considered parliamentary approval as the only appropriate mechanism, with 18 per
cent of those strongly agreeing
with that proposition. By contrast, 19 per cent
were neutral and 37 per cent of respondents were open to an alternative model
a disciplinary body holding the power to remove.
A number of those judicial officers who endorsed the process of parliamentary
removal qualified their comments by indicating that
an investigatory process
should precede the parliamentary process. The following comments were
Some form of a tribunal or disciplinary council should
exist to work with the executive and legislature. (Male, 10–14
service, Qld, District/County/Federal Circuit).
Removal of a judge is very serious and ought not be delegated. Certainly
Judicial Commissions can and should make recommendations
but the final decision
ought to be by the legislature in full public view. (Male, 10–14
years’ service, Federal,
Supreme/Federal/Family).
Those who indicated openness to a disciplinary body removing a judicial
officer cited concern with the way the parliamentary process
This enables politics and popularity to override reason
and objectivity. (Female, 25+ years’ service, NSW, District/County/Federal
As the experience with professional bodies shows (and contrary to public
perception), disciplinary bodies made up of peers are much
more severe than the
public. A judicial disciplinary body made up of senior judges would be a very
good idea and would see many more
judges disciplined. (Male, 5–9
years’ service, Federal,
Supreme/Federal/Family).
There was some diversity of interpretation of the question. Some judicial
respondents disagreed with the question but indicated in
their comments that
they thought that a disciplinary tribunal or the like should investigate and
make recommendations to parliament.
Others agreed, indicating that they believed
parliament should hold sole decision-making power over removal, but also made
suggesting that they also thought the involvement of a tribunal to
investigate and make recommendations was appropriate.
C. Discussion
None of the issues regarding complaints, discipline,
tenure and removal was seen as a challenge by 50 per cent or more of
respondents.
While much recent reform has clustered around creating systems and
processes for managing complaints, this was not a matter that
aroused much
concern in the respondents. Misconduct remains an area in which there were
significant differences of opinion about
how it should be managed. Perhaps this
reveals that, as it is an area in which there has been considerable change,
judges are waiting
to see whether the new institutional approaches will address
their concerns. Certainly the responses indicate that some of the hesitancies
that accompanied the introduction of Australia’s first reforms in this
area in New South Wales have lessened, with many respondents
indicating their
satisfaction with that model.
The apparent correlation between gender and concern about disciplinary and
removal processes is something of a puzzle. There are a
number of possible
reasons for the fact that female judicial officers are less satisfied with these
processes, such as a sense that
they are ineffective or unfair. However, no
conclusion can be drawn from the data collected in this survey, and further
qualitative
study is needed.
The revelation by one respondent of her concern about the tenure of tribunal
members (rather than judicial officers) highlights the
need for greater
attention to be paid to the position of statutory officeholders who are given
quasi-independence under their constituting
legislation, and whether this is
sufficient where they have obligations to review government decisions and
actions. This would include
tribunal members, but also officers such as the
Ombudsman, human rights commissioners, and the Australian Information
Commissioner.
The fact that respondents in the lower courts appeared more concerned about
judicial tenure is consistent with the findings of Mack
and Roach Anleau that
magistrates do not in every respect enjoy the same protections as judges with
regard to tenure.
Despite the
evolution of magistrates, over the past few decades, from public servants to
independent judicial officers, anomalies
remain in some jurisdictions with
regard to the consequences of abolishing lower courts, ages of mandatory
retirement, protections
against reduction in remuneration, and procedures and
standards for suspension and removal. It is plausible that these were weighty
considerations for respondents from lower courts when answering the questions
relating to tenure.
VII. CONCLUSION
This article has tried to achieve two things. First,
it has sought to interrupt the current scholarship and regulatory study of the
judiciary by indicating the need to consider the wider judiciary’s views
on these issues. The data have revealed the diverse
array of concerns that are
held by the Australian judiciary with respect to their profession and its
operation as the third arm of
government. It illuminates much of the current
debate around the regulation of the judiciary. In some respects—for
in relation to diversity and appointments, and in relation to the
challenges of judicial workload and resourcing—it reinforces
regulatory reform trajectories. But it may also be said to give added impetus to
those efforts where political will is indifferent
or enthusiasm has wavered. In
other respects, the survey results challenge a relative lack of academic and
regulatory interest. A
good example of this is the concerns expressed by many
respondents over the need for greater education and ethical support. This
represents a clarion call for much more academic attention, and possibly even a
more direct contribution to addressing this need
of the judiciary.
In more than a few areas, our empirical research reveals deep divisions
within the judiciary. These often mirror divisions that have
scholarship and regulatory commentary on these topics. In other cases, with the
strong judicial support for capacity checks
being a good example, the results
highlight the weakness of assumptions that appear frequently in academic and
other commentary.
Secondly, this article has reinforced the need for much deeper research,
including empirical research conducted with the co-operation
of, if not in
partnership with, the Australian judiciary. With the exception of the landmark
research of Mack and Roach Anleu, much
of the public or professional
understanding of judicial views on these issues have been through individual
judicial contributions
to public debates, or the confidential consultation that
occurs between government and heads of jurisdiction. While efforts to bridge
wider divide between the judiciary and the academy are not uncommon in this
country, they are typically focused on substantive
areas of law, and rarely on
the institution that judicial officers themselves constitute.
The value of broader empirical work emerges from this study at a number of
levels. Because judges are educated and intelligent individuals,
long-experience with different facets of the judicial system gained over the
course of their careers, they have valuable contributions
to make to debates
perspective from
the courts, and thus have an understanding of,
for instance, the causes of stress within judicial ranks, or the internal
institutional
challenges of creating part-time appointments, or the level of
ethical support they feel they need. Such inside perspectives might
true complexity of the task of reform; or it might reveal that reform is more
achievable than previously believed. Our
survey has also demonstrated that while
judicial perspectives are important, they should be considered one source of
information,
which needs to be supplemented, verified and contrasted with
This article has demonstrated that this broader empirical research must be
considered foundational in scholarly and regulatory debate.
Only in this way can
we aim to better understand and analyse competing arguments on the contemporary
state of the judiciary, let
alone its future.
Associate Professor,
Co-Director of the Judiciary Project, Gilbert + Tobin Centre of Public Law, UNSW
Professor, Adelaide Law
School, University of Adelaide.
Professor, Co-Director of
the Judiciary Project, Gilbert + Tobin Centre of Public Law, UNSW Sydney.
Professor, Faculty of
Law, University of Technology, Sydney.
The authors thank those judicial officers whose co-operation and interest
enabled them to carry out the empirical research upon which
this paper is based.
John M Williams, “Of
‘Fragile Bastions’, ‘Political Judges’ and ‘Robust
Debates’: Judges
and Their Critics” in Rebecca Ananian-Welsh and
Jonathan Crowe (eds)
Judicial Independence: Contemporary Challenges, Future
(Federation Press, 2016) 210.
http://www.therobingroom.com/md/Default.aspx?state=MD
(03012018), a website that describes itself as ‘where judges are
http://www.kiwisfirst.com/2014-new-zealand-judge-survey-results/
(10052017). Judges are reportedly ranked by intelligence, fairness, legal
knowledge and personal character.
For discussion of early
developments in this vein, see, Elizabeth Handsley, ‘Can Public Sector
Approaches to Accountability
Be Applied to the Judiciary?’
Law in Context
For example, in 2013, it was
reported that the Supreme Court of Victoria would refashion its website as a
‘multi-media hub
with video on demand, summaries of judgments and capacity
for the community to leave comments on news from the court’, including
what the Chief Justice said was a ‘plan that a retired judge might write a
regular blog for the court website to create greater
community understanding
around controversial issues’: Chris Merritt, ‘Retired judge to blog
for Supreme Court’,
The Australian
(22 October 2013). While that
blog no longer appears on the Court’s website, at least one judicial
member of that Court tweets
(Justice Lex Lasry, as @Lasry08). See generally,
Alysia Blackham and George Williams, ‘Social Media and Court
Communication’
; Alysia Blackham and George
Williams, ‘Social Media and the Judiciary: A Challenge to Judicial
Independence?’ in Rebecca
Ananian-Welsh and Jonathan Crowe (eds)
Judicial Independence: Contemporary Challenges, Future Directions
(Federation Press, 2016) 223.
See, eg, Kathy Mack and
Sharyn Roach Anleu ‘The National Survey of Australian Judges: An overview
of findings’
Journal of Judicial Administration
Heather Douglas, ‘Practice and Persuasion: Women, Feminism and Judicial
Diversity’ in Rebecca Ananian-Welsh and Jonathan
Crowe (eds)
Independence: Contemporary Challenges, Future Directions
(Federation Press,
http://www.jca.asn.au/inaccurate-reporting-of-judges-sentencing-reasons-30-november-2017/
(04012018).
<https://www.parliament.uk/business/committees/committees-a-z/commons-select/justice-committee/news-parliament-20151/courts-tribunals-fees-charges-fourth-evidence-15-16>
(24042018).
For two notable exceptions,
see Michael Kirby, ‘What is it Really Like to be a Justice of the High
Court of Australia?’
[1997] SydLawRw 26
Sydney Law Review
Kiefel, ‘On Being a Judge’ (Speech delivered at the Chinese
University of Hong Kong, 15 January 2013).
Sharyn Roach Anleu and
Kathy Mack,
Performing Judicial Authority in the Lower Courts
Macmillan 2017); Sharyn Roach Anleu and Kathy Mack, ‘Managing Work and
Family in the Judiciary: Metaphors and Strategies’
(2016) 18(2)
Flinders Law Journal
Sharyn Roach Anleu and Kathy Mack,
‘Judicial Performance and Experiences of Judicial Work: Findings from
Socio-Legal Research’
(2014) 4(5)
Onati Socio-Legal Series
Sharyn Roach Anleu and Kathy Mack, ‘Work Allocation in Australian
Courts: Court Staff and the Judiciary’
[2014] SydLawRw 29
Sydney Law Review
; Sharyn Roach Anleu and Kathy Mack, ‘Job Satisfaction in the
Judiciary’ (2013) 28(5)
Work, Employment and Society
Mack and Sharyn Roach Anleu, ‘In-Court Judicial Behaviours, Gender and
Legitimacy’
Griffith Law Review
; Mack and Roach
Anleu, ‘The National Survey of Australian Judges’, above n 6; Kathy
Mack and Sharyn Roach Anleu, ‘The
Security of Tenure of Australian
Magistrates’
[2006] MelbULawRw 13
Melbourne University Law Review
Mack and Roach Anleu
‘The National Survey of Australian Judges’, above n 6.
This is not just an
Australian concern. The Judicial Attitudes Survey conducted in England and
Wales, Scotland and Northern Ireland
provides a remarkable snapshot of the
judiciary from the inside. Conducted for the first time in 2014, the survey is
now providing
longitudinal data about judicial working conditions.
Rebecca Ananian-Welsh,
Gabrielle Appleby and Andrew Lynch,
The Tim Carmody Affair -
Australia’s Greatest Judicial Crisis
(NewSouth Publishing, 2016).
Elizabeth Handsley and
Andrew Lynch, ‘Facing up to Diversity? Transparency and the Reform of
Commonwealth Judicial Appointments
[2015] SydLawRw 10
Sydney Law Review
See Gabrielle Appleby and
Suzanne Le Mire, ‘Judicial Conduct: Crafting a System That Enhances
Institutional Integrity’
[2014] MelbULawRw 9
Melbourne University Law Review
Heads of Jurisdiction
approached were: Federal Court of Australia, the Family Court of Australia, the
Federal Circuit Court of Australia,
the Supreme Courts of all six States and the
Northern Territory, the District Courts of New South Wales, Queensland, South
and Western Australia, the County Court of Victoria, the Local Courts
of New South Wales and the Northern Territory, and the Magistrates
Victoria, Queensland, South Australia, Tasmania, Western Australia.
Jan van Zyl Smit,
Appointment, Tenure and Removal of Judges under Commonwealth Principles: A
Compendium and Analysis of Best Practice
(Report of Research Undertaken by
Bingham Centre for the Rule of Law) (The British Institute of International and
Comparative Law,
A number of these comments
are reproduced in this paper. Where necessary they have been lightly edited to
remove any typographical
The only jurisdiction not
included in the survey was the Australian Capital Territory. When the survey was
administered in March
2016, there were just 11 judicial officers serving in that
low numbers might have legitimate concerns about the extent to which their
anonymity could be preserved upon publication
of the data. The two jurisdictions
with the lowest numbers of judicial officers included in the survey had almost
double the number
of the Australian Capital Territory – these being
Tasmania and the Northern Territory with 19 and 20 judicial officers
respectively.
The High Court of Australia
was not included in the survey. This was for a similar reason to that which
justified the exclusion
of the jurisdiction of the Australian Capital Territory
– recognition that concerns as to the preservation of anonymity were
legitimate in a setting with so few judicial officers and were likely to inhibit
Australian Institute of
Judicial Administration,
Judicial Gender Statistics
available at:
<https://aija.org.au/wp-content/uploads/2017/03/JudgesMagistrates.pdf>
Brian Opeskin, ‘The
State of the Judicature: A Statistical Profile of Australian Courts and
[2013] SydLawRw 20
Sydney Law Review
ACT is not included in
this graph on the basis that it was not invited to participate in the
Handsley and Lynch, above
Attorney-General’s
Department, Australian Government, Judicial Appointments: Ensuring a Strong,
Independent and Diverse Judiciary
through a Transparent Process (April
Handsley and Lynch, above n
For a recent survey that
includes all these jurisdictions see Judicial Conference of Australia,
Judicial Appointments – A Comparative Study
(April 2015). Since
that report was produced, Queensland has introduced a protocol for judicial
appointments in the wake of the Carmody
affair, see: Queensland Department of
Justice and Attorney-General, ‘Protocol for Judicial Appointments in
Queensland’,
accessed 24 October 2017
http://www.courts.qld.gov.au/__data/assets/pdf_file/0011/472439/ja-pub-protocol-for-judicial-appointments-in-queensland.pdf
Rob Hulls, ‘We have
thrown open the process for judicial appointment, previously subject to secrecy
Victorian Bar News
http://www.justice.vic.gov.au/home/justice+system/courts+and+tribunals/judicial+appointments
See further discussion in
Opeskin, ‘The State of the Judicature’, above n 22.
This calculation is based
on the figures contained in Australian Institute of Judicial Administration,
Judicial Gender Statistics
, available at:
<https://aija.org.au/wp-content/uploads/2017/03/JudgesMagistrates.pdf>
Kathy Mack and Sharyn Roach
Anleu have obtained some data on these attributes in their national survey: Mack
and Roach Anleu, ‘The
National Survey of Australian Judges’, above n
HP Lee and E Campbell,
The Australian Judiciary
(Cambridge University Press, 2
2013), 36-37. See further, Opeskin, ‘The State of the Judicature’,
above n 22, 512-13.
Sir Terence Etherton,
‘Liberty, the Archetype and Diversity: A Philosophy of Judging’
Gabrielle Appleby and
Suzanne Le Mire, ‘The Australian Judiciary: Resistant to Reform?’ in
R Devlin and A Dodek (eds)
Regulating Judges
(Edward Elgar, 2016)
Available at:
https://aija.org.au/wp-content/uploads/2017/10/Suggested-Criteria-for-Judicial-Appointments-AIJA-2015.pdf.
Stephen Gageler,
‘Judicial Appointment’
(2008) 30 Sydney Law
van Zyl Smit, above n 17,
Female, 10-14
years’ service, Vic,
District/County/Federal Circuit.
Demographic data
See, for instance, Mack and
Roach Anleu, ‘In-Court Judicial Behaviours, Gender and Legitimacy’
above n 10; Ulrike Schultz
and Gisela Shaw (eds),
Gender and Judging
(Hart, 2013); Erika Rackley,
Women, Judging and the Judiciary: From
Difference to Diversity
(Routledge, 2014).
Graham Gee and Erika Rackley, ‘Diversity and the JAC’s First Ten
Years’ in Graham Gee and Erika Rackley (eds),
Debating Judicial
Appointments in an Age of Diversity
(Routledge, 2018) 1.
Gee, ‘Rethinking the Lord Chancellor’s Role in Judicial
Appointments’
(2017) 20(1)
Legal Ethics
Forge v Australian
Securities and Investments Commission (
[2006] HCA 44
2006) 228 CLR 45
, 94 [125]. Kirby J
(at 117 [181]) acknowledged it was not the Court’s role ‘to
pronounce on the “general desirability”
of the appointment of acting
judges’ and that although case had ‘potential significance for State
courts other than the
Supreme Court, it was ultimately focussed on the validity
of appointments of acting judges in the Supreme Court of New South
See further Gabrielle
Appleby, Suzanne Le Mire, Andrew Lynch and Brian Opeskin,
Temporary Judicial
Officers in Australia
(2017, Judicial Conference of Australia).
Council of Chief Justices
of Australia,
Guide to Judicial Conduct
(Australian Institute of Judicial
Administration, 3
ed, 2017) cl 6.2
[1991] 2 SCR 114.
Submission of the Law
Council of Australia, referred to in the Senate Legal and Constitutional Affairs
References Committee,
Australia’s Judicial System and the Role of
Brian Opeskin, ‘The
Supply of Judicial Labour: Optimising a Scarce Resource in Australia’
(2017) 7(4)
Onati Socio-Legal Series
Senate Legal and
Constitutional Affairs References Committee, above n 48, [4.69] 47.
Opeskin, ‘The Supply
of Judicial Labour’, above n 56.
See, for example, the
Commonwealth Workplace Gender Equality Agency, and their strategies on workplace
flexibility:
https://www.wgea.gov.au/lead/strategic-approach-flexibility
Christopher Roper,
National Standard for Professional Development for Australian Judicial
Christopher Roper, Review
of the National Standard for Professional Development for Australian Judicial
Officers (December 2010)
Female, 10-14 years’
service, Vic, District/County/Federal Circuit.
Council of Chief Justices
of Australia,
Guide to Judicial Conduct
(Australian Institute of Judicial
Administration, 3
Mack and Roach Anleu,
‘In-Court Judicial Behaviours, Gender and Legitimacy’ above n 10,
Opeskin, ‘The State of
the Judicature’, above n 22, 491.
James Spigelman,
‘Measuring Court Performance’
(2006) 16(2)
Journal of Judicial
Administration
Opeskin, ‘The Supply
of Judicial Labour’, above n 56, 17.
Mack and Roach Anleu,
‘The National Survey of Australian Judges’, above n 6, 17-18.
Kathy Mack, Anne Wallace
and Sharyn Roach Anleu (2012).
Judicial Workload: Time, Tasks and Work
Organisation.
Melbourne, VIC: Australian Institute of Judicial
Administration.
published studies from this research in: Wallace, Mack and Roach Anleu,
‘Work Allocation in Australian Courts’, above
n 10; Anne Wallace,
Sharyn Roach Anleu and Kathy Mack, ‘Evaluating judicial performance for
caseload allocation’
[2015] MonashULawRw 16
Monash University Law Review
Justice RS French, ‘Boundary Conditions – The Funding of Courts
within a Constitutional Framework’ (Speech
at the Australian Court
Administrators’ Group Conference, Melbourne, 15 May 2009).
Sean Fewster, ‘SA
Chief Justice Chris Kourakis Says Retiring Judges Will Not Be Replaced Due to
Funding Cuts’,
The Advertiser
(25 June 2013); Nicola Berkovic,
‘Fewer Judges Equals More Delays, says Wayne Martin’,
(19 May 2014). See also Sean Parnell, ‘Chief Justice Takes
on Abbott Over Cuts’,
The Australian
(21 February 2014).
Gerard Brennan, ‘The
State of the Judicature’
Australian Law Journal
George Winterton,
Judicial Remuneration in Australia
(Australian Institution of Judicial
Administration, 1995) 19-31.
Commonwealth
(2003) 215 CLR 185.
Baker v Commonwealth
[2012] FCAFC 121.
<www.remtribunal.gov.au/about-us> accessed 24 February 2016. See further,
Brian Opeskin, ‘The High Cost of Judges:
Reconsidering Judicial Pensions
and Retirement in an Ageing Population
[2011] FedLawRw 2
Federal Law Review
Mack and Roach Anleu,
‘The National Survey of Australian Judges’, above n 6, 18; see also
Opeskin, ‘The High Cost
of Judges’, above n 78, 43-46.
Opeskin, ‘The High
Cost of Judges’, above n 78, 43-46.
Ibid, 46-47.
The Division 293 tax on
superannuation contributions by individuals earning over $300,000 was introduced
from the 2012/3 year.
Before that amendment,
section 72 had been interpreted by the High Court as providing for life tenure:
Waterside Workers’ Federation of Australia v JW Alexander Ltd
[1918] HCA 56
(1918) 25 CLR 434.
Retirement Act 1918
(NSW). For an account of the enactment as motivated by
‘a variety of political imperatives and personal agendas and ... the
product of a unique time’ see Tony Cuneen, ‘A Creature of Momentary
Panic’ (Winter,
Judicial Officers Act 1986
, (3); Tas:
Supreme Court Act
Magistrates Court Act 1987
should be noted that transitional provisions preserving a judicial age limit of
72 for judicial officers in the Supreme Court
and County Court of Victoria are
now spent and all presently serving judicial officers in that State must retire
at 70 years.
Magistrates Court Act
(WA) sch 1 cl 11(1)(a); ACT:
Magistrates Court Act 1930
Standing Committee on Constitutional and Legal Affairs, Parliament of Australia,
Report on Retiring Age for Commonwealth Judges
(1976) 11. See also Brian
Opeskin, ‘Models of Judicial Tenure’
Oxford Journal of
Legal Studies
, 639-40. Opeskin explains that ‘the issue became a
live one from the mid-1970s as the Australian parliament began to create
federal courts, invest them with jurisdiction and appoint judges to hear and
determine the new matters’ (at
Blackham, ‘Judges and Retirement Ages’
[2016] MelbULawRw 2
University Law Review
Ibid 784. See also
Australian Law Reform Commission (ALRC),
Access All Ages—Older Workers
and Commonwealth Laws
, Report No 120 (2013) 100;
Opeskin, ‘Models of
Judicial Tenure’, above n 88, 635.
Blackham, above n 89, 772-73; Louis Blom-Cooper, ‘The Age of Judicial
Responsibility: The Retirement and Resignation of
Appellate Court Judges’
in Shimon Shetreet and Christopher Forsyth (eds),
The Culture of Judicial
Independence: Conceptual Foundations and Practical Challenges
Nijhoff Publishers, 2012) 339,
Lords Select Committee on the
Constitution
, Parliament of the United Kingdom,
Judicial Appointments
(2012) 59 [191].
Female, 25+ years’
service, NSW, District/County/Federal
Mack, Wallace and
Roach Anleu, above n 70, 30-1. See also Wallace, Roach Anleu and Mack, above n
Appleby, Le Mire, Lynch and
Opeskin, above n
See, for example, the
Commonwealth Workplace Gender Equality Agency, and their strategies on workplace
flexibility:
https://www.wgea.gov.au/lead/strategic-approach-flexibility
Judicial Officers Act
Magistrates Court Act
Judicial Complaints Act 2012
Judicial Conduct
Commissioner Act 2015
Judicial Commission of Victoria Act 2016
Appleby and Le Mire, above n 15, 7-8.
of Proceedings,
(Unreported, Supreme Court of South
Australia, Bollen J, 26 August 1992) 12–13, quoted in
Question of
Law (No 1 of 1993)
[1993] SASC 3896
(1993) 59 SASR 214
, 219 (King CJ), 232–3
(Perry J), 237 (Duggan J). The Court of Criminal Appeal found that the direction
‘was apt to convey
the impression that consent might be induced by
Question of Law (No 1 of 1993)
[1993] SASC 3896
(1993) 59 SASR 214
, 234 (Perry J), 238 (Duggan
J). King CJ dissented: at
Constitution
For example,
Officers Act 1986
Judicial Complaints
(Cth) sch 1 ss 5, 18; see also at sch 1 s 28.
Judicial Officers Act
Judicial Officers Act
Judicial Conduct
Commissioner Act 2015
; Department of the Attorney General (WA),
Protocol for Complaints against Judicial Officers in Western Australian Courts
Magistrates Court Act
(WA), Schedule 1, cl 15.
See further Richard
Devlin and Adam Dodek (eds),
Regulating Judges: Beyond Independence and
Accountability
(Edward Elgar 2016).
Commission of Victoria Act 2016
commenced operation on 1 July 2017..
These principles are
intended to set out the ‘an effective framework for the implementation by
governments, parliaments and
judiciaries of the Commonwealth’s fundamental
See further initial
consideration of such questions in Gabrielle Appleby, ‘Horizontal
Accountability: The Rights-Protective
Promise and Fragility of Executive
Integrity Institutions’
Australian Journal of Human Rights
Mack and Roach Anleu,
‘The Security of Tenure of Australian Magistrates’, above n 10.
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (12.5 MB)
PDF format (517 KB)
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter