URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/journals/IntJlCrimJustSocDem/2025/24.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 15:02:43
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Enkhtugs, Bilguundari; Walby, Kevin --- "You're Investing in People It's Not a Race. It's Not a Rush': Youth Care Worker Emotional Labour in Inner-City Neighbourhoods Across Canada" [2025] IntJlCrimJustSocDem 24; (2025) 14(3) International Journal for Crime, Justice and Social Democracy 25
‘You’re Investing in People ...
It’s Not a Race. It’s Not a Rush’: Youth Care Worker Emotional
in Inner-City Neighbourhoods Across Canada
Bilguundari
University of Alberta, Canada
Kevin Walby
University of Winnipeg, Canada
Youth work; emotional labour; emotions; safety;
secondary prisonization.
Introduction
was a youth care worker in a Canadian city for seven years. There was one young
Indigenous woman with whom she worked for a
few of those years. As Pearl
described her during an interview:
She wouldn’t open up a lot. She wouldn’t trust anybody. She would
always think that there are ulterior motives ... So
as the first year went on,
she finally opened up to me and she started trusting me ... She wasn’t
very close with her family.
I was kind of like an older sister to her.
During the height of the COVID-19 pandemic, it was more difficult to have a
routine or structure, and the young Indigenous woman started
to grow distant.
Pearl reminded the young woman that she could call any time and Pearl would help
And she did call me at 3 am one time, and I missed it because I was sleeping
... I think she just thought that I was trying to ignore
her or something. And
then a week later, I was told that she committed suicide. One night. And that
was heartbreaking.
Pearl missed one phone call in the middle of the night, and everything fell
apart. This tragic account is not uncommon among youth
care workers and the
young people they support in some poorer neighbourhoods in cities across
In this article, we examine youth care work in two Central Canadian cities.
Although other titles exist, such as ‘support worker,’
‘mentor’ and ‘counsellor,’ we use the term ‘youth
care worker’ throughout this article. These
workers provide support for
children and young adults in need, as well as their families. Our participants
work in economically and
socially disadvantaged neighbourhoods, where poverty
and racism are factors that lead youth towards transgression and decreased
involvement
in education and recreation (Arnež 2022; Miller 2022). As Pearl
put it, ‘the North End is very tough and even walking
around, something
could happen.’ Youth in these neighbourhoods are often involved in the
justice system or face the consequences
of their parental imprisonment (known as
secondary prisonization) (Comfort 2003). Youth care work is meaningful for the
workers and
the people they work with, and it is impactful in these communities.
Despite barriers such as criminalization and low socio-economic
status, these
young people still have many aspirations (Hamilton et al. 2020) that youth care
workers attempt to foster. Little is
known about the collateral consequences and
impacts of secondary prisonization on youth care workers who interact with
children of
incarcerated parents on a daily basis.
Below we examine the activities of youth care workers, and we draw from the
literature on emotional labour (EL) (Hochschild 1983)
to explore the ways youth
care workers manage their own emotions and the emotions of youths when engaging
with challenging circumstances.
The literature on EL helps us examine how these
workers manage their own emotions and deal with some troubling work contexts,
criminal justice work (Anleu and Mack 2005; Phillips et al. 2020;
Westaby et al. 2020). We argue that the young people who are supported
workers experience the effects of secondary prisonization. Consequently, youth
care workers are indirectly exposed to the
effects of secondary prisonization
and must engage in extensive EL. Emotions are central to their work processes,
and these youth
care workers do socially meaningful work even after being
exposed to the effects of secondary prisonization through their interactions
with the inner-city youth. We find that the emotional challenges they face are
amplified by policies associated with conditions of
austerity and their indirect
exposure to the effects of secondary prisonization. To illustrate our findings,
we first review relevant
literature on youth care and emotional labour. Then,
after a note on methods, we provide our analysis of interviews with youth care
workers from some of the more impoverished neighbourhoods in Canadian
Literature Review and Conceptual Position
In this study, we draw on the literature on youth care work. Sercombe (1998)
argues that youth care workers have considerable power
in their jobs, and that
ethics is a crucial factor in their work. They argue youth care workers must be
sensitive to issues of power
and ethics in their communications with young
people. Reiterating this point, Reid and Oliver (2014) contend that professional
and care are important in the training of youth support workers and the
implementation of policies to support youth. Youth work is
crucial because when
youth are not supported, they can become engaged in transgression in ways that
derail their life chances (Davies
2015). Whelan (2010) suggests that youth care
workers must cherish the value of care in doing this work (also see Love and
1994) and, as Spence (2008) notes, communication is fundamental to youth
support work. These building blocks and values of professionalism
and ethics are
fundamental to youth care work, as demonstrated by Zubulake (2017).
The literature on youth care work reveals that emotions and communication,
along with ethics and professionalism, are fundamental
to this work. However, as
Davies (2013) and Price (2018) argue, government policies change over time,
funding levels can decrease
and support from the government can be scaled back,
which makes it more challenging for youth care workers to dedicate themselves
these youths. As Hughes et al. (2014) point out, austerity in government not
only decreases the number of care workers supporting
youths, but increases the
caseloads of workers, which makes it more challenging for youth workers to
undertake emotion work and communication
with youths. Clyne (2015) argues that
sometimes governments can place emphasis on professionalism for youth care
workers at the same
time as material support and financial backing for youth
care divisions are scaled back, a contradiction that makes it difficult
youth care workers to do their jobs.
Beyond government austerity, another challenge is the context within which
youth care workers do their job. The context of criminalization
and imprisonment
creates another set of challenges for youth care workers to navigate, as the
youth they care for can be facing the
stigma and barriers associated with having
a parent who is criminalized or imprisoned. Many young people served by youth
care workers
have parents who are themselves struggling with unemployment,
divorce and criminalization, as our interviewees note. In this sense,
and the youth care workers may experience secondary prisonization (Comfort
Comfort (2003) argues that exposure to the criminal justice system leads to
the experience of secondary prisonization. When family
members – and
especially youths – visit incarcerated family members, they feel shame and
stigma, which can result in
withdrawal and barriers. This finding resonates with
Brayne’s (2014) argument that any criminal justice contact subsequently
results in what the author calls ‘system avoidance’. This means they
will not only distrust and avoid police, but they
will also avoid other systems
such as the healthcare system, the education system, social services and the
welfare system. As Condry
and Minson (2021) point out, the effects of
imprisonment on families are dire, and these effects extend to youth care
workers. The
collateral consequences and the harms of criminalization cut across
social and economic factors associated with well-being. Moreover,
Reizabal et
al. (2021) argue that secondary prisonization can have psychological effects,
which may lead to personality or behavioural
issues. Bailey (2011) maintains
that secondary prisonization can intersect with racism and racial
discrimination, leading to further
marginalization and deprivation for family
members and young people with an incarcerated parent. As one staff member
located in inner-city
Winnipeg’s North End noted, about 65% or more of the
students served by workers are Indigenous – the population that
impacted by incarceration in Canada.
Sometimes young people experience social harm or pass away by suicide. This
is a far too common issue, as Pearl shared. This results
in a tremendous sense
of loss, grief and sadness for the youth care workers with whom we talked. Youth
care workers must manage their
own sadness and grief while continuing to support
young people and their families in the context of secondary prisonization and,
by extension, these workers experience the effects of imprisonment and
criminalization. Youth care workers attempt to mitigate the
negative effects and
consequences of imprisonment. In doing so, youth care workers must
simultaneously manage their own emotions
and those of the young people with whom
In addition to the literature on youth care work and secondary prisonization,
we engage with the literature on emotional labour, particularly
in criminal
justice work (Anleu and Mack 2005; Perry and Ricciardelli 2021; Phillips et al.
2020; Westaby et al. 2020). Hochschild
(1983) famously examined emotion work and
emotional labour, defining emotion work as the work people do in everyday life
their emotions according to feeling rules, to prevent outbursts and to
follow the social order as it pertains to emotions in any
particular situation.
On the other hand, emotional labour is the performance of emotion work within an
organization, often for pay.
The organization or employer may set the emotion
rules in this work context (also see Walby and Spencer 2012; 2020). The example
Hochschild uses is that of airline attendants, who must be kind, courteous and
prompt under challenging work conditions where people
are not always behaving at
their best. Workers engaging in emotional labour self-regulate their private
emotions and abide by feeling
rules in the context of a given work setting.
Continued emotional labour can create dissonance or alienation where people
become detached from their typical sense of self or their
usual approach to
experiencing daily life. Repeated emotional labour can do damage when one
continually takes on the demands and
stress of performing EL. To manage their
emotions, workers in different fields of work create an emotional climate in
which emotions
travel in time and space through communication, making the
experience of emotions a collective one. According to Rimé (2007),
collective nature of emotions is important in constructing relationships between
co-workers and their clients because the collectively
experienced emotions shape
the overall emotion atmosphere, which helps them to avoid stressful situations.
There is also a secondary
set of literature on emotional labour debating the
concept and some of the nuances of Hochschild’s ideas (Theodosius 2006;
see also Walby and Cole 2019; Walby and Spencer 2018). This literature on EL
provides a framework for thinking about the nature of
youth care work and how
youth care workers undertake the activities of managing the emotions of young
people while controlling their
own emotions and experiences over time.
Literature on youth care work in the Canadian context is rare. As Barford and
Whelton (2014) show in the Western Canadian context,
youth care workers become
emotionally exhausted from work pressure. Similarly, Karabanow’s (1999)
earlier research focuses
on the importance of organizational culture in shaping
the experiences of emotional labour among youth shelter workers in Canada.
the US context, White et al. (2020) found that levels of actual support and
perceived support from direct supervisors affect the
mental well-being of
support workers. They also found that stress experienced at work is felt at home
as these workers carry their
emotions over into their private lives. In the UK
context, de St Croix (2013) and Parry, Williams and Oldfield (2022) show the
of recognition of emotional labour in human services work. Building
on this literature, we examine how emotional labour is performed
by youth care
workers in the context of socio-economically disadvantaged communities in Canada
while describing the emotional labour
that youth care workers engage in, the
supports they rely on to navigate these difficult moments and some of the
consequences. Bringing
together literature on youth care work, secondary
prisonization and emotional labour, we provide a framework to analyze the
between emotion work and secondary prisonization through tertiary
relations during times of austerity.
Methodology
Guided by a constructivist grounded theory approach, we explore how youth
care workers perform emotional labour and cope with the
stresses associated with
extensive emotional labour and indirect exposure to secondary prisonization
(Charmaz, 2001; Cresswell and
Poth 2017). We interviewed eight participants from
two non-profit community organizations in Canada from late November 2022 to late
January 2023. One of the community organizations on which we report is located
in inner-city Winnipeg’s North End – one
of the poorest
neighbourhoods in the country, known for its long history of being viewed as an
‘undesirable place to live’
(MacKinnon 2020: 203). The other
organization serves cities in the Greater Toronto Area. Two gatekeepers from
Toronto and Winnipeg
played a crucial role in helping to recruit participants,
as we maintained contact with the gatekeepers from June 2022. We also received
comments and reflections on the manuscript from members of the groups. Formal
approval from the University of Winnipeg’s Ethics
Board was obtained to
conduct this study. Once the approval was issued, the gatekeepers connected
participants with us by email to
schedule in-person or online interviews via
Zoom. Snowball sampling was used for recruitment, given the gatekeepers’
involvement in this study. We have conducted one face-to-face interview
and seven interviews on Zoom. Our interviews lasted from
0.5 to 1.5 hours. Our
participants had between one and ten years of ongoing work experience (except
for one who ended their employment
a few months before the interview in January
The online synchronous meeting platform (Zoom) has extended the outreach of
study participation (Deakin and Wakefield 2013; Hamilton
and Bowers 2006).
Online interviews are convenient, easily accessible and save travel time and
money (Gray et al. 2020). The interviewees
felt comfortable sharing their work
experiences from the perspective of those working in inner-city North End, even
though sharing
stories about emotions online or over the phone can be
problematic or limited (Madge and O’Connor 2004, cited in Deakin and
Wakefield 2014: 605). We used unstructured interview questions that focused
broadly on the types of emotions experienced by participants,
the types of
emotions displayed by the children with whom they worked, how our participants
managed emotionally challenging moments,
their views of the justice system and
future needs and concerns.
In addition to interview questions, we used the visual techniques of object
elicitation (De Leon and Cohen 2005; Willig 2016) and
photo elicitation (Harper
2002). We asked participants to bring an object that represented their
engagement with emotion work. Participants
had a choice to describe an object or
to share a picture of an item that related to emotion work. These visual
techniques helped
our participants to elicit in-depth responses about their
emotions, stress coping skills and explore the ways they formed a collective
emotion atmosphere. Further, this technique enabled our interviewees to
‘think visually,’ enriching their responses through
visual cues
(Alexander 2013). Visual methods tell a story by unpacking thick meanings, which
in turn helps to foster data triangulation
(Pink 2013). The visual techniques
made stressful conversations a little less difficult, as visual guides were
there to iterate about
how our participants managed their emotions and the
stress that arose from their work (Guillemin and Gillam 2004). None of the
participants
showed signs of stress and frustration during the interviews,
though some did recall sad memories when talking about youth.
The interviews were audio-recorded and then transcribed using transcription
software. We have edited the interview transcripts for
accuracy. All responses
were anonymized. We used a constructivist grounded theory approach to guide our
unstructured interview questions
(Charmaz 2001). The constructivist grounded
theory approach was also useful for guiding our data analysis (Charmaz 2001;
and Poth 2017). Without pre-assumptions, we engaged in a memoing
process for a constant comparative approach where each interview
was analysed
before conducting the next interview. The constant comparative approach helped
us to ask additional questions during
the next interview, which enabled us to
obtain more-detailed responses about our participants’ work duties and the
of their work. In fact, via this constant comparative method, we were
able to gain insight into the challenges presented by austerity,
norms related to emotions and display rules. In our analysis, we used open
coding to identify different aspects of support
work and emotions related to
this line of work. With axial coding, we identified how youth care workers
perform EL through different
interactions, including youth and their family
members, as well as their colleagues – that is, other youth care workers.
ideas grounded in the open and axial coding approaches generated our
argument that EL is a useful concept to explain how, by extension,
workers are exposed to and affected by secondary prisonization. Emotions are
used to mitigate the effects of secondary
prisonization. We recognize the
importance of EL performed by youth workers to better support socio-economically
marginalized youths
and demonstrate that emotion work is an important practice
to also advocate for investment in this line of work, which provides real
to communities.
Findings and Analysis
Situating Youth Care Work Experience in Inner-City Neighbourhoods
Our participants work in non-profit organizations that offer educational,
social, cultural and spiritual support to young people in
urban communities
where issues such as poverty and racism prevail (also see Arnež 2022;
Miller 2022). They work with middle
school and high school students who have
experiences related to the youth justice system or who have experienced the
negative effects
of secondary prisonization in Manitoba and Ontario (Comfort
2003; Condry and Minson 2021). For example, the grassroots organization
Ontario offers children and youths (aged 5 to 25 years) a family visitation
program where they have the opportunity to maintain
a relationship with their
incarcerated parent. Participants who provide child–parent
relationship-building support are directly
exposed to the kids experiencing
parental imprisonment. The changes in youths’ moods and emotions due to
the prison visitation
program expose support youth care workers to secondary
prisonization:
[I]t sits with them and bothers them and then that’s when we have to
debrief them. They have feelings like, ‘Oh, what
if my dad’s not
safe? Like is he gonna come home?’... And they personalize everything and
put the blame on themselves.
And as their support workers, you have to try to
get them to understand that it isn’t their fault. (Kim)
Youths internalize their anxiety and distress as a result of parental
imprisonment. To navigate this challenge, our participants engage
managing both the youths and their own emotions. Through their work duties, Kim
and others become exposed to the justice
system. To mitigate the harms
associated with secondary prisonization, our participants and the non-profits in
which they work aim
to foster welcoming, respectful and trustworthy
relationships that help children and youth to build self-esteem. Interviewees
caring and secure environments for children to succeed in their school
and community. In addition to providing support on site at
their organization,
they perform community outreach work at a local school division.
In Manitoba, most of our participants grew up in the North End, Winnipeg
– the same neighbourhood where the non-profit is located.
Having similar
lived experiences, the participants become familiar with the situations in which
young people find themselves. It
is noteworthy that the 2016 census data from
the city of Winnipeg indicates that 40% of the North End (or North Point Douglas
population identify as Indigenous, whereas only 12% of the city of
Winnipeg’s population identify as Indigenous. Moreover,
while the average
household income in the city of Winnipeg in 2015 was $86,920, the average
household income in the North End was
$43,721 (the City of Winnipeg and
Statistics Canada 2019). Having similar lived experiences – such as
experiencing parental
incarceration and growing up in the same neighbourhood
– connects youth workers in Ontario and Manitoba with the young people,
enabling them to gain a better understanding of their social backgrounds.
Our participants from the two non-profits indicated that Black and Indigenous
youths, and youths of colour, make up the largest part
of their program
attendees. Growing up in the same community helps these workers to connect with
the populations they serve, including
both the young people and their parents.
Support provided to families is crucial, as parents of young people are also in
support. While some parents struggle
‘to make ends
meet’ (Pearl) and seek financial support (with facing food insecurity and
paying bills), some others struggle
with parenting due to the history of
colonization that caused intergenerational trauma and disruption in
socio-cultural values (Grace,
Duke). Some participants are living with
intergenerational trauma from residential schooling, as their parents are
survivors of residential
schools struggling with traditional skills of
parenting. Their lived experiences foster an understanding and non-judgemental
to helping the youths with whom they work.
Acknowledging this common challenge, the study sites provide cultural support
for youth, giving them a chance to reconnect with their
traditional values and
cultures in addition to providing education support. Participants cited several
challenges of having young
people involved in gangs, criminal activities,
experiencing homelessness, addictions and substance abuse, and food insecurity.
the struggles they face, with the needed support, some youths grow to
take on the responsibilities of parenting their siblings, attending
finishing secondary school and attending post-secondary schools. This is the
context of our participants’ work conditions,
where the engagement in
emotional labour becomes a crucial, yet informal aspect of the occupation.
Our findings extend to describing several instances of engagement in
emotional labour that bring positive changes into youths’
elaborate on the ways different arrays of emotions are interpreted and managed
through visual methods in the next section.
Then we explore participants’
experiences of EL concerning community investment (and government austerity),
secondary prisonization
and the importance of the work they do.
Emotion Management
Our participants feel a range of emotions that are broadly grouped as
positive (happiness, satisfaction, gratitude, pride) and negative
fear, anger, sadness). When asked to describe the most rewarding aspect of their
jobs, interviewees cited the events related
to youths graduating, obtaining IDs
for the first time, organizing community events, improving youths’
attendance rates and
not seeing young people being involved in gangs and other
criminal activities. While positive emotions take less effort for our
participants
to manage, negative emotions require active emotion management,
including techniques used to suppress emotions, such as fear and
display positive ones (called surface acting) (Hochschild 1983). Emotion
management is not recognized as part of their
formal work duties, whereas our
data suggest that these youth care workers manage their own as well as young
people’s emotions.
The participants’ extensive engagement in EL relates to youths’
family backgrounds and the environments in which they
grew up, including
instances where youths may be experiencing the consequences of secondary
prisonization. In this context, our participants
learn to suppress their
emotions and engage in EL to offer care and support. As Turkey put it:
‘[A]lthough I do think that
there’s validity in sharing emotion with
them, there’s that fine line of burdening them with something that they
no control over.’
Being cognizant of their personal emotions
and their potential impacts on the youth, Turkey chooses to conceal and suppress
her emotions,
which indicates that surface acting is an important aspect of
youth care work as an occupation.
Another way our participants engage in the management of different rays of
emotions relates to the forming of a collective emotion
atmosphere (Rimé
2007). The emotions displayed by youth care workers do not have boundaries and
can be conveyed through time
and space, having an impact on young people’s
feelings and emotions:
Because they can read right through me. If you’re phony ... and
you’re just doing this for, say you need money, you don’t
this job. They’re going to see right through you and they’re going
to come on it. And they won’t like
you. (Grace)
Similarly, Blake states:
Youth do feed off and feel our vibes
and our energy and whatnot ... you definitely need to kind of check your stuff,
your personal
emotions at the door.’ As much as recognizing a collective
emotional atmosphere is important, other workers explain why they
manage their own emotions by suppressing them:
I don’t need to project my emotions onto the students who already have
emotions that could come to me – to be able to
deal with their emotions.
And if they already have mine, and I just share mine, they wouldn’t want
to come back because they
don’t need my negative emotions dealing with
them. (Mama)
This participant stresses the importance of effectively managing their
emotions and prioritizing their work duty to help and support
young people. The
collective emotion atmosphere plays a central role in this emotion management.
Our participants care about the
well-being of the people with whom they work,
which involves them performing EL. For example, young men may become hesitant to
their emotions. Acknowledging this barrier, our participants engage in
non-judgemental listening and communication, performing the
role of a counsellor
or organizing sharing circles. In other cases, youths are referred to
professional counsellors or Elders in
the community. Youth workers’
collective efforts offer not only emotional support, but in some cases suicide
and self-harm
prevention strategies to young people with experiences of
secondary prisonization. Offering informal counselling, listening to their
needs, and making themselves approachable are some ways participants perform
emotion work because it involves suppression and control
of negative
Coping Mechanisms
In the context of emotional labour, coping mechanisms are actions taken
towards managing emotions (embodied by suppression or expression
of emotions).
One common reason to manage emotion work is the action of carrying over or not
carrying emotions outside of their workplaces.
Carrying emotions over includes
sharing emotions with family members and close friends for solace and comfort.
For all participants, carrying emotions over to their home environment meant
actively engaging in EL at home:
I would say it would be like 24/7. And every time my phone rang on the
weekends, it would just be like a little heart attack like,
someone’s in trouble.’ Because usually no one would call me on the
weekends unless it was an emergency.
The nature of occupation requires transferring emotional atmosphere to their
for time off of work is a
challenge for our participants, but carrying over emotions from their
professional lives to their personal
lives can be helpful for youth (by helping
them at times of emergency and distress) and socially meaningful for youth care
While the range of positive and negative emotions experienced at work could
be shared with significant others at home, some participants
decide not to share
these emotions in their home environment. While some workers cope with emotions
with the help of significant
others, others seek professional help from
therapists. Participants state that they ‘[do] not dump ... things on
friends and
my boyfriend’ (Pearl) and ‘balance things [and]
don’t want their kids to be drained with tragic stories’
Thus, support workers learn to perform emotion work at their home by not letting
emotions out on their significant others.
Coping with difficult emotions and engaging in EL do not stop with youth care
workers’ decisions to carry over emotions. Youth
workers provide emotional
support to each other. Turkey said, ‘We absorb all of this stuff [youth
facing hardships] from our
students and then we just kind of [took a pause] ...
If we don't have each other to kind of vent it out to, then we bring it home
our families.’ By hosting debriefing sessions, workers help each other to
overcome difficult emotions. This kind of collegial
support adds to their
performance of emotional labour.
Aside from learning these coping strategies, the visual data on the object-
and photo-elicitation methods present another effective
approach for coping
mechanisms. Below, we elaborate on the in-depth visual data that helped us
understand the importance of emotion
work (De Leon and Cohen 2005; Harper 2002;
Willig 2017).
The participants who chose to participate in the photo-elicitation technique
shared photos that symbolize their personal involvement
in this line of work of
supporting youths. Despite the challenges they face, the photo-elicitation
technique reveals the reasons
why they remain dedicated to their occupation.
Duke shared a picture of his hobby, which he described as keeping him grounded.
also spoke of how the ‘nurturing’ role of youth care workers
could foster success among youths. Two other interviewees
shared pictures of
their family members that remind them about the importance of their work and
their contributions to the community:
I always think of my daughter and I think of my grandkids and stuff like
that. And then it reminds me why I’m doing this. I’m
not doing this
just for me and the kids. I’m doing it for my family. (Turkey)
Other interviewees chose to bring objects that connect to their emotions. A
traditional medicine pouch, sage bundle, eagle feather
and smudging bowls are
the objects used for object-elicitation. Miniature artefacts made by youths were
also presented as these objects
connect emotional labour with youth care work.
Engaging in spiritual practices helps our participants to cope with and manage
In addition to the participants themselves, they find that providing
cultural and spiritual support is equally important for the
well-being of young
When asked to describe the objects, Alex and Pearl reflected on how these
objects helped them and their young clients to overcome
challenging moments.
These objects have symbolic and spiritual meanings for Alex and Pearl to feel
empowered, strong and ‘grounded’
(or calm and present). Often, they
incorporate traditional teachings and share their knowledge with young people
through the use
of these objects. Pearl describes an object (a smudge bowl) and
highlights a meaning-making process associated with the object, which
have been shared without the use of object-elicitation (Alexander 2013):
My family has been using it as the way to cleanse away all the bad energies
and the emotions that we carry. You smudge your eyes to
see things better, your
nose and mouth to say things better, your ears to hear things better and your
mind to think things better.
And then your heart, to feel to feel those better
emotions or like trying to work through those emotions. It’s more of like
a strengthening tool, I guess, in a way. Like a strengthening and a cleansing
tool. [When] I can’t focus on something, I’m
anxious. I’m
scared. But when I smell the sage, I feel like, okay, I’m calm now.
With the use of photo- and object-elicitation techniques, we find that youth
care workers process or cope with their emotions by engaging
in EL. The visual
methods consisting of object- and photo-elicitation methods are effective
strategies to evoke feelings and memories
(Harper 2002). These techniques helped
us to strengthen our data by adding a visual component while offering our
participants the
opportunity to contemplate the ways in which they performed
emotional labour and its social significance (Alexander 2013; Pink 2013).
Not receiving sufficient funding to function effectively defeats the purpose
of the work of supporting young people while presenting
numerous challenges
related to this type of human-to-human work. When asked about needs and changes
to improve their work performance,
all participants identified the need for
increased funding. Guided by a grounded theory approach, our interview questions
focused on emotional labour, coping mechanisms and work context
involving indirect exposure to secondary prisonization. However,
conditions of
austerity emerged as a key challenge, with in-depth analysis urged. We report on
the implications of the conditions
of austerity as it adds another layer to our
participants’ engagement in EL. Our participants share that to see the
successfully finish high school and pursue further education for a good
future, the non-profit organizations should be able to organize
extracurricular
activities regularly, provide mental health support resources for students and
staff members, and have a sufficient
number of workers supporting young people.
On any given day, our participants work with 30 to 40 youths, despite the fact
hired to work with just 25 youths. This increase in the number of
young clients is associated with the government funding cuts (similar
described by Hughes et al. 2014). As a result, they expressed frustrations with
being burnt out and stressed at work, which
requires them to engage in EL more
extensively. It can result in poor mental well-being, which affects their work
performance. Grace
states that,
‘Staff mental well-being is
important to be productive and serve the youths better. Otherwise we start
falling apart.’
Grace prioritizes her mental health, as mental health could become an issue
impeding work performance. This will affect the collective
emotion atmosphere.
We also noticed that our participants expressed greater concern about the mental
health of young adults and the
need for mental health first aid training for
staff members to better support the kids who had experienced secondary
prisonization.
However, this type of special training is limited due to
constraints in funding and resources.
Besides the mental well-being of staff and youths, maintaining contact with
youths’ families is another challenge related to
the shortage of staff
members (which is directly impacted by conditions of austerity). With the
insufficient number of youth care
workers, young people become disengaged from
the program, and more interested in engagement in delinquent behaviour with
street-based
social groups. Youth care workers must perform emotional labour to
prevent youths from making thoughtless decisions. To do this,
they also need to
stay in touch with parents and teachers. Youth workers undertake home and school
visits to become familiar with
youths’ social backgrounds and establish
positive relationships with their parents. However, it takes multiple attempts
youth workers to connect with families and build positive relationships due
to the parents’ practice of ‘system avoidance’
(Brayne 2014).
Given the shortage of staff members, creating and maintaining positive
relationships with every family presents a
challenge for our participants.
We have focused on emotion management, coping strategies and common
challenges of the occupation. Adding to these challenges, young
family situations related to poverty, social disadvantage and criminalization
undoubtedly present a distressing challenge
that calls for community
reinvestment. In fact, Blake identified one of the main causes of youths being
involved in criminal activities
and why investment in the community is needed:
Sometimes they get so desperate for money and for groceries and for just
resources or help that they will go to extreme lengths and
they will go sell
drugs. They would go find a gang to join ...
Put otherwise by Turkey, the social environment affects youths’
attendance and future success:
Because even if our students don’t pay the hydro bill, if they go home
and there’s no lights on and then they can’t
eat because they
can’t cook or there’s no heat on because they’re freezing in
the wintertime or they’re on
limited heat in the wintertime and stuff like
that, then they’re freezing. And how can they be successful?
Duke also shares how the exposure to secondary prisonization and
youths’ social environment shape their behaviour:
Well, I don’t think it’s totally unique to having a parent inside
[a prison or jail]. I think it’s as much of that
as it is the environment
they grew up in. So it’s lived experience in the sense that they live in
poverty ... I heard the comment.
Well, like, ‘Why can’t I do that?
My dad stole and he’s in jail, so why can’t I steal?’ type of
So, I knew that it’s the lived experience type of thing. But also
I think they witnessed a lot of poor behaviours in the community
they live in.
Blake, Turkey and Duke identified the root cause of the youths’
behaviours and revealed why inner-city youths and their families
should receive
the support they need – whether it is financial, or parenting skill, or
cultural and traditional – that
is beyond what our participants workers
can offer. Youth care workers must engage in EL to help young people struggling
own emotions regarding the structural barriers they face in their
lives. At the same time, in this work setting they are exposed
to the effects of
secondary prisonization. Thus, one way to mitigate this challenge and to improve
the lives of inner-city youths
and their families relates to the initiative of
investing in the community rather than implementing policies towards austerity.
We also find that the value of EL is not recognized by their communities or
government funders of youth care organizations, which
can have an impact on
future funding prospects. The quality of the work they do is not diligently
assessed due to the measurement
of success rates that our participants find
ineffective. Blake shares their insights on the measurement of success that
affects funding
They [funders] want to see A + B = C. Instant results, fast results ... I
think that the crucial part about [the program] is like
the stuff that
can’t be measured. It’s the relationships that students have with us
... The relationships that students
have with schools and their parents are a
lot different than with us ... Lots of the kids trust us ... They [funders] want
the report cards and they want [them] to be decent ... But there’s
more to grades and attendance ... These kids are so special
and so nice.
And there’s more than just names on papers ... You’re investing in
people, you’re investing in time.
It’s obviously you serve like a
four-year term, but that’s kind of an investment that we’re putting
in these young
people to four to six years ... It’s not a race. It’s
not a rush ...
In a sense, the respondent is recounting an experience with the government
demand for fast policy (Peck 2002). Their frustration and
disappointment in the
way work performance is measured stem from the austere government funding
decisions. Result-driven rushed decisions
may be ineffective and may fail the
most vulnerable youths. These youth care workers build positive relationships
that take significant
effort, time, emotional labour and even exposure to
secondary prisonization. We argue that investment policies and the recognition
of the EL conducted by non-profit youth care workers can provide community
safety and positive changes in youths’ lives. These
organizations are
independent of the police and the criminal justice system. As our data on
emotional labour in youth care work suggest,
we advocate seeing more funding
being allocated to the communities where the workers are adequately compensated
while looking after
the young people who experience negative consequences of
secondary prisonization and who need educational, spiritual and cultural
We have brought together literature on youth care workers, secondary
prisonization and emotional labour to examine youth care work
in Canadian
cities, and the ways youth care workers manage their emotions and those of the
young people they support. We have found
that youth care workers develop
strategies to support young people emotionally and feel supported emotionally
themselves, especially
in times of austerity when staff numbers are lower than
necessary and caseloads are higher than optimal.
Learning about youth care workers’ duties, we have expanded the
literature on youth support work and emotional labour. Drawing
interviews we conducted in two urban neighbourhoods, we conclude that youth care
workers should be supported more fully
in terms of financial supports to staff
and their offices, as well as in terms of emotional or social supports, given
the stresses
of the work and the exposure to secondary prisonization.
Empirically, we have found that they work carefully with young people and
a lot of themselves in the lives of young people.
It hurts youth care workers when horrific events happen to young people. Many
of these horrific incidents relate to the effects of
imprisonment and
criminalization on the families of the young people, as well as their social
environments. Thus, we have found that
these youth care workers are not only
navigating the emotions of young people, but also navigating the effects of
secondary prisonization
and criminalization (Comfort 2003). Given these
workers’ lived experiences, socio-cultural background and efforts at
community betterment, these grassroots groups’ efforts to build
relationships with young people to provide real safety in impoverished
communities should be recognized and fully supported by funders.
In addition to these important findings, methodologically we have combined
the use of interviews with a focus on object- and photo-elicitation
methods. We
made a point of asking youth care workers about objects that are important in
their work or that help them with emotional
labour (Hochschild 1983). Some of
them brought objects that had a sacred quality to them. These objects have a
cleansing and healing
quality in Indigenous culture. Others shared photos and
artefacts from which they found solace and comfort. We have made a contribution
by suggesting that talking about objects and looking at photographs, through
visual methods, can be a useful methodological supplement
in research on
emotional labour.
Finally, in conceptual terms, we have argued that emotional labour and
secondary prisonization intersect in ways that deserve more
research attention.
Secondary prisonization extends beyond the immediate family of criminalized
persons and affects those in tertiary
relations, such as youth care workers.
Therefore, emotional labour is undertaken at this tertiary level, suggesting
that the effects
of imprisonment run deeply in our social networks (also see
Clear 2007). The literature on youth care work should continue in this
look not only at ethics of care and professionalism in youth care work, but
further branch out to assess emotional labour
in order to examine emotions
themselves and reveal what emotions and emotional labour can tell us about the
effects of the criminal
justice system.
Acknowledgement
We thank Janet Nowatzki for her insightful comments and suggestions. We thank
the reviewers for their constructive comments.
Correspondence:
Bilguundari Enkhtugs, Centre for Criminological
Research, Department of Sociology, University of Alberta, Edmonton, Canada.
enkhtugs@ualberta.ca
Alexander V (2013)
Views of the neighbourhood: A photo elicitation study of the built environment.
Sociological Research Online
18(1): 1–26.
https://doi.org/10.5153/sro.2832
Anleu S and Mack K (2005) Magistrates’ everyday work and emotional
Journal of Law and Society
32(4): 590–614.
https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/j.1467-6478.2005.00339.x
Arnež J (2022)
Negotiating class in youth justice: Professional
practice and interactions.
London: Routledge.
Bailey H (2011) Secondary prisonization: The effects of involuntary
separation on families of incarcerated African American men. PhD
University of Kansas.
Barford S and Whelton W (2010) Understanding burnout in child and youth care
Child and Youth Care Forum
39(4): 271–287.
https://doi.org/10.1007/s10566-010-9104-8
Brayne S (2014) Surveillance and system avoidance: Criminal justice contact
and institutional attachment.
American Sociological Review
https://journals.sagepub.com/doi/10.1177/0003122414530398
Charmaz K (2001) Qualitative interviewing and grounded theory analysis. In
Gubrium JF and Holstein JA (eds)
Handbook of Interview Research
675–694. Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage.
The City of Winnipeg and Statistics Canada (2019, 24 July)
2016 Census
data – North Point Douglas
https://legacy.winnipeg.ca/census/2016/Community%20Area
Clear T (2007)
Imprisoning communities: How mass incarceration makes
disadvantaged neighborhoods worse
. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Clyne A (2015) Uncovering youth ministry’s professional narrative.
Youth & Policy
115: 19–42.
https://www.youthandpolicy.org/wp-content/uploads/2017/06/clynne-115.pdf
Comfort M (2003) In the tube at San Quentin: The ‘secondary
prisonization’ of women visiting inmates.
Journal of Contemporary
Ethnography
32(1): 77–107.
https://doi.org/10.1177/0891241602238939
Condry R and Minson S (2021) Conceptualizing the effects of imprisonment on
families: Collateral consequences, secondary punishment,
or symbiotic harms?
Theoretical Criminology
25(4): 540–558.
https://doi.org/10.1177/1362480619897078
Cresswell J and Poth C (2017) Five approaches to qualitative inquiry. In
Qualitative inquiry and research design
(4th ed.): 65–108. Thousand
Oaks, CA: Sage.
Davies B (2013) Youth work in a changing policy landscape: The view from
Youth and Policy
https://www.youthandpolicy.org/wp-content/uploads/2017/06/bernard-davies-youth-work-in-a-changing-policy-landscape.pdf
Davies B (2015) Youth work: A manifesto for our times – revisited.
Youth and Policy
114: 96–117.
https://www.youthandpolicy.org/wp-content/uploads/2017/06/davies-youth-work-manifesto-revisted.pdf
Deakin H and Wakefield K (2013) Skype interviewing: Reflections of two PhD
researchers.
Qualitative Research
14(5): 603–616.
https://doi.org/10.1177/1468794113488126
De Leon J and Cohen J (2005) Object and walking probes in ethnographic
interviewing.
Field Methods
17(2): 200–204.
https://doi.org/10.1177/1525822X05274733
de St Croix T (2013) ‘I just love youth work!’: Emotional labour,
passion and resistance.
Youth and Policy
110: 33-51.
http://www.youthandpolicy.org/wp-content/uploads/2013/07/tania-de-st-croix-i-just-love-youth-work.pdf
Gray L, Wong-Wylie G, Rempel G and Cook K (2020) Expanding qualitative
research interviewing strategies: Zoom video communications.
The Qualitative
25(5): 1292–1301.
https://doi.org/10.46743/2160-3715/2020.4212
Guillemin M and Gillam L (2004) Ethics, reflexivity, and ‘ethically
important moments’ in research.
Qualitative Inquiry
https://doi.org/10.1177/1077800403262360
Hamilton S, Maslen S, Best D, Freeman J, O’Donnell M, Reibel T and
Watkins R (2020) Putting ‘justice’ in recovery
capital: Yarning
International Journal
for Crime, Justice and Social Democracy
9(2): 20–39.
https://doi.org/10.5204/ijcjsd.v9i2.1256
Hamilton R and Bowers B (2006) Internet recruitment and e-mail interviews in
qualitative studies.
Qualitative Health Research
16(6): 821–835.
https://doi.org/10.1177/1049732306287599
Harper D (2002) Talking about pictures: A case for photo elicitation.
Visual Studies
17(1): 13–26.
https://doi.org/10.1080/14725860220137345
Hochschild A (1983)
The managed heart: Commercialization of human
. Berkeley, CA: University of California Press.
Hughes G, Cooper C, Gormally S and Rippingale J (2014) The state of youth
work in austerity England: Reclaiming the ability to ‘care’.
Youth and Policy
https://www.youthandpolicy.org/wp-content/uploads/2017/06/yandp113.pdf
Karabanow J (1999) When caring is not enough: Emotional labor and youth
shelter workers.
Social Service Review
73(3): 340–357.
https://doi.org/10.1086/514427
Love J and Hendry L (1994) Youth workers and youth participants: Two
perspectives of youth work?
Youth and Policy
https://www.youthandpolicy.org/wp-content/uploads/2017/06/youthandpolicy107-1.pdf
MacKinnon S (2021) Post-secondary education in the inner-city: Breaking
barriers and building bridges in a divided city.
International Journal for
Talent Development and Creativity
8(1–2): 203–211.
https://doi.org/10.7202/1076757ar
Miller E (2022)
Race, recognition and retribution in contemporary youth
justice: The intractability malleability thesis
. London: Routledge.
Parry S, Williams T and Oldfield J (2022) Reflections from the forgotten
frontline: ‘The reality for children and staff in residential
during COVID-19.
Health and Social Care in the Community
https://doi.org/10.1111/hsc.13394
Peck J (2002) Political economies of scale: Fast policy, interscalar
relations, and neoliberal workfare.
Economic Geography
https://doi.org/10.2307/4140813
Perry K and Ricciardelli R (2021) Working with incarcerated youth: Emotional
labour and moral wages.
The British Journal of Criminology
https://doi.org/10.1093/bjc/azaa107
Phillips J, Waters J, Westaby C and Fowler A (eds) (2020)
Emotional labour
in criminal justice and criminology
. London: Routledge.
Pink S (2013) Making meanings in visual ethnography. In
Doing Visual
Ethnography
: 141–160. Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage.
Price M (2018) Youth practitioner professional narratives: Changing
identities in changing times.
British Journal of Educational Studies
66(1): 53–68.
https://doi.org/10.1080/00071005.2017.1332334
Rimé B (2007) The social sharing of emotion as an interface between
individual and collective processes in the construction
of emotional
Journal of Social Issues
63(2): 307-322.
https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1540-4560.2007.00510.x
Reid H and Oliver J (2014) Beyond rhetoric: Asserting the importance of
professional ethics and values in the training of youth support
challenging times.
Youth & Policy
113: 31-47.
https://www.youthandpolicy.org/wp-content/uploads/2017/06/yandp113.pdf
Reizabal L, Garcia I, Sansinenea E, Sarrionandia A, Fernández E and
Lopez-de-Ipina K (2021) Psychological effects of secondary
prisonization on
older parents.
Trends in Psychology
https://doi.org/10.1007/s43076-021-00127-6
Sercombe H (1998) Power, ethics and youth work.
Youth Studies
17(1): 18-23.
Spence J (2008) What do you youth workers do? Communicating youth work.
Youth Studies Ireland
2(2): 3-18.
Theodosius C (2006) Recovering emotion from emotion management.
40(5): 893–910.
https://doi.org/10.1177/0038038506067512
Walby K and Cole D (2019) Beyond emotional labour: Emotions and peer support
in a Canadian prison.
Emotion, Space, and Society
33: 100631.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.emospa.2019.100631
Walby K and Spencer D (2012) Objects, organizations and the emotional climate
of a mass spectrometry laboratory, in Spencer D, Walby
K and Hunt A (eds)
Emotions matter: A Relational Approach to Emotions
: 181-200. Toronto, ON:
University of Toronto Press.
Walby K and Spencer D (2018) Tree planting as neo-tribalism: Ritual, risk
boundaries, and group effervescence.
Emotion, Space, &
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.emospa.2018.06.006
Walby K and Spencer D (2020) Circus aerialism and emotional
Emotions and Society
2(2): 215-232.
https://doi.org/10.1332/263169020X15943015197376
Westaby C, Fowler A, Phillips J and Waters J (2020) Conformity, conflict and
negotiation in criminal justice work: Understanding practice
through the lens of
emotional labour.
International Journal of Law, Crime and Justice
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ijlcj.2020.100390
Whelan M (2010) Detached youth work, in Batsleer J and Davies B (eds)
is youth work?:
Exeter: Learning Matters
White A, DeMand A, McGovern G and Akiva T (2020) Understanding youth worker
job stress.
Journal of Youth Development
15(1): 47–69.
https://doi.org/10.5195/jyd.2020.817
Willig C (2017) Reflections on the use of object elicitation.
Qualitative
4(3): 211–222.
https://doi.org/10.1037/qup0000054
Zubulake D (2017) Building blocks of professionalism: Values, principles, and
ethics in youth work.
Journal of Youth Development
12(1): 9–17.
https://doi.org/10.5195/jyd.2017.483
Bilguundari Enkhtugs, Centre for Criminological
Research, Department of Sociology, University of Alberta, Edmonton, Canada;
Department of Criminal
Justice, University of Winnipeg, Winnipeg, Canada.
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (629 KB)
PDF format (427 KB)
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter