URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/journals/UTSLRS/2019/3.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 15:51:00
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Aroney, Eurydice; Crofts,Penny --- "How Sex Worker Activism Influenced the Decriminalisation of Sex Work in NSW, Australia." [2019] UTSLRS 3; (2019) 8(2) International Journal for Crime, Justice and Social Democracy 50
Sex Worker Activism Influenced the Decriminalisation of Sex Work in NSW,
In 2015, Amnesty International joined over 200 sex worker organisations in
calling for nations to adopt decriminalisation of sex work.
Despite this, only
two jurisdictions in the world, New Zealand and New South Wales (Australia),
have successfully implemented this
approach. This article examines the role that
sex worker activists played in sex work law reform in NSW through their
representative
organisation, the Australian Prostitutes Collective (NSW). The
APC produced and submitted ground breaking research to the Select
Committee of
the NSW Legislative Assembly on Prostitution (1983-86) whose recommendations
laid the foundation for the decriminalisation
of sex work in NSW. This article
contributes to a developing history of the contribution of sex worker activism
to law reform. It
explores why it is so important that sex worker voices are
included in the process of reform, and how meaningful consultation with
workers helped shape and invoke a radical policy and legal transformation.
Authors: Eurydice Aroney and Penny Crofts
Corresponding author
Eurydice Aroney, University of Technology Sydney PO Box 123. Broadway NSW 2007.
Mobile 61.2.411817283.
eurydice.aroney@uts.edu.au
is a Senior Lecturer in Journalism at the University of Technology,
Sydney. Her award winning audio documentaries chart the radical
and unique story
of the sex workers rights movement in NSW. Eurydice is a member of Scarlet
Alliance, Australia’s peak national
sex worker representative organisation
and a former member of the Australian Prostitutes Collective.
Penny Crofts
is an Associate Professor of Law at the University of
Technology Sydney. She is an international expert on criminal law, models of
culpability and the legal regulation of the sex industry. Many of her
recommendations for the legal regulation of brothels have informed
Parliamentary
debates, influenced council planning policies and shaped proposed law reforms.
How Sex Worker Activism Influenced the
Decriminalisation of Sex Work in NSW, Australia.
Introduction
Through a presentation of a snapshot of time this article explores the
significance of sex worker activism and engagement with law
reform processes to
accomplish and sustain meaningful
New South Wales (NSW),
Australia is one of two jurisdictions in the world to have successfully
implemented and sustained the decriminalisation
of sex work (Abel, Fitzgerald
and Healy 2010).
Notwithstanding
its limited adoption, the decriminalisation of sex work is endorsed by human
rights bodies such as Amnesty International,
medical journal,
and over 200 sex worker organisations globally. Our research is noteworthy
because it shows how the association
between sex workers and the NSW Select
Committee in the mid 1980’s contributed to the current NSW legal and
regulatory framework
of decriminalisation.
It is important to note that the
decriminalisation of sex work in NSW has been a process rather than a sudden
transformation. It began
in 1979 with the removal of penalties for street based
sex work and it was not until 1995 that the decriminalisation of brothels
accomplished. The Committee was appointed to look at possible regulatory
approaches to sex work. At the same time, sex workers,
invigorated by the 1979
legislative reforms and its effects, began to unite and organise. In what
follows, we examine the tense
but often mutually advantageous connection between
sex workers and the Committee. We do this through an analysis of sex worker
archives, Hansard reports and the Select Committee Final
Our analysis of the
archives is consistent with arguments by Tiefer (2018) that academics have a
responsibility to increase scholarship
‘about activism and advocacy
how-to, why and what-for’ to remedy society’s problems with
sexuality’ (Tiefer
2018). By drawing attention to a sex worker movement
archive that chronicles an almost unique narrative - the contribution of sex
worker activists in developing workable and enduring policy - we aim to show how
this collaborative approach between government and
sex worker activists helped
to achieve social justice and enduring law reform.
Although our research
centres on events that took place over thirty years ago, the meaningful presence
of sex worker voices in the
law reform process remains
exceptional.
Instead, sex work law
reform is most frequently endorsed without the input of those most affected and
in a moralistic register asserting
an aim to protect (or punish) women (Wagenaar
and Altink 2012; van der Melen and Durisin 2008, (Munro and Scoular,
For example, in their
recent text
Designing Prostitution Policy
, Wagenaar, Amesberger and
Altink (2017: 33-42) argue that prostitution policy in Europe has been
‘morality driven’ with
fierce debates driven by a coalition of
radical feminists and Christian and social democrats who have argued, amongst
other things,
that sex work is an inherent abuse of women, sex workers are
victims of socially and morally tainted clients, women are primarily
organised crime, and that sex worker organisations themselves are pimp
Similarly, in her analysis
of major Canadian prostitution law reform initiatives during the 1980s and
1990s, Jeffrey (2004) found
that morality played a role in policy formation
across this whole period especially where it applied to street based sex work.
argues that when the Conservative government adopted the controversial Bill
C-49 in 1985 which criminalised communication between
clients and sex workers
[d]rew on a paternalistic gender discourse that posed the nuisance of street
solicitation as a threat to ‘good’ women
who lived in those
neighbourhoods and may be subject to harassment. In this discourse then, only
“good” women who lived
up to the code of decent female behaviour
deserved protection by the state from sexual threats. (Jeffrey 2004: 101)
These legal and regulatory conditions reflect and reproduce “moral
stigma and the cluster of associated stigmatic assumptions
that positions sex
workers not only as ‘other’ and not like us, but a toxin to be
eliminated from the social body”
(Bruckert, Chabot and POWER 2010).
This moralistic approach involves law reformers speaking for and about sex
workers, rather than being informed by and based on the
concrete lived
experiences of sex workers and the kind of reforms that sex workers actually
want and need (Neave 1988: 202-213).
The NSW Select Committee was not
immune to the widely held moralistic view that in a perfect society prostitution
should not exist
(Rogan 1986: xxv).
This is demonstrated in the first
sentence of the introduction to its Final Report that asserts that
“[p]rostitution is not
endorsed by the Committee and no recommendation in
this report is directed to the furtherance of this dangerous and undesirable
(Rogan 1986: xxv). Despite this, the Committee asserted that
morality had little to do with good policy design. For instance it took
express awareness of the “element of intellectual disturbance and disquiet
surrounding the subject which most contributes
to the fugitive character of the
trade and simultaneously hampers attempts to deal with it effectively”
(Rogan 1986: xxv),
and asserted a
desire to “change social attitudes” (Rogan 1986: ix). The Committee
aspired to go beyond making recommendations
and saw its role as providing
“a forum for public discussions of a controversial subject where issues
had all too frequently
been clouded by social embarrassment” (Rogan 1986:
x). To this end it embarked on a series of hearings (both public and private),
drew upon existing research, and commissioned new research. The Chair of the
Select Committee, Pat Rogan, commented that “while
none of us on the
Committee expected that the fugitive trade would suddenly blossom into full and
frank disclosure, such open public
discussion did appear to stimulate an
increased flow of valuable information to the Committee from within the ranks of
those directly
involved in prostitution” (Rogan 1986: x).
These ‘ranks’ were organised and led by the Australian Prostitutes
Collective (NSW) which emerged in response to the
same tensions that warranted
the government inquiry.
this article we demonstrate how the activities of the APC, which became part of
the law reform process, disrupted the construction
of sex workers as
“victims” lacking choice or agency (van der Meulen, Durisin and Love
2013; Wagenaar, Amesberger and
Altink 2017 (Munro and Scoular, 2012)).
In this we confirm Wagenaar’s (2017) insight that the involvement of
sex worker organisations in “authentic dialogue”
with governments
fosters an escape from the “ideology driven”
approaches.
Wagenaar’s idea
of “authentic dialogue” is significant, as this emphasises not just
telling sex workers what is
good for them, or allowing them to express their
views, but actually
to sex workers critique and recommended
legal and regulatory approaches and including them in the formation of policy.
Our focus on the time period from 1983 until 1986 contributes to a history
of involvement of sex workers in the law reform process.
This was a time during
which sex workers developed political skills and made meaningful contributions
to the Select Committee through
the production of original primary quantitative
and qualitative research of their working conditions. The sex workers also
to form the APC to articulate a clear conception of the kinds of reforms
that they wanted.
The Final Report was clearly strongly influenced by the
involvement of sex workers and sex worker activists. Almost every page of
Final Report includes quotations from individual workers and the APC, and
primary research produced by the APC. The APC and its
allies were essential to
instigating and then sustaining law reforms.
We begin by describing our
research materials and approach, then move to the context and regulatory
framework prior to the appointment
of the Select Committee. We go on to explore
the emergence of sex worker voices as individuals and as a collective, and
the ways in which the Select Committee invited and relied upon sex
worker activist led research along with sex worker lived experience
and activist
recommendations. More broadly this
article explores
important that sex worker voices are included and
their voices have
been included in sex work law reform.
Methodology
The methodology of this article was the examination, collation and close
reading of private archives as well as a substantial body
of primary source
materials. Our main source was the sex worker activist archives from individual
members of the APC.
is available in a library collection (Homburg 1970-1986) others are private and
yet to be made available for public access.
The APC archives include
questionnaires, summarised reports and submissions, correspondence, meeting
notes, pamphlets, and APC member’s
media representations. These documents
revealed the organising principles, aims, motivations, strategies, activities,
challenges,
methods, and research of the Australian Prostitutes Collective. The
authors accessed the bulk of these archives thanks to personal
members of the APC. We undertook a content analysis of the archives in order to
gain a sense of APC interventions during
the time of the Committee.
primary source of these archives was the author and researcher Roberta Perkins,
one of the APC’s principal organisers. Perkins
became involved with the
sex worker community in 1981 when she spent two months interviewing transsexual
showgirls, strippers and
sex workers in the bars and clubs of Kings Cross for
research for her honours’ thesis (eventually published as
Queen Scene
(Perkins 1983)). Over the next two decades Perkins, with her
co-researchers and collaborators (including current and former sex workers,
social workers, students, LGBTI activists and academics), published a vast
compendium of original research collected from surveys
and interviews with sex
workers and non-sex workers involved in all aspects of the sex industry (Perkins
1983; Perkins and Bennett
1985; Perkins 1991; Perkins et al. 1994; Perkins and
Lovejoy 2007). When Roberta Perkins passed away in June 2018 her archive was
bequeathed to the Sex Workers Outreach Project (SWOP). Her archive includes
documents produced by many individuals who were involved
in the collective and
consists of nine large archival boxes of text-based materials. At the time of
writing most of these are in
a disorganised state. While the authors became
familiar with the archive contents, it was beyond the scope of this research to
and categorise these to a degree where we can confidently point to the
location of individual references for researchers to pursue.
Perkins drew upon
and referred to many of these archival documents in her published books and
research papers. At the time of writing
the NSW State Library is in
communication with SWOP with the intention of adding Perkins and other APC
archives to the libraries
collection.
Although the replication of our
methodology is limited by the uncertain state and future location of the bulk of
the APC archive,
there is value in our ‘early intervention’ into its
contents. Prominent researchers have argued that there needs to be
engagement between activists and academics for social justice and reform to take
place in the area of sexualities (Altman
2018; Weeks 2018; Tiefer 2018). Many
documents in the archive remain for further analysis - especially those that go
beyond the timeframe
examined in our study.
Our methodology examined the
archive and then reduced the sheer number of materials by restricting our
analysis to a specific point
in time – the period just prior to and
encompassing the Select Committee (1983-1986). This time period is highly
significant
as it encompassed the impact on sex workers of the 1979 reform, the
origins and the formation of the APC, and the mobilisation of
the sex industry
and it allies in responding and contributing to the Select Committee whose
recommendations shaped decriminalisation
and continue to structure contemporary
sex work law in NSW. The archive also included media reports and magazine
articles and submissions
to the Committee. Transcripts of Committee testimonials
were examined in detail.
drew upon Hansard Reports of political
We correlated archive
materials with the Final Report in order to provide some indication of the
extent of influence by the APC on
the Committee’s findings.
Legal and social context of the Select Committee
Committee was appointed after a patchy history of regulating and media
controversy. Prior to 1979, street-based sex workers
were fined and often
imprisoned for soliciting and loitering under the
Summary Offences Act 1970
(NSW). In 1979, reforms were enacted to repeal the two core offences of
soliciting for the purposes of prostitution and being an
owner who knowingly
permits premises to be used for prostitution (keeping a brothel). The reforms
recognised “that the present
law discriminates unfairly against the
prostitute as compared to the customer, and second, that wherever possible the
be directed at preventing and punishing exploitation”
(Parliament of New South Wales 1979: 4923). The impetus for these reforms
from civil liberty groups, feminist organisations and the newly elected Labor
government concerned about the overreach of the
criminal law, the discriminatory
impact of these offences and associated police
corruption.
Throughout this time
there was tension between public order and crime, and problems associated with
the restrictive legal approach,
particularly corruption (Egger and Harcourt
1991). The repeal of prostitution offences in 1979 had the advantages of
decreasing police
corruption and increasing independent sex work (Rogan 1986).
However, the 1979 reforms were incomplete. For instance, although it
longer an offence to own a premise used for prostitution it was still an offence
for owners, managers, receptionists or others
such as family members to
‘live off the earnings’ of prostitution. In addition, police argued
that the repeal of offences
had resulted in an increase of public disorder. The
police used other offences and powers to replace those that had been repealed,
directly undermining the intent of the reforms. For example, according to the
NSW Bureau of Crime Statistics between 1976 to 1978
arrests of females for
‘offensive behaviour’ only numbered 1,663. From 1979 to 1981,
following decriminalisation, the
number of females arrested for ‘serious
alarm and affront’ increased to 10,480 under the
Offences in Public
(Perkins 1991: 142).
The 1979 reforms also had unintended
consequences for those working indoors. Women who chose to work in their homes
independently
could no longer be arrested for ‘habitually using premises
for prostitution’, but they could still be evicted from rental
Landlord and Tenant Act
simply because prostitution was
taking place on the premise. In addition, from the early 1980’s, Sydney
City Council targeted
small female run brothels by acting on by-laws that
prohibited commercial activities in residentially zoned areas. Notices were
by the council on a number of residences that had operated without
complaint for many years in the traditional red-light district
of East Sydney.
These and other effects of the repeal of the
Summary Offences Act 1979
sex workers have been researched in detail and were cited in the Final Report
(Perkins 1991: 139-145; Travis 1986). The research
confirms that the police,
encouraged by a small group of determined residents and supported by City of
Sydney Council, were not only
successful in finding ways to circumnavigate the
intention of the 1979 repeal but were ultimately effective in pressuring the NSW
Government to respond to their concerns with the introduction of a new offence
in 1983 applying to street sex work in residential
zones under the
Prostitution Act 1979
As a consequence of ongoing tensions and
media controversy about the regulation of prostitution, the Government appointed
the bipartisan
NSW Legislative Assembly Select Committee “[t]o investigate
and report upon the public health, criminal, social and community
aspects of prostitution in New South Wales” (Rogan 1986). The membership
of the Select Committee changed over time,
but throughout all members were male
(Rogan 1986: xii). Both sides of politics were well represented, for example
Rogan, Don Browman
and Fred Miller were Labor, whilst Peter Collins and John
Dowd were members of the opposition Liberal Party. Dowd strongly supported
reinstatement of police powers and would go on to become Attorney General in
1988. Collins was Leader of the Opposition between
1995 to 1998 when
decriminalisation of brothels was introduced as a consequence of the
Royal Commission
The Select Committee was appointed in response to
circumstances particular to NSW, but it was not the only state to consider law
in this period. In the 1980’s and 90’s seven from eight
Australian States considered prostitution law reform and four
instigate changes, though none took the path of full
decriminalisation.
Collective and individual voices of sex
The APC (initially the Collective of Australian Prostitutes) was founded at a
public meeting on July 13
1983 at the Wayside Chapel in Sydney just
four months after the Committee was appointed. In its first public statement
the APC confirmed
that it was conceived “in response to the mounting
pressure in Sydney by residents, council and police to displace us (sex
and to restrain our trade to commercial areas only” (Perkins and Bennett
1985: 283). Prior to its formation, APC members
had already recognised the
Committee as a target for strategic intervention and had begun distributing
questionnaires to sex workers
for the purposes of collecting data for their
submissions (Perkins 1991).
The APC saw itself as part of a growing
international movement of sex workers calling for the decriminalisation of
prostitution (Delacoste
and Alexander
A printed flyer titled
Power to the Prostitutes
entreated Sydney’s sex workers to attend
the inaugural meeting with the claim that “Prostitutes in France, England,
and Canada have stood up against police bullies and resident action
groups and WON. If they can do it so can we.” The APC
then listed the
organisation’s main demands: the removal of all laws used against
prostitutes and the setting up of a legal
advice, health and 24-hour child
minding service for (sex) workers (APC 1983).
The APC then wrote a
(15,000 word)
History and Manifesto of The Australian Prostitutes Collective
that declared their ambitions for the immediate future: “The APC as a
group is in a key position to offer the world some of
the most important
analyses in prostitution ever produced in this hitherto shadowy
subculture” (Perkins 1985). As we argue
below, this rhetoric was not
totally hyperbolic, as the APC was indeed a pioneering force. But it was not in
fact the first time
sex workers had attempted to organise. According to Frances
and Gray “from the 1970s onwards prostitutes began to publish newsletters,
form collectives and push for unionisation and the support they received from
the women’s movement and civil libertarians would
have inspired many to
continue to battle for workplace rights” (Frances and Gray 2007: 308). It
was a time of radical and
social reform in general and this had political
consequences as well. The election of the Australian Labor Party (ALP) in May
ended over a decade of conservative rule with a commitment to ending
discrimination against women. One of its first moves was to
Women’s Co-ordination Unit and a Women’s Advisory Council that
immediately set about researching prostitution
in NSW (Frances and Gray
Despite this
commitment to reform, our research indicates that sex workers continued to have
great difficulty in gaining an audience
with government and policy advisors. For
example, former sex worker, brothel owner, and the spokesperson for the
Prostitution Law
Repeal Association, Margaret Dee, told ABC Radio in November
1976 that she was having trouble getting through to the government:
“Can’t get through to them at all. I have telephone numbers and
I have spoken to them on the phone and ‘yes we’ll
we’ll call you back we’ll have an appointment, talk to you’
nothing – nothing comes of it we’re
just ignored” (
As Margaret Dee pointed out, criminalisation of the
industry meant that there were considerable costs attached to speaking out as
sex worker. As a consequence she called on the NSW government to provide an
amnesty on arrests and penalties for prostitution related
offences so that sex
workers could speak freely about law reform. She had closed her small brothel
because as someone who was ‘living
off the earnings’ of prostitution
she was at risk of being charged. As she explained to ABC radio in foregoing her
she was now “free to be able to speak on behalf of the girls
who can’t speak”. Margaret Dee was clear about the
kind of reform
that sex workers wanted: “Certainly it’s got to be decriminalised
and that means total repeal of the law,
right off the statute books
1976). It is not known whether Dee or any
other sex workers finally connected with the Women’s Advisory Committee.
Nevertheless,
with the removal of the threat of criminal sanctions for
street-based sex workers in 1979, ‘the girls who couldn’t
found their voices and began to use them.
Donovan and
Harcourt’s research demonstrates that the effects of decriminalisation on
NSW sex workers (following the 1979 reforms)
were not only liberalising but also
empowering:
A climate of decriminalisation gave the participants within the sex industry
the ability to organise and helped to reduce the traditional
power difference
between sex worker and client (Donovan and Harcourt 1996: 64-65).
particularly important when HIV/AIDS emerged, because sex workers were given the
task by government of educating clients
and the industry in general about the
importance of safe sex. Donovan and Harcourt describe how the
“skeletal” government
funding of Australian sex worker community
groups in the 1980s to 1990s “greatly enhanced their ability to
and gave them “a degree of legitimacy” (Donovan and
Harcourt 1996: 65). This was conferred in 1986 when the NSW state
and federal
governments pre-empted the NSW Select Committee recommendations and funded the
APC, making it the first community-based
sex worker organisation in Australia,
and possibly the world, to receive government funding (Donovan and Harcourt
1996: 64). This
decision was more to do with the emergence of HIV/AIDS than it
was to do with law reform, but it was an acknowledgement by government
support and expertise of the APC was crucial in preventing the further emergence
of HIV/AIDS in the community (Sendziuk,
The APC and the Select
Committee also operated in the context of second wave
A key method of second
wave feminism was standpoint
drawing upon Marxist
insights about the influence of inequalities upon knowledge production. The idea
of standpoint feminism is that
knowledge is socially situated and marginalised
standpoints offer epistemic advantages (Collins 1990). This method emphasises
perspectives and experiences as a starting point for inquiry
(Harding 2004: 21). On this basis, women are knowing subjects rather
than merely
objects that are known by others.
Standpoint theory asserts that
those who are marginalised and relatively invisible from the vantage point of
the epistemologically
privileged become conscious of their social situation with
regard to power and oppression and begin to find a voice. In articulating
personal experiences, sex workers became increasingly aware that their
individual predicaments were all too common. This is a collective
recognition and acknowledgment (Harding 2004; Frances and Gray
In accordance with
the insights of standpoint feminism, the government’s Women’s
Advisory Committee ostensibly adopted
a policy of wide-ranging consultation.
Despite this, sex workers were not initially included or invited to take part in
the law reform
process. It was not until the process of decriminalisation began
in 1979 that sex workers began to gain the confidence to properly
organise and
take an active role in the public domain.
Funding also assured other
developments closely aligned to the collective’s wider goals. APC members
were now able to appoint
staff and rent premises where those involved in the
industry could come for legal advice and support. This gave the organisation
secure location where it could hold staff and community meetings and run
information and training sessions in skills from self-defence
to writing a
funding application, and it enabled the organisation to develop resources for
public education campaigns. It was from
this location that the APC developed and
operated its safe sex ‘outreach’ services to sex workers across NSW
A 1990 "Sex Workers and Aids an Introduction to the Issue" National Aids
Bulletin June
1990. Page 12
Funding also enabled a transient
population of sex workers to be represented by
peers. Prior
to funding, APC members were seen as spokespersons for an activist organisation.
As a consequence of funding, APC spokespeople
represented the sex worker
(when it suited them) the NSW and Federal Departments of
Health. This enhanced the APC’s legitimacy and awarded them a degree
authority when dealing with the media, recalcitrant brothel owners and clients,
and the police. Thirdly, and of particular relevance
for our research, funding
signalled the beginning of a formal collaboration between sex workers and policy
makers. Although the process
of decriminalisation was still in its initial
phase, the funding of a sex worker organisation at this time demonstrated a
willingness
on the behalf of sex workers and policy makers to engage in
“authentic dialogue” which according to Wagenaar et al. can
“only be achieved in situations of face-to face dialogue” (Wagenaar,
Amesberger and Atlink 2017: 247). As was the case
for other Australian sex
worker organisations, funding meant that the APC was now better equipped to
develop their strategies that
included political activism toward law reform.
Decriminalisation enabled them to emerge from the shadows, organise and rally
a specific and significant target – the Select Committee.
The Impact of Sex Workers in the Final Report of the
Select Committee
Sex workers took part in the Select Committee process as individuals and
collectively through the APC. Sex workers were interviewed,
provided inspection
tours of brothels and other sex work locations, and addressed the committee and
made oral and written submissions.
To strengthen the weight of their submissions
the APC, together with Terry Goulden and Garry Bennet from the Sydney’s
Gay Centre,
formed what became known as the
Task Group on Prostitution
which in turn invited other groups, individuals and organisations to contribute
their own research and observations on sex workers.
This culminated in 21
separate submissions from the
totalling over 130,000 words to
the Select Committee. These submissions were later edited and published (Perkins
and Bennett 1985).
Perkins own research benefited from her academic connections
and along with a team of Sydney University social work students, and
research student Kerry
Carrington,
who collected and
compiled primary data through surveys and in-depth interviews with over 130 sex
workers (Rogan 1986: xvi –
The Committee split its findings
into ten chapters. The chapter headings give some idea of the breadth of the 355
page Report: A profile
of the prostitution trade in NSW; A description of those
living off the earnings of prostitution; The estimated size of the trade;
demand for prostitution; Prostitution practice and law overseas; Social and
community welfare aspects of prostitution; Health
aspects of prostitution; Drug
use by prostitutes; Criminal aspects of prostitution; Prostitution and the
Throughout the Report, the
Committee drew on original research by the APC. For example, in the first
chapter providing a profile
of the trade in NSW, the Committee cites three
studies concerning street prostitution – two from the NSW Bureau of Crime
and Research, and the third from Perkins’ original primary
In May and June 1983 Roberta Perkins, member of the Task Group on
Prostitution, surveyed 121 inner-city street and brothel
prostitutes. Her
information relates to soliciting circumstances under the
Prostitution
(Amendment) Act 1983
, whereby soliciting near a dwelling, school, church or
hospital becomes an offence. It will be referred to as the ‘Perkins
survey’. (Rogan 1986: 6)
The reference to her work as “Perkins
survey” shows the extent of the reliance by the Committee on
Perkins’ work
in the Final Report.
One consequence of sex worker
involvement with the Committee was that the Final Report differentiated between
One describes the particular models of sex work and
how these were impacted on by laws to different degrees. By distinguishing
street-based, brothel based, parlour and escort work the Select
Committee was able to consider the benefits and disadvantages of
each mode. For
instance, the Report reveals that the primary advantage to street-based sex work
is that it ‘entails minimal
overhead costs’ and that sex workers
‘keep virtually all earnings’ (Rogan 1986: 8). The Report also
acknowledges
the significant amount of mobility between the different styles of
work: ‘in a recent study of 50 female streetwalkers, for
example, 37
individuals had prior prostitution -related job experience in other aspects of
prostitution’ (Rogan 1986: 6). The
Report thus recognises that sex workers
have agency – they made calculated choices and these could change
according to circumstances.
differentiation of types of sex work remains a key recommendation of the
Brothels Taskforce and researchers, although it has
not been widely implemented
by local councils in NSW (Department of Planning 2001).
Not only are sex
worker voices included in the report, they are heavily relied upon. For example,
Debbie Homburg, a founding member
of the APC, interviewed female sex workers in
eight Sydney and one Canberra brothel during this period. Her research revealed
each worker paid shift money to police with the remainder then split
fifty-fifty with the parlour (brothel) management (Homburg 1983:
1). The women
were expected to work eight hours a day, six days a week, and had no right to
refuse clients unless the men were diseased
or violent and as Homburg recounted
“The client is always right in most places, and unlike (on) the streets is
not even required
to wear a condom” (Homburg, D 1983, 1)). These
accounts demonstrated to the Committee that some brothel-based workers were
at risk of contracting HIV/AIDS and other STDs than were street workers who were
in a position to refuse clients if they did
not use condoms.
proved savvy in representing their research findings to media. They selectively
chose to present new data that challenged
myths and preconceptions about sex
workers. For instance Perkins told the newspapers that her data demonstrated
that up to forty
four percent of sex workers had children, most were single
mothers who regarded prostitution as a career, and that they were able
their children more security than non-sex working mothers because of their
larger earnings. Additionally, they had more
time available to spend with their
families because of flexible working hours “it may shock people but when
you weigh up everything
you can’t help but reach a conclusion that
prostitute mothers in the main make better mothers” (Daily Telegraph
Chapter Nine of the Select Committee Report is reflective of all the
chapters in the Report – in that it relies upon individual
interviews and
submissions by the APC and the Task Group on Prostitution to provide research
and context of the actual needs and
working conditions of sex workers. Entitled
‘Criminal Aspects of Prostitution’, it is divided into three parts
prostitution related crime in general; allegations of police corruption
and prostitution; and organised crime and patterns of ownership.
section of the report details Perkins research that showed that sex workers were
often victims of crime against their person
and property and that ‘three
out of nine women interviewed at length had experienced rape and bashings while
(Rogan 1986: 220). Police witnesses provided information about
the crimes committed by drug affected sex workers (including solicitation
extending to drug offences, theft and shoplifting). But this is supplemented
with a sex worker explaining that she had tried
to dry out but had not succeeded
and had committed crimes to pay for her addiction. The Committee also received
submissions from
East Sydney residents about their fear of crimes such as
muggings, robberies and fires due to prostitution.
In relation to police
corruption, the Committee noted that most brothel owners were reluctant to
discuss police corruption due to
fear of repercussions. As a consequence, the
Committee depended upon evidence by sex workers who asserted that the focus of
corruption had changed from individual street sex workers to the managers
of brothels (Rogan 1986: 226). Individual sex workers also
described the ways in
which police asserted power. For example, one member of the APC (previously
employed in a parlour) described
this distinction:
I remember one detective who used to come in and try and boss us. He would
come in and say who he was and where he was from and he
would look around the
premises and we would have to make sure all the beds were made, that the towels
were neatly folded, that the
talc was in the corner, that the showers and the
curtains were all straight and that no French letters or durex were left lying
because that would indicate that it was a brothel and not a massage
parlour, not a health studio
(Roz Nelson, for the Task Group on
Prostitution, in evidence 12 September 1983: 58). (Rogan 1986: 10)
The Select Committee concluded that decriminalisation would decrease
corrupt police practices (Rogan 1986:
The APC were also
sought out for advice by other interested groups that in turn made submissions
to the Committee such as the Northern
Region of the Health Department, the
Australian Legal Workers Group, the Interdepartmental Task Force on Drug
Dependent Prostitutes
and the Young National Party (Perkins and Bennett 1985:
This resulted in other
governmental and non-governmental groups finding common cause with the APC. For
example, the Final Report
noted that the Women’s Advisory Council had
drawn attention to the segregation and segmentation of the Labor party by gender
– and that women were in low-paid and often part-time positions (Rogan
1986: 133). The paragraph then continues:
Perkins’ findings on prostitutes’ qualifications and skills
should be read against the information that women in this
State generally have
fewer post-school qualifications than men. In 1981, 69 per cent of women over
fifteen years had no post-school
qualification as compared with 57 per cent of
men. (Rogan 1986: 133)
The APC briefed the APC to the Women’s Advisory
Committee to drawn their attention to common issues and concerns about the
Task Group on Prostitution
had insisted on the
repeal of all laws as affected sex workers (Perkins n.d.: 5). This required no
further restrictions on street-based
workers and no special zoning or regulation
of brothels. Brothels and parlours were to be permissible under the same
conditions as
other businesses under planning and council zoning and individual
sex workers who saw clients in their own homes should be left alone.
Nevertheless the Select Committee was keen to know what type of regulatory
control or specific zoning recommendations the APC
especially as it applied to street-based sex work. After repeated and sustained
questioning by the Select Committee
Our role here is to support the prostitutes’ view and their position.
I know that you have got to do as mediators of a very
difficult situation. You
are getting feedback from residents and others who feel their lives are
affected... We are making recommendations
for people whose very lives depend on
the type of business they are doing, whether they work on the streets in a
brothel or in a
parlour. If compromise is to be sought, it surely must be up to
you. (Select Committee Upon Prostitution NSW 1983:
This demonstrates the
APC’s refusal to compromise for the Select Committee. Although Wagenaar et
al (2017) have emphasised authentic
dialogue, past a certain point, sex workers
were unwilling to compromise.
The Final Recommendations of the Select
The voices of sex workers were heard through a combination of submissions to
the Select Committee and strategic interventions with
the media. The Select
Committee submitted its Final Report in 1986 with a long list of recommendations
(Rogan 1986: xv-xxiv) summarised
in the introduction to the Report as:
be subject not to criminal legislation but to planning requirements, the most
important of which are that they not be permitted
in residential levels, at
street level in commercial shopping centres nor in areas which will result in
public offence;
be placed on the ownership of
soliciting be prohibited in residential areas and near a school, church or
of criminal sanctions for those who use violence, coercion or other forms of
exploitation in order to live on the earnings
of prostitution;
Advertising
of prostitution to be prohibited in the electronic media and limited
to social welfare arrangements to make it less difficult for prostitutes to
leave the trade and to make prostitution less
of an alternative to those who may
be forced to consider it as employment;
measures to reduce the incidence of sexually transmissible disease and drug
abuse (Rogan 1986:
greeted the report and its findings with mixed emotions but they were
“basically pleased with the first 272 pages of
the 286 page report”
(Perkins 1986: 181). They were particularly pleased with the recommendations
that related to the expansion
of welfare services for women and youth, the
repeal of sections within the
Prostitution Act
that referred to individuals
‘living off the earnings’, and the decriminalisation of brothels.
However, the APC was unhappy
with the Committee’s recommendations for a
series of ‘controls’ framed by State Environmental Planning Policy
would restrict brothels to above ground only in commercial shopping areas
and industrial zones. The APC also particularly objected
to local councils
deciding on development applications for brothels on the grounds that “the
hypocrisy surrounding official
dealings with the industry has nowhere been more
evident than in the case of local government” (Perkins 1986: 182). The APC
claimed that if there were no overriding regulation put in place to require
councils to implement the original intentions of decriminalisation
then councils
would “reject development applications for brothels in moral terms”
(Perkins 1986: 182). The APC asserted
that there should be an overriding
mechanism that would ensure that re-zoning by councils was not employed
“as a mechanism
for impeding prostitution in a municipality”
(Perkins 1986: 182).
Committee described its approach as “decriminalisation with
controls” and stated that “reform will not occur
Councils, police and the trade itself, but most importantly the community at
large, need time to adjust themselves to
proposals carried into law”
(Rogan 1986: xxx). The Committee was correct – the most significant of
these reforms –
the decriminalisation of brothels – was not
implemented until 1995.
Disorderly Houses Amendment Act 1995
was justified primarily in terms of
public health and police corruption (in response to the Wood Royal Commission)
and drew upon the
findings of the Select Committee to justify the
decriminalisation of brothels.
The recommendations
of the Committee were a mix of the radical (including a complete overhaul of the
welfare system to address the
relative impoverishment of women compared to men)
and conservative (such as the control of ownership and prohibition against
advertising).
It is necessarily impossible to prove that the involvement of
individual sex workers and the APC influenced specific reforms. However,
prevalence of sex worker voices throughout Final Report provides some indication
of their influence. The first page of the Report
Recently, prostitutes have become more political and outspoken as a group. In
July 1983 a number of Sydney prostitutes, ex-prostitutes
and supporters formed
the Australian Prostitutes’ Collective (APC). The Collective describes
itself as ‘part of an international
link of prostitute organisations
around the world, formed to provide support, information and expression networks
for those working
in the sex industry providing services for men’. It
calls for decriminalisation. As author Eileen McLeod writes, such campaigns
Britain, on the Continent and in the USA have also pressed for decriminalisation
of prostitution. Since the establishment of the
APC in Sydney, branches have
been formed in other states. (Rogan 1986: 1-2)
Sex workers and the APC were
included as experts in the field rather than objects who were spoken for and
evidence informed by the lived experience of sex
workers enabled (and required) the Select Committee to shift away from
(idealistic) discourse to deliver practical and realistic
recommendations of law and policy reform.
Our focus of the time period
around the NSW Senate Inquiry from 1983 until 1986 contributes to a history of
involvement of sex workers
in the law reform process. This was a time during
which sex workers developed political skills and made meaningful contributions
to the Select Committee through the production of original primary quantitative
and qualitative research that linked their social
disadvantage and appalling
working conditions to ineffective and discriminatory laws and police corruption.
The Select Committee
itself reflected the reforming impulse of the time and
provided an authoritative forum which actively welcomed sex worker involvement
which in turn bestowed greater legitimacy to the proposed reforms of the Select
Committee. The resulting decriminalisation of sex
work in NSW is at the
forefront internationally in terms of working conditions, health and safety and
amenity impacts. If decriminalisation
of the sex industry is to be enacted
elsewhere then there is much to gain in learning from the achievements and
disappointments in
Reference list
Abel G, L Fitzgerald, and C Healy (eds.)
Taking the Crime out of Sex Work: New Zealand Sex Workers' Fight for
Decriminalisation.
Bristol: Policy Press
[radio]. Australian Broadcasting Corporation. 18 November.
International (2016).
Q&A Policy to Protect the Human Rights of Sex
. Available at
www.amnesty.org/en/qa-policy-to-protect-the-human-rights-of-sex-workers/
(accessed 27 August 2018).
Australian Prostitutes Collective (1983)
Power to the Prostitutes.
Leaflet distributed to Sydney sex workers.
Available at the Roberta Perkins private archive.
Bates J, and R Berg
(2014) Sex Workers as Safe Sex Advocates: Sex Workers Protect Both Themselves
and the Wider Community from HIV.
AIDS Education and Prevention
191-201. DOI: 10.1521/aeap.2014.26.3.191.
Begum S, et al. (2012) Sex
Workers Talk About Sex Work: Six Contradictory Characteristics of Sex Work in
Melbourne, Australia.
Culture, Health and Sexuality
15(1): 85-100. DOI:
10.1080/13691058.2012.743187.
Bruckert C, F Chabot, and POWER (Prostitutes
of Ottawa Gatineau Work, Educate and Resist) (2010)
Challenges: Ottawa Area
Sex Workers Speak Out
. Available at
www.nswp.org/sites/nswp.org/files/POWER_Report_Challenges.pdf
27 August 2018).
Collins P H (1990)
Black Feminist Thought: Knowledge,
Consciousness and the Politics of Empowerment.
New York and London:
Crofts P (2010) Brothels: Outlaws or Citizens?
International
Journal of Law in Context
6(2):151-166. DOI:
10.1017/S1744552310000054.
Crofts P, et al. (2012) Ambivalent Regulation:
The Sexual Services Industries in NSW and Victoria - Sex Work as Work, or as
Current Issues in Criminal Justice
23(3): 393-412.
Crofts P, and J Prior (2012) Home Occupation or Brothel? Selling Sex from
Urban Policy and Research
30(2): 127-143. DOI:
10.1080/08111146.2012.679923.
Crofts P, J Prior, and P Hubbard (2013)
Policing, Planning and Sex: Governing Bodies Spatially.
The Australian and
New Zealand Journal of Criminology
46(1): 51-69.
DOI:10.1177/0004865812469974
Daily Telegraph (1983) Prostitutes Make the
Best Mothers.
Daily Telegraph,
October 5. Accessed at the Roberta Perkins
private archive.
Delacoste F, and P Alexander (1988)
Sex Work: Writings
by Women in the Sex Industry.
London: Virago.
Department of Planning
Report of the Brothels Taskforce.
Sydney: New South Wales
Government.
Donovan B, and C Harcourt (1996) The Female Sex
Industry in Australia: A Health Promotion Model.
Venereology
Donovan B, et al. (2012)
The Sex Industry in New South Wales: A
Report to the NSW Ministry of Health.
Sydney: Kirby Institute, University of
New South Wales.
Egger S, and C Harcourt (1991) Prostitution in NSW: The
Impact of Deregulation. Paper presented at the Women and the Law Conference,
September 24-26, 1991.
Frances R, and A Gray (2007) ‘UNSATISFACTORY,
DISCRIMINATORY,
UNJUST AND INVITING CORRUPTION’: Feminists and the
Decriminalisation of Street Prostitution in New South Wales.
Feminist Studies
22(53): 307-324. DOI:
10.1080/08164640701393223.
Hancock L (1992) Legal Regulation of
Prostitution: What or Who Is Being Controlled? In Gerull SA, and Halstead B
Sex Industry and Policy.
Canberra: Australian Institute
of Criminology, 167.
Harding S (ed) (2004)
The Feminist Standpoint Theory
New York and London: Routledge.
Homburg D (1983)
Prostitution in Sydney 111 – Parlour Prostitutes: Submission to the Select
Committee Upon Prostitution.
Available at the
Roberta Perkins private
Jeffrey L A (2004) Prostitution as Public Nuisance: Prostitution
Policy in Canada. In Outshoorn J (ed)
The Politics of Prostitution: Women's
Movements, Democratic States and the Globalisation of Sex Commerce.
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Lancet Journal Series (2014)
and Sex Workers
. Available at
www.thelancet.com/series/HIV-and-sex-workers
(accessed 27 August
Munro V and Scoular J. (2012) Abusing vulnerability: Contemporary law and
policy responses to sex work in the UK.
Feminist Legal Studies
Neave M (1988) The Failure of Prostitution Law Reform.
Australian & New Zealand Journal of Criminology
21 (4). DOI:
10.1177/000486588802100403.
O’Doherty T (2011) Criminalization and
Off-Street Sex Industry Work.
Violence Against Women
Parliament of New South Wales, Legislative Assembly (1979)
Parliamentary debates (Hansard).
April 23, 1979 (Frank Walker). Sydney:
NSW Government.
Perkins R, et al. (n.d.)
Task Group on Prostitution
Submission to the Select Committee of the Legislative Assembly Upon
Prostitution
. Unpublished manuscript. Available at the Roberta Perkins
private archive.
Perkins R (1983)
The Drag Queen Scene: Transsexuals in
Kings Cross Tell Their Own Story.
North Sydney: Allen and Unwin.
History and Manifesto of The Australian Prostitutes Collective.
Unpublished manuscript. Available at the Roberta Perkins private
Perkins R (1986) Review of the New South Wales Select Committee
Report of the Legislative Assembly Upon Prostitution.
Legal Services
Perkins R (1991)
Working Girls: Prostitutes, Their Life
and Social Control.
Canberra: Australian Institute of
Criminology
Perkins R, and G Bennett (1985)
Being a Prostitute.
Sydney: Allen and Unwin
Perkins R, and F Lovejoy (2007)
Call Girls:
Private Sex Workers in Australia.
Western Australia: University of Western
Australia Press.
Perkins R, et al. (1994)
Sex Work and Sex Workers in
Sydney: University of NSW Press. Prior J, and P Crofts (2012) The
Effects of Sex Premises on Neighbourhoods: Residents, Local Planning
Geographies of a Controversial Land Use.
New Zealand Geographer
130-140. DOI: 10.1111/j.1745-7939.2012.01228.x
Rogan P (1986)
Committee of the Legislative Assembly Upon Prostitution
. Sydney: Parliament
of New South Wales.
Sanders T (2004) A Continuum of Risk? The Management of
Health, Physical and Emotional Risks by Female Sex Workers.
Sociology of
Health and Illness
, 26(5): 557-574. DOI: 10.1111/j.0141-9889.2004.00405.x.
Sanders T (2008) Selling Sex in the Shadow Economy.
International
journal of Social Economics
35(10: 704-716. DOI:
10.1108/03068290810898927.
Select Committee Upon Prostitution NSW (1983)
Transcript of Evidence Taken in Camera by the Select Committee Upon
Prostitution
. Unpublished. Accessed at the Roberta Perkins private
Sendziuk P (2003)
Learning to Trust,
Sullivan B (2010) Why (Some) Prostitution is Legal: The Impact of Law
Reform on Sex Work in Australia.
Journal of Law and Society,
85-104. DOI: 10.1111/j.1467- 6478.2010.00496.x
Travis G (1986)
in Darlinghurst: Female Transsexual and Male Prostitutes Talk About Their Work.
Available at
www.bocsar.nsw.gov.au/Documents/General-Series/R07.pdf
(accessed 27 August 2018).
UNAIDS (2009)
Guidance Note on HIV and Sex
Work 2009-2012.
Available at
www.unaids.org/sites/default/files/sub_landing/files/JC2306_UNAIDS-guidance-note-HIV-sex-work_en.pdf
(accessed 27 August 2018).
van der Meulen E and E M
Durisin (2008) Why Decriminalise? How Canada's Municipal and Federal Regulations
Increase Sex Worker's Vulnerability.
Canadian Journal of Women and the
20 (2): 289-311. DOI: 10.3138/cjw120.2.289
van der Meulen E, E M
Durisin, and V Love (2013)
Selling Sex: Experience, Advocacy, and Research on
Sex Work in Canada.
Vancouver: UBC Press, 1.
Wagenaar H (2017) Why
prostitution policy (usually) fails and what to do about it?
6 (2): 13. DOI: 10.3390/socsci6020043
Wagenaar H, and S Altink
(2012) Prostitution as Morality Politics or Why It Is Exceedingly Difficult to
Design and Sustain Effective
Prostitution Policy.
Sexuality Research and
Social Policy
9 (3): 279-292. DOI 10.1007/s13178-012-0095-0
H, H Amesberger, and S Altink (2017)
Designing Prostitution Policy: Intention
and Reality in Designing the Sex Trade.
Great Britain: Polity.
R (2009) Sociology of Sex Work.
Annual Review of Sociology
35: 213-234.
DOI: 10.1146/annurev-soc-070308-120025.
World Health Authority (2018)
HIV/AIDS Sex Workers.
Available at
www.who.int/hiv/topics/sex_work/about/en/
(accessed 27 August
Throughout this article we
emphasise a labour-based understanding and hence will use the term ‘sex
work’. This is in
accordance with contemporary literature emphasising sex
work and employment, improving workplace conditions, unionisation, and sexual
labour. See, for example, Bernstein E (2007)
Temporarily Yours: Intimacy,
Authenticity, and the Commerce of Sex.
Chicago: University of Chicago Press;
Sanders T (2005) It’s Just Acting: Sex Workers’ Strategies for
Capitalizing on Sexuality.
Gender, Work and Organization
12(4): 319-342.
10.1111/j.1468-0432.2005.00276.x
This is also reflective of the legal construction of brothels in NSW as
legitimate businesses: see Crofts P (2006). A Decade of
Licit Sex in the City.
Local Government Law Journal
New Zealand is the other
notable exception. For the stated purposes of the New Zealand reforms, see
Prostitution Reform Act
(NZ) (2003). As noted below, in NSW, street sex
work remains partially criminalised with restrictions on where it can take
Henceforth the Select
Committee Final Report will be referred to as the ‘Final Report’ in
For example, recent
texts continue to emphasise the need for, and significance of, the inclusion of
personal perspectives and experiences
of sex work ‘as the basis for new
and more nuanced conceptualizations for sex work’: van der Meulen, E, E M
and V Love (2013)
Selling Sex: Experience, Advocacy, and Research on
Sex Work in Canada.
Vancouver: UBC Press,
feminists have contributed to the moralistic discourse by asserting that sex
work reflects women’s sexual subordination
to men and that all sex workers
are victims: see for example, Farley M (2004) "Bad for the Body, Bad for the
Heart": Prostitution
Laws Harm Women Even If Legalized or Decriminalized.
Violence Against Women
10 (10): 1087-1125. DOI: 10.1177/1077801204268607;
Farley M (2006) Prostitution, Trafficking and Cultural Amnesia: What We Must Not
Know to Keep the Business of Sexual Exploitation Running Smoothly.
Journal of Feminism
18 (1); Barry K (1995)
The Prostitution of
New York: New York University
See also Chrisje Brants
who argues that “policy on prostitution in any country depends on the
underlying ideology about the
moral (un)acceptability of paid sex”: Brants
C (1998) The Fine Art of Regulated Tolerance: Prostitution in Amsterdam.
Journal of Law and Society
25 (4): 621-635. DOI:
10.1111/1467-6478.00106.
the radical reforming legislation decriminalising brothels in 1995 in NSW
explicitly states in a moral register: ‘The
enactment of the
Houses Amendment Act 1995
should not be taken to indicate that Parliament
endorses or encourages the practice of prostitution which often involves the
exploitation
and sexual abuse of vulnerable women in our society.’
Disorderly Houses Amendment Act (NSW)
(1995) s. 20. This is also
reflected in the
Purpose of the Prostitution Reform Act (NZ)
APC chapters were also formed
in Victoria and South Australia. For the purposes of this article, APC refers
to the NSW chapter.
(2017) focused on New Zealand as a case study. In 2003 the New Zealand
parliament adopted the full decriminalisation of
prostitution. This was the
result of intense and sustained lobbying by the New Zealand Prostitutes
Collective and their
Roberta Perkins,
Julie Bates, Victoria Principal and Erica Red are all privately held archives.
The other major archive is “Deborah
Joan Homburg Papers
to Involvement in Social Movements, 1970-1986, Particularly Prison Reform and
the Women's Movement
”, which contains a selection of papers regarding
the establishment and operation of the Australian Collective of Prostitutes.
includes submissions to the NSW Parliamentary Select Committee on Prostitution
(1983), typescript speeches and correspondence,
and is held by Mitchell Library,
Sydney NSW at call number MLMSS 4948, Box 10/Item
These submissions were
authored by a range of individuals and institutions including women’s
groups, civil libertarians, welfare
groups, police and other interested
This approach was
also adopted in Nagy V, and A Powell (2016) Legalising Sex Work: The Regulation
of Risk on Australian Prostitution
Law Reform.
Current Issues in Criminal
28 (1): [1]-16.
These groups were
influenced in part by the Wolfenden Report (1957) which contemplated sexual
offences. The Report recommended that
state law focus on outdoor, public sex
work rather than invisible and indoor forms of
prostitution.
Sullivan (2010) argues there are complex and numerous reasons
Australian state governments transformed their sex work laws during this period.
She asserts that by attending to sex work
law reform Australian states were
exhibiting an established preference for using neoliberal strategies to address
a multitude of
social problems associated with sex work such as organised crime,
police corruption and public health concerns. Yet in her analysis
Sullivan also
credits the “strength of sex worker advocacy groups” (Sullivan 2010:
86) as one of the main factors in
the push for reform. Donovan and Harcourt
concur, describing the period from 1979-1995 as “one of profound change
for the Australian
sex industry” (Donovan and Harcourt 1996 p
It is beyond the scope
of this article to explain why similar movements at roughly the same time in
different jurisdictions did not
result in decriminalisation. For example, the
Special Committee on Prostitution and Pornography in Canada recommended that
and procuring laws should be loosened and that sex workers should be
able to work from their own home: Department of Supply and Services
Pornography and Prostitution in Canada,
Volume II. Ottawa: Department of
Supply and Services. Van der Meulen and Durisin argue that these reforms did not
transpire due to
the shift from a Liberal to a Conservative federal government
just prior to the release of the committee’s final report: van
E, and E M Durisin (2008) Why Decriminalise? How Canada's Municipal and Federal
Regulations Increase Sex Worker's Vulnerability.
Canadian Journal of Women
and the Law
20 (2): 289-311. DOI: 10.3138/cjw120.2.289
The Women’s Advisory
Council also made submissions to the Select
Influential texts
preceding the 1980s include Freidan B (1963)
The Feminine Mystique.
York City: W. W. Norton & Company; Greer G (1970)
The Female Eunuch.
London: HarperCollins; Hanisch C (1970) The Personal is Political
Firestone S, and Koedt A (eds)
Notes from the Second Year: Women’s
. New York: Radical Feminism; Millett K (1970)
. United States: Doubleday and
The method of standpoint
feminism continues to be used, however has also been ‘ranked as one of the
most contentious theories’
in terms of its status as a theory and its
relevance to current thinking about knowledge: Harding S (ed) (2004)
Feminist Standpoint Theory Reader.
New York and London: Routledge, 339-40.
The Women’s Advisory
Council also made submissions to the Select
Professor Kerry
Carrington has written about her research experience with Perkins
in Carrington K (2010) Researching crime and violence:
Untold stories from
the field. In Bartels L, and Richards K (eds)
Qualitative criminology:
Stories from the field.
Australia: Federation Press,
It should be noted that
trafficking was not raised as an issue by the Select Committee. Crofts and Prior
have argued that the decriminalisation
of sex work in NSW radically reduces the
profits associated with the sex industry and thus is highly effective in
reducing sex trafficking:
Crofts P, and J Prior (2016) The Proposed
Re-Introduction of Policing and Crime into the Regulation of Brothels in New
South Wales.
Current Issues in Criminal Justice
The recognition of
different types of sex work is not sustained in the work of some theorists,
including radical feminists, who focus
only on the worst-case scenarios and
preclude the idea of sex workers as active agents in a complex sex industry. For
examples of
radical feminist arguments see Farley M (2004) "Bad for the Body,
Bad for the Heart": Prostitution Laws Harm Women Even If Legalized
Decriminalized.
Violence Against Women,
10(1): 1087-1125. DOI:
10.1177/1077801204268607; Farley M (2006) Prostitution, Trafficking and Cultural
Amnesia: What We Must Not
Know to Keep the Business of Sexual Exploitation
Running Smoothly.
Yale Journal of Law & Feminism
, 18(1). For
critiques of methodological flaws, see Shaver F M, J Lewis and E Maticka-Tyndale
(2011) Rising to the Challenge: Addressing
the Concerns of People Working in the
Sex Industry.
Canadian Review of Sociology
48(1): 47-65. DOI:
10.1111/j.1755-618X.2011.01249.x; Weitzer R (2005) Flawed Theory and Method in
Studies of Prostitution.
Violence Against Women
11 (7): 934-949. DOI:
10.1177/1077801205276986. The focus by researchers on street sex work is
particularly problematic, given that
it makes up only 2% of the industry in NSW:
Donovan B, et al. (2012)
The Sex Industry in New South Wales: A Report to the
NSW Ministry of Health.
Sydney: Kirby Institute, University of
This assertion by the
Select Committee has proven largely to be correct. The decriminalisation of sex
services premises in NSW has
reduced the huge profits associated with an illegal
industry and reduced opportunities for police corruption. However, restrictive
policies in councils has offered a limited opportunity for council corruption:
Crofts P (2012) The Proposed Licensing of Brothels
in New South Wales.
Government Law Journal
There is also a letter
of thanks from the Northern Region of the Health Department for the advice given
by the APC for their submission
in the Roberta Perkins private
In 1986, Perkins
organised another submission to the Task Group in associate with town planning,
health and legal consultants and
a small group of sex workers. This recommended
a town planning framework – which was a compromise of sorts – and
presented directly to the Premier of NSW Neville Wran after submissions to
the Committee had already closed.
The Brothel Taskforce
recommended that local councils differentiate between sex services premises
principles: Department of Planning (2001)
Report of the Brothels Taskforce.
Sydney: New South Wales Government. The
majority of local councils exclude ‘brothels’ from residential
zones, however,
different category and are permitted in residential zones, thus fulfilling
recommendation by the Select Committee. The treatment of home occupations (sex
services) is very important as they make up at
least 40% of the sex industry in
New South Wales and also reflect that sex workers have options of where they
work and their working
conditions: Crofts P, and J Prior (2012) Home Occupation
or Brothel? Selling Sex from Home in New South Wales.
Urban Policy and
30(2): 127-143. DOI: 10.1080/08111146.2012.679923. Academic comment
NSW: Campbell D K
(2010) The (Continuing) Regulation of Prostitution by Local Authorities. In Abel
G, Healy Fitzgerald C and Taylor
Taking the Crime out of Sex Work:
New Zealand Sex Workers’ Fight for Decriminalization.
Bristol: The
Policy Press. Valverde’s insight that local or municipal law can be as
blunt and homogenizing as criminal law in
its execution is apposite: Valverde M
Everyday Law on the Street: City Governance in an Age of Diversity.
Chicago: University of Chicago Press. Extending this theme, Crofts, Prior
and Hubbard have analysed the extensive police powers of
NSW local councils:
Crofts P, J Prior, and P Hubbard (2013) Policing, Planning and Sex: Governing
Bodies Spatially.
The Australian and New Zealand Journal of Criminology
46(1): 51-69. DOI:
10.1177/0004865812469974
control on ownership of brothels has not transpired. Planning law focuses on the
use of land rather than the owner: Crofts P
(2012) The Proposed Licensing of
Brothels in New South Wales.
Local Government Law Journal
Street solicitation
remains partially criminalised in
Most of the
Inquiry’s recommendations concerning the health of sex workers and drug
users were adopted and funded immediately
by the NSW Government who provided
some 5 million dollars plus an additional one million for AIDS related research:
Rogan P (1988)
Speech delivered by Pat Rogan, former Chair of the Select
Speech presented at the National Conference Sex Industry and AIDS
Debate, Melbourne, October 26, 1988. Interestingly, health was not
focus of the Committee. The issue of sexual health was not considered until
Chapter Seven of the Final Report. In contrast,
contemporary accounts about the
regulation of sex work tend to prioritise health. A predominant contemporary
account in assessing
sex work policy is to focus on the health of sex workers
and their clients and this has been the target of much research in the
post-decriminalisation
period in NSW. Despite the devastating impact of HIV/AIDS
in the 1980s and 1990s an independent report commissioned by the NSW Ministry
Health in 2012 showed that “over 99% of all commercial vaginal sex
encounters in Sydney involve the use of a condom”
(Donovan et al. 2012:
24). This achievement has been credited to the early resourcing of sex work peer
organisations that effectively
persuaded the sex industry to adopt safe sex
practices (Bates and Berg 2014). Whilst sexual health is important, Sanders has
“the concentration on disease and drug use not only blurs the
whole picture of prostitution but distorts the emphasis on certain
occupational
risks while neglecting others” (Sanders 2004: 560). For a similar insight
see van der Meulen E and E M Durisin
(2008) Why Decriminalise? How Canada's
Municipal and Federal Regulations Increase Sex Worker's Vulnerability.
Canadian Journal of Women and the Law
20 (2): 289-311. DOI:
10.3138/cjw120.2.289.
arguments by the APC have proven to be prescient, with contemporary analysis
demonstrating that some local councils continue
to grapple with local politics
and NIMBYism in the absence of clear guidance from the NSW government (Crofts
2010; Crofts, Prior
and Hubbard
There is a huge
literature on the advantages of decriminalisation. Bestowal of legal status
imports an existing framework of legal
responsibilities – including
occupational health and safety, administration and payment of taxes, and the
capacity to claim
protection from the legal system which is more difficult when
sex work is illegal (Crofts 2010). For example, NSW WorkCover (2001)
and Safety Guidelines for Brothels.
NSW: Workcover NSW. The New Zealand
government followed suit in 2004 with a 100-page brochure ‘for everyone
involved in the
New Zealand sex industry’: Department of Labour’s
Occupational Safety and Health Service (2004)
Sex Industry: A Guide to
Occupational Health and Safety in New Zealand.
Wellington: Government of New
Zealand. In addition, treating sex work as legitimate helps integrate the
businesses and workers into
the community (Sanders 2008). Prior and Crofts have
undertaken extensive research on the amenity impacts of sex work premises on
nearby neighbours. See for example, Prior J, and P Crofts (2012) The Effects of
Sex Premises on Neighbourhoods: Residents, Local
Planning and the Geographies of
a Controversial Land Use.
New Zealand Geographer
68(2) 130-140. DOI:
10.1111/j.1745-7939.2012.01228.x.
National Co-ordinator and founding member of the New Zealand Prostitutes
Collective Catherine Healy has acknowledged that the
advice and experiences of
Australian sex worker organisations provided guidance for the campaign by the
NZPC for decriminalisation
in New Zealand: see Abel G, L Fitzgerald, and C Healy
(eds.) (2010)
Taking the Crime out of Sex Work: New Zealand Sex Workers'
Fight for Decriminalisation.
Bristol: Policy Press, 60.
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (198 KB)
PDF format (614 KB)
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter