URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/journals/IntTBLawRw/2004/4.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 15:05:18
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Peters, Christopher J --- "Corporate Fundraising in Australia and the US - Harmonisation Achieved?" [2004] IntTBLawRw 4; (2004) 9 International Trade and Business Law Review 73
Corporate Fundraising in Australia and the US- Harmonization Achieved?
Introduction
Disclosure requirements
Disclosure requirements in Australia
Disclosure requirements in the US
Lessons from the US
The regulation of financial projections
The regulation of financial projections in Australia
The regulation of financial projections in the US
Lessons from the US
The role of the regulator
The role of ASIC in Australia
The role of the SEC in the US
Lessons from the US
SME Fundraising
SME fundraising in Australia
SME fundraising in the US
Lessons from the US
Advertising128
Advertising in Australia
Advertising in the US
Lessons from the US
Statutory liability for Inadequate disclosure
Statutory liability for inadequate disclosure in Australia
Statutory liability for inadequate disclosure in Australia
Lessons from the US
Corporate Fundraising in Australia and the US-
Harmonization Achieved?
Christopher J Peters
Introduction
Since 1993, Australia’s system of corporate law has been subject to an
ongoing program of appraisal and reform, referred to
as the Corporate Law
Economic Reform Program (CLERP).
According to High Court Justice Ian
Callinan, the program is ‘intended to effect a fundamental review of
corporate law [in
Australia].’
Among the most significant
recent reforms introduced by CLERP were those enacted by the
Corporate Law
Economic Reform Program Act 1999
(Cth) (CLERP Act) on 13 March 2000. In addition
to addressing issues as diverse as corporate governance, accounting standards,
and compulsory acquisitions,
the Act specifically targeted
the regulation of equity capital fundraising by corporate entities.
While canvassing possible alternatives, the Act retained the basic disclosure
requirements of the prevailing fundraising system, including
those relating to
financial projections. However, the Act also included:
detailed changes designed to better regulate fundraising by small and
medium-sized enterprises (SMEs) and advertising by issuers;
new liability provisions; and
amendments to the role of the securities market regulator, the Australian
Securities and Investments Commission (ASIC).
According to the explanatory memorandum to the CLERP Bill 1998, these reforms
were designed to ‘minimise the costs of fundraising
while improving
investor protection’.
CLERP’s review of the existing fundraising regime was ostensibly
influenced by regulation in other jurisdictions. The explanatory
memorandum to
the CLERP Bill 1998 indicated that ‘the CLERP program … seeks to
… improve harmonisation of Australia’s
laws with those applying in
major financial markets’.
Similarly, the CLERP Issues
made explicit reference to relevant fundraising initiatives in
New Zealand, the United Kingdom and the US. However, in both
documents, analyses of such overseas approaches were merely cursory,
and did not
appear to effect any substantive findings. This paper places considerably more
emphasis on the comparative methodology.
It builds on the brief analyses
conducted by CLERP by evaluating whether the CLERP Act fundraising reforms could
have been improved
by incorporating aspects of the US fundraising system.
Such an approach makes an incremental contribution to academic literature.
While academic works have previously considered the effectiveness
of the CLERP
a detailed comparative approach has not yet been employed.
Moreover, according to Paul Redmond, ‘the US experience …
demonstrates alternative approaches [to fundraising] which might be taken by
government’.
Therefore, a comparative study focusing on the
US represents a particularly constructive extension of the extant literature.
The paper compares the two regimes across six dimensions. These dimensions
relate to key issues discussed in the CLERP Issues Paper:
disclosure requirements;
the regulation of financial projections;
the role of the regulator;
SME fundraising;
advertising; and
liability for inadequate disclosure.
While the six dimensions do not constitute a complete coverage of all
subjects raised by the CLERP Issues Paper, they are intended
to represent the
most contentious aspects of the pre-CLERP Act Australian system.
The paper is structured to consider the six dimensions in turn. Each section
commences with a discussion of the relevant aspects of
the law in Australia and
the US, and then undertakes a critical analysis of the alternatives. Given the
methodology employed, these
sections do not purport to be comprehensive surveys.
Rather, the latter are intended as broad overviews that may inspire further,
more detailed research. The section headed Conclusion draws together the
findings from each dimension and derives an overall conclusion.
requirements, although there is evidence of closer
harmonisation regarding
financial projections and SME fundraising. The differences, however, are
justifiable and overall the CLERP
reform choices are supported as appropriate to
the Australian market.
Disclosure requirements
Disclosure requirements in Australia
Prior to the CLERP Act, the Corporations Law (Cth) primarily regulated
Australia’s equity capital fundraising.
In general, the
Corporations Law (Cth) mandated the disclosure of certain information in a
prospectus distributed to potential investors,
although some issues
were exempted from this requirement.
Section 1021 of the
Corporations Law (Cth) outlined a limited list of specific items to be included
in all prospectuses,
while Corporations Law (Cth) s 1022 also
required issuers to include ‘all such information as investors and their
professional
advisers would reasonably require, and reasonably expect to find in
the prospectus’.
Academic commentary relating to ss
1021–22 of the Corporations Law (Cth) suggested that issuers were
therefore left with some
discretion in assessing the requisite
disclosure.
The fundraising reforms introduced by the CLERP Act were incorporated
directly into the Corporations Law (Cth) on 13 March 2000. The
Corporations Law
(Cth) has since been succeeded by the
Corporations Act 2001
(Cth) (Corporations
which currently regulates corporations in Australia. In
general, the
Corporations Act
continues to mandate the disclosure of certain
information in a disclosure document,
subject to certain
exemptions.
Although articulated in slightly different language,
the basic requirements of ss 1021–22 of the Corporations Law (Cth) are
encapsulated in the
Corporations Act
. Thus, the
Corporations Act
contains a limited checklist of required disclosures,
Corporations Act
sets out a general test requiring the disclosure of
‘all the information that investors and their professional advisers would
reasonably require’. The similarity of these provisions and ss
1021–22 of the Corporations Law (Cth) suggests that the
available to issuers in relation to disclosure effectively remains
Disclosure requirements in the US
In the US, the Securities Act of 1933 (Securities Act) primarily governs
equity capital fundraising.
The Securities Act also mandates the
disclosure of certain information in a registration statement,
although ranges of exemptions are available.
registration statement must include a prospectus,
to be distributed
to prospective investors. The disclosure requirements for these two documents
are essentially identical. The Act
outlines a strict checklist of 32 items that
must be included in a registration statement,
28 of which must be
included in a prospectus.
These items include not only technical
details such as the name of the issuer,
the state in which the
issuer is incorporated
and the address of the issuer31 but also
substantive items such as an audited balance sheet
and three years
of audited profit and loss statements.
Lessons from the US
It follows from the above that significant differences exist between the
basic disclosure requirements in Australia and the US. To
varying degrees, both
systems mandate disclosure.
However, the extensive checklist of
specific disclosures required in the US is considerably more restrictive than
the combined checklist/general
disclosure test approach maintained in Australia.
The key argument in favour of checklist disclosure is that it establishes a
standard form for disclosure documents, thereby enabling
market participants
efficiently to compare potential investments.
However, the force of
this argument is reduced by the fact that a checklist must necessarily include
broadly worded requirements,
thereby effectively limiting comparability.
Proponents of the checklist approach also argue that the existence of a
standard form limits the costs of compliance, due to the development
precedents.
However, the counterargument is that a checklist in
fact encourages unnecessarily complex and costly detail.
evidence supports the latter interpretation. In Australia, fundraising costs
averaged 10% of the funds for Australian Stock
Exchange listings during
In the US, empirical evidence suggests that such costs
average approximately 11%.
The strengths of a general disclosure test are less ambiguous. In particular,
such an approach achieves greater flexibility
in two senses. First,
a general disclosure test permits flexibility across issues, thereby allowing
factors such as issue size to
influence the level of disclosure for particular
capital raisings. According to the Australian Financial System Inquiry Final
released in 1997, ‘this [Australia’s general disclosure
test] approach … is flexible and places responsibility
for the content of
a prospectus squarely on the issuer which is in the best position to judge the
information needed by investors
to make an informed investment
Secondly, the general disclosure test approach
allows flexibility in a temporal sense. In a rapidly changing market, an
general disclosure requirement is better equipped to evolve across
time in response to the requirements of investors.
Both the checklist approach and the general disclosure test approach
therefore have attractive attributes, although the strengths
of the general
disclosure test approach are subject to fewer criticisms. It follows that the
ideal regulatory system should combine
a general disclosure test with some form
of checklist disclosure. The Australian regime effectively achieves such
reconciliation,
by supplementing the general disclosure test in the
Corporations
with a basic checklist in
of this Act. In contrast, the US
system relies solely on a comprehensive checklist, thereby restricting the
flexibility available
to issuers and discouraging issue-specific disclosures. On
these bases, CLERP’s decision to perpetuate the existing flexible
is compelling.
The regulation of financial
projections
The regulation of financial projections in
Prior to the CLERP Act, financial projections constituted a particularly
controversial aspect of prospectus disclosure.
Although not
required as part of the checklist in the Corporations Law (Cth) s 1021,
interpretations of the general disclosure test
in s 1022 of the Corporations Law
(Cth) suggested that financial projections would be required in certain
circumstances. In ASIC
Practice Note 67 (Financial Forecasts in
Prospectuses),
the regulator stated ‘directors must assess
[whether a forecast must be included in a prospectus] on a case-by-case
While there is no case law directed at this aspect of
s 1022 of the Corporations Law (Cth), the Federal Court of Australia addressed
similar issues in relation to statements in a takeover context.
the first such case,
Pancontinental Mining Ltd v Goldfields Ltd
Tamberlin J held that a statement issued by the bidder, Goldfields Ltd, in
relation to its proposed scrip bid for Pancontinental Mining
Ltd was deficient
in failing to include an earnings forecast.
However, his Honour
also noted that ‘what is material … is a matter for judgment and
assessment in the light of all the
evidence, facts and circumstances in each
particular takeover context and this will necessarily differ from case to
Subsequent decisions supported Tamberlin J’s
conclusion.
The view held by ASIC and the court was confirmed by
academic commentary.
The CLERP Act’s effective retention of the existing disclosure
requirements means that the financial projections are now regulated
general disclosure standard in the
Corporations Act
the similarities between the
Corporations Act
and s 1022 of the
Corporations Law (Cth), the law relating to the disclosure of financial
projections is effectively unchanged.
ASIC Policy Statement 170
(Prospective Financial Information), which was issued on 6 September 2002 and
which replaced ASIC Practice
supports this interpretation.
It suggests that ‘an issuer must assess on a case-by-case basis if
prospective financial information
needs to be disclosed’.
The regulation of financial projections in the
Historically, the regulation of the disclosure of financial projections has
also been a controversial issue in the US. Issuers are
not legally required to
include any form of financial projection pursuant to the checklist contained in
the Securities Act.
Indeed for many years, the securities market
regulator, the Securities and Exchange Commission (SEC),
active position that registration statements and prospectuses should include
only verifiable facts.
However, this position was heavily
and, in 1978, the SEC indicated that it
‘encourages the use … of management’s projections of future
economic performance
that have a reasonable basis and are presented in a
reasonable format’.
In 1979, the regulator introduced the SEC
r 175, which provides a ‘safe harbour’ for financial projections,
that no liability exists for a ‘forward-looking
unless that statement is ‘made …
without a reasonable basis or … disclosed other than in good
Subsequent interpretations of the SEC r 175 have
indicated that while overly optimistic financial projections may form the basis
for liability,
the mere failure to realise a financial projection
is not actionable under securities law.
Lessons from the US
The regulation of financial projections trades off two competing
considerations. First, the academic literature indicates that projections
often highly inaccurate, and optimistically biased.
This suggests
that projections are liable to mislead the market and should be prohibited on
the basis of investor protection. Secondly,
however, the academic literature
also indicates that financial projections are value relevant to the market, in
the sense that their
disclosure has a significant impact on the share price of
the disclosing firm.
This argument suggests that projections are
considered useful by investors and should be mandated.
The approaches taken by the Australian and US legislatures to balance these
considerations differ. The US approach provides encouragement
for issuers to
include financial projections where such information can reasonably be made
available in good faith.
Under this regime, the paramount
consideration is the issuer’s capability accurately to predict future
earnings, while the
highly relevant nature of such predictions is a secondary
consideration. In contrast, the disclosure of a financial projection is
in Australia wherever investors would reasonably require such
information.
While a solitary reading of this provision suggests a
singular focus on the value relevance of projections, ASIC Policy Statement
effectively limits the requirement to disclose a projection to situations in
which ‘there are reasonable grounds for its
inclusion’.
It follows that the Australian approach achieves a more effective
reconciliation between the two competing considerations of accuracy
relevance. Consistent with the observed inaccuracy of financial projections, it
limits Australia’s disclosure to
circumstances in which accuracy can be
reasonably assured. Moreover, in those circumstances of relatively assured
accuracy, it actively
requires disclosure, consistent with the value relevance
of such projections. While similar limitations are placed on disclosure
US, the mere encouragement to disclose provided by the SEC r 175 fails to place
sufficient emphasis on the value relevance
of financial projections. As there is
no universally accepted disclosure for financial projections, the CLERP
Act’s omission
of a safe harbour for financial projections is appropriate.
The role of the regulator
The role of ASIC in Australia
Prior to the CLERP Act, ASIC had a significant role in overseeing prospectus
disclosure in Australia. This role derived from the requirement
prospectuses were to be lodged with and registered by ASIC prior to their
release to the market.
ASIC was required to register a prospectus
within 14 days of lodgment,
provided the prospectus did not contain
a false or misleading statement or omission, and otherwise complied with the
Corporations
However, despite these requirements, the
CLERP Issues Paper noted that, ‘in practice, [ASIC] only examines
prospectuses in
a limited manner prior to registration.’
Consequently, non-complying prospectuses were often registered.
Accordingly, ASIC often reviewed prospectuses subsequent to registration
(post-vetting), especially where concerns about compliance
with the Corporations
Law (Cth) arose.
In cases of non-compliance, ASIC had the power to
issue a stop order to prevent further issues of the securities.
The CLERP Act introduced certain procedural changes that ostensibly affect
ASIC’s role, although the practical effect of the
reforms is limited. In
particular, disclosure documents continue to be
but need not be
by the regulator.
an exposure period of seven days
begins from the date of lodgment,
during which time the issuer may accept no subscriptions.
to the explanatory memorandum to the CLERP Bill 1998, this exposure period is
to give … ASIC and the market an opportunity to consider the disclosure
before the commencement of subscriptions for the securities on offer
… where the
disclosure document was defective, the market could draw it
to the attention of ASIC or
aggrieved parties could, if appropriate, seek
injunctions preventing the
fundraising.
Consistent with the procedural
change, ASIC Policy Statement 152 (Lodgment of Disclosure Documents)
confirms that the regulator’s oversight role in relation to
disclosure documents is effectively confined to post-vetting.
conjunction with the procedural changes, the CLERP Act has retained ASIC’s
power to issue a stop order upon the discovery
of non-compliance with the
Corporations Act
by a disclosure document,
and ASIC has indicated
its continued willingness to exercise that power.
The role of the SEC in the US
The SEC also plays an active role in regulating equity capital raisings in
the US. Pursuant to the Securities Act, the registration
statement and
prospectus prepared by an issuer must be lodged with the SEC before securities
are issued.
Moreover, the regulator actively reviews most
registration statements and prospectuses before lodgment (the pre-filing
period), between
lodgment and registration (the effective period) and after
registration (the post-effective period).
During the pre-filing period, the SEC staff have no formal involvement, but
are generally willing to provide advice for a potential
During the effective period, the SEC ‘review[s] the contents of
almost every registration statement filed by an issuer which
has not previously
registered securities with the SEC’.
This review often leads
to concerns about defects in the registration statement, in which case the
Commission must inform the issuer
of those perceived defects within 10 days of
Once the Commission is satisfied with the registration
statement, it has the power to register the statement immediately.
Alternatively, the registration statement automatically becomes effective
20 days after it is lodged or after the SEC informs the
issuer of required
amendments.
Finally, during the post-effective period, the
Commission continues to oversee the fundraising process, and has the power to
a stop order if it discovers defects in a distributed prospectus.
Lessons from the US
The CLERP Act effectively formalised a clear divergence between the roles of
ASIC and the SEC. Whereas the SEC has historically undertaken
an aggressive
program of informal and formal review of registration statements and
prospectuses, both before and after the release
of prospectuses to the market,
ASIC’s focus remains almost entirely upon post-vetting disclosure
The most attractive aspect of the US approach is its comprehensive coverage.
A three-phase review process that incorporates the pre-filing
period, the
effective period and the post-effective period clearly maximises the SEC’s
opportunities to detect improper disclosure,
thereby also maximising the level
of investor protection. However, there are two key arguments in favour of a less
comprehensive
approach. First, because a prospectus is generally unavailable to
the market for at least 20 days after lodgment, the US approach
timeliness of the information disclosed.
In a fast-moving market,
such a delay may be detrimental to the success of an issue. Secondly, the
comprehensive coverage of the
SEC’s approach is associated with
considerable cost. As many as 2,900 people staff the US regulator,
and it has an annual budget exceeding US$423 million.
contrast, ASIC’s total staff is currently 1,221,
annual budget is AUS$143 million.
Ultimately, these arguments must be balanced according to the particular
characteristics of the relevant market. The costs associated
with operating a
large, aggressive regulator are feasible for a global financial centre such as
the US, whereas it is more difficult
for the relatively minor Australian market
to bear similar costs. Moreover, concerns relating to the level of investor
in the Australian market are partly allayed by recent evidence
relating to the transition effected by the CLERP Act. According to
number of stop orders issued in the 2000–01 financial year
‘because we no longer have the power to refuse to
register inadequate prospectuses’.
It follows that
ASIC’s increasing focus on post-vetting has merely shifted, rather than
diminished, its intervention in the
equity capital market. Therefore, since
ASIC’s existing approach appears to be appropriately adapted to the
Australian market,
a move to a more comprehensive SEC-style review process would
be unlikely to achieve a better cost-benefit relationship.
SME Fundraising
SME fundraising in Australia
Prior to the CLERP Act, the basic fundraising provisions of the Corporations
Law governed SME fundraising in Australia. Thus, SMEs
were generally required to
issue a prospectus in order to issue securities, in the same manner as any other
However, two exceptions to the prospectus disclosure
requirements were particularly relevant to SMEs:
over a rolling 12-month period, an issuer could make up to 20 personal
offers of securities to specific persons, without issuing a
prospectus (the
personal offers exception);
an entity could issue securities to an unlimited number of sophisticated
investors, defined as entities investing AUS$500,000 or more
in a single
transaction, without issuing a prospectus (the sophisticated investor
exception).
One of the most important aspects of the
CLERP Act was the introduction of additional measures to assist SMEs in raising
equity capital.
First, issuers now have the opportunity to raise
up to AUS$5 million on a single occasion using an Offer Information Statement
The disclosure requirements for an OIS are considerably
less onerous than those relating to a prospectus.
Secondly, the
requirements of the personal offers exception have been reformulated. An issuer
may now raise up to AUS$2 million over
a rolling 12-month period from up to 20
of securities (rather than
of securities), to
persons with a connection to the issuer, without the need for a
prospectus.
Thirdly, the Act effectively amended the definition of
sophisticated investor. According to the
Corporations Act
, a sophisticated
investor is a person who invests AUS$500,000 or more in the securities (the
pre-CLERP Act requirement),
or a person with net assets of AUS$2.5
million or more,
or a person who has a net annual income of
AUS$250,000 or more.
SME fundraising in the US
SME fundraising in the US is regulated under a similar framework. Although
the Securities Act generally requires issuers to comply
with its disclosure
requirements, it exempts certain issues from its registration requirements and
empowers the SEC to permit further
exemptions. The most relevant exemptions for
SMEs are contained in the SEC’s reg A
promulgated pursuant to s 3(b) Securities Act (which empowers the SEC to
exempt certain issues where the aggregate amount raised does
not exceed US$5
million) and clarifying s 4(2), (6) Securities Act (which exempts private issues
and issues to accredited investors).
In particular, required financial statements are simpler
and need not be audited.
Therefore, according to Thomas Hazen,
‘the [SEC] Regulation A offering will prove to be significantly less
expensive than registration,
especially in terms of legal, printing,
underwriting and accounting fees’.
The SEC’s reg D was promulgated in 1982 to encourage capital raising by
small businesses.
The key components of reg D are SEC rr 504-506.
First, the SEC’s r 504 allows an issuer to raise up to US$1 million during
a rolling 12-month period in a general solicitation, without any disclosure.
Secondly, the SEC’s r 505 allows an issuer to
raise up to US$5 million
from an unlimited number of accredited investors and up to 35 unaccredited
investors, provided certain reduced
disclosure requirements are met.
Accredited investors include eligible financial institutions,
as well as individuals with an annual income of US$200,000
or net worth of US$1 million.
Thirdly, the SEC’s r 506
allows an issuer to raise an unlimited amount from accredited investors, without
any disclosure.
Lessons from the US
The SME fundraising reforms implemented by the CLERP Act are relatively novel
in an Australian context. In many respects, however,
they closely resemble the
SME-targeted fundraising provisions of the Securities Act. For example, the OIS
Corporations Act
is directly comparable to the Offering Circular under
the Securities Act. Similarly, the Australian sophisticated investor exception
essentially replicates the SEC’s r 506, albeit using slightly different
definitions.
The key difference between the two regimes lies in the opportunities to
undertake general solicitations. In Australia, although the
personal offers
exception allows issuers to make personalised offers, these offers must be based
on ‘previous contact between
[the issuer] and [the
‘some professional or other connection
between [the issuer] and [the offeree]’
or ‘statements
or actions by [the offeree] that indicate that they are interested in offers of
that kind’.
In the US, an issuer may undertake a general
solicitation for up to US$1 million without a prospectus,
raise up to US$5 million from unaccredited investors with limited
disclosure.
On the basis of this comparison, the US approach appears to provide greater
assistance to SME in accessing equity capital markets.
Given that SMEs provide
approximately 40% of Australia’s private sector output and almost 50% of
private sector employment,
a case can certainly be made for the
introduction of even less stringent SME fundraising requirements. However, the
imperative of
investor protection balances any argument further to relax
Australia’s SME fundraising regime. In the US the SME capital raising
system has been criticised as favouring the interests of business ahead of
investors. As Marvin Mohney points out, ‘Regulation
D … achieves a
precarious balance between investor protection and capital formation, and might
sacrifice too much of the former
to benefit the latter’.
balance, Australia’s legislature has achieved a reasonable compromise
between encouraging SME fundraising and ensuring an
adequate level of investor
protection. Therefore, the introduction of more relaxed provisions seems
unnecessary in the prevailing
Australian fundraising climate.
Advertising
Advertising in Australia
Australia’s Corporations Law (Cth) prospectus disclosure requirements
were underpinned by the principle that ‘investors
should not be induced to
invest in securities until they have had the benefit of reviewing a prospectus
in relation to the offer’.
Accordingly, the disclosure
requirements were supplemented by restrictions on the advertising of securities
issues. Until a prospectus
was registered by the ASIC, an issuer was prohibited
not only from advertising security issues, but also from even referring to a
prospectus in advertisements.
Additionally, in order to avoid
circumvention of that prohibition through apparently objective publications such
as newspaper articles,
the Corporations Law (Cth) prohibited persons from
publishing reports that were ‘reasonably likely to induce a person to
for the securities’.
However, factual independent
reports were permitted,
and the ASIC was given a mandate to exempt
persons or classes of persons from the advertising restrictions.
Moreover, after a prospectus was registered, an advertisement could be
published provided it drew attention to the availability of
prospectus.
The CLERP Act introduced a number of changes to the advertising restrictions.
Until the end of the exposure period, the
Corporations Act
generally continues
to prohibit issuers of unlisted securities from advertising,
although basic objective statements (such as the identity of the issuer)
are now permitted.
In contrast, however, issuers of listed
securities may advertise to any extent, provided such advertisements note the
availability
of a disclosure document.
The basis of this
‘significant relaxation’
is that adequate information
relating to the issuer exists through the continuous disclosure requirements of
Corporations Act
Factual independent reports continued to be
while the ASIC retains its power to exempt persons or
classes of persons from the advertising provisions.
exposure period expires, advertising is unrestricted provided a warning
specified in the Act is included.
Advertising in the US
In the US, advertising is heavily regulated. In accordance with s 5 of the
Securities Act, all offers of securities must be made through
prospectus.
An offer is defined in the Securities Act to mean
‘every attempt or offer to dispose of, or solicitation of an offer to buy,
a security or interest in a security, for value’.
been interpreted to include advertising relating to the issue.
However, this rule has been relaxed somewhat by the SEC. During the
pre-filing period, the SEC’s r 135 permits an issuer to
publish a purely
factual notice detailing such items as the name of the issuer and the proposed
date of the issue.
In the subsequent effective period and
post-effective period, the SEC’s r 134 provides only slightly more
latitude, allowing
an issuer to publish a factual notice detailing the issuer
and the terms of the offer.
Lessons from the US
Since the CLERP Act, the Australian advertising restrictions are
significantly less strict than those laws applicable in the US. That
after the completion of the exposure period, the regime merely requires an
advertisement to be accompanied by a warning;
listed companies may advertise even during the exposure period, subject to
the inclusion of a warning.
In both cases, the US more clearly restricts the level of advertising
There is significant support for the maintenance of a strict, US-style
approach to advertising. In particular, certain commentators
argue that investor
protection may be compromised by allowing investors effectively to invest on the
basis of unregulated advertising.
According to Nicole Calleja,
‘advertising, press reports and publicity … can lead to an
atmosphere of investor hysteria’.
This argument implies that
significant intervention is necessary in order to protect vulnerable
However, the strongest counter-argument is that
sufficient protection exists for investors without the specific advertising
requirements.
Even in Australia, investors ultimately cannot
invest in securities without viewing a disclosure document and completing an
application
form. Moreover, any misleading or deceptive statements contained in
advertising are subject to legal liability (discussed below in
under the heading
Statutory liability for inadequate disclosure). These counter-arguments suggest
that in fact, Australia’s
advertising restrictions could be further
relaxed or even eliminated.
On balance, the Australian approach seems to achieve an appropriate level of
intervention. In circumstances in which investor protection
is very important,
such as in relation to initial public offerings, advertising remains heavily
restricted. In contrast, where information
is already in the market, such as in
relation to seasoned issues or subsequent to the lodgement and exposure of a
disclosure document,
advertising is not so strictly constrained. On those bases,
it does not appear that the CLERP Act advertising reforms could have
improved by incorporating stricter, US-style restrictions.
Statutory liability for Inadequate
Statutory liability for inadequate disclosure in
Prior to the CLERP Act, liability for inadequate disclosure arose from a
variety of legislative sources.
The most specific provision was s
996(1) of the Corporations Law (Cth), which directly prohibited false material
or misleading statements
in, or omissions from, prospectuses. Contravention of
the Corporations Law (Cth) s 996(1) led to criminal liability, and a maximum
penalty of AUS$20,000151 or imprisonment for five years, or both,
or civil liability for the recovery of damages under the Corporations Law
(Cth) s 1005.
However, s 996(1) of the Corporations Law (Cth) was
subject to two defences in s 996(2) of the Act, where reasonable grounds existed
for believing that a false or misleading statement was true,
where a false or misleading omission was inadvertent.
The various
entities liable under s 1005 of the Corporations Law (Cth) were outlined in s
1006 of the Act,
a provision accompanied by specific additional
defences in the Corporations Law (Cth) ss 1007–11.
Less specific, but arguably more effective bases for liability also existed
under s 995(2) of the Corporations Law (Cth), s 52
Trade Practices Act 1974
(Cth) (TPA) and the state and territory Fair Trading Acts. Section 995(2)
Corporations Law (Cth) prohibited conduct that was misleading
or deceptive in
connection with any dealing with securities. The broader scope of s 995(2)
contrasted with the targeted prospectus
focus of s 996(1) of the Corporations
Law (Cth). Contravention of the Corporations Law (Cth) s 995(2) gave rise only
to civil liability
under s 1005 of the Act,
for the entities
outlined in
Corporations Law (Cth). However, it appeared that the
defences in
did not apply to an action pursuant to s 995 of the
Corporations Law (Cth), although that issue was ‘the subject of much
Trade Practices Act
more general prohibition in relation to misleading or deceptive conduct, or
conduct likely to mislead or deceive, and
formed the basis for a civil action
for damages against the issuer under
Trade Practices Act
. An action brought
in relation to
Trade Practices Act
was subject to no defences.
Similar civil causes of action existed under the state and territory Fair
Trading Acts.
This complex liability overlap was the subject of significant criticism,
notably from the Lonergan Committee, a sub-committee of the
Companies and
Securities Advisory Committee,
the Corporations Law Simplification
Task Force (the predecessor of CLERP)
and the Financial System
In response, the CLERP Act provides a
‘self-contained liability regime’ in the Corporations Act.164
Accordingly, the
Trade Practices Act
and the state and territory
Fair Trading Acts no longer apply to prospectus disclosure. Under the
Corporations Act
, false or misleading statements or omissions in disclosure
documents are now prohibited under
Corporations Act
prohibition forms the basis for criminal liability,
penalties of up to AUS$20,000
or five years’ imprisonment,
200 penalty units. or both.
A single civil cause of action exists
Corporations Act
, which also outlines the entities
Defences to such actions are contained in
of the Corporations Act.
Statutory liability for inadequate disclosure in
The Securities Act incorporates an exacting liability regime, described by
some as draconian,
envisaging both criminal and civil liability
for improper disclosure. Criminal liability arises under s 17(a) Securities Act,
Act’s general anti-fraud provision, in relation to any person who
offers securities for sale through a registration statement
that contains a
material misstatement or omission. The maximum criminal penalty is US$10,000 or
five years’ imprisonment.
Civil liability arises from two
principal sources:
section 12(a)(1) of the Securities Act makes any person who offers or sells
a security without fulfilling the registration requirements
liable to pay
damages to the purchaser of that security;
section 11 of the Securities Act extends liability to a number of
where a registration statement contains a material
misstatement or omission, and where an investor relied on that statement or
The issuer is effectively strictly liable in this respect,
while a number of due diligence defences are available to individual
defendants.
Civil liability may also arise under s 17(a)
Securities Act, although the interpretation of that provision remains
Lessons from the US
The above discussion serves primarily to highlight the clear parallels
between the Australian and US liability systems. In both jurisdictions,
sanctions are available, if rarely implemented.
Similarly, in each
country, civil liability arises for misleading statements or omissions, subject
to due diligence defences that
centre on reasonable investigations and
reasonable beliefs.
If any distinction is apparent, it lies in the relative complexity of the two
regimes. As a consequence of the CLERP Act, Australia’s
fundraising system
is now characterised by a relatively clear set of self-contained liability
provisions. In contrast, the US relies
primarily on a range of provisions whose
clarity is somewhat diminished by the lack of certainty relating to their
application.
While the US system is nonetheless serviceable, the
straightforward nature of Australia’s liability provisions suggests that
the CLERP Act changes could not have been significantly improved.
At a basic doctrinal level, the evidence presented above confirms Paul
Redmond’s comment that ‘the US experience …
demonstrates alternative approaches [to fundraising] which might be taken by
government.
In particular, there is considerable divergence in
relation to the basic disclosure requirements, the role of the securities market
regulator and restrictions on advertising. To a lesser extent, differences are
also apparent in relation to the disclosure requirements
for financial
projections, SME fundraising regulation, and liability for inadequate
disclosure.
At a more fundamental level, the evidence also supports a consistent finding
in relation to each of the six dimensions. In each case,
after an analytical
evaluation of the alternative approaches, the Australian approach appears to be
appropriately suited to the features
of the Australian market. Thus, the
paper’s conclusion is that while a comparative examination of the US
fundraising regime
provides valuable insights, it is unlikely that the CLERP Act
reforms could have been significantly improved by implementing aspects
Such a conclusion is necessarily subject to certain limitations. Most
importantly, the scope of this study is strictly constrained.
Rather than narrow
its methodology by focusing on a particular component of the CLERP Act
fundraising reforms, the study seeks to
provide a broad overview of those
reforms in a comparative context. Future studies may extend this work by
examining particular aspects
of the Australian system by reference to other
implemented by the CLERP Act in order to provide a succinct and concise
Subsequent works may build on the study by addressing a
different range of reforms.
* LLB, TC Beirne School of Law, The University of Queensland, Brisbane,
Queensland. 1 The program, initially named the Corporate Law
Simplification
Program, was established in 1993 by the Labor federal government. It was renamed
CLERP in 1996 by the Liberal federal
government upon its accession to power. 2
Callinan, I, ‘The Corporate Law Economic Reform Program: an
Overview’, paper
presented at the Corporations Law Update Conference,
1998, Sydney, 2. 3 For a general summary of these reforms, see Baxt, R
Clerp Explained: The
Corporate Law Economic Reform Program Act 1999
2000, Sydney: CCH Australia Ltd; Black, A
CLERP and the New
Corporations Law,
2nd edn, 2000, Sydney: Butterworths; Callinan,
, fn 2; Ford, HAJ, Austin, RP and Ramsay, IM,
An Introduction to the
CLERP Act 1999: Australia’s New Company Law,
2000, 1st edn, Sydney:
Butterworths. 4 See www.asic.gov.au. Until 1 July 1998, ASIC was named the
Australian Securities
Commission (ASC). 5 Explanatory Memorandum, Corporate Law Economic Reform
Program Bill 1998 (Cth) 1.
See www.asic.gov.au.
Fundraising: Capital Raising Initiatives to Build Enterprise and
Employment,
1997, Canberra: AGPS.
Given the primarily state-based nature of Canada’s corporations
regulation, the Issues Paper focuses on Ontario law.
Baxt, fn 3;
, Callinan, fn 2;
, Ford, Austin and Ramsay, fn 3; Grose, C,
‘Will the small business fundraising reforms proposed by CLERP really make
for SMEs to raise capital in Australia?’ (1998) 16(4) Company
and Securities Law Journal 297; Hone, G, ‘Fundraisings
and prospectuses
– the CLERP proposals’ (1998) 16(4) Company and Securities Law
Journal 311; Lessing, J, ‘Overview
of the CLERP reforms regarding
fundraising and takeovers’
[1999] BondLawRw 19
(1999) 11(2) Bond Law Review 287.
Redmond, P,
Companies and Securities Law: Commentary and Materials
(2001) Lawbook Co [1–2], Chapter 12: ‘Corporate
fundraising’, www.lawbookco.com.au at 25 August 2002.
The six dimensions identified are broadly consistent with the ‘key
features of the new regulatory arrangements’ identified
by the Explanatory
Memorandum, Corporate Law Economic Reform Program Bill 1998 (Cth) 13. They are
also consistent with issues identified
in the prior literature as being of
greatest importance. See Golding, G, ‘The CLERP fundraising
proposals’, paper presented
at the Corporations Law Reform Conference,
1998 Sydney; see also
, Hone, fn 9.
The Corporations Law (Cth) was subsidiary legislation contained in
Corporations Act 2001
(Cth). It commenced on 1 January 1991, replacing
earlier co-operative schemes of companies and securities codes. For a summary of
those schemes, see Ford, HAJ, Austin, RP and Ramsay, IM,
Principles of Corporations Law,
2001, 10th edn, Sydney: Butterworths,
42–48; Lipton, P and Herzberg, A,
Understanding Company Law,
10th edn, Sydney: LBC, 4–6; Redmond, P,
Companies and Securities Law:
Commentary and Materials,
2000, 3rd edn, Sydney: LBC, 51–52; Tomasic,
R, Jackson, J and Woellner, R,
Corporations Law: Principles, Policy and
2002, 4th edn, Sydney: Butterworths, 21–24. This study is
principally concerned with the transition effected by the CLERP Act
1999 (Cth),
and therefore focuses on the regulatory environment existing under the
Corporations Law (Cth).
Section 1018 of the Corporations Law (Cth).
Section 1017 of the Corporations Law (Cth). A list of excluded issues,
offers and invitations was contained in s 66 of the Corporations
Law (Cth). See
Azzi, J, ‘Disclosure in Prospectuses’ (1991) 9(4) Company and
Securities Law Journal 205, 219–22;
Baxt, R, Ford, HAJ and Black, A,
Securities Industry Law,
1996, 5th edn, Sydney: Butterworths,
41–48; Ford, HAJ, Austin, RP and Ramsay, IM,
Ford’s Principles of
Corporations Law,
1999, 9th edn, Sydney: Butterworths, 883–90; Lipton,
P and Herzberg, A,
Understanding Company Law,
1999, 8th edn, Sydney: LBC,
131–33; Taylor, M, ‘Capital raising in Australia’, in Walker,
G, Fisse, B and Ramsay,
Securities Regulation
in Australia and New
1998, 2nd edn, Sydney: LBC, 293–96. Some of these exclusions
related to SME fundraising, and are discussed in detail in the
section in this
paper headed SME fundraising.
The specific requirements included the use of type no smaller than eight
point Times (s 1021(2) of the Corporations Law (Cth)),
the inclusion of the
issue date of the prospectus (Corporations Law (Cth) s 1021(3)), the inclusion
of a statement that no securities
would be allotted later than 12 months after
the issue date of the prospectus (s 1021(5) of the Corporations Law (Cth)) and
the disclosure
of the interests of directors, proposed directors and experts in
the company (s 1021(6) of the Corporations Law (Cth)).
Further guidance as to the meaning of this general disclosure test was
provided in s 1022(2) and (3) of the Corporations Law (Cth).
Pursuant to
Corporations Law (Cth) s 1022(2), such disclosure was limited to information
that was known to the issuer, or to information
that would be reasonable for the
issuer to obtain by making inquiries. Section 1022(3) of the Corporations Law
(Cth) also indicated
a number of factors that could be taken into account in
determining what information to include in a prospectus. These factors included
the nature of the securities and the corporation, the kinds of persons likely to
consider subscribing for the securities, the reasonable
knowledge of
professional advisers and the extent to which likely subscribers already have
information relating to the securities.
Azzi, fn 14, 226–28;
, Baxt, Ford and
Black, fn 14, 64–65;
, Ford, Austin and Ramsay, fn 14,
, Lipton and Herzberg, fn 14, 135;
Taylor, fn 14, 298.
Corporations Act 2001
(Cth) commenced on 15 July 2001. Between the
introduction of the CLERP Act 1999 (Cth) and the commencement of the
Corporations Act 2001
(Cth), the relevant provisions of the
Corporations Act
(Cth) were simply provisions of the Corporations Law (Cth).
Sections 704
Corporations Act 2001
(Cth). The section in
this paper headed Disclosure requirements focuses on the disclosure requirements
relating to prospectuses.
However, the section headed SME fundraising in this
paper considers in detail some alternative disclosure documents of particular
relevance to SMEs.
Such exemptions are now largely contained in
Corporations Act
, Ford, Austin and Ramsay, fn 12, 954–64;
, Lipton and Herzberg, fn 12, 149–52;
Jackson and Woellner, fn 12, 732–33. Some of these exclusions relate to
SME fundraising and are discussed in detail
in the section headed SME
fundraising in this paper.
The specific requirements include the disclosure of terms and conditions
of the offer
Corporations Act 2001
(Cth)), the disclosure of
the interests of the directors, the proposed directors, the advisors, the
promoters and the underwriters
of the company
and (4) of the
Corporations Act 2001
(Cth)), the disclosure of the fees and benefits to the
directors, the proposed directors and the advisers of the company
Corporations Act 2001
(Cth)), the disclosure of the admission of the
securities or the application for the admission of the securities to quotation
a financial market (s 711(5) of the Act 2001 (Cth)), the disclosure of the
expiry date of the prospectus
Corporations Act 2001
the disclosure of the fact that the prospectus has been lodged with ASIC
Corporations Act 2001
, Baxt, fn 3, 177;
, Ford, Austin and Ramsay, fn 3, 53.
In conjunction with the Securities
Exchange Act
of 1934 (which regulates
the secondary market in securities trading), the Securities Act of 1933
represented a response by President
Franklin Roosevelt’s federal
government to the Great Depression. See Keller, E and Gehlmann, GA, ‘A
historical introduction
to the Securities Act of 1933 and the Securities
Exchange Act
(1988) 49 Ohio State Law Journal 329
Seligman, J, ‘The historical need for a mandatory corporate disclosure
system’ (1983) 9 Journal of Corporation
Law 1, 27. It is also important to
note that because art I United States
Constitution
§ 8 restricts federal
securities regulation to interstate commerce, the Securities Act of 1933 is
supplemented by individual
state laws regulating fundraising. Indeed, some
controversy initially surrounded the ability of the federal government to
securities regulation at all, although the United States Supreme Court
rejected such constitutional objections in
Jones v SEC
[1936] USSC 73
While state laws are important, especially given that they often require review
of the merits of a prospectus, the pre-eminence
of the Securities Act 1933
(jurisdiction) renders their consideration beyond the scope of this paper.
Securities Act of 1933, 38 USC § 5(a) (1994).
See Dunfee, TW
Modern Business Law,
1989, 2nd edn,
New York: Random House, 910–15; Eisenberg, M,
Corporations and Other
Business Organisations: Cases and Materials,
2000, 8th edn, New York:
Foundation Press, 1310–42; Hazen, TL,
Securities Regulation,
, 3rd edn, St Paul: West Publishing Co, 162–286; Pinto, AR and
Branson, DM,
Understanding Corporate Law,
1999, 1st edn, New York:
Matthew Bender, 143–47. Some of these exceptions relate to SME
fundraising, and are discussed in detail
in the section in this
paper headed SME fundraising.
Securities Act of 1933, 38 USC § 7 (1994).
, § 10 Sched A.
, § Sched A(1).
, § Sched A(2).
, § Sched A(3).
, § Sched A(25).
, § Sched A(26).
Accordingly, a discussion of the extensive debate relating to the need for
disclosure in securities markets is beyond the scope of this paper.
, CLERP, fn 7, 13–14.
Section 1017 of the Corporations Law (Cth).
, Golding, fn 11, 6–7.
PricewaterhouseCoopers,
Survey of Sharemarket Floats 2001,
PricewaterhouseCoopers, 15.
, ‘The costs of raising capital’ (1996) 19
Journal of Financial Research 59, 62. See also Decker, W, ‘The attractions
of the US securities markets to foreign issuers and the alternative methods of
accessing the US markets: from the issuer’s
perspective’
Fordham International Law Journal 10
; Jensen, F, ‘The attractions of the
US securities markets to foreign issuers and the alternative methods of
accessing the US
markets: from a legal perspective’
(1994) 17 Fordham
International Law Journal 25.
Explanatory Memorandum, Corporate Law Economic Reform Program Bill 1998
(Cth) 56; Explanatory Memorandum, Corporations Bill 1988
(Cth) 743, 747;
, Azzi, fn 14, 227;
, Baxt, fn 3, 177;
fn 7, 13–14; Wallis, S,
Financial System Inquiry: Final Report,
, Canberra: AGPS, 265.
, Wallis, 265.
, CLERP, fn 7, 13.
See Callum, C and Law, L, ‘Soft information disclosure requirements
under the Corporations Law’ (2001) 29(2) Australian
Business Law Review
149; Kyrwood, J, ‘Disclosure of forecasts in prospectuses’ (1998)
16(5) Company and Securities Law
Journal 350; Callum, C and Law, L, ‘Is
there an obligation to disclosure earnings forecasts in IPO prospectuses?’
10(1) Accounting Research Journal 44; Kriedmann, R and Walker, S,
‘Forecasts: misleading or essential?’ (1997) 15(1)
Company and
Securities Law Journal 47.
Issued 4 August 1997.
ASIC Practice Note 67 at 1.
In a takeover context, s 750 of the Corporations Law (Cth) required an
offeror to produce a disclosure document, referred to as
a Part A statement, for
the information of shareholders and directors of the target company. Section 750
cl 17 of the Corporations
Law (Cth) required a Part A statement to include
‘information material to the making of a decision by an offeree whether or
not to accept an offer’.
(1995) 16 ACSR 463.
For a discussion of
Pancontinental Mining Ltd v
Goldfields Ltd
, see Nathanson, D, ‘A modest judgment of what should
and should not be in takeover documents? Or a new disclosure standard
takeovers and new issue prospectuses?’ (1995) 18(2) University of New
South Wales Law Journal 523.
Pancontinental Mining Ltd v Goldfields Ltd
(1995) 16 ACSR 463
Solomon Pacific Resources NL v Acacia Resources NL
GIO Australi
Holdings Ltd v AMP Insurance Investment Holdings Pty Ltd
AAPT v Cable & Wireless Optus Ltd
(1999) 32 ACSR 63.
, Callum and Law, fn 44, 150;
, Ford, Austin and
Ramsay, fn 14, 901;
, Kyrwood, fn 44, 358;
and Law, fn 44, 57;
, Kriedmann and Walker, fn 44, 50–51.
, Baxt, fn 3, 179;
, Ford, Austin, Ramsay, fn 3, 54.
, Baxt, fn 3, 177. Note, however, that while the obligation
to disclose a financial projection is effectively unchanged by the CLERP
1999 (Cth), the onus of proof in establishing liability for improper disclosure
of a financial projection is now upon the claimant
rather than the defendant
Corporations Act 2001
(Cth) compare to
s 765(2) of the Corporations Law (Cth)).
ASIC Policy Statement 170 at 1.
, Baxt, fn 3.
Securities Act of 1933, 38 USC § 7, 10, Sched A (1994).
See www.sec.gov.
Goldring, GF, ‘Mandatory disclosure of corporate projections and the
goals of securities regulation’ (1981) 81(7) Columbia
Law Review 1525,
, Hazen, fn 25, 151; Ratner, DL,
Securities Regulation,
1988, 3rd edn, St Paul: West Publishing Co, 38-39; Schneider, CW,
‘Nits, grits and soft information in SEC filings’ (1972)
University of Pennsylvania Law Review 254, 254–55.
See, for example, Mann, BA, ‘Prospectuses: unreadable or just
unread? – A proposal to reexamine policies against permitting
projections’ (1971) 40(2) George Washington Law Review 222;
Schneider, fn 59.
Item 10 SEC Regulation S–K.
The term ‘forward-looking statement’ is defined in SEC r
175(c) to mean: ‘(1) a statement containing a projection
of revenues,
income (loss), earnings (loss) per share, capital expenditures, dividends,
capital structure or other financial items;
(2) a statement of
management’s plans and objectives for future operations; (3) a statement
of future economic performance
contained in management’s discussion and
analysis of financial condition and results of operations …; or (4)
statements of the assumptions underlying or relating to any of the
statements’.
SEC r 175(a).
See, for example,
Eisenberg v Gagnon
766 F 2d 770
(3rd Cir, 1985);
Goldman v Belden
[1985] USCA2 146
754 F 2d 1059
(2nd Cir, 1985);
In re Washington
Public Power Supply System Securities Litigation
650 F Supp 1346
1986). See generally
, Hazen, fn 25, 152.
See, for example,
Hillson Partners Ltd Partnership v Adage
204 (4th Cir, 1994);
Kowal v MCI Communications Corp
[1994] USCADC 27
16 F 3d 1271
Cir, 1994). See generally
, Hazen, fn 25, 152–53.
Foundation papers establishing the inaccuracy and positive bias of
management earnings forecasts include Basi, B, Carey, K and Twark,
comparison of the accuracy of corporate and security analysts’ forecasts
of earnings’ (1976) 51 Accounting
Review 244; Daily, R, ‘The
feasibility of reporting forecasted information’ (1971) 46 Accounting
Review 686; Imhoff,
E, ‘The representativeness of management earnings
forecasts’ (1978) 53 Accounting Review 836; McDonald, C, ‘An
empirical examination of the reliability of published predictions of future
earnings’ (1973) 48 Accounting Review 502.
Foundation papers establishing the value relevance of management earnings
forecasts include Gonedes, NJ, Dopuch, N and Penman, S,
‘Disclosure rules,
information-production, and capital market equilibrium: the case of forecast
disclosure rules’ (1976)
14 Journal of Accounting Research 89; Lev, B and
Penman, S, ‘Voluntary forecast disclosure, nondisclosure, and stock
(1990) 28 Journal of Accounting Research 49; Penman, S, ‘An
empirical investigation of the voluntary disclosure of corporate
forecasts’ (1980) 18
Journal of Accounting Research 132.
Section 710
Corporations Act 2001
ASIC Policy Statement 170 at 3.
Section 1018(1)(c) of the Corporations Law (Cth).
s 1020A(1).
See also reg 7.12.08 of the Corporations
Regulations (Cth), which prescribes
the 14-day period.
Section 1020A(2) of the Corporations Law (Cth).
, CLERP, fn 7, 65. See also
, Ford, Austin and
Ramsay, fn 14, 898;
, Lipton and
Herzberg, fn 14, 134; Australian Securities Commission, ‘Vetting of
prospectuses’ (1993) 11 Company and Securities Law
Journal 119, 120;
, Taylor, fn 14, 308.
, Ford, Austin and Ramsay, fn 14, 898;
and Herzberg, fn 14, 134.
Australian Securities Commission,
ASC Procedures Manual –
Prospectuses,
1993, Sydney: LBC, 6–7;
, Baxt, Ford and
Black, fn 14, 73–74;
, Ford, Austin and Ramsay, fn 14, 910;
, Lipton and Herzberg, fn 14, 134
Taylor, fn 14, 324.
Section 1033 of the Corporations Law year (Cth). The objectives of the
post-vetting program were outlined in ASIC Policy Statement
56 (Prospectuses) at
8. ASIC Policy Statement 56 was issued on 20 May 1996, and was last updated on 9
February 2000.
Sections 718
Corporations Act 2001
Explanatory Memorandum, Corporate Law Economic Reform Program Bill 1998
According to
Corporations Act 2001
(Cth), the seven-day
period may be
extended to 14 days by ASIC.
Section 727(3)
Corporations Act 2001
Explanatory Memorandum, Corporate Law Economic Reform Program Bill 1998
Issued 17 February 2000; updated 7 June 2000.
ASIC Policy Statement 152 at 12. See also Richard Cockburn,
ASIC Speaks
on Fundraising,
Takeovers and CLERP
(2001) Australian Securities and Investments
Commission, www.asic.gov.au at 25 August 2002.
Section 739
Corporations Act 2001
ASIC Policy Statement 152 at 12–13.
Securities Act of 1933, 38 USC § 5 (1994).
, Hazen, fn 25, 82; Thomson, J and Cramer, K, ‘United
States’, in
Euromoney Books
International Securities Law,
1996, Euromoney Books: London, 444.
, Thomson and Cramer, fn 88, 444–45. See also
, Dunfee, fn 25, 908-10;
, Hazen, fn 25, 138; Lieberman, JK
and Siedel, GJ,
Business Law and the Legal Environment,
1988, 2nd edn,
New York: Harcourt Brace Jovanovich, 1032–33; PricewaterhouseCoopers,
Securities Regulations,
www.pwcglobal.com at 20 September 2002;
, Ratner, fn 59, 40; US Securities and Exchange Commission,
that Govern the Securities Industry,
www.sec.gov/about/laws.shtml at 10
September 2002.
Securities Act of 1933, 38 USC § 8(b) (1994).
, CLERP, fn 7, 65.
US Securities and Exchange Commission, ‘The SEC: who we are, what we
do’, www.sec.gov
at 25 September 2002.
AQ again???
Securities and Exchange Commission,
2001 Annual Report,
Washington DC: SEC, 170.
Australian Securities and Investment Commission,
Annual Report
2001, Sydney:
ASIC, preamble. 98
, CLERP, fn 7, 13–14. ASIC did not reveal the number of
stop orders issued in 1999–2000, but directly stated that the
orders issued in 2000–01 represented an increase on the previous period.
, CLERP, fn 7, 13–14.
Section 1018 of the Corporations Law (Cth).
, s 66(2)(d), (3)(d).
, s 66(2)(a), (3)(a), (3)(ba).
, CLERP, fn 7, 7; Explanatory Memorandum, Corporate Law
Economic Reform
Program Bill 1998 (Cth) at 1, 13. See also
, Baxt, fn 3, 152;
, fn 3, 2–3;
, Ford, Austin
and Ramsay, fn 3, 41;
, Grose, fn 9;
, Hone, fn 9,
312; Whincop, MJ, ‘Due diligence in SME fundraising: reform choices,
economics and empiricism’ (1996) 19(2)
University of New South Wales Law
Journal 433, 434.
Section 709(4)
Corporations Act 2001
(Cth). The AUS$5 million
limit includes all amounts previously raised by the issuer.
Section 715
Corporations Act 2001
(Cth). Essentially,
Corporations Act 2001
(Cth) sets out a checklist of the following disclosures:
(a) the issuer and the nature of the securities; (b) the body’s business;
(c) what the funds raised by the issuer are to be used for;
(d) the nature of the risks involved in investing in the securities; (e)
details of all amounts payable in respect of the securities
(including any
amounts by way of fee, commission or charge); (f) a statement that: (i) a copy
of the OIS has been lodged with ASIC;
and (ii) ASIC takes no responsibility for
the content of the OIS; (g) a statement that the OIS is not a prospectus and
that it has
a lower level of disclosure requirements than a prospectus; (h) a
statement that investors should obtain professional investment
advice before
accepting the offer; (i) a copy of a financial report for the body; and (j) any
other information that the regulations
require to be included in the OIS. See
, Grose, fn 9;
, Hone, fn 9; Chapple, L,
Kazakoff, A and Karl, A, ‘Market response to offer information
statements’, paper presented
at the AAANZ Conference, July 2001, Auckland,
since published as 21(4) Company and Securities Law Journal 231–47);
, Lessing, fn 9, 290.
Section 708(1)
Corporations Act 2001
s 708(8)(a)
s 708(8)(c)(i).
s 708(8)(c)(ii).
SEC rr 251–63.
SEC rr 501–08.
The required contents of an offering circular are outlined in SEC r
SEC r 253. See also
, Eisenberg, fn 25, 1323.
, Hazen, fn 25, 198.
, Eisenberg, fn 25, 1318–19;
, Hazen, fn
25, 207; Mohney, MR, ‘Regulation D: coherent exemptions for small
businesses under the Securities Act of 1933’
(1982) 24(1) William and Mary
Law Review 121.
The disclosure requirements are defined in SEC r 502 to include
relatively limited financial and non-financial information.
SEC r 501(1)(1).
, r 501(1)(6).
, r 501(1)(5).
Section 708(2)(b)(i)
Corporations Act 2001
s 708(2)(b)(ii).
s 708(2)(b)(iii).
, CLERP, fn 7, 51.
, Mohney, fn 116, 166.
The issue of securities hawking, although related to advertising, is
beyond the scope of this paper.
Calleja, N, ‘Current issues relating to prospectus advertising and
securities hawking’ (2000) 18(1) Company and Securities
Law Journal 23.See
, Baxt, Ford and Black, fn 14, 37;
, CLERP, fn 7,
33; Explanatory Memorandum, Corporate Law Economic Reform Program Bill 1998
, Ford, Austin and Ramsay, fn 3, 893;
Hone, fn 9, 314;
, Lipton and Herzberg, fn 12, 144;
, Taylor, fn 14,
Section 1025(3) of the Corporations Law (Cth).
, s 1026(3).
, s 1026(2). A report could be published under s 1026(2) of
the Corporations Law (Cth) if it was: (a) a report relating to the affairs
listed body corporate submitted to and published by ASIC; (b) a report of
proceedings at a general meeting; (c) a report published
on behalf of a body
corporate by or on behalf of its directors with ASIC’s consent; or (d) a
news report or genuine comment
published in a newspaper, periodical or on radio
or television.
Section 1084 of the Corporations Law (Cth).
Section 1025(2) of the Corporations Law (Cth). An advertisement could be
published under s 1025(2) of the Corporations Law (Cth)
if it: (a) was published
by the issuer; (b) stated that a prospectus had been lodged with ASIC; (c)
specified the date of the prospectus;
(d) stated where a copy of the prospectus
could be obtained; (e) stated that issues would only be made on receipt of an
application
form referred to in and attached to a copy of the prospectus; and
(f) specified the interest that the publisher of the advertisement had in the
success of the issue.
Section 734(2)
Corporations Act 2001
s 734(5)(b).
An advertisement may be published under
Corporations Act 2001
(Cth) if it: (a) identifies the issuer;
(b) states that a disclosure document will be available in relation to the
issue; (c) states
that issues will be made on the basis of an application form
that will be in the disclosure document; and/or (d) states how to arrange
receive a copy of the disclosure document.
Section 734(5)(a)
Corporations Act 2001
(Cth). The minimal
disclosure required by
s 734(5)(a)
Corporations Act 2001
statement that a disclosure document will be made available in relation to the
issue, and that issues will be made on
the basis of an
application form that will be in the disclosure document.
, Calleja, fn 129, 38.
, fn 129, 38;
fn 7, 33; Explanatory Memorandum, Corporate Law Economic Reform Program Bill
1998 (Cth) 58;
, Ford, Austin and Ramsay, fn 3, 966. Under
Corporations Act 2001
(Cth) and ASX Listing Rule 3.1, entities listed on the
ASX are obliged to disclose information that is not generally available and
which a reasonable person would expect to have a material effect on the price of
the security.
Section 734(7)
Corporations Act 2001
(Cth). According to
Corporations Act 2001
(Cth), a report may be published if it: (a) is a
notice or report by the issuer about its affairs to ASIC; (b) is a notice or
of the issuer’s general meeting; (c) is a notice or report
published by the issuer in relation to other matters; (d) is a news
genuine comment in a newspaper or periodical or on radio or television; or (e)
is a report about the issue published by
an unrelated party.
Section 741
Corporations Act 2001
In particular,
Corporations Act
(Cth) requires an advertisement to include a notice that issues will be
made on the basis of an application form
in the disclosure document.
Securities Act of 1933, 38 USC § 5(c) (1994).
Securities Act of 1933, 38 USC § 2(a)(3) (1994).
See, for example,
In the Matter of Carl M Loeb, Rhoades & Co and
Dominick and Dominick
SEC 843 (SEC, 1959).
Violations of s 5 of the Securities Act during the pre-filing period are
referred to as gun-
jumping. See, for example,
, Hazen, fn 25, 81. 147
, fn 129, 27.
, fn 3, 39; McKenzie, R,
‘“Jumping the gun” – an examination of the
law relating to pre-prospectus advertising of securities issues in
Australia’ (1993) 1 Murdoch
University Electronic Journal of Law 1, Part 5.
Prospectus Law Reform Sub-Committee Report
, 1992, Sydney:
CASAC, para 73;
, Calleja, fn 129, 27.
The common law was also relevant to liability for inadequate disclosure.
, Ford, Austin and Ramsay, fn 3, 910–13. However, a
discussion of the common law is beyond the scope of this paper.
200 penalty units.
Schedule 3 to the Corporations Law (Cth).
Alternative remedies were also possible; see in particular ss
1324–25 of the Corporations Law
Section 996(2)(a) of the Corporations Law (Cth).
, s 996(2)(b).
The entities liable to pay compensation included the company, the
directors of the company, certain proposed directors, promoters,
experts, certain stockbrokers, share brokers and underwriters, certain auditors,
bankers and solicitors, and certain other
No entity was liable if the plaintiff knew of the false or misleading
nature of the relevant representation (s 1007 of the Corporations
Law (Cth)). No
liability attached to directors who did not consent to becoming directors (s
1008 of the Corporations Law (Cth)),
or to directors who had reasonable grounds
for believing that the relevant representation was correct (s 1008A of the
Corporations
Law (Cth)). The liability of experts was limited to their own
statements (ss 1009–10 of the Corporations Law (Cth)), while
general defence was available if the false or misleading statement or omission
was due to a reasonable mistake, due to
reasonable reliance on information
supplied by another person, or due to the act or default of another person, to
an accident, or
to some other cause beyond the entity’s control (s 1011 of
the Corporations Law (Cth)).
Section 995(3) of the Law (Cth).
Prospectus Liability Under the Corporations Law,
Melbourne: CCLSR, 37. Whereas a direct linguistic connection existed between s
996 of the Corporations Law (Cth) and s 1006
of the Corporations Law (Cth) (both
provisions were phrased in terms of ‘false or misleading’ statements
or omissions),
s 995 of the Corporations Law (Cth) was instead expressed in
terms of misleading or deceptive conduct. Moreover, it was the drafters’
expressed intention that Corporations Law (Cth) s 995 should operate in terms
Trade Practices Act 1974
(Cth), a strict liability
provision. See also Explanatory Memorandum, Corporate Law Economic Reform
Program Bill 1998 (Cth) 59;
, CLERP, fn 7, 38;
Golding, fn 11, 21;
, Hone, fn 9, 318; Legg, M, ‘Misleading
and deceptive conduct in prospectuses’ (1996) 14(1) Company and Securities
Journal 47.
Fair Trading Act 1985 (Vic);
Fair Trading Act 1987
(NSW); Fair Trading
Act 1987 (Qld);
Fair Trading Act 1987
Fair Trading Act 1987
Trading Act 1990
(Tas); Fair Trading Act 1990 (NT);
Fair Trading Act 1992
Corporations Law Simplification Task Force,
Trade Practices
and Dealings in
, 1996, Canberra: AGPS.
, Wallis, fn 41.
Explanatory Memorandum, Corporate Law Economic Reform Program Bill 1998
Trade Practices Act 1974
(Cth) was not directly amended by the CLERP
Act 1999 (Cth). It was amended by the
Financial Sector Reform (Consequential
Amendments) Act 1998
(Cth), which provided,
Practices Act 1974
(Cth) had no operation in relation to prospectuses after 1
July 1998. See
Trade Practices Act 1974
s 51AF(2)(a)
(inserted by
Financial Sector Reform (Consequential Amendments) Act 1998
(Cth)) Sched 2
(27) which reads ‘sections 52 and 55A [TPA] do not apply to conduct
engaged in relation to financial services’. Schedule
2 item 7 inserts
Division 2 ASIC Act, including ASIC Act 2001 (Cth) s 12DA, transferring powers
previously held by the Australian
Competition and Consumer Commission (ACCC)
Trade Practices Act 1974
(Cth) to ASIC. See
Austin and Ramsay, fn 3, 930.
Section 728(3)
Corporations Act 2001
Schedule 3 to the
Corporations Act 2001
The entities liable include the issuer, directors
of the issuer (including proposed directors), the underwriter and any other
named in the disclosure document with their consent.
Essentially, these defences are due diligence defences, available in
circumstances where an issuer made reasonable inquiries and
had a reasonable
belief in the adequacy of the disclosure
Corporations
(Cth)), or where reasonable reliance was
placed on another person’s statement
Corporations Act
, Pinto and Branson, fn 25, 141.
Securities Act of 1933, 38 USC § 24 (1994).
The entities liable are outlined in Securities Act of 1933, 38 USC §
11(a)(1)–(5) (1994), and include persons who signed
the registration
statement, directors (including proposed directors), experts such as
accountants, engineers or appraisers, and underwriters.
Securities Act of 1933, 38 USC § 11(a) (1994). See also Securities
Act of 1933, 38 USC § 12(a)(2) (1994), which provides
a similar but
supplementary basis for liability, albeit not dependent on the Act’s
registration requirements.
Securities Act of 1933, 38 USC § 11(b) (1994).
, § 11(b) (1994). The primary defence, under Securities
Act of 1933, 38 USC § 11(b(3)) (1994), is available where a defendant
‘had, after reasonable investigation, reasonable ground to believe, and
did believe … that the statements … were
true and that there was no
, Dunfee, fn 25, 916;
, Hazen, fn 25,
, Lieberman and Siedel, fn 89, 1033.
In relation to Australia, see
, Golding, fn 11, 2. In
relation to the United States, see
, Keller and Gehlmann, fn 23,
344; ‘Federal regulation of securities: some problems of civil
liability’ (1934) 48(1) Harvard
Law Review 107, 108.
See in particular the discussion in fn 177 relating to Securities Act of
1933, 38 USC § 17(a) (1994).
, Redmond, fn 10, 1–2.
For example, the CLERP Act 1999 (Cth) also implemented changes in
relation to securities hawking, electronic commerce and governmental
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (210 KB)
PDF format (149 KB)
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter