URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/journals/UNSWLawJl/2025/19.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 15:44:43
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Erlings, Esther; Grenfell, Laura --- "Delimiting Detention" [2025] UNSWLawJl 19; (2025) 48(2) UNSW Law Journal 575
The detention of persons in residential care in Australia has received
little recognition. Given also the absence of human rights
frameworks in most
Australian jurisdictions, it has been argued that Australian governments resist
the idea of deprivation of liberty
in social care settings. However, the South
Australian case of Public Advocate v C, B (‘Public Advocate Case’)
a turning point. This article analyses developments in South
Australia and nationally to consider whether Australia is resisting
social care
detention and associated deprivation of liberty. It engages with the complex
legal landscape, covering federal-state
care schemes, tort law, guardianship and
human rights law, and makes two main arguments: first, that the Public Advocate
be read as a formative step in recognising social care detention in
Australia; and, second, that subsequent developments leave care
providers at
risk of liability, and care receivers without the full protection of their human
I INTRODUCTION
the Supreme Court of the United Kingdom (‘UK Supreme Court’) case of
Surrey County Council v P
Baroness Hale
DPSC famously stated that ‘a gilded cage is still a
The remark emphasised
that deprivation of liberty can occur despite persons otherwise receiving
high-quality care in settings like
disability or aged
British scholar Lucy Series
has since associated the
Cheshire West
case with the concept of
‘social care detention’: forms of detention that may be presented as
safeguards for persons
receiving care in institutional and community
This kind of detention,
often involving people deemed to lack capacity, is directly linked with the
human right not to be deprived
of liberty where the detention is unauthorised.
According to Series, following
Cheshire West
, a socio-legal shift has
taken place in England and Wales with greater acknowledgement of the potential
for deprivation of liberty
in social care
By contrast, Series
argues that Australia ‘resist[s] the very
that social care
settings could be associated with deprivation of
At first sight, the idea that Australia resists the association between
social care and deprivation of liberty appears to characterise
Australia’s post-carceral era, where community care arrangements for older
persons and adults with disabilities living
in residential care are generally
regarded as benign,
and ideas of
detention and deprivation of liberty are rarely paired with such
However, this position
may be shifting as a result of test cases brought to Australian courts and
tribunals for decision-making.
This article engages with Series’ assertion
by considering recent developments around social care detention in Australia,
South Australia (‘SA’) as a case study. In 2019, SA saw a
ruling similar to
Cheshire West
, albeit considered under tort
The judgment and subsequent
developments offer an opportunity to reflect on Series’ assessment of
In considering social care settings, it should be kept in mind that Australia
is a federal nation with interlinking federal and state
or territory laws for
aged and disability care.
areas are subject to federal regulation attached to funding, and the federal
Parliament in Australia works together with sub-national
parliaments on
governance.
Australia’s
six states and two territories are often expected to fill in gaps by legislating
aspects of disability and aged
care consistently with federal laws, but the
sub-national laws vary, and many predate the national schemes. One sub-national
key to the matter of social care detention is that of guardianship, as
authorisation for detention may be obtained through use of
provisions under
guardianship legislation for ‘protected persons’ (adults under
guardianship).
Where there is no
relevant sub-national legislation, courts and tribunals must seek a solution to
issues arising, and it is here
that we find developments that may both support
and challenge Series’ assertion.
Noteworthy for Australia is also the lack of a national bill of rights, with
only a minority of two states and one territory having
adopted sub-national
legislation.
The want of a
legislative human rights framework likely plays an important role in respect of
the absence of deprivation of liberty
(and possibly detention) as an idea in
Australian social care settings. Since direct protection of human rights is
generally not
available, associated terminology found in international treaty
provisions is sometimes forgone in favour of homegrown concepts.
Whilst, for
example, deprivation of liberty is not a commonly used phrase, there has been a
recognition for some years now that persons
in social care settings may be
subject to ‘restrictive practices’, which involve seclusion, and
physical, environmental,
mechanical (equipment-based) and chemical
(drug-induced) restraint.
terminology can nonetheless cover up the reality that detention in social care
settings is prevalent,
certain cases properly characterised as deprivation of liberty under
international human rights law.
Australian governments continue to display a reluctance to fully recognise
detention and deprivation of liberty in social care settings
– or at least
are not keen on oversight. In 2023, a United Nations (‘UN’) treaty
monitoring body terminated its
visit to Australia due to obstruction to visiting
places of detention including mental health wards at the sub-national
This is consistent with
the federal government stance, articulated in 2020, that ‘aged care
facilities do not fit within the
concept of “places of
detention”’.
federal government has taken this position despite the 2016 findings of the
Senate Community Affairs References Committee that
‘indefinite detention
of people with cognitive or psychiatric impairment is a significant problem
within the aged care
The Committee
found that social care detention more generally is often ‘informal,
unregulated and unlawful’.
In making this statement, it relied on a 2016 observation from the then
President of the Guardianship and Administration Board of
Residential Aged Care Facilities continue to systematically detain people
with dementia without clear authority to do so.
... It seems that most
facilities are prepared to ‘risk it’ that no-one will bring criminal
or civil proceedings in relation
to unlawful
This statement has since proven to be one of great foresight. Absent the
possibility to rely directly on human rights in most Australian
applicants have started to harness civil torts remedies to protect their
Many common law torts
are underpinned by values shared with human rights, such as liberty of the
person or bodily autonomy,
Australian courts are allowed to consider human rights when developing the
common law or as aids to
interpretation.
This is also
true for the tort of false imprisonment, which is essentially the civil
reflection of the right not to be arbitrarily
deprived of liberty. The High
Court of Australia authority of
Trobridge v Hardy
provides a classic
statement on the foundation of false imprisonment: ‘The mere interference
with the plaintiff’s person
and liberty constituted prima facie a grave
infringement of the most elementary and important of all common law
Although false imprisonment has previously been used to challenge social care
a watershed moment
occurred in 2019 when the Full Court of the Supreme Court of South Australia
(‘SASCFC’) handed down
an extensively reasoned judgment in which it
found a protected person to have been falsely imprisoned in their care facility.
Public Advocate v C, B
Public Advocate
notably considered the need to protect the rights of persons lacking capacity in
care settings, and the principle of legality,
which requires clear expressions
for the abrogation of rights and/or judicial
The latter meant
that, without relevant orders having been obtained under guardianship
legislation, there was no lawful justification
for the applicant’s
detention (in a locked dementia ward).
The decision prompted recognition of the issue of social care detention and
had important practical implications: guardians had to
obtain special orders
Guardianship and Administration Act 1993
Guardianship Act
’) if they contemplated detaining a
protected person to avoid challenges under tort law in the civil courts. These
to be obtained from the South Australian Civil and Administrative
Tribunal (‘SACAT’),
which is then charged with a review of the detention orders within 6 months, and
subsequent reviews at intervals of not more than
Such tandem systems of two
interlocking court/tribunal systems with independent decision-makers –
tribunals in charge of guardianship
who provide authorisation relevant for tort
cases before civil courts – exist throughout Australia (and make the South
experience relevant more broadly). Even if Australian guardianship
legislation is itself often considered to be at odds with Australia’s
international human rights obligations, notably under the
Convention on the
Rights of Persons with Disabilities
tandem system requires both oversight and monitoring with remedies for breaches
in ways akin to that expected under the human
right not to be arbitrarily
deprived of liberty.
requires that the guardianship and torts systems are aligned. By contrast, the
upshot of the
Public Advocate Case
– a significant increase in the
need for orders and reviews, combined with a reluctance of the Parliament of
South Australia
(‘SA Parliament’) to address the matter of detention
in legislation
to SACAT seeking to narrow its definition of detention under guardianship with
reference to treatment and care. These
developments signal a conceptual return
to excluding the idea of detention from social care settings, potentially also
falling short
of civil law requirements.
Using the developments in SA as a case study, this article argues that an
understanding of social care detention is emerging in Australian
tribunals. However, it observes that, unlike in the United Kingdom
(‘UK’), this understanding is not anchored
in human rights law but
in torts, and, furthermore, that the tandem system is developing divergent
understandings of detention. For
their part, sub-national parliaments in
Australia show reluctance to legislate in the area of aged care, and possibly
social care
detention more broadly. For SA, this has meant that SACAT was forced
to find clarity in the applicable rules itself. In doing so,
the Tribunal has
limited the notion of detention for the guardianship jurisdiction in ways that
may be at odds with the tort of false
imprisonment and the oversight required by
human rights standards. Its jurisprudence may weaken the function of detention
as safeguards and put protected persons at risk of a breach of the right
not to be arbitrarily deprived of liberty (or falsely imprisoned)
providers at risk of civil liability under torts.
Part II of this article outlines the
Public Advocate Case
first of the SACAT test cases that followed it. Part III analyses whether and
how the SA Parliament responded to these cases,
arguing that it left SACAT to
find a solution. Part IV outlines SACAT’s subsequent guardianship decision
where it took a narrow
approach to detention. Part V analyses the implications
of these developments from the perspective of tort law, questioning whether
SA cases align with established law and give due regard to the rights-protective
function of detention orders in social care.
Before concluding, Part VI reflects
on the reduction of oversight for those detained, and Australia’s
resistance to international
calls to monitor social care detention through a
preventative mechanism.
II 2019 DETENTION CASES
Public Advocate Case
On 24 May 2019, the SASCFC delivered a much-anticipated judgment in the
Public Advocate Case
. The action centred on the possibility that the
95-year-old applicant, identified by his initials BC (hereafter, Mr C), had been
falsely imprisoned in the aged care facility where he was residing. Mr C had
moderate dementia and issues with his
It was uncontested that
Mr C lacked legal capacity. Both his spouse and the Public Advocate had been
appointed as his limited guardians
in matters of health, and
‘accommodation and lifestyle’
respectively.
On the basis of
its general powers of accommodation and lifestyle – and without applying
for special
Guardianship Act
orders authorising detention under section
32(1)(b) – the Public Advocate had arranged for Mr C to live in a Memory
Unit (‘MSU’), a dedicated locked ward for residents with
Mr C could not leave
the MSU on his own as he did not have a swipe card or the code for the keypad;
he was only able to leave the
ward with family members or carers who would
accompany and supervise him.
Public Advocate, as Mr C’s guardian, also issued directions on how often
Mr C could have outings and with
These became contentious
when the Public Advocate effectively barred Mr C’s son, DC, from spending
time with his father outside
the facility after some apparent incidents with DC
had taken place.
Mr C appeared
content in the MSU, or at least had not actively objected to his living
arrangements.
The two main questions that arose in the
Public Advocate Case
1. whether the Public Advocate could have relied on the general powers of
guardianship to accommodate Mr C in the MSU with the directions
or whether special
orders authorising detention under section 32(1)(b) of the
Guardianship
should have been obtained; and
2. if such authorising orders were necessary, whether the restrictions placed
upon Mr C amounted to a level of detention sufficient
for his situation to
constitute the tort of false
imprisonment.
Under South Australian law, false imprisonment requires an intentional,
positive act that directly causes a person to be restrained
within a certain
area with no reasonable possibility of escape, and without lawful justification
or valid defence.
Question (1)
speaks to the lawful justification: the orders authorising detention would be
the lawful justification for such detention
if general powers of guardianship
were insufficient. Question (2) speaks to being restrained to an area without
reasonable possibility
of escape, which is often simply referred to as
In response to the first question on the need for authorising orders, the
Court held that section 32 of the
Guardianship Act
had abrogated any
general powers of guardians to detain a protected person, insofar those powers
had existed previously.
for the Court, Kourakis CJ emphasised that detention would cause a change in
rights and liabilities that only a court (or
in SA, a tribunal) could occasion,
and it was salient that the
Advance Care Directives Act
did not allow substitute decision-makers under advance care directives to
consent to forced detention.
Honour further noted the ‘progressive approach to safeguarding personal
autonomy’ in the care of persons with a mental
Importantly, the judgment
made a link between the common law principle of legality, which operates at the
national level, and the
human right not to be deprived of liberty under article
International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights
which the SASCFC used in its interpretation of the
Guardianship Act
vis-a-vis the tort of false imprisonment. As noted by the Court, both the
principle and provision contain a substantive liberty aspect,
and aspect of
supervision:
A construction of s 32 of the [
Guardianship Act
] ... which requires
that an order be first obtained from the Tribunal which has supervisory
and that the guardian justify any
constraint of the protected person’s liberty, is consistent with Article 9
of the International
Covenant on Civil and Political Rights. That article in
turn reflects the common law principle of
Combined with ‘the fundamental value the common law accords personal
arguments clearly spoke in favour of the need to obtain authorising orders. Also
on a textual construction of the
Guardianship Act
: ‘the very
conferral of the power on the Tribunal to order detention suggests that the
power to do so unilaterally has been
withdrawn from the
As a result,
any guardian contemplating the detention of a protected person would need to
apply for prior authorising orders under
section 32(1)(b) of the
Guardianship
, and could no longer simply rely on general powers of accommodation
and/or lifestyle. That is, the lawful justification necessary
to detain a
protected person without this constituting the tort of false imprisonment is
encapsulated in the authorising order provided
by SACAT under section 32 of the
Guardianship Act
. Absent such order, there may be false imprisonment
the protected person is relevantly detained.
The second question therefore concerned the matter of detention itself, and
the principles applying in respect of the tort of false
imprisonment that may be
derived from case law. To this end, the SASCFC referred first to
Grahame-White Aviation Co Ltd
for the principle that a person does not need
to be aware of their detention for there to be false imprisonment meaning
someone can
be detained without them knowing that they
What matters is whether the
person can effectively leave a place, or whether there is ‘restraint
within a particular
The latter is a
wide notion, and includes being detained ‘in the open
It also applies to
a situation where there may seem to be no immediate barriers, but an
intervention will take place if the person
attempts to
This speaks to the rule
on constructive detention, accepted by the Court with reference to
, from which it quoted the
Lord Coke ... speaks of ‘a prison in law’ and ‘a prison in
deed:’ so that there may be a constructive, as
well as an actual,
imprisonment: and, therefore, it may be admitted that personal violence need not
be used in order to amount to
it. ... [I]f a person should direct a constable to
take another in custody, and that [other] person should be told by the constable
to go with him, and the orders are obeyed, and they walk together in the
direction pointed out by the constable, that is, constructively,
imprisonment, though no actual violence be used. In such cases, however, though
little may be said, much is meant and perfectly
understood.
Where ‘little may be said, [but] much is meant and perfectly
understood’, it does not matter that the person is detained
‘public street’, or that the person detaining them ‘never
touched’ them;
barriers or physical contact are not necessary for constructive imprisonment to
arise out of an understanding that disobedience
to expectations will have
consequences. The Court further emphasised the principle related to the absence
of a need for (physical)
force through reliance on
This case dealt
with a plaintiff who was taken to hospital under a doctor’s instructions
for examination under the
Mental Health Act 1959
(Vic). The plaintiff had
protested but otherwise
cooperated.
Yet, as Walsh J held
(and Kourakis CJ in the
Public Advocate Case
although ‘[n]o
physical force was used at any time by the defendant’, the plaintiff would
have had a justified apprehension
that ‘if he did not submit ... he would
be compelled by force to go to the
Court did not separately discuss the authority of
Symes v Mahon
Walsh J in support, this SASCFC case had previously adopted the above principles
for the South Australian
meaning that by
the time they were discussed in the
Public Advocate Case
, the principles
already constituted established law in
With respect to the case at hand, the Court noted that at first instance the
Court had found Mr C to have been unlawfully detained,
and ruled that this
assessment of the situation was ‘plainly
There was no
question that Mr C was detained when present in the locked ward, and ‘on
those occasions when he was allowed to
leave whilst accompanied by another
person, it is clear that if the Public Advocate’s directions were
followed, it would have
been clearly conveyed to [him] ... that he was required
to return’.
During these
outings Mr C thus ‘remained in detention even though no physical force
might have been required because of his
submission’.
Even if the
outings were not seen as detention (a contention that would fly in the face of
accepted principles and not the primary
view of the court), Mr C’s time in
the locked ward was sufficient for a finding of unlawful
As a result –
and because there was no lawful justification – Mr C had been falsely
imprisoned in his care facility.
This notably meant that the Public Advocate was
liable to payment of compensation for infringement of rights, though a
action seeking such compensation was ultimately
The decision in the
Public Advocate Case
had important consequences.
First, it brought to the fore the importance of oversight and monitoring for the
protection of the rights
of persons under guardianship by means of special
orders that are subject to regular reviews of the person’s
Second, the decision
made it likely that a great many protected persons in SA were falsely imprisoned
for lack of appropriate detention
orders. This situation of likely de facto
detention created much uncertainty for care providers, leading to an increase in
applications
for SACAT orders, which carried the potential to overwhelm the
Tribunal, much like
Cheshire West
had done for English
Third, it led to test
cases in SACAT.
Public Advocate Case
immediately led
to test cases brought by concerned guardians and providers, the first of which
following just three months later:
considered restrictive practices regulated under the federal National Disability
Insurance Scheme (‘NDIS’ –
a federal scheme from which
disability-related allowances are paid, including, for example, for services,
equipment and accommodation),
but contained a focus on the possibility that such practices might constitute
detention, necessitating
Guardianship Act
section 32 orders. It comprised
three joint cases related to clients of a major disability and aged care
provider in Australia who
were under the NDIS. Involved were: (1) KF, who was
from time to time non-forcibly fitted with a removable helmet to prevent injury
to his head during behaviours like
head-banging;
(2) ZT, who was
for health reasons subject to an environmental restraint, namely restriction of
access to places where food was stored
as consumption of certain food items made
and (3) WD, who
exhibited a range of ‘challenging behaviours’ and was therefore
subject to both environmental restraint
(access to places where food was stored
as these triggered his behaviours) and mechanical restraint (occasional use of a
lock during vehicle
transport).
In all three cases,
the provider sought guardianship orders from SACAT, where necessary with special
powers for detention under section
Guardianship Act
. It argued
that such orders were necessary because the
NDIS (Restrictive Practices and
Behaviour Support) Rules 2018
required a guardian’s consent to restrictive practices in their
clients’ cases.
Sitting as the Tribunal, Executive Senior Member Rugless had limited tools
available to provide a clear reasoning due to the ‘confusing
legislative
landscape in South
discrepancy between the federal
and state legislation, namely
Guardianship Act
Public Advocate Case
While both pieces of legislation attempted to regulate restrictive practices,
they did not marry well together, as the
SA Parliament had not yet legislated to
integrate restrictive practices into the
Guardianship Act
. Working around
this disjuncture, SACAT instead employed an avenue offered by the
Medical Treatment and Palliative Care Act 1995
’), another act under SACAT’s jurisdiction, by providing an
extended definition of medical treatment via its attributes
‘healthcare’ and ‘physical
This allowed the
concept of medical treatment to capture mechanical, environmental and chemical
restraint, with application of the
law on consent to medical treatment under the
Consent Act
(instead of guardianship orders) if treatment was also
supervised by a healthcare
practitioner.
That is, some
forms of practitioner-supervised restrictive practices would now count as
medical treatment for which a ‘person
responsible’ (a substitute
decision-maker who can consent to medical treatment where a person lacks
capacity, previously known
as ‘next of kin’) could provide consent
without the need for a guardianship
In respect of the use of
chemical restraint, this approach could always apply, given that administration
of medication must be supervised
by a healthcare
practitioner.
However, as NDIS
or disability support workers are not registered practitioners in
and could thus not
appropriately supervise ‘the treatment’ as required for consent by a
person responsible, guardianship
orders were still required for ZT and WD (but
not KF, as the helmet did not restrict
In its determination, SACAT held that none of the three clients were subject
to detention under the
Guardianship Act
, and therefore would not need
section 32(1)(b) orders.
may seem especially surprising in respect of WD when fitted with a seatbelt lock
that would have prevented him from leaving
his car seat. However, the Tribunal
interpreted detention as only relevant to residence in the care
and vehicle transport
took place outside the facility.
Ultimately, SACAT narrowed down the remit of authorising orders under section
Guardianship Act
as applying to particular accommodation
decisions or situations involving the use of force, so that only:
Accommodation decisions involving seclusion, detention or the need for
directed or enforceable decision making ... [and] [h]ealthcare
and medical
treatment decisions (all medical treatment and therapy, including chemical,
mechanical and environmental restraint) involving
any type of physical restraint
(i.e. with the use of force) will need to be authorised by the Tribunal as a
special powers order
under s 32(1)(a) and
Through this delineation and the
Consent Act
effectively limited and circumvented the interpretation of detention for the
purposes of the
Guardianship Act
, and the concomitant need for special
authorising orders. Thus, as a consequence of
, guardianship orders
are now needed in only few cases of restraint – and authorising orders for
detention are available in
only a handful of them. This minimises
restraint-related oversight in social care.
Importantly, in her decision in
, Executive Senior Member Rugless
repeatedly appealed to the SA Parliament to address the gaps between legislative
frameworks. She
acknowledged that her adoption of the
Consent Act
approach ‘may lead to some inconsistency between the application of the
and consent processes’ but added that these were
‘matters which require the attention of the SA
Parliament’.
Similarly, in
Public Advocate Case
two members of the bench flagged that the issues
may merit attention from
Parliament.
III PARLIAMENTARY RESPONSE TO DETENTION CASES
In 2021, two bills were introduced into the SA Parliament to deal with the
matters raised by the
Public Advocate Case
; the first
aimed at disability care, and the second aimed at aged care. Both bills
concerned restrictive practices more broadly,
but due to restrictive practices
normally being the underlying basis for detention in social care, the debates
would also necessitate
discussion of detention. Ultimately only the first bill
(on disability care) was passed, and it set up a complex relationship between
Disability Inclusion Act 2018
Guardianship Act
. This section starts by
explaining the debate on that Bill and analyses how it interacts with the
Guardianship Act
and section 32 detention orders. It then briefly
reflects on the second, unsuccessful Bill, and SA’s reluctance to
in the field of aged care.
A First Bill: Disability Inclusion Amendments
Parliamentary debate suggests that the
Public Advocate Case
and the problems around interpretation and harmonisation faced by SACAT
were all on the radar of the executive and the legislature
when new disability
legislation was considered. Debates on the first bill, the Disability Inclusion
(Restrictive Practices –
NDIS) Amendment Bill 2021 (SA) (‘Inclusion
Act Amendment Bill’) were largely dominated by discussion of risks and the
liability of those administering restrictive practices, namely providers and
The Second Reading Speech in both Houses aimed to explain the common law torts
position and how it could be altered by Parliament
via legislation if providers
were to be relieved of liability. For example, in the Lower House the
Attorney-General explained:
The common law does not authorise the use of restrictive practices. That lack
of authorisation means that, unless there is a statutory
scheme expressly
authorising the use of restrictive practices ... then restrictive practices are
used unlawfully against a person.
If restrictive practices cannot lawfully be
used against the person, criminal liability or other civil liability may attach
person or provider using
In the Upper House, the Minister for Human
Services explained that the Inclusion Act Amendment Bill would supplement the
federal legislative framework for NDIS participants, and that it was
seeking to address the ‘gaps’ in the SA system.
She then referenced
Guardianship Act
, noting that the act requires an additional
application to SACAT for section 32 special powers where ‘there is use of
or detention’, though without at this stage commenting on what
detention might entail.
problems raised by the apparent gaps
explicitly detailed by a crossbencher, the Hon Connie Bonaros, who observed the
above-discussed cases and the interlocking
federal-state law scheme, and argued
that ‘[the] crossover is confusing and is creating a drain on resources
for even the simplest
of measures’ since measures ‘as simple as a
seatbelt on clients’ now required an application to SACAT, whereas
historically ‘their implementation was a relatively informal process made
in close consultation with family
Focusing on
system efficiency rather than the problematic aspects of this unregulated past,
Bonaros noted that ‘it was clear
SACAT was looking for guidance and
simplification from
parliament’.
The parliamentary debates suggest that members were alive to the issue of
liability, including in ways synergistic with human rights.
When issues of
liability were discussed during the Committee Stage, the Opposition asked the
Minister for Human Services to elaborate
on ‘how many prosecutions there
have been for that type of behaviour [restrictions without proper authority] in
the last 10
years and how many of those prosecutions have been
successful?’
The Minister
replied that they did not have ‘that sort of information’, but that:
[W]e do know that it is a significant risk and [particularly providers] know
they are exposed all the time.
SACAT is being utilised all the time because
people seek guardianship orders so that they can reduce the legal risk to
themselves.
We cannot not address this significant gap that we have in our
legislation.
To be honest, the commonwealth will give us a kick up the
backside if we do not get on with it ...
[t]here is a particular case that we
often refer to as the ‘locked door’ case
Public Advocate
It has thrown a lot of what was thought to be established
practices in relation to restrictive practices and has meant that there
much higher level of scrutiny.
I think from a human rights perspective you
would say that is the right way to go. It is certainly something that needs to
be addressed.
Notwithstanding the awareness of the liability risks exposed by the
Advocate Case
shown by the Minister’s response, no legislation was
passed to explicitly and comprehensively address the problems raised by
case. Although the Inclusion Act Amendment Bill did ultimately involve
references to detention, this was only to facilitate the
exclusion of detention
from the application of the bill (as discussed below). Overall, the Inclusion
Act Amendment Bill was piecemeal,
aimed at implementing the federal
by retrofitting them into the state framework through introduction of
a state level authorisation scheme for the use of restrictive
practices in line
with the principles set out in the
Notably, although debates on the Inclusion Act Amendment Bill were replete
with concerns about the rights of ‘people with disabilities’,
Bill’s coverage was not extended to include
persons with
disabilities.
It only applied to
NDIS participants. However, the NDIS is only available to persons who apply
before the age of 65.
who did not qualify for the NDIS because they had been over 65 at the time of
application were not covered, creating an unusual
discrepancy between older
persons under the NDIS (who applied before the age of 65 and elected to
continue) and older persons with
disabilities outside the NDIS (who either
encountered disabilities after the age of 65 or elected to leave the scheme at
Neither in the
Bill’s Second Reading Speech nor in the debates was this situation
acknowledged. As a result, any added protections
under the Bill mostly would not
extend to those in aged care. Furthermore, although an important objective of
the Inclusion Act Amendment
Bill was to respond to the matters raised by the
Public Advocate Case
, the amendments to the
Inclusion Act
ultimately not cover cases of detention.
1 Detention and the Amended Inclusion Act
Despite the aim of simplification, the amended
Inclusion Act
do away with the role of guardianship. Section 23F(3) of the
provides that the
Inclusion Act
does not derogate from the
Guardianship Act
‘or any other Act or law that authorises the use
of restrictive practices’, and this provision was not amended. Moreover,
the amended
Inclusion Act
regulates the ‘use of
restrictive practices
this purpose, both section 23C of the
Inclusion Act
and regulation 7 of
Disability Inclusion (Restrictive Practices – NDIS) Regulations
Inclusion Regulations
Under section 23C,
detention includes ‘any direct or indirect curtailment of the
person’s ability to leave particular
premises [or part thereof]’, or
a requirement that they remain at (part of) the premises, as well as limiting
to means of leaving’ such as a wheelchair or ‘any
other act or omission of a kind declared by the regulations to be
regulations may also exclude acts from establishing
Notably, an
ability to leave only after obtaining permission ‘does not ... mean that
the person is not
‘the detention of a person pursuant to another Act or law will be taken
not to constitute detention for the purposes of
The latter quote
suggests that the
Inclusion Act
works as a self-contained system,
unrestrained by other acts or laws. This means, for example, that the
Inclusion Act
does not have to adopt the same definition as tort law, and
that it can capture – for its own purposes – situations that
constitute detention under these other laws, including common law rules on false
imprisonment. The main reason this makes sense
is because the
implements an extra oversight mechanism under which restrictive
practices require different kinds of administrative authorisation.
Public Advocate Case
was not entirely forgotten is indicated
Inclusion Regulations
, which exclude two situations from the scope
of detention for the purposes of the
Inclusion Act
. The first is an
emergency situation in which a person who is at risk of causing themselves or
another person serious harm may be
confined for up to two hours for
de-escalation or
self-regulation.
speaks more directly to closed doors and stipulates that the ambit of detention
include the situation where a residential care premises that
offers services on a 24 hour basis has locked doors and external gates
person ‘does not have such supports as may be reasonably necessary to
enable [them] to safely leave the premises at
discretion’.
Inclusion Regulations
seek to classify this practice as an
‘environmental
restraint’.
legislative attempt to redefine detention in the NDIS context might be read as
an attempt to circumvent the
Guardianship Act
and to reduce the number of
Guardianship Act
orders. However, it should be read in
conjunction with section 23F(3) of the
Inclusion Act
, which denies a
derogation, meaning that authorising orders may still be necessary to comply
Guardianship Act
Inclusion Act
does not otherwise regulate detention. Detention
thus remains fully regulated under the
Guardianship Act
. This is in line
with the common law principle of legality that, given the gravity of detention
and the change in rights and liabilities
entailed by a detention order, it must
be a decision authorised by a court or tribunal or clearly and unambiguously
detailed in the
Regardless of whether the
Inclusion Act
seeks to redefine a form of
detention as an environmental restraint, where there is ambiguity, it is
arguable that as a result of
section 23F(3) of the
Inclusion Act
Guardianship Act
order must still be
B Second Bill: Proposed Aged Care Extension
The Inclusion Act Amendment Bill was passed swiftly by both Houses in a
period of 11 sitting days. Prior to its passing, one crossbencher,
the Hon John
Darley, released two media statements highlighting that residents of residential
aged care facilities ‘also needed
safeguards’
unauthorised use of restrictive practices, including those that might lead to
detention. The media statements reminded the
public of the events at SA’s
Older Persons Mental Health Service at Oakden, which sparked the
Commission into Aged Care Quality and Safety
On the day the Inclusion Act Amendment Bill was passed, Darley asked whether the
authorisation scheme would be expanded to cover
‘aged care and other
vulnerable groups’.
her response, the Minister for Human Services explained that the Government had
initially planned a broader Bill to cover all
situations when restrictive
practices might be applied.
This approach was not advanced because SA had already fallen behind in aligning
its law with the
and the urgency to legislate meant that the
piecemeal approach had been
She concluded by
saying ‘[i]t’s something that’s very front of mind for us and
is a very large work in progress
Five months later, Darley introduced a private members bill, the
Adult Safeguarding (Restrictive Practices) Amendment Bill 2021
(‘Aged Care
Bill’), to effectively expand the authorisation scheme to residents of
aged residential care in SA. Darley’s
Second Reading Speech mentioned that
‘[d]ementia is the leading cause of disability in older Australians’
it will normally arise after the age of 65 so that the NDIS is not
applicable, and cited evidence received by
of excessive and
‘inappropriate use’ of chemical restraints and physical restraints
in residential aged care.
Darley pointed out that under that the federal scheme (namely the
(Cth)), ‘[i]t remained for the states to complete the
next steps and require an authorisation process to oversee positive behaviour
management plans, where restrictive practices are necessary in individual
Inclusion Act Amendment Bill, the Aged Care Bill included a provision providing
that it would not derogate from the
Guardianship
but it did not make
any separate reference to detention.
The Aged Care Bill was passed in the Upper House with the assistance of the
Opposition, but it failed to progress in the government-dominated
Lower House.
On behalf of the Government, the Minister for Health and Wellbeing explained
that the Attorney-General’s Department
was ‘undertaking a project to
assess and develop a uniform approach to the regulation and authorisation of
restrictive practices
in South Australia across all settings – aged care
and beyond’.
without progress, and given the failure of the Aged Care Bill to expand the
authorisation scheme, older persons living in care
facilities continue to enjoy
a lower level of protection via oversight than NDIS participants, contrary to
Recommendation 17, which specified that ‘restrictive practices
are to be prohibited unless recommended by an independent expert
... or ... in
an emergency, to avert the risk of immediate physical
recommended that ‘any breach of the statutory requirements
should expose the approved provider to a civil penalty at the suit
regulator’.
this Recommendation,
underlined ‘the overall principle that
people receiving aged care should be equally protected from restrictive
practices as
other members of the
community.’
even a detailed review of SA’s
Ageing and Adult Safeguarding Act
(SA) in 2022 did not include consideration of detention or
authorisation.
All in all, SA appears reluctant to legislate in the area of aged care,
presumably so as not to assume any direct responsibility in
this care setting
and possibly also because the federal government is in the process of changing
the legal landscape via the new
Aged Care Act 2024
Aged Care Act
survey of other sub-national jurisdictions indicates that this reluctance is not
confined to SA.
while there have been calls for a national approach to detention in relation to
guardianship,
adopted federal
Aged Care Act
does not intend to reach this far,
despite its constitutional reliance on Australian’s obligations under
ratified human rights
The complexity of
Australia’s various legislative schemes for social care thus appears
enduring, despite a Senate Committee
describing it as creating ‘an
environment for abuse’.
Its report noted that the problem of de facto
detention and the
prevalence of indefinite detention in social care settings have been
‘well-known to states and territories,
and the Commonwealth, for some
In sum, notwithstanding recognition for the need for such guidance, the SA
Parliament did not offer SACAT any direction but left it
to the Tribunal to
navigate through the issues raised by section 32 of the
Guardianship Act
in conjunction with tort law and restrictive practices regimes. This solution
may seem expedient, but it does not factor in the increased
workload for a
tribunal fielding applications from concerned guardians and providers, or that
SACAT’s decisions on detention
have a spillover effect into the civil
in Part IV(A),
which analyses SACAT’s most recent landmark case on social
care detention.
IV SACAT’S NARROWING OF DETENTION
Whilst the SA Parliament continued to drag its feet on a response to the
Public Advocate Case
, and the regulation of detention and restrictive
practices more broadly, the federal Parliament introduced mandatory behaviour
plans (‘BSP’) for NDIS participants in 2020, and for aged
care residents in 2021.
is required if restrictive practices are contemplated, including where such
practices contain elements of detention. Non-compliant
providers risk sanctions
or even loss of
accreditation.
Importantly, a
valid BSP requires that all relevant state/territory authorisations have been
For SA, this means
that appropriate guardianship orders with any necessary special powers need to
be in place. Within a context still
characterised by legal uncertainty after the
Public Advocate Case
– and ultimately also a pandemic – a
significant increase in guardianship orders arose.
Although SACAT does not maintain disaggregated data for appointments of
guardians and administrators,
the years since 2019 have not seen real changes to the administration regime and
it is therefore likely that increases in applications
would have been
principally in the field of
guardianship.
This makes it
salient that prior to the
Public Advocate Case
, applications for
appointment of guardians hovered around 450 per quarter, with 1,813 applications
for the 2017–18 financial
This jumped to 3,305
for 2018–19, and by the 2022–23 financial year had reached 5,086.
New applications for existing
cases (which may have been made to ‘top
up’ with special powers) increased from 1,334 in 2017–18 to 3,832 in
Again, it was
left to SACAT to respond, which it did by narrowing the scope of detention.
However, whilst this narrowing reduced
the need for future
Guardianship
applications, it is not certain that either providers or protected
persons will be truly aided by this development, which risks liability
providers and interference with fundamental rights for protected persons.
The case of
was presided
over by two Members: Hughes P and Senior Member Lester. The general playing
field was unlike
, where, despite the significance of setting out
the interaction between various key acts, none of the parties were represented
the Tribunal only obtained evidence from the provider’s disability
services coordinator, its specialist development educator/behaviour
practitioner and a parent of each protected person (the proposed
By contrast, in
, all parties (the Public Advocate as applicant guardian, the care
providers and the protected persons) were represented and the Tribunal
to appoint a contradictor to the Public Advocate’s position to
‘assist it to reach the correct or preferable
Critically,
the protected persons themselves were deemed unable to participate in the
proceedings.
There is no
indication of persons having been heard or providing evidence beyond employees
or representatives of the Public Advocate
as appointed guardian, one of the
providers (the second elected not to be heard or make submissions), the
representative of the protected
person and the contradictor. This may have
limited the available evidence for SACAT to base its decision
By contrast, this was the
first case where it is likely that SA care providers had a formulated litigation
strategy, as the action
was less ‘on the run’ than the
Advocate Case
Additionally, SACAT
would have had more time to reflect on the implications of previous cases.
involved three joint cases concerning
protected persons in different situations. The first protected person, LOR,
lived in a facility
with an unlocked door, but with video surveillance in all
common areas.
The evidence
was that LOR was capable of indicating that he wanted to go outside and these
requests were adhered to (at least, SACAT
found that ‘the evidence does
not support the conclusion’ that they were
Since LOR could
‘[not] go outside without assistance ... there has been no need to prevent
him from leaving’.
was unable to self-mobilise and spent his time in a tilt-in-space wheelchair.
Although he was allowed to go outside (presumably
on the facility’s
premises), he only received support to access the community two to four hours a
day, for four days a week.
information was provided on what would happen if LOR wished to leave facility
premises to access the community beyond these moments,
though it would not be
far-fetched to presume that such wishes would not (normally) be acted upon. The
second protected person, ONO,
lived in the same accommodation as LOR in a mostly
similar situation.
also incapable of self-mobilisation and her wheelchair had to be moved manually.
Again, the Tribunal found no evidence that
‘expressions of a desire to
move’ were or would be
and noted that
ONO’s happy disposition and physical incapability meant she would not be
acting in ways to create risk to her
No information was
provided on leaving the premises for outings, though the regime may have been
similar to that for LOR.
The third protected person, SGN, lived in accommodation of a different
provider. This accommodation, a supported independent living
arrangement
referred to as a house, was not specifically locked beyond that expected in
daily life (eg, at night), and SGN had the
ability to unlock
Unlike LOR and ONO,
SGN’s mobility was not restricted, and she was able to leave the facility
on her own. However, because
she had no sense of danger, she was considered very
vulnerable if she left the house alone and a staff member would therefore
SGN allegedly
‘would not try to leave the premises without her support
there was also evidence that she did leave on
circumstances, if SGN ‘tried to leave the accommodation, for example to go
out onto the road or go for a walk, she
would be supported to do so [but if] a
staff member was not available, [SGN] would either be redirected or staff
assistance would
be sought from the affiliated SIL property next
This meant that
‘[her] wishes to move from A to B are
There had also
been instances where SGN had been distressed when in a car, and had to be
prevented from trying to abscond (though
this last happened some years prior to
the proceedings).
At first instance, a section 32 authorisation order for detention had been
made (or prolonged) for each protected person by various
individual SACAT
These decisions were
subsequently set aside upon application for internal review by the Public
Advocate who sought revocation of
the special powers orders. In the joint case
SACAT found that there was no need for a section 32(1)(b) order authorising
in any of the
This was in part due
to SACAT’s interpretation of the
Guardianship Act
, and in part to
its definition of detention.
Notably, SACAT clarified that detention orders under the
Guardianship
do not exist in
Instead, residence
and detention orders are connected. Under section 32(1)(a), the Tribunal may
direct a protected person to reside
in a certain place or with a certain person.
This is normally done to solve any confusion around accommodation, in cases
protected person objects, or where there is disagreement with third
parties regarding living
arrangements.
32(1)(b) then states that the Tribunal ‘may, by order, authorise the
detention of the person in the place in which
he or she will
32(1)(c) of the
Guardianship Act
is again a standalone provision and
provides the Tribunal with authority to authorise reasonably necessary force to
ensure the person’s
‘proper medical or dental treatment, day-to-day
care and well-being’. Due to the addition of ‘so resides’
the detention provision, on a normal interpretation of the
Guardianship
, the detention of the person is linked with an order for them to reside
in the place determined by a section 32(1)(a) order. SACAT
It is significant that the authority to detain is not at large and is limited
to the place of residence. One of the purposes of a
direction under s 32(1)(a)
(though not the only purpose) is to supply a defined area in which an authority
to detain under s 32(1)(b)
As a result, SACAT made clear that detention orders cannot be granted
independently under the
Guardianship Act
; an authorising order for
detention can only be made in respect of the protected person’s directed
accommodation, and not some
other place or space. In taking this approach that
links detention and residence, SACAT agreed with the Public Advocate’s
that for each protected person ‘accommodation was long-standing
and permanent’,
would be possible for consensual arrangements to be
This led SACAT to
accept the Public Advocate’s further submission that section 32(1)(a)
directed accommodation orders would
no longer be required, as such orders
‘[are] not usually made for uncontentious
arrangements’.
necessary consequence of the removal of residence direction orders, there was
subsequently no longer a basis for section 32(1)(b)
orders authorising detention
in this place of
Furthermore, the Tribunal highlighted that the
Guardianship Act
requires it to adopt the least restrictive order in respect of a protected
person, and orders under section 32(1) (accommodation,
detention, force) can
only be made if the health or safety of the protected person or that of others
would be ‘seriously at
risk’ without the authorising
Seriousness is based
on ‘likelihood of a risk’ and ‘magnitude of the
consequences’ if it
eventuated.
Here, SACAT found
[W]hilst it cannot be said that there are no circumstances in which it can be
envisaged that authority to detain might be acted upon
in respect of any of the
three protected persons, and perhaps more particularly in relation to SGN, it
also cannot be established
that detention is reasonably foreseeably needed for
any of them.
It is important to stress at this point that this decision meant that LOR,
ONO and SGN could therefore not be detained at all (and
SGN’s wishes to
leave, for example, would always need to be
This is because
absent authorising orders there would be no lawful justification for detention,
even if the need to retain the protected
persons were to arise at some point in
the future. That is, any future detention without a common law defence would be
SACAT also considered the meaning of detention within the context of
disability care in a way to (potentially) limit its scope. To
do this, it
adopted, as a starting point, many of the general tort law principles: the rules
around a defined space, albeit that
the ‘defined space’ would
consist of the accommodation; the actions of the person restraining being the
determining factor;
it not being determinative that the detained person is
unaware of the detention, or that they do not or cannot resist or consent
detention; it not being necessary for the person to have the ‘physical
ability to act independently on a desire to exercise
possibility that detention arises even if the person does not resist or try to
escape, notably where acquiescence is based
on known consequences of
The limitation
would need to be complete (ie, without reasonable escape), but need not be
However, SACAT subsequently added a new imperative proposed by the Public
Advocate: that there may be matters that should not count
as detention, because
they are instances of care.
Although the Tribunal sided with the contradictor on finding that ‘the
extent of assistance that [could] be taken from’
the authority proposed
for this new rule,
South Australia v Lampard-Trevorrow
Lampard-Trevorrow
was ‘limited’ since it concerned parental care of children and not
guardianship over adults.
SACAT appeared willing to adopt care by guardians or service providers as a
limitation on detention as a general principle in guardianship
question, according to the Tribunal, is ‘whether the person restricting
another’s freedom of movement is undertaking
an act that may merely be an
incident of care and not properly characterised as
detention’.
question of fact and requires ‘an assessment of all the circumstances of
the protected person and of the care arrangements’
will necessarily entail consideration of the protected person’s
expressed wishes to exercise liberty, and their other physical
affecting their ability to act on their own wishes. It will also necessarily
entail an assessment of the guardian’s
or carer’s approach to the
protected person’s wishes and whether those wishes are acceded to or
thwarted and how that
is effected. It may entail a consideration of the nature
of the care and control being effected arising from the relationship between
two persons.
Accordingly, SACAT held that two questions, one
related to the establishment of an otherwise prohibited restriction and one
to the exception of care, ‘must be asked in relation to each of
the protected persons’:
(a) Does the evidence before the Tribunal support a finding that the freedom
of movement of any of the protected persons is any of
them [sic] has been wholly
restricted by the actions of those responsible for the person’s care?
(b) If yes, does the evidence support a conclusion that the restriction, by
it [sic] circumstances, amounts to detention or is it
an incident of care
arising from the relationship of guardian and protected
As SACAT answered the first question in the negative, it was not necessary
‘to explore further the point or points at which
lawful incidents of care,
and detention, meet’ under the second
SACAT thus placed a limitation on what counts as detention
via the notion of instances of care, which do not historically form part
detention considerations. In doing so, the Tribunal pushed the notion of
detention part way out of social care settings, thereby
signalling a potential
in Australia. Moreover, when
considering its questions, it appears that SACAT
will take matters into account that are explicitly excluded under tort law, such
as expression of wishes, and the person’s physical condition or ability to
act on their wishes. There may thus be a growing
divergence between the
Guardianship Act
and torts jurisprudence, as further commented on
V TORTS PERSPECTIVE ON DETENTION IN CARE
Public Advocate Case
and the developments that have followed it
raise some important issues from a torts perspective, pointing to significantly
liability for care providers and an uncertain situation for protected
persons. It is in this respect important to recognise that
tort law works with
general principles that are applicable to everyone (bar
and that social
care detention is not a separate area of torts. As mentioned in the
introduction, tort law is also increasingly employed
in Australia to protect
human rights in the absence of a human rights charter, as its concepts often
speak to fundamental values
This notion was
reiterated in the
Public Advocate Case
, where the Court quoted the lower
court on the ability of tort law to provide protection for ‘the most
important fundamental
Fundamental assumptions deeply embedded in the foundational structure and
rules of the common law recognise that certain rights and
freedoms are not to be
infringed except by clear lawful authority. Some of the most important
fundamental rights are the rights to
enjoy personal liberty, freedom of movement
and privacy (at least in the sense of freedom from invasive
With that in mind, some SA developments are problematic, either from the
perspective of guardians and facilities seeking to provide
care in good faith,
or the perspective of protected persons who stand to lose important means of
protection of their rights and liberty.
These issues can be divided into the
‘residence-detention link’, and the definition of detention. Both
can be discerned
in the SACAT cases that followed the
Public Advocate
and subsequent legislative inaction.
A ‘Residence-Detention’ Link
The first issue arising from recent decisions is the possibility to obtain
detention orders at all, now that SACAT has expressly limited
section 32(1)(b)
Guardianship Act
to the protected person’s place of
residence, and made it clear that residence orders will only be granted
sparingly, notably
in case of existing
As a result of the
residence-detention link, it is now impossible for guardians to obtain the
‘lawful justification’
(via section 32(1)(b) authorising orders)
that averts false imprisonment for any detention outside the scope of the
protected person’s
residence. This means that any potentially warranted
detention during outings, social activities, day programmes or other pursuits
out-of-doors cannot (or can no longer) be authorised by a
Guardianship
detention order. For example, use of a seatbelt lock aimed at preventing
someone from leaving a car can no longer be authorised,
because vehicle
transport happens outside the
However, without
detention orders, the use of such a lock where it impedes the ability to exit
the vehicle becomes false imprisonment
if no other justifications or defences
can be relied upon.
would be true for, for example, social activities in closed venues other than
the residence, or supervised outings that
amount to constructive detention. It
is in this respect noteworthy that relevant authorisation also cannot be
obtained for NDIS participants
under the Senior Authorising Officer Scheme,
because this scheme excludes relevant forms of
Furthermore,
applies the rules on medical consent to numerous
restrictive practices for those under guardianship outside the residence
that a guardian can consent to them as a person responsible, providing
lawful authorisation for the
), such general powers of consent
cannot provide a lawful justification where the proposed practice leads to a
under tort.
One reading of the
Guardianship Act
could be that authorising orders
may instead be derived from section 32(1)(c), which states that the Tribunal can
the persons from time to time involved in the care of the
[protected] person to use such force as may be reasonably necessary for
purpose of ensuring the proper medical or dental treatment, day-to-day care and
well-being of the person’. Whilst seemingly
capable of capturing some
situations of detention outside the residence, there are two key hurdles to this
reading. The first relates
to the general rules of interpretation: section
32(1)(c) does not mention detention, whereas section 32(1)(b) does. This
that section 32(1)(c) was probably not meant as a detention provision,
or otherwise the term would have been
The second hurdle
relates to words section 32(1)(c)
use: to ‘use ...
force’. As noted above, in the
Public Advocate Case
emphasised the general rule of tort law that false imprisonment does not require
any use of force.
If a person
willingly puts up with a seatbelt lock they cannot open or complies with a
constructive detention because they like being
around their carers, that person
is still detained, and without lawful justification falsely imprisoned. As case
law suggests, there
is no requirement that the protected person be aware that
they are detained.
for force more generally sits ill with constructive detention, where a person
submits because non-compliance will lead to
intervention, even if force may be
implied in the intervention itself (for example, holding on to a person trying
to ‘escape’).
these cases, the detention happens well before any force may be applied, because
it is caused by the prior understanding of an
intervention following
non-compliance.
In cases where force is not applied, this seemingly leaves only one other
the common law
defence of necessity. Necessity allows for a lawful detention where such
detention is a reasonable response to a situation
of imminent peril (danger or
harm), or in today’s parlance, an
Although there
were some (unanswered) questions raised around emergency situations in the
Public Advocate Case
necessity is a well-established defence to trespass torts. The defence, however,
comes with strict requirements: amongst others,
the act must be truly necessary
and not merely convenient,
and there must be an urgent situation of imminent peril, not an ongoing
situation (which would not be an
emergency).
Most forms of
social care detention outside the residence would therefore not qualify as such,
because they are generally preventative
in respect of harms that may be foreseen
but are not imminent. For example, if a protected person opened the door of a
driving car
in order to get out, and their carer intervened at that moment,
necessity would apply. Conversely, applying a seatbelt lock for every
is not a matter of necessity. In most situations, the defence would not apply.
Ultimately, the residence-detention link has two important implications: bar
the limited cases covered by prior obtained section 32(1)(c)
orders authorising
force, the defence of necessity, or any specifically legislated exceptions, it
is no longer possible to obtain
lawful justification for detention of persons
under guardianship outside the residence. Secondly, any guardians or providers
detain a protected person outside the residence without the presence of an
emergency (necessity), or other legislative authorisation
are liable to charges
of false imprisonment and accompanying compensation
B Definition of Detention
The second issue arising from the SACAT cases is the definition of detention.
It is in that respect important to remember that SACAT
and the civil
to adopt SACAT’s increasingly
limited definition of detention. Through its
decisions, the Tribunal has reduced the need for orders in the guardianship
but this may jeopardise the fundamental rights tort law seeks to
protect, and leave guardians and providers exposed in the civil
when facing a false imprisonment suit. Two issues arise here: a more general
limited understanding of the scope of detention,
and the proposed care-exception
to detention.
In respect of the more general understanding of detention, apparent
inconsistency appears to be arising between the scope, duration
and requirements
of detention in guardianship versus tort law. In respect of scope, we have
commented elsewhere on the seemingly
restricted scope of actions that can lead
to detention under guardianship, when compared with
For example, under
tort law, sedation to the point of unconsciousness or immobility would classify
as detention sufficient to cause
imprisonment.
, SACAT deemed chemical restraint a ‘less intrusive’
restriction capable of consent by a person
responsible.
Although tort
law may acknowledge the consent to treatment (thereby avoiding battery), this
would not excuse the detention caused
by the same. Tort law also recognises
constant supervision with an inability to leave as a form of detention, notably
context of constructive
For example, the
Court in the
Public Advocate Case
suggested that even on his outings Mr C
was detained, because it was conveyed that he had to remain with the persons
supervising
him and return to the facility, without the freedom to leave this
arrangement.
This aligns with
the key case on social care detention in the UK,
Cheshire West
the UK Supreme Court found that there would be a deprivation of liberty if a
person were under continuous supervision and
control, and not free to
In Australia, the
Disability Act
(Vic) states explicitly that to ‘detain
... includes ... constantly supervising and escorting a person to prevent the
from exercising freedom of
By contrast,
SACAT found that the protected persons in
, who were subject to
surveillance via cameras and constant supervision, were not detained. This was
so even in the case of SGN whose
wishes to leave the premises could in any case
not always be accommodated due to staffing
limitations.
It is important to remember that false imprisonment is not a matter of
relativity or reasonableness:
infringement of right is too much,
given the importance of individual liberty under the common
The protected rights
apply equally to persons with disabilities and/or reduced legal
Non-relativity also
means that no distinction can be made in terms of time or duration, so that
protected persons asked to wait a
little before given their liberty are falsely
imprisoned from a torts
perspective.
In the case of
New South Wales v Le
, a detention of only seconds was found capable of
amounting to false imprisonment in the absence of lawful
justification.
because tort rules apply generally and to everyone. In an alternative context of
trying to fight off a hostage taker, even
20 seconds would feel like an
In the determination of detention in
, SACAT notably placed
emphasis on the expressed wishes of the protected
finding no detention
because requests to go outside were on the evidence adhered
From a torts perspective,
this consideration would be irrelevant: if a person does not even need to be
aware that they are detained,
it is not hard to see that asking them to express
a wish to go anywhere cannot be a requirement of the regime, and consequently
speak to whether or not a person is detained (it would, instead, have an
impact on the amount of damages to be obtained in
compensation).
generalisability of tort rules further implies that tort law is
‘blind’ to matters such as inexperience, incapacity
or physical
which must be
disregarded for the question of detention. It is on this point that the
references to protected persons’ physical
immobility jar significantly
with the tort rules for detention and false imprisonment, including as
identified by the Tribunal itself.
, SACAT reiterated the
longstanding rule that ‘[t]he physical ability to act independently on a
desire to exercise liberty to
move is not
necessary’.
However, it
then noted in respect of the two protected persons in wheelchairs that there was
no need for detention orders because:
(1) since LOR could ‘[not] go
outside without assistance ... there [had] been no need to prevent him from
and (2) ONO,
‘[b]y reason of her [happy] disposition ... rarely has wishes that are
inconsistent with her own safety ... [and]
[b]y reason of her physical
capability ... is physically incapable of acting on her wishes such as creates a
risk to her own
From a torts
perspective the relevant question is: had the person not been in a wheelchair,
but able to freely walk around, would
they have been stopped if they had
attempted to leave the area in which they were expected to stay? The answer to
that question would
turn on the facts, but the evidence suggested that the
protected persons in
could not always leave the
If physical
inability were accepted, the prospect of abuse would be significant. For
example, a person capable of operating an electric
wheelchair may simply be
given a manually pushed one and then told that they are not detained because
they are physically incapable
of wheeling themselves out of the
Amidst the matter of physical ability and the other issues mentioned above, a
gap is growing between SACAT’s delimitation of
detention for which the
Tribunal is willing to provide authorising orders, and the general rules of tort
law where such orders are
necessary as lawful justification to prevent a claim
of false imprisonment. This gap may widen even further if the care exception
becomes established. Under the care exception proposed in
would not be a detention for the purposes of guardianship if a restriction of
movement can be characterised as an ‘incident
of care arising from the
relationship of guardian and protected
The exception
turns on two things that cannot currently play a role under tort law. First,
regarding consideration of the suggested
facts to determine that there is an
instance of care and not detention, it is proposed that considerations including
wishes, physical
ability and motivations of the carer play a
However, as noted above
(and also true for
motivations),
these matters
have long been established as incapable of playing a role in tort law.
The second aspect of the social care exception is the required relationship:
the exception arises out of the relationship between
a guardian and a protected
person, and this relationship exists because of the person’s incapacity.
Yet, as also noted above,
incapacity is not a relevant consideration in tort
Tort law only makes an
exception for children, because the experience of childhood is common to
Incapacity is
regarded as idiosyncratic under tort law. For example, in the UK
Morriss v Marsden
, which has since been adopted in
the respondent had
attacked the plaintiff during a psychotic episode in a state of accepted
incapacity, yet was still held liable
for trespass to person because incapacity
is irrelevant.
In that case,
the capacity question arose on the side of the respondent, but it would be both
incoherent and unfair if a plaintiff
could not benefit from a rule that would be
held against them if they were the respondent. In
Lampard-Trevorrow
SASCFC held accordingly that ‘it should not matter that the victim of the
alleged unlawful restraint lacks the mental
capacity, permanently or
temporarily, to choose to resist the restraint in
Attempts to
bring in capacity via a care exception would thus need to overcome decades of
precedent holding that capacity cannot
play a role in trespass torts. It is thus
hard to see how the civil courts could embrace the care exception. Crucially,
that facilities may find themselves between a rock and a hard place:
they are incapable of obtaining detention orders from SACAT
due to the care
exception, but without the orders they do not have the lawful justification
needed to escape liability in the civil
, SACAT highlighted the importance of
adopting ‘the least restrictive
required under the
Guardianship
Detention orders are
considered particularly restrictive, and should be avoided if
While there is much
truth to this, it is also important not to lose sight of the reality that
detention orders exist because sometimes
they are considered
Notably, such
; they act as a security for when detention is
unavoidable (as a last
not a reason to
detain without cause. It may be that, at the end of the day, a seatbelt lock is
the lesser of all evils where it
allows a protected person to go on outings with
their friends. Yet, the practical result of the residence-detention link and
of the definition of detention is that it may now not always be
possible for guardians and providers to obtain the orders needed
liability for false imprisonment due to lack of lawful justification, even where
they act in good faith.
From the perspective of the protected person, the emphasis on reducing
detention orders is at first sight very welcome. Ideally, all
restrictive practices should be eliminated. However, whether a protected person
stands to benefit from the above developments
depends on whether there will
indeed be less detention (without reduction of activities by providers who may
now choose to simply
forgo outings and other events), or whether detention
endures in practice, but is now losing oversight.
VI REDUCED OVERSIGHT?
De facto detention, where a person is in practice deprived of their liberty
without authorisation, is widespread in social care settings
in Australia, in
particular aged care.
is evidence that this has long been known to Australian
governments.
Detention orders
are a safeguard to ensure that the situation of those who are detained in
practice is subject to appropriate review
and oversight by courts and tribunals.
Public Advocate Case
, Kourakis CJ explained that ‘the public
interest in the making of detention orders by the independent and transparent
of courts and tribunals is so obvious that it requires no
explanation’.
To fully recognise the right not to be deprived of liberty, Australia must
not only protect the substantive values of liberty involved
– as tort law
is capable of doing to some extent – but also comply with oversight and
monitoring standards.
However, in
, SACAT noted that by bypassing the
Guardianship
and using the
Consent Act
pathway, oversight would be reduced as
persons responsible could now consent to matters previously requiring Tribunal
Tribunal similarly recognised that by limiting the scope of detention for the
purposes of the
Guardianship Act
, it would remove situations that would
have historically counted as detention from its scrutiny. SACAT observed that
is a conflict of policy objectives at play’ as:
[T]he legislative scheme ... places the most significant decisions involving
the liberty of protected persons in the hands of the
Tribunal as an independent
overseer of guardians’ actions. In [deciding LOR] some oversight of these
protected persons ...
It subsequently called on the legislature to consider whether current
legislation achieved ‘the appropriate balance of personal
autonomy of
disabled persons and transparency of care providers’
So far, the
SA Parliament has not responded.
Public Advocate Case
has done much to raise awareness of the
problem of de facto
detention in care settings, but as identified by the
Queensland Office of Public Advocate in 2017, tort law comes after the fact.
Hence, ‘[b]ringing actions against aged service providers under tort law
may result in compensation for mistreated residents
would not necessarily
serve as a preventative measure
or raise the standard of care for people
subject to restrictive
practices’.
Much needed preventative measures could be emerging. In late 2017, Australia
signed onto an obligation to monitor all places of detention
Protocol to the Convention Against Torture
which sets up a scheme for preventative detention monitoring via a visiting
In its preventative
focus, the scheme does not require complaints to be made or actions to be
commenced in courts or tribunals by
individuals. Instead, a system of regular
visits, announced or unannounced, conducted by an independent team of experts is
to spot risks of ill treatment, including risks of unlawful detention.
As a human rights treaty, the
does not add any additional
substantive rights, but it is a means of partially implementing key rights, like
article 9 of the
(deprivation of liberty) to prevent arbitrary
However, the
impact of the
for social care hinges on the scope of its
application.
Article 4(2) of the
defines deprivation of liberty as ‘any
form of detention or imprisonment or the placement of a person in a public or
custodial setting which that person is not permitted to leave at will by
order of any judicial, administrative or other authority’.
This must be
read together with article 4(1) which applies the visiting scheme to places
where persons ‘are or
deprived of liberty, either by virtue
of an order given by a public authority or at its instigation or with its
acquiescence
‘Acquiescence’ is broadly interpreted by
monitoring body, the United Nations Subcommittee on the Prevention of Torture
and Other Cruel, Inhuman or Degrading Treatment
or Punishment
(‘SPT’), and means
tacit consent, allowing the deprivation of liberty in question to happen and
not exceeding the powers of authority to avoid it. This
would include situations
in which the state should regulate deprivation of liberty and chooses not to do
this may concern situations in which the state tolerates, allows or in
any other form chooses to turn a blind eye to deprivation of
liberty caused by
any other entity or
The SPT has confirmed that article 4 covers non-traditional places of
detention such as ‘nursing homes ... [and] centres for
persons with
disabilities’.
broad interpretation is supported by other international
and indicates that
the SPT recognises – and
covers – social care
It is in that
respect important to reiterate that
thus requires
preventative
monitoring of social care settings where people
be detained.
However, the Australian Government is showing resistance to calls to set up
and resource the independent monitoring of social care
settings under
It has chosen
to take an idiosyncratic approach to implementing
by designating
traditional places of detention such as prisons as ‘primary places of
detention’, relegating social care
detention as secondary and beyond the
government’s current implementation
This is even though
these federally funded and regulated social care settings may be unlawfully
depriving residents of their liberty
with government ‘acquiescence’.
The arrangement flies in the face of the
Royal Commission into Violence,
Abuse, Neglect and Exploitation of People with Disability
recommendation in 2023 for the Government to broaden ‘[the] definition of
“places of detention” to enable
all places where people with
disability may be deprived of their liberty to be
monitored’.
out of step with Australia’s international counterparts as close to 20
State Parties (all developed nations like Australia) have set up
systems to monitor social care
reluctance to comply with these internationally mandated preventative measures,
it is especially problematic that the SACAT
cases have now also removed
quasi-judicial oversight for numerous cases involving social care detention.
VII CONCLUSION
Public Advocate Case
and its aftermath suggest that Australian
courts and tribunals are beginning to develop an understanding of social care
However, this understanding is not anchored in human rights
standards, but in the prospect of unauthorised detention causing the
false imprisonment. Even so, the
Public Advocate Case
arguably matches
Series’ characterisation of
namely that it
‘has a transgressive quality, identifying care arrangements for older and
disabled people that are widely accepted
and relied upon throughout Western
societies, as forms of
detention’.
for the SASCFC, a clear association exists between social care settings and
liberty rights, including – indirectly
– the right not to be
arbitrarily deprived of liberty.
Nonetheless, Series’ evaluation of Australia as resisting the idea of
deprivation of liberty being associated with social care
retains some weight.
The SA Parliament is tiptoeing around the issue, and at federal level there is
significant resistance to resourcing
preventative detention monitoring (and
other oversight) for social care settings. Defiance in this context appears
deliberate. That
is perhaps less so for tribunals like SACAT who have become
inundated with guardianship applications and are pushing back against
definition of detention in response. SACAT’s approach to detention is
nonetheless problematic because, with characterisation
of restrictions as
treatment and dissociation of social care from detention under the proposed care
exception, it blocks avenues
to obtain orders that impose requirements for
regular review and may serve as lawful justification under torts for care
The approach, moreover, exposes persons in care settings to a greater
risk of de facto detention without the safeguard of oversight
provided by courts
and tribunals. When it comes to detention orders made under guardianship laws,
courts and tribunals should not
lose sight that there is an
‘obvious’ public interest that transparency and accountability be
central when detention
regardless of how
benign the care settings purport to be.
Senior Lecturer in Law,
Macquarie University.
Professor, The University of Adelaide. The authors would like to acknowledge the
input of Matthew Boisseau (Howard Zelling
Chambers) to discussions on the issues
covered in this article. We also thank the anonymous reviewers for their helpful
and the editors for their work on the article.
Surrey County Council v P
[2014] UKSC 19
[2014] AC 896
Cheshire West
’). The authors refer to the
second action in this case, better known by its medium neutral citation:
Cheshire West and Chester Council
[2014] UKSC 19.
Cheshire West
This article is not concerned
with other care arrangements, such as those for children.
Lucy Series,
Deprivation of
Liberty in the Shadows of the Institution
(Bristol University Press, 2022)
ch 2 <https://doi.org/10.56687/9781529212006> (‘
Deprivation of
Ibid 98 (emphasis in
original). As a basis of her assessment, Series offers a brief outline of
Australian case law and Australia’s
interactions with UN treaty
This is not to say that
opportunities for improvement were not identified. See, eg, Department of Health
and Aged Care (Cth),
Living Longer. Living Better: Aged Care Reform
(Report, April 2012); Australian Human Rights Commission,
‘Respect and Choice: A Human Rights Approach for Ageing and Health’
(Paper, 8 August 2012).
See, eg, resistance to this
pairing by Alzheimer’s Australia: Alzheimer’s Australia, Submission
No 11 to Australian
Human Rights Commission,
Optional Protocol to the
Convention against Torture
(21 July 2017) 3.
Public Advocate v C, B
(2019) 133 SASR 353 (‘
Public Advocate Case
For SA there is the
National Disability Insurance Scheme Act 2013
Aged Care Act 1997
’) at the federal level, and the
Guardianship and Administration
Guardianship Act
Inclusion Act 2018
Inclusion Act
’) at the state
See especially arrangements
under the National Disability Insurance Scheme (‘NDIS’) regulated by
(n 10) and its subsidiary legislation, with oversight by the
NDIS Quality and Safeguards Commission, as well as the system set up
1997 Aged Care Act
(n 10) and its subsidiary legislation, with oversight
by the Aged Care Quality and Safety Commission. For further information on
schemes between the Australian federal and sub-national governments, and in
particular the redistribution of taxation funds
to states and territories via
constitutionally supported grants (under section 96 of the
Constitution
, and therefore also known as ‘
see, eg, Cheryl Saunders and Michelle Foster, ‘The Australian Federation:
A Story of the Centralization of
Power’ in Daniel Halberstam and Mathias
Reimann (eds),
Federalism and Legal Unification: A Comparative Empirical
Investigation of Twenty Systems
(Springer, 2014) 87, 98–9
<https://doi.org/10.1007/978-94-007-7398-1_3>; Matthew Stubbs, Adam
Webster and John Williams,
‘Persons with Disability and the Australian
Constitution
’ (Research Report, Royal Commission into Violence, Abuse,
Neglect and Exploitation of People with Disability, 8 October 2020)
Guardianship
(n 10) s 32(1)(b). Notably, in some states like SA or Queensland (which
uses ‘containment’ and ‘seclusion’),
detention orders
must be explicitly obtained. In others like New South Wales (‘NSW’)
and the territories, powers to detain
should be spelled out in the guardianship
order itself. See, eg,
[2020] NSWCATGD 28
Human Rights Act 2004
Human Rights Act 2019
Charter of Human Rights and
Responsibilities Act 2006
(Vic). See for recent commentary Bruce Chen,
‘If at First You Don’t Succeed... A Critique of the Australian
Proposal and the Inquiry into Australia’s Human Rights
[2024] UNSWLawJl 14
(2024) 47(2)
University of New South Wales Law Journal
<https://doi.org/10.53637/EXTY3197>.
See Department of Social
National Framework for Reducing and Eliminating the Use of
Restrictive Practices in the Disability Service Sector
(Report, 1 May 2013);
Bernadette McSherry and Yvette Maker (eds),
Restrictive Practices in Health
Care and Disability Settings: Legal, Policy and Practical Responses
(Routledge, 2021).
Senate Community Affairs
References Committee, Parliament of Australia,
Indefinite Detention of People
with Cognitive and Psychiatric Impairment in Australia
(Report, November
2016) 169 [8.71] (‘
Indefinite Detention
United Nations Subcommittee
on Prevention of Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or
Punishment,
Visit to Australia Undertaken from 16 to 23 October 2022:
Recommendations and Observations Addressed to the State Party
CAT/OP/AUS/ROSP/1 (20 December 2023) [1], [4]. See also Calina Ouliaris et al,
‘OPCAT: How an International Treaty
Regarding Torture Is Relevant to the
Australian Mental Health System’ (2024) 58(5)
Australian and New
Zealand Journal of Psychiatry
<https://doi.org/10.1177/00048674231221419>.
Senate Standing Committee
on Legal and Constitutional Affairs, Parliament of Australia,
Supplementary
Budget Estimates 2019–20
(Answers to Questions No 140, 4 February
2020) 2. In response to a question asked by Senator Nick McKim the government
stated that
‘aged care facilities do not fit within the concept of
“places of detention” as set out in article 4 of
there is presently no proposal to include them in any list of primary places of
detention’.
Indefinite Detention
(n 15) 169 [8.69]. It noted similar for disability contexts at 169 [8.71].
Ibid 169 [8.69].
Ibid 168 [8.65] (emphasis
See Sarah Joseph and Joanna
Kyriakakis, ‘Australia: Tort Law Filling a Human Rights Void’ in
Ekaterina Aristova and
Uglješa Grušić (eds),
Civil Remedies
and Human Rights in Flux: Key Legal Developments in Selected Jurisdictions
(Hart Publishing, 2022) 43, 46
<https://doi.org/10.5040/9781509947621.ch-003>. See also Ciara Murphy,
‘Damages in the
Australian Human Rights Context’
(2022) 27(2)
Australian Journal of Human Rights
<https://doi.org/10.1080/1323238X.2021.1997093>.
Australian Law Reform
Commission,
Traditional Rights and Freedoms: Encroachment by Commonwealth
(Interim Report No 127, July 2015) 455.
Public Advocate
(n 9) 366 [52] (Kourakis CJ). At common law it is also accepted that
Australian courts may take international agreements into consideration
process of interpreting legislation even though the legislation is not directed
to giving effect to the agreement: see
Dietrich v The Queen
[1992] HCA 57
, 305–6 (Mason CJ and McHugh J), 321 (Brennan J). This is
particularly the case where there is ambiguity: see
Chu Kheng Lim v Minister
for Immigration, Local Government and Ethnic Affairs
(1992) 176 CLR 1
(Brennan, Deane and Dawson JJ);
Minister of State for Immigration and Ethnic
Affairs v Teoh
[1995] HCA 20
(1995) 183 CLR 273
, 287 (Mason CJ and Deane J).
[1955] HCA 68
(1955) 94 CLR 147
(Fullagar J) (‘
Skyllas v Retirement
Care Australia
(Preston) Pty Ltd
[2006] VSC 409
Antunovic v
[2010] VSC 377
(2010) 30 VR 355
Darcy v New South Wales
[2011] NSWCA 413
White v Local Health Authority
[2015] NSWSC 417.
In these cases, the
detained persons were themselves opposed to the arrangements.
Public Advocate Case
In Australia, the principle
of legality requires statutes to be interpreted in the context of a legal
framework in which they are
enacted, including the rights of individuals against
the state. Where Parliament intends to alter these rights and duties via
it must do so in unambiguous language. The principle of legality
protects individuals’ rights and freedoms from unintended
legislative
interference. See
Lacey v Attorney-General (Qld)
[2011] HCA 10
(2011) 242 CLR 573
591–2 [43] (French CJ, Gummow, Hayne, Crennan, Kiefel and Bell JJ)
The SACAT was established
in 2015 as a ‘super-tribunal’, usurping a number of smaller
tribunals and boards, including
the South Australian Guardianship Board. It is a
tribunal with limited jurisdiction, meaning that it can only take decisions
specifically
attributed to it by legislation. SACAT notably has jurisdiction
Guardianship Act
Advance Care Directives Act
Consent to Medical Treatment
and Palliative Care Act 1995
Consent Act
overview of jurisdiction can be found at ‘Jurisdiction List’,
South Australian Civil and Administrative Tribunal
<https://www.sacat.sa.gov.au/about-sacat/who-we-are/jurisdiction-list>.
For an overview of the establishment and
working of Australian civil and
administrative tribunals, see, eg, Robin Creyke, ‘Australian Tribunals:
Impact of Amalgamation’
(2020) 26(4)
Australian Journal of
Administrative Law
Guardianship Act
10) s 57(1).
Convention on the Rights
of Persons with Disabilities
, opened for signature 30 March
2007, 2515 UNTS
(entered into force 3 May 2008) (‘
’). See Australian
Law Reform Commission,
Equality, Capacity and Disability in Commonwealth
(Final Report No 124, August 2014) 277 [10.14]. For a different
interpretation and a more positive reflection on compliance, see,
eg, Shih-Ning
Then, Ben White and Lindy Willmott, ‘Adults Who Lack Capacity: Substitute
Decision-Making’ in Ben White
Health Law in Australia
(Thomson Reuters, 4
ed, 2024) 221, 226–7.
Human Rights Committee,
General Comment No 35: Article 9 (Liberty and Security of Person)
CCPR/C/GC/35 (16 December 2014) (‘
General Comment No 35
See also Human Rights Council,
Older Persons Deprived of Liberty: Report of
the Independent Expert on the Enjoyment of All Human Rights by Older Persons,
, UN Doc A/HRC/51/27 (9 August 2022) (‘
Older Persons
Deprived of Liberty
See below Parts III and
Public Advocate Case
(n 9) 354 [1], 367–9 [63] (Kourakis CJ).
Ibid 354 [2]. Under South
Australian law, guardianship can be full (covering all aspects of a protected
person’s life) or
limited, whereby the person is only under guardianship
for certain areas such as healthcare, accommodation or ‘lifestyle’
(social activities, etc). Where there is (family) conflict surrounding the
appointment of a guardian, the Public Advocate can be
appointed as a neutral
decision-maker. In all instances, a guardian can only be appointed by SACAT in
compliance with the
Guardianship Act
(n 10). For further information see
‘About Guardianship Orders’,
Office of the Public Advocate
<https://www.opa.sa.gov.au/information-service/about-the-information-service/about-guardianship>.
Public Advocate Case
(n 9) 354 [1], 367–9 [63] (Kourakis CJ).
Ibid 367 [57], 367–9
[63]–[64]. This was principally for safety reasons, including related to
his vision.
Ibid 367–9 [63]. This
contrasts with earlier cases: see above n 25.
Under section 31 of the
Guardianship Act
(n 10), guardians can (subject to limitations imposed by
SACAT) exercise ‘all the powers a guardian has at law or in equity’.
As suggested in the
Public Advocate Case
, the common law gives content to
such powers ‘at law’:
Public Advocate Case
(n 9) 356 [11],
359–60 [25] ff (Kourakis CJ).
A third issue that arose in
the case was how to get Mr C’s case before the court, as his incapacity
meant that he lacked legal
standing. To this effect, a (successful) writ of
habeas corpus was employed:
Public Advocate Case
(n 9) 355 [4]–[5],
369–70 [66] (Kourakis CJ). This matter will not be further discussed here.
See generally Esther Erlings,
‘False Imprisonment in Locked Wards:
Public Advocate v C, B
’ (2019) 21(2)
Flinders Law Journal
White v South
[2010] SASC 95
(2010) 106 SASR 521
, 589–90 [414]–[422] (Anderson J)
The other elements of the
tort were seemingly taken as given by the Court, and not further discussed in
the judgment. See, eg, ibid
Public Advocate Case
(n 9) 366–7 [52]–[56] (Kourakis CJ).
Ibid 357 [15].
Ibid 363 [33].
International Covenant
on Civil and Political Rights
, opened for signature 19 December
(entered into force 23 March 1976) (‘
Australia has ratified seven core international human rights treaties including
. SA has not yet adopted sui generis human rights legislation
nor implemented these relevant treaties beyond a few provisions. This
human rights standards do not have any direct effect in either SACAT or the
state’s general court system. Reliance
cannot, for example, be placed
directly on the human right not to be arbitrarily deprived of liberty, as
articulated by article 9
. However, human rights may
influence the interpretation and development of the applicable
Public Advocate Case
(n 9) 366 [52] (Kourakis CJ) (citations omitted).
Ibid 366 [53].
Ibid 366 [51].
(1919) 122 LT 44
, 53 (Atkin
’), quoted in
Public Advocate Case
370 [68] (Kourakis CJ).
(Atkin LJ), quoted in
Public Advocate Case
(n 9) 370 [68] (Kourakis
(Duke LJ), quoted in
Public Advocate Case
(n 9) 370 [67] (Kourakis
(Duke LJ), quoted in
Public Advocate Case
(n 9) 370 [67] (Kourakis CJ);
Bird v Jones
(1845) 7 QB 742, 748 (Williams J)
Public Advocate Case
(n 9) 370–1 [70] (Kourakis CJ) (emphasis omitted).
747–8 (Williams J).
[1971] HCA 33
(1971) 124 CLR 621
Ibid 626 (Walsh J).
Public Advocate Case
(n 9) 371 [71] (Kourakis CJ).
Symes v Mahon
[1922] SAStRp 57
, 449, 453 (Murray CJ) (‘
See also discussion of the
case in a leading South Australian torts textbook: Julia Davis,
with Tort Law
(Oxford University Press, 1
144–5, 147.
Public Advocate Case
(n 9) 371 [72] (Kourakis CJ).
The authors would like to
thank an anonymous South Australian lawyer involved for providing information on
the compensation case,
which is not reported.
Guardianship Act
10) s 57(1). In the case of detention, an initial review must be conducted
within 6 months and subsequent reviews should occur
in intervals of not more
than a year.
See Lucy Series, ‘On
Detaining 300,000 People: The Liberty Protection Safeguards’ (2019) 25
International Journal of Mental Health and Capacity Law
[2019] SACAT 37
For a definition of a
restrictive practice, see
(n 10) s 9;
National Disability
Insurance Scheme (Restrictive Practices and Behaviour Support) Rules 2018
(Cth) r 6. For more information, see
<https://www.ndis.gov.au>.
Attachment 2 [12]–[13] (Executive Senior Member Rugless).
Ibid Attachment 1
Ibid Attachment 3
Ibid [45]–[48].
Ibid [85]–[113]. See
also Esther Erlings and Laura Grenfell, ‘Restrictive Practices:
Disentangling the Laws of Consent,
Guardianship and Restrictive Practices’
(2022) 44(2)
The Bulletin
Though note that a Senior Practitioner
Scheme has since been adopted for the NDIS under the
Inclusion Act
(n 71) [107],
[112], [123] (Executive Senior Member Rugless).
See for the rules around
substitute decision-making by a person responsible
Consent Act
14–14D. On the rules around substitute decision-making in healthcare for
adults without capacity generally, see Then,
White and Willmott (n 30).
[123]–[127] (Executive Senior Member Rugless). Beyond that, and as the
Tribunal noted, supervision by a healthcare practitioner
(eg, a nurse) is more
likely in aged care than in disability care. See also Andrew Cashin, Amy
Pracilio and Nathan J Wilson, ‘A
Proposed Remedy to the Inequitable
Representation of Nursing in the Australian National Disability Insurance
Scheme’ (2023)
<https://doi.org/10.1016/j.colegn.2022.11.002>.
The NDIS requires screening
and has adopted a code of conduct. See ‘NDIS Code of Conduct’,
NDIS Quality and Safeguards Commission
<https://www.ndiscommission.gov.au/rules-and-standards/ndis-code-conduct>;
National Disability Insurance Scheme (Code of Conduct) Rules 2018
In SA, screening is regulated under Part 5A of the
Inclusion Act
Attachment 1 [30], Attachment 2 [15]–[16], Attachment 3 [35] (Executive
Senior Member Rugless).
Ibid Attachment 1 [28],
Attachment 2 [18], Attachment 3 [33].
Ibid [144].
Ibid [144]–[145].
Ibid [118]. See also at
[48], [117].
Public Advocate Case
(n 9) 372 [73] (Kourakis CJ), 373 [78] (Hinton J).
South Australia,
Parliamentary Debates
, Legislative Council, 4 March 2021, 2861–5
(Michelle Lensink, Minister for Human Services); South Australia,
Parliamentary Debates
, Legislative Council, 18 March 2021, 3005–8;
South Australia,
Parliamentary Debates
, Legislative Council, 1 April
2021, 3153–73; South Australia,
Parliamentary Debates
Assembly, 11 May 2021, 5636–51. In an unscripted response to a question
that ‘under our common
law, ... [w]e have, in the criminal context, false imprisonment ... across to
civil liability’:
at 5647 (Vickie Chapman, Attorney-General).
South Australia,
Parliamentary Debates
, House of Assembly, 11 May 2021, 5637 (Vickie
Chapman, Attorney-General). See also South Australia,
Parliamentary
, Legislative Council, 1 April 2021, 3161 (Michelle Lensink, Minister
for Human Services).
South Australia,
Parliamentary Debates
, Legislative Council, 4 March 2021, 2861 (Michelle
Lensink, Minister for Human Services). In 2021, the relevant state acts for
restrictive
practices were the
Guardianship Act
Consent Act
Mental Health Act 2009
Australian Civil and Administrative Tribunal Act 2013
South Australia,
Parliamentary Debates
, Legislative Council, 18 March 2021, 3005–6
(Connie Bonaros).
South Australia,
Parliamentary Debates
, Legislative Council, 1 April 2021, 3162 (Clare
Ibid 3162 (Michelle
Lensink, Minister for Human Services) (emphasis added).
4–5. The scheme includes two levels for authorisation: lower level (Level
1) restrictions to be approved by a designated
officer of the provider, and
higher level (Level 2) restrictions requiring independent authorisation from a
Senior Authorising Officer.
Inclusion Act
(n 10) ss 23N–23O.
Disability Inclusion
(Restrictive Practices – NDIS) Amendment Bill 2021 (SA) s 5
(‘Inclusion Act Amendment Bill’).
A person under the NDIS
has the option to remain under the NDIS or choose to instead be covered by aged
care provisions once they
reach the age of 65. However, moving into residential
aged care funded by the Department of Health Aged Care System will cause a
person to automatically leave the NDIS: see NDIS,
Leaving the NDIS
(Guideline, 10 February 2025) 3
<https://ourguidelines.ndis.gov.au/home/becoming-participant/leaving-ndis#download>.
Inclusion Act
10) pt 6A div 4 (emphasis added).
There is no Hansard
debate on section 23C of the
Inclusion Act
(n 10), which was introduced
by the Inclusion Act Amendment Bill (n 97). The
Disability Inclusion
(Restrictive Practices) Regulations 2021
Regulations
’) received scrutiny via the Legislative Review Committee,
whose concerns are not recorded.
Inclusion Act
ss 23C(1)(a)–(d).
Ibid s 23C(1).
Ibid s 23C(2). For the
purposes of this section, the fact that a person may leave premises or a part of
particular premises, or
access means of leaving premises or a part of premises,
with the permission of a specified person does not, of itself, mean that
person is not detained.
Ibid s 23C(3).
Inclusion Regulations
(n 101) reg 7(2)(b).
Ibid reg 7(2)(a).
Ibid reg 5(1)(b). The
practice would classify as a Level 2 Restrictive Practice, subject to
authorisation by the Senior Authorising
Public Advocate
(n 9) [16], [30], [52] (Kourakis J);
(n 27) 591–2
[43] (French CJ, Gummow, Hayne, Crennan, Kiefel and Bell JJ).
This is also the
interpretation taken by SACAT which, in its August 2024 Factsheet, advised the
public that ‘only SACAT can
authorise detention by making a special powers
order’: South Australian Civil and Administrative Tribunal, ‘Special
Applications to SACAT for Special Powers Orders’ (Factsheet,
August 2024) 2.
South Australia,
Parliamentary Debates
, Legislative Council, 27 October 2021, 4684 (John
Ibid. In Australia,
Oakden has become a byword for serious systemic failures in social care,
particularly the care of older persons
with very severe or extreme dementia in
closed care units. See Aaron Groves et al,
The Oakden Report
(Report, 20
April 2017).
South Australia,
Parliamentary Debates
, Legislative Council, 11 May 2021, 3403 (John
Ibid 3403 (Michelle
Lensink, Minister for Human Services).
South Australia,
Parliamentary Debates
, Legislative Council, 27 October 2021, 4683 (John
Ibid 4684 (John
Ageing and Adult
Safeguarding (Restrictive Practices) Amendment Bill 2021
(SA) s 37G(2).
South Australia,
Parliamentary Debates
, Legislative Council, 17 November 2021, 4911
(Stephen Wade, Minister for Health and Wellbeing).
Royal Commission into
Aged Care Quality and Safety
Final Report, 1 March 2021)
Ibid vol 1, 222.
Ibid vol 1, 221.
The 2022 Review was
conducted by the South Australian Law Reform Institute (‘SALRI’), a
body with close connections
to the Attorney-General’s Department. In its
lengthy report and 46 recommendations, SALRI made no mention of detention or of
the need for an authorisation scheme by which to regulate the use of restrictive
practices on persons over 65 years of age. This
was despite the fact that
SA’s Adult Safeguarding Unit had been established with the intention to
‘“fill the gaps”
... in the protection of vulnerable adults,
notably in relation to elder abuse’. See South Australian Law Reform
‘Autonomy and Safeguarding Are Not Mutually
Inconsistent’: A Review of the Operation of the
Ageing and Adult
Safeguarding Act 1995
(Report No 17, September 2022) xii.
Aged Care Act
Aged Care Act
Since the NDIS was
created in 2013, no jurisdiction has enacted legislation that covers older
persons in residential care. For example,
Victoria’s coverage of all
persons with disabilities via its
Disability Act
Disability Act
is a legacy of it being a
pre-NDIS law. Section 3(1) of the
Disability Act
indicates that the
legislation continues to cover all persons with disabilities which means it
includes those persons accessing state
funded disability services and persons
under the Commonwealth’s Disability Support for Older Australians program.
of legislation enacted after 2013, the
Senior Practitioner Act
(ACT) is very broad in its regulation of restrictive practices, but it
exempts prisons, hospitals and nursing homes (unless the resident
is under the
Only the newly adopted
Aged Care Restrictive Practices
Substitute Decision-Maker Act 2024
(Vic) deals explicitly with detention in
aged care, but it specifies who can consent to restrictive practices on behalf
of an older
person, rather than introduce an authorisation scheme.
‘Transcript of Roundtable: Best Practice Models of Guardianship’
(Transcript, Royal Commission into Violence,
Abuse, Neglect and Exploitation of
People with Disability, 1 June 2022) 52 (‘Royal Commission
Roundtable’).
Section 5(a) of the
2024 Aged Care Act
(n 125) explains that the legislation gives effect to
Australia’s obligations under the
(n 30) and the
International Covenant on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights
for signature 19 December
1966, 993 UNTS 3
(entered into force 3 January 1976),
thus indicating that the federal Parliament intends to legislate at least in
part under the
external affairs power,
section 51(xxix)
Constitution
. For commentary on earlier proposals vis-a-vis human rights,
including that of detention, see Anita MacKay, Laura Grenfell and Julie
Debeljak, ‘A New
Aged Care Act
for Australia? Examining the Royal
Commission’s Proposal for Human Rights Inclusive Legislation’
[2023] UNSWLawJl 27
University of New South Wales Law Journal
<https://doi.org/10.53637/ZMED8094>.
(n 15) 154 [8.8].
Ibid 169 [8.72].
See respectively the
NDIS (Restrictive Practices and Behaviour Support) Rules 2018
’), which entered into force in 2020, and the
Quality of Care Principles 2014
(Cth) pt 4A div 5 (‘
’), which entered into force in 2021. The latter is a
subsidiary instrument to the
1997 Aged Care Act
Compliance with
restrictive practices and behaviour support rules is notably a NDIS Compliance
Priority for 2023–24. See for
policy and priorities ‘Compliance and
Enforcement’,
NDIS Quality and Safeguards Commission
(Web Page, 26
October 2023)
<https://www.ndiscommission.gov.au/about/compliance-and-enforcement/our-compliance-and-enforcement-approach>.
131) rr 9, 20(2);
Care Principles
(n 131) s 15FA(1)(j)
The former are charged
with aspects of life and the latter with the finances of persons deemed to lack
decision-making capacity
in either area.
The lack of
disaggregated data is a serious hindrance to the conduct of research and means
that the statements here made should
be understood as containing high levels of
uncertainty.
‘Our Service
South Australian Civil and Administrative Tribunal
<https://www.sacat.sa.gov.au/about-sacat/publications-and-resources/our-service-data>.
[2023] SACAT 59
Attachment 1 [4], Attachment 2 [4], Attachment 3 [4] (Executive Senior Member
[36]–[41] (Hughes P and Senior Member Lester). This became especially
relevant as a consensus arose between the Public
Advocate, care providers’
and protected persons’ legal representatives on the absence of a need for
special authorising
orders: at [42].
It is beyond the scope
of this article to consider in any depth the implications of this silence.
This strategy may have
coalesced with that of the South Australian Public Advocate, Anne Gale, who
called for a reconsideration
of how detention should be interpreted as well as
some national consistency. See ‘Royal Commission Roundtable’ (n 127)
[81] (Hughes P and Senior Member Lester).
Ibid [94], [99].
Ibid [94]. It is not
entirely clear from the way the decision is written whether this had already
happened, or whether this is what
would happen, should SGN try to leave.
However, the later comment that SGN’s wishes are usually (but not always)
suggests that the comment is based on previous experience.
Ibid [96] (emphasis
Ibid [14], [22],
Ibid [85], [92],
Guardianship Act
(n 10) s 32(1)(b) (emphasis added).
[51] (Hughes P and Senior Member Lester).
Ibid [106].
Ibid [106]. This
contrasts with the approach taken in, for example, NSW, where the NSW Civil and
Administrative Tribunal has been
alive to the nature of false imprisonment as a
tort of strict liability and the need for orders as both lawful justification
a means to ensure the least restriction on liberty. See, eg,
(n 12) [138]–[160] (Principal Member Fougere, Dr Jamieson and Prof
[2024] NSWCATGD 2.
Guardianship Act
(n 10) s 32(2);
(n 138) [52] (Hughes P and Senior Member
[53] (Hughes P and Senior Member Lester).
Ibid [103].
Though this does not
mean that staff would need to be made available to go anywhere with SGN. Rather,
SGN had a right to leave independently.
[72] (Hughes P and Senior Member Lester).
[2010] SASC 56
(2010) 106 SASR 331
Lampard-Trevorrow
[76] (Hughes P and Senior Member Lester).
[1966] HCA 13
(1966) 115 CLR 199
McHale v Watson
See Joseph and
Kyriakakis (n 21) 46.
Public Advocate
(n 9) 362 [30] (Kourakis CJ), quoting
BC v Public Advocate
[2018] SASC 193
, [29] (Stanley J).
See above nn 160–7
and accompanying text.
Notably, the NDIS does
not regard seat belt locks or seat belt guards as restrictive practices when
applied during transport due
to the legal requirement to wear a seatbelt in a
moving vehicle: NDIS Quality and Safeguards Commission,
Restrictive Practice
Guide: Safe Transportation
(Report, February 2023). In
Executive Senior Member Rugless disagreed with this finding and described a seat
belt lock as a restrictive practice, but one to
which a guardian without special
powers can agree:
(n 71) Attachment 3 [18].
(1988) 34 A Crim R 11
on false imprisonment inside a moving car
from which the person could not reasonably escape.
Inclusion Act
10) s 23C, pt 6A div 4; Department of Human Services (SA),
Restrictive
Practices Guidelines
(Report, 6 January 2022).
[136] (Executive Senior Member Rugless). See also
Public Advocate Case
9) 367 [56] (Kourakis CJ).
See Jeffrey Barnes,
‘Contextualism: “The Modern Approach to Statutory
Interpretation”’
[2018] UNSWLawJl 37
(2018) 41(4)
University of New South Wales Law
, 1091–4 <https://doi.org/10.53637/PRVR3704>.
Public Advocate
(n 9) 370–1 [70]–[72] (Kourakis CJ).
Ibid 370 [67], citing
(n 51) 51 (Duke LJ). See also
(n 138) [71] (Hughes
P and Senior Member Lester) with reference to obiter statements in
Lampard-Trevorrow
(n 176) 394 [299] (Doyle CJ, Duggan and White JJ).
See above nn 55–63
and accompanying text.
(n 138) [74] (Hughes P and Senior Member
It is possible to
envisage an argument stating that the exclusion of situations from the
definition of detention under regulations
7(1)(a) and (b) of the
Inclusion (Restrictive Practices – NDIS) Regulations 2021
(SA) thereby
provides lawful justification for these matters. Currently, these are restraint
up to two hours in an emergency (where
the length is greater than that
ordinarily required) and the locking of doors where persons do not have the
physical means to leave.
Yet, it is salient that SACAT did not rely on the
provision in
(n 138) which came close to the second situation, and
it is likely that the mere exclusion ‘for the purposes of’ the
Inclusion Act
’s authorisation scheme is not a clear enough
expression of lawful justification to limit rights under the principle of
In any case, the
Inclusion Act
provisions only apply to NDIS
participants and not, eg, to aged care:
Inclusion Act
Illert v Northern
Adelaide Local Health Network Inc (Modbury Hospital)
[2016] SASC 186
[38]–[70] (Hinton J) (‘
New South Wales v
[2003] NSWCA 208
(2003) 57 NSWLR 496
, 513–16 [75]–[85] (Hodgson JA). The
term ‘emergency’ has been adopted in the
Consent Act
and was employed by the Court in the
Public Advocate Case
(n 9). Though,
historically, as noted in the English case of
Re F (Mental Patient:
Sterilisation)
[1991] UKHL 1
[1990] 2 AC 1
, a distinction between emergency as the cause,
and necessity as the defence has been made.
Public Advocate
(n 9) 372 [73] (Kourakis CJ).
Murray v McMurchy
[1949] 2 DLR 442 (British
Columbia Supreme Court). Whilst Canadian, this case is
widely considered persuasive law in Australia. See, eg, Sam Boyle and Nikola
Stepanov, ‘Providing Emergency Medical Care without Consent: How the
“Emergency Principle” in Australian Law Protects
against Claims of
Trespass’ (2021) 33(3)
Emergency Medicine Australasia
575–6 <https://doi.org/10.1111/1742-6723.13772>.
[38]–[70] (Hinton J), citing
Southwark London Borough Council v
[1971] Ch 734
New South Wales v McMaster
[2015] NSWCA 228
(2015) 91 NSWLR
Erlings (n 41) 119; Mark
A Robinson, ‘Damages in False Imprisonment Matters’ (Paper, NSW
Legal Aid Commission Seminar,
22 February 2008).
Erlings and Grenfell (n
HarperCollins Publishers Australia Pty Ltd (No 3)
[2020] FCA 1687
[550]–[567], [647]–[651] (Jagot J), citing
Hart v Herron
[1984] Aust Torts Reports 80–201, 67, 810.
(n 71) [77]
(Executive Senior Member Rugless).
Public Advocate
(n 9) 371 [72] (Kourakis CJ);
(n 62) 449, 453 (Murray CJ)
(in this case the supervision was indirect, as the two people involved even
travelled in separate train
compartments). See also
Indefinite Detention
(n 15) 167, quoting Global Action on Personhood, Submission No 26 to Senate
Standing Committee on Community Affairs,
Indefinite Detention of People with
Cognitive and Psychiatric Impairment in Australia
which quotes previous
policy of the South Australian Office of the Public Advocate defining detention
to include ‘constant
supervision and escorting of a person’: at
Public Advocate
(n 9) 371 [72] (Kourakis CJ).
Cheshire West
1) 920 [49] (Baroness Hale DPSC). A deprivation of liberty is the human rights
equivalent of false imprisonment.
Vic Disability Act
(n 126) s 3(1).
[94]–[96] (Hughes P and Senior Member Lester).
590 [420] (Anderson J);
(n 24) 152 (Fullagar J).
Secretary, Department
of Health and Community Services v JWB
[1992] HCA 15
(1992) 175 CLR 218
Marion’s Case
Whilst not included in
the judgment, this was a matter discussed the case of
New South Wales v Le
[2017] NSWCA 290
, [9] (Basten, Leeming and Payne JJA) (‘
Le Court of
’). The lower court had found false imprisonment (
South Wales
(2017) 24 DCLR(NSW) 180)
which was overturned on appeal only
because the Court of Appeal ruled that a lawful justification was present:
Court of Appeal
(n 211) [23] (Basten, Leeming and Payne JJA).
The Tribunal here
considered expressed wishes for the determination of detention in ways contrary
to tort law. This is different
from the obligation SACAT is under to consider
the person’s wishes when making decisions for them under section 5(b) of
Guardianship Act
[77], [83], [90], [96] (Hughes P, Senior Member Lester).
By contrast, tort law
recognises that, if a person deliberately stays in a particular place for their
own purposes there is no false
imprisonment even if objective restrictions have
been put in place, as long as there is a means of egress. See
McFadzean v
Construction, Forestry, Mining and Energy Union
[2007] VSCA 289
(2007) 20 VR 250
275–8 [90]–[113] (Warren CJ, Nettle and Redlich JJA)
(logging protesters deliberately stayed
in their camp – although loggers were obstructing the main route out, the
could have left via the forest).
McHale v Watson
Morriss v Marsden
[1952] 1 All ER 925
[72] (Hughes P and Senior Member Lester), citing
Lampard-Trevorrow
176) 394 [297] (Doyle CJ, Duggan and White JJ). See also at 392 [289].
[83] (Hughes P and Senior Member Lester).
See above nn
138–57 and accompanying text.
Note that the definition
of detention under the
Inclusion Act
includes the limitation of access to
mobility means without which the person cannot reasonably leave, such as a
wheelchair:
Inclusion Act
(n 10) s 23C(1)(c). However, this is not to say
that someone should be provided with these means if they do not already have
[78] (Hughes P and Senior Member Lester). As an aside, false imprisonment is not
concerned with (positive) freedom of movement,
but freedom to leave:
(n 54) 751 (Patterson J), quoted in
(n 214) 274 [85]
(Warren CJ, Nettle and Redlich JJA).
[77] (Hughes P and Senior Member Lester).
This is regarded as
different from involuntary conduct as, eg, caused by an unexpected epileptic
Carrier v Bonham
[2001] QCA 234
[2002] 1 Qd R 474
, 486 [32] (McPherson JA)
Lampard-Trevorrow
(n 176) 394 [298] (Doyle CJ, Duggan and White JJ);
McHale v Watson
182). This explains the existence of the care exception for children.
485 [30], 486 [32] (McPherson JA).
Lampard-Trevorrow
(n 176) 393 [295] (Doyle CJ, Duggan and White JJ). See also
(n 224) 485 [30], 486 [32] (McPherson JA).
[102]–[103] (Hughes P and Senior Member Lester);
(n 71) [19]
(Executive Senior Member Rugless).
Guardianship Act
(n 10) s 5(d).
[12], [102]–[103] (Hughes P and Senior Member Lester).
Views diverge on this
matter. The
rejects all detention where the underlying basis is
disability:
(n 30) art 14. However, this is not the case for other
human rights frameworks, even if disability per se cannot be the sole
consideration.
Within Australia, the latter approach is prevalent and
illustrated by the case of
NLA (Guardianship)
[2015] VCAT 1104
under the framework of the Victorian Human Rights Charter.
This aligns with the
legal framework for BSPs. See above nn 131–3 and accompanying text.
(n 15) 169 [8.69].
[8.64]–[8.72]. At 169 [8.72] the Senate Committee Report stated that it
was ‘clear to the committee
that evidence for this problem has been well
known to states and territories, and the Commonwealth, for some time’.
Public Advocate
(n 9) 361–2 [29].
General Comment No
Older Persons Deprived of Liberty
Report of the
Committee on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities
, UN Doc A/72/55 (2017)
[124] (Executive Senior Member Rugless).
[110] (Hughes P and Senior Member Lester).
Ibid (citations
Office of the Public
Advocate (Qld),
Legal Frameworks for the Use of Restrictive Practices in
Residential Age Care: An Analysis of Australian and International
(Report, June 2017) 7 (emphasis added). The report also
highlights that actions for false imprisonment or other torts in care settings
are rare, because they require significant resources beyond the reach of most
Optional Protocol to
the Convention against Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman or Degrading Treatment
or Punishment,
opened for signature 18 December
2002, 2375 UNTS 237
into force 22 June 2006) (‘
Through the system of
preventative visits, the
(n 242) monitoring scheme requires that
Australia establish independent mechanisms to monitor all places of detention
of whether the detention is de jure or de facto.
Other relevant rights
include articles 7 (prohibition of ill treatment) and 10 (requirement for humane
treatment when deprived of
liberty) of the
(n 242) art
4(1) (emphasis added).
United Nations
Subcommittee on Prevention of Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman or Degrading
Treatment or Punishment, ‘Draft
General Comment No 1 on Places of
Deprivation of Liberty (article 4)’ (Consultation Paper) [34] (emphasis
Ibid [38]. See also
Royal Commission into Violence, Abuse, Neglect and Exploitation of People
with Disability
(Final Report, 29 September 2023) vol 11,
Disability Royal Commission Final
The UN Working Group on
Arbitrary Detention includes ‘social care contexts’ as a context in
which detention can take
place and it advises against narrow interpretations of
the term deprivation of liberty: Human Rights Council,
Arbitrary Detention:
Report of the Working Group on Arbitrary Detention
, UN Doc A/HRC/51/29 (21
July 2022) [57]–[58]. See also judgments of the European Court of Human
Rights, such as
Stanev v Bulgaria
[2012] I Eur Court HR 1, where
applicants lived in social care facilities and were deprived of their liberty
contrary to article
Convention for the Protection of Human Rights
and Fundamental Freedoms
, opened for signature 4 November
1950, 213 UNTS 221
(entered into force 3 September 1953). The regional counterpart of the SPT, the
European Committee for the Prevention of Torture
and Inhuman or Degrading
Treatment or Punishment, visits social care establishments and has published a
factsheet on social care
detention: European Committee for the Prevention of
Torture and Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or Punishment, ‘Persons
of Their Liberty in Social Care Establishments’ (Factsheet, 21
December 2020).
Deprivation
The federal government
has indicated the focus will initially be on monitoring ‘primary places of
detention’ such as
immigration detention facilities and prisons. See
Evidence to Senate Standing Committee on Legal and Constitutional Affairs,
of Australia, Canberra, 3 March 2020, 159 (Sarah Chidgey, Deputy
Secretary, Integrity and International Group, Attorney-General’s
Department); Australian Human Rights Commission,
Road Map to OPCAT
(Report, 17 October 2022) 11. See
also Laura Grenfell, ‘Aged Care, Detention and
(2019) 25(2)
Australian Journal of Human Rights
<https://doi.org/10.1080/1323238X.2019.1642998>.
This approach of
prioritising so-called ‘primary places of detention’ was explained
in 2017 by the then federal Attorney-General
George Brandis: ‘Torture
Convention: The Australian Government OPCAT Announcement’ (Speech, 22
February 2017)
<https://hrlc.squarespace.com/bulletin-content/2017/2/22/torture-convention-the-australian-government-opcat-announcement>.
Disability Royal
Final Report
(n 247) vol 11, 14. On 30 July 2024 the
federal government responded to the Royal Commission and ‘accepted in
this recommendation: Australian Government,
Government Response to the Disability Royal Commission
(Report, 30 July
Deprivation
(n 4) 96–7.
Cheshire West
1), the UK’s equivalent case, decided on the basis of deprivation of
Deprivation
Public Advocate
(n 9) 362 [29] (Kourakis CJ).
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (311 KB)
PDF format (400 KB)
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter