URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/journals/PrivLawPRpr/2006/10.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 15:30:25
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
National Approach Required To Regulation Of Direct Marketing
National approach required to regulation of direct
Submission by the Australian Privacy Foundation in Response to the
Department of Communications, Information Technology and the Arts’
Discussion Paper on the Introduction of a Do Not Call Register, November 2005.
This submission is included in PLPR as an important example of the
APF’s input to national debate on private sector privacy
intrusions. The
submission welcomes the proposal for a national do-not-call register, but calls
for it to be set in a wider context
of the need for effective regulation of
direct marketing in general, and to avoid pandering to special interests by way
of extensive
exemptions, which would significantly undermine the effect of a
General comments
1.We welcome the initiative of the Department of Communications, Information
Technology and the Arts in publishing the Discussion
Paper for public comment.
The introduction of a Do Not Call Register would be an important step in
enhancing the protection of privacy,
and a strong regulatory approach is likely
to be the only effective solution.
2. The Australian Privacy Foundation supports the introduction of a Do Not
Call Register. However, as is clear from the comments below,
considerable work
remains before a satisfactory solution is found. In particular, it is submitted
that such a Register must be sophisticated
enough to cater for individual choice
going beyond a mere ‘yes’ or ‘no’ alternative to all
forms of direct
4. As to the scope of the proposed regulation, we suggest there are good
reasons to take this opportunity to approach the identified
problems in a
broader manner, and to aim for a
Do Not Approach Register
technology neutral and thereby covers all means of communication (see below).
DoCITA’s area of responsibility would
appear wide enough for this not to
pose a jurisdictional problem.
5. In addition, the relationship to, and interaction with, the
should be made clearer, thus avoiding the type of confusion and
duplication that exists in relation to the relationship between the
Telecommunications Act 1997
. While there is some discussion of
in the Appendix, the implications are not drawn out. The key
points here are that any reliance on the
as part of the
solution can only be partial due to the extensive exemptions to the application
of that Act, such as the small business
exemption, but also that in relation to
those organisations subject to the
, any do-not-call register
obligations should be at least as effective as the statutory obligations under
Glossary/Definitions
6. Certain of the definitions found in the Discussion Paper may need further
consideration:
Automated calls
– There is a need to distinguish between
automation of the dialling process, on the one hand, and random or sequential
of numbers without knowing anything about who might answer, on the
other hand. The former involves no particular problems where the
numbers have
been purposely selected. The latter approach, however, is rarely, if ever,
justified. We understand that random or sequential
dialling is prohibited in
some other jurisdictions, and would support this in Australia, although it is a
separate issue which need
not be part of a Do-not-call register.
Furthermore, there is a need to distinguish between automated first response
from automated dialling that seamlessly transfers to
a human operator when the
call is answered. Automated messages which are not left for the recipient to
hear later but which are used
instead to elicit a first response (by voice or
dialling a number) which results is switching to further recorded options and/or
human response should arguably be treated the same as normal voice calls rather
than as recorded message calls as defined in the
Discussion Paper.
– While it is clear that a broad definition seems
appropriate, it is nevertheless necessary to clarify its relationship to the
concept of ‘related body corporate’ as found in the
definition).
Direct marketing
– It is vital that the definition of
‘direct marketing’ is kept appropriately broad. Every form of
limitation of
this key term is an invitation for direct marketers to take steps
to circumvent the regulation.
– It may be necessary to include a definition of the term
‘calls’ to ensure certainty as to whether it includes
recorded message calls, VoIP etc.
Dual purpose calls
– It is advisable that the phrase
“while they purport not to be for telemarketing” be removed from the
definition,
and replaced by the phrase “whether or not they purport to be
for telemarketing”.
Market researcher/Social researcher
– These definitions should
be linked to compliance with the AMSRO MSR Privacy Principles (see below).
Perceptions
7. While the
Spam Act 2003
is an ‘opt-in’ instrument in
theory, it is arguable that it really is an ‘opt-out’ instrument in
because of the wide range of exemptions. The justification, in the
Discussion Paper, for why a similar default position is not appropriate
telemarketing calls is inadequate.
8. The Discussion Paper mentions the balancing of two important sets of
rights: “an individual’s right to privacy, and
the rights of
legitimate businesses and organisations to access the community for commercial
and non commercial reasons”. However,
while the first of these rights is
established both through international and domestic instruments, there is no
specific right to
use personal information to directly approach individuals. In
addition, there are plenty of other ways of advertising. Thus, it can
not be suggested that we here are balancing two equal rights.
A Regulatory Approach
9. The two examples of a non-regulatory approach given in the Discussion
Paper could in our view form part of a regulatory response.
We suggest that more
meaningful distinction involve universality and enforceability.
10. As already highlighted above, it is essential that the proposed register
is not of an ‘all or nothing’ type. Avoiding
such an approach is in
the best interest of both the consumers and telemarketers as, otherwise,
consumers may be forced to decline
some welcome calls (e.g. research) to avoid
unwelcome ones.
11. The discussion of where telemarketers obtain numbers in the first place
– including the relationship of any do-not-call
register to the IPND (the
Appendix mentions current the ACMA consultation on a draft IPND Standard but
this is not explored) is inadequate.
12. As we have suggested above, the
Spam Act 2003
is essentially an
‘opt-out’ instrument in practice, because so much of the Spam that
is received from Australian businesses
will be covered by one of the exemptions,
and therefore confer only an opt-out right. The Spam to which the opt-in regime
is largely of overseas origin and beyond the effective reach of the Act.
Further, it appears likely that e-mail will become a more
and more popular
medium for businesses with an existing relationship with consumers. Combining
these two observations, it is clear
that consumers will be faced with the
burdensome task of contacting each business individually to
‘opt-out’ of receiving
spam from those businesses. In light of this,
it is clear that the Do Not Call Register could play a valuable role also in
to spam, and there appears to be no problems with such overlapping
regulation. The same is true in relation to marketing via fax.
13. Furthermore, current opt-out mechanisms for addressed direct (postal)
mail suffer all of the weaknesses that currently apply to
calls. Consequently
there are no good reasons not to address also these problems when designing a Do
Not Call Register (note: the
Distribution Standards Board mentioned as
regulating direct mail is largely irrelevant – as this only covers
unaddressed advertising
(http://www.catalogue.asn.au/distribution/).
14. On a more general level, the criticism of opt-in is only valid if such an
approach is applied harshly – if a similar regime
adopted, this would leave most organisations with existing relationships with
customers free to operate under an opt-out regime.
15. To summarise the above, this review provides a valuable opportunity to
approach the identified problems in a broader manner, and
to aim for a
Approach Register
that is technology neutral.
Registration
16. It is indisputable that telemarketing aimed at businesses and
organisations, rather than at consumers, also can be a problem.
This is perhaps
particularly true for small businesses or organisations, but may also be so in
relation to larger corporations and
organisations. Consequently, where a
corporation/organisation wishes to be included on the Do Not Call Register, in
the full knowledge
that such an approach may cause them to miss out on valuable
business proposals, their wish ought to be respected.
17. We agree that there should be no time limitation to the duration of the
registration – once registered, a number should
remain registered
unless/until unregistered by the person concerned (or when the line is given up
and allocated to a new customer).
Further, while the implementation delay period
of 30 days may be reasonable, it is important that those registering are made
of this delay period.
18. The treatment of silent numbers needs to be considered. It would be
logical to assume that holders of silent lines would want
to be included in a
do-not-call register, and it would be unreasonable to expect them to register
again. Marketing calls are currently
made to silent lines both by automated
random/sequential diallers and because there is an inevitable
‘leakage’ of silent
line numbers into general use (such as by
persons giving those numbers to merchants and others that they deal with, etc).
the automatic inclusion of silent lines in the register (by transfer
either from telcos or from the IPND to the register administrator)
would create
additional security concerns and difficulties. We suggest the treatment of
silent lines needs further consideration.
19. While not an issue that should stand in the way of a Do Not Call
Register, further work is necessary in relation to who can make
registrations. Issues would arise, for example, in the context of
tenant/landlord situations. Where the subscriber for the phone
landlord, the tenant should still have the possibility to register on the Do Not
Call list. Similar issues arise in relation
to members of a household and shared
accommodation and it should be made clearer as to whether registration, and the
consequent effect,
would apply to all calls to the specified number or only to
calls to the registering person on that number. If this issue is not
dealt with,
one person’s registration could be voided by another person using the same
number establishing a relationship with
an organisation, calls from which could
then be exempt (if the proposed existing relationship exemption applied).
20. While not completely free from problems, the concept of ‘Australian
link’ from the
Spam Act 2003
constitutes a suitable point of departure
also for the regulation of a Do Not Call Register. It is particularly important
that action
can be taken, not only against the party making the actual call, but
also against those who may have contracted for, or otherwise
authorised, the
call to be made.
21. The practice of sequential/random automated and predictive dialling, and
recorded message marketing, is not a problem that needs
to be dealt with in the
context of a Do Not Call Register. Rather, such practices constitute a separate
problem and should be prohibited
in any case (see under Definitions).
22. It is important for the Do Not Call Register to cover dual purpose calls
that have selling, at least, as one of their ultimate
23. We question why registration needs to be made in writing. Registration
could suitably also be made via telephone and fax, subject
to appropriate audit
trails to provide accountability. Furthermore, on-line registration should be an
24. The rules regulating exemptions are of the greatest importance as they
risk seriously undermining the value of the Do Not Call
Register. The starting
point must be that the rights to opt-out should be no less than those which are
currently provided under NPP2.1(c)
. There are no
reasons for, or legitimacy in, providing exemptions that go beyond what is
catered for in that instrument.
25. In our view, provided that the Register is sophisticated enough to allow
selective registration, there is no need for exemptions
at all. In other words,
as long as a registrant can choose to register to avoid calls from e.g.
religious organisations, charities
and political parties and candidates, and
still allow for calls from e.g. existing business contacts, government bodies
researchers, there is no reason to provide for exemptions to the Do
Not Call Register. This reasoning is in line with the above observation
the superiority of individuals’ well established right to privacy over the
purported “rights of legitimate businesses
and organisations to access the
community for commercial and non commercial reasons”. Further, it is
consistent with the view
that individuals are quite capable of deciding for
themselves whether they want to receive the discussed types of calls, and that
none of the purported public interests put forward are strong enough to
‘trump’ an individual’s clearly expressed
wish not to be
26. In addition to the above, there are several other reasons why exemptions
are not necessary. First, as is stressed in the Discussion
Paper, there are
other less intrusive means by which businesses and organisations can approach
people. Second, people always have
the right to say ‘no thanks’ once
the call is made anyhow. Thus, the Register simply constitutes a means for
say ‘no thanks’ before the harm is done. This observation
is perhaps particularly relevant in relation to research calls
(which is the
call type that may be most heavily supported by a ‘public interest’
argument) – people have the right
to decline taking part in the research,
and the option of exercising that right through a specific choice on a Do Not
Call Register
cannot be said to be against the ‘public
27. If, contrary to our preference, an exemption is granted for social/market
research, it should be linked to clear criteria/definitions,
such as the
Association of Market and Survey Research Organisations (AMSRO) Market and
Social Research Privacy Principles (at http://www.amro.com.au/index.cfm?p=1635
which require that no personal information is disclosed to the client.
Administration
28. The ACMA, or a contractor, provided that it is just as accountable and
acts in an equally transparent manner, should be the administrator
of the Do Not
Call Register. The responsibility should not be given to a body with a vested
interest like and industry association
(such as ADMA) or a commercial
organisation with conflict of interest (such as Telstra/Sensis).
29. Security will be very important – as unauthorised access to or use
of names and numbers on the list would be particularly
unfortunate, and
potentially harmful if it also contained silent numbers by default (see
Enforcement
30. As complaints may relate to the administration of the Register, it is
essential that the body responsible for the enforcement
of the Do Not Call
Register is different to, and independent from, the body in charge of the
administration of the scheme.
31. It is also important that the body responsible for the enforcement of the
Do Not Call Register is suitably equipped to deal with
violations. It needs to
have a full range of powers and sanctions, including: injunctions, compliance
notices, determinations awarding
compensation and ordering changes in practice.
In addition, it needs to be able to undertake pro-active audits and must have
32. Companies tend to focus their compliance efforts on legislation /
regulation where there are the greatest penalties, where negative
could damage the reputation of the company, and where legislation is enforced
and administered with vigour. It is important
therefore that there are
substantial penalties for non-compliance and that the body responsible for
enforcement is adequately resourced
to investigate complaints within reasonable
timeframes and impose penalties.
33. It is appropriate that where a company can demonstrate that they have a
compliance program in place, which includes training,
monitoring and supervision
of employees, etc, that this be taken into account when assessing the
appropriate consequences of any
inadvertent breach of the law.
34. A party said to have violated the provisions of the Do Not Call Register
ought to have access to a ‘defence’ of having
taken reasonable
steps. However, such a defence should not be provided in the cases of repeated
35. Particularly considering that marketers are being given the benefit of
default permission to market (opt-out) rather than opt-in,
it is absolutely
essential that the Do Not Call Register be free of charge for those registering.
Further, it is appropriate that
the industry should pay for the Register, but it
is also important that the payment system is not designed in a manner that
discourages
businesses and organisations from doing the right thing in
frequently cleaning their lists.
General telemarketing issues
36. The suggestion of a national standard is good and should apply even to
those exempt (if any) from the register rules.
37. There should be a standard restriction on the hours during which calls
may be made. The MCCA Model Code hours seem a reasonable
compromise, but many
individuals are likely to resent calls in the early evening. To deal with this,
the Register could include the
option of limiting the hours during which allowed
calls may be made.
38. It is essential to include a requirement for the caller to identify not
only the caller, but also the client, if the call is being
made by an agent.
Further, the caller should give genuine contact details (for both themselves and
any client) on request (The NPPs
arguably require this anyway but it would be
useful to expressly make this clear). In this context it is also worth
remembering that
one reason people are reluctant to provide their credit card
details over the phone to a telemarketer is that the consumer cannot
whether the caller is actually calling from the company that they claim to be.
This point is not explored in the discussion
paper. A requirement for the
telemarketer to provide certain details may help alleviate these concerns, or
alternatively alert the
consumer that the caller may not be from the company
that they claim.
39. Callers should also be required to disclose, on request, where the
name/number has been obtained. This would ensure that those
called can complain
both about compliance by the source of the data with the NPPs, and opt-out of
further disclosure by the source
(in accordance with NPP 2.1(c)) even where they
have chosen not to register with the national scheme.
40. Finally, it is also essential to require immediate termination of call on
request. However, at the same time, there is a need
for a safeguard to avoid
callers using an initial reaction along the lines of ‘I don’t want
calls like this’ to
avoid legitimate follow up questions about where
information has been obtained, and how to opt-out etc.
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
No downloadable files available
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter