URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/journals/MqLawJl/2019/2.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 15:21:12
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Gageler, Stephen --- "Small Steps and Giant Leaps: Patterns in Australian Constitutional Adjudication" [2019] MqLawJl 2; (2019) 18 Macquarie Law Journal 5
SMALL STEPS AND GIANT LEAPS: PATTERNS IN AUSTRALIAN
CONSTITUTIONAL ADJUDICATION
JUSTICE STEPHEN GAGELER
Annual Tony Blackshield Lecture, delivered at the Federal
Court of Australia, Sydney 27 November 2018
Constitution
Constitution
drawn up and approved by the Australian people at the close of the nineteenth
century. It entered into operation by force
of Imperial statute on the first day
of the twentieth century. The
Constitution
mandated the existence of a
Federal Supreme Court to be known as the High Court of Australia, but left to
the Commonwealth Parliament
the task of creating the necessary machinery and to
the Commonwealth Executive the task of making the necessary appointments. The
Commonwealth Parliament created the machinery necessary for the working of the
High Court by enacting the
Judiciary Act 1903
’). The Commonwealth Executive appointed the first Chief Justice
and Justices of the High Court a short time later.
There was never any doubt amongst those responsible for framing the
Constitution
and amongst those responsible for framing the
that the High Court, once established, would assume the role of final
arbiter of the meaning of the
Constitution
. The principle underlying the
decision of the Supreme Court of the United States in
establishing the role
of that Court as the final arbiter of the meaning of the
United States
Constitution
, was accepted in Australia as
There was also never any doubt amongst those responsible for framing the
Constitution
Judiciary Act
that, in performing the role of
final arbiter of the meaning of the
Constitution
, the High Court would
act as a living national institution, attuned to contemporary Australian
circumstances. The understanding of
the High Court as a living national
institution attuned to contemporary national circumstances informed both sides
of the conflict
which occurred, in the closing stages of the framing of the
Constitution
, between Australian representatives and Imperial authorities
concerning appeals to the Privy Council. The conflict resulted in the
that the Privy Council was to lack jurisdiction to hear appeals from the High
Court in matters concerning the constitutional
powers of the Commonwealth and
the States as between each other without the prior certification of the High
The speech made by the Commonwealth Attorney-General, Alfred Deakin, in the
House of Representatives in 1902, when moving that the
Bill for the
be read for a second time, laid out an understanding of how the role of
the High Court as the final arbiter of the meaning of the
Constitution
would likely play out through time. Deakin drew on the earlier experience of the
Supreme Court of the United States in interpreting
United States
Constitution
, with which he and other key participants in the framing of the
Constitution
were broadly familiar.
Noting that the
United States
Constitution
was notoriously difficult
to amend, Deakin said that the Americans had found themselves with a
Constitution
which might have been a ‘dead letter’ and a
‘burden’ to them ‘but for the fact that they had created
Supreme Court capable of interpreting it, a court which had the courage to take
that instrument, drawn in the eighteenth century,
and read it in the light of
the nineteenth century, so as to relieve the intolerable pressure that was being
put upon it by the changed
circumstances of the
Deakin continued:
Precisely the same situation must arise in Australia, for although it be much
easier to amend our
Constitution
, it is yet a comparatively costly and
difficult task and one which will be attempted only in grave emergencies. In the
the statute stands and will stand on the statute-book just as in the
hour in which it was assented to. But the nation lives, grows,
and expands. Its
circumstances change, its needs alter, and its problems present themselves with
new faces. The organ of the national
life which preserving the union is yet able
from time to time to transfuse into it the fresh blood of the living present, is
Judiciary — the High Court of Australia or the Supreme Court of the
United States. It is as one of the organs of Government
which enables the
Constitution
to grow and to be adapted to the changeful necessities and
circumstances of generation after generation that the High Court operates.
Amendments achieve direct and sweeping changes, but the court moves by gradual,
often indirect, cautious, well considered steps,
that enable the past to join
the future, without undue collision and strife in the
In choosing to describe in the present tense the conduct of a national
institution which had not yet then begun to function, Deakin
plainly thought it
beyond question that the High Court would apply to constitutional interpretation
the dominant methodology of common
law courts which could be traced back at
least to the period that saw the framing of the English constitutional
settlement of the
late seventeenth century. No differently from any other
subject matter of adjudication, constitutional interpretation would proceed
incrementally within an historical continuum in which problems thrown up by the
present would be resolved in light of contemporary
circumstances, with respect
for the collective wisdom and experience of the past and with concern for the
effect which the present
resolution of those problems would have through the
doctrine of precedent on the resolution of those and other problems in the
There would be changes in constitutional interpretation from generation
to generation, but, in the later words of Sir Owen Dixon
concerning judicial
method more generally, those changes would be ‘gradual and
evolutionary’.
Evolutionary and incremental change, to the extent no more and no less than
necessary to serve the needs of a changing society, is
the ideal of the common
law system. When changes are viewed doctrine by doctrine over a comparatively
short period, the reality can
be seen sometimes to have approximated the ideal.
When changes are viewed in aggregate over the entire history of the common law
system, a more complicated pattern emerges. The societies which the common law
system has served have not changed merely incrementally
over that period. Nor
has the common law system itself been characterised by merely evolutionary and
incremental change.
In his important treatise on the formation of the Western legal tradition,
the first volume of which was published in
and the second volume of
which was published in 2003,
Professor Harold Berman contrasted what he described as
‘incremental’ or ‘smooth’ historiography characteristic
of the late nineteenth century — the age of Darwin, the age of Empire, and
the age in which the
Constitution
was called into existence as the
political destiny of the Australian people — with the
‘[c]atastrophic history, dominated
by social conflict’, which became
‘characteristic of the historical writings of the early and middle parts
of the twentieth
century’, dominated as that time was from the perspective
of the West by two World Wars.
Viewed from the standpoint of the late twentieth century and looking back over a
millennium, the dominant theme of Western history,
including Western legal
history, which Berman identified, was not merely evolution and not merely
revolution but the blending of
Berman wrote of the Western legal tradition, of which the common law
tradition has formed a distinctive although not unique part,
as having been
transformed by a series of revolutions — epoch-making periods in each of
which a pre‑existing system of
social relations, beliefs and values was
overthrown and replaced with a new one. The first was the period of the Papal
of 1075–1122, which brought about the separation of church and
state, the rediscovery of the
Institutes of Justinian
and the beginning
of the scholastic tradition. The last of present relevance was the period
beginning with the American Revolution
of 1776 and ending with the French
Revolution of 1789. In between, and critical to the emergence of the common law
system in its
distinct modern form, was what Berman described as the
‘English Revolution’ which began with the so-called ‘Great
Rebellion’ of 1640 and came to an end with the so-called ‘Glorious
Revolution’ of 1688. From the English Revolution
emerged the
constitutional settlement which Baron de Montesquieu came to describe in the
1740s in terms of the separation of legislative,
executive and judicial
What also emerged was
that mixture of positivism, reason and historicism epitomised by Sir Matthew
Hale, who had occupied the position
of Chief Justice of the Court of the
King’s Bench at the height of the English Revolution, and this mixture
came to characterise
the idealised form of common law judicial methodology so
ably described by Deakin in his second reading speech for the
Judiciary Act
Berman explained that each revolution was different but that all shared a
small number of common features. Each marked a fundamental
change from that
which had existed before. Each sought legitimacy in a remote past and an
apocalyptic vision. Each eventually produced
a new body of law. Each was
transformative of the legal tradition from which the common law tradition
emerged while remaining within
that tradition.
The patterns of a century are hardly the patterns of a millennium. The
changes that have occurred within Australian society during
the twentieth
century do not begin to match the upheavals which Berman described as
revolutions. Parallels should not too readily
be drawn lest they be taken too
Looking back from the early twenty-first century to the changes that occurred
in Australian constitutional interpretation during the
first hundred years of
the High Court’s existence, however, it is difficult to portray the course
of constitutional adjudication
as conforming in all respects to Deakin’s
articulated common law ideal of evolutionary and incremental change. Any
fair-minded
and informed reader of the Court’s work product is forced to
acknowledge that there have been marked changes in constitutional
interpretation
brought about through a relatively small number of landmark decisions. The two
most important of those decisions were
each described as revolutionary not long
after they were made,
can be seen to share in a minor way some of the features which Berman associated
with transformative revolutions.
The common features that can be seen are: first, a fundamental departure from
prior constitutional doctrine; second, a return to an
original understanding of
Constitution
different from that which previously prevailed, bringing
with it a different understanding of the function of the
Constitution
of the role of the Court within the Australian polity; third, the laying of the
foundation for the development in time of a new
body of constitutional
principle; fourth, the assimilation of the changed perspective within the same
overall constitutional tradition
characterised by the same common law judicial
methodology, the ideal form of which was described by Deakin.
How you can tell that a decision of the High Court is a landmark decision in
Australian constitutional law is that Professor Tony
Blackshield has written a
song about it. In the balance of this lecture in Professor Blackshield’s
honour, I want to illustrate
the observations I have just made by reference to
the two decisions to which I refer. The first is
Amalgamated Society of
Engineers v Adelaide Steamship Co Ltd (‘Engineers’
The second is
Cole v Whitfield
a note of Blackshieldian humour, I will borrow some libretti from the Tony
Blackshield Songbook. The musical score you will
need to imagine.
II THE ENGINEERS’ CASE
Engineers’ Case
is unquestionably the single most important
case in Australian constitutional history. Much will be written of it as we
approach its
hundredth anniversary in 2020. For present purposes, I want to use
it to illustrate the four common features to which I have referred.
First, we see in the
Engineers’ Case
a fundamental departure
from prior constitutional doctrine. The initial 17 years of the High
Court’s existence, from 1903 until
1920, had been dominated by what
Professor Leslie Zines would refer to as a struggle for constitutional
The struggle
manifested in a strongly held difference of opinion within the Court as to the
appropriateness of importing into Australian
constitutional analysis two
constitutional doctrines which then held sway in the United States. The first
doctrine was that of ‘immunity
of instrumentalities’, by which the
Commonwealth and the States were each treated as lacking in power to make laws
on the agencies or instrumentalities of the other. The second doctrine
was that of ‘reserve powers’, by which subject
legislative power not expressly conferred on the Commonwealth were treated as
reserved to the States. Both of those doctrines
were supported by a body of
American case law which developed after the Civil War of the 1860s and which
would be swept away in their
country of origin in the 1930s following changes in
the composition and jurisprudence of the Supreme Court wrought by the New Deal.
Viewed from Australia in the decades following federation, the body of case law
appeared formidable and relatively coherent. Grouped
together under the banner
of ‘implied prohibitions’, importation of the two doctrines was
justified by their Australian
proponents as founded on a principle of
‘necessity’ inherent in the nature of federalism.
The champions in the struggle during those initial years had been Sir Samuel
Griffith, who had been appointed the first Chief Justice
of the High Court in
1903, and Sir Isaac Isaacs, who had joined the Court with Henry Bournes Higgins
when its numbers were increased
in 1905. Griffith, who favoured the application
of the American-inspired doctrines, had commanded the majority, although the
had become increasingly fragile as difficulties in the application of
the doctrines had become apparent. Isaacs, who with Higgins
had rejected the
doctrines from the beginning, had been continuously in dissent.
The problems with the imported doctrines having become increasingly apparent,
the national mood having distinctly changed during and
immediately after the
First World War, and the composition of the Court also having changed (most
significantly with the retirement
of Griffith in 1919), the scene was set in
1920 for what had previously been the minority view to become that of the
majority. In
written reasons for judgment published in the rarely used form of
‘The judgment of Justices A, B, C and D (delivered by Justice
Isaacs, writing for the plurality in the
Engineers’ Case
in a wholesale repudiation of what had gone before. Of the prior case law in
which the two doctrines in question had been
adopted and applied, Isaacs said
The more the decisions are examined, and compared with each other and with
Constitution
itself, the more evident it becomes that no clear
principle can account for them. They are sometimes at variance with the natural
meaning of the text of the
Constitution
; some are irreconcilable with
others, and some are individually rested on reasons not founded on the words of
Constitution
or on any recognized principle of the common law
underlying the expressed terms of the
Constitution
, but on implication
drawn from what is called the principle of ‘necessity’, that being
itself referable to no more definite
standard than the personal opinion of the
Judge who declares it. The attempt to deduce any consistent rule from them has
failed, but has disclosed an increasing entanglement and uncertainty,
and a conflict both with the text of the
Constitution
and with distinct
and clear declarations of law by the Privy
In the balance of the judgment of the plurality, the old doctrines were
repudiated, by reference in part to early decisions of the
Privy Council
interpreting the scope of powers conferred by Imperial statutes on colonial
legislatures, including one purportedly
decided by reference to the
Constitution
which Griffiths, a year later, had openly disparaged to the point of declaring
the Privy Council to have exceeded its
In the place of
the old doctrines, Isaacs laid down the principle that the words of the
Constitution
were to be accorded their broad and ordinary meaning, and
that it would henceforth rest ‘upon those who rely on some limitation
restriction ... to indicate it in the
Constitution
supremacy of Commonwealth law over State law, Isaacs pointed out, was expressly
established by
Constitution
This new interpretation
Should fill us all with hope:
The powers of the nation
Are limitless in scope.
Good legalistic arguments
Should keep the States in line –
And if that’s not enough
We can always get tough
section 109!
The cases which had applied the old doctrines were then re-examined. Some
were declared to be wrongly decided and were overruled.
Others were declared to
have been correctly decided, albeit for the wrong reasons, and were explained on
other grounds.
Second, we see in the
Engineers’ Case
a return to an original
understanding of the
Constitution
different from that which previously
prevailed, bringing with it a different understanding of the function of the
Constitution
and of the role of the Court. I use the expression ‘an
original understanding of the
Constitutio
n’ in deliberate
contradistinction to ‘the original understanding of the
Constitution
’. Griffith and Isaacs had both been intimately
involved in the framing of the
Constitution
, Griffith most prominently in
the framing of the original draft which emerged from the Convention of 1891 and
Isaacs in its revision
into the final draft which emerged from the Convention of
1897 and 1898. Just as Sir Kenneth Bailey made the point in 1933 that it
be futile to describe either view as
it would be
futile to describe the view of one but not the other as reflecting the original
understanding of the
Constitution
Constitution
product of many minds and several distinct influences. Neither Griffith nor
Isaacs held
original understanding of the
Constitution
original understanding of the
Constitution
. Each held a
different original understanding of the
Constitution
and the different
understanding of each was well capable of being defended by reference to
orthodox legal methodology.
To attribute the difference between Griffith and Isaacs to a difference in
the relative weight each attached to rival precedents of
the Supreme Court of
the United States and of the Privy Council, or even to the relative weight each
attached to the Westminster
and United States models of government, both of
which had been drawn on in the framing of the
Constitution
, would not be
inaccurate. But it would be incomplete. There was a deeper division between
them. At the risk of oversimplification,
that division can be explained as
Griffith’s understanding of the federal compact embodied in the
Constitution
was essentially that of a compact between polities —
the federating colonies which had become the States and the newly created
Commonwealth — in which the role of the High Court was akin to that of a
contractual arbitrator maintaining the polities as
potential antagonists within
their designated spheres. It was an understanding which closely aligned with the
first of the principles
of federation proposed by Sir Henry Parkes and adopted
by the Convention of 1891 to the effect that ‘in order to establish
secure an enduring foundation for the structure of a federal government ... the
powers and privileges and territorial rights
of the several existing colonies
shall remain intact, except in respect to such surrenders as may be agreed upon
as necessary and
incidental to the power and authority of the National Federal
Government’.
Isaacs’ rival and ultimately triumphant understanding of the federal
compact embodied in the
Constitution
was essentially that of a compact
between people — the people or electors of the colonies who voted for
those colonies to become
States and who also became, on federation, the people
or electors of the newly created Commonwealth. The Commonwealth and the States
were representatives of the same unified people owing allegiance to the same
unified Crown. The High Court had no role in policing
the exercise of power by
the people’s representatives beyond that which the people themselves, in
the nationwide referenda
which adopted the
Constitution
, had quite
clearly committed to the Court by the terms of the
Constitution
Court to attempt to do so was both unnecessary, because the people acting
electorally could be expected to look after themselves,
and improper, because it
involved an overreaching by the judicial arm of government into the political
arena where it had neither
the skill-set nor the mandate to interfere. Following
on from the popular movement towards federalism of the
this was an
understanding which more closely aligned with the revised principles of
federation proposed to and adopted by the Convention
of 1897 to the effect that
‘in order to enlarge the powers of self-government of the people of
Australia ... the powers, privileges,
and territories of the several existing
colonies shall remain intact, except in respect of such surrenders as may be
agreed upon
to secure uniformity of law and administration in matters of common
So it was said in the
Engineers’ Case
When the people of Australia, to use the words of the
Constitution
itself, ‘united in a Federal Commonwealth’, they took power to
control by ordinary constitutional means any attempt on
the part of the national
Parliament to misuse its powers. If it be conceivable that the representatives
of the people of Australia
as a whole would ever proceed to use their national
powers to injure the people of Australia considered sectionally, it is certainly
within the power of the people themselves to resent and reverse what may be
done. No protection of this Court in such a case is necessary
Third, we see in the
Engineers’ Case
the laying of the
foundation for the development in time of a new body of constitutional
principle. And fourth, we see the assimilation
of new doctrine within the same
overall constitutional tradition stretching back to the time of Deakin. To
introduce an element of
hyperbole, although the result of the
Engineers’ Case
was arrived at through application of essentially
the same orthodox legal methodology which had supported the earlier doctrines it
repudiated, the
Engineers’ Case
was Australia’s
constitutional ground zero. It recalibrated the baseline for all that has
The steady expansion in the practical reach of Commonwealth legislative power
which has occurred since 1920, made possible by an expansive
interpretation of
the express provisions of the
Constitution
which confer Commonwealth
legislative power, exemplified by the holdings in the
Payroll Tax Case
Tasmanian Dam Case
Choices Case
been built directly on the foundation of the
Engineers’ Case
although post‑
implications have replaced
implications in limiting Commonwealth and State
legislative and executive power, the legacy of the
Engineers’ Case
has been to require those more modern implications to be linked closely to
the constitutional text and
III COLE V WHITFIELD
Cole v Whitfield
, when it was decided in 1988, was unquestionably the
most important case in Australian constitutional history second only after the
Engineers’ Case
. The great accomplishment of
Cole v Whitfield
was to overcome what had until then seemed an intractable problem.
Ironically, that accomplishment is now under-recognised precisely
because of the
lasting success that it achieved.
The unqualified prescription of
Constitution
‘trade, commerce, and intercourse among the States ... shall be absolutely
free’ was for the first 85 years of the
High Court’s existence the
bane of its Justices and the scourge of every constitutional adviser to
Commonwealth and State governments.
Before 1988, at least one third of all constitutional cases decided by the
High Court were cases decided on
Despite several
valiant attempts to do so, most notably in
McArthur’s Case
Nationalisation Case
, neither the High Court nor
the Privy Council had been successful in articulating a coherent explanation of
the section’s meaning,
let alone a workable criterion for its legal
On his retirement as Chief Justice in 1952, Sir John Latham said that, when
he died, the words of
would be found written on his heart. Writing in
retirement in 1957, he described the section as ‘the curse of the
Constitution
’ and as a ‘boon to lawyers and to
road‑hauliers and to people who want to sell skins of protected animals or
trade in possibly diseased
1977, Professor Geoffrey Sawer described the whole subject of
of ‘gothic horrors and theological
complexities’.
Cole v Whitfield
in 1988, a unanimous High Court, under the
leadership of Sir Anthony Mason as Chief Justice, discarded the existing case
law, reinterpreted
the section and formulated a new standard to guide its
application. The parallels to the
Engineers’ Case
significant.
The first is the deliberate and extensive departure from prior constitutional
doctrine. Members of the High Court, differently constituted,
would later say
that ‘it would be an error to read what was decided in
as a complete break with all that had been said in [the] Court
respecting the place of
in the scheme of the
Constitution
is so to the extent that, like the reasoning in the
, some of the reasoning in
Cole v Whitfield
was foreshadowed in
some of the earlier case law. The greater error would be to treat what was
Cole v Whitfield
as mere continuation of what had gone before.
Of the earlier case law, the joint judgment of the High Court in
No provision of the
Constitution
has been the source of greater
judicial concern or the subject of greater judicial effort than
notwithstanding, judicial exegesis of the section has yielded neither clarity of
meaning nor certainty of operation. Over the
years the Court has moved uneasily
between one interpretation and another in its endeavours to solve the problems
thrown up by the
necessity to apply the very general language of the section to
a wide variety of legislative and factual situations. Indeed, these
shifts have
been such as to make it difficult to speak of the section as having achieved a
settled or accepted interpretation at
any time since
federation.
‘Departing now from the doctrine which has failed to retain general
acceptance’, announced the High Court, ‘we adopt
the interpretation
which ... is favoured by history and
Starting again
with the constitutional text and reading it against the background of
nineteenth-century colonial history, the High
Court reinterpreted the critical
reference in
to free trade as referring to an absence of
protectionism. The section, the Court held, would be infringed only by a law
which imposed
a discriminatory burden on interstate trade which was
protectionist in nature.
Discrimination is now the sole test –
Local protection, implied or expressed.
Outside those limits, the State knows what’s best.
Once the new doctrine was fully unveiled,
Dozens of precedents suddenly failed.
Next, we see in
Cole v Whitfield
, as we saw in the
, the High Court self‑consciously returning to an original
understanding of the
Constitution
. Of the competing late
nineteenth-century conceptions of freedom of trade available to be drawn on, the
conception of equality of
trade was given precedence over that of unrestrained
Engineers’ Case
, which was decided at a time when
some of the principal participants in important events of the 1890s were still
alive, however,
the return to an original understanding in
Cole v Whitfield
involved an extensive analysis of historical material. Resort to
pre‑federation history, including the debates of the Conventions
and of 1897 and 1898, it was said, was permissible ‘not for the purpose of
substituting for the meaning of the words
used the scope and effect — if
such could be established — which the founding fathers subjectively
intended the section
to have, but for the purpose of identifying the
contemporary meaning of language used, the subject to which that language was
and the nature and objectives of the movement towards federation from
which the compact of the
Constitution
And we see in
Cole v Whitfield
, as we saw in the
, a revised understanding of the
Constitution
bringing with it a
revised understanding of the role of the High Court itself. The application of
as reinterpreted was unavoidably evaluative, and the evaluative nature
of requisite constitutional adjudication was to be openly
acknowledged and
embraced. Pondering the future application of the interpretation which it was
then announcing, the High Court adopted
a tone of cautious realism. It said
The adoption of an interpretation prohibiting the discriminatory burdening of
interstate trade will not of course resolve all problems.
It does, however,
permit the identification of the relevant questions and a belated acknowledgment
of the implications of the long‑accepted
perception that ‘although
the decision [whether an impugned law infringes
was one for a court
of law the problems were likely to be largely political, social or
economic’ ...
Cole v Whitfield
, as we saw in the
, the laying of the foundation for the development of a new body of
constitutional principle.
Cole v Whitfield
set out the parameters of a
more coherent approach to the application of
Constitution
, which has come to be worked out in more detail in
subsequent cases on that
Cole v Whitfield
also set the groundwork for a complementary approach which came soon afterwards
to be taken in relation to the interpretation and
application of the related and
similarly opaque prescription in
Constitution
makes ‘the power ... to impose duties of customs and of excise’
exclusive to the Commonwealth
Parliament.
Finally, we see in the wake of
Cole v Whitfield
, as we saw in the wake
Engineers’ Case
, the assimilation of new doctrine within a
continuing and enriched constitutional tradition. Two aspects of approach taken
Cole v Whitfield
to the interpretation and application of
Constitution
have had a profound influence on the development of
constitutional law in general since 1988. One is resort to pre-federation
sources, including but not limited to the transcripts of the debates
which occurred during the Conventions of 1891 and of 1897 and
1898, to identify
the purpose of constitutional provisions and to elucidate their text. The other
is insistence on a consideration
of the substantive or practical operation of an
impugned law in order to determine its compliance with a constitutional
or restriction on power. In that latter respect,
Cole v Whitfield
presaged the structured form of analysis which would come soon afterwards to
be embraced in relation to the doctrine of the implied
freedom of political
communication, as recognised in
Australian Capital Television Pty Ltd v
Commonwealth
consolidated in
Lange v Australian Broadcasting
Corporation
in which the
validity of an impugned law was to be determined by enquiring as to whether the
burden which it placed on conduct within
an area of constitutionally protected
freedom was able to be justified by reference to the law’s pursuit of
constitutionally
permissible ends by constitutionally appropriate and adapted
IV CONCLUSION
To avoid misunderstanding, my point has not been to suggest that all, or even
many, landmark cases in Australian constitutional law
during the twentieth
century exhibited the qualities that I have attributed to the two on which I
have focused. The important cases
on Ch III of the
Constitution
example, within which can be included the
Boilermakers’
controversial at the time of decision, but they involved no large scale
departure from prior case law and took considerably
longer to be assimilated.
Overcoming extreme temptation, I refrain from incorporating words from the Tony
Blackshield ‘Separation
of Powers’ song set to the tune of
‘Three Coins in the Fountain’.
My point has been to acknowledge that, while small steps are the ideal, the
history of constitutional interpretation cannot honestly
be told without
reference to the giant leaps. The two cases on which I have focused to
demonstrate that proposition, although separated
by more than half a century,
have much in common. In the words of Mark Twain, which could easily have been
the words of Tony Blackshield,
‘history never repeats itself; but it
Justice of the High
Court of Australia. This is a revised version of the Tony Blackshield Lecture
delivered at Queen’s Square,
Sydney on Tuesday, 27 November 2018. My
thanks to Glyn Ayres and Duncan Wallace for their assistance and comments. The
final quotation
I owe to Harry Hobbs and Andrew Trotter: Harry Hobbs and Andrew
Trotter, ‘Lessons from History in Dealing with Our Most Dangerous’
[2018] UNSWLawJl 13
University of New South Wales Law Journal
[1803] USSC 16
Australian Communist
Party v Commonwealth
[1951] HCA 5
(1951) 83 CLR 1
See Stephen Gageler,
‘James Bryce and the
Constitution
Federal Law Review
Commonwealth,
Parliamentary
, House of Representatives, 18 March 1902, 5 (Alfred Deakin).
Sir Owen Dixon,
Pilate and Other Papers and Addresses
, ed Judge Woinarski (William S Hein
ed, 1997) 158.
Harold J Berman,
Revolution: The Formation of the Western Legal Tradition
(Harvard University
Press, 1983) (‘
Formation of the Western Legal
Harold J Berman,
Revolution, II: The Impact of the Protestant Reformations on the Western Legal
(Belknap Press, 2003).
Formation of the
Western Legal Tradition
Montesquieu,
of the Laws
, tr Anne M Cohler, Basia Carolyn Miller and Harold Samuel Stone
(Cambridge University Press, 1989).
R T E Latham, ‘The
Law and the Commonwealth’ in W K Hancock,
Survey of British
Commonwealth Affairs: Problems of Nationality 1918–1936
University Press, 1937) vol 1, 510, 563; Michael Coper, ‘Section 92 of the
Constitution
Cole v Whitfield
’ in H P Lee
and George Winterton (eds),
Australian Constitutional Perspectives
Book Co, 1992) 129, 131.
Amalgamated Society of
Engineers v Adelaide Steamship Co Ltd
[1920] HCA 54
(1920) 28 CLR 129
Engineers’ Case
[1988] HCA 18
(1988) 165 CLR 360
Cole v Whitfield
James Stellios,
The High Court and the
Constitution
(Federation
ed, 2015) ch 1.
Engineers’ Case
(n 12) 141–2.
Webb v Outtrim
[1906] UKPCHCA 4
(1906) 4 CLR 356.
Commissioners of
Taxation (NSW) v Baxter
[1907] HCA 76
(1907) 4 CLR 1087
Engineers’ Case
(n 12) 154.
Ibid 154–5.
Ibid 156–60.
K H Bailey, ‘The
Working of the
Constitution
since Federation’ in G V Portus (ed),
Studies in the Australian
Constitution
(Angus & Robertson, 1933) 23,
Official Report of the
National Australasian Convention Debates
, Sydney, 4 March 1891, 23 (Sir
Henry Parkes).
See Stephen Gageler,
‘Sir Robert Garran: Medio Tutissimus Ibis’ (2018) 46
Federal Law
Official Report of the
National Australasian Convention Debates
, Adelaide, 23 March 1897, 17
(Edmund Barton).
Engineers’ Case
(n 12) 151–2.
Victoria v Commonwealth
[1971] HCA 16
(1971) 122 CLR 353.
Commonwealth v Tasmania
[1983] HCA 21
(1983) 158 CLR 1.
New South Wales v
Commonwealth
[2006] HCA 52
(2006) 229 CLR 1.
See, for example,
McGinty v Western Australia
[1996] HCA 48
(1996) 186 CLR 140
, 168, citing
Engineers’ Case
(n 12) 145, 155.
See Stephen Gageler,
Revolution’ in James Stellios (ed),
with Constitutional Interpretation and Legal Education: Essays in Honour of
Michael Coper
(Federation Press, 2018) 26, 27.
W & A McArthur Ltd v
[1920] HCA 77
(1920) 28 CLR 530.
Bank of New South Wales
v Commonwealth
[1948] HCA 7
(1948) 76 CLR 1.
J G Latham, ‘Book
[1957] MelbULawRw 31
(1957) 1(2)
Melbourne University Law Review
Geoffrey Sawer, ‘Book
[1977] FedLawRw 28
(1977) 8(3)
Federal Law Review
Betfair Pty Ltd v
Western Australia
[2008] HCA 11
(2008) 234 CLR 418
, 451 [11].
Cole v Whitfield
Ibid 408, quoting
Freightlines & Construction Holding Ltd v New South Wales
[1967] UKPCHCA 1
Castlemaine Tooheys
Ltd v South Australia
(1990) 169 CLR 436
Barley Marketing Board (NSW) v
[1990] HCA 50
(1990) 171 CLR 182
Betfair Pty Ltd v Western Australia
[2008] HCA 11
234 CLR 418
Betfair Pty Ltd v Racing NSW
[2012] HCA 12
(2012) 249 CLR 217.
Ha v New South Wales
[1997] HCA 34
(1997) 189 CLR 465.
[1992] HCA 45
(1992) 177 CLR 106.
[1997] HCA 25
(1997) 189 CLR 520.
New South Wales v
Commonwealth
[1915] HCA 17
(1915) 20 CLR 54.
R v Kirby; Ex parte
Boilermakers’ Society of Australia
[1956] HCA 10
(1956) 94 CLR 254
Attorney-General of the Commonwealth of Australia v The Queen
[1957] HCA 12
[1957] AC 288.
Kable v Director of
Public Prosecutions (NSW)
[1996] HCA 24
(1996) 189 CLR 51.
Mark Twain quoted in
‘A Said Poem’ in John Robert Colombo,
Press, 1970) 46, quoted in Harry Hobbs and Andrew Trotter, ‘Lessons from
History in Dealing with our Most Dangerous’
[2018] UNSWLawJl 13
(2018) 41(2)
University of
New South Wales Law Journal
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (241 KB)
PDF format (839 KB)
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter