URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/journals/UTSLRS/2019/2.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 15:51:19
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Hobbs, Harry --- "Treaty Making and the UN Declaration on the Rights of Indigenous Peoples: Lessons from Emerging Negotiations in Australia" [2019] UTSLRS 2; (2019) 23(1-2) The International Journal of Human Rights 174
Treaty Making and the UN
Declaration on the Rights of
Indigenous Peoples
: Lessons from Emerging Negotiations in Australia
Harry Hobbs
Lecturer, UTS Faculty of Law
PhD Candidate,
UNSW Faculty of Law
No treaties between Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander peoples and the
Australian state have ever been recognised. In recent months
however, several
states and territories have committed to entering treaty negotiations with the
First Nations whose lands they claim.
Negotiations are in their preliminary
stages and it remains to be seen what eventuates, but these developments are
promising. Nonetheless,
many challenges exist. In this paper, I explore the
initial developments in Victoria, and assess whether and how the United Nations
Declaration on the Rights of Indigenous People has influenced the debate thus
far. This analysis reveals lessons for all Indigenous
peoples seeking to enter
treaty negotiations with states across the globe.
: treaty, UNDRIP, Indigenous peoples, Australia, Aboriginal
and Torres Strait Islander people
Introduction
The United Nations
Declaration on the Rights of
Indigenous Peoples
(the ‘UNDRIP’) is ‘the most
comprehensive and progressive of international instruments dealing with
Recognised as a
‘milestone in the re-empowerment of the world’s aboriginal
the Declaration was
welcomed as representing ‘the beginning of a new phase in the debate on
Indigenous rights.’
Reflecting this epochal shift, debate has since moved from identification to
implementation. In this vein, the Expert Mechanism on
the Rights of Indigenous
Peoples (EMRIP) has recently surveyed UNDRIP’s impact, examining its
application by UN treaty bodies,
the Human Rights Council’s Universal
Periodic Review procedure, regional human rights bodies, domestic courts, and UN
This review reveals that the UNDRIP informs the work of a variety of
actors in international and domestic spheres and has influenced
legislative and
constitutional drafting as well as judicial interpretation, across the
While the report makes clear
that there is much to be done, it also demonstrates that—ten years after
its adoption—the
Declaration is increasingly valuable as a political and
legal instrument to protect and promote the rights of Indigenous peoples.
Australia has a complicated relationship with the UNDRIP. It
was—along with Canada, Aotearoa/New Zealand and the United
of only four states to vote against the Declaration in
September 2007. While this decision may owe more to Australia’s
distinctive
approach to settler-state constitutionalism, rather than any
objection to international standard-setting on Indigenous rights per
the decision was greeted by
many Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander people with
All four states have since
endorsed the UNDRIP, but Australia’s reversal remains qualified by the
same objections it expressed
Nonetheless, despite these qualifications, the Australian state maintains that
it is committed to the norms and principles of the
Declaration. In 2013, for
instance, it informed the UN Permanent Forum on Indigenous Issues that it is
working with the Australian
Human Rights Commission and the National Congress of
Australia’s First Peoples to ‘increase awareness of, and encourage
dialogue about, the Declaration in policy development, program implementation
and service delivery as a way to embed the Declaration
in how business is
This is positive, but
Australia’s reluctance to wholeheartedly endorse the Declaration augurs
challenges.
Australia also has a complicated relationship with the
Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander peoples whose land it claims. In contrast
to the situation in Canada, Aotearoa/New Zealand and the United States, no
treaty between Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander peoples
and the Australian
state has ever been recognised, leaving both the constitutive legitimacy of the
state, and its exercise of authority
over First Nations people, open to
question. The absence of treaties is reproduced in a politico-legal framework
that neither constitutionally
protects Indigenous rights nor provides for
specific mechanisms to promote Indigenous interests in the processes of
Australian government.
Consequently, Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander
peoples have long fought for recognition of their unique status as prior
self-governing
nations whose sovereignty has never been ceded, calling for a
reconstituted politico-legal structure that empowers them ‘to
rightful place
This struggle has been ongoing for generations but has re-emerged in recent
years as part of a decade-long national discussion over
‘recognising’ Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander people in the
Constitution
In 2016, this debate was reinvigorated as several Australian states and
territories—Victoria, South Australia, and the Northern
Territory—committed to undertake treaty negotiations with First Nations
whose traditional lands fall within their boundaries.
This article ties
these two complex issues together by exploring the relevance and salience of the
UNDRIP to modern treaty negotiations
in Australia and across the globe, through
a detailed examination of the preliminary stages conducted thus far in Victoria.
issue is important, because all Indigenous peoples must negotiate treaties
and other legal arrangements with states to safeguard
their interests and embed
their aspirations and values in legal forms. The Declaration establishes a
‘framework that states
can adopt to underpin their relationship with
Indigenous peoples and ... guide them in the development of domestic law and
The procedural and substantive rights recognised in the Declaration should
therefore inform consultation and negotiation between
First Nations and the
state. Does this occur in practice, and if not, what consequences might flow?
In exploring this issue, I divide the article into three substantive
parts. Part I identifies two key themes relevant to treaty-making
that underlie
the UNDRIP—self-determination and participation—in order to
articulate a standard against which negotiations
can be assessed. In Part II, I
take an empirical look at the initial stages of treaty negotiations in Victoria,
examining whether
the Declaration has informed this process. Focus on Victoria
is appropriate because although many scholars have analysed modern treaty
processes in Canada, no one has yet studied the unprecedented emerging
negotiations in Australia. Furthermore, while Canada has recently
committed to
fully implementing the
Australia’s relationship to the Declaration remains strained; criticism
exists over Canada’s approach, but Australia’s
engagement with the
UNDRIP is more common globally and may present particular challenges in
negotiations moving forward.
In a final Part III, I draw on the
Victorian material, as well as experiences of modern negotiations in Canada, to
identify several
lessons for all treaty processes. The UNDRIP is a positive and
productive instrument that has the potential to invigorate and strengthen
Indigenous advocacy as well as inform the content of any treaty. In the absence
of legally enforceable provisions or standards, however,
asymmetrical power
relations and non-legal forces may negatively impact negotiations. Nonetheless,
the Declaration enjoys considerable
moral and political force and there is
significant value for Indigenous peoples in framing their aspirations in its
language. Employing
the Declaration in this way may increase pressure on state
actors, and enhance the prospect that negotiations lead to a renewed
relationship
built on mutual trust and respect.
Articulating a treaty-making standard
As the preeminent instrument
on Indigenous rights, the UN Declaration recognises a swathe of procedural and
substantive entitlements
relevant to protecting and promoting the position of
Indigenous peoples. Explicit reference to treaties is minimal, however. Only
Article 37 expressly refers to treaties, guaranteeing that Indigenous peoples
are entitled to their ‘recognition, observance
and enforcement’,
though, several preambular paragraphs do consider the value of such agreements
as affirming key rights and
obligations and representing ‘the basis for a
strengthened partnership’. Nevertheless, despite relatively little overt
reference, two key themes that underlie the process, purpose, and content of
treaties reverberate through the operative clauses of
the Declaration:
self-determination and participation. It is these values that inhere within the
Declaration that create a framework
for Indigenous dialogue and political
advocacy with states.
section briefly highlights how these principles connect to, and strengthen
treaty-making, by establishing a working standard
against which negotiations can
be assessed.
The Declaration acknowledges that over hundreds of years,
many forms of agreements have been concluded between Indigenous peoples
states. Although it considers—correctly—that all such arrangements
should be respected,
it does not
consider what elements are necessary for an agreement to constitute a treaty.
Recent Australian scholarship, informed
by the UNDRIP and other developments
internationally, argues that treaties are a distinct form of agreement that must
satisfy three
First, a treaty recognises Indigenous peoples as a polity, distinctive from
other citizens of the state, based on their status as
prior self-governing
communities. Second, a treaty is reached by a fair process of negotiation
conducted in good faith and in a manner
respectful of each participant’s
standing as a polity. Third, a treaty recognises or establishes concrete
outcomes, including
some form of decision-making and control that amounts to at
least a limited form of self-government. The principles that underpin
Declaration are helpful in elucidating these criteria.
A polity is a
political community differentiated from and different to other citizens of the
state. This first condition therefore
requires states to acknowledge and accept
that Indigenous peoples are not merely an ethnic or cultural minority group, but
society whose relationship to the state must be mediated in a
dialogic fashion. The Declaration recognises and affirms this understanding
emphasising the multiple nested or overlapping nationalities that Indigenous
peoples may have.
For example,
the UNDRIP confirms that Indigenous peoples have the right ‘to a
nationality’,
the right to ‘belong to an Indigenous community or nation’
determined in accordance with the ‘traditions
and customs of the community
or nation concerned’.
Recognition of Indigenous peoples as a polity clearly entails commitment to
Indigenous self-constitution and self-determination.
Participation is
most clearly evidenced in the second condition; a treaty must be reached by way
of a fair process of negotiation.
Although the Declaration affirms this right,
it does not clearly articulate a practical standard, indicating simply that
states must
undertake ‘effective
consultation’
‘consult[] and
cooperat[e]’
Indigenous peoples. UN mechanisms and international human rights jurisprudence
have, however, elaborated on these provisions,
suggesting that consultation
should be ‘undertaken in good faith’ through culturally appropriate
procedures and with
representatives freely chosen by Indigenous peoples through
their own representative structures. Indigenous representatives should
afforded sufficient time and information to reach a decision, and the process
should entail ‘no coercion, intimidation or
manipulation’.
requires a fair, independent, impartial and transparent mechanism to facilitate
consultation and alleviate power
imbalances.
In other words, any
fair process of negotiation will safeguard Indigenous rights and mitigate
inequities,
Indigenous peoples’ authority as self-determining
communities.
of Indigenous nations’ status as self-determining polities who freely
participate in negotiations, a treaty must
also recognise or establish some form
of decision-making and control amounting to at least a limited form of
self-government. Self-determination
has been identified as the ‘the heart
and soul’ of the UNDRIP, constituting the ‘river in which all other
Indeed, the Declaration upholds the ‘evolving right of democratic
governance at international
confirming that
self-rule is the ‘oldest aspect of democratic
entitlement’
entailing a
right to determine one’s political destiny ‘in a democratic
References to
self-government and participation in decision-making are replete throughout the
instrument. Under Article 3, self-determination
is conceived as a right of
Indigenous peoples to ‘freely determine their political status and freely
pursue their economic,
social and cultural development’. Although broadly
framed and suggestive of an expansive understanding of sovereignty, this
is conditioned by Article 46(1), which protects the territorial integrity of
existing states, and Article 4, which qualifies
the right to self-determination
to the ‘right to autonomy or self-government’ in relation to
‘internal and local
Some Indigenous scholars and
activists have critiqued this elaboration of
self-determination,
that it will ‘inevitably reinstate colonial
This formulation may
be ‘an inherently pragmatic
but it reflects
a strong, majority current of Indigenous thinking. Throughout negotiations,
Indigenous peoples involved in the drafting
frequently asserted that they
‘have no interest in secession’ but desire greater autonomy and
decision-making authority
in order to ‘finally become part of’ the
As Megan Davis has
explained, the UNDRIP’s underlying values of self-determination,
‘participation, engagement and
consultation,’
are based on the ‘assumption of interdependence between states and
Indigenous peoples’.
interdependence is, however, grounded on the pre-existing sovereignty of
Indigenous nations,
the right to maintain their distinct
institutions,
and exercise real
governmental authority over certain matters, rather than a relationship between
the state and undifferentiated
As this brief survey
demonstrates, the UNDRIP makes only occasional explicit reference to
treaty-making, but its underlying themes
support and articulate a working
standard against which treaties can be assessed. Treaties should accurately
recognise Indigenous
peoples’ status, negotiations should be conducted in
a fair and respectful manner, and they should enable some form of
self-government
to be exercised. However, obligatory statements as to what is
‘required’ by the UNDRIP may be misleading. As a General
Declaration, the instrument is, at least formally, legally non-binding. Is this
a relevant standard to assess treaty negotiations?
Notwithstanding its
formal status, the Declaration has always enjoyed a distinctive character.
Adopted with overwhelming majority
support, some scholars have suggested it
carries particular authority.
Others have argued, and some courts have accepted, that while the Declaration is
a soft-law instrument, many of its provisions, including
self-determination, political participation and consultation—themes that
inhere in treaty-making—reflect hard
Certainly, in UN
practice, Declarations are considered ‘formal and solemn’
instruments, restricted to ‘rare occasions
when principles of great and
lasting importance are being enunciated’ and as such, there is ‘a
strong expectation that
members of the international community will abide
The subsequent
use and endorsement of the Declaration by a range of international and domestic
actors as expounded by EMRIP adds
further credence to its legal
In any case, however,
as Amy Maguire has argued, in practice, what may be more important than whether
a rule is hard or soft law
is whether it is effective in changing state
Australia and Canada,
two states engaged in modern treaty processes have endorsed the UNDRIP. Is the
Declaration influencing their
negotiations? The following Part takes an
empirical look at the preliminary negotiations in Victoria—the first in
Treaty-making in Australia
No treaties were ever signed between representatives
of the British Crown or colonial governments and the Aboriginal and Torres
Islander peoples of the continent. Treaty has therefore always been a key
aspiration of Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander peoples,
Australian state has often equivocated. In 1979, the National Aboriginal
Conference, a nationally elected Indigenous body
advising government, passed a
resolution calling for a ‘Makarrata’, a Yolŋu word meaning
‘a coming together
Several years
later, in 1983, the Senate Standing Committee on Constitutional and Legal
Affairs delivered a report on the concept
of a treaty, recommending
constitutional change in order to implement a
years later, in 1988, Prime Minister Bob Hawke promised to negotiate a treaty to
respect and recognise Indigenous sovereignty
within three
The treaty did not
eventuate, and was quietly shelved. Calls for treaty by the Council for
Aboriginal Reconciliation and the Aboriginal
and Torres Strait Commission in the
new millennium also fell on deaf
Despite these setbacks,
Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander calls for treaty have never abated. Most
recently, in the 2017 Uluru
Statement from the Heart, around 250 Aboriginal and
Torres Strait Islander delegates from across Australia called for the
establishment
of a Makarrata Commission to ‘supervise a process of
agreement-making between governments and First
Federal government dismissed the recommendations arising from the Uluru
Statement, but several state and territory governments
have responded to these
demands. Over the last two years,
the Northern
officially committed
to enter treaty negotiations with Aboriginal peoples. Reflecting the political
nature of these agreements, however,
the situation is complex and subject to
change; in June 2018, for instance, a newly elected South Australian government
abandoned the treaty
Despite this step
backwards, political leaders in several other states and territories have
indicated that they may soon commence
negotiations. The Queensland Labor
government adopted treaty as part of their policy platform in 2016, and is
currently considering
how talks might be
Similarly, the New
South Wales Labor opposition has promised to hold treaty talks with Aboriginal
nations within the state if they
win the next election, due in
The Tasmanian Labor
Opposition made a similar promise, though it failed to secure election in
Reflective of the
shift in national debate, treaty is not simply the province of Labor governments
and parties. In Western Australia,
the conservative Liberal government signed
the largest and most-comprehensive agreement to settle Aboriginal interests in
Australian history with the Noongar people in
The agreement involves
30,000 Noongar people and covers around 200,000 km². The total value of the
package is about $1.3 billion,
and includes agreement on rights, obligations,
and opportunities relating to land, resources, governance, finance, and cultural
In exchange for this package, the Noongar people have agreed to
surrender all current and future claims relating to historical and
contemporary
dispossession. Although this agreement was conducted under the framework of the
Native Title Act 1993
(Cth) rather than a specific treaty process, its
size and scope reveal that it is Australia’s first de facto, if not de
This fact was
recognised at the time by Deputy Western Australia Opposition Leader Roger Cook,
who explained in Parliament that,
‘by its very nature, the Noongar
agreement is in fact a classic
notwithstanding the significance of the Noongar Settlement and the emerging
negotiations in the Northern Territory, this
Part will only explore the
Victorian process, as it is being conducted under an explicit treaty process and
is the most advanced.
Preliminary negotiations in Victoria
In June 2018, the Victorian Parliament passed
Australia’s first treaty bill. The
Advancing the Treaty Process with
Aboriginal Victorians Act 2018
’) creates a
legislative basis for negotiating a treaty with Aboriginal people in the state.
Under the Act, the government must
recognise an Aboriginal-designed
representative body empowered to determine a treaty negotiation framework and
administer a self-determination
fund to support Aboriginal Victorians in treaty
negotiations. The Act is the culmination of a two-year process of preliminary
negotiations
initially catalysed by concern that the national debate on
‘recognising’ Indigenous peoples in the Australian
Constitution
would fail to deliver meaningful reform.
The process
began in February 2016, when the Victorian government convened a meeting with
representatives of Victorian Aboriginal
communities to understand what
self-determination might mean for their communities. At this meeting, Aboriginal
representatives affirmed
their support for a
These views were
reiterated at the first ever state wide Aboriginal Victoria Forum held on 26-27
May 2016, where 500 participants
unanimously agreed to advance
self-determination and a treaty by establishing an Aboriginal representative
The state government
responded positively to these demands, establishing an Aboriginal Treaty Working
Group to consult with Aboriginal
Victorians over the design of an appropriate
body to represent them in treaty negotiations, and to advise the Minister for
Affairs on progress towards a treaty and ‘the broader
self-determination
The Working Group
is composed entirely of Aboriginal people with a balance between male and female
representatives. It is not clan-based
but is comprised of representatives of
Victorian Aboriginal community organisations and members appointed in their
individual capacity
by the Minister for Aboriginal
Consultations
were organised by the management consulting company EY to provide structural
independence from government. Initial consultations
took place at ten locations
across Victoria in the second-half of 2016. Participants were asked what
representation meant to them
and discussed design principles as well as
potential roles and functions of a putative Aboriginal representative
A further six
consultations were held in March 2017 to refine the structure and framework of
the body. Community members considered
who should be eligible to vote and stand
for election, as well as how the electorate should be
In an effort to ‘allow the community to drive the next steps in the Treaty
this latter
round of consultations included a series of ‘Treaty Circles’. These
community-run conversations were coordinated
and supervised by self-nominated
individuals who held discussions in their local area, with the aim of
‘ensuring maximum participation
by as many members of the Victorian
Aboriginal community as
‘Message Stick’ was created to allow those unable to attend a
community consultation or Treaty Circle to have
their say as well. Approximately
7,500 Aboriginal Victorians were consulted or engaged directly through this
The results of
these consultations were presented to an Aboriginal Victoria Forum at the end of
April 2017. At this meeting, the state
government committed to provide $28.5
million to progress the treaty process in the 2017/18
This funding included
provision for an Aboriginal Community Assembly to discuss and provide further
advice to the Working Group on
the design of a representative body, and a
Victorian Treaty Advancement Commission (VTAC) to operationalise the outcomes of
the Community
Assembly. The VTAC has broad responsibilities; it is empowered to
guide establishment of the representative body, maintain momentum
for treaty,
consult with Aboriginal Victorians, provide research and advice on the process,
and keep all Victorians
representative body is established, the VTAC is to be abolished.
Aboriginal Victorians aged over 18 years were eligible to apply for membership
of the Aboriginal Community Assembly. Three Aboriginal
Victorians reviewed the
applications, and 33 people were eventually selected with the aim of ensuring
accurate demographic representation
In November and
December 2017, 31 of these members ‘from across Victoria with a diversity
and wealth of cultural knowledge,
expertise and experience’ met over six
days to deliberate and provide their
That same month, Jill
Gallagher, a Gunditjmara woman from Western Victoria, was appointed the
Victorian Treaty Advancement
Commissioner.
2018 Act constitutes the next steps in this process and is an effort to
formalise treaty negotiations in advance of the state
election in November 2018.
The design of the Representative Body is still being considered. Once it has
been constituted and recognised
by the state government, these two entities will
work together to establish a treaty negotiation framework. That framework must
with several guiding principles set out in the Act: self-determination
and empowerment; fairness and equality; partnership and good
faith; mutual
benefit and sustainability; and, transparency and
accountability.
representative body will not negotiate for Aboriginal Victorians but simply
assist in developing an appropriate framework. In
the meantime, Aboriginal
Victorians will need to organise their negotiating position, decide what Treaty
means to them, and what
form a treaty or treaties should take. The final step
will involve negotiations between Aboriginal Victorians and the state. This
stage could take many years.
Is the Declaration informing negotiations?
In acknowledging Indigenous peoplehood and
recognising mechanisms for democratic self-rule, treaties are consistent with
the UNDRIP’s
vision and endorsement of a pluralised account of the state,
where sovereignties are dispersed among multiple
It is, however, too
early to say whether the treaty process in Victoria, let alone the Northern
Territory and elsewhere, will be
successful. It is also unclear whether state
and territory governments are interested in recognising Indigenous
self-governance or
other rights enshrined in the UNDRIP; simply calling an
agreement a ‘treaty’ will not make it so. This section explores
extent to which the Declaration is being used as a framework to guide
preliminary negotiations in Victoria.
In answering this question, it is
important to begin with a note of caution; this section is based only on
publicly available material.
I do not have access to internal government policy
briefs, cabinet documents, legal advice, or other such material. Equally, I am
not privy to information held by Aboriginal groups engaging in the preliminary
stages of treaty negotiation. This carries a risk
that I may miss critical
themes or principles underlying and giving force to practices of negotiation as
well as the substantive
terms that may be agreed in the future. Nonetheless,
assessing the public record of the initial stages of negotiations is valuable.
While debate over the legal status of the Declaration is important, its real
value lies in its political force. As Claire Charters
has argued, articulating
aspirations in the language of the Declaration ‘can contribute to state
internalisation of its
intensifying its political, if not legal salience. Use of the Declaration in
private fora or confidential memoranda necessarily has
a more limited impact.
The Victorian government has often made clear its commitment to the
UNDRIP, but a close analysis reveals some areas of potential tension
forward. First, the
specifically refers to the Declaration in
its preamble, noting that the State ‘recognises the importance of the
treaty process
proceeding in a manner that is consistent with’ the
Declaration. This reference was, however, absent in the initial Bill presented
to Parliament,
government rejected a proposed amendment to insert an operative clause requiring
consistency.
Consequently, the
Declaration’s norms and values remain aspirational rather than obligatory
and there is no mechanism to enforce
compliance with its standards. This could
give rise to complications in the future, as the preamble to the
may provide a window on the government’s negotiating position.
Indeed, despite the historical absence of any treaty or act
ever legitimating
British colonisation, the Act merely acknowledges that ‘Victorian
traditional owners
that their sovereignty has never been
Will recognition
of sovereignty be a sticking point? Second, the UNDRIP also does not appear to
be playing a key role within the
public service, who provide advice to
government and will undertake many essential functions once treaty negotiations
commence. In
fact, the Declaration is cited only once on the Victorian
government’s
Aboriginal Victoria
departmental website—under
heritage protection rather than the treaty
Third, a search
of the Victorian Parliamentary Hansard reveals similarly patchy executive
consideration of the Declaration within
the legislature. Although the Bill was
introduced into Parliament on 7 March 2018, the first reference on the floor was
until almost three weeks later—and not by a member of the
government. Rather, reference was made by Gunnai and Gunditjmara
woman Lidia
the first Aboriginal
woman elected to the Parliament and a member of the Greens Party. While the
Declaration has been mentioned more
frequently since this date, only six
government members have specifically cited the
Declaration,
and often only in
response to its invocation by non-government members. The government’s
limited engagement with the UNDRIP
mirrors the Parliament’s approach
before the Bill’s introduction. Prior to this date, the Declaration had
only been referred
to three times in the current 58
Parliament, all
of which were made in 2015, before treaty discussions commenced. Intriguingly,
only one of these three references
was made to the
Declaration on the Rights
of Indigenous Peoples
the other two referring to the Declaration
the Rights of Indigenous
suggesting an imperfect
awareness of the instrument.
Formal government engagement with the
Declaration may be inconsistent but it is clear that the principles, norms, and
values underling
the instrument are playing a role. In March 2015, Premier
Daniel Andrews declared that his government’s approach to Aboriginal
affairs would be guided by the principle of
self-determination.
Hutchins, the Minister for Aboriginal Affairs, has frequently echoed this
statement and explicitly connected it to the Declaration,
acknowledging that
‘self-determination is one of the over-arching principles of the
Declaration on the Rights of Indigenous
2017-18 budget the government allocated $68.2 million to improving Indigenous
self-determination, including by supporting
the treaty process and,
‘looking at ways within government we can embed self-determination for
decision-making...for Aboriginal
Victorians’.
2018-19 budget, a further $9 million was committed to the establishment of the
Aboriginal Representative Body.
The government’s commitment to Indigenous self-determination extends
beyond the treaty process. For instance, important amendments
Traditional Owner Settlement Act 2010
(Vic), developed in close
consultation with Indigenous
make it easier
for traditional owners to exercise their rights to Crown land and natural
resources for cultural, social and economic
The values and
standards underlying the Declaration are identifiable in the processes
undertaken so far. Consistent with articles
3 and 4 of the UNDRIP, treaty was
initiated entirely by Aboriginal people. Aboriginal Victorians first instigated
the push towards
a treaty by rejecting the state-sponsored national
constitutional recognition process. Rather than ignore this call, or seek to
it, the government met these aspirations by providing adequate resources
for Aboriginal people to conduct consultations across the
state on the design of
a representative body. When those consultations revealed broader feelings of
disempowerment and alienation
from political and governmental
the government acknowledged that the body could be more than just an entity that
negotiates a Treaty but may be capable of playing
a longer-term role as a
representative voice for the Aboriginal community in the political, economic,
social, and cultural life of
the State, including perhaps by participating in
devising legislative or administrative measures that affect them. At the same
the government has batted away questions about the content of any treaty,
correctly noting that that is an issue for negotiation,
after the establishment
of a representative body. Reflecting this commitment, the government has made it
clear that it envisages
the treaty process as meeting obligations under the
UNDRIP. In the
’s Second Reading Speech, Narelle Hutchins
explained that the government firmly believes that ‘all stages of the
process’ must be guided by Aboriginal self-determination, and that
the state perceives itself acting in ‘partnership
with Aboriginal
Victorians’.
Minister of State, Gavin Jennings echoed these comments, noting that the guiding
principles set out in the Act ‘are
more than aspirational’; they
‘crystallise’ the government’s commitment and ‘draw
on’ the Declaration.
These comments are positive, and it is important to note that the
government has demonstrated a commitment to the UNDRIP by amending
legislation to incorporate the instrument. However, the government’s more
limited broader engagement with the Declaration
suggests challenges going
forward. Scarce references in Parliament, across the public service, and within
the executive, potentially
signal that the document itself is not contributing
to debate. In the absence of an enforceable standard, it remains to be seen how
far Victoria’s rhetorical or political commitment to the UNDRIP and
Indigenous self-determination extends once negotiations
Engagement with the Declaration may be inconsistent, but the
values that underpin it are clearly playing a role in the Victorian
government’s
approach to treaty. Significantly, Aboriginal approaches have
adopted a similar position; the UNDRIP is not explicitly publicly employed,
the instrument is driving their demands. For example, while Jill Gallagher has
noted that the Declaration is a ‘central
principle of the Working
it does not appear
in any public records of their meetings. Similarly, although some participants
in community consultations and
members of the Working Group have expressed their
views in the language of the Declaration, including Lidia Thorpe who resigned
her position on the Working Group when she felt her cultural integrity was
being compromised,
Declaration itself is absent in official reports of the community consultations.
This may reflect limited awareness of the UNDRIP,
suggesting that it has not
permeated within the community. Considering the values and principles expressed
at these community consultations,
however, it may be more likely that the
limited public use of the Declaration is a pragmatic calculation by Aboriginal
not articulate their claims through this instrument, believing either
that it will have little salience with state officials, or
that it will spark
anxiety within the non-Indigenous community. This pragmatic calculation may be
working. Despite some concerns,
the process so far has been largely positive.
Even if Indigenous people and leaders are not publicly articulating their claims
the Declaration, they are speaking in the language of its values,
standards, and principles. Even more importantly, the state has
proved receptive
to these calls. Should this strategy continue once negotiations
Treaties and the value of the Declaration
The norms and values underlying the UNDRIP are
driving the push towards treaty in Victoria, but in the public sphere,
government and
Aboriginal invocations of the instrument itself are largely
sporadic. Is this a problem? While the preliminary stages of treaty negotiations
may be resolved in the absence of the Declaration, this could prove dangerous
when negotiations commence. Although the Victorian
government assures us it is
committed to its values and principles, without more clearly grounding that
commitment in clear and enforceable
standards and obligations concerning process
and outcomes, negotiations may flounder. Even a principled but inchoate
understanding
of the terms of the Declaration may mean that agreements conducted
under the guise of treaty negotiations fail to result in meaningful
reform. This
Part draws back from the specific Victorian process to identify several
challenges that may arise in all modern treaty
negotiations conducted in the
shadow of the UNDRIP.
First, in the absence of explicit legislative
endorsement of the UNDRIP, either by the Victorian government or other relevant
there is a risk that both the negotiations and content of any treaty may
not satisfy the minimum standards recognised in the Declaration.
The experience
in Canada, where modern treaties have been negotiated since 1973, suggests that
the negotiation stage will be the
most difficult, and it is easy to imagine that
a state’s much vaunted political commitment to Indigenous
self-determination
may be discarded or at least downgraded during the tumult of
negotiation, as it is here where a rhetorical promise to an amorphous
must be concretised into specific terms. How will state’s respond if, for
instance, Aboriginal Victorians insist on
powers of self-government consistent
with First Nations in Canada, or concomitant to the guarantees in the
Declaration, including
the right to convene their own law-making bodies?
It is critical to remember that the UNDRIP constitutes the
‘minimum standards for the survival, dignity and well-being of the
Indigenous peoples of the
expressed therein are not bargaining chips. Without the Declaration acting as an
enforceable framework to guide state
approaches and policies, there is a real
danger that substantive Indigenous rights may not be realised. In Australia,
concerns along
these lines had been raised even before the South Australian
process was abruptly dismantled. In announcing the South Australian
government’s commitment to treaty in 2016, the Minister for Aboriginal
Affairs and Reconciliation characterised Indigenous
self-governance and autonomy
only in terms of ‘cultural
authority’.
maintaining cultural authority is a critical component of Indigenous
peoples’ aspirations, it does not entail the entirety
self-governance rights. This risk is particularly pronounced where support for
the treaty process is divided along partisan
lines. Indeed, the failure to
expressly ground treaty negotiations in the UNDRIP in South Australia, may have
contributed to the
new government’s rejection of the process. Similar
concerns exist in Victoria, where the Opposition voted against the Treaty
State elections in late 2018 therefore loom as the most significant immediate
challenge, but longer-term challenges cannot
be ignored.
Second, the
absence of UNDRIP in public debate may exacerbate First Nations’ unequal
bargaining position. Notwithstanding the
Victorian government’s positive
steps in resourcing community consultations on the design of an Aboriginal
Representative Body
as well as the body itself, the negotiation stage will be
very challenging for Indigenous peoples as they will face a significant
disparity in bargaining power. In Australia, this is intensified by the absence
of common law fiduciary duties imposed on the Crown
in their dealings with
Indigenous peoples,
which means
that there are little constitutional limits preventing the state from
undertaking ‘sharp
relationship with Indigenous peoples. The UNDRIP can be helpful here. Julie Jai,
a former negotiator for the Yukon government,
has argued that First Nations in
Canada have been able to enhance their negotiating power by using the
Declaration as an external
standard of
legitimacy,
holding the state
accountable to its standards, articulated in Part II above. Without suggesting
that contemporary negotiations in
Canada always reach this benchmark, it is
clear that agreements reached prior to 2007 were often characterised by
considerable political
and economic pressure levied on Indigenous
Nonetheless, without
explicit endorsement by the state, and without First Nations publicly pressuring
government, Indigenous peoples
may not be able to use the Declaration in this
way, placing Indigenous negotiators in a worse position than they might
The UNDRIP may be useful in articulating and pressuring
government to stick to a minimum standard in negotiations, but the experience
Canada suggests that conducting debate in the language of the Declaration does
not resolve all challenges. Following the election
of Justin Trudeau, the
federal government committed to legislation that would align government action
and policies with the UNDRIP
as well as ensure ‘rigorous, full and
meaningful’ implementation of all
Several provincial
governments, including British Columbia, have followed
These governments often
expressly link standards and obligations set out in the Declaration to
Canada’s historic treaties as
well as the modern treaty process. For
instance, in 2016, Carolyn Bennett the Minister for Indigenous and Northern
Affairs, declared
that the Declaration ‘reflects the spirit and intent of
our treaties,’ and explained that the state conceives ‘modern
treaties and self-government agreements as the ultimate expression of free,
prior and informed consent among
the British Columbia Treaty Commission has argued that the treaty process in the
province is consistent with key principles
of the UNDRIP, which
‘breathe[s] life into
negotiations’,
while the Ministry of Indigenous Relations and Reconciliation seeks to
‘transform the treaty process so it respects...the
modern treaty process in Canada provides a ‘clear pathway’ to forms
of self-government
arrangements,
but invocations
of the Declaration in the context of these negotiations has garnered
considerable criticism. As many have argued,
the ‘setting in which
treaties...have been negotiated (since 1973) is not one of cooperative
agreement, but a context of asymmetrical
that coerces
First Nations into a process that fails to satisfy UNDRIP’s procedural and
substantive guarantees. In particular,
extreme resource disparities as well as
powerful non-Indigenous non-government actors, such as the extractive and
pastoral industries,
challenge the ability of negotiations to remain free and
fair. The boundaries of modern treaty negotiations in Canada are thus policed
the state, with concerns frequently raised over both the ‘narrowness of
what governments have been willing to
grounding of those negotiations within the context of Canadian
Drawing these threads
together, James Tully contends that the provincial and federal governments
consider themselves ‘entering
into negotiations with
“minorities” within Canada’, presupposing a
‘relationship of subordination and some
form of subjection to the
Crown’, ‘foreclos[ing] precisely what the negotiations should be
challenges have impacted on negotiations in Australia, most seriously in leading
to amendments in 1998 that substantially
weakened the
Native Title Act
The Canadian experience reveals that express government
commitment to the Declaration, rising even to a public
legislate, does not resolve strains over the process and outcomes of
negotiations but shifts debate towards what the UNDRIP requires.
Nonetheless,
Indigenous peoples should insist that all treaty negotiations remain under the
aegis of the Declaration. Structuring
negotiations in this way maintains the
focus on Indigenous
(notwithstanding dispute over the content of
those rights) rather than on lesser agreements, such as contracts or service
arrangements. This is particularly important in countries like
Australia where governments have historically preferred to minimise
Indigenous rights agenda in favour of a focus on ‘practical’
reconciliation.
preference remains strong. In announcing that the South Australian government
would abandon the treaty process, for example,
newly-elected Premier Stephen
Marshall declared that state-based treaties are ‘expensive gestures’
and committed to reforms
aimed at delivering ‘practical’
treaties between Indigenous peoples and the state are distinct from legal
contracts. Treaties are ‘constitutional accords’
‘articulate basic terms and conditions of social co-existence’ and
‘establish the constitutional parameters
nations enter into treaties ‘as keepers of a certain
settlement constitutes ‘a form of political recognition and a measure of
the consensual distribution of
In this sense,
a treaty is intended to ground an ongoing relationship between Indigenous
peoples and the state. In states where dominant
conceptions of identity and
citizenship operate to deny Indigenous normative
distinctiveness,
can help to articulate justifications for both that distinct status and the
necessity of a treaty relationship to reconcile
the coexisting sovereignty of
multiple political communities that share the
At their highest, the
treaty relationship is a symbol of equal partnership, based on ‘mutual
recognition, mutual respect, sharing,
responsibility’.
Without the UNDRIP framing negotiations, the Nation-to-Nation relationship that
a treaty embeds may be dropped or otherwise lose
prominence, leaving
reconciliation precariously placed. This risk is particularly acute where, for
constitutional reasons, negotiations
are conducted by a subnational entity
rather than the federal government itself.
Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander
peoples’ agitation for structural reform of Australia’s political
and legal system
long predates the signing of the UNDRIP in 2007. Nonetheless,
the Declaration has the potential to revitalise and strengthen Indigenous
advocacy for meaningful reform by acting as a framework to underpin and guide
development of law and policy in
The absence of
explicit legislative endorsement of the UNDRIP by the Victorian government, and
its muted public invocations by Aboriginal
Victorians, is therefore concerning.
Writing in the aftermath of the General Assembly’s adoption of the
Declaration, Megan
Davis argued that in order to shift the ground in public
debate in Australia, Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander people ‘need[]
to be strategic about adopting a new direction in advocacy for
self-determination as underpinned by the
considered that this new direction should be built on the moral and educative
value of the Declaration.
Preliminary steps towards treaty in Victoria and elsewhere suggest that some
Australian governments are interested in pursuing a
new direction. Whether that
interest is real largely depends upon whether state actors have internalised the
instrument’s norms
and values. If they have, then treaty negotiations
should result in meaningful substantive reform. If they have not, then
negotiations
may falter.
Developments in Australia have lessons for all
modern treaty negotiations. A state’s rhetorical commitment to the
Declaration
or ritual public incantation of its terms will not automatically
lead to meaningful reform. In the absence of enforceable standards
holding the
state to account, asymmetrical power relations will affect the process and
outcomes of any negotiation. To challenge
this, Indigenous peoples must publicly
use the UNDRIP and seek to embed its values within state actors. Critically,
norm internationalisation
will not occur if those advocating for structural
reform fail to articulate their aspirations in the language of the Declaration.
In the words of Claire Charters, Indigenous peoples should ‘use it’
rather than ‘lose
: 9397 (including endnotes, not including
Claire Charters,
‘Indigenous Peoples and International Law and Policy’ in Benjamin J.
Richardson, Shin Imai and Kent
McNeil (eds),
Indigenous Peoples and the
(Hart Publishing, 2009) 161,
James Anaya and Siegfried
Wiessner, ‘The UN Declaration on the Rights of Indigenous Peoples: Towards
Re-Empowerment’,
, 3 October 2007
http://www.jurist.org/forum/2007/10/un-declaration-on-rights-of-indigenous.php
Stephen Allen and Alexandra
Xanthaki, ‘Introduction’ in Stephen Allen and Alexandra Xanthaki
Reflections on the UN Declaration on the Rights of Indigenous Peoples
(Hart, 2011) 1, 7.
Mechanism on the Rights of Indigenous Peoples,
Ten Years of the
Implementation of the United Nations Declaration on the Rights of Indigenous
Peoples: Good Practices and Lessons
Learned—2007-2017
A/HRC/EMRIP/2017/CRP.2 (10-14 July 2017) 3,
Kirsty Gover,
‘Settler-State Political Theory, “CANZUS” and the UN
Declaration on the Rights of Indigenous Peoples
European Journal of International Law
refuses to sign UN declaration on indigenous rights’,
ABC Lateline
14 September 2007.
Macklin, ‘Statement on the United Nations Declaration on the Rights of
Indigenous Peoples’ (Official Statement,
3 April 2009). Of course, from a
purely doctrinal perspective, issuing a qualification to a General Assembly
Declaration is unnecessary
as they are formally non-binding. As such, it is
likely that the qualification was intended to serve a rhetorical purpose.
Mandy Doherty and Jenny
Bedford ‘Implementation of the Declaration of the Rights of Indigenous
Peoples’ (Speech on behalf
of the Australian Government and Australian
Human Rights Commission to the Permanent Forum on Indigenous Issues, New York,
Uluru Statement
from the Heart
, cited in Referendum Council,
Final Report of the
Referendum Council
(June 2017)
See generally George
Williams and Megan Davis,
Everything You Need to Know about the Referendum to
Recognise Indigenous Australians
(NewSouth Publishing, 2015).
Megan Davis,
‘Indigenous Struggles in Standard-Setting: The United Nations
Declaration on the Rights of Indigenous Peoples
[2008] MelbJlIntLaw 17
Melbourne Journal of International Law
Carolyn Bennett,
‘Speaking Notes’ (Address delivered to the UN Permanent Forum on
Indigenous Issues, 16
Session, New York, 10 May 2016). Speech
available at: ‘Fully Adopting UNDRIP: Minister Bennett’s Speech at
Northern Public Affairs
, 11 May 2016
http://www.northernpublicaffairs.ca/index/fully-adopting-undrip-minister-bennetts-speech/
Megan Davis, ‘The United Nations Declaration on the Rights of Indigenous
[2007] IndigLawB 50
(2007) 6(30)
Indigenous Law Bulletin
Willem van Genugten and
Federico Lenzerini, ‘Legal Implementation and International Cooperation
and Assistance: Articles 37-42’
in Jessie Hohmann and Marc Weller (eds),
The UN Declaration on the Rights of Indigenous Peoples: A Commentary
(Oxford University Press, 2018) 539,
Harry Hobbs and George
Williams, ‘The Noongar Settlement: Australia’s First Treaty’
[2018] SydLawRw 1
Sydney Law Review
See further Michael Mansell,
Statehood: Aboriginal Self-Determination
(Federation Press, 2016) 99-102;
Sean Brennan et al,
(Federation Press, 2005) 3-11.
Michael Keating,
Plurinational Democracy: Stateless Nations in a Post-Sovereignty Era
(Oxford University Press, 2001)
UNDRIP art 9. See also
UNDRIP art 33.
UNDRIP arts 15(2),
17(2), 19, 32(2), 36(2), 38.
Permanent Forum on Indigenous Issues, ‘Report of the International
Workshop on Methodologies regarding Free, Prior and Informed
Consent and
Indigenous Peoples’, UN Doc E/C.19/2005/3 (New York, 17-19 January 2005)
12 [46]-[47].
James Anaya and Sergio
Puig, ‘Mitigating State Sovereignty: The Duty to Consult with Indigenous
University of Toronto Law Journal
Patrick Macklem,
The Sovereignty of Human Rights
(Oxford University
Press, 2015).
UN Commission
on Human Rights, Sub-Commission on the Promotion and Protection of Human Rights
Working Group on Indigenous Populations,
Preliminary Working Paper on
the Principle of Free, Prior and Informed Consent of Indigenous Peoples,
Submitted by Antoanella-Iulia Motoc and the Tebtebba Foundation
, 22nd sess,
Agenda Item 5, UN Doc E/CN.4/Sub.2/AC.4/2004/4 (8 July 2004)
Michael Dodson, cited
in Craig Scott, ‘Indigenous Self-Determination and Decolonisation of the
International Imagination: A
Human Rights Quarterly
, 814. See also Brenda Gunn, ‘Self-Determination and Indigenous
Women: Increasing Legitimacy through Inclusion’
Journal of Women and the Law
Davis, above n
Thomas Franck, ‘The
Emerging Right to Democratic Governance’
American Journal of
International Law
See for e.g. (2011)
Griffith Law Review
‘Special Issue: The 2007 Declaration on
the Rights of Indigenous Peoples: Indigenous Survival – Where to from
Irene Watson,
Aboriginal Peoples, Colonialism and International Law: Raw Law
(Routledge, 2015) 2.
Megan Davis, ‘To Bind or not to Bind: The United Nations
Declaration on
the Rights of Indigenous Peoples
Five Years On’
International Law Journal
Ted Moses, Cree Leader,
cited in Ronald Niezen,
The Origins of Indigenism: Human Rights and the
Politics of Identity
(University of California Press, 2003)
Davis, above n
Roderic Pitty and
Shannara Smith, ‘The Indigenous Challenge to Westphalian
Sovereignty’ (2011) 46
Australian Journal of Political Science
Clive Baldwin and Cynthia
Morel, ‘Using the United Nations Declaration on the Rights of Indigenous
Peoples in Litigation’
in Stephen Allen and Alexandra Xanthaki (eds),
Reflections on the UN Declaration on the Rights of Indigenous Peoples
(Hart, 2011) 121, 123-4.
See for example Javaid Rehman, ‘Between the Devil and the Deep Blue Sea:
Indigenous Peoples as Pawns in the US “War on
Terror” and the Jihad
of Osama Bin Laden’ in Stephen Allen and Alexandra Xanthaki (eds),
Reflections on the UN Declaration on the Rights of Indigenous Peoples
(Hart, 2011) 561. See also James Anaya,
Promotion and Protection of all
Human Rights, Civil, Political, Economic, Social and Cultural Rights, including
the Right to Development
, UN Doc A/HRC/12/34 (15 July 2009) 12-15
Commission on
Human Rights,
Report of the Eighteenth Session
, UN ESCOR, 34
sess, Supp No 8,UN Doc E/CN.4/832/Rev.1 (19 March-14 April 1962) 15
Indigenous Peoples’ Status in the International
Legal System
(Oxford University Press, 2016)
Amy Maguire, ‘The
UN Declaration on the Rights of Indigenous Peoples and Self-Determination in
Australia: Using a Human Rights
Approach to Promote Accountability’
[2014] NZYbkIntLaw 7
New Zealand Yearbook of International Law
See Julie Fenley,
‘The National Aboriginal Conference and the Makarrata: Sovereignty and
Treaty Discussions, 1979-1981’
Australian Historical Studies
Senate Standing
Committee on Legal and Constitutional Affairs, Parliament of Australia,
Hundred Years Later...
(1981), Recommendation
Festival’ (1988) 2
Land Rights News
Council for
Aboriginal Reconciliation,
Reconciliation: Australia’s Challenge
(Final Report of the Council for Aboriginal Reconciliation, 2000) 106,
Recommendation 6; Hannah McGlade (ed),
Treaty: Let’s Get it Right!
(Australian Institute of Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander Studies,
Referendum Council,
Uluru Statement
also called for a national representative Indigenous body empowered to
advise Parliament on laws that affect Indigenous peoples, as
well as a process
of local and regional
truth-telling.
the Treaty Process with Aboriginal Victorians Act 2018
The Barunga
(8 June 2018)
Kyam Maher MLC,
‘Treaty Speech’ (Parliament House, Adelaide, 14 December 2016)
available at: <
https://statedevelopment.sa.gov.au/upload/aboriginal-affairs/treaty-speech.pdf?t=1504335059137
Dr Roger Thomas,
Treaty Talk: Summary of Engagements and Next Steps
(Office of the Treaty Commissioner, July
Michael Owen,
‘Aboriginal people failed by “expensive gesture”
The Australian
, 11 June 2018 <
https://www.theaustralian.com.au/national-affairs/indigenous/aboriginal-people-failed-by-expensive-gesture-treaties/news-story/84b000a2f0b81c82801d93cc9a45cb3c
Stephen Fitzpatrick and Michael McKenna, ‘Queensland Considers Treaty
Talks as Federal Bids Stall’,
The Australian
, 17 July 2018 <
https://www.theaustralian.com.au/national-affairs/indigenous/queensland-considers-treaty-talks-as-federal-bids-stall/news-story/1431f48699d2085e65631efcb9e55a02
Calla Wahlquist, ‘NSW
Labor plans to sign treaty recognising Indigenous ownership’,
, 25 January 2018 <
https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2018/jan/25/nsw-labor-plans-to-sign-treaty-recognising-indigenous-ownership
Matthew Denholm,
‘Tasmanian Labor promises Aboriginal treaty talks’,
, 1 June 2017
http://www.theaustralian.com.au/national-affairs/indigenous/tasmanian-labor-promises-aboriginal-treaty-talks/news-story/a5352d573913ce86794ff641a37806bc
Gian De Poloni, ‘WA Premier signs $1.3 billion Noongar native title
settlement’,
, 8 June 2015
http://www.abc.net.au/news/2015-06-08/premier-signs-noongar-native-title-settlement/6530434
Hobbs and Williams, above n
Western Australia,
Parliamentary Debates
, Legislative Assembly, 19 November 2015,
Hamish Fitzsimons,
‘Victorian Government to begin talks with First Nations on
Australia’s first Indigenous treaty’,
, 26 February
http://www.abc.net.au/news/2016-02-26/victoria-to-begin-talks-for-first-indigenous-treaty/7202492
Aboriginal Victoria,
Summary of the Aboriginal Victoria Forum, 26-27 May 2016, Melbourne
Aboriginal Treaty Interim Working Group, Terms of Reference
Aboriginal Treaty Interim
Working Group,
Aboriginal Community Consultations on the Design of a
Representative Body
(December 2016).
Aboriginal Treaty Interim
Working Group,
Aboriginal Community Consultations on the Design of a
Representative Body—Phase 2
(June 2017) 9.
Aboriginal Treaty Interim
Working Group,
Treaty Circle Facilitators Handbook
Aboriginal Treaty
Interim Working Group, above n
NITV Staff Writer,
‘Victorian government commits $28.5M for treaty discussions, amid
confusion and criticism’,
, 2 May 2017
http://www.sbs.com.au/nitv/nitv-news/article/2017/05/01/victorian-government-commits-285m-treaty-discussions-amid-confusion-and-criticism
Aboriginal Victoria, ‘Victorian Treaty Advancement Commission’
https://www.vic.gov.au/aboriginalvictoria/treaty/victorian-treaty-advancement-commission.html
Aboriginal Community
Assembly Information Handbook: Continuing on the Journey towards Treaty
Community Assembly,
Final Statement and Recommendations to the Aboriginal
Treaty Working Group
(December 2017)
Reconciliation Victoria,
‘Jill Gallagher named Victorian Treaty Advancement Commissioner’
http://www.reconciliationvic.org.au/news/jill-gallagher-named-victorian-treaty-advancement-commissioner.php
Advancing the Treaty
Process with Aboriginal Victorians Act 2018
Will Kymlicka,
‘Beyond the Indigenous/Minority Dichotomy?’ in Stephen Allen and
Alexandra Xanthaki,
Reflections on the UN Declaration on the Rights of
Indigenous Peoples
(Hart, 2011) 183, 188. See UNDRIP arts 6, 8(1)-(2), 9,
Claire Charters,
‘Use It or Lose It: The Value of Using the Declaration on the Rights of
Indigenous Peoples in Māori Legal
and Political Claims’ in Andrew
Erueti (ed)
International Indigenous Rights in Aotearoa New Zealand
(Victoria University of Wellington Press, 2017) 137,
Advancing the Treaty
Process with Aboriginal Victorians 2018 Bill (introduced 7 March
Greens Amendments,
item 24, proposed insertion of Clause E after Clause 21; Victoria,
Parliamentary Debates
, Legislative Assembly, 7 June 2018 (clause
defeated); Victoria,
Parliamentary Debates
, Legislative Council, 21 June
2018, 2924 (clause negatived).
Advancing the Treaty
Process with Aboriginal Victorians 2018 Act
(Vic), preamble (emphasis
Aboriginal Victoria,
Working with Aboriginal Intangible Heritage
https://www.vic.gov.au/aboriginalvictoria/heritage/aboriginal-intangible-heritage-in-victoria/working-with-aboriginal-intangible-heritage.html
(accessed 19 July 2018).
Parliamentary Debates
, Legislative Assembly, 27 March 2018,
Parliamentary Debates
, Legislative Assembly, 28 March 2018, 871 (Narelle
Hutchins, Minister for Aboriginal Affairs), 5 June 2018, 1723 (Lily
D’Ambrosio),
1738 (Sonya Kilkenny), 1741 (Steve Dimopoulos), 7 June 2018,
1923-4 (Richard Wynne, Narelle Hutchins); Legislative Council, 21 June
2915, 2925 (Gavin Jennings). No members of the Opposition cited the UNDRIP.
Accurate as of 19 July 2018.
Parliamentary Debates
, Legislative Assembly, 26 November 2015,
5132 (Narelle Hutchins).
Parliamentary Debates
, Legislative Assembly, 8 October 2015,
3668 (Anthony Carbines); Victoria,
Parliamentary Debates
, Legislative
Assembly, 20 October 2015, 3805 (Heidi Victoria; opposition member).
Daniel Andrews,
‘Closing the Gap—Premier’s Speech’, 19 March 2015.
Parliamentary
, Legislative Assembly, 26 November 2015, 5132 (Narelle Hutchins,
Minister for Aboriginal
Parliamentary Debates
, Legislative Assembly, 22 June 2017, 2061 (Narelle
Hutchins, Minister for Aboriginal
Victorian Budget 18/19: Getting Things Done—Overview
Parliamentary Debates
, Legislative Council, 8 November 2016, 5851 (Mr
Traditional
Owner Settlement Amendment Act 2016
(Vic); Victoria,
Parliamentary
, Legislative Council, 8 November 2016, 5837 (Gayle
Aboriginal Treaty
Interim Working Group, above n
Parliamentary
, Legislative Assembly, 28 March 2018,
Parliamentary Debates
, Legislative Council, 8 June 2018, 2571 (Gavin
Jill Gallagher,
‘The Treaty Process in Victoria’ (Address to the Public Law
Conference,
The Frontiers of Public Law
, University of Melbourne, 13 July
Rachel Hocking,
‘Where is Treaty at in Victoria’,
, 17 April 2017
http://www.sbs.com.au/nitv/nitv-news/article/2017/04/17/where-treaty-victoria
Thorpe became the first Aboriginal woman elected to the Victorian Parliament
after a by-election in November
Kyam Maher MLC,
‘Treaty Speech’ (Parliament House, Adelaide, 14 December 2016)
available at: <
https://statedevelopment.sa.gov.au/upload/aboriginal-affairs/treaty-speech.pdf?t=1504335059137
Kirsty Gover, ‘The Honour of the Crowns: State–Indigenous Fiduciary
Relationships and Australian Exceptionalism’
[2016] SydLawRw 16
[1996] 1 SCR 771
, 794 [41] (La Forest, L’Heureux-Dubé,
Gonthier, Cory and Iacobucci
‘Bargains Made in Bad Times: How Principles from Modern Treaties can
Reinvigorate Historic Treaties’ in John
Borrows and Michael Coyle (eds.)
The Right Relationship: Reimagining the Implementation of Historical Treaties
(University of Toronto Press, 2017) 105,
For example, for
criticism of the 1975 James Bay and Northern Quebec Agreement see: Paul Rynard,
‘“Welcome In, But Check
Your Rights at the Door”, The James
Bay and Nisga’a Agreements in Canada’
Canadian Journal
of Political Science
Parliamentary
, House of Commons, Vol 148, No. 264, 14 February 2018, 17219 (Justin
Trudeau); Bill C-262
John Horgen,
‘Statement from Premier John Horgan on the 10th anniversary of the UN
Declaration on the Rights of Indigenous
Peoples’ (Media Release, 13
September 2017).
British Columbia Treaty Commission,
Annual Report 2016
British Columbia
Ministry of Indigenous Relations and Reconciliation,
2018/19–2020/21
Service Plan
Blaine Favel and Ken
Understanding UNDRIP
(McDonald-Laurier, 2016)
Jason Tockman,
‘Eliding Consent in Extractivist States: Bolivia, Canada, and the UN
Declaration on the Rights of Indigenous
International Journal of Human Rights
Ravi de Costa,
‘History, Democracy, and Treaty Negotiations in British Columbia’ in
Alexandra Harmon (ed),
The Power of Promises: Rethinking Indian Treaties in
the Pacific Northwest
(University of Washington Press, 2008) 297,
Taiaiake Alfred,
‘Deconstructing the British Columbia Treaty Process’
Balayi: Culture, Law and Colonialism
James Tully,
‘Reconsidering the B.C. Treaty Process’ in
Speaking Truth to
Power: A Treaty Forum
(British Columbia Treaty Commission, 2000) 3,
John Borrows,
‘Practical Recolonisation?’
[2005] UNSWLawJl 39
UNSW Law Journal
Michael Owen,
‘Aboriginal people failed by “expensive gesture”
The Australian
, 11 June 2018 <
https://www.theaustralian.com.au/national-affairs/indigenous/aboriginal-people-failed-by-expensive-gesture-treaties/news-story/84b000a2f0b81c82801d93cc9a45cb3c
Patrick Macklem, ‘The Constitutional Identity of Indigenous Peoples in
Canada: Status Groups or Federal Actors?’ (Working
paper, available at:
https://papers.ssrn.com/sol3/papers.cfm?abstract_id=2956605
p 12. (To be published in Andrew Arato, Jean Cohen and Astrid von Busekist
Forms of Pluralism and Democratic Constitutionalism
University Press, 2018).
James [Sakej] Henderson, ‘Interpreting Sui Generis Treaties’
Alberta Law Review
Russel Lawrence Barsh
and James Youngblood Henderson,
The Road: Indian Tribes and Political Liberty
(University of California Press, 1980) 270. See further James Youngblood
Henderson, ‘Empowering Treaty Federalism’
Saskatchewan
Harry Hobbs, ‘Constitutional Recognition and Reform: Developing an
Inclusive Australian Citizenship through Treaty’ (2018)
Journal of Political Science
British Columbia
Treaty Commission, above n
‘It leads to the recognition of Nation-to-Nation relationships, a
recognition that shapes the negotiations and leads to
constitutionally
Patton, ‘The “Lessons of History”’ in Saliha Belmessous
Empire by Treaty: Negotiating European Expansion 1600-1900
2014) 243, 250.
Megan Davis,
‘Indigenous Rights and the
Constitution
: Making the Case for
Constitutional Reform’
(2008) 7(6)
Indigenous Law Bulletin
Davis, above n
Charters, above n
. See also Michael Dodson, quoted in
Australian Human Rights Commission,
The Community Guide to the UN Declaration
on the Rights of Indigenous Peoples
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (371 KB)
PDF format (1.35 MB)
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter