URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/journals/SydLawRw/2024/17.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 15:38:36
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Barnes, Ashleigh --- "Stare Decisis and Constitutional Guarantees: Commonwealth v Yunupingu" [2024] SydLawRw 17; (2024) 46(3) Sydney Law Review 347
I Introduction
II Background and Procedural History
III Stare Decisis in the Constitutional Setting: The Role of Constitutional Guarantees
A The Sui Generis Nature of Stare Decisis in the Constitutional Setting
B Is the Protection of Constitutional Guarantees Relevant to the Application of Stare Decisis Principles?
C Alternatively, Is There a Category of Constitutional Cases of ‘Vital Importance’ That Have Particular Weight in Stare
Decisis Questions?
IV Application to Yunupingu
V Conclusion
Before the High Court
Stare Decisis and Constitutional Guarantees:
Commonwealth v
Ashleigh Barnes
Commonwealth v Yunupingu
the High Court of Australia will
consider, inter alia,
whether the requirement in s 51(xxxi) of the
Constitution
that acquisitions of property must be on just
terms applies to a Commonwealth law that is supported by the territories power
and no other head of power in
Whether the just terms requirement
applies to laws made under the territories power is a question of enormous
significance. This
question is in part answered by whether either
Wurridjal v
Commonwealth
Teori Tau v Commonwealth
is good law, and whether
either or both of those cases should be reopened and overruled. This column
analyses this question in light
of novel insights into the Court’s current
approach to
stare decisis
in the constitutional setting drawn from the
Court’s recent application of the doctrine in
NZYQ v Minister for
Immigration, Citizenship and Multicultural Affairs
Vanderstock v
Vunilagi v The Queen
Introduction
Commonwealth v Yunupingu
the High Court of Australia will consider, inter alia,
whether the
requirement in s 51(xxxi) of the
Constitution
acquisitions of property must be on just terms applies to a Commonwealth law
that is supported by the territories power in
and no other head of power
Whether the just terms
requirement applies to laws made under the territories power is a question of
enormous significance. This
question is in part answered by whether either
Wurridjal v Commonwealth
Tau v Commonwealth
good law, and whether either or both of those cases should be reopened and
In the final weeks of the 2023 term, the High Court had cause to focus on the
doctrine of
stare decisis
as applied to constitutional cases. In three
different cases, the Court had to consider whether it was appropriate to
overrule constitutional
precedent. In
NZYQ v Minister for Immigration,
Citizenship and Multicultural
the Court overruled its 2004 judgment in
a precedent
had withstood various challenges for almost two decades. In
Vanderstock v
the Court divided on the question of whether to overturn
Dickenson’s Arcade v
a decision which had
withheld challenge for 50 years, but unanimously denied leave to reopen
Capital Duplicators v Australian Capital
New South Wales
was also asked in
Vunilagi v The
to reopen and re-explain or overrule
Only Edelman J considered it appropriate to consider this aspect of the appeal.
The three decisions offer new insights into when
and how the High Court will
overrule its previous decisions, and expose substantive and procedural questions
which persist in this
jurisprudence.
This column is
limited to one such question: whether the protection of constitutional
guarantees is relevant to the decision to reopen
and overrule constitutional
It is ‘now generally accepted that
is a constitutional
guarantee’;
this is the position advanced by some of the respondents in the pending
However, this has been
doubted by some
this is the position advanced by the
It is beyond the scope of this column to defend the view that
correctly understood as a constitutional guarantee. The aim of this
column, rather, is to consider, assuming it is a constitutional
guarantee, the
relevance of that status to questions of
stare decisis
. However, it is
also worth underscoring that
provides the Court with an
additional opportunity to clarify the scope and application of
the ‘underlying constitutional values ... to be given expression or
priority under
The principles of
stare decisis
as applied to constitutional precedent
are a centrepiece of the submissions in
examines the relevant history of the case.
argues that the nature of
the case — concerning a constitutional guarantee —
relevant to the application of
stare decisis
this analysis to
Background and Procedural History
The proceedings involve two applications made under
Title Act 1993
(Cth) by Dr Yunupingu AM (deceased), on behalf of the Gumatj
Clan or Estate Group, related to the resource-rich Gove Peninsula, in
Arnhem Land in the Northern Territory. In the Full Court of the Federal Court of
Australia the claimants sought a determination
of native title over this land
and compensation
for the alleged effects on native title of certain executive and legislative
acts done after the Northern Territory became a territory
of the Commonwealth in
1911, but prior to the coming into force of the
Northern Territory
Self-Government Act 1978
It was uncontested that the case was ‘the latest in a long
campaign by Yolngu peoples for the recognition of their
The pending appeal raises several complex and constitutionally significant
questions, including the following:
(1) Does the just terms requirement in
Constitution
apply to a Commonwealth law that is supported by the territories power in
and no other head of power in
(2) Is a Commonwealth law that grants or asserts interests in land, such as
to extinguish or impair native title rights in that land,
a law with respect to
an acquisition of property within the meaning of
so as to attract the
just terms requirement?
(3) Did the grant of a pastoral lease by South Australia in 1903 that
excepted and reserved timber, minerals and other substances
extinguish a
non-exclusive native title right to use the natural resources of the land
insofar as that native title right relates
This column focuses on the background, reasoning and argumentation with
respect to one aspect of the first question only. The first
question broadly
concerns the application of the just terms requirement in
territories power in
In the Full Court of the Federal Court, this
question was answered by applying the doctrine of precedent:
had overruled
and was binding law. According to
the just terms requirement in
Constitution
applies to laws supported by the territories power in
decided in 1969,
concerned mineral rights
ordinances passed with respect to the (then) Territory of Papua and New Guinea.
The Court held that the territories
Constitution
does not attract the just terms requirement. This was on the basis that the
territories power is ‘plenary in quality and unlimited
and unqualified in
point of subject matter’
and ‘akin to that possessed by the States ... to make laws for the
compulsory acquisition of property without necessarily providing
in those laws
for terms of acquisition which can be seen in the circumstances to be
decided in 2009,
involved a proceeding, on
demurrer, regarding the validity of two Acts of the Howard Government
underpinning the Northern Territory
National Emergency Response (or
Intervention), passed under
Constitution
was impugned on the basis that it constituted an acquisition of property
otherwise than on just terms, in contravention
of s 51(xxxi). Allowing the
demurrer, a majority of the Court observed that
ought to be
overruled. The Full Federal Court in
Yunupingu v Commonwealth
for four of the Justices in
, ‘a necessary step in their
reasoning was the proposition that s 51(xxxi) applies to an acquisition of
property pursuant to
a law made only under
In the appeal pending before the High Court, the legal battlefield shifts
from the doctrine of precedent to the doctrine of
stare decisis
If the Court accepts that
a key question for all parties is whether either
should be reopened and overruled. The Commonwealth challenges
the Full Federal Court decision as to the binding nature of
It argues that
is binding (that is, that
did not overrule
). In the alternative, it submits the Court
should reopen and overrule
. The Respondents maintain that
is binding. If not, they submit the Court should reopen and
Stare Decisis in the Constitutional Setting: The
Role of Constitutional Guarantees
The Sui Generis Nature of Stare Decisis in the
Constitutional Setting
It is well recognised that the decision to overrule constitutional precedent
is governed by different considerations than the decision
to overturn precedent
concerning statutory construction or the common
This is because the ‘sworn loyalty’ of the High Court is to the
Constitution
first of all’ rather than the doctrine of
stare decisis
constitutional cases
, it is ‘not ... better that the
Court should be persistently wrong than that it should be ultimately
The reasoning of
the Court in an earlier judgment on a constitutional question ‘may not be
used as a substitute for the
Constitution
is at least partly because ‘[e]rrors in constitutional interpretation are
not remediable by the
legislature’.
The Court has noted that outside the referendum procedure, the only way a
question of constitutional interpretation can be altered
is by the Court
reopening and overruling
This means the threshold for reopening and overruling constitutional precedent
is lower than in other matters.
Notwithstanding this, the question of whether to reopen and overrule
constitutional cases is still subject to ‘ a strongly conservative
cautionary principle, adopted in the interests of continuity and consistency in
Exceptional
circumstances will be required to overrule a constitutional holding and caution
should be exercised in so doing.
An error in constitutional interpretation alone is usually not sufficient and
would need to be supported by other factors before
stare decisis
The four factors set out in
John v Federal Commissioner of Taxation
are typically cited as matters that may justify departure from earlier
These factors
(1) whether the earlier case rested upon ‘a principle carefully worked
out in a significant succession of cases’;
(2) whether there were differences between the justices in the reasoning in
the earlier case;
(3) whether the earlier case had ‘achieved no useful result but ... led
to considerable inconvenience’; and
(4) whether the earlier case ‘had not been independently acted on in a
manner which militated against
reconsideration’.
However, the following doctrinal examination of overruling in constitutional
cases suggests this list of factors is incomplete.
Is the Protection of Constitutional Guarantees
Relevant to the Application of Stare Decisis Principles?
Another factor that has been historically
relevant to the
Court’s decision whether or not to overrule is the impact of the
constitutional precedent on the constitutional
guarantees or individual rights
protected by the
Constitution
the just terms requirement is one such individual
an important opportunity for the Court to clarify the relevance and weight of
this factor when applying
stare decisis
to constitutional precedent.
The factor was relied on in
Street v Queensland Bar
Association
The case was
brought by a New South Wales barrister who was refused admission by the
Queensland Bar unless he guaranteed he would
practise principally in Queensland.
He argued that this infringed
Constitution
, a provision
which prohibits discrimination on the basis of state residency. This argument
required the High Court to overrule
Davies v Western
cases which had held that the challenged requirements were
constitutional as they applied equally to all
Mason CJ decided to
overrule the two precedents as they supported an incorrect interpretation of
‘an important provision in
Constitution
dealing with
individual rights central to
stated that ‘the doctrine of stare decisis ... is
least cogent
its application to those few provisions which are calculated to protect human
rights and fundamental
In addition,
McHugh J stated that ‘
most importantly
, the decision, if followed,
will greatly reduce the scope of a great constitutional protection for the
residents of this
Boeddu and Haigh
note that their Honours did not simply rely on disagreement with the prior
precedents as sufficient to overrule
these decisions. Instead, the emphasis on
as an individual right acted as ‘a short
supporting the
decision to overrule.
Similar reasoning was used by Gummow J in
, and this is of
particular relevance to
the Court considered whether to overturn
held that when an issue before the Court relates to ‘an important
provision of the
Constitution
which deals with
individual rights
... the “Court has a responsibility to set the matter
Gummow J relied on rights-based reasoning as part of his decision to overrule
Conversely, but relatedly, that no rights would be adversely affected in the
precedent being challenged was a factor contributing
to the decision to overrule
Commonwealth v Hospital Contribution Fund of
Writing in 2003,
Boeddu and Haigh argued that, together, these statements from
suggest that
once the Court is asked to consider an individual right granted or protected by
a constitutional provision, then deciding upon the
interpretation for that section, rather than one supported by precedent, becomes
the overriding aim. ...
In these decisions the need to adhere to precedent has been inversely related to
the importance of the constitutional subject matter
involved. In particular,
constitutionally enshrined individual rights have been categorised as being more
important than some ‘other’
constitutional principles and thus more
likely to outweigh the need to preserve
precedents.
2023 jurisprudence provides some support for this claim.
The majority of the Court in
denied leave to reopen
and did not engage in a detailed application of the
factors or other discussion of
stare decisis
in the constitutional
setting. Notwithstanding this, Edelman J, in dissent, impliedly endorsed the
claim that the subject matter of
the impugned case (and, relatedly, whether the
case causes injustice) is a relevant factor to the application of
. His Honour observed:
There may even be cases that are so fundamentally contrary to basic principle,
involving reasoning that is so
or involving such significant
and manifest error or
, that the result or reasoning should
never be permitted to stand even if the decision might be thought to have become
structurally
embedded and even if overruling would lead to large consequences.
Such cases are likely to be extremely rare. But, if and when those
cases arise,
a judge’s ethical duty precludes timorous acceptance of grave injustice
even if the price of that duty is perpetual
passage suggests that
stare decisis
is weaker where the impugned
constitutional precedent is ‘contrary to basic principle’ and
involves ‘significant
and manifest ... injustice’. While Edelman J
did not expressly invoke the language of individual rights, safeguards or
guarantees,
his Honour’s reasoning possibly captures both constitutional
precedents concerning express constitutional safeguards alongside
category of constitutional precedents that generate injustice. This could
possibly also include constitutional precedents
concerning structural
implications drawn from the
Constitution
and having rights-protecting
ramifications.
the Court unanimously overturned
This line of jurisprudence does not concern an express constitutional
guarantee; instead, it concerns the constitutionally guaranteed
separation of
judicial powers. This doctrine, sourced in the text and structure of the
Constitution
, arguably has rights-protecting ramifications for
individuals the subject of judicial and executive power in Australia. In
particular,
concerned the constitutional immunity drawn in
Minister for Immigration, Local Government and Ethnic Affairs
the involuntary detention of a citizen in custody by the state is penal or
punitive in character and, under our system of government,
exists only as an
incident of the exclusively judicial function of adjudging and punishing
concerned the application of this constitutional immunity to indefinite
immigration detention of non-citizens in Australia by the
executive. In
the High Court had upheld as constitutionally valid the
indefinite immigration detention of a stateless Palestinian man.
the identification of ‘error’ in or
‘incompatibility’ of
revealed by conflict
with ‘a stream of
authority’,
was the basis
for granting leave to reopen and for overruling. The lack of ‘consistency
and continuity’
in light of subsequent jurisprudence appears to be the
Court’s predominant consideration in favour of overruling. This factor
(briefly) weighed against one countervailing factor:
Having regard to the importance of continuity and consistency in the application
fundamental constitutional principle
, the legislative reliance and
implicit legislative endorsement which weighed in favour of not reopening the
statutory construction
necessarily assumes less
significance in considering reopening of its constitutional holding. The same is
true of administrative
inconvenience.
short, the inconsistency of
with the immunity stated in
and subsequently understood and applied was the reason for overturning
While the Court did not
consider the impact of the impugned
precedent on the liberty of the individual or the rights-protecting
ramifications of the scope
principle, the above passage does
refer to ‘the importance of consistency and continuity in the application
fundamental constitutional principle’. This possibly indicates
the relevance of the importance of the constitutional subject
. Moreover, the substantive differences between
were arguably averted to by the Court in the following statement:
The Lim principle would be devoid of substance were it enough to justify
detention, other than through the exercise of judicial power
in the adjudgment
and punishment of guilt, that the detention be designed to achieve an identified
legislative objective that there
is no real prospect of achieving in the
reasonably foreseeable future.
It is clear that the substantive differences between the
principle as articulated in
remaining stream of authority that the Court is referring to lie in the
different articulations of the scope of executive
and judicial power, which
result in different protections of the liberty of the
individual.
Responding to the case, Sanderson and Malone considered that
[t]he choice not to avert to the dire human consequences of the holding in
may have helped to clearly position
as a decision
based in law, in anticipation of the kind of political backlash against activism
which has followed several High Court
decisions giving rise to constitutional
developments.
is certainly plausible that the Court did not resort to such express reasoning
because it was prioritising other defensible stylistic
choices (such as
publishing a short, unanimous
or because the
‘consistency and continuity’ ground was
reopening and overruling. However, this does not necessarily mean that
rights-based reasoning is not a valid consideration
in the application of
stare decisis
to constitutional precedent, or that the subject matter of
the case (concerning a structural limitation with liberty-protecting
ramifications)
was not relevant to the Court’s decision to overrule.
Alternatively, Is There a Category of
Constitutional Cases of ‘Vital Importance’ That Have Particular
Weight in Stare
Decisis Questions?
Part III(B)
illustrated that there is evidence
for a weaker
application of
stare decisis
to precedent that concerns constitutional
guarantees or individual rights. However,
Part III(C)
suggests that there is
also an argument, on a careful reading of the jurisprudence, for a broader set
of constitutional cases where
the doctrine of
stare decisis
is weakened.
Building on the previous section, it could be argued that
support for the understanding that a weaker application of
stare decisis
is warranted for certain constitutional cases in particular (albeit not only
those that touch an express individual right).
Historically, Australian
commentators have limited the identification of this factor — that the
protection of constitutional
guarantees is relevant to the application of
stare decisis
principles — to the individual rights cases explored
above, citing
(concerning
(concerning
s 51(xxxi)).
However, early jurisprudence may also
support a more capacious framing of this category. It is suggested here that the
factor could
be broadened beyond express constitutional safeguards and instead
be based, in broad terms, on the ‘importance’ of the
subject matter
of the constitutional case. It may be equally relevant to the application of
stare decisis
whether the impugned precedent touches on an express
constitutional guarantee, a freedom secured by a constitutional implication,
another constitutional doctrine of ‘vital
importance’.
There is some support for this framing in the jurisprudence. In
Australian Broadcasting Corporation
for example,
a unanimous
Court held that
stare decisis
is weaker (that is, ‘the Court will
re-examine a decision’) ‘if
it involves a question of
“vital constitutional importance” and
is “manifestly
persist as to whether these terms are or can be ‘satisfactorily
In an arguably
similar vein, in
HC Sleigh Ltd v South Australia
said the Court needed to be ‘convinced’ of both the decision’s
its causing of intolerable ‘social, economic or
political consequences’.
Boeddu and Haigh understand this as the Court proposing different tests in cases
concerning fiscal arrangements than those it fashioned
for overruling individual
rights cases, comparing this reasoning to that in
However, the
reference to intolerable
consequences could also be understood as
recognising that cases touching on certain subject matter are to be treated
differently
(while also accepting that the broader comment invokes the third
An additional example is drawn from the more recent case of
This case, which has not been analysed from the perspective of
, concerned the interpretation of
Constitution
That provision renders certain persons incapable of being chosen or of sitting
as a Senator or a Member of the House of Representatives
if they have any direct
or indirect pecuniary interest in any agreement with the Commonwealth Public
Service. The case concerned
the only decision
of the Court concerning
, should be reopened and
Nettle and Gordon JJ
acknowledged that the impugned precedent was ‘of a special kind’
because it involved ‘constitutional
provisions respecting Parliament and
its members’.
arguably also reminiscent of Edelman J’s comments in
The brief review of the case law possible within the scope of this column
suggests that there is a set of cases — a broader
category than previously
understood — where the Court has been prepared to treat the importance of
the subject matter as weighing
against the application of
stare decisis.
It may be that the critical issue is not whether a provision, principle or
implication can be characterised as a constitutional guarantee
or individual
right. Rather, it is that certain provisions, principles or implications raise
such fundamental consequences or questions
of justice that
stare decisis
is more likely to give way and that questions impacting individual rights
are more likely to be of such a nature.
Application to
The pending appeal
presents an important opportunity for the Court to
explain the relevance of the protection of constitutional guarantees to
reasoning, and to articulate the scope of this factor — that
is, does it apply only to express constitutional guarantees or
to a broader
sub-category of constitutional precedent. Several of the respondents emphasise
the status of the just terms requirement
as a constitutional safeguard. The
submissions made on behalf of Dr Yunupingu (the First Respondent) indicate that
the ‘heart’
of the present appeal
involves a consideration as to whether Indigenous people should be denied the
protection of a
constitutional safeguard
that applies to property owned
by other Australians, based on a discriminatory denigration of native title as
‘inherently defeasible’
for the purposes of
First Respondent emphasises that
this Court would not be intimidated by the prospect that its function of
interpreting and applying the
Constitution
... may occasion fiscal
inconvenience to the Commonwealth. That is
especially so in the case of the
great constitutional safeguard
represents.
Moreover, the First Respondent observes:
If it be the case that a ‘vast’ Commonwealth liability would arise
under the Full Court’s orthodox approach to
ss 51(xxxi)
Constitution
, that could only be on account of a ‘vast’
number of Indigenous peoples of the Northern Territory having been historically
and unjustly dispossessed of their property, to the Commonwealth’s
countervailing benefit, in contravention of the limits on
Commonwealth power
Constitution
. ... Insofar as the scale of such unconstitutional
acquisition of property on other than just terms is ‘vast’, that
only underscore the importance of the Court recognising the specific
constitutional wrong underlying the present
In numerous important cases in this Court’s history, the application of
Constitution
in accordance with legal principle has occasioned
substantial inconvenience, whether financial, administrative, or other. The
Commonwealth
has occasionally sought to sustain a position on the basis of what
it urged would be the intolerable consequences of a contrary
In each such case, this Court has not eschewed its responsibility to enforce the
Constitution
, but has instead embraced it. No less would be true in the
present appeal which at its heart involves a consideration as to whether
Indigenous people should be denied the protection of a constitutional safeguard
that applies to property owned by other Australians,
based on a discriminatory
denigration of native title as ‘inherently defeasible’ for the
purposes of
s 51(xxxi).
response to the Commonwealth submission that
is good law, the
Rirratjingu Parties (the Twenty-Fifth to Twenty-Eighth Respondents) seek leave
to be reopened and overruled. The Rirratjingu Parties also
expressly cite the relevance of the application of
stare decisis
principles to cases where the ‘constitutional question is of
“vital” importance’ such as where it concerns
‘constitutional
guarantee’.
Likewise, the Northern Land Council and the Arnhem Land Aboriginal Land Trust
(the Twenty-Ninth Respondent and the Thirty-Second
Respondent, respectively)
— together, the NLC Parties — submit that ‘inconvenience does
not overcome principle’
an argument reminiscent of the First Respondent’s argument and which
raises, albeit in different [or more oblique] language,
the significance of the
constitutional question in the pending appeal.
Notably, the Commonwealth (the Appellant) denies the status of the just terms
requirement as an individual
Moreover, in the context
of the submission that
did not overturn
the Commonwealth submits:
That said, given the stark differences of opinion expressed in [the impugned
precedent] ... in this Court the answer to the above
[of whether
the territories power is subject to the just terms requirement]
appropriately resolved by reference to constitutional principle than by
arguments about the ratio of those
Rirratjingu Parties contest this submission, arguing that it seeks to
‘skip over’ issues of precedent:
The Court should pause before taking that approach. Constitutional principle
does not exist in a vacuum, disconnected from precedent.
The pages of the law
reports are not ‘blank’; they record the judgments in
Interestingly,
the Commonwealth submission is not framed in the language of
; nor does it seek to argue that the case should
determined by the doctrine of precedent because it concerns a constitutional
safeguard or some other special category of constitutional
questions of
fundamental importance or with rights-protecting ramifications. Instead, this
submission is more akin to the general
claim identified at the outset of this
column: that
stare decisis
is weaker in the constitutional setting.
It thus appears there are at least three possibilities with respect to
stare decisis
in the constitutional setting:
Stare decisis
is weaker in the constitutional setting generally
(the Commonwealth position).
Stare decisis
is weaker in the constitutional setting generally
especially so when assessing precedent that concerns an express
constitutional guarantee (the position of Dr Yunupingu, the Rirratjingu
and the NLC Parties).
Stare decisis
is weaker in the constitutional setting generally
especially so when assessing precedent that concerns constitutional
principles of fundamental importance, whether these be express
constitutional
guarantees or requirements or implications drawn from other provisions (the
alternative explored in
Part III(C)
of this column).
If the role of express constitutional guarantees is relevant to the
application of
stare decisis
a further question arises.
This question is relevant to
, though beyond the scope of
this short column:
[I]s overruling only more appropriate where it will increase an individual right
or does the same higher standard apply where it
would restrict it? In other
stare decisis
less important to incorrect interpretations of
constitutional rights that had previously expanded such a right or should it be
on the historic applications of this factor in
stare decisis
Boeddu and Haigh initially note: ‘It is not clear in
whether their Honours’ readiness
to overrule was influenced by the fact that the constitutional right involved in
precedent.’
[T]he tenor of these decisions suggest[s] that the Court would be less inclined
to take away rights than to ensure protection of
rights. This is especially true
where individual rights are vying against collective or governmental rights
— the Court’s
past attitude appears to have been driven by a need to
prevent restricting
the narrower formulation (that reopening is only more appropriate where it will
increase an individual right) supports both
of the claims by Dr Yunupingu, the
Rirratjingu Parties and the NLC Parties that
should not be
reopened and, alternatively, that
should be reopened. Applying
the broader formulation (that reopening is more appropriate wherever the
impugned precedent touches upon
an individual right)
supports the
Commonwealth’s argument that
should be reopened (although
this was not an argument made in the Commonwealth’s written submissions).
Within the scope permitted by this column, I have also considered whether the
category of cases of special relevance is broader than
the category of cases
that concern an express constitutional guarantee. I have suggested that the
‘importance’ of the
subject matter of the impugned constitutional
case generally may be a relevant consideration for the application of
. This may include cases where the impugned precedent touches on an
express constitutional guarantee, concerns a freedom secured by
a constitutional
implication or touches some other ‘vital’ or
‘fundamental’ constitutional provision or principle.
However, this
possibility provokes further questions, including most importantly how this
broader category is to be defined. It is
hoped the Court takes the opportunity
to clarify the relevance of the rights-protecting factor and
the scope of its operation.
Please cite this column as:
Ashleigh Barnes, ‘Stare Decisis and Constitutional Guarantees:
Commonwealth v Yunupingu
[2024] SydLawRw 17
(2024) 46(3)
Sydney Law Review
DOI: https://doi.org/10.30722/slr.19761
This work is licensed via CC BY-ND 4.0
https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nd/4.0. Unmodified content is free to
use with proper
attribution
* Lecturer, UNSW Sydney, New South Wales, Australia; Email:
ashleigh.barnes@unsw.edu.au; ORCID iD:
https://orcid.org/0009-0007-6322-6452.
I thank Professor Rosalind Dixon for her helpful comments on this piece and
Jemimah Roberts for insightful conversations regarding
this jurisprudence. Any
errors are my own.
Commonwealth v Yunupingu
(High Court of Australia, Case No D5/2023).
The Court will also consider
whether a Commonwealth law that extinguishes or impairs native title rights in
land is a law with respect
to an acquisition of property within the meaning of
so as to attract the just terms requirement, and whether the grant of a
pastoral lease by South Australia in 1903 that excepted and
reserved timber,
minerals and other substances extinguished a non-exclusive native title right to
use the natural resources of the
land insofar as that native title right relates
to minerals. The appeal thus concerns the appropriate interpretation of the
, including touching on remedies and the content of the
Commonwealth’s constitutional obligation. This question is addressed
another column contribution: see Lael K Weis and Rosalind Dixon,
‘Rethinking “On Just Terms”:
Commonwealth v
[2024] SydLawRw 18
(2024) 46(3)
Sydney Law Review
Wurridjal v
Commonwealth
(2009) 237 CLR 309
Tau v Commonwealth
[1969] HCA 62
(1969) 119 CLR 564
NZYQ v Minister for
Immigration, Citizenship and Multicultural Affairs
(2023) 415 ALR 254
Al-Kateb v Godwin
[2004] HCA 37
(2004) 219 CLR 562
Vanderstock v Victoria
[2023] HCA 30
(2023) 98 ALJR 208
Vanderstock
Dickenson’s Arcade
Pty Ltd v Tasmania
(1974) 130 CLR 177.
Capital Duplicators Pty Ltd
v Australian Capital Territory [No 2]
[1993] HCA 67
(1993) 178 CLR 561.
Ha v New South Wales
[1997] HCA 34
(1997) 189 CLR 465.
Vunilagi v The Queen
(2023) 411 ALR 224 (‘
R v Bernasconi
[1915] HCA 13
(1915) 19 CLR 629.
My ongoing research with
Jemimah Roberts probes these questions.
Lael K Weis,
‘“On Just Terms”, Revisited’
(2017) 45(2)
Federal Law
Trade Practices Commission v Tooth & Co Ltd
[1979] HCA 47
(1979) 142 CLR 397
, 403 (Barwick CJ) (‘a very great constitutional
safeguard’);
Newcrest Mining (WA) Ltd v Commonwealth
[1997] HCA 38
(1997) 190 CLR
, 613 (Gummow J) (‘an important provision ... which deals with
individual rights’); 655, 661 (Kirby J) (‘relevant
fundamental rights of all persons’, an ‘express constitutional
promise’) (‘
that some of the respondents did not make submissions on this point.
Rosalind Dixon,
‘Overriding Guarantee of Just Terms or Supplementary Source of Power?
Constitution
(2005) 27(4)
Commonwealth,
‘Appellant’s Submissions’, Submission in
Commonwealth v
, Case No D5/2023, 28 March 2024, 16 [43] (‘Appellant’s
Submissions’).
Yunupingu v Commonwealth
(2023) 298 FCR 160
, 165–6 [1]–[2] (Mortimer CJ, Moshinsky and
Banks-Smith JJ) (‘
Yunupingu FCAFC
Ibid 166 [3] (Mortimer CJ,
Moshinsky and Banks-Smith JJ).
Evidently, the case
involves several grounds of appeal. This means that even if the Court finds for
the respondents regarding the
application of the just terms requirement to the
territories power, the Court may find against them on either or both of the
Yunupingu FCAFC
) 221–6 [257]–[279]
(Mortimer CJ, Moshinsky and Banks-Smith JJ).
) 570 (Barwick CJ, McTiernan, Kitto,
Menzies, Windeyer, Owen and Walsh JJ).
Ibid 569 (Barwick CJ,
McTiernan, Kitto, Menzies, Windeyer, Owen and Walsh JJ).
Northern Territory
National Emergency Response Act 2007
Families, Community Services
and Indigenous Affairs and Other Legislation Amendment (Northern Territory
National Emergency Response
and Other Measures) Act 2007
Yunupingu FCAFC
) 223 [266] (Mortimer CJ, Moshinsky
and Banks-Smith JJ). For a helpful summary of
Yunupingu FCAFC
Aaron Moss, ‘The Constitutional Relationships between “Just
Terms” Acquisition, Territories, and Native Title:
Yunupingu on behalf of
the Gumatj Clan or Estate Group v Commonwealth of Australia’,
(Blog Post, 16 June 2023)
<https://www.auspublaw.org/blog/2023/6/the-constitutional-relationships-between-just-terms-acquisition-territories-and-native-title-yunupingu-on-behalf-of-the-gumatj-clan-or-estate-group-v-commonwealth-of-australia-2023-fcafc-75>.
Anthony Mason, ‘The
Use and Abuse of Precedent’
(1988) 4(2)
Australian Bar Review
94; Gian Boeddu and Richard Haigh, ‘Terms of Convenience: Examining
Constitutional Overrulings by the High Court’
[2003] FedLawRw 5
(2003) 31(1)
Federal Law
, 169; Michael Kirby, ‘Precedent Law, Practice and Trends in
(2007) 28(3)
Australian Bar Review
, 247; Joshua
Thomson and Madeleine Durand, ‘Overruling Constitutional Precedent’
(2021) 95(2)
Australian Law Journal
, 139. See also
Queensland Bar Association
[1989] HCA 53
(1989) 168 CLR 461
, 489 (Mason CJ), 518–19
(Brennan J), 549 (Dawson J), 588 (McHugh J) (‘
Tyler; Ex parte Foley
[1994] HCA 25
(1994) 181 CLR 18
, 38 (McHugh J) (‘
’). For an overview of the relevant principles regarding
decisions to overrule common law precedents, see Matthew Harding and
Ian Malkin,
‘Overruling in the High Court of Australia in Common Law Cases’
[2010] MelbULawRw 17
(2010) 34(2)
Melbourne University Law Review
For an overview of the
relevant principles regarding decisions to overrule statutory precedents, see
Lisa Burton Crawford and Dan
Meagher, ‘Statutory Precedents under the
“Modern Approach” to Statutory Interpretation’
[2020] SydLawRw 10
(2020) 42(2)
Sydney Law Review
Australian Agricultural
Co v Federated Engine-Drivers and Firemen’s Association of Australasia
[1913] HCA 41
(1913) 17 CLR 261
, 278 (Isaacs J).
Damjanovic & Sons
Pty Ltd v Commonwealth
[1968] HCA 42
(1968) 117 CLR 390
, 396 (Barwick CJ).
Lange v Australian
Broadcasting Corporation
[1997] HCA 25
(1997) 189 CLR 520
, 554 (Brennan CJ, Dawson,
Toohey, Gaudron, McHugh, Gummow and Kirby JJ) (citations omitted)
’). See also
Queensland v Commonwealth
[1977] HCA 60
139 CLR 585
, 598–9 (Gibbs J), 630 (Aickin J) (‘
Representation Case [No 2]
) 38 (McHugh J).
Cole v Whitfield
[1988] HCA 18
(1988) 165 CLR 360
) 400 (Brennan CJ, Dawson, Toohey,
Gaudron, McHugh, Gummow and Kirby JJ) (citations omitted). See also
Representation Case [No 2]
Commonwealth v Hospital Contribution Fund of Australia
(1982) 150 CLR 49
72 (Aickin J) (‘
Hospital Contribution Fund
Territory Representation
Case [No 2]
) 620 (Aickin J);
) 620 (Aickin J);
) 38 (McHugh
) 264 [36] (Gageler
CJ, Gordon, Edelman, Steward, Gleeson, Jagot and Beech-Jones JJ).
) 352 [70] (French CJ). See also at 353
[71] (French CJ);
259–60 [18] (Gageler CJ, Gordon, Edelman, Steward, Gleeson, Jagot and
Beech-Jones JJ) (referring to the ‘strongly conservative
principle’);
Vanderstock
) 315 [426] (Gordon J, citing Kitto
Hughes & Vale Pty Ltd v New South Wales
[1953] HCA 14
(1952) 87 CLR 49
(‘[e]ven in constitutional cases ... it is obviously undesirable that a
question decided by the Court after full consideration
should be re-opened
without grave reason’).
Territory Representation
Case [No 2]
) 599 (Gibbs CJ),
602 (Stephen J), 620 (Aickin J).
For an overview and
critique of the Court’s approach, see Boeddu and Haigh (n
); Thomson and Durand (n
John v Federal
Commissioner of Taxation
(1989) 166 CLR 417
Ibid 438–9 (Mason CJ,
Wilson, Dawson, Toohey and Gaudron JJ).
This section draws on the
See above nn
–15 and accompanying text.
Davies v Western
[1904] HCA 46
(1904) 2 CLR 29.
Henry v Boehm
[1973] HCA 32
128 CLR 482.
) 489 (emphasis added).
Ibid 518–19 (emphasis
Ibid 588 (emphasis
Boeddu and Haigh (n
Ibid 613 (emphasis added)
(citations omitted).
His Honour also relied on
other factors, such as that
significantly acted upon by the Parliament or territorial legislatures’:
Hospital Contribution
) 58 (Gibbs J)
(emphasising ‘[n]o one will be adversely affected if the decisions are
overruled’, in express comparison
Western Australia v Commonwealth
[1975] HCA 46
(1975) 134 CLR 201
Territory Representation Case [No 1]
Boeddu and Haigh (n
) 263 [164] (emphasis added).
Lim v Minister for
Immigration, Local Government and Ethnic Affairs
(1992) 176 CLR 1
27–8 (Brennan, Deane and Dawson JJ) (‘
) 264 [35] (Gageler CJ, Gordon, Edelman,
Steward, Gleeson, Jagot and Beech-Jones JJ)
Ibid 259 [17], 264
[36]–[38], [41] (Gageler CJ, Gordon, Edelman, Steward, Gleeson, Jagot and
Beech-Jones JJ).
Ibid 264 [36] (Gageler CJ,
Gordon, Edelman, Steward, Gleeson, Jagot and Beech-Jones JJ) (emphasis
Ibid 265–6 [45]
(Gageler CJ, Gordon, Edelman, Steward, Gleeson, Jagot and Beech-Jones JJ)
(emphasis added).
Ibid 264 [35] (Gageler CJ,
Gordon, Edelman, Steward, Gleeson, Jagot and Beech-Jones JJ).
Indeed, in the course of
explaining the authoritative background principles that are drawn from
the Court observed that ‘Ch III is concerned with
substance and not mere form, and ... it is the involuntary deprivation of
liberty itself that ordinarily constitutes punishment’: ibid 262 [28]
(Gageler CJ, Gordon, Edelman, Steward, Gleeson, Jagot
and Beech-Jones
Harry Sanderson and Meghan
Malone, ‘NZYQ: Consistency, Continuity, and Human Rights’,
(Blog Post, 5 February 2024)
<https://www.auspublaw.org/blog/2024/2/nzyq-‌consistency-‌continuity-and-human-rights>.
See Stephen McDonald,
‘NZYQ: A New Style of Unanimous Judgment for the High Court of
Australia’,
(Blog Post, 31 January 2024)
<https://www.auspublaw.org/blog/2024/1/‌nzyq-a-new-style-of-unanimous-judgment-for-the-high-court-of-australia>.
This suggestion does not
cure any concern as to the ‘ill-defined’ nature of the latter
category in particular: Boeddu
and Haigh (n
) 554 (Brennan CJ, Dawson, Toohey,
Gaudron, McHugh, Gummow and Kirby JJ) (citations omitted) (emphasis added).
Boeddu and Haigh (n
HC Sleigh Ltd v South
(1977) 136 CLR 475
Boeddu and Haigh (n
Re Day (No 2)
(2017) 263 CLR 201.
[1975] HCA 22
132 CLR 270.
Re Day (No 2)
) 220 [45] (‘There is the
consideration that persons may have ordered their affairs on the basis of that
decision, and may have
to act promptly to regularise them. In any event the
decision is of a special kind, involving as it does constitutional provisions
respecting Parliament and its members. If the construction adopted in
is affected by error, it should not be allowed to
See above n
and accompanying text.
Yunupingu on behalf of the
Gumatj Clan or Estate Group, ‘First Respondent’s Submissions’,
Submission in
Commonwealth v Yunupingu
, Case No D5/2023, 27 May 2024, 6
[10] (emphasis added).
Ibid [9] (citations
The Rirratjingu Parties,
‘Submissions of the Twenty-Fifth to Twenty-Eighth Respondents (The
Rirratjingu Parties)’, Submission
Commonwealth v Yunupingu
No D5/2023, 27 May 2024, 28–9 [92] (citations omitted) (‘Submissions
of the Twenty-Fifth to Twenty-Eighth Respondents’).
The Northern Land Council
and the Arnhem Land Aboriginal Land Trust, ‘Submissions of the NLC Parties
(Twenty-Ninth Respondent,
Northern Land Council, Thirty-Second Respondent,
Arnhem Land Aboriginal Land Trust)’, Submission in
Commonwealth v
, Case No D5/2023, 27 May 2024, 11 [28] (citations omitted).
Appellant’s
Submissions (n
The Rirratjingu Parties,
‘Submissions of the Twenty-Fifth to Twenty-Eighth Respondents (n
Boeddu and Haigh (n
Ibid (emphasis in
This echoes earlier calls
for more express reasoning in this regard: ibid 173–4.
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (152 KB)
PDF format (310 KB)
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter