URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/journals/UNSWLawJl/2025/25.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 15:45:12
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Keane, Katherine; Johnson, Hope; Lewis, Bridget --- "Rights Off the Table: Exploring Food Relief Governance in Australia Through a Human Rights Lens" [2025] UNSWLawJl 25; (2025) 48(3) UNSW Law Journal 753
A Food (In)security in the Australian Context
B Food Relief as the Primary Response to Food Insecurity
A Legal Foundation and Scope of the Right to Food
B Developing the Analytical Framework
A The Queensland Approach to Food Relief
B Analysis: The SA Approach
RIGHTS OFF THE TABLE: EXPLORING FOOD RELIEF GOVERNANCE IN
AUSTRALIA THROUGH A HUMAN RIGHTS LENS
KATHERINE KEANE,* HOPE JOHNSON** AND BRIDGET LEWIS***
Australians increasingly depend on food relief
due to various factors, including the cost of living crisis. The charitable
of food relief has become the major national response to food
insecurity at the individual and household levels. Legal scholarship
investigate how food relief is governed in Australia. This article develops a
human rights-based analytical framework to
assess Australia’s governance
of the food relief system. Using this framework and focusing on three Australian
legal jurisdictions
– the Commonwealth, Queensland, and South Australia
– this article uncovers gaps in the law, policy and institutional
infrastructure that reflect a failure to govern food relief in the context of
binding obligations to fulfil the right to food. This
article identifies the
need for a comprehensive and rights-based law and policy response to food relief
that focuses not only on
immediate requirements, but also on realising the right
to food over the long term.
I INTRODUCTION
The human right to adequate food imposes legal obligations on States to take
necessary measures to ensure everyone is free from hunger
and can fully enjoy
the right as soon as possible.
Those measures include strengthening people’s access to resources and
means to ensure their livelihood, including food security
(a precondition to
fulfilling the right to food), and providing for the right directly where people
are unable to do so for themselves.
In Australia, food aid, known as food relief, has become the major response to
food insecurity at the individual and household levels.
As such, it represents a
key way through which Australia seeks to fulfil the right to food.
Reliance on food relief has increased dramatically across the country in
recent years.
In 2023, the House of
Representatives Standing Committee on Agriculture finished an inquiry into food
security in Australia (‘Food
Security Inquiry’). The Inquiry
recognised the critical importance of food relief and recommended, among other
things, establishing
a comprehensive and regular national survey of household
food insecurity and increasing federal funding for food
Despite the central role that food relief currently plays in the Australian
food security landscape, legal scholarship on its governance
is very limited and
has focused more broadly on food security and other food systems
This article provides the
first doctrinal analysis of food relief governance in Australia. To evaluate how
food relief is governed
in Australia, this article develops an analytical
framework drawing on international human rights law and specifically, the human
right to food. Using this framework, this article employs a human rights
analysis to critically appraise the extent to which food
relief governance in
Australia fulfils the right to food. In doing so, this research contributes to
the growing legal literature
in Australia on food law and policy generally as
well as public health literature focused on Australian food relief.
This article answers two research questions. First, how is food relief
currently governed in Australia? Second, how does Australia’s
approach to food relief align with its legal obligations to fulfil the right to
adequate food? To answer these questions,
we reviewed existing research findings
on food security, food relief and the right to adequate food in Australia and
synthesised
international human rights law principles regarding the right to
food in a food relief context. We then conducted a mapping exercise
of the laws
and policies related to food relief in Australia and undertook a human
rights-based analysis to determine whether Australia’s
governance approach
aligns with its international obligations. After a broader initial
investigation, we chose the Commonwealth,
Queensland and South Australian
(‘SA’) jurisdictions for analysis in this article. We selected the
Commonwealth because
international human rights obligations are situated at the
national level, and the federal government is the key source of funding
food relief sector. We selected Queensland as an example of a state-level
to have limited governance
structures in place for food relief. SA was chosen because it had implemented
measures to govern food
relief in the context of the right to food. For reasons
of scope, food relief through local government initiatives was excluded,
food relief in the context of natural disasters.
Part II of this article outlines the present state of food insecurity in
Australia, including its causes. It describes how food relief
currently operates
as Australia’s principal modality for addressing the immediate food needs
of the population. Part III of
this article then presents an analytical
framework for conducting a human rights-based assessment of food relief
governance, drawn
from a synthesis of key human rights principles distilled from
authoritative international and domestic sources. Part IV presents
findings from
an analysis of the Commonwealth jurisdiction, while Part V presents findings
from Queensland and SA and evaluates the
differences between the two state
rights obligations.
Part VI of this article discusses the key findings and
implications of food relief governance in the context of the right to food.
Our findings indicate that governance of food relief in the context of the
right to food in Australia is greatly underdeveloped and
has significant gaps.
We argue that existing food relief governance does not meet Australia’s
obligations for the right to
adequate food. Among various weaknesses and gaps,
we highlight how the current approach to food relief governance lacks engagement
with durable solutions to food insecurity. Food relief governance must be
reorientated towards reducing reliance on food relief and
fulfilling the right
to adequate food.
II FOOD RELIEF IN AUSTRALIA: AN OVERVIEW
A Food (In)security in
the Australian Context
As with other high-income nations, food insecurity in Australia is not a
problem of food shortage (ie, availability in terms of the
amount of food
produced and imported)
but of access (ie, accessibility in terms of
economic and physical access).
nation, Australia produces more food than its population could consume, and much
of it is exported to other
However, food security
‘is more than a question of quantity of food being
As demonstrated by
scholarship since the work of Amartya Sen in the late 20
famines, the existence of enough food in a country is no guarantee that everyone
will be fed.
If people do not have
the resources to buy food, then it does not matter how much food is being
Food security at an
individual or household level is thus not determined by the food security status
of the nation overall.
In high-income countries like Australia, food insecurity is an equity issue
connected to income.
secure means one has the financial means to acquire sufficient food for an
adequate diet so that other basic needs are
not threatened or
compromised.
In this way, food
insecurity in Australia is not really about food. It is about economic factors
like income and labour force status,
which directly affect food
The main driver of food
insecurity in Australia is the inability of disadvantaged households to afford
nutritious food, either as
a result of chronic poverty or an acute financial
The recent Senate
inquiry into the extent and nature of poverty in Australia heard from people
with lived experience of poverty who
described ‘the impossible daily
choices they make between food, shelter and
healthcare’.
The fact that food insecurity in high-income countries like Australia is not
a ‘food’ problem is demonstrated by the solutions
proposed by
experts to fix it. In a recent international Delphi consensus study conducted by
Danielle Gallegos et al with food security
experts, the three top-ranked
national policy intervention priorities for addressing food insecurity in
high-income countries did
not even mention food. The priorities were: (1)
income, eg, social welfare payments, universal basic income and a legislated
wage; (2) comprehensive poverty alleviation strategies; and (3)
addressing insecure and under-employment, and working
conditions.
Lower-ranked policy
priorities did address food directly, such as the need for a multi-sector food
and nutrition security policy,
and to measure, map and report food
With structural
poverty a leading cause of food insecurity, food relief is only one of a suite
of broader interventions required
to address the issue.
Socio-economic disadvantage in Australia that drives chronic food insecurity
is influenced by factors such as unemployment, unstable
or precarious
employment, low wage growth, housing insecurity, insufficient social assistance
payments and geographical (regional
and remote) location, as well as personal
factors such as illness, disability and limited
Groups that are
likely to be more food insecure than the general population include low-income
and single-parent households; children;
First Nations communities; people living
in rural and remote communities; people from culturally and linguistically
diverse backgrounds,
particularly refugees and asylum seekers; people
experiencing homelessness; and people with
disabilities.
In recent years, food insecurity has increasingly affected demographic groups
that were historically less vulnerable, as their financial
obligations outpace
their income, including households with individuals in paid employment,
middle-income households, and
There has been a
notable shift in the most commonly cited cause of food insecurity, from
unexpected expenses to expected, everyday
Foodbank Australia cites
the rising cost of living, the COVID-19 pandemic, and the frequency and severity
of national disasters as
playing a role in the increasing diversity of food
insecure households.
households, food is the only flexible budget component; there is no flexibility
on fixed costs such as rent.
With grocery prices rising significantly since 2021 and outpacing inflation in
the context of a cost-of-living crisis in
along with increased
private rents and insecure housing, the ability of many Australians to afford
adequate food, especially without
adversely impacting other needs, has been
Thus, Australia is
described as having ‘significant pockets’ of food insecurity at the
individual and household
However, the true extent of food insecurity is unknown because food security
(or insecurity) is not extensively measured regularly
by the Australian
Government.
The most recent
national food security data released by the Australian Bureau of Statistics
comes from the National Nutrition and
Physical Activity Survey, conducted as
part of the Australian Health Survey in
Annual data
collected by the nation’s largest charitable food agency, Foodbank
Australia, indicates that food insecurity increased
across all states and
territories of Australia in
According to
their results, 36% of Australian households reported some level of food
insecurity in the 12 months to July 2023, and
3.7 million households experienced
moderate to severe levels of food
insecurity.
B Food Relief as the
Primary Response to Food Insecurity
Australia does not have an official domestic definition of food relief. Thus,
this article puts forward a definition adapted from
international definitions of
Domestic food relief
in Australia can be defined as:
assistance or support in the form of food or
for the procurement of food, which is aimed at improving the food security of
individuals
and households
Food relief may be accessed through
informal sources, such as family and friends, or formal
The governance of
formal food relief in Australia forms the focus of this article.
forms of formal food relief in Australia encompass both the direct provision of
food (eg, food parcels, hampers, community
kitchens, food pantries, soup
kitchens or vans, hot or frozen meals, and fresh fruit and vegetables) along
with mechanisms to improve
access to food (eg, food banks, which collect and
distribute rescued or donated food to charitable agencies and are at the heart
of food relief efforts in Australia and other high-income nations, cash or
supermarket vouchers, and discounts on food purchased
at specific
A vast network of charitable non-governmental organisations
(‘NGOs’) and religious institutions undertake formal food
services in Australia.
of food aid is known as ‘third sector’ food aid – emergency
food distributed by non-profit organisations
instituted separately from the
government.
Unlike the United
States (‘US’), the Australian Government does not directly operate a
national food relief program.
Instead, the government plays a funding role, targeting food insecurity through
grants to charitable food relief agencies and indirectly
via broad social safety
nets such as social assistance
At state, territory
and local government levels, funding is also provided to charitable agencies to
provide food relief services.
Support from philanthropic donations and the commercial food sector supplements
this government funding.
size and scope of food relief agencies vary, but they are
Food relief delivered by the charitable sector is widely considered to be
Australia’s primary response to food insecurity, as
is the case in other
high-income countries.
recent Food Security Inquiry focused on various threats to agricultural
production (such as climate change and economic viability)
for long-term
national food security. However, a chapter from the Inquiry’s report did
address food insecurity at individual
and household levels. Recommendations
included developing a better understanding of the causes of food insecurity in
Australia, regularly
measuring domestic food insecurity, increasing education
regarding nutrition, considering school meals programs (which are generally
considered part of food assistance), increasing federal funding for the food
relief sector, and introducing specific tax incentives
The Food Security
Inquiry also provided some specific recommendations regarding food insecurity in
remote communities, including
First Nations communities, and recommended, in
particular, that the government support community
These recommendations
partly reflect the continuing emphasis in Australian policy discourse on
improving food relief as a primary
response to food insecurity.
Because food insecurity in Australia is now often a long-term issue affecting
individuals and households for months or years, reliance
on food relief, which
originated as a temporary or emergency response measure, can be
protracted.
individuals and families in Australia access food relief services for days or
weeks, others may rely on ‘emergency’
food relief for months, years
or even generations. Research suggests that this increasing entrenchment of
long-term provision of
food assistance in Australia is mirrored in Canada and
the United Kingdom, other high-income countries which have seen a sharp rise
the number of people seeking food relief in recent
Those who do access food
relief services receive a significant amount of their total food from food
Food relief providers
have reported that they cannot keep up with the increasing demand for
III USING THE RIGHT TO FOOD AS AN ANALYTICAL FRAMEWORK FOR
FOOD RELIEF GOVERNANCE
A Legal Foundation and Scope of the Right to
Access to adequate food is not just a basic human need but also a fundamental
human right with corresponding legal obligations on
The right to adequate
food is recognised in several international human rights
instruments
and enshrined as
part of the right to an adequate standard of living in the
International
Covenant on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights
also recognises the fundamental right of everyone to be free
from hunger.
The right to adequate food is closely associated with the inherent dignity of
the human person, essential for the fulfilment of other
human rights, and
inseparable from social justice.
The right is linked to Goal 2 of the Sustainable Development Goals
(‘SDGs’): Zero Hunger, one of the 17 goals that form
blueprint for achieving ‘a better and more sustainable future for
The right to adequate food is realised when ‘every man, woman and
child, alone or in community with others, have physical and
economic access at
all times to adequate food or means for its
procurement’.
Nations (‘UN’) Committee on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights
(‘CESCR’) considers that the
core content of the right implies both
availability and accessibility of adequate food.
available in sufficient quantity and quality to satisfy dietary needs, is free
from adverse substances and is culturally
acceptable.
both economically and physically accessible in a sustainable way that does not
interfere with the enjoyment of other human
is a key element in determining whether food that is available and accessible is
appropriate (eg, safe for human
consumption).
Food security is a closely linked concept and a precondition to the
fulfilment of the right to adequate
The right to food is not
met if there is food insecurity. Food security exists when ‘all people, at
all times, have physical
and economic access to sufficient, safe and nutritious
food to meet their dietary needs and food preferences for an active and healthy
Food security can
be viewed as a continuum, with ‘food secure’ at one end, ‘food
insecure without hunger’
(or with ‘hidden hunger’, ie,
nutritional inadequacies) in the mid-range, and ‘food insecure with severe
at the other
Individual and
household food security status is not fixed and can and does change over time;
food insecurity might be transitory,
episodic, deepening or persistent
It is important to note that food security is not a legal concept; it does
not place legally binding obligations on governments or
provide for enforceable
individual entitlements. It is the
right to food
that imposes legal
obligations on States to take initiatives with respect to hunger and
malnutrition and work towards food security
Hence, some scholars have
suggested that the emphasis on food security, as opposed to the right to food,
in international law and
policy discourse is problematic because it avoids human
States, as the primary duty bearers under international human rights law,
must create environments conducive to the enjoyment of the
right to adequate
States Parties to the
undertake to take steps, to the maximum of available resources, to
progressively achieve the full realisation of the right to adequate
but have an immediate
obligation to ensure freedom from
Typically, binding State
obligations under human rights law are understood through the tripartite
‘respect, protect and fulfil’
The CESCR has
conceptualised how these three pillars of duty apply to States in the specific
context of the right to adequate food:
1. The obligation to
: States must refrain from taking measures
that detract from people’s existing access to adequate food.
2. The obligation to
: States must take steps to ensure that
third parties do not interfere with people’s access to adequate food.
3. The obligation to
States must proactively strengthen
people’s access to and use of resources and means to ensure food security
) and meet the right directly when they cannot fulfil the
right through means at their own disposal
State obligations to fulfil are especially relevant in the context of food
relief. States should provide practical assistance to individuals
or groups in
circumstances where they are unable to meet the right to food for
themselves.
This can be done by
putting in place social safety and food safety
Where food relief plays a
role in those safety nets, it should ‘bridge the gap between the
nutritional needs of the affected
population and their ability to meet those
needs themselves’.
From a human rights perspective, acceptable food relief empowers recipients,
provides for independence and inclusion, and upholds
Transparent eligibility
criteria must be established based on the principle of
non-discrimination.
Food relief
initiatives should provide for meaningful participation of
recipients.
Appropriate foods
offered through food relief are nutritionally adequate, safe and appropriate,
considering local circumstances,
dietary traditions and
Food safety nets should
be linked to complementary interventions that promote longer-term food
These ideals have
informed the analytical framework outlined in the next section.
B Developing the Analytical Framework
To develop an analytical framework to assess food relief governance, we
reviewed a range of predominantly international authoritative
sources that
provide detailed guidance on the human rights-based approach
(‘HRBA’) that States should be taking regarding
the right to
adequate food and the provision of food relief. Those sources included:
1. the CESCR’s
General Comment No 12 (Twentieth Session, 1999): The
Right to Adequate Food (Art
2. the Food and Agriculture Organization of the UN’s
(‘FAO’) ‘Voluntary Guidelines to Support the Progressive
Realization of the Right to Adequate Food in the Context of National Food
3. the Committee on World Food Security’s ‘Voluntary Guidelines
on Food Systems and
Nutrition’;
4. reports from Special Rapporteurs on the Right to
5. concluding observations from UN committees on periodic reports submitted
by Australia as part of its human rights treaty reporting
commitments;
6. scholarly commentary and other human rights-based literature, including
from national human rights
institutions.
Human rights jurisprudence based on the
did not offer any
guidance. There has yet to be a single individual communication to the CESCR
based on the right to adequate food,
with only limited cases founded on other
rights that even mention food.
This may be in part because few countries have ratified or acceded to the
Optional Protocol to the
, which allows for individual
communications on the rights contained
and also because
economic, social and cultural (‘ESC’) rights have historically been
viewed as non-justiciable and
unenforceable.
From the sources outlined above, we synthesised a set of key human rights
principles: participation, accountability, non-discrimination
and equality,
empowerment, legality and dignity. Incidentally, these principles largely align
with a general human rights-based framework
used by policymakers, which is
referred to as PANEL.
this framework does not expressly include dignity. Based on our review of
international human rights law regarding the right
to food and literature on the
experiences of people accessing food
dignity should be
explicitly included in any framework seeking to operationalise the right to
food. A detailed description of the
framework principles is contained in Table
Table 1: The Framework Principles
Description
Participation
Everyone has the right to be heard concerning decisions that affect their
The formulation of laws,
strategies and policies for the right to food requires full participation of the
and particularly the
inclusion of marginalised and vulnerable people who are generally excluded from
such processes.
Accountability
Accountability ensures individuals are participants in their own
development, rather than passive
recipients.
States must ensure
that rights-holders can hold the State accountable for rights violations and
obtain remedies for those
violations.
Accountability
requires transparent rules of engagement – there must be transparency in
decision-making processes and policy
implementation on the right to food in a
way that addresses individuals’ specific
The right of individuals
to freedom of expression and the right to see, receive and impart information is
also critical.
Non-discrimination and equality
Emphasis is on inclusive societies that are free from
discrimination.
People should
have ‘equal and equitable access to sufficient, affordable, safe and
nutritious foods’.
requires special consideration for groups including but not limited to
Indigenous peoples, women, the poor, people with disabilities
States must account for
power imbalances that undermine good
governance.
Empowerment
Agency is central to a HRBA to ‘put power into the hands of all
Individuals must
be empowered to take part in the conduct of public
and be able to change
the system to improve their own and social
well-being.
Laws must be consistent with human rights, and individuals must be able to
assert their rights.
requires the adoption at a national level of laws, institutional structures and
mechanisms to ensure that ICESCR rights, including
the right to food, are
recognised and justiciable (ie, legally enforceable), and that remedies are
available when violations
Restrictions on
justiciability must be
specifics of each nation’s governance approach will differ depending on
local circumstances, fulfilment of human
rights obligations at a domestic level
1. a legal structure to be put in place;
2. implementation of a process resulting in outcomes compatible with human
rights; and
3. available remedies in the event the structure or the process falls
The right to food is ‘indivisibly linked to the inherent dignity of
the human person’.
duty to fulfill the right is not just about eliminating hunger and malnutrition;
it extends to ensuring that everyone lives –
and eats – with
This includes, inter
alia, combating poverty and promoting social
recognising and
protecting the cultural values associated with
and providing
dignified food assistance that does not disempower or create
Ultimately, dignity
comes from being able to provide for oneself, not from being
Many of the principles are interlinked or have significant overlap. For
example, the creation of a legal and regulatory framework
provides avenues for holding the government to account (
accountability
involvement in processes (
participation
) can allow individuals to affect
system change (
empowerment
). Developing the framework showed us that
governance of food relief cannot be considered in isolation from broader
considerations
around governance of food security, the right to food, and
poverty more broadly. Thus, in the Appendix we have identified best practice
examples that operationalise an effective HRBA to governance of food relief.
These best practice examples are not exclusive and focus
on food relief and food
security in a high-income country context.
In addition to the specific principles of our framework, as outlined above, a
HRBA to governance is based on all human rights being
interdependent
interrelated
indivisible
particular focus is on interdependence. To describe rights as interdependent
means that ‘the enjoyment of any right or
group of rights requires
enjoyment of others – which may or may not be part of the same
category’ (eg, civil and political
rights versus ESC
In this regard, the
right to food is essential for the fulfilment of other human rights, and cannot
itself be achieved without also
addressing, for example, rights to social
security, housing and health.
Analysis of the right to food under the HRBA in this paper will thus extend, at
times, to consideration of other key human rights
and associated
initiatives.
Figure 1: PANELD – a human rights-based
framework for analysis of food relief governance which includes dignity.
IV FEDERAL GOVERNANCE ARRANGEMENTS FOR FOOD RELIEF
This Part presents findings from a human rights-based analysis of
Commonwealth law and policy that intersects with food relief using
framework. It reveals the lack of an overall legal framework for the right to
adequate food and food security, the absence
of federal-level laws or policies
dealing with food relief, and a reliance on the charitable sector as the main
governance response.
We also identified gaps in specific food standards, rules
and practices regarding food donations. Finally, we found that food relief
brought into federal policies and policy discourse regarding food waste, which
can be problematic for effectively addressing
the two issues.
A Gaps in the National Framework for the Right to Food and
Food Security
Australia’s governance approach to food
security and the right to food at the national level has significant gaps.
has accepted obligations under international law to respect, protect
and fulfil the right to adequate food, and these obligations
incorporated (transformed) into our domestic legal
However, to date,
Australia has failed to implement a domestic governance framework for the right
to food which appropriately reflects
its human rights obligations – food
security and the right to adequate food ‘is not inscribed into Australian
This regulatory gap in the right to food space does not exist in isolation;
Australia’s domestic legal framework with respect
to human rights in
general is patchy.
has been proactive in ratifying rights treaties on the international stage but
is wary of enshrining those rights in domestic
legislation, an essential step in
a dualist system.
Zipoli suggests that Australia’s approach to protecting human rights is
‘Janus-faced’ – it champions
human rights principles in the
international sphere while resisting their full incorporation
domestically.
This may be
indicative of political attitudes in Australia that human rights are foreign or
global norms with little suitability
to local circumstances. Political leaders
in Australia have historically taken the view that individual rights are
adequately protected
through the doctrine of responsible government; there is an
underlying assumption that Parliament can be relied upon to provide the
protections needed.
Constitution
has a structural focus. It defines the
relationship between the Commonwealth and the states in a federal system,
establishes fundamental
legal principles, and creates governing
institutions.
Constitution
pays scant attention to individuals; the nation’s
guiding legal document has ‘little to say about the relationship between
government and the
It does not
contain a Bill of Rights, and there is very limited protection for a small
number of fundamental rights, mainly relating
to respecting rights (ie,
protecting them from interference) rather than declaring them
positively.
There are no
constitutional provisions or protections specifically concerning the right to
food, and Australia does not have a Charter
of Rights in statutory
Australia does have a
national human rights institution, the Australian Human Rights Commission
(‘AHRC’), but the rights
contained in the
do not fall
within the AHRC’s jurisdiction, and as such, it cannot hear complaints
with respect to the right to
There is also no
pathway for individual complaints from Australian citizens regarding the right
to food at the international level;
Australia still needs to ratify the
Optional Protocol to the
International Covenant on Economic, Social
and Cultural Rights
, which establishes an individual complaints procedure
for breaches of ESC rights to the
Consequently, individual rights-holders are disempowered; there is no
recourse available to legal measures to hold government to account
where there
is a failure to fulfil the right to food. Neither the right to adequate food nor
the broader right to an adequate standard
of living was even mentioned in
Australia’s latest report to the CESCR on its implementation of
contrast, civil and political rights do fall within the jurisdiction of the
and Australia has
ratified the
Optional Protocol to the International Covenant on Civil and
Political Rights
, allowing for individual complaints about breaches of the
rights contained therein to the UN Human Rights
There is also no Commonwealth framework law enshrining the right to food, nor
any laws explicitly addressing national food
Australia does not
have a national food security Act like, for example,
Australia does have a
Parliamentary Joint Committee on Human Rights (‘PJCHR’), established
Human Rights (Parliamentary Scrutiny) Act 2011
(Cth). However,
the PJCHR only works on domestic legislative development; it has no direct
engagement with international human rights
instruments or
mechanisms.
Further, the
PJCHR can only assess a law once introduced; it does not comment on the
for a particular law in a specific sector.
In sum, with no domestic legal recognition or structure and no recourse to
remedies, legality and accountability – critical
components of the PANELD
framework – are absent in Australia's right to food space. This situation
contrasts with other countries,
with the FAO estimating that approximately 23
countries explicitly recognise the right to food in their constitutions, while
further 33 countries there is implicit recognition of the right to food in
national constitutions.
Gaps also exist at the policy
The Australian
Government does not have a coordinated policy approach to governing our national
food system, nor is there a clear
policy platform directing the goal of
individual and household food security and fulfilment of the right to
Australia’s
institutional structure for food policy may be described as the
‘antithesis of a systems
No national
framework underpins food policy activity in Australia, and no single government
department is responsible for coordinating
it. A mapping exercise conducted in
2021 identified that at least 11 different federal government departments are
involved in making
food policy in Australia, with others having ancillary
Those policies vary
across diverse sectors, including agriculture, health, waste management,
finance, food safety, consumer protection
The authors of that
mapping exercise suggested that a unified food policy framework would
‘allow food-related activities and
initiatives to be underpinned by the
same set of goals and reduce the likelihood of policies/activities contradicting
or undermining
Their recommendation of developing a coordination mechanism and clear
leadership from one federal department or agency was echoed
by the Food Security
Inquiry Committee, which recommended the creation of the role of Minister for
Food, sitting within the Prime
Minister and Cabinet
Food relief was
positioned as a sub-topic within this proposed coordinated approach. Food
security and public health nutrition experts
have similarly noted the need for a
specific institution to take responsibility for the right to
There is no national food security or right to food strategy in Australia.
However, the federal government has declared an intention
to develop a national
strategy for food security in remote First Nations communities in partnership
with state and territory
governments.
In a discussion
paper released to inform the First Nations food security strategy consultation
process, a rights-based approach led
by First Nations people was proposed to
‘better address the structural factors behind food insecurity, while
removing stigma
caused by ineffective frameworks that blame
individuals’.
the discussion paper references the
Universal Declaration of Human Rights
and SDG Goal 2,
which do not
impose legally binding obligations as such, and makes no mention of the
, which does. This indicates an ongoing failure to link
human rights obligations with governance approaches.
B Food Relief Governance
As with the broader governance framework for food security and the right to
adequate food, significant gaps and issues exist specifically
concerning food
relief. There are no Commonwealth laws specifically addressing food relief in
Australia, and no national food relief
policy or plan, nor any public indication
of an intention to develop one. This is at odds with food relief’s current
role in addressing food insecurity and further reflects a lack of
legality and accountability in the system.
Responsibility for funding and coordinating emergency relief services,
including food relief, is managed at the Commonwealth level
by the Department of
Social Services
funds three national food rescue and food banking organisations –
OzHarvest, SecondBite and Foodbank – to ensure
food items are available to
an extensive network of emergency relief providers, which then directly deliver
food support to individuals
and households in
Grant information
indicates the DSS provides millions of dollars in funding to these food relief
organisations.
However, there
appears to be no publicly available information about the existence of a DSS
strategy or policy towards food relief
grants, nor is there published
information regarding the terms of the grants. Food relief was only briefly
mentioned once in the
DSS’s most recent annual report – the report
noted that the Department intends to continue to ‘provide Emergency
and Food Relief to Australian individuals and families’ but provided no
other information.
there is a significant lack of transparency in the government’s approach
to food relief, which is a vital component
of the accountability principle under
the PANELD framework.
Food safety is directly related to food adequacy, a key element of the right
A HRBA requires
people to have equal access to food that is safe for human
consumption.
However, in
Australia, food safety laws at the federal level lack clarity concerning food
donated for the purposes of food relief.
There is no explicit reference to
donated foods in the
Australia New Zealand
Food Standards Code
Food Standards
contains food standards enforced at state and territory levels, and no other
federal laws regulate food donation
Whether food rescue
organisations are captured as a ‘food business’ under the
Standards Code
Compliance with the
Code’s provisions by donors when donating food is presumed, but not
The lack of
governance around donated food safety creates ‘a fragmented
approach’ to the charitable food system compared
with the mainstream food
supply chain.
Australia is
not unique in this regard; the divergence in control management practices for
food donated for relief purposes is a
problem that has been observed
internationally.
This lack of regulation regarding food safety in a food relief context is
problematic as there are documented safety issues relating
to food relief
donations in Australia. Research has shown that supermarkets are the main source
of food donated to food banks which
is categorised as unsuitable, potentially
unsafe and unsafe (‘UUP’). In one study, supermarkets were
responsible for
90% of UUP donations received by a food
Decisions about food
donations by retailers may be largely informal and
inconsistent.
In this regard,
there appears to be a power imbalance between food relief organisations and
large food businesses and
supermarkets,
with the former
relying on the latter with little to no control over the supply chain or its
quality. A HRBA requires Australia to
address such power imbalances which
undermine good governance and threaten the health of rights
Further, judgments
made by workers (usually volunteers)
with limited training and knowledge of food
Decisions to keep or
reject donated food are based on aesthetics, not scientific methods of testing
or analysis.
Consequently,
current donation and receiving practices could threaten the health of vulnerable
clients who are already more susceptible
to foodborne
Sharona Mossenson
et al note the ‘urgent need’ for food safety guidance to protect
food banks from UUP food which poses
a risk to their
Despite these gaps and risks, the regulatory approach seems to be less about
ensuring the activities of market players and civil society
conform with the
right to food and providing safe
and more about
encouraging a greater volume of food donations from businesses. In reflection of
this, a Bill has been introduced
to the Commonwealth Parliament that provides
tax incentives for businesses donating to food
While the primary
purpose is to facilitate donations, the Bill does contain a proviso that tax
offsets are only available in relation
to food that is ‘fit for human
consumption’.
it does not specify any further details in this
This emphasis on the
volume of donations makes sense given the reliance on voluntary food donations
to address food insecurity in
Australia (as opposed to State-based approaches),
but it carries the risk of undermining the adequacy of food in the sense of
and potentially nutrition.
While specific policies regarding food relief are lacking, food relief is
commonly mentioned in policies and policy discourse related
to food waste. Thus,
Australia has closely linked the problem of food wastage with food relief.
Australia has a National Food Waste
Strategy, which emphasises that wasted or
surplus food can relieve food insecurity through its
redistribution.
The strategy
positions the food industry as responsible for donating food that would
otherwise be wasted to food rescue organisations
and commends these
organisations for their partnerships in contributing to action on food
This melding of food
waste with food relief was also reflected in the Food Security Inquiry’s
report, which concluded that
‘[b]etter connecting vulnerable food
consumers with the supply chain through food donation’ is one way to
better manage
food waste.
discuss the implications of this approach further in Part VI.
In the absence of concrete food security and food relief laws and policies,
considering Australia’s social security practices
becomes particularly
relevant for assessing whether the government is strengthening food security and
people’s access to the
resources and means to ensure
In line with the key
human rights concept of interdependence, as outlined above, the right to social
security can be an essential
contributor to the realisation of other ESC rights,
such as the right to food.
Human rights require social security benefits to be adequate in amount and
duration so that everyone can realise their right to an
adequate standard of
However, high levels
of poverty among households reliant on social security payments in Australia are
primarily because those payments
mostly sit below the poverty line; the base
rate of many social security payments is too low to sustain an adequate standard
As a result, many individuals receiving social assistance payments, such as
job seekers, students, people with disabilities and carers,
have been shown to
have higher rates of food insecurity and to be at significantly higher risk of
food insecurity than the general
population.
Increases in
costs of living have further exacerbated food insecurity because they have not
been matched by commensurate increases
in social security
nor are factors
like higher food costs in remote locations adequately provided
Notably, poverty
decreased sharply when the Australian Government increased and introduced income
support payments in the fourth
quarter of 2019–20 because of the COVID-19
V STATE-LEVEL GOVERNANCE ARRANGEMENTS FOR FOOD
A The Queensland Approach to Food Relief
1 Lack of a State-Based Framework for the Right to Food and Food
As in other states and territories in Australia, Queensland’s
Constitution
does not expressly provide for human
Queensland does have
a statutory human rights charter, the
Human Rights Act 2019
’), which has been in force since 2020 and is based
on the dialogue model of human rights
protections.
However, the Act
focuses on civil and political rights, with only 2 out of 23 recognised rights
drawn from the
, neither being the right to
The Queensland Human
Rights Commission’s jurisdiction under the
is limited to
the rights contained therein and thus does not extend to the right to
Similar to the federal
level, human rights-based legislative responses to the right to food are absent.
Consistent with the federal approach, Queensland has no laws that directly
manage or provide for food security or food
Queensland does not
have one single overarching food security strategy or policy. However, a range
of current and former initiatives
directly relate to, or, more commonly, touch
on or are ancillary to, food
These initiatives
are managed by different government portfolios such as health and agriculture.
While food security is sometimes
mentioned briefly within policies, on the
whole, the weight of potentially relevant policies regarding food security and
to food are focused on agriculture and economic benefits to the State.
For example, the ‘Queensland Food and Fibre Policy’
focuses on the
economic contributions of the food and fibre sectors, aiming to increase
‘productivity and prosperity, and drive
long-term job creation in regional
and rural Queensland’.
It makes no mention of food security. Similarly, the newly released
‘Queensland Biosecurity Strategy 2024–2029’
states that
contributing to Queensland’s food security is one of its goals, though it
does not thereafter mention food security
and makes no mention of the right to
This emphasis is
consistent with research on food policy discourse, which shows that food
security tends to be interpreted in ways
that focus on increasing agricultural
production instead of food
One Queensland food policy that does have a focus on human rights is the new
‘Gather + Grow 2023–2032: Queensland Remote
Food Security
Strategy’, which aims to change systems to improve food security in remote
Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander
communities in the
The framework
recognises the human right to adequate food and the components of food security
and is guided by key principles such
as equity, community-centring and
However, this
policy, like the other initiatives, is not based in law and does not provide for
enforceable rights. There is no justiciable
pathway of action for Queenslanders
to uphold or enforce their right to food. As at the federal level, fulfilment of
the right to
food in accordance with key PANELD principles like legality and
accountability is missing in Queensland.
2 Food Relief Governance
The structure of food relief in Queensland tends to mirror the federal level.
There is no specific law governing food relief, nor
is there a policy guiding
food relief initiatives in the State. Similar to the federal response, this lack
of food relief regulation
is an issue from a human rights perspective because
there is no formal process in which rights-holders can participate and be heard,
no mechanism available to hold government to account, and no recourse to
remedies when rights are not fulfilled. Where there is no
development of law and
policy, the PANELD principles are not met.
One exception where the law does touch on food relief is the
Liability Act 2003
(Qld), which contains ‘Good Samaritan’
protections against civil liability for donors in certain circumstances where
harm results from the consumption of donated
Research discussed
prior shows that supermarkets are the main source of UUP food donated to food
banks, so the practical application
of this exception to food businesses would
require close examination. Like several other states and territories in
Australia, this
law only protects food donors – it does not protect from
liability the organisations that receive and distribute the donated
This may be problematic
from the perspective of enabling food relief organisations because it means
commercial donors are protected
from private causes of action while charities
Importantly, the inclusion of donated foods in civil liability protections
raises broader tensions from a human rights perspective.
On the one hand, food
insecure people currently rely on food relief to meet immediate needs, while
food relief relies on donations,
and corporate donors may only engage in
voluntary food donation schemes if legal risks are assessed as acceptable. On
the other hand,
a HRBA requires that food insecurity be treated as a
rights-based issue, not a charitable one. The PANELD principles dictate that
individuals must be able to assert their rights, that restrictions on doing so
must be prevented, and that remedies must be available
when rights are not met
(such as in the case of unsafe
The Queensland Government does not appear to conduct food insecurity
monitoring or data collection state-wide. Measuring and assessing
the degree of
food insecurity and its causes in the population is one example of best practice
under the PANELD framework because
it provides an evidence base for policy
action to fulfil the right to
Perhaps because there is no government-led data collection and no regulation,
combined with the geography of the state and its social
demographic composition,
access to food relief is highly unequal in Queensland. There are limited
services offering food relief in
Northern and Central Queensland compared to
South-East Queensland, even though data collected by civil society indicates
those regions are, on average, 20% more likely to experience food
insecurity than the rest of Queensland
The federal and state governments fund food relief services where they do
exist in Queensland.
State Government’s primary funding is through its Emergency Relief
Program, which is delivered by not-for-profit emergency
relief providers that
provide financial and material support to Queenslanders in financial crisis. The
government itself is not involved
in direct service delivery. There are 179 NGOs
across the State that people can contact for
assistance.
services from those organisations include vouchers for food and the provision of
food parcels.
In the budget
for 2024–25, in response to ‘unprecedented cost-of-living
pressures’,
Queensland Government dedicated an additional almost $9 million to
not-for-profit food relief initiatives, including $2.8 million
to Foodbank
Queensland over four years to establish operations in Townsville and expand its
existing Brisbane operations.
As Townsville is in North Queensland, this funding may help address inequalities
in access to food relief.
In Queensland, as at the federal level, food relief and food waste
initiatives are closely intertwined. In addition to the government's
funding for
food relief, it also funds food rescue initiatives to contribute to its
‘Waste Management and Resource Recovery
Queensland Organics
The government’s Food Rescue Grant Program gives grants to not-for-profit
organisations to cover costs associated with diverting
surplus food from
landfill and redistributing
The 10 organisations
listed as receiving funds in Round 2 of the Food Rescue Grant Program are all
based in South-East Queensland
– nine within the Greater Brisbane area and
one in Toowoomba.
None are in
Central or Northern Queensland. Given the under-developed nature of food relief
services in rural and remote Queensland,
this raises human rights concerns from
an equality and non-discrimination perspective.
Schools are increasingly active in the food relief space in Queensland via
the School and Community Food Relief Program
(‘SCFRP’), with
funding support provided by the Queensland Government for school breakfast and
lunch food programs.
Dignified access to nutritious, free school meals is strongly supported by
human rights, where accompanied by broader initiatives
to address underlying
causes of food insecurity.
additional $15 million in funding was included in the 2024–25 state budget
for the SCFRP and the establishment of a School
and Community Food Taskforce to
provide advice on options to support Queensland families’ access to
healthy food and drink.
recent change of government following the October 2024 State election may impact
all of these food relief funding initiatives.
B Analysis: The SA Approach
Compared with Queensland, SA takes a more coordinated and evidence-based
approach to managing food insecurity and food relief services
that is better
aligned with the PANELD principles. Our analysis below indicates that while
there are aspects to develop further,
the SA approach has greater capacity to
ensure dignity for food relief participants and to address necessary structural
change towards
reducing the need for people to rely on food relief in the first
1 The State-Based Framework for the Right to Food and Food Security
As in Queensland and other jurisdictions in Australia, the
Constitution
of SA does not expressly recognise or protect human rights
as a body of rights in
Attempts to
introduce a state-based statutory human rights charter (and an associated human
rights commission) have yet to be
successful.
However, the
State is now exploring the feasibility of introducing a formal human rights
scheme governed by a
Human Rights
If it proceeds, SA will
become the fourth state or territory jurisdiction to have a statutory human
rights charter in Australia,
after the Australian Capital Territory, Queensland
and Victoria.
If it follows
the lead of those that came before it, there will be few, if any, ESC rights in
the SA Act, and no enshrinement of
the right to
SA does not have a food security framework law, reflecting the same
deficiency in legality and accountability under the PANELD framework
Queensland and the Commonwealth. As in other state and territory jurisdictions,
Food Act 2001
(SA) and its associated regulations focus on food
safety and suitability; they do not mention food
However, SA is
progressing towards a food security strategy or policy. The government’s
Secure Food Systems project is underway
to develop an evidence-informed response
to food insecurity in the State. The process includes extensive community and
lived experience
consultation.
The government
planned to release a discussion paper in late 2024, which would form the basis
for collaboration with non-governmental
stakeholders on the development of a
long-term food security strategy for the State to identify ‘secure food
system models
that support equitable, culturally appropriate and dignified
access to nutritious food in food insecure
communities’.
multi-stakeholder, participatory approach to policy development strongly aligns
with human rights best practices under the PANELD
framework for the right to
and provides a model
which could be adopted by Queensland and other jurisdictions to better support
food insecure people.
Continuing with best practices for developing right-to-food policy responses,
SA also takes a comparatively proactive approach to
monitoring food insecurity.
This is done via two platforms: the annual statewide population health survey,
which asks a single question
insecurity;
and the more
specialised Population Health Survey Module System, which is an ad-hoc, bespoke
omnibus survey.
2 Food Relief Governance
SA recognises that food insecurity is a threat to the health and well-being
of its people.
Compared to
Queensland, it has formed a more coordinated approach to managing food
insecurity and associated food relief initiatives
via its Food Security
Initiative (‘FSI’), a Public Health Partnership Authority
(‘PHPA’) between Wellbeing
SA and the SA Department of Human
Services (‘SADHS’) that actively collaborates with civil society,
academia, other state
government agencies and local
governments.
Notably, the FSI
recognises the limitations of food relief as a solution to food insecurity; it
aims to go beyond the short-term,
emergency focus of traditional food relief to
take a systems approach to address the broader range of factors underlying the
insecurity experience.
Stakeholders have also acknowledged that as food insecurity is a symptom of
poverty and inequality, the underlying determinants of
food insecurity must be
addressed to make progress.
This is critical from a right-to-food perspective as dignity and empowerment,
key PANELD principles, are realised not from being
fed but from being able to
provide for oneself.
Related to this longer-term approach to food relief and food insecurity, the
PHPA recently funded a pilot social supermarket project
with a view to moving
food security initiatives away from direct food relief provision towards more
dignified, client-centred service
models that do not just provide food but also
offer access to, for example, supports and services to address underlying
determinants
of food insecurity, and capacity and skill
Like Queensland, the only law directly relating to food relief in SA is the
Civil Liability Act 1936
(SA) with its ‘Good Samaritan’
provisions. Introduced in 2008, these amendments encourage the donation of
surplus foods
for food relief. Unlike Queensland, the provisions protect both
the food donor
the recipient entity that distributes the food from
civil liability for ‘loss of life or personal injury arising from
consumption
of the food donated or
distributed’.
human rights tensions addressed in relation to Queensland’s civil
liability laws in this regard apply to SA.
As with the federal level and Queensland, SA links food waste policy with
food relief. SA’s Strategy to Reduce and Divert Household
and Business
Food Waste states that food loss and waste have two main effects: food
insecurity and hunger and deleterious environmental
impacts. This food waste
strategy acknowledges that food rescue and redistribution alone is not a
long-term solution to food insecurity.
Still, food rescue and redistribution is
seen as an important part of the ‘reuse’ level of the food waste
However, the causative link between food waste, food insecurity and hunger in
this strategy is problematic. It implies that the problem
is one of food
availability
because so much is going to waste, ie, that there is
insufficient food available for people to eat because it is being dumped in
and landfill. In reality, food insecurity in Australia is a food
problem caused, inter alia, by poverty and low income. Moreover, statements that
link food insecurity with a lack of food availability
are inconsistent with the
other policy work of SA that emphasises the complexity of food insecurity as an
issue beyond food.
The Government of SA funds grant programs that incorporate food relief
alongside other emergency relief services and financial assistance
initiatives.
In 2024, the
SADHS granted an additional $1 million in food security grants to 27 charitable
organisations in recognition of the
cost of living crisis to ‘support
communities to move out of food insecurity in South
Australia’.
government said this commitment was a component of $5 million over four years
that had been included in the 2023–24 State
Budget for food relief
organisations and financial
counselling.
The Department
of Education also makes small food security grants available for SA government
schools and preschools for sustainable
health food projects that connect to
learning about growing food, accessing food and/or preparing
The Department of
Education also funds charities to provide breakfast programs to hundreds of
schools and preschools across the
Guidelines and
standards have been developed to guide food provided in schools, including that
provided by way of food relief
3 The SA Food Relief Charter
In 2019, SA launched its
Food Relief Charter
underpins the State’s approach
to governance of the food relief
A charter is a policy
tool often used as a governing document for a group of organisations. It may
contain a commitment to shared
values, and in service settings it commonly
establishes standards that clients can expect in service
is the first government-led charter (or similar instrument) of its
kind in Australia developed ‘with and for’ the food
is grounded in five guiding principles intended to
guide ‘best practice’ human service delivery:
1. collaborating to build an effective and integrated food relief system;
2. focusing on nutrition and health;
3. delivering a service built on fairness and equity;
4. connecting people, building skills and confidence; and
5. monitoring and evaluating to measure collective
Community sector actors such as food banks and emergency relief agencies that
make several commitments: to work in partnership to
increase food and nutrition security for South Australians; to adopt
best-practice
food relief standards and build a skilled and sustainable food
relief workforce; and to support people in building skills and capacity
out of food insecurity.
is accompanied by the ‘Nutrition Guidelines for the Food
Relief Sector in South Australia’, which aim to improve the
nutritional
quality of food available via food relief to support the health needs of
recipients.
Importantly, the
is expressly grounded in human rights. It
recognises access to ‘sufficient, safe, culturally appropriate, nutritious
as a basic human right and has a rights-based focus in some of its
guiding principles language around dignity, equity and
empowerment.
was developed through a robust participatory partnership process
between relevant government agencies, civil society and academia,
and included
the perspectives of food relief
participants.
Tahna Pettman
et al commend this collaborative and power-sharing approach as one that results
in effective policy-making.
recognises the underlying economic and social factors
driving food insecurity, emphasising food relief services’ important
in connecting people to other support services. The
welcome focus on the complex and inter-related issues that lead to food
insecurity and client pathways out of it – as
such, it represents a move
away from the standard ‘solution’ to food insecurity of providing a
few days of emergency
Pettman et al consider it a step in the right direction ‘towards an
integrated optimal food relief system that goes beyond
the provision of
Table 2: The
and a HRBA to Food Relief
Participation
The Charter was developed through a participatory process between
government, academia and civil society, incorporating recipient
perspectives and
Accountability
No complaint, monitoring or accountability mechanisms are built into the
Non-discrimination and equality
The Charter does not expressly mention non-discrimination or equality, but
it is based on the associated principles of fairness and
equity for everyone in
Empowerment
The Charter has an express focus on empowerment of recipients and providing
longer-term pathways out of food insecurity.
The Charter is non-binding and legally unenforceable.
The Charter enshrines dignified service delivery as a
Of the three jurisdictions analysed, SA is the only one with both a formal
governance approach to food relief and an approach overtly
grounded in human
rights. However, drawing on the human rights-based PANELD principles developed
, this approach could be improved to further advance the right to
does not provide for accountability or legality
– it is non-binding, unenforceable and provides no recourse for those
by a breach to complain or enforce rights. This is common where
charters are used as a policy tool. They can be ‘symbolic in
their intent,
providing aspirational principles and values for signatories to work
As such, it
is arguable that the
cannot be seen as a governance instrument
‘in the true
From a transparency perspective, there does not appear to be a publicly
available list of Charter signatories. Further, the
be directed more towards service providers than government. That is, it is
oriented towards establishing service standards
and values for food relief
agencies, as opposed to imposing obligations on government to fulfil rights. The
Charter does not provide
for systemic change to the nature of the food relief
system because civil society continues to bear responsibility for food
when that responsibility should ultimately lie with government.
Further, the Charter adopts a values-based service delivery culture for food
relief rather than a rights-based approach. It promotes
the values of
‘choice, safety, dignity, respect, compassion, transparency, privacy,
cultural sensitivity, empowerment, and
independence’.
practice there is overlap between what the
describes as a
values-based approach and a rights-based approach, eg, values like dignity and
empowerment are also key human rights
principles under the PANELD framework for
the right to food. However, values are flexible and may be ‘widened or
narrowed according
to current priorities’.
By contrast, human rights are
inherent, universal and inviolable: ‘no individual, no group, no
authority, no state, can give
them and no one can eliminate
Importantly,
human rights have a legal foundation, which Australia has repeatedly accepted
internationally. Values as a foundation
for governance do not impose legally
binding obligations on governments to take positive action nor offer remedies
for a failure
to do so; human rights do this. The HRBA to governance requires
that rights be legally embedded.
VI DISCUSSION: RIGHTS OFF THE
In this Part, we identify fundamental issues in food relief governance in
Australia revealed by our analysis and offer guidance for
reform. As part of
this, we illustrate how Australia is failing to meet its obligations to fulfil
the right to adequate food both
in specific features of its food relief
governance and through the overall approach adopted.
Our analysis has shown an absence of government-based responses to food
relief in Australia. The governance of food relief has no
foundation in law
(except for some civil liability protections for food donors), and food relief
has an inconsistent and limited
policy presence. This is problematic because
there is no way for people to enforce their right to food without a solid legal
and there is no overarching governmental accountability or coordination
regarding food relief.
result of this lack of governmental response, the charitable sector takes almost
the sole responsibility for managing food relief
with little regulatory guidance
and established long-term
Thus, the charitable
food relief sector is left responsible for delivering
‘self-organised’ food-based solutions to a
complex problem that goes
beyond food. When Australian governments do focus on food relief, regulatory
interventions tend to target
enabling charitable food donations (eg, tax
incentives and civil liability exemptions) or, relatedly, positioning food
a way to address food waste. Both are problematic as points of
intervention.
In relation to the former, the way in which Australian governments have
mainly intervened to enable donations entrenches philanthropic
food relief as
the primary response to food insecurity. In doing so, it reinforces the view of
people as ‘passive recipients
of charity’ when they should be
treated as rights-holders entitled to adequate food and be supported by
governmental plans
to facilitate their long-term realisation of the right to
Thus, the singular
emphasis on facilitating donations with no other approaches represents a failure
to recognise the fundamental
difference between legal entitlement and charity or
moral responsibility.
In relation to the latter, the policy focus on diverting food waste to food
relief as a (or the) solution to food insecurity presents
significant governance
concerns and has been critiqued by
From a human rights
perspective, food insecurity must be positioned not as a problem for households
and businesses to solve via redistribution
of food waste but rather as an issue
of structural inequality that requires an appropriate governance response. In
other words, governments
should address why people lack an adequate standard of
living and turn to food relief. Food waste is caused by various factors,
overproduction, supply chain structures and trading
According to the
food waste hierarchy, which is a widely used policy concept in Australia and
internationally, the most preferable
solution to food waste is to prevent food
surplus and waste existing in the first
Diversion of food
waste to food relief significantly shifts the economic costs of waste
management, which may otherwise influence
corporate actions that cause food
waste, to food rescue organisations which now must sort and dispose of food as
well as transport
and process
In sum, the
representation of food waste and food relief as a ‘win/win’
situation fails to adequately address the complex
problems they both
Additionally, food relief based largely on redistributed food waste does not
align with the rights-based requirement for a dignified
and empowering human
rights-based food assistance system. Food relief foods, because they are ad hoc
donations, are often not healthy
nutritious,
and feeding
people with food waste risks undermining their dignity where the food lacks, or
is perceived to lack,
The creation of a
secondary food market for food relief with sometimes lower-quality food is
disempowering, restricting choice and
representing the treatment of
food-insecure people as lesser
These issues, including the lack of State-based governance for food relief,
the absence of long-term policy direction for food relief,
and the emphasis on
third-party charity-based responses and food waste, are emblematic of the fact
that Australia’s approach
to food relief governance is not grounded in
human rights. A broader lack of institutionalised domestic human rights
protections
likely influences Australia’s governance approach to food
relief in this regard. Human rights should be used to create action-oriented
systems based on obligations grounded in
Australia’s overall human rights regime is affected by
‘institutional deficiencies’, including an insufficient
framework for rights
protection,
whereby human
rights protections are left mostly to the discretion of
Parliament.
particularly the case for ESC rights, which have tended to be viewed as
‘peripheral’.
This has facilitated a situation where food relief and food insecurity are not
perceived or addressed through a human rights lens.
As a consequence of this broader lack of a human rights approach, discourse
related to food relief in Australia emphasises food security
instead of the
human right to food.
shows that food security tends to be interpreted in ways that support growing
agricultural production instead of food
Even in jurisdictions
where the right to food is acknowledged, such as SA, it remains peripheral to
the governance focus.
problematic because, as noted above, food security is not a legal concept. It
does not place legally binding obligations
on governments or provide for
enforceable individual entitlements. It is the
right to food
, for which
food security is a precondition, which imposes legal obligations on governments
to take initiatives with respect to hunger
and malnutrition and work towards
food security for all.
fulfilment of the human right to adequate food is the appropriate end goal, not
food security. A focus only on food security
denies the human rights
responsibilities Australia has committed to progress domestically.
Ultimately, the absence of a clear and coordinated governance framework for
food relief, combined with the lack of a human-rights-based
approach, shifts the
responsibility for access to adequate food from government to individuals. In
other words, food insecurity is
dealt with as a problem of individual
responsibility solved by individuals accessing charitable giving. Literature has
broadly observed
how definitions of social problems are often individualised in
this way, with both the problem and solution (ie, classification and
as inherent in the
individual.
Those who deviate
from the expected social standard are responsible for their own
insecurity, this personalisation of the issue depoliticises it and reduces the
scope for debate about the systemic drivers
underlying the
As a consequence,
the provision of food relief has followed a pathway of government-enabled
self-help’,
pivot from social assistance programs to charitable food
philanthropy.
This is problematic from a human rights perspective, as the government is
responsible for facilitating the right to food. It is also
problematic from the
standpoint of effectively addressing the problem of food insecurity.
Facilitating individual access to charitable
food relief should not be the
primary way governments understand and respond to food insecurity or implement
their right to food
obligations. Food relief is oriented towards food (its
rescue, (re)distribution and provision) as a temporary resource to meet
individual needs.
It focuses on delivering material aid to individuals rather than on social
Yet, as summarised
, food insecurity in Australia is not a problem about food but stems
from broader inequalities such as poverty and social exclusion.
As a result,
food relief is not on its own providing meaningful food security for Australians
in need. Of the three jurisdictions
analysed, SA has demonstrated the clearest
understanding of the charitable food relief system as representing the treatment
long-term and systemic problem with short-term or emergency
solutions’.
Food relief
agencies, staffed mainly by volunteers, fill the void left by governments with
stop-gap measures that permit those governments
to ‘look the other
way’ in relation to the underlying causes of food
insecurity.
When viewed
through this lens, the current reliance on charitable food relief is not a
meaningful response to food insecurity or
an effective way to achieve the right
to food, but rather ‘part of the
Ultimately,
it does not solve the fundamental problem of people needing to rely on food
relief in the first instance.
Further, without a structural, government-led approach to the right to food,
government funding of charitable food relief services
can inadvertently entrench
food-based inequality.
food relief services in Australia are based on charitable agencies within a
community that directly provide food to community
members (eg, food boxes, food
parcels, or pantries). The ability of this type of food relief to positively
impact food insecurity
is contingent upon each food-insecure community having a
charitable infrastructure in the first place. Food relief organisations
be effective in directly delivering food to communities in those places where
the organisations operate. This becomes an
issue when charitable food relief
agencies and initiatives are not spread evenly around the country. For example,
there are limited
relief services in Central and Northern Queensland, which have
higher rates of food insecurity, while the bulk of funding from the
government appears to go to the most populated part of the State, South-East
Queensland, which has lower comparative rates
of food insecurity but a higher
concentration of food relief agencies.
Human rights law requires measures that prevent discrimination in access to
food or resources for food and transparent eligibility
criteria for food relief
which are based on the principle of
non-discrimination.
the ‘spatial inequality’ of services fails to ensure equitable
access and imposes fundamental limitations on
the potential positive effects of
government investment in food
Some communities have
more food relief organisations than others, and food-insecure communities with
more organisations receive more
benefits than food-insecure communities with
fewer organisations.
High-needs communities that lack charitable food infrastructure can be largely
excluded from receiving food
assistance.
As a consequence,
directing government funding to food relief in this way has ‘at best,
uneven effects’.
As a starting point to address these governance gaps, there is a need to
develop a coherent national framework for food relief that
is based on human
rights and responds to immediate food relief requirements as well as longer-term
strategies to reduce reliance
on food relief. Effective implementation of the
right to food specifically requires governments propose ‘ways and
by which fulfilment of the right will be
States are expected
to adopt national right-to-food strategies and policies based on human rights
principles and objectives.
The human rights-based PANELD framework, with its best practice examples in the
Appendix, provides guidance regarding what strategies
could be included. For
Australia to embrace the fulfilment of the right to food as a governmental
responsibility under human rights
law, it must establish policies, plans and
laws enshrining governmental obligations. In particular, best practice requires
legislative
action to transform an aspirational right into a justiciable
VII CONCLUSION
Legal scholarship on food relief governance in Australia is limited. This
article shows that part of the reason for that is that there
is no comprehensive
response from the State regarding food relief. As a result of this and the
broader lack of a HRBA, governments
in Australia are failing to govern food
relief in the context of binding obligations to fulfil the right to food, though
significant promise in this regard. Overall, there is significant room
for improvement in food relief and food security laws and
policies to meet those
obligations. In particular, it is important that future improvements in food
relief governance identify governmental
responsibility, position individuals as
rights-holders, and address immediate and long-term dimensions as well as
spatial inequalities.
APPENDIX: THE PANELD FRAMEWORK
Table 3: Best Practice Examples
Best Practice Examples
Participation
• Food relief is provided with ‘the fullest possible
participation of those
• A multi-stakeholder approach to national food security is employed,
including civil society and the private sector, to pull
together knowledge and
facilitate the efficient use of
and to increase
the consumption of healthy, nutritious
• Representatives of groups most affected by food insecurity have
full and transparent participation in relevant
institutions.
Accountability
• The degree of food insecurity and its causes in the population is
measured and assessed.
Benchmarks are developed and applied along with appropriate indicators and
mechanisms to monitor and verify progress in achieving
• National food security strategies and policies that are based on
human rights principles and objectives to ensure food security
for all are
• Corporate power is limited and corporations are held accountable.
The activities of all market players and civil society are
ensured to be in
conformity with the right to
There are safeguards
against conflicts of interest and power
imbalances.
• Effective anti-corruption legislation and policies are developed
and maintained in the food sector, and accountability and
administrative systems
in food relief are implemented to prevent leakages and
corruption.
• Where necessary, the mandate, organisation and structure of public
institutions is reformed, improved or
established.
Non-discrimination and equality
• Measures are taken to ensure access to adequate food as part of
social safety nets that target those in
Food safety nets
connect with complementary interventions that promote longer-term food
• Discrimination in access to food or resources for food is
and transparent
eligibility criteria for food relief are established based on the principle of
non-discrimination.
• Access is provided to opportunities and economic resources for
vulnerable groups to ensure they can participate fully and
equally in the
• An enabling environment is created to generate change towards
gender equality, eradicate discriminatory practices with respect
to gender, and
promote women’s full and equal participation in the
Empowerment
• Information is provided to individuals to strengthen both their
participation in policy decisions that may affect them and
their ability to
challenge decisions that threaten their
• Measures (including policies and instruments) are implemented to
support dietary diversity, affordability and accessibility
of healthy diets and
healthy eating habits, and food
preparation.
• Indigenous and local communities’ food knowledge and food
cultures are promoted and
• Policies are adopted that encourage stable employment in rural
areas and promote investments to enhance the livelihoods of
• International instruments which further the availability of
recourse for violations of economic, social and cultural rights
• Effective institutions and avenues for accountability are
implemented domestically through a conducive legal and regulatory
o constitutional principles that provide for progressive realisation of the
right to food;
o a human rights-based national strategy for food security and realisation
of the right to adequate
o a framework law as a major instrument for implementation of the national
o sectoral legislation for sectors which impact significantly on food
• ICESCR rights, including the right to food, are included in the
mandates of well-resourced national human rights institutions
quasi-judicial bodies such as
ombudspersons.
• Food relief bridges the gap between the nutritional needs of
individuals and their capacity to meet those needs
themselves.
• Food relief is:
o empowering for recipients, providing for independence and inclusion, and
upholds dignity;
o nutritionally adequate and safe; and
o designed to take into account local circumstances, dietary traditions and
cultures (practices, customs and
traditions).
• The poorest sections of society are protected from budget
reductions that negatively affect access to adequate
• Social safety nets and social protection programmes are adequate to
facilitate access to basic needs, including
• A national poverty reduction strategy based on comprehensive
statistical data is adopted which addresses access to adequate
food, with a
particular focus on marginalised and disadvantaged
* PhD Candidate and Associate Lecturer, School of Law, Queensland University
of Technology.
** Associate Professor, School of Law, Queensland University of
Technology.
*** Associate Professor, School of Law, Queensland University of Technology.
Committee on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights,
Comment No 12 (Twentieth Session, 1999): The Right to Adequate Food (Art
UN Doc E/C.12/1999/5 (12 May 1999) 6 [21] (‘
Comment No 12
Ibid 5 [15].
OzHarvest, SecondBite and
Foodbank, Submission to the Treasury,
2024–25 Pre-budget
Submissions
(January 2024)
<https://consult.treasury.gov.au/pre-budget-submissions/2024-25/view/54>;
OzHarvest, SecondBite and Foodbank,
Submission to the Treasury,
Pre-budget Submissions
(January 2023)
<https://consult.treasury.gov.au/pre-budget-submissions/2023-24/view/524>;
Luke Henriques-Gomes, ‘“Most
Severe We’ve Seen It”:
Australia’s Food Relief Providers Struggle to Meet Demand’,
(online, 30 October 2022)
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2022/oct/30/most-severe-weve-seen-it-australias-food-relief-providers-struggle-to-meet-demand>.
House of Representatives
Standing Committee on Agriculture, Parliament of Australia,
Australian Food
Story: Feeding the Nation and Beyond
(Report, 7 December 2023)
<https://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/download/committees/reportrep/RB000221/toc_pdf/AustralianFoodStoryFeedingtheNationandBeyond.pdf>
Australian Food Story
Only a very small number of
law academics address food security in Australia from a legal perspective, and
none specifically focus
on food relief governance: see, eg, Liesel Spencer,
‘Late to the Table: Australian Law and Policy on Food Security’
(2024) 49(1)
Alternative Law Journal
<https://doi.org/10.1177/1037969X231224947>; Benedict Sheehy and Ying
Chen, ‘Let Them Eat Rights: Re-framing the Food
Insecurity Problem Using a
Rights-Based Approach’
(2022) 43(3)
Michigan Journal of International
<https://doi.org/10.36642/mjil.43.3.let>. Most research and
literature on food security and human rights in Australia comes
from public
health and nutrition academics: see, eg, Rebecca Lindberg et al, ‘Revising
a Right to Food Road Map: Perspectives
of Australian Key Informants’
(2024) 48(5)
Australian and New Zealand Journal of Public Health
<https://doi.org/10.1016/j.anzjph.2024.100189> (‘Revising a Right to
Food Road Map’). Other food law scholars
in Australia focus on related but
different food systems issues, such as food labelling, food marketing, food
systems policy generally
or agriculture: see, eg, Elizabeth Handsley and Belinda
Reeve, ‘Holding Food Companies Responsible for Unhealthy Food Marketing
Children: Can International Human Rights Instruments Provide a New
[2018] UNSWLawJl 17
(2018) 41(2)
University of New South Wales Law Journal
<https://doi.org/10.53637/OXLV4395>.
General Comment No
(n 1) 2–3 [5].
Australian Food Story
(n 4) 23 [3.2], 38 [3.64], 54 [3.125].
Roslyn Foskey et al,
‘Interdisciplinary Conversations on Complexities of Food/In
Security’ in Quentin Farmar-Bowers,
Vaughan Higgins and Joanne Millar
Food Security in Australia: Challenges and Prospects for the
(Springer, 2013) 49, 51
<https://doi.org/10.1007/978-1-4614-4484-8_4>.
See Amartya Sen,
and Famines: An Essay on Entitlement and Deprivation
(Oxford University
Press, 1982).
Carol Richards, Unni
Kjærnes and Jostein Vik, ‘Food Security in Welfare Capitalism:
Comparing Social Entitlements to
Food in Australia and Norway’ (2016) 43
Journal of Rural Studies
<https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jrurstud.2015.11.010>; Jennifer Clapp,
‘Food Security and Food Sovereignty: Getting
Past the Binary’ (2014)
Dialogues in Human Geography
<https://doi.org/10.1177/2043820614537159>.
The availability of food
‘does not necessarily equate to universal food security within a
nation’: Richards, Kjærnes
and Vik (n 10) 62.
Michelle L Gatton and
Danielle Gallegos, ‘A 5-Year Review of Prevalence, Temporal Trends and
Characteristics of Individuals
Experiencing Moderate and Severe Food Insecurity
in 34 High Income Countries’ (2023) 23
BMC Public Health
2215:1–13, 11 <https://doi.org/10.1186/s12889-023-17139-9>; Sheehy
and Chen (n 5) 655.
General Comment No
(n 1) 4 [13].
Richards, Kjærnes and
Vik (n 10) 64; Jeromey B Temple, Sue Booth and Christina M Pollard,
‘Social Assistance Payments
and Food Insecurity in Australia: Evidence
from the Household Expenditure Survey’ (2019) 16(3)
International
Journal of Environmental Research and Public Health
455: 1–15, 2
<https://doi.org/10.3390/ijerph16030455>.
Quentin Farmar-Bowers,
Vaughan Higgins and Joanne Millar, ‘Introduction: The Food Security
Problem in Australia’ in
Quentin Farmar-Bowers, Vaughan Higgins and Joanne
Millar (eds),
Food Security in Australia: Challenges and Prospects for the
(Springer, 2013) 1, 7
<https://doi.org/10.1007/978-1-4614-4484-8_1> (‘Food Security
Problem’); Richards, Kjærnes
and Vik (n 10) 62; Hall & Partners
Emergency Relief in Australia: A Review of the Commonwealth Funded
Emergency Relief Program
(Report, 2022) 38
<https://www.dss.gov.au/system/files/resources/emergency-relief-australia-review-commonwealth-funded-emergency-relief-program.pdf>
Emergency Relief in Australia
Senate Community Affairs
References Committee, Parliament of Australia,
The Extent and Nature of
Poverty in Australia
(Final Report, February 2024) 1 [1.4]
<https://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/download/committees/reportsen/RB000208/toc_pdf/TheextentandnatureofpovertyinAustralia.pdf>.
Danielle Gallegos et al,
‘Food Security Definition, Measures and Advocacy Priorities in High-Income
Countries: A Delphi Consensus
Study’ (2023) 26(10)
Public Health
1986, 1993 <https://doi.org/10.1017/S1368980023000915>.
Fiona H McKay, Bronte C
Haines and Matthew Dunn, ‘Measuring and Understanding Food Insecurity in
Australia: A Systematic Review’
(2019) 16(3)
International Journal of
Environmental Research and Public Health
<https://doi.org/10.3390/ijerph16030476>; Mitchell Bowden,
‘Understanding Food Insecurity in Australia’
(CFCA Paper No 55,
Child Family Community Australia, Australian Institute of Family Studies, 2020)
<https://aifs.gov.au/sites/default/files/publication-documents/2009_cfca_understanding_food_insecurity_in_australia_0.pdf>;
Aaron Reeves, Rachel Loopstra and Valerie Tarasuk, ‘Wage-Setting Policies,
Employment, and Food Insecurity: A Multilevel Analysis
of 492 078 People
in 139 Countries’ (2021) 111(4)
American Journal of Public Health
718, 724 <https://doi.org/10.2105/AJPH.2020.306096>; Nick Rose et al,
‘The Human Right to Food’ (2016) 29(2)
Emergency Relief in Australia
(n 15); Fiona H McKay et al, ‘The
Prevalence, Severity and Experience of Food Insecurity in Australia: An
Investigation of
Food Aid Use’ (2020) 28(6)
Health and Social Care in
the Community
2399; Tahna L Pettman et al, ‘A Food Relief Charter for
South Australia: Towards a Shared Vision for Pathways out of Food
Insecurity’
(2022) 19(12)
International Journal of Environmental
Research and Public Health
7080:1–16, 1–2 (‘A Food Relief
Charter for South Australia’).
Bowden (n 19) 9–12;
Rebecca Lindberg et al,
Food Secure Communities in South Australia: An
Evidence Summary to Support Food Security Across Food and Social Systems
(Report, 29 June 2023) 4 <https://doi.org/10.26187/0ax1-0740>
Food Secure Communities
Foodbank Australia,
Submission No 1 to Senate Select Committee on the Cost of Living, Parliament of
Australia (February 2023) 11–12
(‘Submission No 1’).
Ibid 9; Sharonna Mossenson
et al, ‘Evidence for Initiating Food Safety Policy: An Assessment of the
Quality and Safety of
Donated Food at an Australian Food Bank’ (2024) 123
Food Policy
102589:1–12, 2
<https://doi.org/10.1016/j.foodpol.2023.102589>.
Richards, Kjærnes and
Vik (n 10) 64; Graham Riches and Tina Silvasti, ‘Hunger in the Rich World:
Food Aid and Right
to Food Perspectives’ in Graham Riches and Tiina
Silvasti (eds),
First World Hunger Revisited: Food Charity or the Right to
(Palgrave Macmillan, 2
ed, 2014) 1, 6
<https://doi.org/10.1057/9781137298737_1> (‘Hunger in the Rich
World’); Bowden (n 19) 8.
Christina Zorbas and
Kathryn Backholer, ‘We’re in a Food Price Crisis: What Is the
Government Doing to Ease the Pressure?’,
The Conversation
7 February 2024)
http://theconversation.com/were-in-a-food-price-crisis-what-is-the-government-doing-to-ease-the-pressure-222368
‘Consumer Price Index, Australia, June Quarter 2024’,
Bureau of Statistics
(Web Page, 31 July 2024)
<https://www.abs.gov.au/statistics/economy/price-indexes-and-inflation/consumer-price-index-australia/jun-quarter-2024>;
‘Selected Living Cost Indexes, Australia, June 2024’,
Bureau of Statistics
(Web Page, 7 August 2024)
<https://www.abs.gov.au/statistics/economy/price-indexes-and-inflation/selected-living-cost-indexes-australia/jun-2024>;
Lindberg et al,
Food Secure Communities
(n 20) 5; Australian Competition
& Consumer Commission, ‘Higher Grocery Prices Force Many Consumers to
Make Sacrifices,
ACCC Hears’ (Media Release 40/24, 28 March 2024)
<https://www.accc.gov.au/media-release/higher-grocery-prices-force-many-consumers-to-make-sacrifices-accc-hears>;
Amy Remeikis, ‘Priced Out: How Australians Are Being Hit by the Soaring
Cost of Food’,
The Guardian
(online, 1 May 2023)
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2023/may/01/priced-out-how-australians-are-being-hit-by-the-soaring-cost-of-food>;
Lucy Slade, ‘Cost of a Supermarket Shop Rises by 33 Per Cent in Nearly
Three Years’,
(online, 9 April 2024)
<https://www.9news.com.au/national/exclusive-supermarket-product-price-compare-between-grocery-shop-in-2021-and-today-due-to-inflation/8b1f03b1-c094-4ee5-aa68-35d401517b90>.
Pettman et al, ‘A
Food Relief Charter for South Australia’ (n 19) 2.
Australian Food
(n 4) 54 [3.125].
Bowden (n 19) 6.
Australian Bureau of
Statistics,
Australian Health Survey: Updated Results, 2011–2012
(Catalogue No 4364.0.55.003, 7 June 2013). A new National Nutrition and Physical
Activity Survey was conducted in 2023, with results
yet to be released:
‘National Nutrition and Physical Activity Survey’,
Bureau of Statistics
(Web Page, 26 April 2024)
<https://www.abs.gov.au/participate-survey/household-survey/national-nutrition-and-physical-activity-survey>.
Hunger Report 2023: National Key Findings Report
(Report, 25 September 2023)
<https://reports.foodbank.org.au/wp-content/uploads/2023/10/2023_Foodbank_Hunger_Report_IPSOS-Report.pdf>
Foodbank Hunger Report
Food and Agriculture
Organization of the United Nations,
The State of Food and Agriculture 2006:
Food Aid for Food Security?
(Report, 2006) 11
<https://www.fao.org/4/a0800e/a0800e.pdf>; Joachim von Braun,
‘International Workshop on Food Aid:
Contributions and Risks to
Sustainable Food Security’ (2004) 25(1)
Food and Nutrition Bulletin
Foodbank Hunger
Fiona H McKay,
‘Responding to Hunger in Australia: The Role of Traditional and Emerging
Food Distribution Measures in Addressing
Food Insecurity’ in Beth R Crisp
and Ann Taket (eds),
Sustaining Social Inclusion
(Routledge, 2020) 108,
110 <https://doi.org/10.4324/9780429397936-10>;
Emergency Relief in
(n 15) 31; McKay et al (n 19).
McKay et al (n 19) 2399,
Thirza Andriessen and Laura
A van der Velde, ‘How the Social Dignity of Recipients Is Violated and
Protected across Various
Forms of Food Aid in High-Income Countries: A Scoping
Review’ (2024) 41(1)
Agriculture and Human Values
<https://doi.org/10.1007/s10460-023-10476-w>.
‘Supplemental
Nutrition Assistance Program (SNAP)’,
Economic Research Service
(Web Page, 8 January 2025)
<https://www.ers.usda.gov/topics/food-nutrition-assistance/supplemental-nutrition-assistance-program-snap/>.
‘Food Relief’,
Department of Social Services
(Web Page, 13 November 2024)
<https://www.dss.gov.au/emergency-support/food-relief>. See also McKay (n
See, eg, ‘Food Rescue
Grant Program: Round 2’,
Queensland Government
(Web Page, 16 March
<https://www.qld.gov.au/environment/circular-economy-waste-reduction/funding-grants/food-rescue-grant-program-round-2>
(‘Food Rescue Grant Program’); ‘NSW Food Program’,
Department of Communities and Justice
(Web Page, 9 May 2024)
<https://dcj.nsw.gov.au/service-providers/deliver-community-and-sector-assistance/nsw-food-program.html>;
‘Community Food Relief’,
Service Providers
(Web Page, 20
December 2024)
<https://providers.dffh.vic.gov.au/community-food-relief>.
McKay et al (n 19)
For example, in Western
Australia (‘WA’) alone, more than 450 organisations, mostly
charities or churches, provide food
relief throughout the State: Western
Australian Council of Social Service,
WA Food Relief Framework 2019
(Report, 2019) 33
<https://www.wacoss.org.au/wp-content/uploads/2019/10/Food-Relief-Framework-report-sml.pdf>
WA Food Relief Framework
Pettman et al, ‘A
Food Relief Charter for South Australia’ (n 19) 2; Danielle Gallegos and
Mariana M Chilton, ‘Re-evaluating
Expertise: Principles for Food and
Nutrition Security Research, Advocacy and Solutions in High-Income
Countries’ (2019) 16(4)
International Journal of Environmental Research
and Public Health
561:1–16, 1
<https://doi.org/10.3390/ijerph16040561>; Graham Riches and Valerie
Tarasuk, ‘Canada: Thirty Years
of Food Charity and Public Policy
Neglect’ in Graham Riches and Tiina Silvasti (eds),
First World Hunger
Revisited: Food Charity or the Right to Food?
(Palgrave Macmillan,
ed, 2014) 42, 43 <https://doi.org/10.1057/9781137298737_4>;
Katharine S E Cresswell Riol and Sean Connelly, ‘Beyond a
Critique of Hunger: A Genealogy of Food Charity in Aotearoa New Zealand’
(2023) 40(3)
Agriculture and Human Values
<https://doi.org/10.1007/s10460-023-10414-w>.
Australian Food
(n 4) 104–5 [5.111]
150 [7.69]–[7.71], 151 [7.73].
Ibid 151 [7.74].
Food insecurity has been
described as ‘increasingly pervasive, chronic and intractable’:
Submission No 1 (n 21) 4. See
also Lindberg et al,
Food Secure
Communities
(n 20) 1; Sue Booth, ‘Food Banks in Australia:
Discouraging the Right to Food’ in Graham Riches and Tiina Silvasti (eds),
First World Hunger Revisited: Food Charity or the Right to Food?
(Palgrave Macmillan, 2
ed, 2014) 15, 21
<https://doi.org/10.1057/9781137298737_2>; Mossenson et al (n 23) 1.
McKay et al (n 19) 2400.
In what was stated to be
the largest qualitative study of food aid users in Australia, most participants
reported obtaining half
to one-third of their food from food aid: ibid 2405.
OzHarvest, Submission No 40
to House of Representatives Standing Committee on Agriculture, Parliament of
Inquiry into Food Security in Australia
(9 December 2022)
International Covenant
on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights
opened for signature 16
1966, 993 UNTS 3
(entered into force 3 January 1976) art 11.1
Declaration of Human Rights
GA Res 217A (III), UN GAOR, UN Doc A/810
(10 December 1948) art 25 (‘
Convention on the
Rights of the Child
opened for signature 20 November
1989, 1577 UNTS
(entered into force 2 September 1990) art 24.
Ibid art 11.2.
General Comment No
(n 1) 2 [4].
‘Take Action for the
Sustainable Development Goals’,
Sustainable Development Goals
<https://www.un.org/sustainabledevelopment/sustainable-development-goals/>.
General Comment No
(n 1) 3 [6].
Ibid 3 [8].
Ibid 3 [7]; Office of the
High Commissioner for Human Rights and Food and Agriculture Organization of the
United Nations, ‘The
Right to Adequate Food’ (Fact Sheet No 34, 1
April 2010) 3
<https://www.ohchr.org/sites/default/files/Documents/Publications/FactSheet34en.pdf>.
‘The Right to
Adequate Food’ (n 57) 4.
Food and Agriculture
Organization of the United Nations, ‘World Food Summit Plan of
Action’ (Plan, November 1996) [1]
<https://digitallibrary.un.org/record/195568>. There have been suggestions
made recently to redefine food security for the
specific context of high-income
countries where severe food insecurity is less prevalent: Gallegos et al (n 17)
Sheryl L Hendriks,
‘The Food Security Continuum: A Novel Tool for Understanding Food
Insecurity as a Range of Experiences’
(2015) 7(3)
Food Security
<https://doi.org/10.1007/s12571-015-0457-6>.
Foodbank Hunger
(n 30) 24; Submission No 1 (n 21) 13.
‘The Right to
Adequate Food’ (n 57) 4.
See, eg, Hope Johnson,
International Agricultural Law and Policy: A Rights-Based Approach to Food
(Edward Elgar Publishing, 2018).
Hilal Elver,
Food: Interim Report of the Special Rapporteur on the Right to Food
A/74/164 (15 July 2019) 4 [3] <https://docs.un.org/en/A/74/164>
2019 Interim Report
By making accessible the
minimum amount of essential food which is ‘sufficient, nutritionally
adequate and safe’:
General Comment No 12
(n 1) 4 [14], 6 [21].
The obligation to respect
requires States to refrain from interfering with the enjoyment of human rights.
The obligation to protect
requires States to prevent third parties from
violating rights and to react when such violations are committed. The obligation
fulfil mandates States to take appropriate measures towards the realisation
of human rights (ie, to provide), which could require
allocating significant
public resources for such purposes: see, eg, David Jason Karp, ‘What Is
the Responsibility to Respect
Human Rights? Reconsidering the “Respect,
Protect, and Fulfill” Framework’ (2020) 12(1)
International
83, 86 <https://doi.org/10.1017/S1752971919000198>; Anthony R
Reeves, ‘Standard Threats: How to Violate Basic Human Rights’
Social Theory and Practice
403, 416–17
<https://doi.org/10.5840/soctheorpract201541322>; Ida Elisabeth Koch,
‘Dichotomies, Trichotomies or
Waves of Duties?’
(2005) 5(1)
Rights Law Review
, 82 <https://doi.org/10.1093/hrlrev/ngi004>.
General Comment No
(n 1) 5 [15].
Food and Agriculture
Organization of the United Nations, ‘Voluntary Guidelines to Support the
Progressive Realization of the
Right to Adequate Food in the Context of National
Food Security’ (Guidelines, 2005) 25–7 [14.1]–[14.7]
Voluntary Guidelines’).
Ibid 26 [14.5].
Graham Riches and Tiina
Silvasti (eds),
First World Hunger Revisited: Food Charity or the Right to
(Palgrave Macmillan, 2
<https://doi.org/10.1057/9781137298737>.
Those eligibility criteria
should ensure no one in need is excluded, and those not in need are excluded:
‘FAO Voluntary Guidelines’
(n 70) 25 [13.3].
Ibid 15 [5.4], 26
Ibid 26 [14.4].
General Comment No
‘FAO Voluntary
Guidelines’ (n 70).
Committee on World Food
Security, ‘CFS Voluntary Guidelines on Food Systems and Nutrition’
(Guidelines, February 2021)
<https://www.fao.org/fileadmin/templates/cfs/Docs2021/Documents/CFS_VGs_Food_Systems_and_Nutrition_Strategy_EN.pdf>
Voluntary Guidelines’).
Michael Fakhri,
Food: Report of the Special Rapporteur on the Right to Food, Michael Fakhri
UN Doc A/HRC/46/33 (24 December 2020) (‘
Right to Food
Hilal Elver,
Critical Perspective on Food Systems, Food Crises and the Future
of the Right to Food: Report of the Special Rapporteur on the Right
UN Doc A/HRC/43/44 (21 January 2020) (‘
Critical Perspective on Food
’); Hilal Elver,
Report of the Special Rapporteur on the
Right to Food, Hilal Elver: Access to Justice and the Right to Food
A/HRC/28/65 (12 January 2014) (‘
Access to Justice and the Right to
’); Michael Fakhri,
Right to Food for Food System Recovery and
Transformation: Report of the Special Rapporteur on the Right to Food, Michael
, UN Doc A/78/202 (18 July 2023) (‘
Food System
’); Michael Fakhri,
The Right to Food: Interim Report of
the Special Rapporteur on the Right to Food, Michael Fakhri
, UN Doc A/76/237
(27 July 2021) (‘
2021 Interim Report
Interim Report
See, eg, Committee on
Economic, Social and Cultural Rights,
Concluding Observations on the Fifth
Periodic Report of Australia
, UN Doc E/C.12/AUS/CO/5 (11 July 2017)
Concluding Observations on the Fifth Periodic Report
Committee on the Elimination of Discrimination against Women,
Observations on the Eighth Periodic Report of Australia
CEDAW/C/AUS/CO/8 (25 July 2018) (‘
Concluding Observations on the Eighth
Periodic Report
‘Human Rights-Based
European Network of National Human Rights Institutions
<https://ennhri.org/about-nhris/human-rights-based-approach/>; Katie
Boyle, Scottish Human Rights Commission,
Models of Incorporation and
Justiciability for Economic, Social and Cultural Rights
(Report, November
<https://www.scottishhumanrights.com/media/1809/models_of_incorporation_escr_vfinal_nov18.pdf>;
Human Rights Commission, Submission to the Treasury,
What Matters
(January 2023)
<https://treasury.gov.au/sites/default/files/2023-03/c2023-379612-australian_human_rights_commission.pdf>
(‘Measuring
What Matters Submission’); Scottish Human Rights
Commission,
‘SNAP 2: Scotland's Second National Human Rights Action
Plan (2023–2030)’ (Plan, March 2023)
<https://www.snaprights.info/wp-content/uploads/2023/03/SNAP-2-March-2023-FINAL-PDF.pdf>
(‘SNAP 2’); Booth (n 45).
Based on a search of
individual communications to the CESCR conducted on 21 July 2024: Office of the
High Commissioner for Human
Jurisprudence Database
<https://juris.ohchr.org/
. One case based on the right to
social security did mention foodstuffs in connection with that right: Committee
on Economic, Social
and Cultural Rights,
Views: Communication No 1/2013
UN Doc E/C.12/57/D/1/2013 (20 April 2016).
Only 31 parties, as of June
2025. Australia is not one of them: ‘Optional Protocol to the
International Covenant on Economic,
Social and Cultural Rights’,
Nations Treaty Collection
<https://treaties.un.org/Pages/ViewDetails.aspx?src=IND&mtdsg_no=IV-3-a&chapter=4&clang=_en>.
Salma Yusuf, ‘The
Rise of Judicially Enforced Economic, Social, and Cultural Rights: Refocusing
Perspectives’
(2012) 10(2)
Seattle Journal for Social Justice
766; Elver,
Access to Justice and the Right to Food
[6]–[8]; Boyle (n 82) 43–7. While the UN human rights treaty system
has been criticised for its failings around
implementation and enforcement of
State obligations, it nonetheless remains an important source of norms,
standards and liabilities:
Sheehy and Chen (n 5) 659–60.
The PANEL framework is a
general HRBA to governance that is underpinned by five key human rights
principles: participation, accountability,
non-discrimination and equality,
empowerment, and legality: see, eg, ‘Human Rights Based Approaches’,
Australian Human Rights Commission
<https://humanrights.gov.au/our-work/rights-and-freedoms/human-rights-based-approaches>;
‘Human Rights-Based
Approach’ (n 82); Measuring What Matters
Submission (n 82) 5 [13]; ‘SNAP 2’ (n 82); ‘Our Mission and
That Underpin Our Work’,
Northern Ireland Human Rights
<https://nihrc.org/about-us/who-we-are/our-mission-and-principles-that-underpin-our-work>.
Rebecca Lindberg, Mark
Lawrence and Martin Caraher, ‘Kitchens and Pantries: Helping or Hindering?
The Perspectives of Emergency
Food Users in Victoria, Australia’ (2017)
Journal of Hunger and Environmental Nutrition
26, 35, 39–40
<https://doi.org/10.1080/19320248.2016.1175397>; Sue Kleve et al,
‘Perspectives of Food Insecurity
and Service Delivery amongst Emergency
Food Relief Clients in a Regional City in Victoria, Australia’ [2023]
Health and Social Care in the Community
8711041:1–10
<https://doi.org/10.1155/2023/8711041>.
Measuring What Matters
Submission (n 82) 5 [13].
General Comment No
(n 1) 6–7 [23]; ‘CFS Voluntary Guidelines’ (n 79) 11
[54]; Olivier De Schutter,
Report of the Special Rapporteur on the Right to
Food, Olivier De Schutter: Final Report
, UN Doc A/HRC/25/57 (24 January
2014) 14–15 [35].
‘FAO Voluntary
Guidelines’ (n 70) 6–7 [19].
Perspective on Food Systems
(n 80) 14 [60].
‘FAO Voluntary
Guidelines’ (n 70) 9 [1.2]; ‘CFS Voluntary Guidelines’ (n 79)
‘FAO Voluntary
Guidelines’ (n 70) 6–7 [19].
‘CFS Voluntary
Guidelines’ (n 79) 17 [56].
‘FAO Voluntary
Guidelines’ (n 70) 6–7 [19], 16 [8.2]–[8.3]; ibid guideline
3.3.1(d), 22 [59].
Perspective on Food Systems
(n 80) 15 [65].
(n 80) 14 [74].
‘FAO Voluntary
Guidelines’ (n 70) 6–7 [19].
(n 80) 14 [74].
Justice and the Right to Food
(n 80) 9 [26]; Fakhri,
2021 Interim Report
(n 80) 6 [15]; Measuring What Matters Submission (n 82) 5 [13].
Justice and the Right to Food
(n 80) 9 [26], 9–10 [28]–[29],
General Comment No 12
(n 1) 8 [32]–[33];
Concluding Observations on the Fifth Periodic Report
Justice and the Right to Food
(n 80) 9 [26].
Boyle (n 82)
General Comment No
(n 1) 2 [4]. All human beings are born equal in dignity:
50) art 1. Human rights derive from the inherent dignity of the human person:
(n 49) Preamble.
(n 80) 10 [51].
Observations
on the Fifth Periodic Report
(n 81) 8 [40].
‘FAO Voluntary
Guidelines’ (n 70) 22 [10.10].
Booth (n 45) 15;
Graham Riches, ‘Food Banks and Food Security: Welfare Reform, Human Rights
and Social Policy. Lessons from
Canada?’ (2002) 36(6)
Social Policy and
Administration
648, 650 <https://doi.org/10.1111/1467-9515.00309>
(‘Food Banks and Food Security’); Christina M Pollard and Sue
‘Food Insecurity and Hunger in Rich Countries: It Is Time for Action
against Inequality’ (2019) 16(10)
International Journal of
Environmental Research and Public Health
1804:1–13, 5
<https://doi.org/10.3390/ijerph16101804>; Sue Booth and Jillian Whelan,
‘Hungry for Change: The Food
Banking Industry in Australia’ (2014)
British Food Journal
<https://doi.org/10.1108/bfj-01-2014-0037>.
Booth and Whelan (n
Vienna Declaration
and Programme of Action
, UN Doc A/CONF.157/23 (12 July 1993); Elver,
Critical Perspective on Food Systems
(n 80) 15 [64].
Daniel J Whelan,
Indivisible Human Rights: A History
(University of Pennsylvania Press,
2010) 3 <https://doi.org/10.9783/9780812205404>.
General Comment No
(n 1) 2 [4]; Elver,
Critical Perspective on Food Systems
General Comment No
(n 1) 8 [33]. In Australia, the rights and obligations in an
international treaty will only become part of domestic law if implementing
legislation incorporates (transforms) its provisions:
Dietrich v The
[1992] HCA 57
(1992) 177 CLR 292
, 305 (Mason CJ, McHugh J);
Minister for
Immigration and Ethnic Affairs v Teoh
[1995] HCA 20
(1995) 183 CLR 273
, 286–7 (Mason
CJ, Deane J).
Richards, Kjærnes
and Vik (n 10) 68.
Domenico Zipoli,
‘The Australian National Human Rights System: An Overview’ in
Bertrand Ramcharan et al (eds),
A Global Handbook on National Human Rights
Protection Systems
(Brill Nijhoff, 2023) 385
<https://doi.org/10.1163/9789004535053_017>.
Ibid 387–8;
Russell Solomon,
Australia’s Engagement with Economic and Social
Rights: A Case of Institutional Avoidance
(Palgrave Macmillan, 2021) 276
<https://doi.org/10.1007/978-981-16-0033-3>.
This leads to a
‘clear disconnect between Australia’s legal obligations under
ratified human rights treaties and national
laws’: Zipoli (n 117) 411.
Ibid 386–7.
See John Pyke,
Government Powers under a Federal
Constitution
: Constitutional Law in
(Lawbook, 1
ed, 2017) ch 4.
Chief Justice Robert
French, ‘Protecting Human Rights without a Bill of Rights’
John Marshall Law Review
Ibid 774–9;
Australian Human Rights Commission, ‘Free and Equal: A
Human Rights Act
for Australia’ (Position Paper, December 2022) 11
<https://humanrights.gov.au/sites/default/files/free_equal_hra_2022_-_main_report_rgb_0_0.pdf>
Human Rights Act
for Australia’).
Australia is the only
Commonwealth country without one: ‘A
Human Rights Act
For Australia’
(n 123) 7; French (n 122) 769.
Australian Human
Rights Commission Act 1986
See also Zipoli (n 117) 403. The AHRC has ‘long advocated for
to be given the same status in the
as the other
core human rights treaties’: Rosalind Croucher, ‘A New National
Human Rights Framework for Australia’
(Speech, Annual Castan Centre for
Human Rights Law Conference, 21 July 2023)
<https://humanrights.gov.au/about/news/speeches/new-national-human-rights-framework-australia>.
Office of the High
Commissioner for Human Rights, ‘Ratification of 18 International Human
Rights Treaties’,
Status of Ratification Interactive Dashboard
Page) <https://indicators.ohchr.org/> (‘Ratification of 18
Treaties’).
Committee on Economic,
Social and Cultural Rights,
Sixth Periodic Report Submitted by Australia
under Articles 16 and 17 of the Covenant, Due in 2022
, UN Doc E/C.12/AUS/6
(20 November 2023).
Alongside several other
human rights conventions:
(n 125) schs 1–5.
‘Ratification of
18 Treaties’ (n 126). Russell Solomon describes Australia’s approach
to the domestic implementation
of its rights obligations under international law
as ‘something of a “light touch” ... with a focus on civil and
political rights, representative government and a market economy’: Solomon
(n 118) 275.
There are currently
seven principal federal laws in force with the word ‘food’ in their
title. Five relate to imported
food controls and charges, one is the
Standards Australia New Zealand Act 1991
Food Standards
’), and the other is the
United Nations Food and Agriculture
Organization Act 1944
(Cth). Based on a search of Commonwealth laws
conducted on 5 August 2024:
Federal Register of Legislation
<https://www.legislation.gov.au/>.
National Food
Security Act 2013
(India). The Act’s long title is ‘[a]n Act to
provide for food and nutritional security in human life cycle approach,
ensuring access to adequate quantity of quality food at affordable prices to
people to live a life with dignity and for matters
connected therewith or
incidental thereto’.
Zipoli (n 117) 393.
Lidija Knuth and Margret
Vidar, ‘Constitutional and Legal Protection of the Right to Food around
the World’ (Study Paper,
Food and Agriculture Organization of the United
Nations, 2011)
http://www.oda-alc.org/documentos/1340937409.pdf
Australian Food Story
(n 4) 7 [2.2].
Ibid 13 [2.26];
Farmar-Bowers, Higgins and Millar, ‘Food Security Problem’ (n 15)
14; Commission for the Human Future,
The Need for Strategic Food Policy in
Australia: Governing for a Healthy, Sustainable, Economically Viable and
Resilient Food System
(Policy Report, June 2020) 2; ‘National Food
Security Strategy’,
<https://www.foodbank.org.au/national-food-security-strategy/>.
Marion Nestle used this
term to describe the US’ approach to food policy. She also called it a
system of ‘regulatory
fragmentation’. The US has a range of
government agencies involved in overseeing food policies and programs, with some
overseen by multiple agencies. Like Australia, there have been calls
for a single food agency in the US: Marion Nestle, ‘Food
Politics and
Policy’ (17 July 2024)
Oxford Research Encyclopedias: Food Studies
8 <https://doi.org/10.1093/acrefore/9780197762530.013.19>.
Pratibha Naudiyal et al,
Food Policy in Australia: The Role of Different Federal Government
Organisations
(Report, December 2021) 4–5
<https://www.sydney.edu.au/content/dam/corporate/documents/charles-perkins-centre/food-policy-in-australia-december-2021.pdf>.
Australian Food
(n 4) 21 [2.57].
Lindberg et al,
‘Revising a Right to Food Road Map’ (n 5) 3.
The strategy is in
response to recommendation 10 of the parliamentary inquiry into food pricing and
food security in remote Indigenous
communities, and will be managed by the
National Indigenous Australians Agency (‘NIAA’): Strategy Partners,
Strategy for Food Security in Remote First Nations
Communities’ (Discussion Paper, 2024) 4
<https://www.niaa.gov.au/sites/default/files/documents/2024-06/food-security-discussion-paper-7-6-2024.pdf>
(‘Strategy Discussion Paper’). Consultations about the proposed
strategy were held during the period May to August 2024,
with 400 people
participating in forums and discussions across 31 locations. More than 25
written submissions were received by the
NIAA: National Indigenous Australians
Agency, ‘National Strategy for Food Security in Remote Aboriginal and
Torres Strait Islander
Communities: 2025–2035’ (Strategy Paper,
<https://www.niaa.gov.au/sites/default/files/documents/2025-03/National-Strategy-for-Food-Security-in-Remote-Aboriginal-and-Torres-Strait-Islander-communities_0.pdf>.
The results of the consultation are yet to be released at the time of
Discussion Paper’ (n 142) 5.
Relief’ (n 38).
This is done via a
closed, non-competitive selection process to increase the access of emergency
relief organisations to ‘a
cost-effective supply of food items’:
‘Grant Award View: GA325652-V4’,
GrantConnect
<https://www.grants.gov.au/Ga/Show/3483512b-18aa-4cbe-bffd-31ceda32d76e>
(SecondBite); ‘Grant Award View: GA325653-V4’,
GrantConnect
<https://www.grants.gov.au/Ga/Show/dbc9a056-c9c9-4f00-b4c0-d039952a9c44>
(Oz Harvest Limited); ‘Grant Award
View: GA325654-V4’,
GrantConnect
<https://www.grants.gov.au/Ga/Show/616d2223-0a8e-477b-98dc-20728b135b16>
(Foodbank Australia Limited).
Department of Social
Services (Cth),
Annual Report 2022–23
(Report, 2023) 3
<https://www.aph.gov.au/Parliamentary_Business/Tabled_Documents/3928>.
‘The Right to
Adequate Food’ (n 57) 3.
‘CFS Voluntary
Guidelines’ (n 79) 17 [56].
The Code comprises a
series of standards passed as legislative instruments:
Food Standards Act
(n 130) s 94. The standards are read together as a single instrument:
Australia New Zealand Food Standards Code
(Cth) standard 1.1.1–2(1)
Food Standards Code
’). The Code is enforced under
application Acts in each state and territory, and under Commonwealth legislation
for imported
food: at standard 1.1.1, div 4, note 1.
Note that civil
liability protections for donated foods are dealt with at the state and
territory level – this is not enacted
at the Commonwealth level: Joseph S
Beckmann et al,
Australia: Legal Guide, Food Donation Law and Policy
(Report, June 2022) 8–10
<https://atlas.foodbanking.org/wp-content/uploads/2023/11/Australia-Legal-Guide-6.22.22.pdf>.
Mossenson et al (n 23)
A global scoping review
on controls in charitable food relief programs found divergence between food
control management by the conventional
food supply chain compared with that of
food relief, and gaps in legislation governing food relief programs to ensure
food safety
and general hygiene. Food relief practice was described as ‘a
detour from the conventional food supply chain’, and that
matters of food control, food safety, and general hygiene [it] is often
overlooked by the food safety regulatory authorities’:
Sizwe Makhunga et
al, ‘Evidence on Food Control in Charitable Food Assistance Programs: A
Systematic Scoping Review’
Systematic Reviews
240:1–8, 5 <https://doi.org/10.1186/s13643-019-1164-8>.
A five-day audit of food
donated to an Australian food bank in 2023 found that 38% of all donations had
products categorised as
unsafe or unsuitable, accounting for 4% by weight of the
total donations received. Supermarkets were responsible for 67% of all donations
containing products categorised as UUP, making up 90% of the total weight of UUP
donations received. In one instance, 300 kilograms
of salami was donated four
months past its use-by date: Mossenson et al (n 23) 5.
Perspective on Food Systems
(n 80) 15 [65].
Mossenson et al (n 23)
Makhunga et al (n 156)
Mossenson et al (n 23)
General Comment No
(n 1) 7 [27]; Fakhri,
Food System Recovery
(n 80) 16–17
[76]–[79]; ‘FAO Voluntary Guidelines’ (n 70) 13 [4.3].
Tax Laws Amendment
(Incentivising Food Donations to Charitable Organisations) Bill 2024
(‘Tax Laws Amendment Bill’). The Bill introduces a tax offset for
companies that are constitutional corporations
for certain expenditure incurred
in undertaking food donation activities for registered food charities:
Explanatory Memorandum,
Tax Laws Amendment (Incentivising Food Donations to
Charitable Organisations) Bill 2024
(Cth). The Bill was referred to the Senate
Economics Legislation Committee for inquiry, which received 63 submissions. The
strongly supported by the food relief sector and Australian food
industry: see, eg, Foodbank, OzHarvest and SecondBite, Submission
Senate Standing Committee on Economics, Parliament of Australia,
Inquiry into
Tax Laws Amendment (Incentivising Food Donations to Charitable Organisations)
(27 August 2024); Australian Food and Grocery Council, Submission
No 6 to Senate Standing Committee on Economics, Parliament of Australia,
Inquiry into
Tax Laws Amendment (Incentivising Food Donations to Charitable
Organisations) Bill 2024
(20 August 2024); Mars Food & Nutrition
Australia, Submission No 59 to Senate Standing Committee on Economics,
Parliament of
Inquiry into
Tax Laws Amendment (Incentivising Food
Donations to Charitable Organisations) Bill 2024
(31 July 2024). Food
security researchers, by contrast, provide cautious and caveated support. They
acknowledge the need for broader
policy instruments that address individual and
household food security beyond food relief (eg, poverty alleviation and social
measures, and sustainable food systems initiatives). They also insist
on recognising that redirecting corporate food waste is not
alone a solution to
food insecurity: see, eg, Centre for Social Impact, Flinders University,
Submission No 7 to Senate Standing Committee
on Economics, Parliament of
Inquiry into
Tax Laws Amendment (Incentivising Food Donations to
Charitable Organisations) Bill 2024
(20 August 2024); Rebecca Lindberg et
al, Submission No 15 to Senate Standing Committee on Economics, Parliament of
Inquiry into Tax Laws Amendment (Incentivising Food Donations to
Charitable Organisations) Bill 2024
(20 August 2024).
This was in the
suggested addition of section 419-15(1)(a) to the
Income Tax Act 1977
(Cth): Tax Laws Amendment Bill (n 166) sch 1 pt 1 item 1.
Department of the
Environment and Energy (Cth),
National Food Waste Strategy: Halving
Australia’s Food Waste by 2030
(Report, November 2017) 7
<https://www.dcceew.gov.au/sites/default/files/documents/national-food-waste-strategy.pdf>.
Ibid 12–13.
Australian Food
(n 4) iii–v.
Social security is of
fundamental importance for human dignity, and can play a crucial role in
alleviating poverty and promoting
social inclusion: Committee on Economic,
Social and Cultural Rights,
General Comment No 19: The Right to Social
Security (Art 9)
UN Doc E/C.12/GC/19 (4
February 2008, adopted 23 November 2007) 2 [3], 12–13 [41]
General Comment No 19
Ibid 9 [28]. The right
to social security is recognised in the
(n 50) and enshrined in a
range of other human rights treaties:
(n 49) art 9;
International Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Racial
Discrimination
opened for signature 21 December
1965, 660 UNTS 195
(entered into force 4 January 1969) art 5(e)(iv);
Convention on the
Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination against Women
signature 18 December
1979, 1249 UNTS 13
(entered into force 3 September 1981)
art 11(1)(e).
General Comment No
(n 172) 7 [22].
Ben Phillips and Vivikth
Narayanan, ‘Financial Stress and Social Security Settings in
Australia’ (Research Paper, Australian
National University Centre for
Social Research and Methods, April 2021) 1
<https://csrm.cass.anu.edu.au/research/publications/financial-stress-and-social-security-settings-australia>;
Peter Davidson, Bruce Bradbury and Melissa Wong,
Poverty in Australia 2023:
Who Is Affected
(Report, March 2023) 48
<https://povertyandinequality.acoss.org.au/wp-content/uploads/2023/03/Poverty-in-Australia-2023_Who-is-affected.pdf>;
Australian Council of Social Service, Submission No 23 to Senate Select
Committee on the Cost of Living, Parliament of Australia,
Inquiry into the
Extent and Nature of Poverty in Australia
(February 2023) 3.
Temple, Booth and
Pollard (n 14) 5–6; Kleve et al (n 87) 6.
Richards, Kjærnes
and Vik (n 10) 65, 68.
Discussion Paper’ (n 142) 45; National Indigenous Australians Agency,
Supplementary Submission No 36.1 to
House Standing Committee on Indigenous
Affairs, Parliament of Australia,
Inquiry into Food Pricing and Food Security
in Remote Indigenous Communities
(23 July 2020) 2; Northern Territory
Government,
Northern Territory Market Basket Survey 2021
(Summary Report,
1 July 2022) 4
<https://digitallibrary.health.nt.gov.au/nthealthserver/api/core/bitstreams/32568ab8-d6f3-41c9-bd03-13b613b4b01b/content>.
Davidson, Bradbury and
Wong (n 175) 20. Similarly, food insecurity declined dramatically in the US
during the peak of COVID-19 with
temporarily expanded government relief payments
(eg, the Child Tax Credit and Pandemic-EBT) and enhanced access to food relief
including the Supplemental Nutrition Assistance Program and school
meals. By 2021, with additional support measures in place, levels
insecurity were the lowest on record since 1998. When most of these additional
support measures were terminated at the end
of 2022, food insecurity increased
again sharply: Diane Schanzenbach, ‘The Pandemic Drop in Food Insecurity
among Families
with Children’,
(online, 13 October 2022)
<https://econofact.org/the-pandemic-drop-in-food-insecurity-among-households-with-children>;
(n 136) 14.
Constitution
Constitution
Act Amendment Act
Constitution
of Queensland 2001
The dialogue model is
aimed at prevention rather than litigation and retains the sovereignty of
Parliament. The courts can inform
the government if legislation is inconsistent
with human rights, but the courts cannot invalidate legislation. The model
for each arm of government to have a distinct role to play in relation
to human rights, with a dialogue between them: Parliamentary
Joint Committee on
Human Rights, Parliament of Australia,
Inquiry into Australia’s Human
Rights Framework
(Report, May 2024) 165–7 [7.3]–[7.6]
<https://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/download/committees/reportjnt/RB000210/toc_pdf/InquiryintoAustralia'sHumanRightsFramework.pdf>;
‘The Role of Parliament’,
Queensland Human Rights Commission
(Web Page, 29 June 2019)
<https://www.qhrc.qld.gov.au/your-rights/human-rights-law/the-role-of-parliament>.
The right to education
is found in
, and the right to health services in
section 37:
’). See also
‘Human Rights’,
Queensland Human Rights Commission
21 September 2021)
<https://www.qhrc.qld.gov.au/your-rights/human-rights-law>. Although
is based on article 12 of the
(n 49), it ‘is not
intended to encompass rights in relation to underlying determinants of health,
such as food and water, social
security, housing and environmental
factors’: Explanatory Notes,
Human Rights Bill 2018
divs 1–2. The Commission can support the resolution of disputes
through dispute resolution procedures (eg, conciliation), but
empowered to make binding rulings about complaints, nor is it an enforcement
body: ‘About Us’,
Queensland Human Rights Commission
Page, 28 June 2019) <https://www.qhrc.qld.gov.au/about-us>.
Queensland has only two
current laws with the word ‘food’ in their title: the
Food Production
(Safety) Act 2000
Qld Food Production Act
Neither law mentions food security, food relief, food aid, food assistance or
food donation. The purposes of the
Qld Food Act
(n 184) are to ensure
food for sale is safe and suitable for human consumption, to prevent misleading
conduct relating to the sale
of food, and to apply the
Food Standards
Qld Food Act
(n 184) s 8. The objects of the
Food Production Act
(n 184) are to establish Safe Food Production QLD, to
ensure the production of primary produce makes food fit for human or animal
consumption and maintains food quality, and to provide for food safety measures
for primary produce production consistent with other
Queensland laws: at s 3.
See, eg, The Queensland
Plan, released in 2014 as the State’s ‘aspirational ...
vision’ for its community over
the next 30 years: Queensland Government,
‘The Queensland Plan: Queenslanders’ 30-Year Vision’ (Strategy
2014) iii. Food security and food aid are implicitly – though not
explicitly – referenced within Goal 5, ‘[i]n
Queensland nobody gets
left behind’, and Goal 16, ‘[w]e are physically and mentally
healthy’, of the plan’s
35 total goals: at 4–5. The current
Department of Primary Industries (‘DPI’) strategic plan for
2024–28 outlines
‘leading global food security and
sustainability’ as its vision. Respecting human rights is listed as one of
six values in the plan, but it makes no specific mention of the
right to food: Department of Primary Industries (Qld), ‘Strategic
2024–2028’ (Strategy Paper, April 2025)
<https://www.publications.qld.gov.au/ckan-publications-attachments-prod/resources/7487166b-5be7-4713-8300-c020853d7674/dpi-strategic-plan-2024-2028.pdf>.
‘Queensland AgTech Roadmap: 2023–2028’ focuses on
accelerating agricultural technology innovation and adoption in
Queensland and
claims that food security in Queensland, Australia and the world will be
strengthened by ‘[t]he accelerated
adoption of AgTech along the value
chain’: Queensland Government, ‘Queensland AgTech Roadmap:
(Roadmap, October 2023) 11. Various food industry plans
or strategies have been introduced in the State over the past 15 years from
sides of the political divide. For example, the Labor Government launched
‘Food for a Growing Economy’
as a food industry plan
in 2011, only for it to be replaced shortly after that by the new
Liberal–National Coalition Government’s ‘Queensland’s
Agriculture Strategy: A 2040 Vision to Double Agricultural Production’.
The former only briefly touched on food security, while
the latter did not
mention food security at all; both focused on the economic benefits of
agriculture as ‘a pillar of the Queensland
economy’. Neither made
any mention of the right to food: Department of Employment, Economic Development
and Innovation (Qld),
‘Food for a Growing Economy: An Economic Development
Framework for the Queensland Food Industry’ (Draft Policy Framework,
2011); Department of Agriculture, Fisheries and Forestry (Qld),
‘Queensland’s Agriculture Strategy: A 2040 Vision to
Agricultural Production’ (Strategy Paper, 2013).
Department of
Agriculture and Fisheries (Qld), ‘Queensland Food and Fibre Policy’
(Policy Paper, 31 July 2015) 6.
Department of Primary
Industries (Qld), ‘Queensland Biosecurity Strategy 2024–2029’
(Strategy Paper, 2024)
<https://www.publications.qld.gov.au/ckan-publications-attachments-prod/resources/e3869c8e-55b6-4578-95f2-43b4dbaeeb97/qld-biosecurity-strategy.pdf>.
See, eg, Isobel
Tomlinson, ‘Doubling Food Production to Feed the 9 Billion: A Critical
Perspective on a Key Discourse of Food
Security in the UK’ (2013) 29
Journal of Rural Studies
<https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jrurstud.2011.09.001>; Sheehy and Chen (n 5)
Health and Wellbeing
Queensland, ‘Gather + Grow 2023–2032: Queensland Remote Food
Security Strategy’ (Strategy
Paper, October 2023)
<https://hw.qld.gov.au/wp-content/uploads/2024/05/Gather-Grow-Strategy-2023-2032.pdf>.
Civil Liability
also Beckmann et al (n 152) 18.
The laws of Victoria, WA, the Northern Territory and the Australian Capital
Territory (‘ACT’) also exclude agencies that
distribute food donated
by others from civil liability protection: Beckmann et al (n 152) 10.
Justice and the Right to Food
(n 80) 9 [26]; Boyle (n 82) 15.
This should include
disaggregated analysis on the food insecurity and vulnerability of different
groups in society: ‘FAO Voluntary
Guidelines’ (n 70) 10 [2.2], 30
A study by the McKell
Institute found that every central and northern state electorate is in the worst
half of the State for food
insecurity while the most advantaged electorates are
in the south-east corner of the State: Rachel Nolan and Esther Rajadurai, McKell
Institute Queensland,
Mapping Food Insecurity: An Index for Central and North
(Report, July 2020) 31
<https://mckellinstitute.org.au/research/reports/mapping-food-insecurity/>.
Another study of five remote
Torres Strait Islander communities found that
‘recommended diets’ would be unaffordable for households on median
costing 35% of gross income, and for those on welfare, 48% of disposable
income, compared to Greater Brisbane, where the recommended
diet would cost 21%
of the gross income of households on median income and 36% of the disposable
income of welfare-only income households:
Amanda J Lee et al, ‘Cost and
Affordability of Healthy, Equitable and More Sustainable Diets in the Torres
Strait Islands’
(2022) 46(3)
Australian and New Zealand Journal of
Public Health
340, 342 <https://doi.org/10.1111/1753-6405.13225>.
Nolan and Rajadurai (n
‘Emergency Relief
Queensland Government
(Web Page, 28 March 2025)
<https://www.qld.gov.au/community/cost-of-living-support/emergency-relief-program>.
Steven Miles and Leeanne
Enoch, ‘Miles Doing What Matters: Budget Backs Bigger, Better Foodbank for
Queenslanders in Need’
(Media Statement, 23 June 2024)
<https://statements.qld.gov.au/statements/100664>.
Queensland Government,
‘Waste Management and Resource Recovery Strategy’ (Strategy Paper,
<https://www.qld.gov.au/__data/assets/pdf_file/0028/103798/qld-waste-management-resource-recovery-strategy.pdf>.
The Queensland Organics
Strategy states that organic materials are a valuable resource that can be used
to reduce food insecurity,
and ‘there is an urgent need to improve and
increase the diversion of edible food to people in need’: Office of
Recovery, Department of Environment and Science (Qld),
‘Queensland Organics Strategy 2022–2032: A Strategy to Improve
Management of Organic Materials along the Organics Supply and Consumption
Chain’ (Strategy Paper, February 2022) 9
<https://www.qld.gov.au/__data/assets/pdf_file/0024/240747/organics-strategy-2022-2032.pdf>.
The strategy aims to ‘improve food security through increased and
effective redistribution of food to Queenslanders in need’:
‘Queensland Organics Action Plan 2022–2032’ has several action
points relating to food rescue, including
increasing food rescue capacity by
providing ongoing funding to food rescue organisations to divert food from
landfill and redistribute
it to Queenslanders in need; exploring opportunities
to increase connections between food rescue organisations, businesses and
to increase the diversion of surplus edible food; and identifying
financial instruments that could encourage greater participation
donation programs: Office of Resource Recovery, Department of Environment and
Science (Qld), ‘Queensland Organics Action
Plan 2022–2032’
(Strategy Paper, February 2022)
<https://www.qld.gov.au/__data/assets/pdf_file/0023/240746/organics-action-plan.pdf>.
The objectives of the
Food Rescue Grant program are twofold – to ‘[i]ncrease the diversion
of food waste from landfill
in Queensland to assist in meeting the actions and
objectives of the Organics Strategy’ and to ‘[s]upport food rescue
organisations to increase their capacity to rescue more food and provide it to
Queenslanders in need’: Queensland Government,
‘Food Rescue Grants:
Round 2 Program Guidelines’ (Guidelines, November 2022) 2. In 2020, Round
1 of the Food Rescue Grant
Program provided over $900,000 to six organisations:
at 1. In 2022–24, Round 2 offered individual grants of up to $500,000
‘infrastructure, equipment and operational costs to divert additional food
from landfill and redistribute it to Queenslanders
in need’: ‘Food
Rescue Grant Program’ (n 39). Examples of initiatives funded under Round 2
of the program include
$491,639 to SecondBite in Brisbane for upgrading freezer
infrastructure and purchasing a truck for distribution of meals; $486,035
Twin Rivers Community Care in Logan to expand leased storage and shop space; and
$408,096 to Foodbank Queensland in Brisbane to
purchase a refrigerated vehicle
and upgrade their coldroom: Annastacia Palaszczuk and Meaghan Scanlon,
‘Food Rescue Helps People
in Need and Saves Food from Landfill’
(Media Statement, 15 March 2023)
<https://statements.qld.gov.au/statements/97371>.
Palaszczuk and Scanlon
In 2023, the Queensland
Government funded 861 schools for school food programs for their students.
Grants were also paid to external
organisations to deliver school food programs
across the State: ‘School Food Programs’,
Queensland Department
of Education
(Web Page, 11 October 2024)
<https://web.archive.org/web/20250116184908/https://education.qld.gov.au/students/student-health-safety-wellbeing/student-health/school-food-programs>.
‘CFS Voluntary
Guidelines’
(n 79) guideline 3.3.2; Fakhri,
2021 Interim Report
(n 80) 23–4 [93]; ‘Strategy Discussion Paper’ (n 142)
Steven Miles et al,
‘Tip-Top Announcement for Queensland Kids: State Budget to Fund Food
Relief’(Media Statement, 30
<https://statements.qld.gov.au/statements/100434>. The SCFRP is aligned
with the ‘Smart Choices: Healthy Food
and Drink Supply Strategy for
Queensland Schools’, a traffic-light guide for schools based on the
Australian Dietary Guidelines,
the National Healthy School Canteens Guidelines
and the Australian Guide to Healthy Eating, to ensure that any food and drinks
in the school environment are healthy: Department of Education (Qld),
‘Smart Choices: Healthy Food and Drink Supply Strategy
for Queensland
Schools’ (Strategy Paper, January 2020) 3
<https://education.qld.gov.au/student/Documents/smart-choices-strategy.pdf>.
Though it notably does
enshrine certain rights, such as the right of women to vote and to stand for
Constitution
(SA) ss 48–48A.
For example, the
of Human Rights and Responsibilities Bill 2020
(SA), introduced by former
Greens parliamentarian the Hon Mark Parnell, lapsed without a second reading.
See also Sarah Moulds and
Mark Knight, ‘Legislating for Human Security:
Could South Australia Lead the Way Again?’
(2023) 48(1)
Alternative Law
, 39 <https://doi.org/10.1177/1037969X221149124>.
In December 2023, the
Social Development Committee of the SA Parliament announced an inquiry into the
potential for a
Human Rights Act
for the State. The Committee has recently
released its report and recommendations: Social Development Committee,
Parliament of South
Inquiry into the Potential for a
Human Rights
for South Australia
(Report No 49, 29 April 2025).
Human Rights Act
Charter of Human Rights and
Responsibilities Act
The three existing
state-based laws are focused on civil and political rights, with limited ESC
rights. The Queensland Act enshrines
health and education rights. The ACT Act
formalises education and work rights. The Victorian Act includes the right to
freedom from
forced work. All three recognise a general right to culture. They
are otherwise silent as to ESC rights. None of them enshrine the
right to food
or the right to an adequate standard of living.
The long title of the
Food Act 2001
(SA) is ‘[a]n Act to provide for the safety and
suitability of food; and for other purposes’. There are seven other laws
or regulations in SA with the word ‘food’ in their title; all relate
to food safety. Based on a search of SA laws conducted
on 1 October 2024:
‘South Australian Legislation’,
Government of South Australia
(Web Page) <https://www.legislation.sa.gov.au/>.
The government is
undertaking a two-stage project in 2024 to better understand the experiences of
food insecurity in the State and
possible solutions. The first stage was an
evidence summary prepared by academics; the second stage was a public
consultation process
with people who have lived experience of food insecurity
and the broader community. It builds on existing work done to date with
relief sector and sees Wellbeing SA and the Department of Human Services working
together with academia (Centre for Social
Impact, Flinders University):
‘Secure Food Systems for South Australians’,
<https://researchnow.flinders.edu.au/en/projects/secure-food-systems-for-south-australians>;
Government of South
Australia, ‘Food Secure Communities in South
Australia’ (Summary Paper, 26 April 2024) (‘SA Food Secure
Communities’).
Government of South
Australia, ‘Banking on Food Security for Cost-of-Living Relief’
(Media Release, 5 September 2024)
<https://www.premier.sa.gov.au/media-releases/news-items/banking-on-food-security-for-cost-of-living-relief>.
‘FAO Voluntary
Guidelines’ (n 70) 15 [5.4], [6.1], 21 [10.3], 30 [17.1].
Each year, the SA
Government conducts monthly surveys of approximately 7,000 SA adults and 2,000
children to monitor the health
of the population. Respondents are asked a single
question about food security: had there been any time in the past 12 months when
they had run out of food and could not afford to buy more?: ‘South
Australian Population Health Survey’,
Preventive Health SA
<https://www.preventivehealth.sa.gov.au/evidence-data/about-our-data-collections/sa-population-health-survey>.
The Population Health
Survey Module System collected modules in 2020 and 2023 on food insecurity using
the comprehensive US Department
of Agriculture Household Food Security Survey
Module: Emails from Rebecca Nolan, Preventive Health SA to Katherine Keane, 27
1 October 2024.
Matt Fisher, Toby
Freeman, and Fran Baum,
Developing a Systems View of the Wellbeing SA:
Department of Human Services Food Security Initiative
(Project Report, 2024)
<https://www.adelaide.edu.au/stretton/ua/media/729/systems-view-wbsa-dhs-food-security-initiative-project-report.pdf>.
This cross-sectoral partnership was formed in 2015 to address food insecurity in
SA and strengthen the charitable food relief sector,
and is seen by stakeholders
as successful and durable: at 2, 4.
Booth and Whelan (n 110)
Tahna Lee Pettman et al,
‘Part Discount Grocer, Part Social Connection: Defining Elements of Social
Supermarkets’ (2024)
Nonprofit and Voluntary Sector Quarterly
1306 <https://doi.org/10.1177/08997640231210463> (‘Part Discount
‘A food donor or
distributor incurs no civil liability for loss of life or personal injury
arising from consumption of the
food donated or distributed’:
Liability Act
The immunity does not operate when
the donor or distributor knew or was recklessly indifferent to the food being
unsafe when it left
their possession or control: at
The strategy affirms
that ‘food rescue and redistribution organisations are central to
retaining the high-value of quality
surplus food to provide to those in
need’: Green Industries SA, ‘Valuing Our Food Waste: South
Australia’s Strategy
to Reduce and Divert Household and Business Food
Waste 2020–2025’ (Strategy Paper, 2021) 13
<https://www.greenindustries.sa.gov.au/resources/valuing-our-food-waste>.
Green Industries SA runs an Infrastructure Grants Program, which provides
support to address storage or logistics barriers for food
rescue operations, eg,
improving cold store and freezer facilities: at 50.
The SA Government
provides funding for a range of initiatives associated with financial assistance
and food relief. Examples include:
the SAcommunity information directory, which
provides an A–Z index of food assistance services for people seeking
and Affordable SA, funded by the Department of Human Services and
facilitated by the Salvation Army, which provides free advice to
Australians struggling with affordability issues and helps them access
information, resources and support, including financial
counselling and food
relief from food relief agencies: ‘Food Assistance’,
SAcommunity
<https://sacommunity.org/az/14456-Food_Assistance>; ‘Emergency
Affordable SA
<https://www.affordablesa.com.au/categories/food/emergency-relief>;
South Australia Department of Human Services
Page, 26 May 2023) <https://dhs.sa.gov.au/how-we-help/grants>; Department
of Human Services (SA), ‘Grants SA 2023–24
Addressing Food
Funding Guidelines up to $50,000’ (Guidelines, 2023)
<https://dhs.sa.gov.au/__data/assets/pdf_file/0003/154695/2023-2024-Grants-SA-Addressing-Food-Security-Funding-Guidelines-For-PDF.pdf>
(‘Funding Guidelines up to $50,000’); ‘Food Security Grants Go
to Heart of Community’,
South Australia Department of Human Services
(Web Page, 1 April 2024)
<https://dhs.sa.gov.au/news/2024/food-security-grants-go-to-heart-of-community>
(‘Heart of Community’);
Government of South Australia,
‘Funding for Food Security and Financial Counselling’ (Media
Release, 13 July 2023)
<https://www.premier.sa.gov.au/media-releases/news-archive/funding-for-food-security-and-financial-counselling>
(‘Funding for Food Security’).
Guidelines up to $50,000’ (n 227) 3; ‘Heart of Community’ (n
227); ‘Funding for Food Security’
Government of South
Australia, ‘$1.5 Million Grants Fund to Help South Australians Battle Food
Insecurity’ (Media Release)
<https://www.premier.sa.gov.au/media-releases/news-archive/$1.5-million-grants-fund-to-help-south-australians-battle-food-insecurity>.
‘Food Security
Grants for South Australia Government Schools and Preschools’,
Department for Education South Australia
(Web Page, 18 March 2024)
<https://www.education.sa.gov.au/parents-and-families/safety-and-wellbeing/health/food-security-grants-for-south-australia-government-schools-and-preschools>.
Programs in South Australian Schools, Preschools and Children’s
Department for Education South Australia
(Web Page, 18
March 2024)
<https://www.education.sa.gov.au/parents-and-families/safety-and-wellbeing/health/breakfast-programs-in-south-australian-schools-and-education-services>.
‘Right Bite Food
and Drink Supply Standards for South Australian Schools’,
for Education South Australia
(Web Page, 15 October 2024)
<https://www.education.sa.gov.au/schools-and-educators/health-safety-and-wellbeing/right-bite-food-and-drink-supply-standards-for-south-australian-schools>;
Preventive Health SA, ‘Food and Drink Classification Guide for South
Australian Public Schools: A System for Classifying Foods
and Drinks 2023’
(Guide, 2023)
<https://www.preventivehealth.sa.gov.au/assets/downloads/HFEH/Food-and-Drink-Classification-Guide-Public-Schools.pdf>.
Pettman et al, ‘A
Food Relief Charter for South Australia’ (n 19) 9.
Ibid 9. The Charter did,
however, take inspiration from the
WA Food Relief Framework
(n 41), which
is similar to a charter.
Pettman et al, ‘A
Food Relief Charter for South Australia’ (n 19) 6.
South Australian Food
Relief Charter
<https://dhs.sa.gov.au/__data/assets/pdf_file/0009/169137/SA-Food-Relief-Charter.pdf>
’). At its launch in 2019, 15 community
sector organisations signed the Charter. How many more have done so at the time
is unknown.
The Guidelines aim to
improve access to nutritious food for food relief recipients by increasing the
supply of healthy food choices
and reducing the supply of unhealthy food choices
offered by food relief providers: Government of South Australia,
Guidelines for the Food Relief Sector in South Australia’
(Guidelines) 1
<https://dhs.sa.gov.au/__data/assets/pdf_file/0008/169136/Nutritional-Guidelines-for-the-Food-Relief-Sector-in-SA.pdf>.
237). See, eg, principle 3, ‘[d]elivering a service built on fairness and
Charter development
processes included the signing of a PHPA agreement between the Department of
Health and Wellbeing and the Department
of Human Services to facilitate
intergovernmental agency collaboration on the project; scoping research; sector
consultations and
engagement via roundtable discussions and surveys; a
discussion paper; and a research project to garner food relief recipient
perspectives:
Pettman et al, ‘A Food Relief Charter for South
Australia’ (n 19) 3–4.
It does not ‘link
to service delivery responsibilities or accountability reporting, and is not
intended as an implementation
instrument’: ibid 9.
237) principle 3.
Costas Douzinas,
‘The Paradoxes of Human Rights’ (2008) 21(Suppl)
Philosophical
Romuald R Haule,
‘Some Reflections on the Foundation of Human Rights: Are Human Rights an
Alternative to Moral Values?’
(2006) 10(1)
Max Planck Yearbook of
United Nations Law
<https://doi.org/10.1163/187574106x00083>.
Similar observations,
but without legal analysis, have been made in Pettman et al, ‘A Food
Relief Charter for South Australia’
Alice Willatt, Rosalind
Beadle and Mary Brydon-Miller, ‘Reshaping the Food Aid Landscape’ in
Henry Tam (ed),
Tomorrow’s Communities: Lessons for Community-Based
Transformation in the Age of Global Crises
(Policy Press, 2021) 197, 199
<https://doi.org/10.56687/9781447361138-015>. See also Riches and
Silvasti, ‘Hunger in
the Rich World’ (n 24) 9–10; Rose et al
(n 19) 14–15; Elver,
Critical Perspective on Food Systems
[60]. This is consistent with measures taken to fulfil other economic and social
rights, such as the right to housing:
Solomon (n 118) 278. Australia’s
food welfare approach is ‘characterised by limited social rights ... and a
strong government
commitment to market-based solutions’: Richards,
Kjærnes and Vik (n 10) 65.
Perspective on Food Systems
(n 80) 14 [60].
Pollard and Booth (n
Camila Colombo de Moraes
et al, ‘Retail Food Waste: Mapping Causes and Reduction Practices’
Journal of Cleaner Production
120124:1–16
<https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jclepro.2020.120124>; Michael Blakeney,
Loss and Food Waste: Causes and Solutions
(Edward Elgar Publishing,
The food waste hierarchy
positions diverting food waste to food relief as secondary to prevention. See,
eg, Effie Papargyropoulou
et al, ‘The Food Waste Hierarchy as a Framework
for the Management of Food Surplus and Food Waste’ (2014) 76
Cleaner Production
<https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jclepro.2014.04.020>; Paul Perovic and Hope
Johnson, ‘Food for Thought: An Assessment
of Australian Law and Regulation
for Combating Food Waste’
(2023) 39(4)
Environmental and Planning Law
Mossenson et al (n 23)
2; Bethaney Turner and Daisy Tam, ‘Moving from Risky to Response-able
Care’ (2022) 54(3)
<https://doi.org/10.1111/anti.12804>.
Rudolf Messner, Carol
Richards and Hope Johnson, ‘The “Prevention Paradox”: Food
Waste Prevention and the Quandary
of Systemic Surplus Production’ (2020)
Agriculture and Human Values
805, 809–10
<https://doi.org/10.1007/s10460-019-10014-7>; Carrie Bradshaw,
‘England’s Fresh Approach to Food
Waste: Problem Frames in the
Resources and Waste Strategy’
(2020) 40(2)
Legal Studies
<https://doi.org/10.1017/lst.2019.37>.
Mercy N Mukoya, Fiona H
McKay and Matthew Dunn, ‘Can Giving Clients a Choice in Food Selection
Needs?: Investigating a Novel Food Bank Approach
for Asylum Seekers’ (2017) 18(4)
Journal of International Migration and
Integration
981, 987 <https://doi.org/10.1007/s12134-017-0515-3>;
Pettman et al, ‘Part Discount Grocer’ (n 224); Turner and
WA Food Relief
(n 41) 45; Riches and Silvasti, ‘Hunger in the Rich
World’ (n 24) 9; Riches, ‘Food Banks and Food Security’
110) 649–50; Booth and Whelan (n 110) 1400; Cresswell Riol and Connelly (n
John D Lowrey, Timothy J
Richards and Stephen F Hamilton, ‘Food Donations, Retail Operations, and
Retail Pricing’ (2023)
Manufacturing and Service Operations
792, 792 <https://doi.org/10.1287/msom.2022.1185>;
Cresswell Riol and Connelly (n 42); Willatt, Beadle and Brydon-Miller (n
Pollard and Booth (n 110); Andriessen and van der Velde (n 36).
2021 Interim
(n 80) 15 [55]; Elver,
Critical Perspective on Food Systems
80) 15 [64].
Solomon (n 118) 276.
Zipoli (n 117) 390.
Solomon (n 118)
Richards, Kjærnes
and Vik (n 10).
Geoffrey Lawrence, Carol
Richards and Kristen Lyons, ‘Food Security in Australia in an Era of
Neoliberalism, Productivism
and Climate Change’ (2013) 29(2)
Rural Studies
30 <https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jrurstud.2011.12.005>;
Amber Bastian and John Coveney, ‘The Responsibilisation of Food
What Is the Problem Represented to Be?’ (2013) 22(2)
Health Sociology
162 <https://doi.org/10.5172/hesr.2013.22.2.162>.
For example, a summary
paper titled ‘Food Secure Communities in South Australia’ is part of
a two-stage initiative from
the Government of SA with the goal of better
understanding how people are experiencing food insecurity and what would help
of it. The government prepared the summary paper based on an evidential
review by academics of best-practice food systems that considered
the right to
food as one of four viable options for a food security governance framework. The
summary paper uses the terms ‘food
security’ 15 times and
‘food insecurity’ 21 times. Still, there is no mention of the human
right to food: ‘SA
Food Secure Communities’ (n 214).
‘The Right to
Adequate Food’ (n 57) 4.
Nancy M Henley,
‘Women as a Social Problem: Conceptual and Practical Issues in Defining
Social Problems’ in Edward Seidman
and Julian Rappaport (eds),
Redefining Social Problems
(Springer, 1986) 65, 66
<https://doi.org/10.1007/978-1-4899-2236-6_5>.
Edward Seidman and
Julian Rappaport, ‘Framing the Issues’ in Edward Seidman and Julian
Rappaport (eds),
Redefining Social Problems
(Springer, 1986) 1, 3–4
<https://doi.org/10.1007/978-1-4899-2236-6_1>.
This issue has been
observed in other countries, including New Zealand, the United Kingdom and
Canada: Cresswell Riol and Connelly
(n 42); Willatt, Beadle and Brydon-Miller (n
251); Riches, ‘Food Banks and Food Security’ (n 110). The underlying
are driven by modern neoliberal governance approaches, which focus on
increasing the economic participation of citizens while keeping
welfare benefits
low: Riches and Silvasti, ‘Hunger in the Rich World’ (n 24)
3–4; Cresswell Riol and Connelly (n
42) 1224, 1233–4; Booth (n 45)
20; Fiona H McKay and Rebecca Lindberg, ‘The Important Role of Charity in
the Welfare
System for Those Who Are Food Insecure’ (2019) 43(4)
Australian and New Zealand Journal of Public Health
<https://doi.org/10.1111/1753-6405.12916>.
Richards, Kjærnes
and Vik (n 10) 65.
Booth (n 45) 16; ibid
Pettman et al, ‘A
Food Relief Charter for South Australia’ (n 19) 2.
Pettman et al,
‘Part Discount Grocer’ (n 224) 2.
McKay et al (n 19)
Graham Riches,
‘Thinking and Acting Outside the Charitable Food Box: Hunger and the Right
to Food in Rich Societies’
(2011) 21(4–5)
Development in
768, 772 <https://doi.org/10.1080/09614524.2011.561295>.
Riches and Silvasti,
‘Hunger in the Rich World’ (n 24) 12.
Brian Hamel and Moriah
Harman addressed this ‘spatial inequality’ in the distribution of
food relief services when they
investigated whether government investment in
charitable food relief organisations that directly deliver food to recipients in
US could decrease food security. They concluded that increased government
investment in food relief organisations could exacerbate,
not reduce,
inequalities in food access: Brian T Hamel and Moriah Harman, ‘Can
Government Investment in Food Pantries Decrease
Food Insecurity?’ (2023)
Food Policy
102541:1–10, 2, 8
<https://doi.org/10.1016/j.foodpol.2023.102541>.
‘FAO Voluntary
Guidelines’ (n 70) 25 [13.3]. See also
General Comment No 12
Hamel and Harman (n 279)
The US’ Farmers to
Families Food Box Program, initiated during the COVID-19 pandemic, involved the
distribution of approximately
175 million boxes of food. An analysis found that
high-need counties with many direct-delivery food relief organisations received
the most food, compared to high-needs counties with fewer organisations:
‘FAO Voluntary
Guidelines’ (n 70) 6–7 [19].
General Comment No
(n 1) 6 [21]; Elver,
Critical Perspective on Food Systems
17 [75]; Elver,
Access to Justice and the Right to Food
Stephanie L Godrich,
Liza Barbour and Rebecca Lindberg, ‘Problems, Policy and Politics:
Perspectives of Public Health Leaders
on Food Insecurity and Human Rights in
Australia’ (2021) 21(1)
BMC Public Health
1132:1–12, 2
<https://doi.org/10.1186/s12889-021-11188-8>; Booth (n 45) 16.
‘FAO Voluntary
Guidelines’ (n 70) 26 [14.5].
Ibid 15 [6.1], 30
Ibid 21 [10.3].
Ibid 15 [5.4].
Ibid 10 [2.2], 30
General Comment No
(n 1) 6 [21]–[22], 7–8 [29], [31];
Observations
on the Fifth Periodic Report
(n 81) 11–12 [62];
‘FAO Voluntary Guidelines’ (n 70) 10 [2.1], 25 [13.2], 30 [17.1],
General Comment No
(n 1) 7–8 [21]; ‘FAO Voluntary Guidelines’ (n 70) 9
[1.2]; Elver,
2019 Interim Report
(n 64) 5 [6]; Elver,
Perspective on Food Systems
(n 80) 17 [75].
General Comment No
(n 1) 7 [27]; Fakhri,
Food System Recovery
(n 80) 16–17
[76]–[79]; ‘FAO Voluntary Guidelines’ (n 70) 13 [4.3].
‘CFS Voluntary
Guidelines’ (n 79) guideline 3.1.3(a).
‘FAO Voluntary
Guidelines’ (n 70) 15 [5.5], 25 [13.3].
[5.1]–[5.2].
Ibid 10 [2.4], 26
Ibid 26 [14.4].
General Comment No
(n 1) 7 [26].
‘FAO Voluntary
Guidelines’ (n 70) 25 [13.3].
[8.2]–[8.3].
‘CFS Voluntary
Guidelines’ (n 79) guidelines 3.6.1(a)–(b), 3.6.2(a); Elver,
Access to Justice and the Right to Food
(n 80) 20–1 [72]; De
Schutter (n 89) 18 [44], annex C(3).
‘FAO Voluntary
Guidelines’ (n 70) 23 [11.5]; Elver,
Access to Justice and the Right to
(n 80) 20–1 [72].
‘FAO Voluntary
Guidelines’ (n 70) 21 [10.1]; ‘CFS Voluntary Guidelines’ (n
79) guideline 3.3.2(a).
‘CFS Voluntary
Guidelines’ (n 79) guidelines 3.5.2(b)–(c).
‘FAO Voluntary
Guidelines’ (n 70) 10–11 [2.6]–[2.7].
Observations on the Fifth Periodic Report
(n 81) 11 [59]; Elver,
to Justice and the Right to Food
(n 80) 20–1 [72].
‘CFS Voluntary
Guidelines’ (n 79) guideline 3.1.3(a); ‘FAO Voluntary
Guidelines’ (n 70) 10 [2.4].
‘FAO Voluntary
Guidelines’ (n 70) 15–16 [7.1]–[7.2]; Elver,
Justice and the Right to Food
(n 80) 5–6 [15], 20–1 [72]; De
Schutter (n 89) annex C(1).
General Comment No
(n 1) 6 [21]–[22], [25]; ‘FAO Voluntary Guidelines’ (n
70) 11 [3.1]–[3.2]; Fakhri,
Food System Recovery
General Comment No
(n 1) 7–8 [29]; Elver,
Access to Justice and the Right to
(n 80) 20–1 [72].
Justice and the Right to Food
(n 80) 20–1 [72].
Observations on the Fifth Periodic Report
(n 81) 2 [9]–[10];
‘FAO Voluntary Guidelines’ (n 70) 31 [18.1]; Elver,
Justice and the Right to Food
(n 80) 11 [37];
General Comment No 12
(n 1) 8 [32]; Elver,
Critical Perspective on Food Systems
‘FAO Voluntary
Guidelines’ (n 70) 26 [14.5].
Riches and Silvasti,
‘Hunger in the Rich World’ (n 24).
‘FAO Voluntary
Guidelines’ (n 70) 26 [14.5], 22 [10.9]–[10.10].
Ibid 24 [12.3].
Ibid 10 [4.9]; Elver,
Access to Justice and the Right to Food
(n 80) 20–1 [72];
‘CFS Voluntary Guidelines’ (n 79) guidelines 3.3.2(e)–(f);
Concluding Observations on the Eighth Periodic Report
(n 81) 13 [46(c)];
De Schutter (n 89) annex C(4).
Observations on the Fifth Periodic Report
(n 81) 8 [39]–[40];
‘FAO Voluntary Guidelines’ (n 70) 12 [3.4]–[3.6].
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (436 KB)
PDF format (707 KB)
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter