URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/journals/IntJlCrimJustSocDem/2025/16.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 15:03:02
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Olarte Delgado, Angela Marcela --- "Attempts in Strengthening Indigenous Justice Systems in Colombia Through Transitional Justice" [2025] IntJlCrimJustSocDem 16; (2025) 14(2) International Journal for Crime, Justice and Social Democracy 83
Temporal Imaginations: Mnemonic Frames Against
Extractivism in Guatemala
Vaclav Masek Sánchez
Institute of Environmental Science and Technology, Autonomous University of
Barcelona (ICTA-UAB), Spain
Political ecology; social movements; memory studies;
Indigenous Peoples; settler colonialism.
Introduction
the last two decades, the debate surrounding the right to consultation of
Indigenous Peoples and the duty to obtain their “free,
prior, and informed
consent” (FPIC) in the case of measures likely to directly affect them
(e.g., a hydroelectric dam, a superhighway,
a mining concession) has intensified
at an international level, particularly in Latin America. Almost all states have
ratified the
International Labor Organization’s (ILO) Convention No. 169
Concerning Indigenous and Tribal Peoples in Independent Countries
(C169). The basic notion of FPIC is that states should seek Indigenous
peoples’ consent before taking actions that
will impact them, their
territories, or their livelihoods. Using contemporary Guatemala as a case study,
this article locates a new
hybrid institution of participation as a site of
struggle for counter-hegemonic social movements to contest political rights
opportunities emerge.
As I have demonstrated in my previous research published in Spanish-language
journals (Masek 2023a, 2023b), the history of community
consultations is
intrinsically linked to the democratic opening in post-conflict Guatemala and
Mayan recourse to law. Approved in
1989, ILO Convention 169 on Indigenous and
Tribal Peoples has been controversial, primarily due to its requirement that
states consult
Indigenous peoples before undertaking projects that affect them.
Guatemala ratified C169 in 1996, but its implementation has largely
theoretical. Research in the country has examined consultation processes by
exploring their legal basis and the implications
of the “right to free,
prior, and informed consent” (Dougherty, 2011; Fulmer, 2011; Fulmer et
al., 2008; LaPlante &
Nolin, 2014; Loarca, 2008; McGee, 2009; Walter &
Urkidi, 2017; Ward, 2011; ), as outlined by the spirit of C169. There is also
relevant literature that systematizes consultation experiences in the country
(e.g., Mérida & Krenmayr, 2010; Trentavizi
& Cahuec, 2012),
showing how the framework established by C169 is seldom followed step-by-step.
On paper, C169 establishes that
state institutions neutrally arbitrate the
demands of the employer and worker sectors to award development projects. So,
conceptually
the Guatemalan State, Maya Indigenous Peoples, and multinational
capital enter into a dialectical relationship, constituting each
other through
this community consultation mechanism.
The proliferation of extractivism and its diversification into new areas,
such as mining, has become a permanent cause of social-environmental
(Arboleda, 2020; Svampa, 2019a,). While governments and multinational
corporations have been riding the wave of the commodities
boom, Indigenous and
peasant communities have found themselves at the edge of the extractive capital
frontier (Escobar, 2006; Gudynas,
2018; Svampa, 2019b). In this puzzling climate
of contention after emerging for long periods of war, scholars have examined the
constitutive
characteristics of the forms of resistance that have emerged to
oppose the logic of extractive mining (Apopostolou &
Cortés-Vásquez,
2019; DeRocher, 2018; Dougherty, 2019; Finkeldey,
The emblematic case for “free, prior, and informed” consultation
in the lake town of El Estor over the oldest mineral
mine in Guatemala, shows
the unfolding of civic action through discursive cultural artifacts I have named
temporal imaginations
—a term I coin for the narrative
reconstruction of how social movements imagine themselves in history and
position themselves
in time. Maya Q’eqchi’ community leaders connect
three layers of meaning-making through the collective memory of colonialism,
genocide, and extractivism.
that tell triumphs against settler colonial violence serve as an amalgamating
force in Indigenous movements against extractivism.
The case is generalizable
since the historical arc fits other narratives in the region where the master
frame bridges issues like
the colonization of Indigenous peoples, suppression of
constitutional freedoms under military dictatorship rule, and the arrival
extractive multinationals.
When historicizing and creating narratives about these anti-extractive
movements, how do participants mobilize the past as a source
of inspiration
instead of despair? Grassroots movements can actively draw on the past to
agglutinate an antagonistic front to carry
out collective action, producing
images, symbols, and discussions of this ongoing struggle that become prevalent
frames (McCammon
et al., 2007; Snow et al., 1986) in movement communication.
Indigenous groups coordinate futures and maintain resistance while facing
overwhelming opponents such as global capitalist and state elites, who often
rely on oppressive and violent tactics (Acosta, 2011;
Ellner, 2020;
Gómez-Barris, 2017). Here is where the collective memory of victories
against settler colonialism becomes a
constitutive form of coalition-building
for these movements, and the case of the Maya Q’eqchi’ against
multinational
mining is exemplary for contending with social movement politics
following periods of mass violence.
Movements Against Settler
Colonialism
In studying social movements, scholars often focus on material resources
(e.g., McCarthy & Zald, 1977), strategies of protest
(e.g., Tilly, 2006),
or political opportunities (e.g., Kitschelt, 1986), paying less attention to the
specificities of place and
space. However, movements are deeply shaped by the
places they defend and, in turn, reshape those places through their actions and
narratives. For Indigenous resistance to settler colonialism—a form of
colonialism where settlers permanently occupy and claim
sovereignty over
Indigenous lands, often displacing or eliminating Indigenous populations
(Fenelon, 2015; Snipp, 1986)—the
state is often seen as the main force
behind colonial dispossession. In Guatemala, the theft of Maya ancestral lands
began with Spanish
colonization and continues today, driven by both state and
non-state actors (Bastos & Cumes 2003, Tzul Tzul, 2018).
Indigenous resistance has targeted both state institutions and private
actors, challenging laws and policies that infringe on Indigenous
sovereignty.
Settler-colonial logic treats Indigenous lands and bodies as commodities, aiming
to turn them into private property
for exploitation. Conceptualizing Indigenous
racialized bodies as commodified non-human objects, the settler-colonial logic
State has been driven by the impulse to “gain sovereignty over
land, bodies, and labor by turning them into private property
that can be
bought, exploited, and sold” (Glenn 2015, p. 59). Settler colonialism
prefigures law and policy by preemptively
claiming land and infringing on
Indigenous sovereignty and nationhood under the
terra nullius
This logic persists in modern forms, such as mining and megaprojects, which many
Indigenous communities see as a “fourth
invasion” (Batz, 2020;
LaPlante & Nolin, 2014) following Spanish colonization, the plantation
economy, and the armed conflict.
By focusing on the legacies of exploitation,
movements draw inspiration and solidarity, creating unique “solidarity
(O’Hearn, 2016) that sustain resistance even under
repression.
The way people understand themselves, the mobilization they are participating
in, and their central framings are important to describe
solidarity cultures in
conditions of high risk and repression. When cultural milieus are
“unsettled” (Swidler, 1986),
collective actors are likely to achieve
their political goals if they frame their arguments in themes, narratives, or
even contradictions
that surface at such unsettled junctures (McAdam et al.,
1996; McCammon, 2007 et al., 2007).
Participation in community consultations is theoretically significant because
it requires a new model of how civil society actors
like Indigenous
organizations can petition or pressure the atate and capital. Analyzing
narratives—focusing on the story’s
temporal structure and content
(Ghosal, 2013)—shows how disagreement works and offers a valuable way to
understand it. This
is particularly relevant since previous scholars have
primarily conceptualized future coordination in non-violent settings and outside
an explicitly settler-colonial framework. By observing and participating
with leaders in social movements who are “strategic
decision-makers who
inspire and organize others to participate in social movements” (Morris
& Staggenborg, 2004, p. 171),
this project reveals how to propitiate
conditions for seizing political opportunities, centering cultural practices as
an emancipatory
force in grassroots movements.
Memory as Mobilizing
For social movements to succeed, their framing must be flexible and inclusive
(Benford & Snow 2000, 619). Collective memory—shared
ideas about the
past—plays a crucial role in providing legitimacy and identity. Movements
rely on memory to connect past struggles
with present actions, creating a sense
of continuity (Kubal & Becerra, 2014). Simultaneously, the structural
positionality and
cultural context where social movements emerge since
“the costumes of revolt are woven from a blend of inherited and invented
fibers into collective action frames in confrontation with opponents and
elites.” (Tarrow 1998, p. 118). Memory is also a site
of struggle (Olick
& Robbins, 1998, p. 79), as different groups compete to shape how the past
is remembered and interpreted.
Agents of memory often participate in
“mnemonic battles” over how to interpret the past, who should be
remembered, or
what the form of that historical narrative ought to take
(Zerubavel, 1996, pp. 295–97). This itself constrains agents of memory,
“people’s ability to reconstruct the past . . . is limited by the
crucial social fact that other people within their
awareness are trying to do
the same thing” (Schudson, 1993, p. 112).
This dynamic process is influenced by broader social and political contexts,
known as “mnemonic opportunity structures”
(Ghoshal, 2013), which
determine which memories gain public recognition and legitimacy. Mnemonic
opportunity structures refer to
the broader social, political, and institutional
contexts that enable or constrain collective memory efforts, shaping which
are publicly recognized, how they are framed, and whether they gain
legitimacy within society. Acknowledging that remembering the
past can evoke
emotional responses, sociological frameworks have been developed to examine the
spectrum between acceptance and denial
in reckoning with difficult histories,
facilitating comparisons of national memory politics (Zubrzycki &
Woźny, 2020). The
intergenerational resistance against indiscriminate
political violence against the Maya Q’eqchi’ and the insidious ways
violence continues to be perpetrated against them currently provide
meaning-making.
Memory sociologists, including Wagner-Pacifici and Schwartz (1991) and Saito
(2006), have used ethnographic methods to trace how memory
functions within
specific social institutions. Expanding on this qualitative-methodological
tradition, I analyze the case of Indigenous
Maya Q’eqchi’ social
movements in post-conflict Guatemala (Masek 2023a, 2023b), using the
introduction of instruments
of international law during the years following the
transition to democracy as a key moment for grassroots mobilization. Three
periods serve as narrative frameworks for contemporary Indigenous
activism: the colonization process (16th–19th century), the
counterinsurgency campaigns culminating in Indigenous genocide (20th century),
and the rise of extractive capitalism (21st century).
Sociological studies of
collective memory, as seen in this case, highlight how movement actors draw on
social resources to bring
the past into the present, shaping identity, power,
and social change (Jedlowski, 2001; Jensen, 2007; Olick & Robbins, 1998).
Halbwachs states, “it is in society that people normally acquire their
memories. It is also in society that they recall,
recognize, and localize their
memories” (1992, p. 38).
Methodology
The ancestral territory of the Maya Q’eqchi’ in Guatemala is
expansive and this group experiences the highest levels of
extreme poverty among
Indigenous Mayans. Child malnutrition rates are disproportionately severe and
Q’eqchi’ women have
the lowest levels of Spanish literacy, with many
remaining monolingual. Community consultations, a participatory mechanism rooted
in international legal frameworks such as ILO Convention 169, provide an avenue
for the Maya Q’eqchi’ to assert their
right to self-determination.
Beyond legal recourse, politically organized Q’eqchi’ communities
use these consultations
to strengthen their political leverage. As a
deliberative democratic mechanism, consultations hold the potential to shape
decision-making
processes by requiring the state to consider Indigenous consent
before approving development projects, positioning them as a strategic
negotiation between Indigenous communities, the state, and capital interests.
shows that Q’eqchi’ remains a crucial marker of
cultural identity, and its presence in multiple regions suggests strong
community networks. The Q’eqchi’ ethnolinguistic zone extends into
Alta Verapaz, Baja Verapaz, Izabal, and parts of Petén,
presence in Quiché. Given that Q’eqchi’ speakers inhabit
resource-rich areas, including lands affected
by extractive industries (such as
mining and monoculture plantations), language retention might be tied to
struggles over land and
Indigenous rights. The map marks Q’eqchi’ as
present in Belize, where it coexists with English, Spanish, Mopan, and
Ethnolinguistic Map of Guatemala
Ethnolinguistic Mapping Project, Guatemala
Ministry of Education (1994)
I chose this particular geographic location and ethnic group because of the
decades-long struggle to gain political recognition as
representatives of the communities inhabiting the Polochic River Valley
(Granovsky-Larsen, 2013; Masek 2023a, 2023b; Mingorría
et al., 2014;
Mingorría 2018). Particularly, the chronology of the Fénix Nickel
Project has been embedded into Guatemala’s
history of state-sanctioned
violence (See
for timeline). Originally known as the EXMIBAL
Mine, the Fénix project began as a subsidiary of the Canadian
multinational
INCO (International Nickel Company). In 1965, amid
Guatemala’s 36-year armed conflict, the military government granted the
company a 40-year lease over 385 square kilometers of Maya Q’eqchi’
territory. This land concession led to the displacement
of local communities
under the regime’s extractive-driven economic development strategy. As the
armed conflict escalated in
the 1970s, the mine faced difficulties in launching
operations, while violent land disputes intensified. These tensions culminated
in the 1978 Panzós massacre, a pivotal event in the national conflict
(Grandin, 2011; Sanford, 2009). In Panzós, the
military opened fire on
Maya protesters demonstrating against the mine, killing dozens. Around the same
time, EXMIBAL was implicated
in the assassination of several community leaders,
as later documented by Guatemala’s Truth Commission (Nolin & Russell,
2021). By the early 1980s, the military launched a scorched-earth campaign
against Maya communities, culminating in genocide (CEH,
In 2006, the Ministry of Energy and Mines (MEM) renewed the mining license
for 248 square kilometers of land and mountains, under
Extracción Minera Fénix, license number LEXT-049-05. It was
authorized on April 18, 2006 during the government
of conservative president
Óscar Berger. The project covers the municipalities of Cahabón,
Senahú and Panzós
in the department of Alta Verapaz; and the
municipality of El Estor in Izabal. The polygon granted is 12 times the maximum
an exploitation license (20 km2), according to article 29 of the Mining
Law (OIE 2021). The polygon granted covers three hydrographic
basins: Río
Cahabón, Izabal-Río Dulce and Polochic.
shows the geographic reach of the license, while
depicts the
mineral interests in a broader context, showing how the region is sought for
exploiting and extracting minerals like
nickel, iron, cobalt, chromium and
Fénix Mining Project in Guatemala’s Caribbean Coast
Regional Context (Izabal and Alta Verapaz) for the Fénix Mining
Observatorio de Industrias Extractivas de
Guatemala (OIE-GT, July 2021).
The research data was collected as part of an ongoing 18-month project
between July 2021 and January 2023 primarily through participant
observation,
which involves immersing oneself in a social setting to observe and interact
with the group being studied. I gained
access to the Asociación
Estoreña de Desarrollo Integral (AEPDI) and the Defensoría
Q’eqchi’, a
land rights group drawing on United Nations treaties
ratified by Guatemala to protect Indigenous communities from extractive threats.
I identified key contacts and established connections with key members of said
civil society group who facilitated entry and acceptance
into the group. My role
as participant observer meant actively engaging in the group’s activities,
making it explicit that
I was conducting research, and ensuring that all group
members are aware of my research role to maintain ethical standards and build
trust. I engaged actively: I participated in the Defesoría’s
activities, attended team meetings, and contributed to
discussions to build
rapport and gain deeper insights. I was sensitive to the group’s cultural
practices and norms (Rivera-Cusicanqui,
2020) to avoid disrupting their
activities. The group sees itself organizing the Q’eqchi’ into a
unified front to help
the Mayans gain sovereignty over their ancestral
territory. The Defensoría seeks measures to protect communities from the
effects of pollution, discrimination, and politically-motivated violence they
have suffered in the past.
It is reasonable to ask how any population can overcome the experience of an
orchestrated campaign of extermination when remembering
the past can be
traumatizing. How can such momentous events be commemorated productively, even
presenting the opportunity for cathartic
reappraisal for survivors? Compiled
between 2014 and 2016 due to the herculean effort of the Guatemalan Forensic
Anthropology Foundation
(FAFG) and the Shoah Foundation, the 30 testimonies I
have observed reveal how collective memory is the mechanism that impacts social
justice movements in Guatemala. In these sensitive testimonies, past events
cease to be disjointed individual memories and become
contextualized collective
memories, which are then translated into joint civic action.
As a Guatemalan-born, foreign-based researcher, I believe that reflecting on
my positionality is necessary to understand what is at
stake when discussing
social movement action. I gained great sympathy for the movements’ causes
as the project progressed.
While some might call this bias,
‘neutrality’ in highly politicized settings such as social movement
campaigns is illusory.
Instead, it should be acknowledged that my personal
opinions and values as a researcher influence my choices during the research
process. By being transparent, I expect readers to obtain a better contextual
sense of my perspective, including the strengths and
limitations of my vantage
point at that point in time.
Participant
Observation
Some of the settings included normal workdays in AEPDI’s headquarters,
located in El Estor. I also participated in field visits
to villages in the
mine’s adjacency zone and quotidian, out-of-office gatherings like
informal get-togethers with group members.
I observed the lives, body
expressions, and experiences of Maya-Q’eqchi’ by looking for
rituals, systems, speech patterns,
hierarchies, and norms to discern the
“culture in action” (Swidler, 1986). I documented what
strategies were effective
in enforcing international instruments pertaining to
land and Indigenous rights that were recognized and enforced by the Guatemalan
State. Focusing on the “thick description” (Geertz, 1973) of
political rituals of neoliberal democracy like community
consultations, I was
able to document how grievances are communicated, how recourse to law can become
a unifying objective for environmental
groups, and how the judicialization of
protests can link conflict over natural resources to other historical instances
of capitalist
exploitation. The groundswell of domestic and international
reactions after the 2021 Q’eqchi’ resistance in El Estor
that it would be disingenuous to pretend that I was a detached observer
disinterestedly documenting social movement practices
and that even as a
witness, I had played an active part.
The rest of the time has involved continuous communication with community
members in El Estor via digital platforms (e.g., encrypted
instant messaging and
video conference applications) in Spanish. The ongoing contact with the study
participants allowed for rapport-building,
providing access to biweekly team
meetings with the Defensorìa Q’eqchi’. I did not start
of political exclusion of Indigenous communities;
instead, I was interested in these democratic mechanisms that expanded
enfranchisement.
In an inductive fashion following Katz’s (1997, 2019)
ethnographic practice, the participants’ stories and words reflected
violent effects of current governing practices and domestic law on their lives.
Participants described their legally-rooted circumstances
in words that evoke
the suffering and resilience associated with more obvious and direct forms of
violence, such as those living
during situations of political violence or war
(e.g., torture, pain, anguish, etc.). This allowed for the extended case method
be useful since:
reflexive science sets out from a dialogue between us and them, between
social scientists and the people we study. It does not spring
Archimedean point outside space and time; it does not create knowledge or theory
tabula rasa. (Burawoy, 1998)
I conducted 15 in-depth, semi-structured interviews with civically-engaged
Maya Q’eqchi’ adult residents of El Estor between
August 2021 and
March 2022. Respondents were recruited through snowball sampling and were told
the study was about community consultations
over the Fénix mine.
Recruitment began by first contacting approximately five
seeds—interlocutors from within the Defensoría
Q’eqchi’. Seeds were interviewed first and asked to refer friends,
family, neighbors, and coworkers. Recruitment also
included some participants
who met through everyday interactions in the lake town, such as at restaurants
or the grocery store. Each
interviewee was then asked to recommend others for
the study. I allowed each seed or interviewee to recommend up to four
individuals
(the mode was one referral) to ensure that the peculiarities of any
particular social network did not heavily bias the sample.
Respondents had to be residents of El Estor, age 18 or older and could
converse in Spanish. The predominant language in the region
Q’eqchi’, so I recognize that this might add bias. The reliance on
Spanish-speaking participants, while pragmatic,
raises concerns about the
exclusion of monolingual Q’eqchi’ speakers. This limitation risks
marginalizing a significant
portion of the community, particularly elders and
women, who may hold critical insights into the historical and cultural
of the struggle. Due to lack of resources, I only interviewed people
who spoke Spanish and did not need Q’eqchi’-Spanish
translation.
Given the quick pace of change and ongoing developments in the consultation
process, the research also draws on newspaper
articles from English and Spanish
language sources to supplement some of the empirical points made regarding the
mobilizing force
of collective memory during community consultation grassroots
organizing. These articles detail similar incidents to those that the
participants shared and provide further evidence of the generalized nature of
contemporary political violence against Indigenous
communities.
Data Analysis
I took notes that would later be organized and coded in
emerging themes, concepts, and hypotheses (Emerson et al., 2011) during the
efforts to participate in the community consultation,
the blockade against the
mine, and the criminalization campaign.
allows researchers to
code data and develop themes iteratively. As new data is analyzed, researchers
can constantly compare it to
existing codes and themes, refining and expanding
the coding scheme as needed. I took steps to validate themes that emerged from
the coding through member checking, where participants review and confirm the
accuracy of the findings, or through triangulation
with archival and
observational data.
Following the constant-comparative approach to qualitative research put forth
by Strauss and Corbin (1998), these hypotheses were
brought back to the field
for testing through theoretical sampling. In line with the extended case method
positing by Burawoy (1998).
Meanwhile, observational and interview data was
discussed with relevant literature to refine theories of social movements and
sociology, particularly the mechanisms that enable collective action
in violent contexts, like multicultural societies, after periods
atrocity. My interview questions aimed at elucidating the rationale to
escalate mobilizing actions over environmental justice:
growing from a localized
concern over Lake Izabal and the irreparable damages to its local flora and
fauna in the wake of multinational
mining, to the grievance becoming an unifying
force for wider preoccupations over models of economic development and
historical exclusion.
Additionally, I spent a month immersed in the Visual History Archive (VHA)
Center for Advanced Genocide Research, based at the University
California. I investigated testimonies of survivors of the genocide in Guatemala
to decipher the articulations of intergenerational
resistance that have woven
robust networks of solidarity throughout our turbulent history. It is reasonable
to ask how any population
can overcome the experience of an orchestrated
campaign of extermination when simply remembering the past can be traumatizing.
can momentous events be commemorated to the extent they can even present the
opportunity for a cathartic reappraisal on behalf of
the survivors? Compiled
between 2014 and 2016 by the Guatemalan Forensic Anthropology Foundation (FAFG)
and the Shoah Foundation,
the 30 testimonies reveal how collective memory is the
mechanism that impacts social justice movements in Guatemala. In these sensitive
testimonies, past events cease to be disjointed individual memories and become
contextualized collective memories, which are then
translated into joint civic
action. I listened to 50 hours of indexed testimonies in Spanish, which allowed
me to transcribe, code,
and look for patterns in the discursive elements of
their recollections.
AEPDI’s legal arm, the Defensoría Q’eqchi’,
strategically engaged with the State through a community consultation
regarding the illegally operating Fénix nickel mine. The civil society
group interpreted the challenges they faced
and organized collective action. In
El Estor, Q’eqchi’ communities have historically leveraged their
right to consultation
as a political tool, shaping its meaning to align with
their objectives. As an Indigenous land rights organization, the
Q’eqchi’ has developed various problem-solving
strategies over time. Beyond the resisting protests’ judicialization
(Sieder, 2011), the Defensoría employs additional conceptual frameworks,
narratives, and perspectives (Warren, 1998) in preparation
for the community
consultation on the neighboring nickel mine, drawing heavily on collective
memory. These narratives are embedded
within broader strategic actions, forming
a key operational approach for movement actors seeking to advance inclusion,
participation,
and resistance against settler colonialism.
Don Cristóbal Pop vividly recounted to me when the water suddenly
turned red in 2017. Indigenous Maya Q’eqchi’
fishers depend on Lake
Izabal, the largest body of freshwater in the country, for their livelihoods.
When the water changed color,
Don Cristóbal Pop had just been elected
president of the local fishers’ guild. “It [Lake Izabal] had a bad
he said, “There were rumors about whether the fish would be
affected.” The rust-colored patch of water stretched for
more than a mile
in front of the city. “Our life is fishing, and we did not know what was
happening to the Lake. There were
many rumors about whether the fish would be
affected by what was happening in the water.” The Fenix nickel mine, owned
time by the Switzerland-based Solway Investment Group, is just three
miles south from El Estor’s urban center. Naturally, the
guild sought answers from the company, given the visible environmental damage.
“We wanted things to be done
transparently,” said Don Raúl
Tixaj, a Defensoría member who recalled how he and others urged the
to disclose water testing results to the public. When that did not
happen, guild members began protesting the mine in May 2017, and
Q’eqchi’ fisherman named Carlos Maaz was killed in the ensuing
crackdown by national police. As showed in the following
section, the three main
historical periods that provide the material grounding for framing the
movement’s mnemonically-produced
messages are linked to the iterative
processes of dispossession and expulsion: colonialism, genocide, and
extractivism.
Colonialism: The Logic of the
The group employs
temporal imaginations
that directly reference the
colonization process, using collective memory to render State institutions
visible and to frame their
resistance as an intergenerational struggle. By
anchoring their plight in this long historical context, they highlight the
patterns of ostracization that shape their present reality. Their
exclusion from the community consultation is deeply embedded in
a longstanding
structure of subjugation. As one Defensoría Q’eqchi’ member
explained, “the [Guatemalan]
State's colonial logic subjects us to
second-class citizen status because our opinions do not seem to matter, even if
concern our livelihoods and communities.” These sentiments
place a heavy symbolic weight on the group’s purpose in a
post-conflict civil society: the transition to democracy has opened up narrow
avenues for participation that should be
seized. Movement leaders recognize that
Indigenous conceptions of environmental justice are not considered or included
in consultation
processes, generating an “epistemic violence”
(Ulloa, 2017, p. 178) against them. “We are hurt and outraged for
racist, oppressive and authoritarian state’s exclusion,” read a
poster at the Indigenous-led demonstration in October
Indigenous peoples’ proposals of environmental justice are based on the
concept of “circulation of life” (Ulloa,
2017, p. 179), articulated
by militant anti-mining Q’eqchi’ that bounds the continuity of life
, understood as the socio-natural space of cultural
reproduction (Riofrancos, 2020). The
must be safeguarded as
extractivism pushes the frontiers of environmental destruction deeper into
Q’eqchi’ territory.
As a central axis, Maya Indigenous groups in
Guatemala like the Defensoría believe environmental justice should be
as an ethical, political, territorial, and reciprocal action with the
nonhumans, sustained by Indigenous cultural principles (Ulloa
& Prieto Rozo,
2013). By framing the struggle as originating five centuries prior, the group
understands its relationship to
the contemporary, postcolonial nation-state as a
legacy of colonialism.
shows how temporal imaginations feature
in the group’s repertoire of contention during the 2021 peaceful
resistance against
illegal nickel extraction at the Fénix mine.
Community Members Display Protest Banners During 2021 El Estor Peaceful
The banner reads, “When will we have a just and equitable
government[?] Every governing power has always favored the interests
rich. For us Indigenous Mayas, we have always been martyred and massacred just
to please foreigners.”
Baudilio Choc/Radio Victoria
The Q’eqchi’ people’s ongoing struggle against land
exploitation and in defense of their water and territory reflects
the broader
issues faced by Indigenous communities in Guatemala. The country's commitment to
Convention 169 should, in principle,
support the Q'eqchi’s right to
organize and advocate for their interests without fear of criminalization or
reprisal. However,
the lack of a clear regulatory framework for implementing the
Convention's provisions, particularly regarding consultation and participation,
has contributed to ongoing conflicts and disagreements between Indigenous
communities and other stakeholders. This situation underscores
the need for
Guatemala to develop more effective mechanisms for upholding its international
commitments and protecting the rights
of Indigenous peoples, including the
Q’eqchi’ community. Defensoría Q’eqchi’ team
member Martín
insists that, “we [Maya Indigenous peoples in
Guatemala/Q’eqchi’ in El Estor] have always been organizing against
the exploitation of the land, the defense of the water, the defense of the
territorio.
” “Always” refers to centuries, in this
There is a complex intertwining of corporate and state power that appears to
dictate the lives of those living near extractive frontiers.
As a result,
processes like consultations gain significance, even when they are associated
with one of these contentious actors.
The Maya Q’eqchi’ Indigenous
Peoples challenge the blending of judicial and legal procedures in everyday
peasant resistance,
asserting their own perspective on law and legality. When I
asked AEPDI members about the stereotypical criticisms of Indigenous
mobilizations—often labeled maliciously by the press as
(blockades) rather than
manifestaciones
(demonstrations) or
(protests)—they expressed frustration. To this day, the
State continues to criminalize participants in these mobilizations,
arrest warrants for what it calls “terrorist actions.” Macloni, an
El Estor resident and Defensoría member,
When people say that Indigenous communities are blocking roads, we respond,
“No, we are mobilizing for a life of dignity, for
profound political
changes in how our country is organized.” The ones truly blocking the path
to a dignified life are the criminal
elites who resist change and cling to the
Guatemalan State. (Masek 2023a, 2023b)
As the Defensoría launched a resistance campaign, other Indigenous
groups from diverse ethnolinguistic backgrounds rallied
in solidarity with the
Q’eqchi’ communities. Identity-based political organizations
representing various Mayan ethnic
groups, including the Chorti, Kaqchikel,
K’iche’, Mam, and Poqomam, traveled to El Estor. On October 12,
2021, the Xinka
Parliament from Eastern Guatemala visited the resistance site in
Izabal. Sharing their experiences of organizing against extractive
encroaching on their territories, Indigenous organizations pledged to continue
their fight. They denounced the centuries-long
campaign of dispossession
inherent to what Gómez-Barris (2015, p. 3) terms “extractive
capitalism.” The Xinka,
a non-Maya Indigenous Peoples, have also been
organizing against the San Rafael Mining Company, which operates the El Escobal
near Guatemala’s border with El Salvador, for decades. Their
leadership who traveled to El Estor told the Defensoría:
We empathize with your struggle, as we have faced similar exclusion. We stand
in solidarity with the measures you’ve chosen
and extend our support in
this moment of resistance. These companies—San Rafael and
CGN/Solway—claim we are responsible
for this dire situation, but in truth,
it is entirely their doing. We are simply asserting our rights. (Masek 2023a,
Genocide: Reivindicating the Legacies
of Violence
The group invokes memories of the military dictatorship era to frame their
current struggles. The Defensoría claims that the
Guatemalan State has
“actively betrayed the residents of El Estor” (source, date, page
number?)by selling their land
to foreign mining companies. This sentiment can be
interpreted in multiple ways. Why do these groups push for participatory
when they see the State as a traitor? The concept of
carries a specific, coded meaning that can be traced across different historical
moments, revealing patterns or recurring themes.
However, it would be inaccurate
to treat this idea as a constant or universal meaning, as people also use other
frameworks to describe
the State’s historical relationship with Indigenous
communities. Thus, temporal imaginations about the genocide are instrumental
refashioning violence in the post-conflict era that carries the underlying
legacies of counterinsurgency as a mobilizing trait.
Following the repression of a peaceful resistance launched after being
excluded from the government-led consultation process, the
imposition of a state
of siege that limits civil liberties for a 30-day period threatened to
jeopardize the residents’ lives
in a heavily-militarized environment. Now,
indigenous organizations like Defensoría Q’eqchi’ and
Tzuultaq’a Community Radio face arbitrary detentions and
persecution for having had participated in the peaceful resistance.
forces raided the offices and private homes of those who allegedly took part,
seizing documents and equipment. “They
are criminalizing our resistance,
as they have done in the past,” mentioned Macloni Sicaján Jacinto
of the Defensoría
Q’eqchi’. The State is once again
subjecting unarmed Maya Q’eqchi’ residents through excessive
military force,
triggering obscene images reminiscent of the armed conflict that
resulted in genocide, illustrated by the military deployment in
Now, under a state of siege, the consultation seems impossible. Repression is
always the means to quell indigenous self-determination.
What is happening in
Guatemala is shameful. We are not terrorists, but if they want to call us that
way as they have been doing for
decades, go ahead; our conviction is that the
future will bend towards justice. (Masek 2023a, 2023b)
Guatemalan Army Units Deployed in El Estor in October 2021
Nelton Rivera, Prensa Comunitaria, October 25,
The VHA testimonies revealed temporal imaginations linking to the genocide,
like those of Domingo Gómez Icoy, a Q’eqchi’
survivor whose early memories growing up being displaced by multiple waves of
settlers. Narrating a part of his biography
where he is explaining to the
interviewer the finca situation in the Polochic River valley, Domingo says,
“the Spanish divided
the lands of the ancestors. The Germans bought the
land, displaced us, and stayed there. And now, it is the military who
administered
it.” Placing them sequentially, Domingo later explains in the
vicious treatment Q’eqchi’ communities have been
subject to in their
land across a longer, cyclical historical periodization. Violence triggers
different temporal landscapes, which
serve a purpose in social movements. But
violence is also a constant in the Indigenous lifeworld, even in postconflict
For example, in El Estor, the intergenerational legacy of struggle is
an element in discursive action during the state of siege after
security forces repressed the peaceful resistance. Narrating their survival
against a counterinsurgent campaign of ethnic
extermination by the State can
amalgamate an antagonistic front. So, when the Guatemalan Army arrived in El
Estor to pacify the “social
conflict” generated by
“terrorists,” Defensoria’s director, Macloni, mentions:
Seeing soldiers patrolling the street brings you back to the years of
conflict violence. Now, militarization is intimidating under
a state of siege
and with a curfew. We distrust their intentions because of the legacy of these
The memory of violence remains indelibly etched on the minds of El Estor
residents because of the intimate relationship state-led
repression has with
this community at the edge of the extractive frontier. This is why the framing
of the struggle for transitional
justice “from below” reaches far
back into the past but reverberates vividly in the present. Just as grassroots
continue to condemn environmental exploitation in the wake of
criminalization, genocide survivors dedicate their lives to the recovery
historical memory in a civil society context depleted of human rights and with a
weak rule of law. In short, the VHA testimonies
show resilience as a
characteristic of subjects facing political violence in Guatemala across
historical periods. Indigenous resistance
is the most enduring feature across
Guatemalan history and the testimonies of genocide survivors also add
unparalleled analytical
leverage to the theoretical proposition embodying the
concept of “temporal imaginations.” Memory must be understood as
exercise to document data and a valuable process for the praxis of communities
affected by violence. Remembering the brutality
serves to typify mass atrocities
and prevent their repetition in the future.
Extractivism:
The Paradox of Development
As my previous research on the October 2021 antimining resistance in El Estor
shows (Masek 2023a, 2023b), the perilous effects of
extractivism are
collectively remembered by residents who experience them first-hand. In February
2018, the artisanal fishermen’s
union of El Estor submitted a writ of
amparo, a constitutional appeal, to the Supreme Court, challenging the lack of
consultation
regarding the licenses granted to the Fénix mine. Operated
by Compañía Guatemalteca de Níquel (CGN),
a subsidiary of
the Switzerland-based Solway Investment Group, the Fénix nickel mine
began operations in 2014 after years
of violent repression, controversy, and
community opposition. The fishermen were particularly concerned about the
pollution endangering
their livelihoods. “Lake Izabal turned red because
of the mine’s toxic waste,” recalls Macloni Sicaján
Later studies showed the presence of heavy metals in the water. And yet, the
authorities paid no mind and looked the other way. How
can this be called
development? Makes absolutely no sense that flora and fauna—and
us—have to suffer for this.
In July 2019, the Constitutional Court ordered a suspension of the
Fénix mine’s operations for violating ILO Convention
169 (C169).
The court ruled that the Ministry of Energy and Mines (MEM) had failed to
conduct a socioenvironmental study or consult
residents when granting CGN an
extraction license in 2006, thereby disregarding Indigenous rights to free,
prior, and informed consent
(FPIC). Despite the Court reaffirming its decision
in June 2020 and imposing stricter measures due to the COVID-19 pandemic, locals
reported that the mine continued operating without interruption, as
shows. “That’s why, on October 4, 2021, we decided to
unilaterally enforce the court ruling by blocking the mining trucks’
the mine should not be operating,” stated Sicaján Jacinto. He
further criticized the MEM for systematically excluding
communities opposed to
the Fénix project from consultations, claiming they were outside the
mine’s impact zone. “Instead
of recognizing the Ancestral
Q’eqchi’ Council as the legitimate authority, the government
accredited individuals who
do not represent our interests and instead act as
lobbyists for the company,” he added.
Aerial View of the Fénix Mining Concession Overlooking Lake
: Joe Daniel Perkins,
The Guardian
The MEM’s pre-consultation process highlighted a stark divide within
the community regarding the Fénix project. While
some residents argued
that the mine had failed to generate development or employment, others,
including mine workers, claimed it
had improved living conditions. The Community
Councils for Urban and Rural Development (Cocodes), which were accredited as the
representatives of the Q’eqchi’ people in the pre-consultation,
supported the mine’s operation. However, the four
Ancestral Councils,
representing traditional Mayan governance structures, were excluded from the
deliberative process. Defensoría
members argued that this exclusion
denied the Q’eqchi’ a meaningful voice in the community
consultation, undermining
the principles of participatory environmental
governance and reinforcing what political ecologists describe as the
of exclusion” (Acosta, 2011, p. 61) inherent in extractive
industries.
The four Q’eqchi’ Ancestral Authorities Councils and the
Association of Artisanal Fishermen of Lake Izabal, both based
in El Estor,
firmly opposed the mine in rhetoric and praxis. They insisted, in shared
communications, that the consultation “cannot
take place until all
operations of the nickel company are suspended,” as mandated by the
Constitutional Court in 2019. Both
groups accused the MEM of treating the
consultation as a superficial administrative formality rather than a genuine
dialogue, further
marginalizing legitimate community authorities. “The MEM
is looking to carry out the consultation as a mere bureaucratic process,
discriminating against the legitimate authorities of the communities and
blatantly violating the proper conduct of the pre-consultation,”
representative during a rare press interaction at the resistance site in October
2021. This dynamic reflects broader critiques
in political ecology about how
states and corporations often co-opt participatory processes to legitimize
extractive projects while
silencing dissenting voices, perpetuating
environmental injustice and dispossession.
The movement against the notorious Fénix mine in Guatemala has begun
to yield successes in the legal realm. In February 2022,
lawyers for the Maya
Q’eqchi’ community of Agua Caliente argued before the Inter-American
Court of Human Rights Wednesday
in a case that could have far-reaching
implications for Indigenous communities throughout the Americas. Agua Caliente
is one of 16
Maya Q’eqchi’ communities in the El Estor municipality.
Following the national trend (Yagenova & García, 2009),
the lawsuit
demands that the Guatemalan government give them title to their land and the
right to determine how its natural resources
are exploited. In June 2022, 22
Maya Q’eqchi’ communities of El Estor and Panzós, in the
department of Alta Verapaz,
filed a lawsuit against the State of Guatemala
before the Inter-American Commission on Human Rights (IACHR). In it, they
that they were not consulted to approve the mining company's
operation, that they had been stripped of their lands, and that they
prosecuted for opposing the project. The Defensoría Q’eqchi’
says that due to the denial of access to
justice by the State of Guatemala, in
the face of the dispossession of our lands, the contamination of their
and natural assets, and the denial of the right to be
consulted, “we had to turn to the inter-American system for
Their members assert that the consultation was made
“secretly” since “it was carried out outside El Estor and
the framework of a State of Siege. This violates human rights and
misrepresents the dialogue that should be opened between the communities
In November 2022, the U.S. Treasury Department issued sanctions targeting
Russian involvement in the Guatemalan nickel sector, according
to a statement.
The sanctions targeted Compania Guatemalteca de Niquel (CGN), ProNiCo, and
Mayaniquel, Guatemalan-based subsidiaries
of Solway Investment Group. As part of
the same action, the Treasury sanctioned Dmitry Kudryakov, who leads Solway's
mining operations
in Guatemala, and a Belarusian national for allegedly leading
bribery and corruption schemes. These latest sanctions also show how
Guatemala’s mining sector have used their connections to the Guatemalan
government to repress Indigenous communities
that oppose the
exploitation of their natural resources. Human rights defenders in Guatemala
have continued to denounce how the army
and the National Civilian Police burn
their land and use force to evict people.
shows how the incident
became front page news in Guatemala.
Prensa Libre Front Page: “US Sanctions Three Guatemalan Mining
: Prensa Libre, November 19, 2022
This case of anti-mining resistance in Guatemala, encapsulated by the events
that took place in El Estor back in 2021, resonates with
broader patterns of
Indigenous mobilization across Latin America, such as the struggles of the
Aymara and Quechua in Bolivia against
water privatization, the Waorani in
Ecuador defending their territories from oil extraction, or the Munduruku in
Brazil resisting
hydroelectric dams. These movements similarly employ collective
memory and transnational networks to challenge extractive industries,
invoking global frameworks like the UN Declaration on the Rights of Indigenous
Peoples (UNDRIP) to assert their rights to self-determination,
cultural integrity. However, the Q’eqchi’ case also highlights
unique divergences, such as the specific role
of ancestral governance structures
in shaping resistance strategies, which may differ from the communal assemblies
prominent in Andean
mobilizations or the coalition-building seen in Amazonian
This project shows how civil society groups use collective memory as a
mechanism by deploying discourses and symbols as political
acts of resistance
against settler colonial violence. Using the extended case method over eighteen
months, I have used a combination
of in-person and digital participant
observation to document how an Indigenous rights organization in Guatemala
maneuvers the intricacies
of deliberative democracy. Findings empirically reveal
that, as part of the movement’s cultural repertoire, social movements
deploy narrative mechanisms that rely on the collective memory of victories
against settler colonialism to invigorate its base and
defend Indigenous
territory in an era of unprecedented climate change. Studying how a
multinational corporation colludes with governmental
institutions provides an
opportunity to look at interlocking systems at work: neoliberal capitalism shows
the expansion of the extractive
frontier, and while Indigenous recourse to law
provides institutional avenues to assert self-determination, sovereignty is
within the framework of human rights and democratic
citizenship.
The cyclical history of extraction, self-identification through the land and
repression are materially grounded through
temporal imaginations
Movement leaders often leverage collective memory as a tool to mobilize
supporters and weaken adversaries, a strategy that can activate
transnational
solidarity networks crucial for the survival of civil society groups in
politically contested environments. This project’s
theoretical aim is to
deepen our understanding of how Mayan conceptions of nature-society integrity
are articulated and enacted within
the Maya Q’eqchi’ community of El
Estor, Izabal, building on prior research with grassroots anti-extractivism
(Masek 2023a, 2023b). Drawing on development sociology and political
ecology, the study seeks to demonstrate that a group’s
position within
relations of production does not predetermine their mode of resistance or even
how they interpret those relations.
Resistance strategies and interpretations of
anti-mining activism vary across contexts, shaped by local histories, cultural
frameworks,
and power dynamics.
Empirical research on questions such as the role of memory in politics
reveals that memory operates in multifaceted ways—publicly
and privately,
among elites and marginalized groups, as personal testimony and as national
narrative. Each form of memory, whether
reminiscence, commemoration, or
collective storytelling, plays a critical role in shaping political action and
identity. This underscores
the importance of understanding memory as a dynamic
and contested process, one that informs how communities navigate and resist
industries. By examining these dynamics, the project aims to
illuminate the diverse ways in which marginalized groups like the
reinterpret and resist dominant development paradigms,
challenging assumptions about their agency and the universality of resistance
strategies. In the case of Guatemala’s incipient democracy, memory serves
as an antidote against distorted official history.
The show of military force in
El Estor in 2021 to suppress Indigenous dissent is reminiscent of the armed
conflict that resulted
in genocide. The military and police crackdown on protest
is the latest manifestation of democratic backsliding in Guatemala—amid
the ravaging effects of the pandemic and the climate crisis—that builds on
a violent legacy of dispossession of Indigenous
In moments of recovery from periods of intense social tension—moments
of hegemonic rupture, as Gramsci would suggest (1971)—the
need for shared
emblematic memories becomes even more necessary to provide a sense of community,
courage, and hope. In such moments,
specific emblematic memories become more
powerful and valuable in providing the scaffolding around which a sense of what
society is possible is imagined. To contribute to a more democratic mode
of social knowledge production, we need to take a deeper
look at why and how
people use stories to interpret social realities based on their own
Recentering inequality complicates the state’s transformed amity
towards Indigenous populations. While policy alignment and
intellectual
contribution are important, my research suggests this is insufficient. Rather,
the momentum to organize toward climate
justice must be channeled to address the
complex personal and structural issues that engender violence against land and
water defenders.
This is a call to not allow attacks on Indigenous
self-determination to be an isolated problem of the day, but to be a gateway for
improving the overall conditions of subjects of historic injustices. By showing
how social movements mobilize against seemingly insurmountable
challenges, the
study emphasizes the importance of collective agency attempting to transcend a
purely antagonistic stance with the
state by reconfiguring local political
interactions and making their immediate surroundings more democratic and
autonomous.
The case of Maya Q’eqchi’ testimonies open new avenues for
transitional justice research connected to ongoing emancipatory
struggles. Colonialism and the social sciences have worked together with
Indigenous people in that they are “the means
through which Indigenous
people have been known” (Simpson, 2007, p. 67). Moving away from an
understanding of culture through
its relationship to “difference” as
a unit of analysis and as distinct from the whole, unquestioned
the study seeks to pose questions about what cultural
analysis would look like if it were to shift from difference as a unit of
and to method and analysis shaped by “the goals and aspirations
of those we talk to” (Simpson, 2007, p. 68). The ways
of knowing resulting
from culture as difference have historically undergirded the laws of settler
nation-states that dispossessed
Indigenous people from the land.
The findings of this study carry significant policy implications,
particularly in the context of international debates on Indigenous
sovereignty,
environmental justice, and transitional justice. By demonstrating how the Maya
Q’eqchi’ of El Estor have
mobilized collective memory and
transnational solidarity networks to resist extractive industries, the research
underscores the critical
importance of recognizing Indigenous rights to
self-determination and land as enshrined in frameworks like the UN Declaration
the Rights of Indigenous Peoples (UNDRIP). These findings challenge states
and corporations to move beyond tokenistic consultations
and instead implement
genuinely participatory processes that respect Indigenous governance structures
and worldviews.
Furthermore, the study highlights the need for transitional justice
mechanisms to address historical and ongoing dispossession, particularly
post-conflict societies like Guatemala, where extractive industries often
perpetuate violence and inequality. Policymakers and
international bodies must
consider these insights when designing environmental and social safeguards,
ensuring that Indigenous communities
are not only consulted but also empowered
to lead decision-making processes that affect their territories and futures.
For advocacy groups, the study provides a compelling case for leveraging
intergenerational memory and transnational networks to amplify
Indigenous voices
in global forums, such as the UN Permanent Forum on Indigenous Issues or climate
negotiations. Policymakers can
draw on these insights to design more inclusive
and equitable consultation frameworks that prioritize the participation of
Indigenous authorities, rather than state-sanctioned representatives.
For grassroots activists, the research offers a model of resistance
integrates legal strategies, community organizing, and cultural revitalization,
which can be adapted to other contexts where
Indigenous communities face similar
threats from extractive industries. Lessons from El Estor can inspire and
strengthen movements
for environmental justice and Indigenous sovereignty across
the globe. Ultimately, this study not only documents a local struggle
contributes to a broader vision of justice and sustainability that centers
Indigenous knowledge and leadership.
Correspondence:
Vaclav Masek Sánchez, Ph.D. Candidate in
Environmental Science, Institute of Environmental Science and Technology at the
University of Barcelona (ICTA-UAB), Spain.
Vaclav.Masek@UAB.cat
A. (2011). Extractivismo and neoextractivismo: dos cara de la misma
maldición. In
Más allá del desarrollo: visiones
alternativas del desarrollo en América Latina
(1st ed., pp. 61-87).
Fundación Rosa Luxemburgo.
Alonso-Fradejas, A. (2015). Anything but a story foretold: Multiple politics
of resistance to the agrarian extractivist project in
The Journal
of Peasant Studies
(3–4), 489–515.
https://doi.org/10.1080/03066150.2015.1013468
Apostolopoulou, E., & Cortés-Vásquez, J.A. (2019).
right to nature: Social movements, environmental justice and neoliberal
(1st ed.), Routledge.
https://doi.org/10.4324/9780429427145
Arboleda, M. (2020).
Planetary mine: territories of extraction under late
. Verso Books.
Bastos, S., & Cumes, A. (Eds.) (2007).
Mayanización y vida
cotidiana: La ideología multicultural y la sociedad guatemalteca
CIRMA, FLACSO.
Batz, G. (2020). Ixil Maya resistance against megaprojects in Cotzal,
Theory & Event
(4), 1016-1036.
https://muse.jhu.edu/article/767879
Benford, R. D., & Snow, D. A. (2000). Framing processes and social
movements: An overview and assessment.
Annual Reviews of Sociology
https://doi.org/10.1146/annurev.soc.26.1.611
Burawoy, M. (1998). The extended case method.
Sociological Theory,
https://doi.org/10.1111/0735-2751.00040
CEH (1999).
Guatemala Memoria del Silencio: Comisión Para el
Esclarecimiento Histórico
, Truth Commission, United Nations.
DeRocher, P. (2018).
Transnational Testimonios: The politics of collective
knowledge production
, University of Washington Press.
Dougherty, M. L. (2011). The global gold mining industry, junior firms, and
civil society resistance in Guatemala.
Bulletin of Latin American
(4), 403–418.
https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1470-9856.2011.00529.x
Dougherty, M. L. (2019). How does development mean? Attitudes toward mining
and the social meaning of development in Guatemala.
Latin American
Perspectives
(225), 161–181.
https://doi.org/10.1177/0094582X18820273
Durkheim, E. (1961).
The elementary forms of religious life
Ellner, S. (Ed.) (2020).
Latin American extractivism: dependency, resource
nationalism, and resistance in broad perspective
, (1st ed.), Rowman &
Littlefield Publishers.
Emerson, R. M., Fretz, R. I., & Shaw, L. L. (2011).
ethnographic fieldnotes
, (2nd ed.), University of Chicago Press.
Escobar, A. (2006). Difference and conflict in the struggle over natural
resources: a political ecology framework,
Development
http://doi:10.1057/palgrave.development.1100267
Farthing, L., & Kohl, B. H. (2013). Mobilizing memory: Bolivia’s
enduring social movements,
Movement Studies
http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/14742837.2013.807728
Fenelon, J. V. (2015). Critique of Glenn on settler colonialism and
Bonilla-Silva on critical race analysis from Indigenous perspectives.
Sociology of Race and Ethnicity
(2), 237–242.
https://doi.org/10.1177/2332649215598158
Finkeldey, J. (2023).
Fighting global neo-extractivism: fossil-free social
movements in South Africa,
Taylor & Francis.
Fulmer, A. M. (2011). La consulta a los pueblos indígenas y su
evolución como herramienta de negociación política
América Latina: Los casos de Perú y Guatemala.
https://doi.org/10.21678/apuntes.68.619
Fulmer, A. M., Godoy, A. S., & Neff, P. (2008). Indigenous rights,
resistance, and the law: Lessons from a Guatemalan mine,
Latin American
Politics and Society
(4), 91–121.
https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1548-2456.2008.00031.x
Geertz, C. (1973). Thick description. In
The Interpretation of
, Basic Books.
Ghoshal, R. A. (2013). Transforming collective memory: Mnemonic opportunity
structures and the outcomes of racial violence memory
https://doi.org/10.1007/s11186-013-9197-9
Glenn, E. N. (2015). Settler colonialism as structure: A framework for
comparative studies of U.S. race and gender formation.
Sociology of Race and
(1), 52–72.
https://doi.org/10.1177/2332649214560440
Gómez-Barris, M. (2017).
The extractive zone: Social ecologies and
decolonial perspectives
. Duke University Press.
Grandin, G. (2011).
The last colonial massacre: Latin America in the Cold
(2nd ed.). University of Chicago Press.
Granovsky-Larsen, S. (2013). Between the bullet and the bank: Access to land
in neoliberal Guatemala,
The Journal of Peasant Studies
https://doi.org/10.1080/03066150.2013.777044
Gudynas, E. (2018). Extractivisms: Tendencies and consequences. In
Reframing Latin American Development
, Routledge. 61–76.
Halbwachs, M. (1992 [1925]).
On collective memory
, University of
Chicago Press.
Jedlowski, P. (2001). Memory and sociology: Themes and issues.
(1), 29–44.
https://doi.org/10.1177/0961463X01010001002
Jensen, R. S. (2007). Resurrection and appropriation: Reputational
trajectories, memory work, and the political use of historical
American Journal of Sociology
(4), 953–1007.
https://doi.org/10.1086/508789
Katz, J. (1997). Ethnography’s warrants.
Sociological Methods &
(1), 391–423.
https://doi.org/10.1177/0049124197025004002
Katz, J. (2019). On becoming an ethnographer.
Journal of Contemporary
Ethnography
(1), 16–50.
https://doi.org/10.1177/0891241618777801
Kitschelt, H. (1986). Political opportunity structures and political protest:
Anti-nuclear movements in four democracies.
British Journal of Political
(1), 57–85.
https://doi.org/10.1017/S000712340000380X
Kubal, T., & Becerra, R. (2014). Social movements and collective memory.
Sociology Compass
(6), 865–875.
https://doi.org/10.1111/soc4.12166
LaPlante, J. P., & Nolin, C. (2014). Consultas and socially responsible
investing in Guatemala: A case study examining Maya perspectives
indigenous right to free, prior, and informed consent,
Society & Natural
(3), 231–248.
https://doi.org/10.1080/08941920.2013.861554
Loarca, C. (2008). Las consultas de buena fe en Guatemala y la Corte
Interamericana de Derechos Humanos
http://www.albedrio.org/htm/documentos/cloarca-001.pdf
Masek, V. (2023a). Memoria colectiva y movimientos indígenas durante
la consulta comunitaria en El Estor, Guatemala. In
Estrategias,
pedagogías y abordajes clínicos en Derechos Humanos
Lis Gebruers Hanya ... [et al.] ; compilación de Cecilia Lis Gebruers
Hanya. - 1a ed compendiada. - Santa Rosa:
Editorial de la Universidad Nacional
de La Pampa, Argentina.
Masek, V. (2023b). La paradoja del desarrollo: consultas comunitarias en la
posguerra guatemalteca: Accésit del VI Premio REEDES
para Jóvenes
Investigadoras/es 2022.
Iberoamerican Journal of Development Studie
(1), 276-300.
https://doi.org/10.26754/ojs_ried/ijds.801
McAdam, D., McCarthy, J. D., & Zald, M. N. (1996).
Comparative
perspectives on social movements: Political opportunities, mobilizing
structures, and cultural framings
. Cambridge University Press.
McGee, G. (2009). The community referendum: Participatory democracy and the
right to free, prior and informed consent to development,
Berkeley Journal of
International Law
(2), 570–635.
https://doi.org/1085-5718
Mérida, A. C., & Krenmayr, W. (2008).
Sistematización de
experiencias: asamblea departamental por la defensa de recursos renovables y no
renovables de Huehuetenango
. Huehuetenango, Guatemala.
https://biblioteca.hegoa.ehu.eus/downloads/18320/%2Fsystem%2Fpdf%2F2571%2Fsistematizacion_de_experiencias_de_la_asamblea_huehuetenango.pdf
McCammon, H. J., Muse, C. S., Newman, H. D., & Terrell, T. M. (2007).
Movement framing and discursive opportunity structures:
The political successes
of the U.S. women’s jury movements,
American Sociological Review
(5), 725–749.
https://doi.org10.1177/000312240707200504
McCarthy, J. D., & Zald, M. N. (1977). Resource mobilization and social
movements: A partial theory,
American Journal of Sociology
https://doi.org/10.1086/226464
Mingorría, S. (2018). Violence and visibility in oil palm and
sugarcane conflicts: The case of Polochic Valley, Guatemala.
The Journal of
Peasant Studies
https://doi.org/10.1080/03066150.2017.1293046
Mingorría, S., Gamboa, G., Martín-López, B., &
Corberá, E. (2014). The oil palm boom: socio-economic
implications for
Q’eqchi’ households in the Polochic Valley, Guatemala.
Environment, Development and Sustainability,
https://doi.org/10.1007/s10668-014-9530-0
Morris, A., & Staggenborg, S. (2004). Leadership in social movements. In
The Blackwell companion to social movements
. Blackwell,
Nolin, C., & Russell, G. (2021).
Testimonio: Canadian mining in the
aftermaths of genocide in Guatemala
. BTS Books.
O’Hearn, D. (2006). Repression and solidarity cultures of resistance:
Irish political prisoners on protest.
American Journal of Sociology
(2), 491–526.
https://doi.org/10.1086/599249
Observatorio de Industrias Extractivas. (2021). Proyecto de extracción
minera FÉNIX LEXT-049-05 De Exploraciones y Explotaciones
Izabal (EXMIBAL) a la Compañía Guatemalteca de Níquel.
Olick, J. K., & Robbins, J. (1998). Social memory studies: From
“collective memory” to the historical sociology of
Annual Reviews of Sociology
https://www.jstor.org/stable/223476
Riofrancos, T. (2020).
Resource radicals: From petro-nationalism to
post-extractivism in Ecuado
r. Duke Press.
Rivera-Cusicanqui, S. (2020).
Ch’ixinakax Utxiwa: On practices &
discourses of decolonization.
Sanford, V. (2009).
La masacre de Panzós: tierra, etnicidad y
. F&G Editores.
Sieder, R. (2011). “Emancipation” or “regulation”?
Law, globalization and Indigenous peoples’ rights
in post-war
Economy and Society
(2), 239–265.
https://doi.org/10.1080/03085147.2011.548952
Simpson, A. (2007). On ethnographic refusal: Indigeneity,
“voice”, and colonial citizenship.
Junctures: Journal of Thematic
(9), 67–80.
https://junctures.org/index.php/junctures/article/view/66/60
Saito, H. (2006). Reiterated commemoration: Hiroshima as national trauma.
Sociological Theory
(4), 353–376.
https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1467-9558.2006.00295.x
Schudson, M. (1993).
Watergate in American memory: How we remember,
forget, and reconstruct the past.
Basic Books.
Snipp, C. M. (1986). The changing political and economic status of the
American Indians: From captive nations to internal colonies.
American Journal
of Economics and Sociology
https://www.jstor.org/stable/3486915
Snow, D. A., Rochford, E. B. Jr., Worden, S. K., & Benford, R. D. (1986).
Frame alignment process, micromobilization, and movement
participation.
American Sociological Review
(4), 464–481.
https://doi.org/10.2307/2095581
Strauss, A. L., & Corbin, J. M. (1998).
Basics of qualitative
research: Techniques and procedures for developing grounded theory
Publications.
Svampa, M. (2019a).
Development in Latin America: Toward a new futur
Columbia University Press.
Svampa, M. (2019b)
. Neo-extractivism in Latin America: socio-environmental
conflicts, the territorial turn, and new political narratives
. Cambridge
University Press.
Swidler, A. (1986). Culture in action: Symbols and strategies.
Sociological Review
(2), 273–286.
Tarrow, S. (1998).
Power in movement: Social movements and contentious
ed) Cambridge University Press.
Tilly, C. (2006).
Regimes and repertoires
University of Chicago Press.
Trentavizi, B., & Cahuec, E. (2012).
Las consultas comunitarias de
“Buena Fe” y las prácticas ancestrales comunitarias
indígenas en Guatemala
. Centro de Investigaciones Regionales de
Mesoamérica – Oficina del Alto Comisionado para los Derechos
Humanos de las
Naciones Unidas.
Tzul Tzul, G. (2018).
Gobierno comunal indígena y Estado
guatemalteco: algunas claves críticas para comprender su tensa
. Instituto Amaq.
Ulloa, A. (2017). Perspectives of environmental justice from Indigenous
peoples of Latin America: A relational Indigenous environmental
Environmental Justice
(6), 175–180.
https://doi.org10.1089/env.2017.0017
Ulloa, A., & Prieto Rozo, A. I. (2013).
Culturas, conocimientos,
políticas y ciudadanías en torno al cambio climático
Universidad Nacional de Colombia.
Wagner-Pacific, R., & Schwartz, B. (1991). The Vietnam veterans memorial:
Commemorating a difficult past.
American Journal of Sociology,
(2), 376–420.
https://doi.org10.1086/229783
Walter, M., & Urkidi, L. (2017). Community mining consultations in Latin
America (2002–2012): The contested emergence of
a hybrid institution for
participation.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.geoforum.2015.09.007
T. (2011). The right to free, prior, and informed consent: Indigenous
peoples’ participation rights within international
Human Rights
(2), 54–84.
https://scholarlycommons.law.northwestern.edu/njihr/vol10/iss2/2
K. B. (1998).
Indigenous movements and their critics: Pan-Maya activism in
. Princeton University Press.
S. V., & García, R. (2009). Indigenous people’s struggles
against transnational mining companies in Guatemala:
The Sipakapa people vs
GoldCorp Mining Company.
Socialism and Democracy
https://doi.org10.1080/08854300903208795
B. (1995). Reading against the grain: The shape of memory studies.
Studies in Mass Communication
(2), 214–239.
https://doi.org/10.1080/15295039509366932
E. (1996). Social memories: Steps to a sociology of the past.
Qualitative
https://link.springer.com/article/10.1007/BF02393273
G., & Woźny, A. (2020). The comparative politics of collective memory.
Annual Reviews of Sociology
(1), 175–194.
https://doi.org10.1146/annurev-soc-121919-054808
Timeline of Key Events for the Fenix Mining Project
1960 INCO, a Canadian nickel company (and precursor to Skye Resources and
Hudbay Minerals), begins negotiations with successive military
governments
regarding the construction of an open-pit nickel mine near El Estor, Izabal.
1965 Guatemalan government grants Canadian-owned INCO a forty-year mining
lease to an area 385 square kilometers in size near El Estor,
on lands and
territories where Maya Q’eqchi’ communities have lived and worked
for generations.
1968-1981 Indigenous Maya Q’eqchi’ farmers are regularly,
illegally, and oftentimes violently expelled from land near
proposed mining areas.
1970 Members of a committee of Guatemalan lawyers and academics who wrote a
1969 report criticizing the 1965 agreement between INCO
and the Guatemalan
government are killed, injured, and forced into exile.
1978 On May 28, the first large-scale massacre of the
‘scorched-earth’ military campaign era took place in Panzós,
thirty-five kilometers west of the mining company installations and plant, then
owned by INCO and its subsidiary EXMIBAL. Hundreds
of Q’eqchi’
people from mining-affected communities and other territorial struggles march to
the central plaza of Panzós
in a peaceful protest for land rights.
1982 General Efraín Ríos Montt was named president of the
military junta after a coup in 1982. He continued the bloody
campaign of
torture, forced disappearances, and "scorched earth" warfare. The country became
a pariah state internationally, although
the regime received considerable
support from the Reagan Administration.
1985 The Guatemalan army deposed Rios Montt in 1983 Constituent assembly
elections were held in 1984. In 1985, after nine months of
debate, the
constituent assembly finished drafting a new constitution, which took immediate
1996 In June, The Guatemalan Congress approves the ratification of the
International Labor Organization's 169th Convention on Indigenous
Peoples, the most important operative international law guaranteeing the rights
of Indigenous and tribal peoples.
In December, the Guatemalan Civil War ended with a peace accord between the
guerrillas and the government, negotiated by the UN through
intense brokerage by
Norway and Spain.
1999 The Historical Clarification Commission (CEH) attributed more than 93%
of all documented violations of human rights to Guatemala's
military government
and estimated that Indigenous Maya peoples accounted for 83% of the victims. It
concluded in 1999 that state
actions constituted genocide.
2004 Canadian company announces that it will sell it to Vancouver-based Skye
Resources. Guatemalan subsidiary CGN operates conjointly.
No consultation
carried out with communities.
2007 Over four days in January, hundreds of police, military, and private
security forces violently evict Maya Q’eqchi’
farmers from various
communities near El Estor,
2008 Hudbay Minerals purchases Skye Resources; Skye Resources changes name to
HMI Nickel Inc.
2009 In September, during a protest in front of the mine organized by the
fishermen’s union of El Estor, Adolfo Ich Chamán
is shot and killed
by security forces employed at Hudbay’s Fénix mining project.
Germán Chub Choc is shot and
paralyzed by Fénix security personnel
on the same day.
2011 Hudbay Minerals sells CGN, the Fénix Project, and all of its
other Guatemalan assets to a Switzerland-based company, the
Solway Investment
2018 Guatemala’s Supreme Court ruled in favor of the Fisherman's Union
of Lake Izabal, the country’s largest expanse of
fresh water in the
country, saying that locals had not been properly consulted when the Fenix
license renewed in 2004.
2019 The Constitutional Court (CC) confirms the sentence and orders
Solway/CGN to comply with restitution by carrying out a free,
informed consultation process as outlined by ILO's C169.
CC ruling goes into effect; preconsulta process (where
official representatives are selected) starts. Government selects a Council
Q'eqchi’ authorities but the Fisherman's Union and the Ancestral
Authorities are excluded.
September 28:
Preconsulta
process begins behind closed doors.
Meeting sites are purposely booked in venues that are miles away from El
The legitimate delegates of the communities present a writ
at a Guatemalan court for their exclusion from the preconsulta.
Local and national government denies petition; peaceful
resistance begins in El Estor.
October 24:
Peaceful resistance is repressed. State of siege, nightly
curfew goes into effect in El Estor for one month.
January 15:
The Government of Guatemala announces the preconsulta
has officially concluded and the Fénix Mine begins operations in
February 22:
Members of Q’eqchi’ community of Agua
Caliente testify before the Inter-American Court of Human Rights t, in Guatemala
demanding that the Guatemalan government give them title to their land and the
right to determine how its natural resources are exploited.
Almost six months after the Ministry of Energy and Mines (MEM)
announced the reactivation of the Fénix mining project, the
Q'eqchi’ communities of El Estor and Panzós, in the department of
Alta Verapaz, filed a lawsuit against the State of
Guatemala before the
Inter-American Commission on Human Rights (IACHR).
November 18:
The U.S. Department of the Treasury’s Office of
Foreign Assets Control (OFAC) sanctioned one Russian national and one Belarusian
national for their role in exploiting the Guatemalan mining sector, as well as
three associated entities connected with their corruption
Letter to Sec. Blinken from U.S. House of Representatives
(October 2021)
Statement of the press release by the U.S. Department of Treasury on
Thursday, November 22, 2022:
https://home.treasury.gov/news/press-releases/jy1118
Using “collective
memory” as an analytical category encompasses two distinct phenomena:
socially framed individual memories
and collective commemorative representations
and mnemonic traces, as proposed by Durkheim (1961) and Halbwachs (1992). These
foundational
French sociologists contend that memory does not simply preserve
the past unchanged. Rather, as Zelizer (1995) observes, memory functions
dynamic process that varies across time. Since memory is actively shaped by its
agents, the issue of its “malleability,”
highlighted by Olick and
Robbins (1998, pp. 128-30)—whether the past can be deliberately reshaped
or remains constrained by
historical reality—has become a central concern
in examining the mobilizing power of mnemonic frames (Jensen, 2007).
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (13.7 MB)
PDF format (2.2 MB)
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter