URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/journals/SydLawRw/2025/3.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 15:39:04
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Hayward, Benjamin --- "The Interpretation of Uncitral Law in Australian Courts: A Roadmap for Elevating the UN Sales Convention""'S Status to That of Arbitration Law" [2025] SydLawRw 3; (2025) 47(1) Sydney Law Review 21292
I Introduction
II Internationalist Interpretation: The CISG, New York Convention and Model Law
III Internationalist Interpretation Examined: The New York Convention and Model Law in Australia
A Realising Internationalist Interpretation in Practice: Singaporean, Hong Kong, and New Zealand Case Law
B Rationales: Understanding Why Singaporean, Hong Kong, and New Zealand Case Law is Considered Important by Australian Courts
C Results: Evidencing Australia’s Receptiveness to Singaporean, Hong Kong, and New Zealand ICA Case Law
1 TCL v Castel: A Starting Point
2 TCL v Castel: A Springboard
3 TCL v Castel: Reflected in Party Submissions
4 Minimum Curial Intervention
5 The Discretion to Enforce
6 The Model Law in the High Court of Australia
IV Internationalist Interpretation Examined: The CISG in Australia
A Singapore’s CISG Case Law
B Hong Kong’s CISG Case Law
C New Zealand’s CISG Case Law
V Two Recommendations: Supporting the CISG’s Internationalist Interpretation in Australia
A Setting Expectations: Judicial Guidance
B Seeking Input: Amicus Curiae
C Securing Action: Motivating Adoption of My Recommendations
VI Conclusion
The Interpretation of UNCITRAL Law in Australian Courts: A Roadmap for
Elevating the UN Sales Convention’s Status to That of
Arbitration
Despite being part of Australian law for more than 30 years, the
Nations Convention on Contracts for the International Sale of Goods
’) has not secured the internationally minded
interpretation that
art 7(1) requires. Australia’s
international commercial arbitration (‘ICA’) laws, however, are
routinely approached
by Australian courts with an internationalist perspective,
as their own interpretative rules require. It is tempting to conclude
Australia’s approach to interpreting its ICA laws is transferable to the
context. In this article I address a previously unexplored nuance
affecting that conclusion. Australian courts routinely accept Singaporean,
Kong and New Zealand interpretative influence concerning ICA laws. In the
context, however, significantly less influence from those
might better apply the
in an internationalist manner. First, I
recommend that Australia’s courts emphasise to practitioners the need to
consider the
application and its internationalist
interpretation requirements. Second, I recommend that Australian courts use the
amicus curiae
procedure to solicit third party submissions addressing the
interpretation. Both techniques are applied by foreign
courts in the ICA context and would assist Australian courts in discharging
art 7(1) obligations.
Introduction
Australia has a long association with the United Nations Commission on
International Trade Law (‘UNCITRAL’). It was an
original UNCITRAL
member and is a current member through to
The UNCITRAL National
Coordinating Committee for Australia ‘provide[s] the primary platform for
Australia’s engagement’
Australia has also
adopted several UNCITRAL instruments aimed at addressing the ‘conviction
that divergences arising from the
laws of different States in matters relating
to international trade constitute one of the obstacles to the development of
world trade’.
These include
United Nations Convention on Contracts for the International Sale of
Convention on the Recognition and Enforcement of Foreign Arbitral
UNCITRAL Model Law on International Commercial Arbitration
is a treaty intended to facilitate cross-border goods trade
by establishing uniform contract law rules governing international sales
By establishing uniform
substantive law rules addressing contract formation and party rights and
obligations,
transaction costs are
reduced and trade is thereby
, on the other hand, are procedural laws
addressing different legal aspects of international commercial arbitration
ICA is ‘a means by which international business
disputes can be definitively resolved, pursuant to the parties’ agreement,
by independent, non-governmental decision-makers, selected by or for the
parties, applying neutral adjudicative procedures that provide
the parties an
opportunity to be
Essentially, ICA is a form of ‘private
grounded in party
agreement that occurs outside of court but remains governed by law and relies on
court support for its
effectiveness.
This being so, the
New York Convention
is a treaty harmonising
standards for enforcing arbitration agreements and ICA
allowing courts to
enforce both party agreements to arbitrate and the outcomes of ICA. The
fulfils a different
‘prototype’
that States can adopt (verbatim or modified) to regulate the conduct of ICAs
occurring within their jurisdictions and harmonise their
ICA processes with
those established in other
Together, the
New York Convention
constitute a necessary legal
backbone for the global ICA system.
Australia’s
and ICA laws, based on these instruments, have
historically had a difficult time so far as their internationally minded
interpretations
year that Justice Croft of the Supreme Court of Victoria queried whether
Australian courts could get their act together
is a pivotal time in this regard. Australia’s ‘most
interesting’
were decided following the enactment of the
International Arbitration
Amendment Act 2010
(Cth) and the
Commercial Arbitration Act 2010
(NSW) – the first of Australia’s domestic commercial arbitration
Acts based on the
that are treated as ICA
laws for the purposes of this
New York Convention
are now routinely
interpreted in an internationalist manner in Australian
On the other hand, Australia’s
laws still do not receive that
same treatment.
In this article,
I investigate this otherwise trite observation from a new perspective. Noting
the intuitive appeal of extending
Australia’s ICA interpretative approach
I argue that different practical strategies are necessary to give effect to
these laws’ respective internationalist interpretation
requirements.
My focus being on these practical strategies, it is important to note that I
am not addressing
Australia’s
and ICA laws are
interpreted inconsistently. Scholarship analyses this matter elsewhere:
identifying as possible explanations (among
other things) their respective
substantive and procedural natures, and the wording of Australia’s
implementing
legislation.
In Part II of this article, I set the scene by identifying the
internationalist interpretation rules governing all three instruments
examination. In Part III,
I demonstrate that in Australia the
New York Convention
are routinely interpreted in a manner particularly receptive of
Singaporean, Hong Kong and New Zealand interpretative influence. In
explain that significantly less influence from those jurisdictions exists
regarding the
. That being so, in Part V I make two
recommendations aimed at better equipping Australian courts to discharge their
art 7(1) interpretative obligations, which are binding under
public international
In Part VI, I conclude that effecting those recommendations stands to assist the
in fulfilling its trade facilitation purposes.
Internationalist Interpretation: The
New York Convention
An appropriate starting point for my analysis, given the interpretative
stratification identified in Part I, is the internationalist
interpretation
requirement relating to the application of the
embeds internationally minded interpretative rules in
art 7(1): ‘[i]n the interpretation of this
, regard is to be had to its international character and to the
need to promote uniformity in its application and the observance of
in international trade’. This provision requires the
autonomous interpretation, ‘free from domestic
preconceptions’.
It also requires judicial and arbitral decision-makers to consider
internationally minded interpretative resources including the
travaux préparatoires
, scholarship, and international case
New York Convention
, pre-dating the
‘standard uniform interpretation
does not contain
interpretative instructions. Equivalent internationalist interpretation rules
apply, however, via public international
law principles reflected in the
Vienna Convention on the Law of
Conceptually, those rules apply to the
New York Convention
‘reading in’.
Finally, although the 1985 version of the
was also silent as
to its interpretation, this changed with its 2006 revisions.
7(1) became the template on which a new
art 2A(1) was
Model laws are generally
domestic legislation when implemented and are not necessarily required to be
interpreted with an internationalist
art 2A(1) displaces that general position, providing that ‘[i]n the
interpretation of this Law, regard is to be had to its
international origin and
to the need to promote uniformity in its application and the observance of good
faith’. Though the
drafting history of
gives little guidance as to its intended
its relationship with
art 7(1) confirms that it requires an internationalist
interpretation when applying the
Internationalist Interpretation Examined: The
New York Convention
in Australia
As I identified in Part I, Australia’s ICA laws have enjoyed more than
a decade of jurisprudential progress, with ICA being
described in 2011 as
‘the new black’ in Australian
While it is well
established that Australia’s ICA laws are now routinely interpreted in an
internationalist spirit, in this
Part I examine a different matter: the
practical means by which that interpretation is secured.
Realising Internationalist Interpretation in
Practice: Singaporean, Hong Kong, and New Zealand Case Law
New York Convention
are both subject to
internationalist interpretation requirements, Australian courts often refer to
Singaporean, Hong Kong, and New
Zealand case law in particular to satisfy those
requirements. At the heart of this proposition lies a ‘critical
Conditioner (Zhongshan) Co Ltd v Castel Electronics Pty Ltd
This approach to confining the scope of public policy has widespread
international judicial support. Contrary to the submission of
the appellant, it
is not only appropriate, but essential, to pay due regard to the reasoned
decisions of other countries where their
laws are either based on, or take their
content from, international conventions or instruments such as the
. It is of the first importance to
attempt to create or maintain, as far as the language employed by Parliament in
permits, a degree of international harmony and concordance of
approach to international commercial arbitration. This is especially
reference to the reasoned judgments of common law countries in the region, such
as Singapore, Hong Kong and New Zealand. Such
is a reflection of the growing
recognition of the harmony of what can be seen as the ‘law of
international commerce’
... It is also an approach required by Art 2A of
, and by the highest authority when dealing with treaties
... This approach should not be confined to treaties proper to which there
contracting state parties. Where, as with the
, there has been
extensive discussion and negotiation of a model law under the auspices of a
United Nations body, such as UNCITRAL,
and where the
adopted by the General Assembly of the United Nations with recommendation of
‘due consideration’ by member states
to advance uniformity of
approach, the same appropriate respect for, and, where necessary, sensitivity or
deference to, reasoned
decisions of other countries, should be shown. This is
especially so in the field of international
be clear, I do not claim that Australia’s courts exclusively or
principally rely on Singaporean, Hong Kong, and New Zealand
ICA case law. That
would be inconsistent with the very notion of internationalist interpretation,
and the High Court of Australia’s
views expressed in related
proceedings
one year earlier:
Those considerations of international origin and international application make
imperative that the
be construed without any assumptions that
it embodies common law concepts or that it will apply only to arbitral awards or
arbitration
agreements that are governed by common law
principles.
TCL v Castel
establishes what might be called a heightened interpretative
value of ‘the reasoned judgments of common law countries in the
such as Singapore, Hong Kong and New
The Full Federal
Court of Australia apparently envisages reliance on cases from those
way towards securing the
New York Convention
Model Law’s
internationalist
interpretation. This view has been influential. The Lexis Advance database
discloses 18 Australian cases citing
TCL v Castel
as at 2 December
and the decision features in Australian judges’ extra-curial
Rationales: Understanding Why Singaporean, Hong
Kong, and New Zealand Case Law is Considered Important by Australian
Why has the Full Federal Court suggested that Australian courts should
‘especially’
to Singaporean, Hong Kong, and New Zealand ICA judgments? There are several
potential explanations and, starting with the practical,
ample ICA jurisprudence
exists in each of these jurisdictions. While it is difficult to say with
absolute precision, there are in
the order of 1,476 Singaporean ICA
388 Hong Kong
and 716 New Zealand
handed down in those
New York Convention
eras. As each jurisdiction adopted the
New York Convention
still further
New York Convention
cases are likely to exist. With this many ICA cases,
relevant and useful decisions are identifiable by Australian courts. In
TCL v Castel
noted, Singapore, Hong Kong, and New Zealand
are common law jurisdictions in Australia’s
From the perspective of
Australian courts and practitioners, decisions from those jurisdictions thus
have a certain accessibility
(especially given their shared use of legal
Still, the significance of the accessibility of Singapore, Hong Kong and New
Zealand case law should not be overstated. Several international
efforts ensure
that the world’s ICA case law is shared widely across national borders,
legal traditions, and languages. For
example, as at 2 December 2024, the Case
Law on UNCITRAL Texts (‘CLOUT’)
New York Convention
case abstracts from 52 different
abstracts from 43 different
including English. Binder’s
article-by-article commentary on the
summarises CLOUT cases
relevant (as at 2019) to each
provision. The
ICCA Yearbook
Commercial Arbitration
, hosted on the Kluwer Arbitration database and in its
volume in 2024, summarises (in English) and translates (into
New York Convention
case law. These and additional cases are
also available on Professor Albert Jan van den Berg’s
newyorkconvention.org website,
covering 97 jurisdictions as at 2 December
New York Convention
case law from around the world is thus readily
accessible to those with the will to look. Given the ready availability of
ICA case law, a more robust explanation than simple convenience is
required to explain the Full Court’s reference to Singaporean,
and New Zealand case law in
TCL v Castel
. This is particularly so given
that Australia’s preparedness to accept interpretative influence from
those jurisdictions has
correlated with an improved quality of Australia’s
ICA case law.
A partial explanation lies in the reality that Australian courts will be most
assisted by ICA case law from jurisdictions also adopting
thereby having
textual ‘similarity’ in their ICA
legislations.
York Convention
boasts 172 Contracting
making its reach
‘almost universal’,
many leading arbitral centres (including England and Wales, France, and
Switzerland) have not adopted the
while Singapore, Hong
Kong, and New Zealand have.
as to local variations in the
Model Law’s
implementation,
Singaporean,
Hong Kong, and New Zealand case law will be instructive in both
contexts. Of course, there are many other
States across the Asia-Pacific and
and much international English language ICA case law (as noted above). Still,
the common ICA framework shared by Australia, Singapore,
Hong Kong, and New
Zealand provides a legal foundation for
TCL v Castel’s
interpretative directive.
In addition to that legal foundation, Singapore and Hong Kong are leading
global (and no longer just
arbitration
New York Convention
can thus fairly be described as having global significance.
When Australian courts refer to them, in turn, those courts can be seen
adopting a de facto internationalist approach to those instruments’
interpretation.
Results: Evidencing Australia’s
Receptiveness to Singaporean, Hong Kong, and New Zealand ICA Case
What evidence is there, then, of Australian courts actually treating
Singaporean, Hong Kong, and New Zealand ICA case law as ‘especially’
In this Part I
identify several examples. According to the Lexis Advance database as at
2 December 2024, 242 cases have addressed
International Arbitration
(Cth) since the
International Arbitration Amendment Act 2010
(Cth) came into force on 6 July
and there are 339
instances of courts addressing Australia’s domestic commercial arbitration
(treated as ICA cases for
present purposes given the
foundations of those Acts). Given
these case numbers, my examples are necessarily select. In this context, then, I
evidence Australia’s
receptiveness to Singaporean, Hong Kong, and New
Zealand ICA case law by reference to
qualitatively impactful
TCL v Castel: A Starting Point
Unsurprisingly,
TCL v Castel
is an excellent starting point. Of its
international case citations, 18 are from Singapore, Hong Kong, and New Zealand,
while 28 come
from the rest of the
On a strictly numerical
basis, citations to Singaporean, Hong Kong, and New Zealand cases are
overrepresented. Although this evidence
is not itself qualitative, it provides
context for
TCL v Castel’s
substantive resolution, where the Full
Federal Court rejected the legitimacy of dressing up merits challenges to awards
as being based
on natural justice
In analysing natural
TCL v Castel
referred to Singaporean, Hong Kong, and New Zealand
That this analysis is
qualitatively impactful is confirmed by its subsequent
attention. It is
interesting also to observe that
TCL v Castel
itself described the issue
as being a matter ‘of some
importance’.
TCL v Castel: A Springboard
Cases citing
TCL v Castel
also tend to cite case law from Singapore,
Hong Kong, and New Zealand. For example, in
Guoao Holding Group Co Ltd v Xue
, the Federal Court noted that
TCL v Castel
had ‘adopted
comments of Bokhary PJ and Sir Anthony Mason in
Hebei Import & Export
Corp v Polytek Engineering Co Ltd
’ from Hong
Equivalent analyses
By way of further example, the Victorian Supreme Court in
Full Joy Foods Pty
Ltd v Australian Dairy Park Pty Ltd
identified that ‘[i]n
the Full Court accepted as “helpful ... but not determinative” the
following list of general principles distilled by
Fisher J in
Trustees of
Rotoaira Forest Trust v Attorney-General
’ regarding public policy and
natural justice.
Other cases are
to similar effect,
and there are
Regarding qualitative impact, here we see courts drawing on
own reasoning in conjunction with its interpretative
TCL v Castel: Reflected in Party
Submissions
Further evidence of
TCL v Castel’s
interpretative directive
having qualitative impact can be seen in courts recounting party submissions
drawing heavily on Singaporean
and Hong Kong ICA case
Such submissions
demonstrate practitioner awareness of the value placed by Australian courts on
those jurisdictions’ cases.
Minimum Curial Intervention
Perhaps one of the most qualitatively impactful examples of Singaporean and
Hong Kong ICA case law’s interpretative influence
in Australia relates to
the principle of minimum (or minimal) curial intervention. Post-2010 Australian
ICA cases have endorsed this
principle, typically citing both
TCL v Castel
and relevant Singaporean and Hong Kong
That this approach is particularly impactful emerges from three considerations.
First, the High Court of Australia has identified
this principle twice, very
recently, with reference to Singaporean
Second, the
International Arbitration Amendment Act 2010
(Cth) was passed amid some
Australian courts intervening in the ICA process more than the
and those cases
were considered damaging to Australia’s ICA
reputation.
Australia’s contemporary adherence to this principle features in its ICA
branding, communicated (for example) through
judges’ extra-curial
The Discretion to Enforce
Another example of Singaporean and Hong Kong case law having a particular
qualitative impact on Australian ICA law is seen in Australia’s
recognition of an enforcement (or annulment) court’s discretion to enforce
an award (or decline annulment) notwithstanding
the existence of a challenge
ground. Australian courts now recognise this discretion, with reference to
Singaporean and Hong Kong
This interpretative
influence ensures that Australian courts respect the text of the
art 34(2), all using the permissive
‘may’ regarding award
challenges,
notwithstanding the
potentially narrow scope for exercising this
discretion.
The Model Law in the High Court of
Finally, returning to the two High Court cases referenced in Part III(C)(4),
both cite Singaporean and Hong Kong cases throughout,
the most recent quite
Here, the influence
of Singaporean and Hong Kong ICA case law is felt not only in these two
decisions, but also in the signalling
effect that their citation practices have
for future disputes.
What emerges from this analysis is both a stated and evidenced preference of
Australian courts for Singaporean, Hong Kong, and New
Zealand ICA case law.
What, then, of the
? Can Australia’s courts take a similar
practical approach to effect its internationalist interpretation? This is the
to which I turn in Part IV.
Internationalist Interpretation Examined: The
in Australia
It is well known that Australia’s courts have not taken a consistently
internationalist approach to the
interpretation, despite the
art 7(1) requirement to do
In this Part, I show
that Australia’s courts cannot correct this state of affairs via
ICA’s practical strategy of referring
‘especially’
Singaporean, Hong Kong, and New Zealand cases. The reason is that only limited
case law exists in those jurisdictions.
For the purposes of clarity, I do not claim that this lack of Singaporean,
Hong Kong, and New Zealand
case law has
Australia’s
status quo. Instead, identifying this relative
lack of helpful case law is essential context for charting the course ahead, a
I address in Part V.
Singapore’s CISG Case Law
Singapore acceded to the
on 16 February
law via the
Sale of Goods (United Nations Convention) Act 1995
(Singapore, 2020 rev ed). Although the
has been part of
Singaporean law for approximately 30 years, no Singaporean cases apply the
instrument.
In order to identify all Singaporean
cases — by which I
mean Singaporean cases relating to the
in any way — I
conducted searches across the vLexJustis database, the eLitigation Supreme Court
Judgments database,
the Albert H
UNCITRAL’s CLOUT database,
and UNILEX.
The vLexJustis and
eLitigation Supreme Court Judgments databases were my primary search
Though they are not commonly used by
scholars, they (collectively)
contain all reported and unreported Singaporean judgments, and are thus complete
repositories of all
reference was made to the other databases listed above to ensure that my
was as thorough as possible. While 20 cases were
identified,
none apply the
Of the 20 cases, 13 reference the
As courts do not review the merits of disputes in ICA-related
litigation,
Singapore’s
courts had no capacity to apply the
in these cases, even where it
was the arbitrated contract’s governing law. Singapore’s status as a
global arbitration
centre might explain its lack of case law applying the
, with several pieces of evidence supporting that conclusion:
• approximately two-thirds of Singapore’s
cases exist
in this ICA context;
• the two most recent cases involved Singapore-seated
arbitrations;
has an empirically confirmed relationship with
Although Singapore has made a
declaration,
it is probably
not true that this ‘seriously’ curtails the
Singaporean application, as suggested
now having 97 Contracting
1(1)(a) (causing the
to apply where both parties are from
Contracting States) is ‘the standard avenue for the
applicability’.
Indeed, two out of Singapore’s top three trading partners (Mainland China
and the United States of America (‘US’),
Singapore’s seven remaining
cases also do not apply the
treaty. One concerns a distributorship
where the parties’ dispute actually involved
the remaining four apply non-harmonised Singaporean contract law and reference
for comparative
At most, Australia’s courts might gain limited interpretative
assistance from Singapore’s cases comparing the
non-harmonised Singaporean contract law. Otherwise, no Singaporean
interpretative assistance exists.
Hong Kong’s CISG Case Law
Compared with Singapore, Hong Kong’s
history is recent. The
People’s Republic of China (‘PRC’) was an original
Contracting State.
However, the United Kingdom’s abstention from
membership and
Hong Kong’s handover to the PRC on 1 July 1997 left it ‘at best
whether the
applied in that Special Administrative Region (‘SAR’).
In addition, there is ‘diverse case law on this
From the PRC’s perspective, the
extends to the Hong Kong SAR
only from 1 December 2022, via the
Sale of Goods (United Nations
Convention) Ordinance
(Hong Kong) cap
Since I examine in this
application in Hong Kong, it is this PRC
perspective that is relevant. Still, it is possible for Hong Kong
case law to pre-date 1 December 2022 if the
was applied as part
of a foreign governing law, or if it were applied to contracts between Mainland
China and Hong Kong entities via
choice of law clauses having that effect (as in
Mainland Chinese court
For this reason, I
did not confine my case law search to 1 December 2022 and beyond.
In order to identify all of Hong Kong’s
cases, my primary
Supplementary
reference was again made to the Albert H Kritzer
-online, UNCITRAL’s CLOUT database, and UNILEX. No cases dated
on or after 1 December 2022 were returned. Six prior cases were
identified,
all referencing
exclusions.
While Hong Kong (like Singapore) is a global arbitration centre, the
recent extension to that SAR is the most likely reason for
its current lack of
case law; though Hong Kong’s arbitration
hub credentials may limit its generation of
case law into the
future. In any event, since no existing Hong Kong cases interpret the
, no interpretative assistance is provided to Australia’s
New Zealand’s CISG Case Law
The position differs in New Zealand, which adopted the
similar time to Singapore (22 September
gave the treaty
initial effect via the
Sale of Goods (United Nations Convention) Act 1994
and currently
enacts it via the
Contract and Commercial Law Act 2017
In order to identify all New Zealand
cases, I employed a
different search strategy as compared to that for Singapore and Hong
Kong’s cases. This is because existing
scholarship identifies some
cases heard by New Zealand
As a starting point, I independently sourced and read these pre-identified
judgments. Acknowledging that some
cases may have been missed in
this scholarship – a possibility that eventuated – I then conducted
my own search across
all dates via the New Zealand Legal Information Institute
case law database.
Advance was used to determine whether cases thereby identified had been reported
New Zealand Law Reports
. Supplementary reference was again made to
the Albert H Kritzer
-online, UNCITRAL’s
CLOUT database, and UNILEX. A total of 29 New Zealand
Butler’s scholarship suggests that New Zealand’s pre-2010
cases mostly refer to the treaty for comparative purposes, when applying
non-harmonised New Zealand contract
My searches (identifying
17 relevant cases) confirm this, and also identify early references to the
for other contextual
New Zealand’s case law comparing the
to its non-harmonised
contract law may offer Australian courts limited interpretative insights. In New
Zealand, more cases of this
nature exist than in Singapore.
The first New Zealand case applying the
was the 2010
Court decision in
Smallmon v Transport Sales
was also applied in the appeal from that
Referring to New Zealand’s
implementing legislation, the High
Court recognised that the
displaced the
Sale of Goods Act 1908
With reference to
art 7, the High Court rejected both parties’ attempts to rely
on ‘domestic sale of goods
The High Court
recognised art 7(1)’s
autonomous interpretation
and evidenced that
rule’s application by referencing international case law and scholarship
On appeal, the
autonomous and internationalist interpretation requirements
were again identified
given effect via reference to international
scholarship
Furthermore, both courts
identified the Pace Law School’s
Albert H Kritzer
There are several reasons why these decisions are instructive from an
Australian perspective. First, Australian courts have generally
interpret the
in accordance with the internationalist requirements
Second, Australian courts have sometimes failed to appreciate that the
application displaces non-harmonised sales law to the
subject-matter extent of
art 35(2) has often been at issue in Australian
litigation.
Referencing
judgments would assist Australian courts in all three
, 10 additional New Zealand judgments reference the
. Some reference
exclusions,
some continue
to compare the
with non-harmonised New Zealand contract
and one identifies that
was not argued and not considered regarding a property law
One applies the
one applies it
indirectly in conjunction with jurisdictional
and another
as a pleaded cause of
New Zealand operation has been likened to a
‘sleeping beauty
although New Zealand has fewer
cases (29) than Australia
case law still stands to benefit Australian courts. One might
wonder why this is so. Although New Zealand similarly does not benefit
Singaporean and Hong Kong
interpretative influence, it must be
remembered (as explained at Part IV’s outset) that no causative argument
is made in this
respect. The wording of New Zealand’s
legislation, confirming that the treaty operates as a
plausible explanation. That wording clearly identifies that New Zealand’s
non-harmonised law is displaced where the
recommended model for Australian legislative
Australia’s
Acts, on the other hand, reference the concept of
inconsistency,
which has led
some courts to decline the
application on the basis that the
is (supposedly) consistent with ordinary Australian
Yet another possible
explanation may be the New Zealand courts’ greater general receptiveness
to international case law and
scholarship:
should this be
the case, it would evidence a mode of reasoning well suited to discharging the
requirements of
the reason, New Zealand
interpretative influence does exist from
which Australian courts might benefit.
Two Recommendations: Supporting the
Internationalist Interpretation in Australia
In Parts III–IV I identified an interpretative stratification. While
New York Convention
subject to internationalist interpretation rules, the practice of Australian
‘especially’
referring to Singaporean, Hong Kong, and New Zealand ICA case law cannot
translate to the
. Only New Zealand’s
provides meaningful interpretative guidance; Singapore’s assistance is
limited; and Hong Kong interpretative assistance
does not exist.
art 7(1) imposes a public international law obligation on
Australia’s courts to interpret the
in an autonomous and
internationalist manner.
obligation has seldom been
discharged.
Noting that
Australia’s courts cannot replicate their ICA interpretative strategy in
context, in this Part I make two recommendations for judges
-related cases that are intended to help Australia’s
courts better comply with
art 7(1). Both are based on strategies
used by foreign courts in ICA matters and are capable of application in the
Setting Expectations: Judicial
My first recommendation is that Australian judges consider giving
parties’ legal representatives guidance around the
application, and their expectations around internationalist
argument. On the former, judges could: insist on parties carefully
considering whether the
applies; explain to parties the principles
used to determine that application; and identify the interpretative implications
application. This would, for example, avoid the
problem recently seen in
CP Aquaculture (India) Pvt Ltd v Aqua Star Pty
There, in the
context of an Australian–Indian contract, the parties agreed that
Victorian law applied; yet the
(part of Victorian law) was not
engaged. On the plaintiff’s view, this was because India was not a
or proved the
application.
Had the parties
been encouraged to consider the matter more carefully, it may have emerged that
still applied via art 1(1)(b) and did not require proof as
On the latter point as to internationalist
argument, judges might
usefully alert practitioners to the ‘several efforts [that] have been made
to make interpretative matters
• online case law databases referenced in Part IV (the Albert H Kritzer
-online, UNCITRAL’s CLOUT database, and
• the world’s two pre-eminent article-by-article
commentaries,
cross-referencing cases to the Albert H Kritzer
• UNCITRAL’s
Advisory Council’s
cited by foreign
courts as authoritative interpretative
• commercial texts collating international
judgments and
arbitral awards.
Consulting these materials would disclose, for example, the existence of
voluminous Chinese
case law rendered through the China International
and Economic Trade Arbitration
and China’s
State courts;
noting that ‘[p]arties do not seem to commonly exclude the application of
and numerous Canadian
Despite some criticism
of its early
US case law
(even in 2004) was described as ‘now by far the most developed and
thoroughly examined amongst the common law member
An Australian judge might model such guidance on the approach taken by
Kaplan J in Hong Kong, concerning ICA law. In
Fung Sang Trading Ltd v
Kai Sun Sea Products & Food Co Ltd
, Kaplan J’s judgment included
the following note addressing the
[It may be helpful for practitioners to be aware of two books on the
. The fullest guide to the
is ‘A Guide to the
Model Law on International Commercial Arbitration
by Howard Holtzmann and Joseph Neuhaus published by Kluwer in 1989. This is a
substantial treatise which takes each
article of the
on it and sets out the various
travaux preparatoires
[sic]. For a shorter
and more succinct commentary there is Aron Broches’ ‘Commentary on
UNCITRAL Model Law
’ also published by Kluwer in
after, Kaplan J addressed the
New York Convention
in a similar fashion.
Shenzhen Nan Da Industrial and Trade United Co Ltd v FM International
, his Honour stated:
Before parting with this case, I would like to make the following observations
which are not intended as criticism of counsel or
their solicitors. There are
almost 90 countries who have acceded to the
New York Convention
countries are being asked to consider the
on a regular basis and there are many decisions on the
is clearly desirable, so far as is practicable, for the interpretation of the
to be uniform. Cases under the
increasing dramatically in Hong Kong. ... There is only one text book devoted
solely to the
New York Convention
and that is by Professor Albert Jan van
den Berg published in 1981 by Kluwer. That must be the starting point for the
consideration
of any problem arising under the
excellent book is now a little out of date and thus it is essential to keep
abreast of new developments by reference to
The Yearbook on Commercial
Arbitration
published by the International Council for Commercial
Arbitration (ICCA). This too is published by Kluwer and is now edited by
Albert Jan van den Berg. This work is in the Supreme Court Library and
is at the Hong Kong International Arbitration Centre and contains
references to
all known decisions on the
. I was not referred to either of
these works and I would suggest that anyone researching or arguing a
point must start with these two
course, it is conventional wisdom for Australian courts to say ‘no more
than is necessary to decide’ the disputes before
One might wonder, then,
whether giving this kind of guidance is an appropriate part of the Australian
judicial function, even if
a suitable case arises. Noting that Australia’s
case load grows incrementally but
consistently,
inevitable that a suitable case will eventually arise, particularly if this
recommendation’s first element is given effect.
When that happens, it
would indeed be appropriate for an Australian court to act as recommended.
Australia’s first ever case
applying the
included critique
around the parties’
argument that approaches this type of
Australian courts
otherwise routinely identify deficiencies in the arguments put before them, in
all kinds of cases.
being the case, it is only an incremental step to implement my recommendation.
The propriety of doing so is further confirmed
by understanding the guidance
recommended here as simple obiter dicta: an unquestionably accepted feature of
Australian law.
Seeking Input: Amicus Curiae
My second recommendation for judges hearing
-related cases in
Australia is to consider using the amicus curiae
procedure to solicit
international (or internationally minded) third party submissions directed at
interpretation.
submissions might be sought from a foreign law firm, the UNCITRAL National
Coordinating Committee for Australia, or perhaps
even an international or
Australian academic expert, to identify just a few possibilities.
This recommendation’s inspiration comes from the Canadian ICA decision
Hypertec Real Estate Inc v Equinix Canada
’). There, a foreign law firm was appointed (pro
bono) as an amicus curiae,
on the court’s own motion and over one
party’s objection, to provide ten pages of written submissions addressing
This appointment was
described as ‘beneficial not only for the parties, but also the
development and growth of the law of arbitration
an amicus curiae
as not just a friend of the court but a friend of the
court ‘in need’,
Babak Barin JCS made the following comments:
Turning back to the issue of expounding law impartially, it is useful not to
underestimate the importance, in certain occasions,
of obtaining neutral and
comprehensive assistance, particularly where the legal issues are delicate,
complex and of general application
and where more significantly, the superior
have the much-needed basic resources — for example,
comprehensive national and international research capabilities — to
an amicus curiae
in Australian
proceedings could bring
several benefits. Notwithstanding the ready availability of English language
case law, an amicus
may help overcome language barriers still
affecting the accessibility of some interpretative
internationalist expertise of an amicus may help narrow a dispute’s
And, most importantly, an amicus may provide a much-needed internationalist
perspective on the
interpretation where party submissions
are not so cast.
appointment of an amicus
in accordance with my recommendation would
therefore not be improperly focused on the law’s abstract
development,
instead be consistent with its ‘major purpose’ of ensuring
‘that a precedent is
Canadian origins, it is again necessary to show
that my recommendation can be implemented in Australia. From the outset, it must
admitted that amicus
appointments are ‘a relatively rare event
in Australian courts’.
The High Court of Australia in particular has been ‘less than enthusiastic
interventions’.
However, even it recently allowed amicus
submissions by the Australian
Centre for International Commercial Arbitration in a case relating to
Australia’s domestic commercial
arbitration
and not for the first
Other Australian
private law cases involving amicus
appointments are readily
identified.
Thus while amicus
may sometimes be appointed where submissions are offered ‘in
Commonwealth v Tasmania
(involving the Tasmanian Wilderness Society
the public interest is
not a limiting factor. Instead, ‘there is no prescription of the
circumstances in which it may or may
not be proper for a court to hear an
Australian courts have provided some guidance as to when amicus
appointments
will be appropriate. According to the Federal Court, an
can be appointed where it would be ‘assisting the court in
its task of resolving the issues tendered by the parties by drawing
attention to
some aspect of the case which might otherwise be
overlooked’.
Court has similarly explained that ‘[t]he footing on which an amicus
is heard is that that person is willing to offer the Court a
submission on law or relevant fact which will assist the Court in a way
the Court would not otherwise have been
Noting that
Australian courts have historically deferred to party submissions concerning the
this test would
be satisfied where such submissions fail to reflect the internationalist
interpretation requirements of
One final aspect of
that might (at first glance) appear
problematic in Australia is that court’s appointment of an amicus
on its own motion. It has been suggested, for example, that in
Australia an amicus
‘must apply to the court for leave to be ...
Nevertheless,
this is not a strict requirement. It has been reported, admittedly without case
citation, that some Australian courts
have themselves ‘instigated the
involvement as amicus
of counsel who are not otherwise involved in the
It is therefore
open to an Australian court to itself seek out amicus
submissions to
assist in discharging its
art 7(1) obligations.
Securing Action: Motivating Adoption of My
Recommendations
While my two recommendations are legally robust, their adoption might require
an Australian judge sufficiently motivated to act on
them. It may be observed,
in this regard, that Kaplan J was a well-known ICA expert prior to his
Honour’s judicial appointment;
and that Babak Barin JCS (deciding
) had a pre-appointment professional background in
arbitration.
This being so, the implementation of my recommendations would be supported by
judicial education initiatives targeting the
. Organisations such as
the Australian Judicial Officers
Association
and the National
Judicial College of Australia
offer potential educative fora. If Australian judges are better equipped at
understanding the requirements of
art 7(1), they should be in a
better position to identify when
proceedings are floating adrift,
and (in turn) understand how my recommendations can restore their mooring.
Education initiatives
targeting the profession would similarly assist in the
longer run, given that (with limited exceptions) senior practitioners form
population from which judges are appointed.
Improving Australia’s
interpretative track record stands to
benefit international trade. As I noted in Part I, UNCITRAL’s work is
premised on the
‘conviction that divergences arising from the laws of
different States in matters relating to international trade constitute
the obstacles to the development of world
Despite being
one nation among the
97 Contracting
‘Australia (and
thus the world) stands to benefit from a more proactive engagement with the
important to note, in addition, that practitioners risk professional
and disciplinary
proceedings
if they fail to
competently engage with the
My Part V recommendations are directed at helping Australian judges to
discharge their art 7(1)
obligation to interpret the
internationalist spirit. Since internationalist argument is more likely to occur
where it is judicially insisted
those recommendations
also mitigate the practitioner risks identified above. The need for these
recommendations reflects the interpretative
stratification identified across
Parts III–IV. That stratification’s identification must now guide
initiatives to improve
future Australian
interpretation.
Despite Australia’s ‘wanting’ state of existing
interpretative challenge faced by future Australian courts should not be
overstated. Even German courts — having excellent
reputations concerning
to refer mainly to German (and German language)
interpretative
If Australian courts
applying the
can begin by referring even to Australian sources of
interpretative guidance (such as Australian
scholarship), this would be a welcome first step. From there, adopting my
recommendations in this article will help Australian courts
elevate the quality
interpretations to ICA law’s existing excellent
status. This is ultimately in the service of the
facilitation objectives and its merchant end-users.
Please cite this article as:
Benjamin Hayward, ‘The Interpretation of UNCITRAL Law in Australian
Courts: A Roadmap for Elevating the UN Sales Convention’s
Status to That
of Arbitration Law’ (2025) 47
Sydney Law Review
21292: 1–28
<https://doi.org/10.30722/slr.21292>.
This work is licensed via CC BY-ND 4.0
https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nd/4.0. Unmodified content is free to
use with proper
attribution
Associate Professor, Department of Business Law and
Taxation, Monash Business School, Monash University, Caulfield East, Victoria,
Email: benjamin.hayward@monash.edu.
ORCID iD: https://orcid.org/0000-0001-7409-7966.
Materials in Part II of this article are adapted from Andrea Anastasi,
Benjamin Hayward and Stephanie Peta Brown, ‘An Internationalist
to Interpreting Private International Law? Arbitration and Sales Law in
[2020] MelbULawRw 19
(2020) 44(1)
Melbourne University Law Review
author would like to thank the organisers of (and attendees at) the annual May
seminar of the UNCITRAL National Coordinating
Committee for Australia held at
the University of Canberra on 26 May 2023, where a work-in-progress version of
this article was presented.
Case law statistics, international instrument
adoption information, and court library holdings referred to in this article are
as at 2 December 2024. Any errors remain the author’s own.
United Nations
(‘UN’), ‘Member States History’,
United Nations
Commission on International Trade Law
<https://uncitral.un.org/en/about/faq/mandate_composition/memberhistory>.
UNCITRAL National Coordinating
Committee for Australia, ‘Chair’s Welcome’,
(Web Page) <https://www.uncca.org/about-us>.
Establishment of the United
Nations Commission on International Trade Law
, GA Res 2205/XXI, UN GAOR,
plen mtg (17 December 1966) 99.
United Nations Convention on
Contracts for the International Sale of Goods
, opened for signature 11 April
1980, 1489 UNTS 3
(entered into force 1 January 1988)
’). See United Nations, ‘Chapter X: International
Trade and Development – 10
United Nations Convention on Contracts for the
International Sale of Goods
United Nations Treaty Collection
Page, 26 March 2025)
<https://treaties.un.org/doc/Publication/MTDSG/Volume%20I/Chapter%20X/X-10.en.pdf>
Sale of Goods (Vienna Convention) Act 1987
Sale of Goods (Vienna Convention) Act 1987
(Norfolk Island);
Sale of Goods (Vienna Convention) Act 1986
Sale of Goods
(Vienna Convention) Act 1987
Sale of Goods (Vienna Convention) Act
Sale of Goods (Vienna Convention) Act 1986
of Goods (Vienna Convention) Act 1987
Goods Act 1958
Sale of Goods (Vienna Convention) Act 1986
Competition and
Consumer Act 2010
(Cth) sch 2 s 68.
Convention on the
Recognition and Enforcement of Foreign Arbitral Awards
, opened for signature
1958, 330 UNTS 3
(entered into force 7 June 1959) (‘
York Convention
’). See United Nations, ‘Chapter XXII: Commercial
Arbitration and Mediation – 1
Convention on the Recognition and
Enforcement of Foreign Arbitral Awards
United Nations Treaty
(Web Page, 26 March 2025)
<https://treaties.un.org/Pages/ViewDetails.aspx?src=TREATY&mtdsg_no=XXII-1&chapter=‌22&clang=_en>
(‘Chapter XXII’);
International Arbitration Act 1974
UNCITRAL Model Law on
International Commercial Arbitration
, GA Res 61/33, UN Doc A/RES/61/33 (18
December 2006, adopted 4 December 2006) (‘
United Nations, ‘Status:
UNCITRAL Model Law on International Commercial
Arbitration
(1985), with amendments as adopted in 2006’, UNCITRAL (Web
<https://uncitral.un.org/en/texts/arbitration/‌modellaw/commercial_arbitration/status>
International Arbitration Act 1974
(1), sch 2.
) Preamble para 3.
Ibid art 4.
‘Introduction to the Convention’ in CM Bianca and MJ Bonell (eds),
Commentary on the International Sales Law: The 1980 Vienna Sales Convention
(Giuffrè, 1987) 1, 14–16 [2.3].
Gary B Born,
International Commercial Arbitration
(Kluwer Law International,
ed, 2021) 67.
Claudia Salomon,
‘Guardian, Gatekeeper or Guide: The Role of Arbitral Institutions in
Protecting the Integrity of the Arbitral
Process, Promoting the Rule of Law, and
Providing Access to Justice’ [2024] (3)
ICC Dispute Resolution Bulletin
ICA is considered a
preferred dispute resolution process among legal practitioners and other
stakeholders operating in the international
trade space: School of International
Arbitration, Queen Mary University of London, ‘2021 International
Arbitration Survey:
Adapting Arbitration to a Changing World’,
(Survey Report, 2021) 5–6
https://www.qmul.ac.uk/arbitration/media/‌arbitration/docs/LON0320037-QMUL-International-Arbitration-Survey-2021_19_WEB.pdf>.
For a description of the range of respondents to this survey: see
Peter Binder,
International Commercial Arbitration and Mediation in UNCITRAL Model Law
(Kluwer Law International, 4
ed, 2019) 18.
Regarding the
see, eg, Lisa Spagnolo, ‘The Last Outpost: Automatic
Misapplications and the Costs of Ignoring the
Vienna Sales Convention
Australian Lawyers’ (2009) 10(1)
Melbourne Journal of International Law
141, 169. Regarding the
International Arbitration Act 1974
see, eg, Justice Clyde Croft, ‘The Development of Australia as an Arbitral
Seat: A Victorian Supreme Court Perspective’
in Albert Jan van den Berg
Arbitration: The Next Fifty Years: 50
Anniversary
Conference, Geneva 2011
(International Council for Commercial Arbitration
(ICCA) Congress Series No 16, Kluwer Law International, 2012) 227, 233.
See generally Justice Clyde
Croft, ‘Can Australian Courts Get Their Act Together on International
Commercial Arbitration?’
(Conference Paper, Financial Review International
Dispute Resolution Conference, 15 October 2010)
<https://www.supremecourt.vic.gov.au/about-the-court/speeches/‌can-australian-courts-get-their-act-together-on-international-commercial>
(‘Can Australian Courts Get Their Act Together?’).
Dean Lewis,
Interpretation and Uniformity of the UNCITRAL Model Law on International
Commercial Arbitration: Australia, Hong Kong and Singapore
(Kluwer Law
International, 2016) 88.
Arbitration Act 2017
Commercial Arbitration Act
Commercial Arbitration (National Uniform
Legislation) Act 2011
Commercial Arbitration Act 2013
Commercial Arbitration Act 2011
Commercial Arbitration Act 2011
Commercial Arbitration Act 2011
Arbitration Act 2012
Australia’s domestic
commercial arbitration Acts must be interpreted consistently with their
international counterpart:
Commercial Arbitration Act 2017
Commercial Arbitration Act 2010
Commercial Arbitration
(National Uniform Legislation) Act 2011
Arbitration Act 2013
Commercial Arbitration Act 2011
Commercial Arbitration Act 2011
Commercial Arbitration Act 2011
Arbitration Act 2012
CBI Constructors Pty Ltd v Chevron
Australia Pty Ltd
[2024] HCA 28
(2024) 98 ALJR 1096
, 1107–8 [45] (Gageler CJ,
Gordon, Edelman, Steward and Gleeson JJ), 1111 [61] (Jagot and Beech-Jones JJ)
Tesseract International Pty Ltd v Pascale
Construction Pty Ltd
(2024) 98 ALJR 880
, 885 [3] (Gageler CJ), 898 [91]
(Gordon and Gleeson JJ), 926–7 [235] (Steward J), 940 [298] (Jagot
and Beech-Jones JJ) (‘
Andrea Anastasi, Benjamin
Hayward and Stephanie Peta Brown, ‘An Internationalist Approach to
Interpreting Private International
Law? Arbitration and Sales Law in
[2020] MelbULawRw 19
(2020) 44(1)
Melbourne University Law Review
20–35; Luke Nottage, ‘Cross-Fertilisation in International
Commercial Arbitration, Investor-State Arbitration and Mediation:
The Good, the
Bad and the Ugly?’ (Speech, Supreme Court of New South Wales ADR Address,
2 November 2023) 4
<https://disputescentre.com.au/supreme-court-of-new-south-wales-adr-address-2023/>.
Anastasi, Hayward and Brown
See, eg, ibid 50–3;
Benjamin Hayward, ‘
as the Applicable Law: The Curious Case of
Australia’ in Poomintr Sooksripaisarnkit and Sai Ramani Garimella (eds),
Contracts for the International Sale of Goods: A Multidisciplinary
Perspective
(Sweet & Maxwell, 2019) 167, 185–7
[10.45]–[10.48] (‘
as the Applicable Law’).
Anastasi, Hayward and Brown
Renaud Sorieul, Emma Hatcher
and Cyril Emery, ‘Possible Future Work by UNCITRAL in the Field of
Contract Law: Preliminary Thoughts
from the Secretariat’
(2013) 58(4)
Villanova Law Review
Pascal Hachem,
‘Article 7 CISG: Interpretation of Convention and Gap-Filling’ in
Ingeborg Schwenzer and Ulrich G Schroeter
Schlechtriem &
Schwenzer: Commentary on the UN Convention on the International Sale of Goods
(Oxford University Press, 5
ed, 2022) 135, 137 [5]
(‘Article 7’).
João Ribeiro-Bidaoui,
‘The International Obligation of the Uniform and Autonomous Interpretation
of Private Law Conventions:
Consequences for Domestic Courts and International
Organisations’
(2020) 67(1)
Netherlands International Law Review
Vienna Convention on the
Law of Treaties
, opened for signature 23 May
1969, 1155 UNTS 331
into force 27 January 1980) (‘
Drossos Stamboulakis,
Comparative Recognition and Enforcement: Foreign Judgments and Awards
(Cambridge University Press, 2023) 214–15.
Ingeborg Schwenzer,
‘Who Needs a Uniform Contract Law, and Why?’
(2013) 58(4)
Villanova Law Review
Howard M Holtzmann, Joseph E
Neuhaus, Edda Kristjánsdóttir and Thomas W Walsh,
the 2006 Amendments to the UNCITRAL Model Law on International Commercial
Arbitration: Legislative History and Commentary
(Kluwer Law International,
2015) 24–5.
Richard Garnett and Luke
Nottage, ‘The 2010 Amendments to the
International Arbitration Act
A New Dawn for Australia?’
(2011) 7(1)
Asian International
Arbitration Journal
Anastasi, Hayward and Brown
TCL Air Conditioner
(Zhongshan) Co Ltd v Castel Electronics Pty Ltd
[2014] FCAFC 83
(2014) 232 FCR 361
383–4 [75] (Allsop CJ, Middleton and Foster JJ) (‘
TCL Air Conditioner
(Zhongshan) Co Ltd v Judges of the Federal Court of Australia
(2013) 251 CLR
533, 545 [8] (French CJ and Gageler J). See also
) 887 [19] (Gageler CJ).
TCL v Castel
) 384 [75] (Allsop CJ, Middleton and
Foster JJ).
International Relief and
Development Inc v Ladu
[2014] FCA 887
, [169] (Kenny J);
William Hare UAE
LLC v Aircraft Support Industries Pty Ltd
(2014) 290 FLR 233
[41], 265 [128] (Darke J) (‘
William Hare NSWSC
Chief Executive Officer of Australian Sports Anti-Doping Authority Australian
Football League (ASADA) v 34 Players
[2014] VSC 635
, [7] n 7 (Croft J)
TCL v Castel
in context, though without pinpoint);
Australasia Pty Ltd v AED Oil Ltd
[2015] VSC 163
, [19] (Croft J)
Robotunits Pty Ltd v Mennel
[2015] VSC 268
(2015) 49 VR
, 328–9 [13] (Croft J) (‘
Support Industries Pty Ltd v William Hare UAE LLC
(2015) 324 ALR 372
[59] (Bathurst CJ, Beazley P agreeing at 391 [64], Sackville AJA agreeing at 391
Indian Farmers Fertiliser Cooperative Ltd v Gutnick
[2015] VSC 724
(2015) 304 FLR
, 207 [18] n 28, 207–8 [20], 212 [32], 222 [73] n 117 (Croft J)
Indian Farmers No 1
Indian Farmers Fertiliser
Cooperative Ltd v Gutnick (No 2)
[2015] VSC 770
, [13] n 20 (Croft J)
Indian Farmers No 2
Amasya Enterprises Pty Ltd v Asta
Developments (Aust) Pty Ltd
[2016] VSC 326
, [23], [31] n 57 (Croft J)
WDR Delaware Corporation v Hydrox Holdings Pty
[2016] FCA 1164
(2016) 245 FCR 452
, 470 [101] (Foster J);
Lysaght Building Solutions
Pty Ltd v Blanalko Pty Ltd
[2017] VSC 97
(2017) 52 VR 198
, 201 [10] n 3 (Croft J)
Mango Boulevard Pty Ltd v Mio Art Pty Ltd
[2017] QSC 87
[2018] 1 Qd R 245
, 255 [20] (Jackson J) (‘
Liaoning Zhongwang Group Co Ltd v Alfield Group Pty
[2017] FCA 1223
[96] (Gleeson J)
Energy City Qatar Holding Co v Hub Street
Equipment Pty Ltd (No 2)
[2020] FCA 1116
, [52] (Jagot J);
Beijing Jishi
Venture Capital Fund (Ltd Partnership) v Liu
[2021] FCA 477
, [40] (Middleton
Hub Street Equipment Pty Ltd v Energy City Qatar Holding Company
[2021] FCAFC 110
(2021) 290 FCR 298
, 305 [18] (Stewart J, Allsop CJ agreeing at 301 [1],
Middleton J agreeing at 302 [12]) (‘
Hub Street Appeal
Gemcan Constructions Pty Ltd v Westbourne Grammar School
[2022] VSC 6
[77] n 78 (Riordan J) (‘
Guoao Holding Group Co
Ltd v Xue (No 2)
[2022] FCA 1584
, [32] (Stewart J)
Secretary, Department of Social Services v
[2024] FCAFC 37
(2024) 302 FCR 352
, 368 [55] (Perry J, Charlesworth J agreeing at 374
[81], Jackson J agreeing at 374 [82]–[83]).
See, eg, Justice Clyde
Croft, ‘The Temptation of Domesticity: An Evolving Challenge in
Arbitration’ in Neil Kaplan and
Michael Moser (eds),
Admissibility and Choice of Law in International Arbitration: Liber Amicorum
Michael Pryles
(Kluwer Law International, 2018) 57, 59–60 (‘The
Temptation of Domesticity’).
TCL v Castel
) 384 [75] (Allsop CJ, Middleton and
Foster JJ).
Determined via searching (as
at 2 December 2024) the vLexJustis database, a subscription database cataloguing
reported and unreported
Singaporean case law: see vLex, ‘Sign In’
(Web Page) <https://justis.vlex.com/>. This search used the exact term
‘Arbitration Act’ and a date range on or after 27 January 1995: the
date that the
International Arbitration Act 1994
(Singapore)
(implementing the
)) came into force. Using the search term
‘Arbitration Act’ thereby captured all references to the
International Arbitration Act
(Singapore, cap 143A, 2020
rev ed) and its predecessors, as well as all references to the domestically
Arbitration Act
(Singapore, cap 10, 2002 rev ed) and its
predecessors. That latter Act’s case law is of ICA significance as
‘much of the
Arbitration Act
] is based on the
’: Robert Merkin and Johanna Hjalmarsson,
Singapore Arbitration
Legislation: Annotated
(Informa Law, 2
ed, 2016) 3. See also
Drydocks World-Singapore Pte Ltd v Jurong Port Pte Ltd
[2010] SGHC 185
[14]–[20] (Nathaniel Khng AR).
Determined via searching (as
at 2 December 2024) the Westlaw US & International database, a subscription
collection of Hong Kong case law. This search
used the exact term ‘Arbitration Ordinance’ and a date range after
2011: as the
Arbitration Ordinance
(Hong Kong) cap 609
(implementing the
)) came into force on 1 June 2011. While
this figure is likely over-inclusive, as some cases decided on or after 1 June
inevitably still have applied the (now repealed)
Arbitration
(Hong Kong) cap 341, it remains sufficiently high to confirm my
proposition.
Determined via searching (as
at 2 December 2024) the New Zealand Legal Information Institute
(‘NZLII’) database: see
NZLII, ‘Search NZLII’ (Web Page)
<https://www.nzlii.org/forms/search1.‌html>. This search used the
term ‘Arbitration Act 1996’, as the
Arbitration Act 1996
(NZ) is the Act implementing the
) in New Zealand.
See UN, ‘Chapter
TCL v Castel
) 384 [75] (Allsop CJ, Middleton and
Foster JJ).
With limited exception in
Hong Kong, where Chinese is also an officially recognised language for court
proceedings:
Official Languages Ordinance
(Hong Kong) cap 5, s 3(1).
United Nations, ‘Case
Law on UNCITRAL Texts (CLOUT)’,
United Nations Commission on
International Trade Law
<https://uncitral.un.org/en/case_law> (‘CLOUT’).
New York Convention
<https://www.newyorkconvention.org/>.
‘Court Decisions: Per
New York Convention
<https://www.newyork‌convention.org/court-decisions/court-decisions-per-country>.
Lewis (n 19) 107–29;
Sydney Law School, ‘Comparative History of International Arbitration:
Australia, Japan and Beyond
(21 September 2023)’,
Recording, 23 November 2023) 00:58:54–00:59:24 (Professor Luke Nottage)
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?‌v=0X6XVOR0Y6U>.
Croft, ‘The Temptation
of Domesticity’ (n 41) 60.
IMC Aviation Solutions
Pty Ltd v Altain Khuder LLC
[2011] VSCA 248
(2011) 38 VR 303
, 314 [37] (Warren CJ). See also
342 [130] (Hansen JA and Kyrou AJA).
UN, ‘Chapter
Alex Baykitch and Lorraine
Hui, ‘Celebrating 50 Years of the
New York Convention
[2008] UNSWLawJl 20
University of New South Wales Law Journal
Arbitration Act 1996
Décret n° 2011-48 du 13 janvier
2011 portant réforme de l’arbitrage
[Decree No 2011-48 of 13
January 2011 on the new French Law on International Arbitration] (France) JO, 14
January 2011;
Bundesgesetz vom 18 Dezember 1987 über das Internationale
Privatrecht
[Federal Act on Private International Law] (Switzerland) AS 1988
1776, 1 January 1989,
International Arbitration Act
(Singapore, cap 143A, 2020 rev ed) s 3(1),
Arbitration Ordinance
(Hong Kong) cap 609, s 4, sch 1;
Arbitration Act 1996
(NZ) s 6(1)(a), sch 1.
) 1117 [89] (Jagot and Beech-Jones JJ);
Mango Boulevard
[45] (Jackson J).
Justice Clyde Croft,
‘The Judicial Approach to Arbitration: An Asia Pacific Perspective’
(Conference Paper, Arbitrators’
and Mediators’ Institute of New
Zealand Conference, August 2014) 1
<https://www.supremecourt.vic.gov.au/about-the-court/speeches/the-judicial-approach-to-arbitration-an-asia-pacific-perspective>
(‘The Judicial Approach’); UN, ‘
Cf Loukas A Mistelis,
‘Arbitral Seats: Choices and Competition’ in Stefan Kröll,
Loukas A Mistelis, María
Pilar Perales Viscasillas and Vikki M Rogers
International Arbitration and
International Commercial Law: Synergy, Convergence and Evolution
(Kluwer Law
International, 2011) 363, 377.
School of International
Arbitration, Queen Mary University of London (n
TCL v Castel
) 384 [75] (Allsop CJ, Middleton and
Foster JJ).
International Arbitration
Amendment Act 2010
There are 6 cases
referencing the
Commercial Arbitration Act 2017
(ACT), 114 referencing
Commercial Arbitration Act 2010
(NSW), 8 referencing the
Commercial Arbitration (National Uniform Legislation) Act 2011
referencing the
Commercial Arbitration Act 2013
(Qld), 24 referencing the
Commercial Arbitration Act 2011
(SA), 11 referencing the
Arbitration Act 2011
(Tas), 60 referencing the
Commercial Arbitration Act
(Vic), and 93 referencing the
Commercial Arbitration Act 2012
(WA). The word ‘instances’ rather than ‘cases’ is
used in this note’s accompanying text as these jurisdictional
numbers are
not mutually exclusive; some cases refer to more than one (sometimes even all)
of the domestic commercial arbitration
TCL v Castel
Ibid 376 [54] (Allsop CJ,
Middleton and Foster JJ).
Ibid 380–1 [64],
384–5 [76], 385–6 [79] (Allsop CJ, Middleton and Foster JJ).
See, eg, Chester Brown and
Malcolm Holmes,
International Arbitration Act 1974
A Commentary
(LexisNexis, 3
ed, 2018) 91, 105–6;
Shaheer Tarin and Ozlem Susler, ‘Judicial Approaches to Enforcing Foreign
Arbitral Awards in Australia
and Singapore’ (2020) 21(2)
Flinders Law
201, 218–19; Jonathan Hill, ‘Claims That an Arbitral
Tribunal Failed to Deal With an Issue: The Setting Aside of Awards
Arbitration Act 1996
UNCITRAL Model Law on International
Commercial Arbitration
(2018) 34(3)
Arbitration International
, 412–13; Stephen R Tully, ‘Challenging Awards Before the
National Courts for a Denial of Natural Justice: Lessons from
(2016) 32(4)
Arbitration International
, 665–6, 675.
Indian Farmers No 1
) 207 [18] (Croft J);
Motorsport AG v Giedo van der Garde BV
[2015] VSCA 37
(2015) 317 ALR 786
, 789 [8], 790 [17]
(Whelan, Beach and Ferguson JJA);
Colin Joss & Co Pty Ltd v Cube
Furniture Pty Ltd
[2015] NSWSC 735
, [45], [56], [79] (Hammerschlag J);
ALYK (HK) Ltd v Caprock Commodities Trading Pty Ltd
[2015] NSWSC 1006
[16] (Black J);
[22], [35], [59] (Croft J);
) [18] (Croft J);
) 209 [29] (Croft J);
Mango Boulevard
) 255 [20] (Jackson J).
TCL v Castel
) 367 [11] (Allsop CJ, Middleton and
Foster JJ).
) [33] (Stewart J). See
Hebei Import
& Export Corp v Polytek Engineering Co Ltd
[1999] HKCFA 40
[1999] 2 HKCFAR 111.
) [78] (Riordan J);
Mango Boulevard
Pty Ltd v Mio Art Pty Ltd
[2018] QCA 39
, [103] (McMurdo JA, Fraser JA
agreeing at [1]) (‘
Mango Appeal
Gutnick v Indian
Farmers Fertiliser Cooperative Ltd
[2016] VSCA 5
(2016) 49 VR 732
, 740 [19] n 31 (Warren
CJ, Santamaria and Beach JJA);
Indian Farmers No 1
) 212–13 [33]–[35] (Croft J);
) [102] (Gleeson
Full Joy Foods Pty Ltd v
Australian Dairy Park Pty Ltd
[2020] VSC 672
, [75] (Niall JA). See
Trustees of Rotoaira Forest Trust v Attorney-General
[1999] 2 NZLR
) [45]–[47], [49] (Croft J);
v Esposito Holdings Pty Ltd
[2017] FCA 648
(2017) 345 ALR 287
, 342 [226] (Beach J);
Mango Appeal
) [17] n 14
(Morrison JA);
Mango Boulevard
) 275 [102]–[103] (Jackson J);
The Nuance Group (Australia) Pty Ltd v Shape Australia Pty Ltd
[2021] NSWSC 1498
, 750–1 [138]–[139] (Rees J)
Lieschke v Lieschke
[2022] NSWSC 1705
, [7], [10], [16], [151] (Rees J)
(n 76) 749 [132], 752 [143], 753
[147] (Rees J);
Sharma v Military Ceramics Corp
[2020] FCA 216
[48]–[49] (Stewart J);
Tayar v Feldman
[2020] VSC 66
46–7 (Lyons J) (‘
Mango Boulevard
) 258 [31]–[34], 260 [47] n 21, 269
[86] (Jackson J);
211–12 [34] n 24, 212 [35] (Croft J);
) [117]–[118] (Gleeson J);
) [28]–[30],
[82] n 158, [92] n 171 (Croft J);
Indian Farmers No 1
) 210 [28] n 41 (Croft J);
) [17] n 17, [53] n 140 (Croft
Indian Farmers No 2
[6] n 10, [13]–[17] (Croft J);
William Hare NSWSC
264–5 [124] (Darke J).
) [23] nn 31–45, 48–9,
51–5, 60, 62–5, [45] n 126, [51] n 137 (Croft J);
) 218–19 [52]–[54] (Croft
) [44], [90]
) [14]–[15] (Rees J);
) [74] (Riordan J);
) [59] n 17, [135]
Spaseski v Mladenovski
[2019] WASC 65
, [55]–[57],
[60] (Kenneth Martin J) (‘
Mango Appeal
) [85] n 82 (Morrison JA);
) 255–7 [20]
(Jackson J);
[74] (Croft J);
Indian Farmers No 1
) 208 [21]–[22] (Croft J);
) 329 [14] (Croft
[20]–[21], [34] n 95 (Croft J).
) 1107 [41] (Gageler CJ, Gordon, Edelman,
Steward and Gleeson JJ);
) 924 [219], 925 [226] (Edelman J).
Condominiums International Inc
[1995] 1 Qd R 406, 427 (Lee J): ‘a
general discretion exists whether to enforce a foreign award’ even if no
refusal is established;
Corvetina Technology Ltd v Clough
Engineering Ltd
[2004] NSWSC 700
(2004) 183 FLR 317
, 320 [10] (McDougall J): the public
policy defence is ‘wide’.
Robert McClelland,
‘International Commercial Arbitration in Australia: More Effective and
Certain’ (Speech, International
Commercial Arbitration: Efficient,
Effective, Economical? Conference, 4 December 2009): ‘I am sure no
one here needs reminding
of the impact that the
decision has
had on Australia’s reputation internationally’. See
Granites Ltd v Eisenwerk Hensel Bayreuth Dipl-Ing Burkhardt GmbH
[2001] 1 Qd
See, eg, Croft, ‘The
Temptation of Domesticity’ (n 41) 60–1; Chief Justice James Allsop
and Justice Clyde Croft,
‘The Role of the Courts in Australia’s
Arbitration Regime’ (Seminar Paper, Commercial CPD Seminar Series, 11
<https://www.supremecourt.vic.gov.au/about-the-court/speeches/the-role-of-the-courts-in-australias-arbitration-regime>;
Croft, ‘The Judicial Approach’ (n
) 1, 3; Justice James Allsop,
‘International Arbitration and the Courts: The Australian Approach’
(Conference Paper, CIArb
Asia Pacific Conference, 2011) 6–7
<https://supremecourt.‌nsw.gov.au/documents/Publications/Speeches/Pre-2015-Speeches/Assorted---A-to-K/allsop_index.pdf>;
Croft, ‘Can Australian Courts Get Their Act Together?’ (n
) 18; Chief Justice Marilyn Warren,
‘The Victorian Supreme Court’s Perspective on Arbitration’
(Speech, International
Commercial Arbitration: Efficient, Effective, Economical?
Conference, 4 December 2009) 4.
Hub Street Appeal
40), 320 [92], 321 [95]–[97] (Stewart J, Allsop CJ agreeing at 301 [1],
Middleton J agreeing at 302 [12]);
) [64], [112] (Kenneth Martin J);
Indian Farmers No 1
[113]–[114] (Croft J);
) [23] (Croft J);
TCL v Castel
) 375 [48] (Allsop CJ, Middleton
and Foster JJ).
) 3435, 3741–2.
Ibid 3436, 3745–6.
) 1101 [15] n 6, 1102 [18], 1104 [25] n
24, 1105 [28]–[29] nn 34–7, 1105 [30] nn 39–40, 1106 [35] n
45, 1106 [37]
n 47, 1107 [41] n 49, 1108 [45] nn 57–60, 1108 [47] (Gageler
CJ, Gordon, Edelman, Steward and Gleeson JJ), 1112 [66] n 101–2,
1114–15 [75]–[77], 1116–17 [84]–[87], 1117 [89] (Jagot
and Beech-Jones JJ);
(n 21) 889 [32]–[33], 891 [46]
(Gageler CJ), 901 [103] (Gordon and Gleeson JJ), 923 [214] n 219, 923 [216] n
221, 925 [226]
n 228 (Edelman J), 947 [342] n 346 (Jagot and Beech-Jones
Anastasi, Hayward and Brown
TCL v Castel
) 384 [75] (Allsop CJ, Middleton and
Foster JJ).
UN, ‘Chapter X’
eLitigation, ‘Supreme
Court Judgments’ (Web Page, 1 August 2024)
<https://www.elitigation.sg/gd/>.
Pace University Elisabeth
Haub School of Law, ‘Search Cases in the
Pace Law Albert H Kritzer CISG Database
<https://iicl.law.pace.edu/cisg/search/cases>. Though there is a
perception that the Albert H Kritzer
updated, this is not so, particularly for the jurisdictions I examined for this
article. Free registration
is required to access the Database’s case law
Faculty of Law University of
Basel, ‘Search for Cases’,
CISG-online
(Web Page, 2024)
<https://cisg-online.org/search-for-cases>.
UN, ‘CLOUT’ (n
‘Selected Cases by
<unilex.info/cisg/cases/country/all>.
The following (exact phrase)
Sales’, ‘Convention
on Contracts’, ‘Convention on
International Sale’, ‘Convention on the International Sale’,
Sale of Goods (United Nations Convention) Act
’. The search term
‘Vienna Convention’ was omitted, so as to eliminate false positive
results referencing the
As at 2 December 2024, and
excluding irrelevant cases where the party name ‘CIFG’ was
misspelled on one occasion as ‘CISG’
CIFG Special Assets Capital
I Ltd v Ong Puay Koon
[2017] SGCA 70
[2018] 1 SLR 170
, 175 [15] (Sundaresh Menon CJ)) and
where the carriage of goods (rather than the sale of goods) was involved
Wilmar Trading Pte Ltd v Heroic Warrior Inc
[2020] 1 Lloyd’s Rep
Award enforcement and set
aside cases:
Quarella SpA v Scelta Marble Australia Pty Ltd
[2012] 4 SLR
, 1060–3 [8], [13]–[21], [23]–[26], [29], 1064 [32],
1066–9 [37]–[39] (Judith Prakash J);
Triulzi Cesare SRL v Xinyi
Group (Glass) Co Ltd
[2014] SGHC 220
[2015] 1 SLR 114
, 121 [17], 159–62
[160]–[165] (Belinda Ang Saw Ean J);
Quanzhou Sanhong Trading Limited
Liability Co Ltd v ADM Asia-Pacific Trading Pte Ltd
[2017] SGHC 199
[17]–[18] (Chua Lee Ming J);
Man Diesel Turbo SE v IM Skaugen Marine
Services Pte Ltd
[2019] 4 SLR 537
, 569–70 [92]–[93] (Belinda Ang
Saw Ean J);
[2019] SGHC 69
, [4(e)], [23]–[24], [28],
[89]–[91], [94], [101] (Ang Cheng Hock JC);
, 1057–8 [51] (Steven Chong JA for the Court);
Lao Holdings NV
v Government of the Lao People’s Democratic Republic
[2021] 5 SLR 228
270 [134]–[135] (Quentin Loh JAD, Vivian Ramsey and Douglas Jones IJJ);
Lao Holdings NV v Government of the Lao People’s Democratic Republic
[2023] 1 SLR 55
, 86 [119] (Robert French IJ for the Court);
Tin Plate Ltd v New Metallurgy Hi-Tech Group Co Ltd
[2024] SGHC 272
[46]–[53] (Hri Kumar Nair J) (‘
’). Otherwise
regarding arbitration:
Mitsui Engineering & Shipbuilding Co Pty Ltd v PSA
[2003] 1 SLR 446
, 453–4 [35] (Woo Bih Li JC);
Silverlink Resorts Ltd v MS First Capital Insurance Ltd
[2021] 3 SLR
, 1431 [26] (Chua Lee Ming J);
Hunan Xiangzhong Mining Group Ltd v Oilive
[2022] 5 SLR 239
, 244–5 [7] (S Mohan J);
[2024] SGHC 107
, [4]–[5], [16]–[17], [25], [27], [42], [54],
[61], [80], [89], [94], [128]–[138], [141], [151], [173]–[189]
(Kristy Tan JC) (‘
, 503–4 [37] (Sundaresh Menon CJ for the Court);
[2011] SGCA 41
[2011] 4 SLR 739
, 772 [65]–[66] (Chan Sek Keong CJ for the Court);
) 3437–8, 3760.
) [1] (Kristy Tan JC);
) [72] (Hri Kumar Nair J).
Ingeborg Schwenzer and
Edgardo Muñoz,
Global Sales and Contract Law
(Oxford University
ed, 2022) 76–7 [5.10]–[5.11].
Pursuant to this
declaration, Singapore will not apply
) art 1(1)(b), which causes the treaty to
apply ‘when the rules of private international law lead to the application
law of a Contracting State’: see UN, ‘Chapter X’ (n
Sale of Goods (United Nations
Convention) Act 1995
(Singapore, 2020 rev ed) s 3(2).
Gary F Bell, ‘Why
Singapore Should Withdraw its Article 95 Reservation to the
United Nations
Convention on Contracts for the International Sale of Goods
[2005] SGYrBkIntLaw 6
Singapore Year Book of International Law
UN, ‘Chapter
Pascal Hachem,
‘Article 1 CISG: Sphere of Application’ in Ingeborg Schwenzer and
Ulrich G Schroeter (eds),
Schlechtriem & Schwenzer: Commentary on the UN
Convention on the International Sale of Goods (CISG)
(Oxford University
ed, 2022) 26, 29 [6].
Department of Statistics
Singapore, ‘Singapore’s International Trade’,
(Web Page, 8 April 2025)
<https://www.singstat.gov.sg/modules/infographics/singapore-international-trade>.
UN, ‘Chapter
William Jacks & Co
(Singapore) Pte Ltd v Nelson Honey & Marketing (NZ) Ltd
[2015] SGHCR 21,
[67] (Zhuang WenXiong AR). Distributorship agreements are not sale of goods
contracts for the purposes of
) art 1(1).
Allianz Capital
Partners GmbH v Andress Goh
[2022] SGHC 266
, [62] (See Kee Oon J);
Allianz Capital Partners GmbH v Andress Goh
[2023] 1 SLR 1618
, 1625 [14]
(Kannan Ramesh JAD for the Court).
Charles Lim Teng Siang
v Hong Choon Hau
[2021] 2 SLR 153
, 165 [39] (Steven Chong JCA for the
Sembcorp Marine Ltd v PPL Holdings Pte Ltd
[2013] SGCA 43
[2013] 4 SLR 193
211–12 [37] (Sundaresh Menon CJ for the Court);
Zurich Insurance
(Singapore) Pte Ltd v B-Gold Interior Design & Construction Pte Ltd
[2008] 3 SLR(R) 1029, 1060–1 [62] (VK Rajah JA for the Court);
Chwee Kin Keong v Digilandmall.com Pte Ltd
[2004] 2 SLR(R) 594, 621 [100]
(VK Rajah JC).
Ulrich Schroeter,
‘Article 99 CISG: Entry into Force’ in Ingeborg Schwenzer and Ulrich
G Schroeter (eds),
Schlechtriem & Schwenzer: Commentary on the UN
Convention on the International Sale of Goods (CISG)
(Oxford University
ed, 2022) 1647, 1650 [9].
Ulrich G Schroeter,
‘The Status of Hong Kong and Macao under the
United Nations Convention
on Contracts for the International Sale of Goods
(2004) 16(2)
International Law Review
UNCITRAL: United Nations
Commission on International Trade Law, ‘Topic 3: The
Backbone of Transnational Commercial Law’,
Recording, 30 October 2020) 00:13:45–00:14:12 (Professor Ingeborg
Schwenzer) <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=‌GidMVLIO6Ig>
(‘Topic 3’).
Unlike Mainland China
(and Singapore), Hong Kong does not disapply
) art 1(1)(b): UN, ‘Chapter X’
See, eg, Geng Wang, Shu
Zhang and Peng Guo, ‘Chapter 1:
Novelact (Resources) Limited v Xiamen
Special Economic Zone International Trade Trust Company
’ in Peng Guo,
Haicong Zuo and Shu Zhang (eds),
Selected Chinese Cases on the UN Sales
Convention (CISG) Vol 1
(Springer, 2022) 1, 5. The
) would not be applicable on its own terms
here because the parties would not be ‘in different States’: see
) art 1(1).
The same exact phrase
), though substituting ‘Sale of
Goods (United Nations Convention) Ordinance’ for ‘
Sale of Goods
(United Nations Convention) Act
Putting aside two
Philippines decisions returned by the Westlaw US & International database in
Benjamin Bautista v Shirley G Unangst
[2008] PHSC 664
referring to the Criminal Investigation Service Group, rather than the
MCC Industrial
Sales Corp v Ssangyong Corp
[2007] PHSC 1235
, n 82 (Nachura J).
Beyond the Network Ltd
v Vectone Ltd
[2005] HKEC 2075, [6] (Reyes J);
PCCW Global Ltd v
Interactive Communications Services Ltd
[2006] HKCA 434
[2007] 1 HKLRD 309
, 312 [8] (Tang
Klöckner Pentaplast GmbH & Co KG v Advance Technology (HK) Co
[2011] 4 HKLRD 262
, 266 [5] (Saunders J);
Pentaplast GmbH & Co KG v Advance Technology (HK) Co Ltd
[2011] HKEC
1401, [4] (Tang V-P);
Defond Electrical Industries Ltd v Partminer Worldwide
[2011] HKEC 335, [3] (Chan DJ);
无锡巿佳诚太阳能科技有限公司
[2014] HKEC 581,
[3] n 1 (Recorder Jat Sew Tong SC).
UN, ‘Chapter
Pursuant to the
of Goods (United Nations Convention) Act
Commencement Order 1995
(NZ) ord 2,
Sale of Goods (United Nations Convention) Act 1994
(NZ) came into
force on 1 October 1995.
Contract and
Commercial Law Act 2017
(NZ) s 345(1)(j) repealed the
Sale of Goods
(United Nations Convention) Act 1994
Petra Butler, ‘New
Zealand’ in Larry A DiMatteo (ed),
International Sales Law: A Global
(Cambridge University Press, 2014) 539, 540–4 (‘New
Zealand 2014’); Petra Butler, ‘New Zealand’ in Franco
The CISG and Its Impact on National Legal Systems
(Sellier European
Law Publishers, 2008) 251, 254–8 (‘New Zealand 2008’); Petra
Butler, ‘The Use of the
in Domestic Law’ (2011) 15(1)
Vindobona Journal of International Commercial Law and Arbitration
19–20, 24–6.
The same exact phase
), retaining ‘
Sale of Goods (United
Nations Convention) Act
’, and adding the exact phrase search term
Contract and Commercial Law Act
’. Noting that the
Contract and
Commercial Law Act 2017
(NZ) addresses contract and commercial law in
general (inclusive of the
)), my search using that term on 2
December 2024 returned 1236 cases, none of which were
) cases not already identified by other
Butler, ‘New
Zealand 2014’ (n
Crump v Wala
[1993] NZHC 1350
[1994] 2 NZLR 331
, 338 (Hammond J);
Attorney-General v Dreux Holdings Ltd
[1996] NZCA 729
(1997) 7 TCLR 617
, 627–8 (Blanchard J), 642 (Thomas J)
Dreux Holdings
BP Oil NZ Ltd v Rhumvale Resources Ltd
[1997] NZCA 198
(1997) 8 TCLR 116
, 123–4 (Keith J);
Tri-Star Customs and Forwarding
Ltd v Denning
[1999] 1 NZLR 33, 37 (Henry J);
Integrity Cars (Wholesale)
Ltd v Chief Executive of New Zealand Customs Service
[2001] NZCA 86
Yoshimoto v Canterbury Golf International Ltd
[2000] NZCA 350
[2001] 1 NZLR
, 547–8 [88]–[90] (Thomas J) (‘
Bobux Marketing Ltd v Raynor Marketing Ltd
[2001] NZCA 348
[2002] 1 NZLR 506
(Thomas J);
KA (Newmarket) Ltd v Hart
(High Court of New Zealand, Heath
J, 10 May 2002) [68];
Thompson v Cameron
(High Court of New Zealand,
Chambers J, 27 March 2002) [20];
International Housewares (NZ) Ltd v SEB SA
(High Court of New Zealand, Master Lang, 31 March 2003) [44]–[45],
Gibbons Holdings Ltd v Wholesale Distributors Ltd
[2007] NZSC 37
[2008] 1 NZLR
, 295 [55] (Tipping J) (not referencing the
by name, but citing
) and referring to
‘general international trade practice’);
MH Publications Ltd v
Komori (UK) Ltd
[2008] NZHC 2570
, [36], [200] (DI Gendall AsJ);
Timbers Ltd v Nielsen
[2009] NZSC 43
[2009] 3 NZLR 160
, 174 [55] n 32 (McGrath J);
Fairfax v Ireton
[2009] NZCA 100
[2009] 3 NZLR 289
, 331 [180] (Baragwanath J);
Alcatel-Lucent NZ Ltd v Juniper Networks Australia Pty Ltd
[2009] NZHC
, [47] (Clifford J);
Nils Sperre AS v Vela Fishing Ltd
[2009] NZHC
, [2], [7], [9] (Duffy J);
Vector Gas Ltd v Bay of Plenty Energy Ltd
[2010] NZSC 5
[2010] 2 NZLR 444
, 449, 452 (McIntosh) (during argument) (‘
Smallmon v Transport
[2010] NZHC 1367
Smallmon Trial
’). See also
Butler, ‘New Zealand 2014’ (n
Smallmon v Transport
[2011] NZCA 340
[2012] 2 NZLR 109
Smallmon Appeal
Smallmon Trial
) [62] (French J). The
Goods Act 1908
(NZ) was repealed by the
Contract and Commercial Law Act
(NZ) s 345(1)(i).
Smallmon Trial
) [85]–[86] (French J).
Ibid [88] (French J).
Ibid [82]–[84]
(French J).
Smallmon Appeal
) 119–20 [34], 121 [39], [41]
(Stevens J for the Court).
Ibid 121 [38] n 26, [40],
122–3 [45] n 38, 125 [58] (Stevens J for the Court).
Ibid 121–23
[42]–[48] (Stevens J for the Court).
Smallmon Trial
) [82] n 1 (French J); ibid
117–18 [26] nn 17–19, 121–3 [42]–[48] nn 29–39
(Stevens J for the Court).
Electronics Pty Ltd v Toshiba Singapore Pte Ltd
[2010] FCA 1028
, [123] (Ryan
Castel Electronics Pty Ltd v Toshiba Singapore Pte Ltd
[2011] FCAFC 55
(2011) 192 FCR
, 460 [89] (Keane CJ, Lander and Besanko JJ);
Fryer Holdings (in liq) v
Liaoning MEC Group Co Ltd
[2012] NSWSC 18
, [16], [19] (McDougall J)
Fryer Holdings
Playcorp Pty Ltd v
Taiyo Kogyo Ltd
[2003] VSC 108
, [235], [245] (Hansen J)
A-G (Botswana) v Aussie Diamond Products Pty
[2010] WASC 141
, [210] (Murphy J) (‘
Bruno Zeller, ‘The
and the Common Law: The Australian Experience’ in Ulrich
Magnus (ed),
CISG vs Regional Sales Law Unification: With a Focus on the New
Common European Sales Law
(Sellier European Law Publishers, 2012) 57, 76.
Fryer Holdings
[16] (McDougall J).
Commerce Commission v
(2024) 16 TCLR 774
, 812 [206] (Peters J);
A-Ward Ltd v
Raw Metal Corp Pty Ltd
[2024] 2 NZLR 475
, 477 [2], 478–9 [8]
(O’Gorman J);
Arachchige v Rasier New Zealand Ltd
[2020] NZEmpC
, app 1 [35] (JC Holden J);
Transdiesel Ltd v MTU America Ltd
, [19] (Osborne AsJ).
Edwards v Laybuy
Holdings Ltd
[2023] NZEmpC 188
, [46] n 16 (JC Holden J);
North Shore City
Council v Body Corporate 188529 [Sunset Terraces]
[2010] NZCA 64
[2010] 3 NZLR 486
[44] (Baragwanath J).
Hayat Group Ltd (in
liq) v New Zealand Customs
[2011] NZHC 922
, [18] (Heath J). But see
) art 4(b).
National Plant and
Equipment Pty Ltd v P Mundy Heavy Equipment Ltd
[2020] NZHC 1201
[33]–[42] (RM Bell AsJ).
Nelson Honey &
Marketing (NZ) Ltd v William Jacks & Co (Singapore) Pvt Ltd
[2015] NZHC
, [51]–[64] (Matthews AsJ).
Hill Forest Services
Ltd v Cirrus Design Corp
[2020] NZHC 2551
, [16] (Downs J).
Butler, ‘New
Zealand 2008’ (n
The most recent published
census puts Australia’s
case load at 57 decisions: Benjamin
Hayward, ‘“Text, Context, and Purpose”: Australian
Lawmakers’ Adoption
, and the Use of Legislative
Histories as Aids in Statutory Interpretation’
[2024] MelbULawRw 7
(2024) 47(2)
University Law Review
385 (‘Text, Context, and
Purpose’). As at 2 December 2024, three further
decisions have been identified:
Aqua Star Pty Ltd v CP Aquaculture (India)
[2024] VSCA 67 (Kennedy
and Walker JJA);
Re Aqua Star Pty Ltd
[2024] VSC 377 (Gardiner
Walsh v Trustees of the Roman Catholic
Church for the Archdiocese of Canberra and Goldburn
(2024) 386 FLR 264
[160] (Curtin AJ). The first two of these do not address the
) but are related to
CP Aquaculture
(India) Pvt Ltd v Aqua Star Pty Ltd
[2023] VCC 2134 (Macnamara
CP Aquaculture
’). I have also identified one judgment
missed in that published census:
Limit (No 3) Ltd v ACE Insurance Ltd
[2009] NSWSC 514
, [147] (Rein J).
Smallmon Trial
) [62] (French J).
Contract and
Commercial Law Act 2017
(NZ) s 205;
Sale of Goods (United Nations
Convention) Act 1994
(NZ) s 5, as repealed by
Contract and Commercial Law
(NZ) s 345(1)(j).
Anastasi, Hayward and
Sale of Goods (Vienna
Convention) Act 1987
Sale of Goods (Vienna Convention) Act
(Norfolk Island)
Sale of Goods (Vienna Convention) Act 1986
Sale of Goods (Vienna Convention) Act 1987
Sale of Goods (Vienna Convention) Act 1986
Sale of Goods
(Vienna Convention) Act 1986
Sale of Goods (Vienna Convention)
Goods Act 1958
Sale of Goods
(Vienna Convention) Act 1986
Competition and Consumer Act 2010
(Cth) sch 2 s 68.
) [235], [245] (Hansen J);
) [210] (Murphy J).
See also Hayward, ‘Text, Context, and Purpose’ (n
I am unable to
statistically confirm this observation, though it appears from my review of
cases applying New Zealand’s non-harmonised
contract law and referring to
comparative purposes: see, eg,
) 538–9 [59]–[62],
539–40 [64]–[65], 540–41 [67]–[68], 542–3
[71]–[74], 545 [80],
547 [88], 548 [90] (Thomas J);
) 453 [5], 455–6 [9], [11],
[13]–[14] (Blanchard J), 457 [19] nn 15 – 16, 458 [22] n 20–2,
459 [23] n 24,
460 [29] nn 29–30, 461 [33] n 35, 462 [34]–[37]
(Tipping J), 468–71 [57]–[69], 472–4 [72]–[78]
J), 478 [103], 481–5 [120]–[130], 485 [132], [134], 487 [142]
(Wilson J).
Hachem, ‘Article
) 139–41 [10],
TCL v Castel
) 384 [75] (Allsop CJ, Middleton and
Foster JJ).
Sorieul, Hatcher and
Anastasi, Hayward and
CP Aquaculture
Ibid [182]–[183]
(Macnamara J).
Roder Zelt-und
Hallenkonstruktionen GmbH v Rosedown Park Pty Ltd
[1995] FCA 1221
(1995) 57 FCR 216
(von Doussa J) (‘
Hachem, ‘Article
7’ (n 27) 140 [11].
Ingeborg Schwenzer and
Ulrich G Schroeter (eds),
Schlechtriem & Schwenzer: Commentary on the UN
Convention on the International Sale of Goods (CISG)
(Oxford University
ed, 2022); Stefan Kröll, Loukas Mistelis and Pilar
Perales Viscasillas (eds),
UN Convention on Contracts for the International
Sale of Goods: A Commentary
(CH Beck, Hart & Nomos, 2
2018). As at 2 December 2024, at least one edition of at least one of these
texts is held in the Federal Court of Australia Library’s
branches in the
Australian Capital Territory, New South Wales, Queensland, South Australia,
Victoria, and Western Australia. See
‘Federal Court Library
Catalogue’,
Federal Court of Australia
<https://www.fedcourt.gov.au/digital-law-library/library/library-catalogue>.
United Nations Commission
on International Trade Law,
UNCITRAL Digest of Case Law on the United Nations
Convention on Contracts for the International Sale of Goods
(United Nations,
ed, 2016). It has been suggested that the equivalent
) digest should be
legislatively identified as a useful
) interpretative resource via amendments
International Arbitration Act 1974
Luke Nottage,
‘International Commercial Arbitration in Australia: What’s New and
What’s Next?’
(2013) 30(5)
Journal of International Arbitration
, 492. For that equivalent
) digest, see United Nations Commission on
International Trade Law,
UNCITRAL 2012 Digest of Case Law on the Model Law on
International Commercial Arbitration
(United Nations, 2012).
‘Opinions’,
CISG Advisory Council
(Web Page, 2024)
<https://cisgac.com/opinions/>.
CISG Advisory Council
(Web Page, 2024)
<https://cisgac.com/case-law/>.
As at 2 December 2024,
) awards rendered by
China International and Economic Trade Arbitration Commission tribunals are
recorded on the Albert H Kritzer
Peng Guo, Haicong Zuo and
Shu Zhang (eds),
Selected Chinese Cases on the UN Sales Convention (CISG) Vol
(Springer, 2022) (48 cases); Peng Guo, Haicong Zuo and Shu Zhang (eds),
Selected Chinese Cases on the UN Sales Convention (CISG) Vol 2
2023) (40 cases); Peng Guo, Haicong Zuo and Shu Zhang (eds),
Selected Chinese
Cases on the UN Sales Convention (CISG) Vol 3
(Springer, 2024) (44
cases); Peng Guo, Haicong Zuo and Shu Zhang (eds),
Selected Chinese Cases on
the UN Sales Convention (CISG) Vol 4
(Springer, 2025) (38 cases).
As at 2 December 2024,
seven Japanese
decisions are recorded on each of the Albert H Kritzer
Asian Business Law
Institute, ‘Exclusive Jurisdiction and
for Contracts under
Japanese Law’ (Report, March 2024) 2
<https://www.linkedin.com/posts/asian-business-law-institute_internationality-‌of-contracts-japan-2-activity-7174230697841229825-OSnx>.
As at 2 December 2024, I have confirmed with the Asian Business Law Institute
that this report has only been published on LinkedIn.
As at 2 December 2024, 49
) cases are
recorded on the Albert H Kritzer
As at 2 December 2024,
482 United States
cases are recorded on the Albert H Kritzer
recorded on
See, eg, V Susanne Cook,
UN Convention on Contracts for the International Sale of
A Mandate to Abandon Legal Ethnocentricity’
(1997) 16(2)
Law and Commerce
, 259–60, regarding
Delchi Carrier SpA v
Rotorex Corporation
[1995] USCA2 1270
71 F 3d 1024
Cir, 1995).
Henning Lutz, ‘The
and Common Law Courts: Is There Really a Problem?’ (2004)
Victoria University of Wellington Law Review
Fung Sang Trading Ltd
v Kai Sun Sea Products & Food Co Ltd
[1992] 1 HKLR 40
Shenzhen Nan Da
Industrial and Trade United Co Ltd v FM International Ltd
[1992] 1 HKC 328
Primavera v Bakos
[2018] NSWSC 142
, [1] (Black J);
Chapman v Quinlan
(Supreme Court of
South Australia, Cox J, 17 June 1980) 1.
Hayward, ‘Text,
Context, and Purpose’ (n
) 220, 233 (von Doussa J).
Ninety Five
Pty Ltd (in liq) v Banque Nationale de Paris
(Supreme Court of Western
Australia, Smith J, 12 June 1987) 101 (claim against constructive trustee);
v Nikodjevic
[2004] VSCA 222
, [21] (Ormiston JA, Callaway JA agreeing at
[53], Vincent JA agreeing at [54]–[55]) (criminal sentencing);
[2010] NSWSC 371
(2010) 78 NSWLR 689
, 703 [68] (Barr AJ) (coronial inquest);
[2019] NTSC 60
, [10], [13] (Riley AJ) (criminal stay);
Minister for Immigration, Citizenship, Migrant Services and Multicultural
[2020] FCA 1539
, [15] (Abraham J) (visa cancellation).
Evidenced by, for
example, obiter dicta’s reference in Australian textbooks designed for use
in first year introductory Bachelor
of Laws units of study: see, eg, Robin
Creyke, David Harmer, Patrick O’Mara, Belinda Smith and Tristan S Taylor,
Laying Down the Law
(LexisNexis, 11
ed, 2021) 194
For the purposes of
clarity, this recommendation addresses the appointment of amicus curiae
and not intervention, the latter being a different procedure whereby
interveners become party to the proceedings: George Williams,
‘The Amicus
and Intervener in the High Court of Australia: A Comparative
(2000) 28(3)
Federal Law Review
Hypertec Real Estate
Inc v Equinix Canada Ltd
[2023] QCCS 3061.
This was an ICA decision in the
sense that Canadian inter-provincial arbitrations ‘are [legally]
assimilated to international
arbitrations’: at [25] (Babak Barin JCS).
Ibid [18]–[19],
Ibid [27] (emphasis in
For example, not all of
the foreign language cases recorded on the Albert H Kritzer
-online are accompanied by English translations, and CLOUT
abstracts (themselves only summaries) may be accompanied by original foreign
language judgments but not English translations of those judgments.
Cf Justice Susan Kenny,
‘Interveners and Amici Curiae in the High Court’
[1998] AdelLawRw 14
(1998) 20(1)
Adelaide Law Review
) 220, 233 (von Doussa J);
) [235], [245]
(Hansen J);
Aussie Diamond
) [210] (Murphy J).
Transcript of
Proceedings,
Garcia v National Australia Bank Ltd
[1998] HCATrans 50
J), cited in Ernst Willheim, ‘Amici Curiae
to Constitutional Justice in the High Court of Australia’
[2010] BondLawRw 18
(2010) 22(3)
Bond Law Review
Loretta Re, ‘The
Amicus Curiae
Brief: Access to the Courts for Public Interest
Associations’
[1984] MelbULawRw 7
(1984) 14(3)
Melbourne University Law Review
Ernst Willheim, ‘An
Experience in the High Court:
Wurridjal v
Commonwealth
(2009) 20(2)
Public Law Review
) 885 [7] (Gageler CJ).
Westport Insurance
Corporation v Gordian Runoff Ltd
[2011] HCA 37
(2011) 244 CLR 239
, 243, 254–6
(Jackson QC) (during argument).
IceTV Pty Ltd
v Nine Network Australia Pty Ltd
[2009] HCA 14
(2009) 239 CLR 458
, 482 [60] (Gummow, Hayne
and Heydon JJ) (copyright);
Stevens v Kabushiki Sony Computer Entertainment
[2005] HCA 58
(2005) 224 CLR 193
, 205 [26] (Gleeson CJ, Gummow, Hayne and Heydon JJ)
(copyright);
Universal Music Australia Pty Ltd v Sharman License Holdings Ltd
[2005] FCA 1242
(2005) 222 FCR 465
, 471 [19]–[21] (Wilcox J) (copyright);
Five Pty Ltd (in liq) v Banque Nationale de Paris
[1988] WAR 132
(Smith J) (trusts). See also Kenny (n
) 162–5 (referencing a medical
negligence claim not proceeding to judgment).
United States Tobacco
Co v Minister for Consumer Affairs
(1988) 20 FCR 520, 535 (Davies, Wilcox
and Gummow JJ) (‘
United States Tobacco
Commonwealth v
[1983] HCA 21
(1983) 158 CLR 1
, 50–1 (Gibbs CJ) (during argument).
United States Tobacco
) 535 (Davies, Wilcox and
Gummow JJ).
Bropho v Tickner
[1993] FCA 25
(1993) 40 FCR 165
, 172 (Wilcox J).
Levy v Victoria
[1997] HCA 31
(1997) 189 CLR 579
, 604 (Brennan CJ). See also
Wurridjal v Commonwealth
[2008] HCATrans 348 (French
Kruger v Commonwealth
HCATrans 68
, quoted in Kenny (n
) [235] (Hansen J);
) [210] (Murphy
Mary Wyburn,
‘Choosing Your Friends Wisely: The Amicus Curiae
in Key Copyright
Cases and its Potential to Affect Copyright Policy’ (2006) 24(1–
, 126. See also Re (n
‘Welcome to the
Australian Judicial Officers Association’,
Australian Judicial Officers
Association
(Web Page, 2024) <https://www.ajoa.asn.au/>.
For an overview of the
College’s programs: see ‘Program Planning Committees’,
National Judicial College of Australia
(Web Page, 2023)
<https://www.njca.com.au/about-us/committees/>.
Establishment of the
United Nations Commission on International Trade Law
(n 3) 99. See also
) Preamble para 3.
UN, ‘Chapter
as the Applicable Law’ (n
187 [10.49].
Spagnolo (n 17)
163–4; UNCITRAL, ‘Topic 3’ (n
) 00:32:59–00:33:53 (Professor
Ingeborg Schwenzer).
Solicitors’ Conduct Rules 2021 (as published November 2023)
Legal Profession Uniform Conduct (Barristers) Rules 2015
Anastasi, Hayward and
as the Applicable Law’ (n
180 [10.34].
Nations Convention on Contracts for the International Sale of Goods
(Conference Recording, 21 December 2012)
00:11:52–00:12:13 (Professor Franco Ferrari)
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Tt8ZY2zFhbM>.
UNCITRAL, ‘Topic
00:34:40–00:00:35:30 (Professor Ingeborg Schwenzer). For two prominent
New Zealand Mussels Case
, Bundesgerichtshof [German Supreme
Court], VIII ZR 159/94, 8 March 1995 [tr Birgit Kurtz,
-online No 144
<https://cisg-online.org/search-for-cases?caseId=6122>];
, Bundesgerichtshof [German Supreme Court], VIII ZR 60/01, 31 October
2001 [tr Birgit Kurtz,
-online No 617
<https://cisg-online.org/search-for-cases?caseId=6575>].
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (342 KB)
PDF format (629 KB)
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter