URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/journals/JCULawRw/2023/2.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 15:06:58
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Keon-Cohen, Bryan --- "From Slavery to Sovereignty? Mabo, Native Title and the Uluru Statement From the Heart" [2023] JCULawRw 2; (2023) 29 James Cook University Law Review 1
From Slavery to Sovereignty? Mabo, Native Title and the
Uluru Statement from the Heart
The Mayo Lecture for 2023
October 2023
Dr Bryan Keon-Cohen AM
I Acknowledgements
for that very generous introduction. It’s as pleasure,
and an honor, to be here.
May I commence by acknowledging the traditional owners and custodians of this
country, the Bindal and Wulgurukaba peoples, and pay
my respects to your elders,
past present and emerging. Your sovereignty has never been ceded or
extinguished. I shall return to that
I also pay my respects to the Islanders residing here in Townsville,
especially Murray Islanders, all of whom were my clients, 40
or so years ago.
You have welcomed my wife June, and I, on several visits, since 1982. Many
thanks for your generous hospitality.
II Introduction
My topic tonight, ‘From Slavery to Sovereignty? Mabo, Native Title and
the Uluru Statement’,
seeks to examine the backgrounds, motivation
and conduct of the main players – individuals, communities, and
governments –
both before and during the
litigation, and to
explore how the Referendum, and Voice Treaty Truth reforms, could assist to
resolve many of the issues that arose
then, and continue to challenge us
The proposed recognition of Indigenous Peoples and entrenchment of their
Voice in our
Constitution
is, in my view, a long overdue recognition and
celebration of the longest continuing culture on the planet, still living
us, and heralds, I hope, a sound basis to deliver a more prosperous, and
inclusive future for the entire nation.
And, ladies and gentlemen, don’t panic! In the time available, I shall
also mention, in support of such Pearson-like rhetoric,
some of those dreaded
Let me start
with Eddie and Bonita Mabo’s extraordinary
achievements, all well documented, including in the History Line in this
University’s
Mabo Library.
Eddie Koiki Mabo was the driving force: without him, no case. Equally, if only
him, the case was doomed since unfortunately, the
trial judge rejected all of
his personal claims to areas on and around Murray Island. I shall return to the
trial later. But I repeat:
Eddie Mabo’s leadership, courage, and total
commitment to this cause were all crucial, and inspiring. As I said at his
he saw far into the past, and far into the future.
‘Slavery’: The Kanaka Connection
I also wish to recall a little of Bonita’s background, and her
impressive advocacy for her people – South Sea Islanders.
Bonita’s family history in this country began when her grandfather, a
Malanbarra man called Jack Tanna, was ‘black-birded’
Island (now part of Vanuatu). He was shipped 1,700 km west to work, as
‘indentured-labour’ in often appalling
conditions in
Queensland’s cane fields. According to Bonita: ‘My grandfather came
from the Tanna Islands and was stolen
out here ... to come and clean the country
Precisely when he was kidnapped from his island home is unclear to me. The
infamous ‘Kanaka’
operated between 1863 and 1904 when about
Pacific Island men, women
and children were transported to Australia by plantation and ship
Many were kidnapped or
‘black-birded’ by labor
, others travelled
voluntarily but were told lies about what they could expect in
Most were paid nothing
for their labour and were effectively treated as slaves.
This appalling trade was terminated by the newly-created Commonwealth
Parliament enacting the
Pacific Islanders Laborers Act
Pursuant to the then
prevailing White Australia policy, this legislation banned further recruitment
after 1903 – but also authorized
deportation.
Only a minority of
Islanders were permitted to stay. A few hid from authorities and stayed
What befell Bonita’s grandfather is not known to me. But I suspect this
traumatic family history carried some inter-generational
impact, perhaps further
alienating Bonita from Queensland’s oppressive laws, policies and
practices that affected her daily
life. That regime also motivated her to work
for reform, especially in the education and recognition of her people –
also supporting her husband, during his final decade, consumed by
‘that case.’
Bonita’s Achievements
Three generations on from her Kanaka grandfather, Ernestine Bonita Nehow was
born, in 1943, near Ingham in North Queensland.
She grew up a devout Christian in a South Sea Islander community known as
‘The Garden’ near
She married Eddie Koiki Mabo in
and in 1964 they moved to
Townsville where they raised ten children, three adopted ‘Islander
Amongst other
community activity, Eddie and Bonita co-founded Australia’s first Black
Community School, here in Townsville,
After Eddie’s death and the Mabo decision, both in 1992, Bonita
continued her advocacy for her people – South Sea Islanders
recognized as a distinct ethnic
In 2000 the Queensland government did exactly that, and acknowledged the
discrimination and injustice experienced by that community
in this country.
Bonita was made an Officer of the Order of Australia and later, was awarded
an Honorary Doctorate of Letters by this University, both
in recognition of her
outstanding contributions to education and human rights.
Aged 75 years, she died in November 2018, and was given an impressive State
Funeral. Attended by several hundred people, this occurred
at the Townsville
cemetery – the same cemetery, it should be said, where her husband was
initially buried only to have his
tombstone desecrated by despicable racists,
still unknown, on the night of his tombstone opening in June
Such episodes are part of
our colonial, and recent, ‘dark’ history. Their truth needs to be
At Bonita’s funeral, the Queensland Premier, Annastacia Palaszczuk,
amongst others, spoke highly of her achievements, saying:
story is powerful. It’ll be told and retold as a beacon to generations to
follow her lead.’
I found that occasion, like Eddie’s funeral, very moving.
For Bonita’s family, over three generations and about 150 years, their
lives, and Indigenous lives generally in Queensland –
or, at least, some
of them – had changed: from slaving in the colonial cane-fields to
challenging the oppressive power, discrimination,
and all-embracing control of
the Bjelke-Petersen government, to being awarded a state funeral with fulsome,
well-earned recognition
by her friends, community and the Premier of the State.
Yet, how much more remains to be done? Now, again, important reforms are
proposed in the Uluru Statement, and the Voice referendum
is upon us, while
powerful forces remain opposed. Yes advocates should be encouraged by the
examples of Eddie and Bonita Mabo. I
hope you are too.
III Relevance to the Uluru Statement?
To me, these family sagas involving Bonita’s ancestors emphasize the
importance of Truth Telling. Recounting the abuse and injustice
experienced by
Jack Tanna is not a national ‘guilt-trip’ but an important recording
of historical facts. The nation should
know all of its history, in order to
better understand First Nations’ dispossession and devastation following
1788, their continuing
disadvantage, and many remarkable achievements.
Hopefully, we will then be better placed to secure a more prosperous future for
In their joint judgement in
Mabo (No 2),
Justices Deane and Gaudron
went a step further, calling out colonial ‘injustices’, thereby
providing powerful, moral support
for remedial action, now proposed in most
states, and already underway in Victoria, as ‘Truth-telling.’
Justices Deane
and Gaudron wrote:
The acts and events by which [the] dispossession [of the Aboriginal people of
most of their traditional lands] ... was carried into
practical effect
constitute the darkest aspect of the history of this nation. The nation as a
whole must remain diminished unless
and until there is acknowledgment of, and
retreat from, those past
injustices.
Such work is now proposed by the Uluru Statement: a Makarrata Commission to
prepare for a Treaty or Treaties, and
Truth-telling.
Truth Telling and Native Title Claims
I note, in passing, that considerable ‘incidental’ Truth Telling
has occurred as part of land claims under the
Aboriginal Land Rights
(Northern Territory) Act 1976
(Cth) and the Native Title regime introduced
in 1994. For example, as of last month, 602 native title determinations have
Queensland.
These have generated
a large volume of material about, amongst many topics, the historical
experiences of traditional owner groups.
I suspect at least 602 piles of paper,
photos, videos, painting, etc, etc, are lying around, in various offices. These
claims processes
will continue for some years. The preservation, organization,
and development of access and use protocols for these often voluminous
collections, incorporating protection for cultural sensitivities, is now being
One example is my collection arising from
. Over ten years, the
chaotic pile of paper sitting on my chambers floor – such piles breed
shamelessly and grow before your
eyes! – was transformed into an organized
and indexed collection held in 73 arch-lever files by several very capable
law students. I provided this collection to the National Library,
Canberra during the 1990s: see NLA MS 9518. Astonishingly, that
collection,
along with Eddie Mabo’s personal papers, and Captain Cook’s journal
from the Endeavour, became Australia’s
first submission to be accepted
into UNESCO’s Memory of the World Register, in June 2001. Thus, land
rights and native title
claims, and the material they generate, become just one
part of Truth-telling.
Yoorrook Justice Commission
As to formal Truth-telling, the Victorian Yoorrook Justice Royal Commission
was established, by Letters Patent, in May
This is the first
Truth-telling process into the impact of colonisation, still felt today, in the
nation. This Inquiry has wide-ranging
Terms of Reference and the full powers of
a Royal Commission.
Public and private hearings continue. The first
Interim Report,
delayed by the Covid pandemic, was delivered in June
Interim Report
concerned with Victoria’s seriously
flawed Child Protection and Criminal Justice Systems, was released a month
It makes 46 recommendations
for substantial reform
‘highlights that present injustice has deep roots in the colonial
foundations of the
A final report, concerned with land injustices in Victoria, is due in
Queensland:
Path to Treaty Act 2023
Last May the Queensland government – with the unanimous support –
I repeat, unanimous support – of the Liberal National
Party opposition
– enacted the
Path to Treaty Act 2023
a landmark achievement for
this State. The Act, currently only partially in force, sets out the legislative
framework to establish
key bodies, including a Truth-telling and Healing Inquiry
to hear and record the historical and ongoing impacts of colonisation on
Queenslanders.
This will proceed
for three years, unless extended.
I note that Truth-Telling is seen as an important foundation for, and to be
closely connected to, the pursuit of treaty-making. The
Queensland Truth-telling
Inquiry may, perhaps, hear about the Kanakas and their descendants.
Other States and Territories
In other states and territories, especially the Northern Territory,
Truth-telling processes are, in various ways, being pursued and
discussion, but have not yet begun.
Federal Truth?
With all these initiatives at state level, being supported across the
political spectrum, federal truth telling under the proposed
Uluru Makarrata
Commission can hardly be objectionable – and presumably, will work in
co-operation with, State and Territory
Truth-telling programs. In my view, the
nation needs them all to be operating. As with the Voice referendum, the nation
has nothing
to fear, and much to gain.
Why Mabo? National Land Rights Agitation
Let me turn to further Truth-telling lessons from both the Mabo litigation,
and native title claims across the country, which provide,
I think, good reasons
to pursue ‘Comprehensive Settlements’ or treaties.
First, why Mabo? The personal histories of Eddie and Bonita, already
mentioned, and of the other four plaintiffs, plus the national
land rights
campaigns of the 1970s and 1980s, all contributed to the plaintiffs launching
their claim.
Eddie Mabo was very much involved in the national land rights campaign. In
Queensland, this was the period – from 1968 to 1987
Bjelke-Petersen Country, later National Party government, its repressive
‘reserve’ system,
called ‘Killoran’s Law’, and active rejection of equal rights
for Indigenous people, especially rights to land.
One example only was preventing John Koowarta
from purchasing a
pastoral lease leading to the High Court decision of
This both upheld,
crucially, the
Racial Discrimination Act
– thus, ironically
and supported the purchase
However, that
decision was promptly circumvented by the government converting the pastoral
lease into a national park – all
very reminiscent of the
government’s conduct during the Mabo litigation, to be mentioned
I note that Greg McIntyre, solicitor, and Ron Castan QC acted
for the plaintiffs in
Further, the Queensland Department of Native
was run for 20 years by
its long-serving Director, Patrick James (or ‘Paddy’) Killoran, from
1964-1985. According to
one commentator, it had ‘operated since its
inception as a closed, secretive and highly defensive government agency ...
almost total control over ... thousands of (Indigenous)
I cross-examined Mr Killoran about his Department’s activities on
Murray Island, during the
trial of facts conducted in the Queensland
Supreme Court – I hope with some effect. For details, see the trial
transcript at
NLA MS 9518, Volume 35, starting at p. 3,073 - and decide for
During this period, that is, the 1970s – 1980s, despite the 1967
referendum delivering legislative powers to the Federal government
Indigenous affairs, federal governments of whatever political persuasion had
failed to enact national land rights
legislation.
The issue was a
political hot potato that no politician wanted to touch. And there was no
national voice.
Personal Concerns
For Eddie Mabo, the land rights campaign had also become very personal. In
over lunch, that he did
not, in Australian law, own his traditional areas on Murray Island, since the
Torres Strait Islands were
all ‘Crown Land’. Indeed, to add insult
to injury, Murray Island – Mer – was described on a map as
‘Aboriginal
Reserve.’ Loos recalls ‘how shocked Koiki was that
his traditional rights on Mer were not legally recognized’ and
determined he was that ‘no-one would take his land
Australian Common Law Position
Another significant factor was the failure of the
land rights
case in the Northern Territory Supreme Court in
This fueled further debate
at the political, academic and community levels. The plaintiffs’ senior
, Ted Woodward QC, decided not to appeal Justice
Blackburn’s decision to the High Court, fearing rejection and an adverse
Thus, when we commenced proceedings in the High Court in
in May 1982, the legal issues raised had never been considered by that
International Context
As to recognition of native title rights in our common law, Australia was, in
1982, centuries behind other former British colonies.
For example, the
equivalent to
Mabo [No 2]
was decided in the USA in
and again in 1831, when the
Chief Justice, John Marshall, described Indian tribes as ‘domestic
dependent nations.’
Similar decisions were made
by Supreme Courts in New Zealand, in
and in Canada in
Constitutional Recognition
imilarly, when it comes to constitutional recognition of First
Nations, Australia lags well behind. Such recognition, now sought as
part of the
forthcoming referendum – and enjoying, it seems, bi-partisan support
– occurred in the USA in 1788, New Zealand
in 1840 with the signing of the
Treaty of Waitangi, and Canada in 1982. It’s time we caught up.
Indigenous Advisory Bodies
Similarly, Indigenous advisory bodies to government, and Parliament, of
various types, already exist in several countries. I refer
especially to the
Sámi Parliament, operating since 1989 in Norway, Sweden and Finland. New
Zealand dedicated four seats in
its Parliament for Maori representatives in
The Immediate Trigger: the JCU Conference
In this national and international context, Eddie Mabo, and this
University’s Students Union, played a significant role in triggering
Mabo litigation.
In August 1981, your Students Union, and the Townsville
chapter of the then active Treaty Committee (co-chaired by Eddie Mabo and
Professor Noel Loos), organized a conference here, at JCU. It was entitled
‘Land Rights and the Future of Australian Race
Relations.’
At that conference, several Aboriginal and Islander speakers suggested that a
land rights test-case should be pursued in the High
Court. Amongst them were
Eddie Mabo, and another future plaintiff, the Revd Dave Passi, an ordained
Anglican Minister and Flo Kennedy,
a well-known political figure from Thursday
Island. She declared: ‘We want our lands, and with them, we want our
natural resources.’
The last session was entitled ‘A High Court Challenge’. Solicitor
Greg McIntyre and Melbourne barrister Barbara
both presented
substantial papers, discussing the relevant legal issues.
Mabo, Passi, McIntyre, Hocking, plus several others, held a meeting and
emerged to announce that the Murray Islanders wished to pursue
provided to McIntyre and Hocking to pursue a claim, and to begin by
senior counsel in Melbourne – the very eminent human rights advocate, Ron
Castan AM QC.
That conference was thus the immediate trigger for the Mabo litigation.
Well done James Cook Student Union. Perhaps some of you here today were there
then? Perhaps you need to organize another conference?
Heard of Voice, Treaty,
You might ask: Keon-Cohen, where on earth were you? How did you get in on the
At that time I was sitting in my tiny chambers in Melbourne – lonely,
unloved, unpaid – trying to look like a barrister.
I had no knowledge of
this Townsville talk-fest, and did not attend. Just two days after the JCU
Conference, on 1
September, 1981, I signed the Victorian Bar roll,
and commenced practice, wondering, as all baby-barristers (and others) do, where
the next dollar was to come from.
By that time I had, however, pursued considerable academic and on-the-ground
work in the field of Indigenous rights. This included
visiting and consulting
with Aboriginal groups throughout central Australia as part of the Australian
Law Reform Commission’s
reference concerning the recognition of Aboriginal
customary law within the Australian legal
So, as a baby-barrister in September 1981, I knew a little about this area of
law and policy – and I was seriously cheap. ‘Mabo’
for me, when, in early October, Ron Castan, who I had met, briefly, rang, out of
the blue, and recruited me to the legal
team – whereupon my life at the
Bar changed – for the better and, it seems,
Ron Castan led the legal team, with great distinction, for the next decade.
He provided the confidence that the best case possible
would be presented for
our plaintiffs. He (as did we all) gave the case top priority; was a brilliant
human-rights advocate, very
experienced in, and respected by, the High Court;
and was always willing to discuss the sometimes weird ideas from his
not-so-learned
but enthusiastic juniors. If that wasn’t enough, he also
provided financial support over the decade on several occasions when,
example, one of Greg McIntyre’s many legal aid applications was rejected,
or funding was delayed.
This included recruiting and supporting his daughter, Melissa – now a
Professor and Director of the Castan Centre at the Monash
University Law School
– and her partner, Robert Lehrer, to live in Brisbane and provide critical
logistical support during
the trial of facts in 1989. This involved, amongst
many tasks, transporting Murray Island witnesses between the airport, my rented
house to discuss their evidence (when my wife June cooked everyone a meal),
their hotel, the Supreme Court, and back to the airport.
Without Melissa and
Robert, important witnesses might never have ‘made it to the court
on-time’ – or at all!
IV The Mabo Claim
The Mabo claim was commenced in the original jurisdiction of the High Court
in May 1982. It is instructive, I think, to review the
responses of the
plaintiffs, the Meriam community, and the Queensland government in this tortured
arena of claiming native title,
in terms of assessing the practical utility of
the Voice referendum, and the second task of the proposed Makarrata Commission:
Treaty-making.
On day one, the claim involved five plaintiffs: Eddie Mabo and four respected
elders, being: his aunt Celuia Mapo Salee, two brothers,
the Revd Dave and Sam
Passi, and James Rice, retired teacher and former Island
Councillor.
Each plaintiff
claimed identified areas of land, and sea offshore within both Queensland and
Commonwealth jurisdictions. Ms Salee
died in 1984, when Eddie Mabo assumed all
of her claims.
Personal Community and Government Responses
Until July 1989 – that is, for over seven years – there were two
defendants: Queensland and the
Commonwealth.
Responses by the two governments ranged from Queensland’s attempt to
extinguish any surviving traditional rights by legislation;
to the usual
forensic court ‘warfare’ – always conducted within proper
professional limits and subject to directions
from the trial judge; to flagrant
contempt of court by Queensland bureaucrats. By contrast, the
Commonwealth’s opposition ranged
from in-principle only; to just
‘don’t want to know’. Of Queensland’s two junior
counsel, the very competent
Margaret White was my major opponent. More of her
Commonwealth withdraws
In 1989, following cross-examination by the Commonwealth’s counsel,
John Logan, the plaintiffs abandoned their claims to Commonwealth
sea areas, and
the Commonwealth withdrew as a
It played no further
part, save for providing some legal aid to the plaintiffs’ severely
overworked – and as mentioned,
sometimes sadly underpaid – legal
Unsurprisingly, the ‘State of Queensland’ – that is, the
Bjelke-Petersen government – fought the case tooth
As I saw it,
Queensland’s defence during the
– apart from normal
forensic battles already mentioned, and extensive legal arguments before the
High Court – included
two memorable aspects.
Queensland Coast Islands
Declaratory Act 1985
First, was its
Queensland Coast Islands Declaratory Act 1985
all of one page. It declared that upon the Torres Strait being annexed to the
colony of Queensland in 1879 the ‘islands
were vested in the Crown in
right of Queensland free from all other rights, interests and claims of any kind
whatsoever and became
wastelands of the
Further, ‘no compensation’ was payable to anyone for any
If this law was valid
and enforceable,
was dead. So, we challenged this legislation as
contrary to the Commonwealth
Racial Discrimination Act.
In December 1988
the High Court decided, 4:3, that the Act was indeed invalid as racially
discriminatory. That was a very close thing
– but Mabo could continue.
To me, this experience underscores the need to entrench the proposed Voice in
Constitution
, to provide independence, security (especially when criticising
government) and national standing. Otherwise, like ATSIC –
rather than reformed – after 15 years by the Howard government in 2005,
and Queensland’s attempt to defeat
through specific
legislation, the Voice is exposed to the political priorities and fluctuating
policies of our governments.
Contempt of Court
Queensland’s second response was, perhaps, reflective of the inquiry
into police corruption – the Fitzgerald Inquiry –
underway between
1987 and 1989, for this response involved disgraceful conduct amounting to, in
the view of the plaintiffs’
lawyers, at least, an egregious contempt of
Sometime prior to the opening of the trial of facts in October 1986, officers
of Killoran’s Department of Native Affairs took
further action to defeat
the claim. Queensland’s legal team, I feel certain, was not involved.
What I am about to say was told to me by the successful plaintiff, Revd Dave
Passi, several years before he died in 2017. According
to Revd Dave, the
Department’s leadership, including, I assume, its long-serving Director,
Paddy Killoran, gave instructions
to one of its officers, George Passi. George
was a long-time, and highly regarded, employee of the Department, a Murray
and a brother of the plaintiffs, Sam and Revd Dave Passi. George was
directed to pressure the four surviving plaintiffs – including
brothers – to withdraw their claim. Such conduct can quickly amount to an
abuse of process for which George Passi and
the responsible bureaucrats could
have been held in contempt of court and possibly jailed. I have always wondered:
what pressure
was George under, and from whom?
My answer: a lot, from his employer, ‘exercising almost total
control.’ I sympathize with what, I assume, was a very distressing
personal crisis for George.
Notwithstanding, Eddie Mabo, James Rice, Revd Dave and Sam Passi were all
spoken to by George and threatened with various disasters
if they persisted: for
example, liability for massive costs when they would surely lose; they might be
evicted from their Murray
Island homes, all leased from Killoran’s
Department; funding for the island’s school could be cut; and more.
To their credit, Eddie Mabo and James Rice told George Passi where to go. But
Sam and Dave Passi, succumbed. Queensland provided the
Passi brothers with new
solicitors, who, a week before the commencement of the trial of facts, in
Brisbane in October 1986, filed
Notices of Discontinuance for their two clients.
We, the lawyers for the suddenly two-only remaining plaintiffs, were
astonished and very concerned. Both Dave and Sam Passi were important
plaintiffs. But we all adjusted as best we could, and Ron Castan opened the
(two) remaining plaintiffs’ case in Brisbane in
October 1986. Ron then
returned to Melbourne, and I led Eddie Mabo’s evidence-in-chief, our first
substantive witness, on and
off, over several days. The trial adjourned,
part-heard, in April 1987 for two years, to await the outcome of our challenge
to Queensland’s
Declaratory Act 1985.
The good news is: upon the success of our High Court challenge – that
Mabo [No 1]
December 1988 – the trial re-commenced in April 1989. By that time, the
Revd Dave Passi, following discussions with anthropologists,
had changed his
mind. Thus, we applied to the trial judge to allow him to re-join as a
plaintiff. He was re-admitted, despite Queensland’s
objections, in June
1989 and gave valuable evidence. Indeed, I led his evidence, with him dressed in
his clerical robes, explaining
how, according to Meriam custom and tradition,
both Malo’s law – that is, the source of Meriam custom and tradition
and Christianity continued and worked together on the island.
For example, the Revd Dave recited Malo’s laws, including, in Meriam
language: ‘Tag mauki mauki, teter mauki mauki,’
meaning (roughly
translated): ‘Do not let your feet tread upon another man’s
To me – and I hoped, to the trial judge – this evidence sounded
very familiar: the law of trespass but founded not upon
Medieval English
doctrine introduced with colonisation of the Torres Strait in 1879 but upon
Meriam custom and tradition, existing
since time immemorial and still operating
on Murray Island 110 years later in 1989. And this from an ordained Anglican
Sam Passi did not seek to be re-admitted as a plaintiff, suffered a mild
stroke, and gave limited evidence generally supporting the
plaintiffs. He died
in October 1990 – before the case was completed, like Celuia Mapo Salee
and Eddie Mabo.
The bad news is that Sam, when giving evidence for the plaintiffs,
nevertheless rejected some of Mabo’s claims – as did
other Meriam
witnesses recruited by Queensland. This was an unexpected and damaging
development, especially in regard to Sam, a former
co-plaintiff and a highly
regarded elder at Mer.
Thus, the Revd Dave Passi’s return as a plaintiff, and his impressive
evidence, proved to be critical. Of the 45 or so areas
originally claimed by the
five plaintiffs, the trial judge accepted as facts, established on the evidence
before him, only two or
three village blocks claimed by the Revd Dave Passi as
still subject to traditional
Justice Moynihan
rejected outright, or seriously questioned, all claims by Eddie Mabo, James Rice
and, of course, Sam Passi. Such
are the unpredictable outcomes of hard-fought
litigation.
This was the Bjelke-Petersen government’s conduct towards its
Indigenous citizens, exercising their rights to pursue justice
Queensland’s courts.
Reflecting its conduct in the Koowarta saga, in the Mabo trial of facts, that
government rejected the constitutional principle of
separation of powers,
introduced from Westminster in 1879, and deliberately interfered with the
judicial process to achieve its objectives.
Fortunately, the political situation in Queensland has changed, for the
The details: Sir Joh resigned as Premier and from politics in December 1987
and, in 1991, stood trial for corruption and perjury.
That trial was aborted.
Paddy Killoran retired in 1985 – prior to giving evidence – and died
in 2010. Now, constitutional
recognition and a Voice, if enshrined, should help
prevent any such corrupt conduct in future, by the VOICE speaking out, loudly.
It’s called empowering First Nations to assert their rights in a free and
open democracy, governed by the Rule of Law. Is this
what No advocates fear?
V Reform for Native Title
Such personal traumas, community disputes, and evidential crises arising in
contested court proceedings, all experienced in
have also been
suffered by many traditional owner claimant groups when seeking to establish
their rights to country under the current
native title regime.
Indeed, over the past twenty or so years, traditional owner groups and others
have complained, many times, about how this claims process
often causes serious
intra and inter-community disputes – as occurred on Murray Island during
decade. This concern particularly applies to claimants who have
suffered the most severe dispossession and conflict during settlement
thereafter, often leading to great difficulty ascertaining who, today, still
enjoys what traditional rights to what areas. Such
details are required by the
burdensome onus-of-proof spelt out in the
Native Title Act 1993
, and High Court decisions raising further, and difficult, evidential
To date, these voices have been ignored. No substantial reforms to the
Native Title Act
have occurred since the Howard government’s
Ten-Point-Plan delivering ‘Bucket-loads of
extinguishment’
then-Deputy Prime Minister Tim Fischer) following the Wik decision of
This is despite the 30
recommendations of the Australian Law Reform Commission in its Report
Connection to Country,
of 2015; and calls for reform by many senior lawyers and Indigenous leaders.
Former Chief Justice Robert French has, for example,
suggested reversing the
onus of proof.
Victoria, however, has, again, led reforms by enacting its
Traditional
Owner Settlement Act 2010
introduced, for claimants, whose
country lies within Victoria, an alternative negotiation process to the native
title scheme, thus
avoiding, or at least minimizing, these negative impacts. To
date, that scheme has delivered three settlements, with more underway.
VI How Might a Voice Help?
As I see it, if/when a national Voice is legislated and operating, reform of
Native Title Act
should be one of its many priorities, since –
as in the 1970s – no government is listening to reform advocates. Such
Voice schemes have already been legislated in Victoria in 2018 through the First
and in South Australia last
to advise State
Parliaments and governments.
I wonder: whatever the referendum result, might these State voices also
advise the Commonwealth regarding federal legislation affecting
people within their states?
Native Title and Land Rights Achievements: Basis for
Voice and Treaty
Despite these difficulties, the native title
rights’ schemes have provided traditional owners with specified rights to
their traditional lands, and an obvious
basis for Treaty-making.
As of August 2023, about 52% of Australia’s land mass, and 40.4% of
Queensland, plus further areas offshore, is held under native
designated traditional owner groups, with a range of stipulated rights to pursue
activities on and relating to their
In addition, as of August, 1,450 Indigenous Land Use Agreements – or
ILUAs – have been negotiated and concluded, under
the native title regime.
These concern the management of land and seas subject to native title, and terms
and conditions upon which
third parties, for example, mining companies, may
enter and pursue activities, as agreed by traditional owners.
Further, principles for awarding compensation to traditional owners for the
extinguishment of native title rights by past acts of
governments, or others,
were clarified by the High Court in 2019, in a case called
These findings about
compensation under the native title regime, will provide important guidance for
future ‘treaty’
and perhaps, reparation, discussions.
To these developments I add various ‘land rights’ schemes under
further Commonwealth and state legislation. For example,
South Australian
legislation. reaching back to the Dunstan government of
government’s Northern Territory
Aboriginal Land Rights Act
and the purchase of
interests in land and sea areas on the open market for Indigenous groups by the
Indigenous Land and Sea
Corporation,
introduced by the
Keating government as part of its three responses to
These Indigenous land and sea-owning groups, and the areas they enjoy
traditional, rights and interests over, provide one important
base, amongst
others, for involvement in federal and/or state Voices (plural) and Treaty
negotiations, (plural) including rights
of self-government.
If a treaty-making option to litigation was available, the abovementioned
risks of personal trauma and community conflict often arising
preparing a native title claim, let alone in contested court proceedings should
be greatly reduced or avoided – to
everyone’s benefit. Costs should
also be reduced and, importantly, an agreed outcome, hopefully, achieved. The
Indigenous communities
involved, of course, might still face intra or
inter-community argument and conflict regarding treaty issues.
This ‘resolution by agreement’ option is already pursued, to a
degree, in the Native Title jurisdiction, by way of first:
‘consent determinations’; second, by way of negotiating and
executing ILUAs regarding access to and use of
land and resources; and third,
under the Victorian
Traditional Owner Settlement Act 2010
processes, however, do not, normally, include rights of self-government, being
central to treaties.
Many ILUAs, for example, do not involve governments as a party to the
agreement. Others, where a government is a party, do not extend
beyond land
As of September 2023, consent and unopposed determinations of Native Title
represent 90% of all determinations across the nation,
in Queensland, 87%. How
times have changed.
However, the treaty option proposed in the Uluru Statement places an
additional significant item on the negotiation table: powers
of self-government.
Treaty schemes have already been legislated in
and in Queensland.
Path to Treaty Act 2023
, referred to previously in regard to
Truth-telling, also establishes a First Nations Treaty Institute to provide
ongoing support
for Indigenous people to prepare for, and pursue, treaty
negotiations.
Treaty discussions are also underway in NSW, South Australia, Tasmania and
the Northern Territory.
Noongar Settlement
Western Australia has not, to date, committed to a Voice, Treaty Truth
process. However, ironically, the best current example of how
the native title
ILUA regime has already facilitated substantial agreements is the Noongar
settlement in Western Australia. This
has been described by Constitutional
lawyers George Williams and Harry
as Australia’s first
During the 1990s and early 2000s, six native title claims and ILUAs
concerning Noongar country were joined into one, consolidated
After Federal Court
proceedings
and extensive
negotiations,
in 2016 the
Western Australian Liberal government, under Premier Colin Barnett, legislated a
settlement under two acts of
Parliament.
Without doubt, the Noongar ‘settlement package’ is the largest
and most comprehensive agreement to settle Aboriginal interests
Australia’s history. Its main features include, amongst
• It affects about 30,000 Noongar people and covers 200,000 sq km in
the State’s south-west corner;
• It establishes, and resources, governance
institutions;
• It provides to the Noongar people, over time, a $1.3 billion package
relating to land, resources, governance, finance and
cultural heritage; and
• In exchange, the Noongar surrendered their native title rights to the
agreement area,
concessions.
Noongar Settlement and Implications for Federal Treaties
This settlement is not an agreement between sovereign states governed by
international law but a domestic, legally binding, negotiated
agreement between
an Indigenous ‘polity’ – that is, a distinct political
community, being traditional owners –
and a state government, that
includes some powers of self-government vested in that
John Howard’s
mantra – ‘A country cannot make a treaty with itself’ –
is irrelevant. The Noongar settlement
is, I think, best described as a
‘domestic treaty.’
This is a different kind of treaty, dealing with a different kind of
sovereignty. As I wrote in
Pandora’s Box
Whether the Noongar Settlement achieves treaty status – domestic or
otherwise – is perhaps not critical. The crucial factor,
in my view, ...
is reaching agreement on self-governing powers concerning the Indigenous
party’s economic, social and cultural
development; recognition of, and
respect for them as a distinct polity; and the establishment and resourcing of
‘culturally
appropriate governance and
decision-making.
Treaty-making, clearly, is already happening in this country.
A Clarification: Crown’s Sovereignty Not
The Noongar Settlement, current state treaty initiatives, and national
treaty-talk as part of the Uluru Statement, triggers an obvious
question: what
of, for example, the Noongar peoples’ sovereignty, or of the Bindal and
Wulgurukaba peoples of Townsville, never
ceded in 1829 (the date of Western
Australia’s colonisation) nor 1788 (for the eastern seaboard), nor
extinguished thereafter,
as claimed in the Uluru Statement?
from day one, the issue of sovereignty residing in the Meriam
people was deliberately not
That question was, in
1982, and remains today, ‘non-justiciable’. The High Court rejected
Indigenous sovereignty claims
in 1979, and subsequent
The question clearly lies
in the political, not judicial
These rejections concern a ‘single, homogenous, Eurocentric, state-kind
of sovereignty conceived as ‘adverse to the
However, times, and the High Court, have changed such that today, both the
Uluru Statement and a recent High Court decision have,
at very different
philosophical, political and legal levels, re-examined this
‘sovereignty’ concept. Both statements,
in different ways, examine
sovereignty not as a European legal concept involving international sovereign
states subject to international
laws, but as a philosophical or spiritual
relationship with country which co-exists with the Crown’s sovereignty
within Australia.
Uluru Statement re Sovereignty
Indigenous understanding of their sovereignty was eloquently expressed in the
Uluru Statement of May 2017.
Statement says, in part:
This sovereignty is a spiritual notion: the ancestral tie between the land,
or ‘mother nature,’ and the Aboriginal and
Torres Strait Islander
peoples who were born therefrom, remain attached thereto, and must one day
return thither to be united with
This link is the
basis of the ownership of the soil, or better, of sovereignty. It has never been
ceded or extinguished, and co-exists
with the sovereignty of the Crown .... we
believe this ancient sovereignty can shine through as a fuller expression of
Australia’s
nationhood.
As Dr Shireen Morris writes:
The Uluru Statement’s ‘conceptual understanding of Indigenous
sovereignty is helpful ... because it co-exists peacefully
and inclusively with
the sovereignty of Australian governments. Recognition of this kind is the
middle ground [between] assimilation
and annihilation of Indigenous peoples on
the one hand, and separatism and fragmentation of the state on the
decided by the High Court three years later, in 2020,
recognition of Indigenous peoples’ cultural and spiritual connection to
the continent by reason of ancestry reaching back 65,000 years – and a
unique basis for citizenship – raises new possibilities
sovereignty.
concerned whether a person of Aboriginal or Torres Strait
Islander ancestry, who is not an Australian citizen, can be classified as
‘alien’ under the
Constitution
, the ‘aliens power,
and thus be deported.
All seven judges wrote separate opinions. The
found, in short, that
‘Aboriginal Australians’ are not embraced by the aliens power and
thus could not be deported. As
summarised by Dr Morris:
The majority drew upon the common law recognition of native title to
acknowledge ... the ‘deeper truth’: that Indigenous
people as the
‘first peoples of this country,’ carry a unique ‘spiritual or
metaphysical’ connection with
the Australian continent. This connection,
being ‘older and deeper than the
Constitution
,’ .... (presents) ...
an ‘underlying fundamental truth’ that could not be ‘altered
or deemed not to exist
legislation.
How these sovereignty notions develop along with the impact of recognition in
Constitution
, should the referendum succeed, remains to be seen.
VII Conclusion
These developments, especially with 602 native title determinations plus
1,450 ILUAs currently in place, all providing a basis for
treaty negotiations;
plus the Uluru Statement’s ‘spiritual sovereignty’ concept,
plus the High Court’s majority
judgments in
referring to the
‘deeper truth’ of
suggest interesting times ahead
– for Voice, Treaty, Truth. Whatever the result on October 14, these
issues are likely to be
an important focus of First Nations’ continuing
struggle to achieve proper respect, recognition and a lasting settlement in
country. Whatever, that struggle ‘for a fuller expression of
Australia’s nationhood’ will
I encourage you all to vote YES – and, to follow this story.
And please note: in regard to entrenching the Voice: its details may be of
interest, but they are not necessary. Its composition,
powers and functions are
to be resolved by the Parliament. Read the proposed new s 129.
Finally, times have changed. In Townsville this morning, I purchased the
latest edition of the
Saturday Paper,
and discovered, to my delight, a
full-page ‘Open Letter to the Australian Public’ supporting the
It begins: ‘The
Voice to Parliament would enhance Australian governance’ and is endorsed
by eight retired senior Australian
judges. These include ‘The Hon Mary
Gaudron KC’, formerly of the High Court; and seven judges of various state
of appeal including The Hon Margaret White, AO, my abovementioned
opponent as junior counsel for the State of Queensland, during
the Mabo trial of
facts. Well done Your Honour.
Many thanks for your attention.
The Voice referendum of October 14 failed – comprehensively. Leading
Yes campaign advocate Marcia Langton has declared that
Reconciliation is
no alternatives have been
proposed by the No campaign to close the
and June Oscar has stressed
the ‘real and palpable pain’ rippling through Indigenous communities
following the referendum
An ugly stream of racism, flowing just below the daily social fabric, has
exploded, along with widespread dismay and disillusionment
with politicians and
the political process. The No campaign’s slogan – ‘If you
don’t know, vote No’
– deliberately encouraged civic
irresponsibility. That issues of constitutional reform should be hijacked and
exploited by
partisan politics, rather than dealt with rationally and carefully
by the electorate – that is, by Australian citizens who
Constitution
– is deeply disturbing, and alienating. This deliberately
orchestrated politicisation of a referendum issue is, to me, completely
unacceptable.
Polling Results
Nationwide, 60.2% of the electorate, and each jurisdiction apart from the
ACT, rejected recognizing Indigenous peoples in the
Constitution
by enshrining a
Voice to advise parliament and the
In Queensland, 69%
The strongest
support for Yes was recorded in Victoria, at
In this disaster, polling in remote Indigenous communities provided some
hope. The Kimberley Land Council, for example, recorded that
polling places
across the north of Western Australia showed 77.5% of residents of remote
Indigenous communities voted
Likewise, undeterred,
Yes23 campaign leader Thomas Mayo noted that:
polling booths in predominantly Indigenous communities across the entirety of
the country overwhelmingly voted ‘Yes’ ...
a great majority of
Indigenous people support constitutional recognition through a Voice to
Parliament. We seek self-determination
over who speaks for us. Claims otherwise
are an incontrovertible lie.
Further, Mayo observed that:
Though the referendum failed, the movement for Indigenous rights and
recognition has grown. In 2017 we were almost 4% of the population
calling for
Voice, Treaty and Truth-telling. As of (referendum day) we are nearly 40%,
walking together. Almost seven million Australians
Devastating Impact
Nevertheless, the Indigenous leadership and communities around the country
were understandably devastated, and very critical of the
No campaign. Amongst
extensive reported commentary, perhaps an anonymous open letter written by
Indigenous leaders and distributed
to politicians the day after the referendum,
is representative:
[Indigenous] peoples are in shock and are grieving the result. We feel
acutely the repudiation of our peoples and the rejection of
our efforts to
pursue reconciliation in good faith. That people who came to our country in only
the last 235 years would reject the
recognition of this continent’s First
Peoples – on our sacred land which we have cared for and nurtured for more
65,000 years – is so appalling and mean-spirited as to be utterly
unbelievable a week following. It will remain unbelievable
and appalling for
decades to come.
Further, according to one Murdoch Press journalist, ‘[t]he scale of
deliberate disinformation and misinformation was unprecedented,
proliferated, unchecked, on social media, repeated in mainstream media, and
unleashed a tsunami of racism against our
The Way Forward?
So, what is to be done, going forward? Manifestly, the 90% support for the
1967 referendum which provided the Commonwealth with constitutional
legislate on matters concerning Indigenous Australians no longer exists. That
referendum, however, did not attract a NO
campaign: ie there was bi-partisan
support. History shows that only 8 of (now) 45 referenda have succeeded –
and all eight
enjoyed bi-partisan support.
Indigenous Policies and Programs
Prominent No campaigner Senator Jacinta Nampijinpa Price and her colleagues
have ‘called for a thorough audit of the (Indigenous)
structures that
exist, to see where problems exist, to identify problems, ascertain what is
working and what isn’t, and take
action to implement real change where
it’s needed.’
Meanwhile, the Uluru Dialogue organization has flagged its intentions to use
the 5.5 million YES voters’ support in a new phase
of advocacy for
‘justice and
According to
Pat Anderson: ‘We are not done. We will continue. ... We thank you ....
who voted YES. We will need every one
of you on the next phase of the journey
... five million voices talking together is a powerful
In addition, in the week after the Referendum, ‘a group of about fifty
Indigenous leaders and organisations met in Canberra,
in person or remotely, for
a day of discussion ‘aimed at navigating a pathway
meeting, Sean Gordon, a co-leader of the group ‘Liberals for Yes’,
advocated for an expansion of the ‘tried
and tested’ Empowered
Communities model pioneered by Noel Pearson in Cape York during the Abbott
This model now operates
in ten regions across the country on an opt-in
The model is
underpinned by a partnership arrangement between Indigenous communities and the
government. It aims to provide Indigenous
people with agency in settling their
own priorities for their
The meeting also proposed to continue pursuing ways to establish an
Indigenous Voice, but without constitutional or legislative backing,
take up the cause of justice for our
As to the Federal government, by 20 December 2023, pressure was reportedly
mounting for it to outline its ‘plan
and that it was
favoring expanding the Empowered Communities option, without legislation, to act
as local and regional voices.
Some Indigenous leaders, however, remained unconvinced, saying this option
represented ‘more of the
would merely add
another ‘layer of bureaucracy’ to regions, such as Alice
, and ‘make
things more difficult’.
Meanwhile, the government is reported as having made no decision on
‘whether to pursue a Makarrata commission to oversee truth-telling
treaty-making’ being an election commitment and already partly
Minister Linda Burney
said that she, and other Aboriginal caucus members were committed to ‘deep
listening,’ that she
‘would not be rushed’ and, that
‘it’s not my decision. It will be the decision of the (Indigenous)
community.’
Constitutional Reform
The result has also given rise to profound cynicism amongst Yes campaigners,
and others, concerning Australia’s constitutional
reform processes.
Professor George Williams opined that ‘Australia’s system of
constitutional reform is broken,’
and called for a ‘root and branch
reform’ of the referendum
He suggests that
‘a fundamental rethink is needed to establish new ways of finding common
political ground and generating proposals
that win broad community
support.’ Further, ‘Australia should move on from its highly
politicised and ad hoc approach
to constitutional
Williams calls for, first:
a cross-party parliamentary inquiry into the conduct of the voice referendum
by the Joint Standing Committee on Electoral Matters....
This is especially
needed ... given the emergence of a host of new issues (including) the rise of
social media.
Second, he suggests:
... a small, nonpartisan constitutional commission should be established to
Constitution
, develop widely supported proposals for reform, consult
with politicians and the public, and recommend ideas to parliament. The best
ideas should be debated at a representative constitutional convention held every
decade before being put to the people at a
referendum.
Clearly, many significant challenges in Indigenous Affairs remain unresolved
– but at least Indigenous determination to achieve
a just and prosperous
future in this country – their country – remains strong. Watch this
Victorian Bar, retired; Adjunct Professor, College of Business,
Law and Governance, James Cook University. I wish to thank Gail Mabo,
of Eddie and Bonita; Leanne Hunter, JCU Law Students
Society&#82
s convenor of this oration, and law
students from Deakin University, Melbourne, for their valuable research
assistance.
Noel Loos and Eddie Mabo,
Edward Koiki Mabo: His Life and Struggles for Land Rights’
UQP, Brisbane, 1996 (‘Loos and Mabo’).
JCU Library website.
‘Kanaka’ is a
Hawaiian word meaning ‘man’. They came from various Pacific islands
and were employed in British
colonies, such as British Colombia, Fiji, Solomon
Islands, Vanuatu, PNG, and Queensland.
Estimates vary, for example,
from between 55,000 and 62,500 Islanders to labour on sugar-cane and cotton
farms in Queensland and
northern NSW. See
https://www.nma.gov.au/defining-moments/resources/islander-labourers
They came from 80 different
islands including Vanuatu, the Solomon Islands, New Caledonia, Fiji, the Gilbert
Islands, New Ireland,
and Papua New Guinea. See
The National Museum of
Australia, Islander Labourers,
https://digital-classroom.nma.gov.au/defining-moments/first-indentured-islander-labourers
The recruiters were generally
white men who worked on contract with plantation owners, or who recruited with
the expectation of selling-on
the Islander’s labour. See ibid,
Museum of Australia, Islander Labourers.
See generally, Edward Wybergh
The Blackbirders,
Angus & Robertson, Sydney, 1970.
This Act provided for
‘the regulation, restriction and prohibition of the introduction of
laborers from the Pacific Islands.’
See also attempts to control the trade
via Queensland
Polynesian Labourers Act 1868; Pacific Island Labourers Act
Between 1906 and 1908 more
than 7,500 South Sea Islanders were thus returned to their country of origin.
See JCU Library,
Eddie Koiki Mabo:
History in the Making
https://jcu.pressbooks.pub/eddiekoikimabotimeline/chapter/the-mother-of-native-title/
10 October 1959.
Two sons, five daughters,
plus three adopted pursuant to Islander tradition, being two sons, one
Children were taught to read
and write, plus Torres Strait Islander history and culture. At its peak, in the
late 1970s, 45 students
were enrolled. The school closed in 1985 due to lack of
It’s worth noting here
that if the Uluru Statement was expanded to embrace ethnic migrant groups, South
Sea Islanders would
surely be embraced. But not under current proposals.
See B A Keon-Cohen,
Mabo Memoir: Islan Kustom to Native Title
(Zemvic Press, Melbourne, 2013)
A Mabo Memoir’
Thereafter, with assistance
from the Keating government, Eddie Mabo’s body was re-buried at Las, his
traditional home, on Murray
Island. There he remains.
JCU Library, ‘
Koiki Mabo: History in the Making’
, The Mother of Native Title,
Timeline, 6/12/2018,
https://jcu.pressbooks.pub/eddiekoikimabotimeline/chapter/the-mother-of-native-title/
Mabo v Queensland [No 2]
[1992] HCA 23
(1992) 175 CLR 1
Such Treaty and Truth
initiatives have already been legislated in Victoria, and Queensland plus what I
have described as a ‘domestic
treaty’ concerning the Noongar native
title settlement, legislated by a Liberal government in Western Australia in
Advancing the Treaty Process with Aboriginal Victorians Act 2018
K Ryan (research assistant)
email, 13/9/23. Native title statistics are available on the National Native
Title Tribunal website.
http://www.nntt.gov.au/Pages/Statistics.aspx
See, for example, Terri
Australian Indigenous Cultural and Intellectual Property (ICIP)
(National Library of Australia, 2023);
Exposure Draft: Land
Claim Collections Repatriation: Practice Handbook,
(AIATSIS, ACU, December
According to the Letters
Patent, it was set up ‘... to constitute a Royal Commission to be known as
the Yoo-rrook Justice Commission
https://yoorrookjusticecommission.org.au/wp-content/uploads/2021/09/Letters-Patent-Yoo-rrook-Justice-Commission-signed-10-1.pdf
It seems, since, to have forgotten the hyphen. See, for example,
with Purpose
(Interim Report, June 2022).
First Interim Report,
Yoorrook with Purpose,
(4 June 2022).
Second Interim Report:
Yoorrook for Justice: Report into Victoria’s Child Protection and
Criminal Justice Systems,
tabled 4/9/2023.
Yoorrook Justice Commission,
Newsletter Issue No 10,
September, 2023.
Victorian First Peoples
Assembly Co-Chair Rueben Berg, says that Truth-telling is also an important part
of treaty negotiations,
because the Commission can make recommendations for
reform. He says: ‘Uncovering and understanding all these truths and
is a way of saying: ‘This is why we need a treaty.’
Sunday Age,
13/8/2023, 27. Professor Megan Davis, Co-Chair of the Uluru
Dialogues says truth-telling can help develop broad support for treaties,
must pass parliament as legislation. ‘You need both sides of parliament on
board,’ she says.
Path to Treaty Act
, ‘Truth-Telling and Healing Inquiry’,
, available at
https://www.legislation.qld.gov.au/view/html/asmade/act-2023-012
The relevant Queensland
legislation – conceived in and continuing the abhorrent policies of
‘Protection’ and ‘Assimilation’
– governing
Aboriginal and Islander Missions and Reserves, including Murray Island in the
Torres Strait, was a major focus
of the land rights campaign, and of critical
writing, including by prominent human rights lawyers and historians, such as
Garth Nettheim, Henry Reynolds and Noel Loos.
Bjelke-Petersen
[1982] HCA 27
(1982) 153 CLR 168.
A sub-department of the
Department of Aboriginal and Islander Affairs.
, (1997) p 346. Discontent with oppressive reserve conditions and
widespread opposition to their governing Regulations rose to new
heights during
the 1970s. This all-embracing system regulating Islanders’ daily lives was
called ‘Killoran’s law’
in the Strait after the then Director
of the Queensland Department of Aboriginal and Island Affairs – Paddy
Similarly, Bob Hawke failed
to deliver on his infamous promise at the 1988 Barunga festival. He said, out
loud: ‘There shall
be a Treaty negotiated between the Aboriginal people
and the government on behalf of all the people of Australia.’ Let us learn
the lessons of history. Political promises are just that - notoriously
unreliable: one very good reason to entrench the Voice in
Constitution
Loos and Mabo (n 1) 11.
Another explanation for Mabo’s litigious zeal is that during the early
1980s, the Bjelke-Peterson government
was posing a real threat to his island
‘permanently reserved’
under the relevant legislation for use by
Islanders. During the Queensland election campaign in October 1980, the
government announced
that it intended, if re-elected, to repeal the relevant
legislation, de-gazette the island reserves and, as an alternative, grant
50-year leases to island communities. This proposed scheme was quickly opposed
by the Islanders’ then existing peak political
body, the Torres Strait
Advisory Council – the Islanders’ VOICE at that time! The
Bjelke-Peterson government was re-elected,
and political agitation concerning
these proposed reforms and land rights generally continued.
Millirrpum v Nabalco Pty
(1971) 17 FLR 141.
Johnson v McIntosh
[1823] USSC 22
(8 Wheat) 543
Worcester v Georgia
[1832] USSC 39
(6 Pet) 515
Cherokee Nation v
[1831] USSC 6
R v Symmonds
Calder v Attorney
General (British Columbia)
[1973] SCR 313, confirmed in
Delgamuukw v
British Columbia
[1985] 13 DLR (4
) 321, imposing a fiduciary duty
upon government when dealing with land subject to native title rights. In
Mabo [No 2]
by a majority the Court rejected this course of action, while
Toohey, Deane and Gaudron JJ supported it. See
Mabo [No 2]
per Toohey J
at 199-205 and Deane and Gaudron JJ at 112-13.
Loos and Mabo (n 1) 15-16; E
Olbrei, (ed)
Black Australians: The Prospects for Change,
Union, James Cook University, Townsville, 1982)
passim, being edited
conference proceedings (‘Olbrei’).
Olbrei (n 40) 163.
They canvassed the legal
issues arising in such a test-case. Barbara Hocking commented, with some
foresight: ‘Whether or not
such a claim was successful, it might very well
act as a catalyst for action at the political level ... A test case brought by a
group of Queensland Aboriginals who still live on their tribal lands could
influence the attitudes of white Australians and the terms
of the (proposed)
Makarrata treaty.’ Ibid, 207. Greg McIntyre also encouraged a test case.
His substantial paper sought to
‘put forward the theory that Aboriginal
land rights do have some existence outside statute law in Australia.’
The Commission’s final
Report, with numerous recommendations (though ‘Land Rights’ issues
were excluded) was finally
provided to the Federal Attorney General in 1986. See
The Recognition of Aboriginal Customary Laws
(ALRC Report 31) 11 June
See phone call at
The plaintiffs sought
declarations that their rights and interests, based on Meriam custom and
tradition, to 45 specified land and
sea areas located on and around the Murray
Islands, were not extinguished, in law or in fact, by the act of colonization in
nor by subsequent settlement, but continued to the present day, and should
be recognized as enforceable property rights in Australian
Queensland, obviously,
because the claim involved the three Murray islands, plus areas of seas located
within Queensland jurisdiction,
ie, within the three-mile territorial limit. The
Commonwealth was included for two reasons. First, due to claims to sea areas
further out, within Commonwealth seas. Second, we wanted to secure High
Court jurisdiction, thus avoiding possible appeals in Queensland’s
Despite serious questions
still waiting resolution, concerning, for example, the legal impact of
colonisation in 1879 upon Indigenous
customs and traditions in a continent
supposedly ‘Terra Nullius’ – the Commonwealth did not want to
As to the plaintiffs’
costs and fees, see Answers to Questions on Notice, Hansard, Senate, 17/10/1989,
2044-46, reproduced
A Mabo Memoir,
Appendix 15, 496-99.
Now, 40-plus years later, in
a different era, and under a government with very different policies, Queensland
has joined Victoria
Path to Treaty
legislation enacted last May.
Yet, at the same time, the latest polls suggest that Queensland’s voters
are about to reject the
referendum.
After almost four years of
pleading and various procedural disputes, in February 1986 Gibbs CJ ordered all
issues of fact raised
by the pleadings to be remitted to the Queensland Supreme
Court for hearing and determination. The ultimate legal issues were expressly
not referred to but were reserved for the High Court alone. That trial process
continued, on and off, for four years, until the trial
judge – Justice
Martin Moynihan – delivered his Determination of Facts in November
Section 3(a)
of that Act
Effect of annexation of islands to Queensland.
For the purpose of
removing any doubt that may exist as to the application to the islands of
certain legislation upon their becoming
part of Queensland, it is hereby
declared that upon the islands being annexed to and becoming part of Queensland
and subject to the
laws in force in Queensland –
(a) the islands were vested in the Crown in right of Queensland freed from
all other rights, interests and claims of any kind whatsoever
and became waste
lands of the Crown in Queensland for the purposes of
sections 30
Constitution
Section 5 of that Act
Claims to compensation:
No compensation was or is payable to any
(a) by reason of the annexation of the islands to Queensland;
(b) in respect of any right, intertest or claim alleged to have existed prior
to the annexation of the islands to Queensland or in
respect of any right,
interest or claim alleged to derive from such a right, interest or claim; or
(c) by reason of any provision of this Act.
Mabo v Queensland [No 1]
[1988] HCA 69
(1989) 166 CLR 186.
For further detail, see
trial transcript, at National Library of Australia, MS 9518, Vol 31, starting at
1,886. See also, for a summary
of his evidence,
A Mabo Memoir
For the trial judge’s response see, ibid 372-73; for
Sam Passi’s ‘Malo Law’ ibid, 243.
We can only surmise what
Queensland’s officers, through his brother George and perhaps others, said
to Sam prior to him giving
evidence. Sam’s behavior arose, I suspect, in
part, from Mabo’s unpopularity amongst some of the Meriam community who,
perhaps, did not wish to antagonize the Department. To them, Mabo was a radical,
an agitator very critical of Queensland’s
reserve legislation and By-Laws,
AKA ‘Killoran’s Law.’ Mabo was also, to some extent, an
outsider. He had been
exiled from Mer, when aged sixteen, for trivial breaches
of Killoran’s paternalistic ‘Morality laws’: that is,
alcohol and talking to girls – all at the same time! He thus had lost
side, escaped the
Department’s control (unlike, it seems, George Passi); was exposed to new
ideas, such as when working as
a gardener at this University during the 1970s;
and learned to think independently and critically for himself.
See Moynihan J,
Determination of Facts
(November 1990) passim.
Further, when finally before
the High Court to argue the ultimate legal questions, Queensland, during the
first hour on day one,
argued that the rulings concerning Dave Passi were so
tenuous that the whole case should be immediately thrown out – with costs.
Fortunately, that submission failed, and the hearing continued. Another very
close call – but a testament to the courage, and
determination of Dave
Passi, the plaintiffs, and the Meriam witnesses and those in the Murray Island
community who supported them.
Australia v Ward
[2002] HCA 28
(2002) 213 CLR 1
Yorta Yorta v Victoria
[2002] HCA 58
Per deputy prime minister
Tim Fisher, who called the High Court Judges a ‘Bunch of Pissants.’
See interview of PM John
Howard, by Kerry O’Brien, ABC TV, 7.30 Report,
12/11/1997, at
https://pmtranscripts.pmc.gov.au/release/transcript-10560
where Howard accepts that Fischer made this statement. See also Paul Keating,
“The 10-point Plan that undid the good done on
native title”,
Sydney Morning Herald,
posted 1/6/2011, at
https://www.smh.com.au/politics/federal/the-10-point-plan-that-undid-the-good-done-on-native-title-20110531-1feec.html
Wik Peoples v Queensland
(1996) 187 CLR 1.
Including recommendation
5(1) that, ‘The definition of native title in
Native Title
(Cth) should be amended to provide that traditional laws and
customs may adapt, evolve or otherwise develop’. See ALRC
Connection to
Country: Review of the
Native Title Act
(ALRC Report 126, June 2015)
(‘ALRC Report 2015’).
Robert French,
Lifting the Burden of Native Title: Some Modest Proposals for
Improvement
’ (Speech delivered at the Federal Native Title Users
Group, Adelaide, 9 July 2009. See also
ALRC Report 2015,
Established under the
Advancing the Treaty Process with Aboriginal Victorians Act
First Nations Voice Act
(SA) enacted 26/3/2023, operative 12/5/2023.
See NNTT statistics (n 20).
The Federal Court had made 481 determinations of the existence of native title
on mainland Australia
and in the Torres Straits.
Northern Territory v
[2019] HCA 7
(2019) 269 CLR 1
Aboriginal Land Trusts
Aboriginal Land
Rights (Northern Territory) Act 1976
The Land Fund, now called
the Land Account, and the Indigenous Land Corporation (ILC) were established in
1994 and 1995 respectively:
Land Fund and Indigenous Land Corporation
(ATSIC Amendment Act) 1995
(Cth). In 2019 the ILC became the Indigenous Land
and Sea Corporation (ILSC) with an extended remit to include water as well as
The ILSC and the Land Account now operate under the
Aboriginal and
Torres Strait Islanders Act 2005
(Cth) to help Indigenous people acquire
interests in, and manage, land, salt-water and fresh-water country to provide
them with ‘economic,
environmental, social or cultural benefit. See
Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islanders Act 2005
See also, in Victoria, the
Traditional Owner Settlement Act, 2010
Aboriginal Heritage Act 2006
Advancing the Treaty
Process with Aboriginal Victorians Act 2018
Treaty Authority
and Other Treaty Elements Act 2022
Path to Treaty Act
In this process, six Noongar
claims were consolidated for this negotiation. Pursuant to the native title
regime, the six groups pursued,
and achieved with the WA government, six ILUAs.
Between January and March 2015, a series of authorisation meetings were held by
six groups, to approve the settlement. Elements of one group, however,
refused to sign-off, leading to Federal Court challenges concerning,
, whether such an authorisation had to be adopted unanimously by the
relevant traditional owners, or by a majority, under the relevant
provisions. The Federal Court determined that the relevant
provisions required a unanimous vote to achieve authorisation: see
Native Title Registrar
[2017] FCAFC 10
(2017) 340 ALR 419.
This led, in turn, to the federal
Parliament passing, in quick time, amendments to the Act to allow majority-only
authorisation:
Native Title Amendment (Indigenous Land Use Agreements)
(Cth) Thus, the six ILUAs were ‘authorised’ as required
Native Title Act
by the traditional owners of the six areas
involved. Thus, the entire Noongar settlement could proceed.
Harry Hobbs and George
Williams, ‘The Noongar Settlement: Australia’s First Treaty’
[2018] SydLawRw 1
(2018) 40(1)
Sydney Law Review
In December 2009 the Noongar
claimants and the state government agreed to pursue a negotiated outcome to a
massive area of 200,000
sq km. stretching from north of Perth across to the
southern coast east of Albany.
McGlade v Native
Title Registrar
[2017] FCAFC 10
(2017) 340 ALR 419
concerning authorisation questions.
In October 2014 the parties
reached an agreement in principle on the text of the settlement negotiated by
the South West Aboriginal
Land and Sea Council Noongar Nations Negotiation Team.
https://www.oric.gov.au/publications/spotlight/australias-biggest-native-title-settlement-clears-final-hurdle
Noongar (Koorah, Nitja,
Boordahwan) (Past, Present, Future) Recognition Act 2016
Administration (South-West Native Title Settlement) Act 2016
This legislation recognises the Noongar people as the traditional owners of
the land and their continued relationship with Country.
The settlement formally
commenced in February, 2021.
Further items: The Noongar
to be invited to co-manage land and its resources outside their territory;
Enhanced socio-economic opportunities
and increased employment.
That is, a Central Services
Corporation, and six Noongar Regional Corporations.
And consented to the
validation of any invalid past acts over the area.
B A Keon-Cohen, ‘From
‘Land-Related Agreements’ to ‘Comprehensive Settlements’
to ‘Domestic Treaties’:
An Inevitable Progression?’ (2018) 25
Pandora’s Box
43, at 55-59 (‘
A Mabo Memoir
44-45 (when drafting the statement of claim, through various amendments over to
the ensuing decade (including on the very last
day of the final High Court
(Brennan J, Mason CJ and McHugh J, agreeing, at 15)
Wacando v The Commonwealth
(1981) 148 CLR 317. Wacando
challenged the legality of the Torres Strait Treaty between Australia and PNG,
entered into by the Fraser
Government in 1978 and argued that his island was not
embraced by the Treaty. The High Court held that the island had been part of
Queensland since 1879, and part of the Commonwealth since 1901.
Commonwealth
[1993] HCA 42
(1993) 118 ALR 193
at 200 (Mason CJ). See also
Yorta Yorta v
[2002] HCA 58
(2002) 214 CLR 422
, at 443-44
[44] (Gleeson CJ, Gummow and Hayne JJ).
J Aird and A Ardill,
‘A ‘Kind of Sovereignty’: Toward a Framework for the
Recognition of First Nations Sovereignties
at Common Law
[2022] MelbULawRw 20
(2023) 46(2)
Melbourne University Law Review
at 3 (advance copy).
Uluru Statement from the
(Statement, First Nations Constitutional Convention, 26 May 2017).
The language follows closely
that of Ammoun J’s statement in the
Western Sahara
Advisory Opinion on the Western Sahara,
[1975] ICJ Reports, per Ammoun J,
Shireen Morris,
in the High Court: Implications for Indigenous Constitutional
Recognition’
(2021) 49(3)
Federal Law Review
(‘Morris’).
Love v Commonwealth
(2020) 270 CLR 152.
Bell, Gordon, Nettle, and
Edelman JJ.
Morris (n 90) 416.
J Massola and P Sakkal,
‘Mundine Uses Ploy claim in No argument’,
9, quoting ‘draft speech notes’. Speaking at the National Press Club
on 27 September, Noel Pearson expressed
the issue before the nation. as follows;
‘This referendum is testing the idea that a nation conceived in the
fiction of Terra
Nullius – a continent empty of owners – can come to
a new understanding of who we are. If affirmed, this referendum will
first best chance and last best hope for a lasting settlement. Australia will
start a new chapter, and the nations of the
earth will learn that with justice,
what remains wrong can be put right’.
Saturday Paper,
– 6/10/2023,
See Marcia Langton,
‘Whatever the outcome, reconciliation is dead’,
The Saturday
14-20/10/2023, 1, at
https://www.thesaturdaypaper.com.au/news/indigenous-affairs/2023/10/14/marcia-langton-whatever-the-outcome-reconciliation-dead#hrd.
Just two of seven Closing
the Gap targets set in 2008 – early childhood education and year 12
attainment – have been
achieved. See Page Taylor, ‘Closing the Gap
“doomed to failure”’,
Weekend Australian,
11-12/11/2023, 5.
Lisa Visentin, ‘There
was no plan B. So: What’s next after the Voice defeat?’
29/10/2023, 14 (‘Visentin’).
38.8% voted Yes; 1% voted
informal. See Nicholas Biddle, ‘Voicing voter stereotypes’,
Sunday Age,
22/10/2023, 31.
Followed by SA 65%, WA
64%. See Paul Kelly, ‘Legacy of voice’s defeat will endure for a
generation,’
The Australian,
18/10/2023, 11.
Kieran Rooney and Chip Le
Grand, ‘Victoria moves on treaty as other states back off.’,
Saturday Age,
21/10/2023, 1.
Paige Taylor,
‘Indigenous leaders: “vote tied to racism”’
Australian,
21-22/10/2023, 7.
Thomas Mayo, ‘After
The Saturday Paper,
21-27/10/2023, 3.
Ibid. As to ‘seven
million’ see n 108.
Quoted in Jacinta
Nampijinpa Price, ‘Referendum not a rejection of anyone’,
Weekend Australian,
28-29/10/2023, 24 (‘Price’).
Paul Garvey, ‘Rebel
Yes: our voice will be heard’,
The Australian,
23/10/2023, 1.
Price (n 105) 24.
See Paige Taylor,
‘Price says leaders of Voice are “cowards”’
Weekend Australian,
28-29/10/2023, 7. As to ‘5.5 million’ the
official number of YES votes cast was 6,286,894.
Ibid, quoting a video
published on Tik-Tok by the Uluru Dialogue.
Visentin (n 98) 14.
Rosie Lewis and Sarah
Ison, ‘No vote is no issue for local voices’,
The Australian,
5/12/2023, 1, 6. (‘Lewis and Ison’)
Ibid, 1. ‘Federal
governments have provided $47 million to the program from 2016 to mid
Ibid, per Eddie Synot,
Indigenous lawyer and member of the Uluru Dialogue.
per Alice Springs Mayor
Matt Paterson, at Sarah Ison, ‘Local Voices? It’s just more
bureaucracy’,
Weekend Australian,
16-17/12/2023, 7.
Lewis and Ison (n 115)
Ison (n 118) 7.
George Williams,
‘For referendums to work, voice lessons must drive reform,’
Australian,
23/10/2023, 13.
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (171 KB)
PDF format (624 KB)
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter