URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/journals/LegEdDig/2013/30.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 15:13:32
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Stinson, J M --- "Generating interest, enthusiasm, and opportunity for scholarship: how law schools and law firms can create a community and culture supportive of scholarship" [2013] LegEdDig 30; (2013) 21(2) Legal Education Digest 50
Generating interest, enthusiasm, and opportunity for scholarship: how law schools and law firms can create a community and culture
supportive of scholarship
Generating interest, enthusiasm, and opportunity for
scholarship: how law schools and law firms can create a community and culture
supportive of scholarship
J M Stinson
Legal Communication and Rhetoric
, Vol. 9, 2012, pp 315-326
As with all things in life, we are more likely to produce scholarship if we
are required to do so. But scholarship is rarely a requirement
of law practice.
Even in the academy, scholarship is not required for many professors who teach
legal writing. And for many in these
two groups, scholarship is not even
expected. Furthermore, although scholarship may have been required or expected
at some point
for some practitioners and law school faculty, requiring continued
scholarship is much more difficult after partnership or tenure.
Institutional barriers can also make scholarship more difficult even for
those who are motivated to write. Time spent on scholarship
detracts not only
from other work, such as client representation and teaching, but it also
detracts from time we can spend with our
families, friends, and communities. In
addition, even in places where scholarship is generally valued, less value is
often placed
on scholarship about legal writing and on scholarship by legal
writing faculty. Yet even when not required and even in the face of
institutional barriers, many lawyers and academics would produce scholarship
under the right conditions.
For many who care deeply about professional legal writing, though, the
problem is that we often see scholarship as selfish: it is
enjoyable, it helps
us, and it therefore must hurt our clients, firms, students, or institutions. We
need to change that perception.
Scholarship not only creates knowledge –
hence, is a form of public service – it also makes us better lawyers and
It can help reduce the burnout that results from doing the same thing
over and over. The intellectual challenge of drafting articles
breaks up the
monotony of our normal routine. Furthermore, scholarship actually helps our own
institutions. For law firms, having
an ‘expert’ can bring in
business. For government offices, creating positive public relations is helpful.
For law schools,
generating more scholarship helps the institution’s
reputation.
For others, fear keeps them from writing. Especially for those relatively new
to the scholarship scene, insecurity about the quality
of their work and the
impression it will make with their colleagues can be paralysing. Whatever causes
us to not write, we can, collectively,
overcome the obstacles to scholarly
production.
The solution largely lies in leading by example, as well as garnering support
from others: the suggestions here are primarily about
creating a culture that
generates interest, enthusiasm, and opportunity for scholarship. As with all
changes in culture, a lot depends
on the existing culture. Both the expectations
of others and support from others matter tremendously.
Generating interest corresponds to this culture change: ‘Make the Work
Matter!’ The gist here is to create incentives
for scholarship.
Money is often a good motivator. For those in law practice, pay in the
immediate sense is rarely provided for scholarship. But publishing
creates a long-term benefit; the author becomes an expert, and experts are
generally more attractive to clients. In addition
to client development,
publishing can increase a lawyer’s prestige with her peers. This
‘rainmaking’ is a key component
of success for many lawyers. For
many who teach legal writing, a more immediate monetary incentive comes in the
form of summer research
grants. They also have the longer-term incentives in
terms of future pay raises and mobility on the job market, which also often
results in higher salaries.
In general, it will further both institutional and personal goals. So for
those who want to write but feel as though they are not
entitled to that luxury,
the law firm or the law school should disabuse them of that notion.
For many, the writing they do needs to matter to those with power-partners,
law school deans, and others. For that reason, when the
scholarship is being
produced in order to obtain partnership or tenure, reframing the situation might
that producing scholarship can create valuable
job security may be enough incentive to generate the interest in writing. When
is seen simply as a necessary evil to avoid being fired, it is much
harder to actually get excited about it.
Furthermore, when there is flexibility in scholarship expectations, it is
easier to generate interest by encouraging writing on any
topic. It is also
often easier to start smaller, writing shorter pieces for bar journals,
newsletters, and for writing publications
that focus on these shorter, focused
articles. Writing of any kind-short or long, doctrinal or procedural or
theoretical –
initiates a positive cycle and creates an expectation of
continued writing. With any luck, producing some scholarship also makes
likely that raises and summer grants will be available in the future, bringing
monetary rewards. And the more the law professor
or lawyer writes, the easier it
is to write. This helps break the negative cycle and self-fulfilling prophesy
that many of us experience
– the ‘they won’t respect it so I
shouldn’t do it’ block.
Finally, scholarly interest can be generated by encouraging interaction
between those engaged in scholarship and those who are not
yet writing
scholarship.
Positive feedback matters to many people. Colleagues can encourage writers by
engaging in discussions about their topics and being
genuinely interested in
their scholarly interests. Colleagues can encourage new lawyers and law
professors to write on topics that
genuinely matter to them. Whether it is
wrongful convictions, environmental law, corporate takeovers, rhetoric, or
composition theory,
authors are much more likely to actually work on a paper
when they are enthusiastic about the topic.
In addition to being encouraging generally and encouraging writing on a topic
of the author’s personal interest, colleagues
should encourage others to
share their written work. Engaging with others about the work is important to
nurturing the passion as
well as to helping create a stronger article draft. But
it also serves the essential function of creating deadlines. Deadlines force
authors to sit down and write.
There are several ways to provide feedback and encouragement. Within a law
office, setting aside time to meet and discuss projects
can be both a rewarding
and team-building exercise. Similarly, for law school faculty, traditional
in-house, faculty-wide scholarship
talks and workshops provide easy
opportunities for obtaining feedback. These internal sessions can be scheduled
on an as-needed basis
or can occur weekly during the summer, for example.
Unfortunately, for many – especially those newer to legal scholarship
that setting can be intimidating. Fortunately, for both lawyers and
faculty, a number of alternatives exist. These settings allow
the scholar to
develop confidence in a ‘safe’ workshop setting where the
participants are critical about the paper, not
the person.
First, ‘invitation-only’ internal workshops can provide a safer
audience yet permit a large number of people to provide
input on the paper and
engage with the author on her paper. Within a firm or government office, this
can mean inviting the five most
new lawyers on their writing on, for example, a Friday afternoon. Expanding on
concept, intra-office or intra-school workshops can fill the same need.
Finally, at least in the academic context, the ALWD Scholars’
Workshops/Forums’ and the LWI Writers’ Workshops are obvious sources
of support and encouragement.
Those interested in encouraging scholarship by others should make clear that
time for renewal is not only permitted but expected.
Productivity increases when
people take short breaks; maintaining a hectic pace can work for short periods
of time but is not sustainable.
Sabbaticals and summer breaks are key, but for
academics at least, that is not only time for renewal but also the primary time
Generating scholarship itself can also be a form of renewal. For
practitioners and judges, scholarship provides an opportunity to
intellectually
engage with ideas and topics beyond what may be necessary to resolve
clients’ needs or cases. For legal writing
faculty, scholarship provides a
break from teaching and can renew the passion to teach, just as teaching
provides a break from scholarship
and can renew the passion to write.
Not all scholars are created the same. What works for one person may spell
disaster for another. The question is this, Where are the
new writers in the
writing process? What would help them move on? The best way to discover the
answer is to ask each of those people
what will make them more productive. For
some, it may be scheduling practice group meetings or classes in the afternoon,
as the morning
is their best writing time. For others, it may be having someone
set weekly or monthly deadlines-maybe three pages a week, or a new
subsection by
a certain date.
One way to meet their needs might be to assign writing partners, so each
person in a firm or law school who wants to work on a project
‘buddy’ to consult with, share drafts, and encourage. These writing
buddies could discuss what each person needs
to be more productive someone to
read drafts, someone to meet for two hours a month to brainstorm about
particular challenges, someone
to set deadlines, someone to send weekly
reminders, or whatever would most help each of the writers. The reciprocal
nature of the
relationship increases the likelihood that each writer will feel
more comfortable asking for help, and it helps meet each writer’s
With very few exceptions, training on how to be a better scholar would
benefit all writers. Organising brown-bag sessions where some
firm’s or school’s accomplished scholars can share their tips for
success can be one easy way to provide this
training. For example, sessions can
be offered on increasing publication opportunities, including discussions about
the structure
of successful articles, how to draft an effective title, timing
for submission, and other strategies. Other sessions could be offered
effectively use SSRN and ExpressO, as well as drafting an effective cover
Individual mentoring by good scholars is also tremendously helpful, although
more time-consuming.
Scholarly productivity will increase if those committed to writing encourage
others to write and make it a priority to write, even
though time is limited.
Share drafts, even though critical feedback is sometimes hard to take. Ask to
read other people’s drafts,
even though that also takes time. And keep in
mind that encouraging scholarship is as much about creating a culture that
and supports scholarship as it is about the actual writing.
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (48.2 KB)
PDF format (2.37 MB)
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter