URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/journals/HRD/2007/14.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 15:01:40
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Lynch, Andrew --- "Should Australia's Muslim Communities really be concerned about Anti-Terrorism Laws?" [2007] HRightsDef 14; (2007) 16(2) Human Rights Defender 7
New Terrorism Crimes – Individuals and Organisations
Crimes of Status and Relationship
Should Australia’s Muslim Communities be concerned about
Anti-Terrorism Laws?
Andrew Lynch
It is often asserted that Australia’s Muslims need have no fear about
the Commonwealth’s raft of recent anti-terrorism
laws being used to
unfairly target them.
The laws are not, we are told, inherently
discriminatory and should give rise to no concern from any particular section of
society that they will be singled out. An examination of the relevant
provisions in Part 5.3 of the Criminal Code Act 1995 (Cth)
Code’) confirms that the language of the law is expressed with complete
neutrality. How then, to explain the findings
of two important investigatory
committees in 2006 that one of the greatest challenges facing the Commonwealth
in achieving an effective
counter-terrorism strategy is to allay the distrust
and apprehension which these laws have engendered amongst Australia’s
In June 2006, the independent Security Legislation Review Committee headed by
retired judge the Honourable Simon Sheller QC, and established
Attorney-General pursuant to a statutory obligation,
recommended:
that greater efforts be made by representatives of all Australian governments
to explain the security legislation and communicate
with the public, in
particular the Muslim and Arab communities, and to understand and address the
concerns and fears of members of
those communities so that practical and
immediate programs can be developed to allay them
Six months later, and after no discernable activity in response to that
recommendation, the bi-partisan Parliamentary Joint Committee
on Intelligence
and Security laid a similar emphasis on the need to address community
perceptions through two specific recommendations
of its own:
Recommendation 4
The Committee recommends that [the Attorney-General’s Department]
increase its effort to ensure that comprehensive information
law regime is available to the public in appropriate community languages.
Recommendation 5
The Committee recommends that Australia’s counter terrorism strategy
a commitment to the rights of Muslims to live free from harassment and enjoy
the same rights extended to all religious groups in
wide dissemination of information about mechanisms for complaint or redress
in relation to law enforcement, intelligence agencies
and the media; and
a statement on the importance of informed and balanced reporting to promote
social cohesion.
Clearly, on the strength of these recommendations, both committees were alive
to the complaint that the laws risked alienation of
Australia’s Muslim
communities at a time when their social inclusion should be a priority. In
addition to the benefits which
accrue from the advancement of Australia as a
diverse yet cohesive society, from a national security perspective any factors
further widen the gap between Muslim communities and the rest of us must
be seriously addressed.
Terrorism can only be more likely to emerge
from a divided society in which some persons feel marginalised on the basis of
race or religious beliefs.
But if the legislation draws no distinction as to those to whom it applies
– and indeed is expressed so as to be of universal
application
-how can it be seen as contributing to the problem of Muslim fear and
dislocation acknowledged by both committees?
New Terrorism Crimes – Individuals and
Organisations
The answer to this puzzle becomes apparent when one looks more closely at
what some of the anti-terrorism amendments to the Code criminalise.
The central
offence inserted into the legislation as a response to September 11 is that of
committing or threatening to commit a
‘terrorist act’. Alongside
that offence, Division 101 of the Code contains provisions which attempt to
address activities
prior to an actual terrorist attack. These include providing
or undertaking training for such activities as well as possessing items
documents which might be useful in preparing for an attack. Those ancillary
offences are not without their own problems but they
are at least dependent on
particular activities or things in order to be invoked.
It is when one turns to Division 102 of the Code that the offences which seem
to be responsible for causing concern in Australia’s
Muslim communities
emerge. All the crimes in that Division hinge upon a person’s relationship
with a terrorist organisation.
Under the Code, there are two ways that a group
can become classified as such an organisation. First, if it is ‘directly
indirectly engaged in, preparing, planning, assisting in or fostering’
a terrorist act (whether or not one occurs). The prosecution
must prove as a
matter of fact not just these activities but also that they were carried out by
a discernible group of persons working
as an organisation. It may be that the
first formal recognition of a group as a ‘terrorist organisation’
comes when charges
are laid. The second and far clearer way in which a group may
be a ‘terrorist organisation’ is if it is proscribed as
such by the
Federal Attorney-General. At present, 19 organisations have been banned under
Australian law, the best known of which
is Al Qa’ida.
Some of the offences relating to organisations are uncontroversial. Targeting
individuals who direct or recruit others to terrorist
organisation is an
entirely sensible national security strategy.
Likewise, those who
provide ‘support or resources’ to an organisation should feel the
force of the law.
But some of the other offences have a worryingly
Human Rights Defender : 7 Anti-Terrorism
Vee Malnar,
Look to the Sky
, Scrylic on canvas and digital print,
160x90cm, Courtesy the artist and Tap Gallery, Sydney.
scope and it is these which have undermined the Government’s efforts to
reassure minority groups that they have nothing to fear
from the new laws.
For example, under section 102.5, a person may be guilty of intentionally
providing training to, or receiving training from, a terrorist
organisation if
he or she is reckless as to its character as such an organisation. But there is
nothing in the offence which requires
the training
to be connected
to a planned terrorist activity. Undoubtedly, running camps dedicated to
weapons training would be covered by the
section, but so also might training of
any other kind, such as the use and maintenance of office equipment. As a
result, the offence
lacks an appropriately targeted operation and exposes
persons to liability when their activity has no direct connection to terrorism
at all. This may be contrasted with the offence of providing ‘support or
resources’ to a terrorist organisation in section
102.7, which requires
that the support or resources will help the organisation engage in planning a
terrorist activity.
Crimes of Status and Relationship
The most controversial of the offences found in Division 102 are those which
relate not to activity conducted in connection with an
organisation, but those
criminalising membership and association. It is understandable that in
close-knit minority groups there might
be unease about offences based upon
one’s relationship to others.
Under section 102.3, a person commits an offence if they are
intentionally a member of an organisation which is, and he or she knows is, a
terrorist organisation. While that appears straightforward
enough at first
glance, it should be remembered that these provisions can apply to groups of
individuals who do not even regard themselves
as an ‘organisation’.
On top of this, the Code defines membership to include ‘informal’
members of an organisation.
While this aims to address the practical problems
surrounding the secrecy and unstructured nature of terrorist organisations, it
makes it rather murky as to when someone has crossed the line into offending the
Section 102.8 is even less precise. It contains the
offence of association with a member (formal or informal!) of a group that has
been listed as a terrorist organisation. This offence will be made out if, on
two or more occasions.
a person ‘intentionally associates with … a member of, or a
person who promotes or directs the activities of, an organisation’;
‘the person knows that the organisation is a terrorist
organisation’ (though confusingly, a later subsection says that
offence will only apply if the person is reckless as to whether the group is
listed as a terrorist organisation) and knows that
the person they associate
with ‘is a member of, or a person who promotes or directs the activities
of, the organisation’;
the nature of the association is that it ‘provides support’ to
the terrorist organisation that is intended to ‘assist
the organisation to
expand or continue to exist’.
However, the
‘association’ is not an offence under a number of circumstances. The
defendant bears an evidential burden
of proving the association is excused on
grounds which include that it took place:
‘with a close family member and relates only to a matter that can
reasonably be regarded … as a matter of family or domestic
in ‘a place being used for public religious worship and takes place in
the course of practicing a religion’; only for
the purpose of providing
humanitarian aid; or
‘only for the purpose of providing legal advice or legal
representation in connection’ with a set range of matters’.
This section is expressly limited by the guarantee implied from the
Constitution
that communication about political matters should remain
free. However, the defendant bears an evidential burden of establishing
extent to which the offence is curtailed by this freedom.
In its report to the Attorney-General, the Sheller Committee was highly
critical of almost every aspect of section 102.8. The central
concepts of
‘associate’ and ‘support’ were unclear, particularly in
their relationship to each other; the
level of knowledge required was confused
by the subsection insisting upon recklessness; and the failure to specify the
of the offence was unsatisfactory. The Committee also felt that the
offence was provocative to the Muslim community by targeting
the human right of
‘association’ when its main concern was actually with the provision
of ‘support’ to terrorist
groups, which was already criminalised by
section 102.7. The Committee recommended section 102.8 be repealed.
The Parliamentary Joint Committee endorsed those criticisms and agreed that
‘the association offence has provoked widespread
anxiety and
It recommended that the offence be reexamined in
light of these considerations.
Ultimately, the harmonious inclusion of Muslims within the Australian
community is a challenge which far transcends the specific provisions
piece of legislation. Its achievement will depend much more on the behaviour and
goodwill of all those who have a stake in
seeing it come about –
essentially, all of us. The responsibility upon political leaders to reach out
rather than divide is
a crucial element in this equation.
But getting the detail of the law right so that it does not alarm innocent
persons about their vulnerability to the State is not insignificant.
offences discussed in this article have a weak connection to criminal activities
relating to terrorism and thus their
justification on national security grounds
is deficient. At the same time, with their strong reliance upon executive
discretion –
both through the process by which terrorist organisations are
proscribed by the Attorney-General and the looseness with which criminal
liability is stipulated by the particular provisions – these offences may
appear to some sectors of the community as sufficiently
flexible that they could
be employed against them if the will to do so arose.
The laws are not inherently discriminatory against Muslims in Australia but
those which point to relationships between persons as
the basis of a crime are
unhelpful in allaying fears about how they might operate. It is to be hoped that
the Attorney-General responds
constructively to the recommendations of both
recent Committees regarding how this situation might be remedied.
1 Joint Doorstop Interview Following Australian Muslim Reference Group
Meeting with Commonwealth Attorney-General Phillip Ruddock and
Minister for Citizenship and Multicultural Affairs John Cobb, Canberra, 6
October 2005 <http://www.ag.gov.au/agd/WWW/MinisterRuddockHome.
nsf/Page/Interview_Transcripts_2005_Transcripts_6_October_2005_-
_Transcript_-_Joint_Doorstop_Interview> at 31 July 2007.
Security Legislation Amendment (Terrorism) Act 2002
3 Commonwealth,
Report of the Security Legislation Review Committee
June 2006, 8 (Recommendation 2).
4 Parliamentary Joint Committee on Intelligence and Security,
of Security and Counter Terrorism Legislation
, December 2006.
5 Commissioner Mick Keelty, ‘Issues in Contemporary Policing’
(speech delivered at the South Australian Press Club, 26 October 2006)
<http://www.afp.gov.au/media/national_media/speeches/issues_in_
contemporary_policing> at 31 July 2007.
6 For a full list of all 19 terrorist organisations banned under Australian
see <http://www.nationalsecurity.gov.au/agd/www/nationalsecurity.nsf/
AllDocs/95FB057CA3DECF30CA256FAB001F7FBD?OpenDocument> at
31 July 2007.
7 See respectively
Criminal Code Act 1995
(Cth), ss 102.2 and 102.4.
Criminal Code Act 1995
(Cth), s 102.7.
9 Parliamentary Joint Committee on Intelligence and Security, above
n 4, [5.96].
10 The Commonwealth Attorney-General has made clear efforts in this
regard: see Joint Doorstop Interview, above n 1.
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (40.3 KB)
PDF format (118 KB)
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter