URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/journals/CICrimJust/2017/17.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 14:50:12
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Al-Natour, Ryan --- "'Of Middle Eastern Appearance' Is a Flawed Racial Profiling Descriptor" [2017] CICrimJust 17; (2017) 29(2) Current Issues in Criminal Justice 107
‘Of Middle Eastern Appearance’ is a Flawed Racial Profiling
Ryan Al-Natour
Arab Australian communities and social science academics have argued that the
racial descriptor ‘of Middle Eastern appearance’
increases anti-Arab
racism in Australia. These stakeholders argue this descriptor is heavily
racialised, gendered, criminalised and
inaccurately racially profiles Arabs as
Muslims with a range of phenotypical characteristics. Identifying the flawed
nature of this
racial profiling descriptor, this article argues that this
inaccuracy enables a range of discourses attempting to legitimise and
anti-Arab racism. The Cronulla pogrom of 2005 is examined as a case study that
details these discourses. Ultimately, this
article points out how this
descriptor produces a number of paradoxes, limitations and unanswered questions
common in attempts to
racially profile Arab Australia.
racial profiling – racism – Middle Eastern
– anti-Arab – phenotypes – Cronulla pogrom –
Introduction
In Paula Abood’s (2000) film
Of Middle Eastern Appearance
police officer questions a woman about alleged gang activity in a South West
Sydney street. The following dialogue is exchanged:
Police Officer: Were they of Middle Eastern appearance?
Woman: What does Middle Eastern look like?
Police Officer: Well, what are you? Greek?
Police Officer: Italian?
Police Officer: Maltese?
Police Officer: Spanish?
Police Officer: Turkish?
Police Officer: You’re not Aboriginal, are ya?
Woman: I’m Arab.
Police Officer: Arab? You don’t look Arab! (Abood 2000)
As ‘an ideologically constructed category’ (Cunneen et al. 2015,
p. 180), ‘of Middle Eastern appearance’ is
a racial profiling
descriptor used by police, the media and the general public in reporting
suspects. It commonly references dark-complexioned
features such as olive
‘tanned’ skin tone and dark-coloured hair, where a person’s
ancestry is correlated with
his or her appearance (El Khouri 2012). The
aforementioned scene depicts the common Arab criticisms of this descriptor. The
struggles to racially profile Marah (the female character), drawing upon
numerous European ancestral descriptors and even questioning
whether Marah is
‘Aboriginal’. The interaction captures how ‘of Middle Eastern
appearance’ is imposed onto
a body, whereby a police officer fails to
‘read’ Marah’s racial identity before engaging in a racial
guessing game. The irony is that the officer, attempting to
successfully profile youths ‘of Middle Eastern appearance’,
unable to identify the Middle Eastern ancestry of the woman he is questioning.
The exchange depicted the common experiences of
some Arab Australians who
challenge a stereotypical mould in which non-Arabs struggle to place them.
‘Of Middle Eastern appearance’
is a broad term used to denote how
non-Arab Australians classify people whose ancestry originates from the Middle
East. As this article
shows, these attempts usually fail. The following extracts
exemplify some common challenges of racially profiling people of Middle
[A]n Aboriginal teenager tragically killed by a train in Western Sydney in
the last year or so. His family were not notified for about
a week because the
police were looking for a ‘Lebanese’ family:
this time (Poynting 2001, p. 110, original emphasis).
How can people from over 20 different counties share one homogenous physical
appearance? (Jabbour 2001, p. 2)
Call them Scottish? ... Mahmoud and Mahamed ... two [red-haired fair-skinned]
Lebanese Australians who don’t fit easily into
a racial stereotype
(Wainwright 2006).
Within the Australian context, scholars and members of Australia’s Arab
communities have challenged the accuracy and usefulness
of this descriptor in
identifying individuals. Since the 1990s, scholars have identified how this
racial descriptor is prominent
in crime reporting, whereas white suspects are
not racialised in the media (Dunn et al. 2004; Jabbour
2001; Manning 2006a
2006b; Poynting et al.
2004; White 2007
; Collins et al. 2000; El Khouri 2012;
Fraser et al. 1997; Warner 2004). While New South Wales (‘NSW’)
police and various
conservative commentators defend using the descriptor
‘of Middle Eastern appearance’, various discourses still contest
accuracy, revealing it to be explicitly redundant in accurately identifying a
person’s ancestral heritage. This article
investigates how this inaccurate
descriptor enables the denial and undermining of racism against Arab Australia.
It argues that this
public racial profiling of a hybrid Arab/Lebanese/Muslim
identity in Australia, achieved through the racial descriptor ‘of
Eastern appearance’, reveals a number of limitations and contradictory
flaws. These limitations and paradoxes enable
commentators to criminalise Arab
Australia as violent and misogynistic while simultaneously denying racism.
The 2005 Cronulla pogrom is an excellent case study that exemplifies how
racial descriptors are fluid and produce flawed characterisations
that racially
profile (usually male) Arab Australians as
‘Muslim’/‘Lebanese’ with particular phenotypical
features. This article contextualises and explores how this descriptor shapes
the experiences of various individuals, both Arab and
non-Arab. The second and
third sections describe the Cronulla pogrom and examine the significance of this
descriptor within this
pogrom’s context. Fourth, the article reveals how
this racial profiling works in narratives that undermine or deny racism explicit
within the pogrom. Finally, a number of specific unanswered questions,
limitations and paradoxes that strengthen the view that ‘of
Middle Eastern
appearance’ is a flawed racial descriptor are discussed.
‘Of Middle Eastern appearance’ as a policing, media and public
racial profiling descriptor
The discussion of the Arab Other (Collins et al. 2000; Poynting et al. 2004)
and Said’s (1978) Orientalism is significant in
charting ‘of Middle
Eastern appearance’ as a racial profiling descriptor. Poynting et al.
(2004) identified how policing
and media stakeholders emphasise ‘of Middle
Eastern appearance’ in crime reporting, contributing to the formation of
the Arab Other who ‘has little to do with the lived experience of those of
Arab or Middle Eastern or Muslim origin, and everything
to do with a host of
social anxieties which overlap and feed upon each other in a series of moral
panics’ (p. 3). Pugliese
(2003) draws on Said’s Orientalism in
challenging this racial descriptor and argues the terminology ‘of Middle
appearance’ exemplifies how Orientalist ideals are imposed on
bodies. Pugliese (2003) critically reflects on his Italian heritage
personal experiences of being profiled as a range of ethnicities in different
contexts, observing a ‘paradoxical formulation’:
Middle Eastern appearance and I am not Middle Eastern’. This racial
descriptor enables the thematisation of
bodies that do not always include
peoples whose ancestries originate directly from the Middle East. ‘Of
Middle Eastern appearance’
is produced by a person’s reading of
another’s body, similar to the way Hall (Hall & Jhally 1996) discusses
identity evolves from a process of reading the body as a text,
whereby conclusions are made regarding a person’s physical appearance.
Pugliese (2003) discusses how the term concerns a racialised, essentialised
figure that people use to categorise entire communities.
Pugliese (2003)
The figure of Middle Eastern appearance is founded on paradox. The paradox of
this geographically named and situated identity, of
this identity that assumes
its conditions of enunciation from a geographical place and location, is that,
in its effects, it produces
no geography as such and an infinitely dispersed
series of locations. Of Middle Eastern appearance is constituted by no habitable
locus ... The power of this ethnic descriptor, what Said would term its flexible
positional superiority, resides precisely in its
capacity to activate and deploy
an infinite series of sign-substitutions that effectively works to encompass a
heterogeneity bodies
within its Orientalist biometric grid.
There is a body of scholarship that identifies how racial profiling ‘of
Middle Eastern appearance’ fits into several discriminatory
practices that
correlate crime with Arab and Muslim communities (Collins et al. 2000; Poynting
2000, 2001; Poynting et al. 2004;
El Khouri 2012; Pugliese 2003). Chan
(2011) argues that for the targets of racial profiling, ‘the intention of
the policing
agent is not an issue; the sense of injustice and insecurity is
what stays with them’ (p. 75). Chan discusses how racial profiling
by police in North America involve prejudice, stereotyping, cognitive biases and
race-based deployment (Alpert et al. 2007)
which are, arguably, paralleled in
the Australian policing context. White (2007, p. 73) argues ‘there is an
implicit offence
category in the New South Wales policing description, people
“of Middle Eastern appearance”. In part this offence stems
actions of a few young men which are then transposed onto the community as a
whole’. Poynting et al. (2001 p. 85)
argued ‘the mainstream media,
in a symbiosis with the police and political leaders, has rather continued its
framing of young
people with “Middle Eastern appearance”’.
Manning (2006a, 2006b, 2003, 2004) profiled numerous Sydney newspapers
aftermath of events of 11 September 2001 and found that the descriptor was not
only prominent in the reporting of suspects
of crime, but that criticisms of the
term received little attention. Dellal (2004, p. 14) argued the media’s
racial profiling
through the ‘phrase ‘Middle Eastern
appearance’ created the usual negative stereotype and aroused undue
and fear in the general population’. Members of the public
further engaged in identifying individuals ‘of Middle Eastern
appearance’ in reporting crime to police, which El Khouri (2012, p. 102)
argues is problematic as they ‘may be subject
to prejudice, emotion and
indefinite opinions of appearance’. While ‘of Middle Eastern
appearance’ is often associated
with Lebanese people (Stratton 2011), Arab
Australians have challenged the accuracy and harm of this descriptor within
media profiling (Fraser et al. 1997). Abdel-Fattah (2007, p. 157) has
called this descriptor a ‘crude misnomer’ that
criminalises Arab
communities. Jabbour (2001, p. 2) argued ‘of Middle Eastern
appearance’ is a redundant racial descriptor
for Arab communities, as it
is ‘not only misleading and inaccurate, but often inadvertently lead to
the victimisation of individuals
and entire communities’. El-Khouri (2012)
discusses the disproportionate police profiling focus on males within Middle
communities. These criticisms from Arab Australians have been
disregarded by NSW police who support the use of this descriptor (New
Wales Police Force 2006) (discussed further below).
The Cronulla pogrom of 2005
A pogrom (Moses 2006) against people ‘of Middle Eastern
appearance’ occurred at Cronulla Beach on 11 December 2005. It
popularly understood that a beachside incident kick-started this pogrom. On
Sunday 4 December 2005, a brawl between three white
male lifeguards and four
Lebanese Australian males took place, resulting in police intervention. Manning
(2006b) noted that the evening
news reported this brawl without racial profiling
those involved. On Monday 5 December, white radio shock-jock Alan Jones took the
initiative to racially profile those involved and claim that ‘Middle
Eastern grubs’ were a menace to Cronulla (Poynting
2007). For five days,
Jones told listeners that Middle Eastern communities were frequenting Cronulla
beach, arriving from the Western
suburbs to assault locals, raping white
females, and invading the beach (Manning 2006b). Jones suggested locals engage
demonstration, where the public would greet Middle Eastern youths at
Cronulla train station and assault them as a way of protecting
local white
females. The mainstream media followed suit and sensationalised the brawl.
Cronulla locals organised text messages inspiring
Aussies to engage in
‘National Leb and Wog bashing day’ (where ‘Leb’ is a
colloquial term for ‘Lebanese’
or ‘Arab’ Australians
(Jackson 2006) and ‘wog’ is a racial slur and a colloquial term that
originates as
an acronym for ‘Western Oriental Gentleman’). On 11
December 2005, over 5000 predominantly white males took part in this
engaged in racial assaults against people ‘of Middle Eastern
appearance’. The expressions of racial violence
were armed with the
national flag and the sporting of racist slogans such as ‘No Lebs’,
‘Wog-free zone’,
‘Fuck Off Lebs’, ‘Ethnic
Cleansing unit’, ‘Free snags, no Tabouli’ and ‘We grew
flew here’ (Singh 2007; Poynting 2007; Perera 2006). A spate of
violent retaliatory attacks and property damage occurred in
nearby suburbs over
the following nights, as community and religious leaders called for calm.
There are ample academic publications that have sought to make sense of the
pogrom. Discourses on racism, gender, masculinity, multiculturalism
nationalism are common topic areas featured in these publications. One of the
first scholarly publications on the pogrom theorised
it as an outbreak of
extreme racist violence (Poynting 2006). Asquith (2008) argued that the riot
indicates the necessity of drawing
attention to the harmful nature of hate
speech and the importance of criminalising hate speech. For Collins (2009, p.
31) the riot
operated as a ‘serious enough to remind governments of the
responsibilities of managing cultural diversity and resisting racist
undercurrents’. Dunn (2009, p. 76) argued that ‘performances of
Australian nationalism were frequent throughout the build-up
to and immediate
aftermath of the Cronulla riots’. Singh (2007, p. 1) stated that
‘racial assertion is central to racial
violence’ within the pogrom.
For Noble and Poynting (2010, p. 499) the riot illustrated ‘not simply the
persistence of
racism in Australia, but the complex interweaving of space and
national belonging that has occurred over several years’.
Reading the body ‘of Middle Eastern appearance’
The racial descriptor ‘of Middle Eastern appearance’ is
significant to the pogrom (El Khouri 2012). From the genesis of
the event by
Jones, to the actions of pogrom-peddlers, this racial descriptor shaped the
profiling of Arabs as ‘Muslims’
through a range subcultural and
physical, phenotypical features. Participants did not ask victims if they were
of Arab heritage;
rather, these identities were assessed and imposed violently
upon individuals. Evers (2009, p. 187) discussed subcultural elements
marked out the ways local white surfers differentiated themselves from Lebanese
Australians:
These blokes favour particular cars, sports, food and ways of dressing; even
their bodily posture is read for its cultural coding;
how they stand, walk and
sit. What informs their choices and bodies are their ethnic and class
backgrounds. Some Cronulla locals
claim that those who come to the beach are
supposed to obey local rules and values...
A poster that was placed in the shire before the pogrom highlights these
associations that discuss subcultural characteristics in
the racialisation of
young Arab men:
Our Australian culture is epitomized by our beaches, which have become
cesspools of antisocial behaviour after the recent and unwelcome
influx of young
men, of ‘middle eastern’ [sic] appearance from the inner suburbs of
Sydney. These young men who sport
the inappropriate ‘beach’ attire
of Adidas track pants, Nike sneakers and utterly unforgivable haircuts upon
their heads,
migrate south every Saturday and Sunday to our Shire, and to our
beaches (New South Wales Police Force 2006, p. 35).
The Other here is gendered as male and identified as looking ‘Middle
Eastern’, which is associated with a number of subcultural
clothing brands
deemed to be the antithesis of beach etiquette and Australian norms.
Interestingly, Nike and Adidas are sporting
brands that are not culturally
‘Middle Eastern’. Further, the discussion of haircuts as
‘unforgivable’ demonstrate
that appearance is key to the
racialisation of the Other. Asquith (2008, p. 54) argues that in the context of
the pogrom, ‘Middle
Eastern’ transformed into an abusive term,
reflecting the power dynamics of social definitions and how they exclude people.
Evidently, the identity ‘Middle Eastern’ has a range of racial
floating signifiers that vilify Arab Australia.
Along with clothing and haircuts, skin tone and colour are significant
factors that mark a subject ‘of Middle Eastern appearance’.
participants identified several peoples by their skin tone and skin colour to
mark them as targets of racially motivated violence.
Dunn (2009, p. 82) writes
that ‘the targets of violence were determined physically, in this case by
their skin colour. Racist
violence is a performance of exclusive nationalism
which identifies and attacks performances that are considered to be
non-normative’.
The pogrom participants were informed by the descriptor
‘of Middle Eastern appearance’ along with other terms such as
‘Lebs’ and ‘Wogs’, even if the victims of racial
violence were not Middle Eastern themselves. As Poynting
(2006, p. 87) observes,
‘in a moral panic about the purported bad behaviour of “Lebs”
at the beach, a bystander
of Bangladeshi background was chased, mobbed and
assaulted. The Arab “Other” ... morphed into the Muslim
The racially constructed ‘Leb’/‘Wog’ ‘of Middle
Eastern appearance’ is an ambiguous term encompassing
flaws. While a
number of observers identify how the Other’s phenotypical features of
criminalised, Farid (2009) discusses how
the Cronulla’s Other is feared
yet envied. Farid (2009, p. 66) situates the pogrom’s racist attacks
against individuals
‘of Middle Eastern appearance’ ‘within the
triangulated axis of power-knowledge — pleasure had functioned
centuries of Orientalist imageries and racist visual codifications to fix the
“Arab” body as an object of both
desire and fear’. As an
object of desire, the racial descriptor ‘of Middle Eastern
appearance’ includes olive ‘tanned’
Tanning on the beach, a cultural pastime at Cronulla beach as in many other
Australian beaches, is seen not as a desire to blacken
the somatic qualities of
the white subject but to enhance its aesthetic modalities. However, there is
always the cautionary dermatological
marker where fetishism of the Arab
body’s sought-after ‘‘olive skin’’ abruptly ends
(Farid 2009, p.
Despite the obvious failures of the racial descriptor ‘of Middle
Eastern appearance’ to accurately represent peoples of
Middle Eastern
ancestry, NSW Police defend their continued usage of it. A police investigation
into the pogrom unconvincingly concluded
that racial descriptors are of
‘considerable benefit to the ethnic community’ (NSW Police Force
2006, p. 17). This report’s
homogenisation of ‘ethnic
community’ overlooked the diversity among Middle Eastern peoples placed
into this category.
Further, this report addressed issues raised by right-wing
political actors and peddlers who sought to justify the pogrom via several
rumours that males ‘of Middle Eastern appearance’ commonly harassed
local white females and violently assaulted white
males. In an unsuccessful
quest to identify a correlation between people of Middle Eastern ancestry and
high rates of crime in Cronulla,
the report found several inaccuracies in the
ways local police racially profiled individuals ‘of Middle Eastern
appearance’.
In pre-pogrom Cronulla, several individuals profiled as being
‘of Middle Eastern appearance’ were not of Middle Eastern
The NSW police dismissed the folklore of Cronulla’s supposed history of
Middle Eastern crime, thus rendering it an
inadequate explanation of the pogrom.
However, this was insufficient to convince NSW Police to abandon a racial
profiling descriptor
they found to be flawed:
The NSW Police in fact, stand alone in their support on the use of racial
descriptors as a valid law enforcement tool. During this
review the use of the
racial descriptor ‘Mediterranean/Middle Eastern’ has been of
significant benefit in providing some
statistics on events involving people so
described. The result obtained from the research painted a picture that was in
fact favourable
to the Middle Eastern community ... This investigation involved
viewing each particular event where a person was described as
‘Mediterranean/Middle
Eastern’. The result of the research was that
some events involved people of strictly Mediterranean background who were
not Middle Eastern. Again, the use of racial descriptors by police in
these instances was of benefit to ethnic communities, in particular
Eastern community (NSW Police Force 2006, p. 23).
This investigation’s bogus sweeping conclusion is that racial profiling
descriptors benefit ‘ethnic’ communities
because they misrepresent
them. As this report found, some individuals profiled as being ‘of Middle
Eastern appearance’
were of Greek, Croatian, Serbian and even Caucasian
ancestry. Thus, NSW police who had an unstable relationships with Sydney’s
Arab communities in the late 1990s (Collins et al. 2000; Fraser et al. 1997)
found that local Cronulla police racially profiled various
people of European
ancestry as ‘Middle Eastern’. Perhaps ironically, such conclusions
only further illustrate how ‘of
Middle Eastern appearance’ is a
flawed racial profiling descriptor.
Contrary to the aforementioned statement, NSW police are not alone in their
support of the racial descriptor ‘of Middle Eastern
appearance’. A
number of discourses that deny or undermine the racism within the pogrom also
find the term useful in characterising
the events as expressions of patriotism
and depicting Arab males as violent and misogynistic. Their support for the term
in their unquestioned racial profiling efforts that criminalise Arab
Australians. The next section unpacks these discourses.
Denial and undermining racism
Noble (2009) argued:
[C]laims that the riots revealed the ‘racist underbelly’ of
Australian society are no less enlightening, because they
reduce complex
phenomena to single frame analysis. This is not to side with those politicians
who refused to see [the pogrom’s]
racism ... Nor is it to side with
conservatives who argued that racism came from the Lebanese (pp. 3–4).
This section examines arguments that deny or undermine the pogrom’s
racism. In avoiding a single frame analysis, this section
unpacks racism in
relation to a number of overlapping themes regarding identity, gender,
patriotism, criminalisation, Otherness,
and culture. Within the context of the
pogrom, racial profiling is central to these themes. The denial or undermining
of the pogrom’s
racism is achieved through the affirming of several racial
profiling efforts that aim to criminalise Arab males as violent sexual
who are obsessed with white females from Cronulla.
The denial of the pogrom’s racism was apparent among anti-Arab/Muslim
peddlers who attempted to legitimise it as an expression
of patriotic defence.
These peddlers zoned in on the infamous beachside incident and emphasise the
‘brutality of the attack,
the extent of injuries, and the frequency of
such events, and racialising all of these as aspects of the inherent criminality
deviant masculinity of Lebanese-Australian young men’ (Poynting 2006,
p. 45). A number of pogrom-enthusiasts claimed that Lebanese
constantly threatened white females on Cronulla beach (even though no white
females were involved in the beachside incident).
These hearsay narratives were
significant to the ways locals legitimised the need to drape themselves with
Australiana items and
racially assault those they deemed to be ‘of Middle
Eastern appearance’. The
Four Corners
program outlined some
examples of these narratives in interviews with pogrom participants, who claimed
that Middle Eastern men regularly
assaulted ‘Aussie’ females,
harassed peoples, polluted the local parks and beaches, played soccer on the
beaches and
often kicked their balls at people passing by, and Middle Eastern
women dressed wearing ‘too many clothes’ on the beach.
LIZ JACKSON: The surfies at Cronulla were talking about it, too. The bare
facts are these. Three volunteer lifesavers were leaving
the beach, having
finished their patrol. They were not in uniform. There was a verbal altercation
with a group of what the locals
call Lebs, with provocative insults from both
sides. The lifesavers were bashed. But these are the rumours that were spreading
SCOTT: They were playing soccer, I think. And they kicked the ball at some
girls and started harassing the girls. And the lifeguards
asked them to stop.
Standard thing — happens all the time down here. And, you know, they
didn’t like it and a fight broke
MARK: Well, I heard that a lifeguard saved, like, a Muslim lady. And because
they touched her, the Muslim men bashed them. But I don’t
that’s true. But that’s what I heard.
MICK: There was two lifeguards on duty. They just got picked on and just,
apparently, bashed, you know (Jackson 2006).
Perera (2006) critiques the
Four Corners
program’s depiction of
the pogrom, arguing: ‘Cronulla Beach comes to stand for a paired sequence
of events, the riot
and the revenge, in a fable of equivalence in which two
misguided groups, mostly of young men, mirror each other’s ignorance
prejudices, for example, by each claiming to protect their womenfolk.’
The personal anecdotes apparent in the program, while incorrect in explaining
the beachside incident, are based on racially profiling
exhibiting the fluidity
of an Arab/Muslim/Lebanese/Middle Eastern Other. The racialised rumour mill did
not have a consensus of a
particular narration of what happened that prompted
the pogrom. However, there is a strong consensus regarding the Othering and
criminalisation
of Lebanese and Muslim males as violent and misogynistic in ways
that victimise white Australia. Shaw (2009) argues that ‘bashings’
and fights on Cronulla beach are not new; there have been several ‘turf
wars’ between locals themselves and between ‘Westies’
colloquial term referring to people from Sydney’s western suburbs) and
local peoples. Wise (2009, p. 141) examines a number
of newspaper headlines from
the local newspapers in Cronulla that report crime and antisocial behaviour in
the beachside city. Wise
(2009) comments:
What is interesting about the reporting is how certain bodies
‘appear’ and ‘disappear’ over this time, intersecting
with moral panics of the time. With a couple of exceptions, until the early
2000s, the anti-social behaviour was committed by perpetrators
without a named
ethnicity (p. 141).
However, according to local racist folklore, crime was alien in the area and
introduced by particular people they labelled as
‘wogs’/‘Lebs’
‘of Middle Eastern
appearance’. A year after the event, Jackson (2006) observed:
New South Wales police are now far more visible on Cronulla Beach. And locals
will tell you that it’s about time. That Middle
Eastern gangs have been
picking fights with them for years and getting away with it. Police acknowledge
there has been escalating
tension. But there isn’t an ethnic breakdown of
local crime, so evidence is largely
(emphasis added).
The Hazzard Report attempted to find truth to these personal anecdotes:
[I]t was claimed that the problem of ethnic tension in the community,
particularly in the beach environment was prevalent over the
past decade. It
allegedly involved gangs or people of Middle Eastern appearance travelling to
Cronulla from [Western Sydney] ...
creating conflict with the local community.
Crime trends and police interaction with persons of interest did not identify
any significant
trend for involvement by people of Middle Eastern background in
local incidents. Research also indicated that the majority of crime
in the local
area command is committed by people who live in the Sutherland Shire. ... the
review also established that historically
there have been incidents of public
disorder in Cronulla that did not involve ethnic tension, but were brought about
by the atmosphere
of an occasion and excessive consumption of alcohol’
(NSW Police Force 2006, p. 17).
To identify these discourses as anecdotal is not to say that there have never
been instances where ‘Lebs’ have harassed
white females; rather, it
is to question the conclusions of these discourses that form the
‘patriotic’ or ‘feminist’
interpretations of the pogrom.
The anecdotal evidence of Middle Eastern deviancy functions within racialised
folklore that proponents draw on in a desperate attempt
to legitimise the
pogrom. The criminalisation of Others in the aftermath of the pogrom is captured
in Stone’s (2006) argument
that Australia has an ‘Islamic
cancer’. Stone (2006) argued the event in Cronulla was provoked by
‘Muslim lawlessness’.
Further, Stone (2006) discussed Muslims
abstractly in defining the ‘Muslim problem’, with the exception of
the ‘gang-raping
of “white Aussie sluts” by young Muslim men
of Pakistani origin’ (p. 11). The 2002 Sydney gang rapes involving
Pakistani perpetrators informed Stone’s position on the pogrom as a
reaction to Middle Eastern deviancy.
While Gleeson (2007, p. 171) writes that gang rape is unfortunately widely
practised among white Australia and is in fact ‘an
tradition’, Stone ignores these events and uses the 2002 gang rapes to
profile Muslims as sexual predators.
In an article titled ‘Racism or patriotism?: An eyewitness account of
the Cronulla demonstration of 11 December 2005’,
Barclay and West (2006)
attempted to portray the Cronulla events as people merely celebrating Australian
identity. In describing
the causation of the event, Barclay and West (2006)
dedicate an entire section titled ‘the Lebanese males’. Here, the
authors criminalise Lebanese males as perpetrators of rape, violence and
terrorism in Australia. The category of ‘Australian’
is afforded to
white people, whom Barclay and West (2006) position as victims. The evidence
they use to criminalise Lebanese males
is largely anecdotal. Barclay and West
(2006, p. 77) claim that local people identify Lebanese males due to their
phenotypical features
such as ‘haircuts and swarthy features helped mark
them out as different from locals’. Further, these authors construct
‘Lebanese males’ as
anti-Australian activists who assault white Australians — and, as a
consequence, ‘Aussies’ legitimately celebrated
their national
identity. A mix of biological and cultural racial profiling works to paint the
pogrom as victimised patriots legitimately
celebrating their national identity.
Barclay and West (2006) contextualise the pogrom in the spirit of this folklore,
it to claim that ‘[m]ales in packs would verbally abuse females
or offer sexually explicit comments. The phrases “you’re
slut”, “you Aussie slut” “you should be
raped”’ (p. 77). Barclay and West (2006) characterise
‘the Lebanese males’ as aggressive, claiming to local peoples:
‘This is our beach. We own it’ (p. 77). These
folklore claims are
only substantiated by gossip rather than statistical evidence of reported crime
rates. Racial profiling is inherent
in their attempt to minimise racism and
legitimise the actions of racist hatred as mere patriotism.
In her feminist response to the Cronulla riots, Lattas (2009) drew on her
ethnography with locals to prove that there is a history
of local harassment of
Lebanese males against white females. Lattas (2009) discussed the work of
conservative commentators to argue
that the ‘Left’ have neglected
these narratives of Lebanese harassment. To legitimise the view that white
females constantly
face Arab male sexism, Lattas (2009, p. 207) even fleshes out
account of a participant in one study (Poynting et al. 1997) named
‘Mohamed’ who described (white) ‘Australian’
poses the questions:
Are these reports of Lebanese/Muslim harassment of white females in Cronulla
evidence of allegations of racists, given their use in
justifying the riots? As
nothing out of the ordinary, given old-fashioned Aussie sexual harassment? As
‘further proof’
of Muslim immigrant misogyny? As the failed
practice, or failed myth, of Australian multiculturalism? ... none of these
will do (pp. 200–1).
While Lattas (2009) positions her analysis away from the undermining of
racism, the conclusions drawn depict Arab/Muslim males as
sexual predators. This
is revealed in a paradoxical assertion communicated later:
[Y]oung [white] women in Australia today are being made to bear an unfair
burden of Muslim male resentment at the exclusion they feel
here. The powerful
myth of the slut is intensifying and channelling the affective charge of this
felt exclusion onto the exposed
bodies of young Aussie women, and they are at a
loss with how to deal with it (p. 211).
The descriptor ‘Muslim’ significantly contrasts data elsewhere in
her ethnography, where participants identify ‘Lebs’
as the common
perpetrators. In these personal anecdotes, participants racially profile the
perpetrators as ‘Lebanese’
(discussed further below) or
‘Muslim’ who unfairly burden white females and thus it is necessary
to distinguish white
male harassment from Muslim. These conclusions not only
contrast the earlier dismissal of ‘Lebanese/Muslim harassment’
211), but also exhibit a white feminist Orientalist (Abood 2002) discourse
within racist perspectives of the pogrom. Said (1978)
hyper-sexualisation of Arab males is common in Western Orientalist
representations. Within the Australian context, Western Orientalist
mythologies
of ‘Arab’ masculinity produce popular depictions of Arab/Muslim
males as ‘unable to control their sexual
urges’ (Dagistanli &
Grewal 2012, p. 129). The sexualisation of Arab males as being lustful and
thirsty for white females
is a typical blockbuster thriller-plot that has wowed
Hollywood and Western audiences (Shaheen 2001). Shaheen (2012) argues that
Hollywood’s common racist depictions of Arab males as a threat to white
females is widespread in storylines across Western
film screens. Within
Australian screens, Orientalism flavours the characterisation of Arab males as
villains who are rarely portrayed
as heroes (Krayem 2014). Perhaps
unsurprisingly, participants within an ethnographic study in the aftermath of
the pogrom hold similar
stories that are mysteriously omitted from a police
investigation into the events.
The limitations, paradoxes and unanswered questions
The characterisation of males ‘of Middle Eastern appearance’ as
sexual predators who target white females is significant
to the pogrom. The
aforementioned discourses empowered these representations uniquely in ways that
denied or undermined racism in
Cronulla. These personal anecdotes of Arab male
harassment, whether documented through hearsay or ethnography, are collectively
on the racial profiling efforts by individuals. The significance of racial
profiling is neglected in these narratives as they collectively
fail to address
five crucial aspects/questions in relation to the pogrom. It is here that the
limitations and paradoxes within the
‘of Middle Eastern appearance’
discourses shine clearly.
The first concerns the common bypassing of the fluid categories involved.
Arab Australians are diverse, ranging from Palestinian,
Lebanese, Syrian, Iraqi,
Egyptian, Sudanese, Algerian, Moroccan, Jordanian, Qatari and so on. Most
Australian Arabs are Christian
and Muslim peoples not exclusive to the Middle
East. Yet the aforementioned narratives that profile people as
and ‘of Middle Eastern appearance’ as
equivalent homogenous categories. While Lebanese Australians are the largest
within Arab Australia (El Khouri 2012), they are not an overwhelming
majority. On the day of the pogrom, several victims of racist
mob violence were
not Lebanese or Middle Eastern, though pogrom enthusiasts identified them as
Individual claims that the harassment of white females was perpetrated by
males ‘who looked to be of Lebanese origin’
(Lattas 2009, p. 208)
— or, as Barclay and West (2006) put it, feature ‘swarthy’ (p.
77) appearances — need
to be examined in this context. Reading
‘race’ on one’s body is a crucial factor in (mis)representing
As discussed previously, the NSW Police report investigating the
Cronulla riot further found this racialised descriptor to be problematic.
constant interchange between the identities of ‘Muslim’,
‘Lebanese’ and ‘Middle Eastern’
only affirms the failure
of individuals to racially profile others, shedding doubt over the accuracy of
the aforementioned narratives.
The second aspect concerns the topic of gender, which Lattas (2009) rightly
argues should be significant to the analysis of the events/discourses
Cronulla. However, the aforementioned narratives of harassment omit the voices
of Arab and Muslim women, as captured in the following
exchange on the
program about the pogrom:
Female 1: As a 17 year old living in South West Sydney. We can walk to school
5 days a week, we can get stopped, 3 out of the 5 days
get harassed for being
[white] Australian walking to School.
Female 2: I am Lebanese and I’m Muslim and I also get harassed. So
it’s not just the Aussies. I really really get angry
when Aussies think
that they are targeted just because they are white. That is not true. All women
get harassed! (Martin 2006)
The exchange reveals how the ‘feminist response’ (Lattas 2009)
encompasses a white Eurocentric account that omits Arab
female voices. This
white hegemonic feminist approach is not unique in Australia. Moreton-Robinson
(2000) critiques the whiteness
within the Australian feminist movement, pointing
out how Indigenous women have challenged the authority of white feminist
Moreton-Robinson (2000) argues this positionality among white
feminists in Australia maintains a white hegemonic racial order within
Australian feminism. From an Arab Australian feminist perspective, Abood (2002)
writes ‘when the voices of Western women still
speak over and above
everyone else. It is equally important that Arab-Australian women be seen and
heard’ (p. 168). Abood (2002)
argues that white Oriental feminism is a
common challenge for Arab Australian feminist activists. Awad (2017) identifies
Australian women mediate between Western ideas and Arab traditions,
noting the importance of critiquing ‘the books written
by Anglo women in
perspectives on the pogrom should account
for the experiences of
women involved, as identified on the day:
on a wall at North Cronulla Beach when three Caucasian
women verbally abused
them. A large crowd gathered, commenced chanting and throwing sausages at them
At 2.30pm two females aged 17 and 18 were near the Cronulla Beach. As they
walked past three Caucasian women of about the same age,
one of the victims was
wearing an Islamic symbol around her neck. They were verbally abused by the
other three women with reference
made to them as being Lebanese and remarks made
A white hegemonic feminist analysis that engages in racial profiling Arab
Australian males furthers the undermining of the pogrom’s
racism. The
stories of victimised white females is centred and neglects other narratives
crucial to the pogrom. Numerous reports
have identified that Arab/Muslim women
are more likely to be victims of racial assaults in Australia (Poynting 2009;
Noble 2004; Tabar et al. 2010), and this reality of assaulting
women has not sparked a riot to ‘protect’ or defend these
among Arab Australian and Muslim communities. This relates to the third aspect
of ‘protection’ in relation to gender.
Within the pogrom, various
white males claimed it was necessary to protect ‘our women’ from
Arab males. These notions
of protecting ‘Anglo women from Lebanese men
recreates the Orientalist understanding’ (Krayem 2014, p. 117) of Arab
as sexually deviant. The feminist response discussed above overlooked
critiquing these actions of dominance alluding to a patriarchal
structure where
white females require white males to protect them from Arab males. In contrast,
Idriss (2014) challenged the attitudes
of males within the Lebanese community
who felt the need to protect Lebanese women from racist white males. Offering an
Arab feminist
critique, Idriss (2014) writes:
Essentially, Lebanese-Australian women did not ask for their honour to be
defended by the boys that day. In fact, many of the young
women I knew and spoke
to about those incidents were frustrated by the ways our very own existence as
females was treated as an excuse
for violence. Lebanese-Australian young women,
including myself, were taunted by the question, ‘How many of your cousins
in the Riots?’ when in fact many of us only knew of the riots by what
we saw on the evening news. ... [We] were drawn into
this conflict without our
The related fourth aspect concerns the ignored normalised misogynistic
Cronulla culture that predates the pogrom and is omitted in
the aforementioned
discussions on gender and patriotism in Cronulla. One famous Australian book
Puberty Blues
(Carey & Lette 1979) narrates the common local
Cronulla white patriarchy against white females. In this classic publication,
white female characters experience various forms of sexism, ranging from
protests against female surfers to beachside sexual abuse.
One of the authors
discussed how white females were treated as second-class citizens,
‘nothing more than a life-support system
to a vagina ... the terms for
women were “bush pigs” or “swamp hogs”. If you were very
good-looking you got
called a “glamour maggot”’ (Jones 2002).
A pertinent question remains: If misogyny is of such concern to pogrom-peddlers,
why did these instances not inspire a riot? Evidently, the racial profiling of
misogyny as Arab is not significant.
The fifth and final aspect concerns the question on why Cronulla was chosen
by ‘ethnic’ males as a space to harass white
females. The racial
profiling of Lebanese/Muslim harassment — whether through local folklore
(Barclay & West 2006), ethnographic
research (Lattas 2009) or communicated
through right-wing commentators — fails to answer this question. There are
beaches all
over Sydney’s coast that Arab Australians visit, yet an
anti-Arab/Muslim pogrom occurred in Cronulla. This begs the questions:
male harassment of white females is a common occurrence in modern-day Australia,
why haven’t pogroms erupted in other
parts of Australia? Do the
aforementioned perspectives hold that misogynistic, Lebanese/Muslim males only
target white females in
Cronulla? What is significant about Cronulla as a space
for these actions? The racial profiling of males ‘of Middle Eastern
appearance’ as sexual predators becomes the focal point that neglects to
explain the obvious: Why Cronulla?
Since the genesis of the recent moral panics in the late 1990s (Collins et
al. 2000; Poynting 2000; Poynting et al.
1997; White 2007)
that increased the
policing, media and public usage of the descriptor ‘of Middle Eastern
appearance’, scholars have noted
a shift from an Arab Other (Poynting et
al. 2004) to an emphasis on a Muslim Other (Itaoui & Dunn 2017). In almost
two decades,
this shift has seen the lingering of the term ‘of Middle
Eastern appearance’ correlated with both forms of interrelated
As this article has highlighted, the NSW police investigation into the events in
Cronulla revealed their relentless support
for usage of the racialised
descriptor. For decades, Arab Australian communities and social science scholars
have argued that this
inaccurate descriptor increases anti-Arab sentiment in
Australia. This article has further highlighted how this racial descriptor,
the context of the Cronulla pogrom, enables the denial and undermining of racism
against Arab Australia. It enables commentators
of the pogrom to legitimise,
undermine or deny anti-Arab racism. The descriptor has a number of flaws and
contradictions that continue
to be ignored by NSW police, media commentators and
a minority of academics involved in ethnographic research or racist hearsay
narratives.
These stakeholders continue to overlook the everyday lived
experiences of Arab Australia, contributing to their marginalisation.
Abdel-Fattah, R 2007, ‘Of Middle Eastern appearance’,
Griffith Review
, no. 15, pp. 157–9.
Abood, P 2002, ‘Arab-Australian women’s activism’, in G
Hage (ed.),
Arab-Australians today: citizenship and belonging
, Melbourne
University Press, Carlton South, Vic, pp. 161–72.
‘After the riots’
, Channel 9.
Directed by R Martin.
Alpert, GP, Dunham, RG & Smith, MR 2007, ‘Investigating racial
profiling by the Miami‐Dade Police Department: a multimethod
Criminology & Public Policy
, vol. 6, no. 1, pp.
Asquith, N 2008, ‘Race riots on the beach: a case for criminalising
hate speech?’,
Papers from the British Criminology Conference
British Society of Criminology, pp. 50–64.
Awad, A 2017,
Beyond veiled cliches: the real lives of Arab women
Vintage, North Sydney, NSW.
Barclay, R & West, P 2006, ‘Racism or patriotism?: an eyewitness
account of the Cronulla demonstration of 11 December 2005’,
, vol. 14, no. 1, pp. 75–85.
Carey, G & Lette, K 1979,
Puberty Blues
, McPhee Gribble, Carlton,
Chan, J 2011, ‘Racial profiling and police subculture’,
Canadian Journal of Criminology and Criminal Justice
, vol. 53, no. 1, pp.
Collins, J 2009, ‘Sydney’s Cronulla riots: the context and
implications’ in G Noble (ed.),
Lines in the sands: the Cronulla riots,
multiculturalism and national belonging
, Sydney Institute of Criminology
Press, Sydney, NSW, pp. 27–43.
Collins, J, Noble, G, Poynting, S & Tabar, P 2000,
Kebabs, kids, cops
and crime: youth, ethnicity and crime
, Pluto Press Sydney, NSW.
Cunneen, C, White, R & Richards, K 2015,
Juvenile justice: youth and
crime in Australia
, Oxford University Press, South Melbourne, Vic.
Dagistanli, S & Grewal, K 2012, ‘Peverse Muslim masculinities in
contemporary Orientalist discourse: the vagaries of Muslim
immigration in the
West’ in G Morgan & S Poynting (eds.),
Global Islamophobia: Muslims
and moral panic in the West
, Ashgate, Surrey, pp. 119–42.
Dellal, H 2004, ‘“Of Middle Eastern appearance”: police and
Muslim communities in Australia’,
Around the Globe
, vol. 1, no. 3,
Dunn, K 2009, ‘Performing Australian nationalisms at Cronulla’ in
G Noble (ed.),
Lines in the sands: the Cronulla riots, multiculturalism and
national belonging
, Sydney Institute of Criminology Press, Sydney, NSW, pp.
Dunn, K, Forrest, J, Burnley, I & McDonald, A 2004, ‘Constructing
racism in Australia’,
Australian Journal of Social Issues
no. 4, pp. 409–30.
El Khouri, P 2012,
Keeping up ‘appearances’ Australia 2013:
Ancestry and ethnic descriptors — after the Cronulla riots
Higgs, Sydney, NSW.
Evers, C 2009, ‘“The local boys”: violence, care,
masculinity and the riots’, in G Noble (ed.),
Lines in the sands: the
Cronulla riots, multiculturalism and national belonging
, Sydney Institute of
Criminology Press, Sydney, NSW, pp. 185–99.
Farid, F 2009, ‘Terror at the beach: Arab bodies and the somatic
violence of white cartographic anxiety in Australia and Palestine/Israel’,
Social Semiotics
, vol. 19, no. 1, pp. 59–78.
Fraser, D, Melhem, M & Yacoub, M 1997, ‘Violence against Arab
Australians’ in C Cunneen, D Fraser, & S Tomsen
hate: hate crime in Australia
, Hawkins Press, Annandale, NSW pp.
Gleeson, K 2007, ‘White natives and gang rape at the time of
centenary’ in S Poynting & G Morgan (eds.),
Outrageous: moral
panics in Australia
, ACYS Publishing, Hobart, Tas, pp. 171–80.
Idriss, S 2014,
The ‘lionesses’ of Lebanon
, SBS, viewed 15
November 2017, http://www.sbs.com.au/
programs/onceuponatimein/article/2014/07/09/lionesses-lebanon.
Itaoui, R & Dunn, K 2017, ‘Media representations of racism and
spatial mobility: young Muslim (un) belonging in a post-Cronulla
Sutherland’,
Journal of Intercultural Studies
, vol. 38, no. 3, pp.
Jabbour, R 2001, ‘Policing partnership in a multicultural Australia:
achievements and challenges: an Australian Arabic perspective’,
Australian Institute of Criminology
, Brisbane, Qld, pp. 25–6.
Krayem, M 2014,
Heroes, villains and more villains: representations of
Arab men on Australian screens
PhD thesis, University of Technology, viewed
15 November 2017, https://opus.lib.uts.edu.au/bitstream/
10453/37018/2/02whole.pdf.
Lattas, J 2009, ‘“Bikini vs Burqa” in contemporary
Australia: a feminist response to the Cronulla riots’ in
G Noble (ed.),
Lines in the sands: the Cronulla riots, multiculturalism and national
, Sydney Institute of Criminology Press, Sydney, NSW, pp.
Manning, P 2003, ‘Arabic and Muslim people in Sydney’s daily
newspapers, before and after September 11’,
Media International
Australia incorporating Culture and Policy
, vol. 109, no. 1, pp.
Manning, P 2004,
Dog whistle politics and journalism: reporting Arabic and
Muslim people in Sydney newspapers
, Australia: Australian Centre for
Independent Journalism, UTS, Sydney, NSW.
Manning, P 2006a, ‘Australians imagining Islam’ in E Poole &
JE Richardson (eds.),
Muslims and the new media
, Tauris and Co., New
York, pp. 128–41.
Manning, P 2006b,
Us and them: a journalist’s investigation of
media, Muslims and the Middle East
, Random House, Sydney, NSW.
Moreton-Robinson, A 2000,
Talkin’ up to the white woman: Aboriginal
women and feminism
University of Queensland Press, St Lucia,
Moses, D 2006,
Pogrom talk
, On Line Opinion, 11 January, viewed 15
November 2017, http://www.onlineopinion.com.au/view.asp?article=4038.
New South Wales Police Force 2006,
Hazard Report – Cronulla riots:
review of the police response: report and recommendations
, New South Wales
Police Force, Sydney, NSW.
Noble, G 2009, ‘“Where the bloody hell are we?”
Multicultural manners in a world of hyperdiversity’, in G
Noble (ed.),
Lines in the sands: the Cronulla riots, multiculturalism and national
, Sydney Institute of Criminology Press, Sydney, NSW,
Noble, G & Poynting, S 2010, ‘White lines: the intercultural
politics of everyday movement in social spaces’,
Intercultural Studies
, vol. 31, no. 5, pp. 489–505.
Of Middle Eastern appearance
2000, motion picture, Metro Screen,
Sydney, Australia. Directed by P Abood.
Perera, S 2006, ‘Race terror, Sydney, December 2005’,
Borderlands
, vol. 5, no. 1, viewed 15 November 2017,
http://www.borderlands.net.au/vol5no1_2006/perera_raceterror.htm.
Poynting, S 2000, ‘Ethnicising criminality and criminalising
ethnicity’ in J Collins & S Poynting (eds.),
The other Sydney:
communities, identities and inequalities in Western Sydney
, Common Ground,
Melbourne, Vic, pp. 63–78.
Poynting, S 2001, ‘Appearances and ethnic crime’,
Issues in Criminal Justice
, vol. 13, no. 1, pp. 110–13.
Poynting, S 2006, ‘What caused the Cronulla riot?’,
, vol. 48, no. 1, pp. 85–92.
Poynting, S 2007, ‘“Thugs” and “grubs” at
Cronulla: from media beat-ups to beating up migrants’
in Poynting, S &
Morgan, G (eds.),
Outrageous: moral panics in Australia
, ACYS Publishing,
Hobart, Tas, pp. 158–70.
Poynting, S 2009, ‘The “lost”girls: Muslim young women in
Australia’,
Journal of Intercultural Studies
, vol. 30, no. 4, pp.
Poynting, S and Noble, G 2004,
Living with racism: the experience and
reporting by Arab and Muslim Australians of discrimination, abuse and violence
since 11 September
, Centre for Cultural Research, University of Western
Sydney Sydney, NSW.
Poynting, S, Noble, G & Tabar, P 1997, ‘“We stay Lebanese
together”: a study in “protest masculinity”’,
Education Australia
, no. 37, pp. 10–13.
Poynting, S, Noble, G & Tabar, P 2001, ‘Middle Eastern appearances:
“Ethnic gangs”, moral panic and media framing’,
& New Zealand Journal of Criminology
, vol. 34, no. 1, pp.
Poynting, S, Noble, G, Tabar, P & Collins, J 2004,
Bin Laden in the
suburbs: criminalising the Arab other
, Sydney Institute of Criminology,
Sydney, NSW.
Pugliese, J 2003, ‘The locus of the non: the racial fault-line
“of Middle-Eastern Appearance”’,
Borderlands
no. 3, viewed 15 November 2017, http://www.borderlands.net.au/
vol2no3_2003/pugliese_non.htm.
Race: the floating signifier
1996, videorecording, Media Education
Foundation, USA. Directed by S Hall and S Jhally.
‘Riot and revenge’ 2006,
Four Corners
, television program
transcript, ABC, Sydney, 13 March, viewed 15 November 2017,
http://www.abc.net.au/4corners/riot-and-revenge/8953550.
Said, E 1978,
Orientalism
, Penguin, New York, NY.
Shaheen, J 2001,
Reel bad Arabs: how Hollywood vilifies a people
Olive Branch Press, New York, NY.
Shaheen, J 2012,
Guilty: Hollywood’s verdict on Arabs after
, Olive Branch Press, New York, NY.
Shaw, W 2009, ‘Riotous Sydney take three (Cronulla): confessions of a
beach survivor’ in G Noble (ed.),
Lines in the sands: the Cronulla
riots, multiculturalism and national belonging
, Sydney Institute of
Criminology Press, Sydney, NSW, pp. 58–71.
Singh, D 2007, ‘White subjectivity and racial terror: towards an
understanding of racial violence’,
, vol. 3, no. 1, pp.
Stone, J 2006, ‘The Muslim problem and what to do about it’,
, vol. 50, no. 9, pp. 11–17.
Stratton, J 2011,
Uncertain lives: culture, race and neoliberalism in
, Cambridge Scholars Publishing, Newcastle, UK.
Tabar, P, Noble, G & Poynting, S 2010,
On being Lebanese in Australia:
identity, racism, and the ethnic field
, Lebanese American University Press,
Beirut, Lebanon.
The big chill
2002, radio broadcast, 2GB, Sydney, 5 December.
Wainwright, R 2006, ‘Which faces fit Middle East tag?’,
Sydney Morning Herald
, 15 July, viewed 15 November 2017,
http://www.smh.com.au/news/national/which-faces-fit-middle-east-tag/2006/07/
14/1152637872158.html?page=fullpage#contentSwap1.
Warner, K 2004, ‘Gang rape in Sydney: crime, the media, politics, race
and sentencing’,
Australian & New Zealand Journal of
Criminology
, vol. 37, no. 3, pp. 344–61.
White, R 2007, ‘Policing the other: Lebanese young people in a climate
of conflict’ in J Jupp, J Neiuwenhuysen & E
Dawson (eds.),
Social cohesion in Australia
, Cambridge University Press, Melbourne, Vic,
Wise, A 2009, ‘“It’s just an attitude that you feel”:
inter-ethnic habitus before the Cronulla riots’
in G Noble (ed.),
Lines in the sands: the Cronulla riots, multiculturalism and national
, Sydney Institute of Criminology Press, Sydney, NSW, pp.
Lecturer, School of Teacher
Education, Faculty of Arts and Education, Charles Sturt University, Locked Bag
49, Dubbo NSW 2830, Australia.
ral-natour@csu.edu.au
Note that the authors of
these studies have produced numerous publications that explore the harassment of
white males against Arab
and Muslim females (see Poynting & Noble 2004;
Tabar, Noble & Poynting 2010). These did not form part of the
response discussed above.
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (465 KB)
PDF format (731 KB)
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter