URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/journals/MelbULawRw/2024/7.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 15:18:12
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Hayward, Benjamin --- "Text, Context, and Purpose': Australian Lawmakers' Adoption of the Cisg, and the Use of Legislative Histories as Aids in Statutory Interpretation" [2024] MelbULawRw 7; (2024) 47(2) Melbourne University Law Review 303
‘TEXT, CONTEXT, AND PURPOSE’: AUSTRALIAN LAWMAKERS’ ADOPTION OF THE CISG, AND THE USE OF LEGISLATIVE HISTORIES AS
AIDS IN STATUTORY INTERPRETATION
I Introduction
II Australia’s Statutory CISG Architecture and the Rules Governing Its Interpretation in Australia
III Determining the CISG’s Extent of Operation in Australia: Where Harmonised and Non-Harmonised Laws Collide
IV Australia’s CISG Legislative Histories Examined: A Systematic Content Analysis
A Reading Australia’s CISG Legislative Histories via a Systematic Content Analysis
1 The ACT’s Explanatory Memorandum (Explanatory Statement)
C Norfolk Island
1 NSW’s Explanatory Memorandum (Explanatory Note)
2 NSW’s Second Reading Speeches
3 NSW’s Parliamentary Debates
1 The NT’s Second Reading Speech
2 The NT’s Parliamentary Debates
F Queensland
1 Queensland’s Second Reading Speech
2 Queensland’s Parliamentary Debates
1 SA’s Explanatory Memorandum Equivalent (Explanation of Clauses)
2 SA’s Second Reading Speech
3 SA’s Parliamentary Debates
1 Tasmania’s Explanatory Memorandum (Clause Notes)
2 Tasmania’s Second Reading Speeches
3 Tasmania’s Parliamentary Debates
1 Victoria’s Original 1987 Legislation
(a) Victoria’s 1987 Explanatory Memorandum
(b) Victoria’s 1987 Second Reading Speech
(c) Victoria’s 1987 Parliamentary Debates
2 Victoria’s Relocated 2010 Legislation
(a) Victoria’s 2010 Explanatory Memorandum
(b) Victoria’s 2010 Second Reading Speech
(c) Victoria’s 2010 Parliamentary Debates
1 WA’s Second Reading Speech
2 WA’s Parliamentary Debates
K The Commonwealth
1 The TPA s 66A: Enacted 1987
(a) The Commonwealth’s 1987 Explanatory Memorandum
(b) The Commonwealth’s 1987 Second Reading Speech
(c) The Commonwealth’s 1987 Parliamentary Debates
2 The ACL s 68: Enacted 2010
(a) The Commonwealth’s 2010 Explanatory Memorandum
(b) The Commonwealth’s 2010 Second Reading Speech
(c) The Commonwealth’s 2010 Parliamentary Debates
L Interim Conclusion
V Australia’s CISG Case Law: Catalogued and Examined
VI Conclusions: Lessons Learned, and Their Implications for Future Case Law and Law Reform Initiatives in Australia and Abroad
VII Appendix 1: Australia’s CISG Legislative Histories by Jurisdiction and Type
VIII Appendix 2: Australia’s CISG Case Law to Date
IX Addendum
‘TEXT, CONTEXT, AND PURPOSE’: AUSTRALIAN
LAWMAKERS’ ADOPTION OF THE
, AND THE USE OF LEGISLATIVE
HISTORIES AS AIDS IN STATUTORY INTERPRETATION
Benjamin Hayward
United Nations Convention on Contracts for the International Sale of
convention aimed at harmonising international sales law and thereby promoting
international trade, has been part of Australian
law for over 30 years. An
interpretative problem persists, however, with respect to Australia’s
implementing Acts: one reading,
endorsed in the case law, suggests that the
applies only on a provision-by-provision basis where
inconsistent with non-harmonised Australian law. Whilst the
text is subject to its own internationally minded interpretative rules,
Australia’s implementing Acts are instead subject to
ordinary Australian
statutory interpretation principles. This article applies Australia’s
extrinsic materials rules, in conjunction
with Australia’s
legislative histories (explanatory memoranda, second reading speeches and
parliamentary debates relating to the
’s adoption), to
confirm our legislatures’ intent to apply the
in its entirety
in Australia. After identifying that no Australian
cases have yet
referenced those materials, this article identifies how future case law (and
local and international legislative activity)
can benefit from their
consideration.
I Introduction
United Nations Convention on Contracts for the International Sale of
‘widespread uniform law’
harmonising cross-border sales laws
intending to facilitate trade
contracting States,
adoption makes it a resounding
only (in the international commercial law arena) by the
Convention on the
Recognition and Enforcement of Foreign Arbitral
comparison is apt given that the development of international dispute resolution
systems and substantive international commercial
law are said to be
faces challenges in its application, including in
‘maintaining uniformity’, given the
constitutes
‘a living thing in a stream of continuing legal
development’.
establishes ‘textual uniformity’, though ‘applied
uniformity’ depends upon its
interpretation:
and this is what
matters’ for the
facilitation
Another challenge arises from merchants’ automatic exclusions of the
as their governing law.
metric, the
’s success ‘is less
These challenges are related.
One important empirical study (amongst several now addressing the
’s application) found that the risk of differing
interpretations being given to the
in different jurisdictions was
one reason for parties opting out of the
application.
This article examines how the
’s Australian adoption via
legislation enacted at the state, territory and Commonwealth levels affects its
local application,
and thus its acceptability to merchants. To that end, I
investigate four questions nearly entirely overlooked in the literature to
1 Did Australia’s lawmakers understand the
’s intended
international operation?
2 Are Australia’s
legislative histories useful in
evidencing that understanding?
3 To what extent have Australian courts drawn upon those legislative
histories as interpretative aids?
4 To what extent might they do so in the future, in order to support the
’s application and (in turn) its trade facilitation
objectives?
Answering these questions is practically important for several reasons.
First, Australian courts do not always approach the
internationalist
Australia’s ‘history of constructive
scholarship’.
Australia’s
applications not only affect outcomes in
particular cases,
but also merchants’
contractual performance outside of formal dispute
resolution.
Thirdly, private international
law (which includes the
‘is increasingly essential to legal practice in
given the increasing
internationalisation of
Fourthly, Australia owes other
contracting States public
international law obligations to apply the
correctly and to
its correct
Finally, and more generally, my analysis is a useful case study on the use of
extrinsic aids in statutory interpretation, amidst
our ‘age of
where statutory
interpretation is ‘the single most important aspect of legal and judicial
and where there is a
‘growing’ use of national uniform
legislation.
analysis of extrinsic materials, intended to support the operation of national
uniform legislation, is an approach that might
be usefully applied in other
legal fields.
Part II of this article sets the scene by examining the
Australian adoption via state, territory and Commonwealth legislation. Part III
identifies an interpretative problem emerging
from that adoption. Case law shows
that some Australian courts consider the
’s individual
provisions applicable only on a piecemeal basis and only where inconsistent with
non-harmonised Australian
to which statutory interpretation rules allow Australia’s
legislative
consulted in resolving this problem is established. Part IV determines the
extent to which those histories evidence parliamentary
intent to instead give
full local operation. Such full operation is necessary for the
to achieve its trade facilitation purposes in
making Part IV’s analysis
an essential consideration for courts and lawyers applying the
as well as Australian merchants entering into international sales contracts.
Part V’s case law analysis considers whether those
histories have been
used as interpretative aids to date. It finds that they have not. Part VI,
concluding, identifies several practical
future applications for my analysis in
Australia and abroad.
As well as answering the four novel questions identified above, this article
makes two additional contributions to the field. First,
Appendix 1 and Part IV
collate and analyse Australia’s
legislative histories in full:
a task never before attempted.
Appendix 2 takes a census of Australia’s current
The last time this was attempted was
and as demonstrated in Part V,
much has happened since
II Australia’s
Architecture and the Rules Governing Its Interpretation in
Australia’s status as a dualist State means the
automatically apply upon accession.
legislation (referred to in this article as ‘Australia’s
legislation’, ‘
Acts’ and ‘
legislation’) was required for the
to create private
rights and obligations in
Australia participated in the
’s drafting at an international
alongside other nation States and interest
via the United Nations Commission
on International Trade Law’s (‘UNCITRAL’) treaty-making
process that culminated
in the 1980 Vienna Diplomatic
Conference.
Yet it was Australia’s
parliaments — collectives of individuals having their own distinct
understandings
— that were entirely
responsible for giving it local effect.
Following Australia’s decision to adopt the
(announced on
22 November
‘principal’
local effect flows
from state or territory legislation making it ‘part of’ Australian
supplementary federal legislation,
Acts came into force on 1 April 1989, coinciding with the
entry into force for
Relying on national uniform legislation
reflects ‘Australian federalism at its
but also reflects constitutional sensitivities of the time. Despite the
existence of the
Commonwealth’s external affairs
the Standing Committee of
Attorneys-General
agreed to use state and
territory legislation to give effect to the
This makes practical
sense as sales law is otherwise state and territory
though it was also thought politically expedient (after
Commonwealth v
to avoid overusing the
external affairs
In addition to
Trade Practices Act 1974
’), Australia’s
legislation initially
comprised the:
Sale of Goods (Vienna Convention) Act 1987
Sale of Goods (Vienna Convention) Act 1987
Sale of Goods (Vienna Convention) Act 1986
Sale of Goods (Vienna Convention) Act 1987
Sale of Goods (Vienna Convention) Act 1986
Sale of Goods (Vienna Convention) Act 1986
Sale of Goods (Vienna Convention) Act 1987
Sale of Goods (Vienna Convention) Act 1987
Sale of Goods (Vienna Convention) Act 1986
Though it was initially intended that later ordinances would extend the
’s Australian application to the Cocos (Keeling) Islands,
Christmas Island, and the Ashmore and Cartier
this never occurred.
Australia’s
art 93 declaration regarding those external
territories remains in force to this
This statutory architecture has been altered three times. First, the
of Goods (Vienna Convention) (Amendment) Ordinance 1989
(ACT) amended the
Australian Capital Territory’s (‘ACT’) original ordinance to
address territory
self-government,
and to correct ‘a number of typographical errors’ in its
reproduction of the
technical amendments are not relevant for this article’s purposes.
However, both Victoria and the Commonwealth also reconsidered
legislation in 2010. This legislative activity is of present interest. The
Consumer Affairs Legislation Amendment (Reform) Act 2010
(Vic) repealed
Sale of Goods (Vienna Convention) Act 1987
(Vic), relocating its
provisions into
Goods Act 1958
Australian Consumer Law
which is set out in sch 2 of the
Competition and Consumer Act 2010
also now supersedes s 66A of the
Australia’s state and territory
Acts, attaching the
contain almost identical operative
provisions.
• define ‘Convention’ (or the lower-case
‘convention’) as the
• stipulate the
’s ‘force of law’ in each
• stipulate that its provisions ‘prevail over any other law in
force’ in each jurisdiction, ‘to the extent
inconsistency’.
Any local adoption of the
requires the achievement of ‘a
balance ... between the international origin of the
fact that the
is inserted in the general structure of each domestic
This balancing exercise raises interesting and very practical questions as to
which interpretative rules support the
’s Australian
application, which in turn directly affect the experiences of Australian lawyers
and merchants engaging with the
’s Australian
adoption includes (as
art 98 requires)
art 7(1): its
internal interpretation rule, pursuant to which ‘regard is to be had to
its international character and to the
need to promote uniformity in its
application and the observance of good faith in international trade’. This
rule requires
’s autonomous
interpretation,
excluding the operation of ordinary contracting State statutory interpretation
provisions must thus be interpreted ‘independently from any domestic
preconception’.
Though existing scholarship has analysed the operative
(‘machinery’) provisions contained in Australia’s
scholarship has not yet addressed
subjection to different
interpretative rules.
art 7(1) applies to ‘the interpretation
’: that is, to the
Australia’s machinery
provisions, giving the
effect, are local
legislation.
interpretation therefore involves applying Australia’s
ordinary statutory interpretation rules: a proposition entirely consistent
art 7(1)’s scope.
provisions, as explained below, have
been problematic with respect to the
’s Australian application.
Understanding the correct basis for their interpretation is essential in seeking
to resolve those
Australian courts conceptualise applying statutory interpretation rules as
involving ‘the duty of a court ... to give the words
of a statutory
provision the meaning that the legislature is taken to have intended them to
The ‘familiar
incantation’
of text, context, and purpose guides this
interpretation Acts and common law rules providing further
In this article, I address how
Australia’s extrinsic materials rules — local statutory
interpretation rules — can
confirm the
’s intended entire
operation in Australia, via their application to Australia’s machinery
provisions.
Extrinsic materials are a
‘useful guide to
their consultation therefore speaks to the essence of Australia’s
statutory interpretation function.
Referencing extrinsic materials is now
as ‘an issue of
considerable significance’ as they ‘may resolve an ambiguity or
doubt as to meaning’ in a
Not all authorities agree,
reflecting the legislative drafters’ joke that ‘we do not read
legislation, we write
legislation’.
This potential nevertheless warrants their careful analysis. In the commercial
arbitration context — where Australia’s
legislation is also based on
international
instruments
— extrinsic materials have informed the interpretation of the
International Arbitration Act 1974
state-based domestic equivalents.
Australia’s interpretation Acts themselves are not
but nearly all contain extrinsic
materials rules. The common law does too, and does not require ‘ambiguity
to be established
before the materials may be
considered’.
I focus on Australia’s statutory rules in this article. Since some apply
subject to thresholds, I thereby confront the highest
hurdle for their use in
’s interpretative problem.
mainly applies via state and territory
Acts Interpretation Act 1901
’) is an appropriate starting point. This section, which state
and territory equivalents are ‘based
Subject to subsection (3), in the interpretation of a provision of an Act, if
any material not forming part of the Act is capable
of assisting in the
ascertainment of the meaning of the provision, consideration may be given to
that material:
(a) to confirm that the meaning of the provision is the ordinary meaning
conveyed by the text of the provision taking into account
its context in the Act
and the purpose or object underlying the Act; or
(b) to determine the meaning of the provision when:
(i) the provision is ambiguous or obscure; or
(ii) the ordinary meaning conveyed by the text of the provision taking into
account its context in the Act and the purpose or object
underlying the Act
leads to a result that is manifestly absurd or is
unreasonable.
Extrinsic materials can therefore be used to confirm legislation’s
ordinary meaning at any time,
though when
used to ‘change an interpretation of legislation which would otherwise
have been arrived at’, there must
first be ambiguity, obscurity, or the
risk of a manifestly absurd or unreasonable
Section 15AB(2)
non-exhaustively lists extrinsic materials that may be consulted.
Australia’s
legislative histories comprise explanatory
memoranda, second reading speeches and parliamentary debates (falling within the
ss 15AB(2)(e)
–(f), (h)). Recourse to extrinsic materials
is also discretionary.
That discretion is
partly defined by
s 15AB(3)(b)
, which instructs that
‘regard shall be had’ to ‘the need to avoid prolonging legal
... proceedings without compensating
advantage’. The implications of my
analysis for the exercise of this discretion are addressed below.
Interpretation Acts in New South Wales
the Northern Territory
Queensland,
South Australia (‘SA’),
and Western Australia
follow this approach,
applying it in substance to those jurisdictions’
provisions. The
Interpretation Act 1979
(Norfolk Island) adopts s 15AB of
in that territory, rendering the Commonwealth rule directly
applicable in Norfolk Island.
and Victorian provisions differ. In these jurisdictions, extrinsic materials can
be referred to in all cases, without
III Determining the
’s Extent of Operation in Australia: Where Harmonised and
Non-Harmonised Laws Collide
This analysis sets the scene to revisit a previously identified statutory
interpretation problem emerging from Australia’s machinery
provisions:
what is the
’s correct extent of operation according to
Australian law? Does the
apply in Australia in its entirety or only
in a piecemeal fashion?
A distinction needs to be drawn here between the
’s intended
international application and its application as defined by Australian law.
Internationally, the
is supposed to apply over non-harmonised
contracting State law,
to the extent of
the subject matter scope of
where its internal application
External gaps (legal issues outside the scope of
are necessarily resolved via an
otherwise applicable law.
Internal gaps
(within the scope of
art 4 but not expressly
are, pursuant to
art 7(2), filled by reference to general principles (if possible) before resort
is had to non-harmonised law.
gaps, and the need to fill them, reflect the fact that the
Nothing described so far in this Part is controversial. Thus, at least in
principle, ‘[t]he
and any other relevant laws will only
apply to those contracts or parts of contracts that are not covered by the
Still, Australia’s machinery provisions (and their interpretation) cast
doubt upon this. This is a matter of great practical
importance as it is here
‘where the relationship between the convention and national law is
regulated’.
Should these machinery
provisions limit the
’s operation, that might violate public
international law, whilst still being correct (if normatively undesirable) under
As Warren CJ explained,
in the related international commercial arbitration context and referring to the
International Arbitration Act 1974
Ultimately, this court is required to construe an Australian statute. That
process must be performed in accordance with established
principles of
Australian statutory interpretation. International case law may be useful and
instructive, but it cannot supersede
the words used in the Act. The weight to be
accorded to such authority will depend upon the similarity of the language used
statutes being construed to the terms of the
The issue comes down
to a simple proposition, as Lord Devlin once put it extra-curially:
The law is what the judges say it is. If the House of Lords [or, for this
article’s purposes, an Australian court] were to
give to an Act of
Parliament a meaning which no one else thought it could reasonably bear, it is
their construction of the words
used in preference to the words themselves that
would become the
Australia’s
force of law and inconsistency provisions (the
being representative) are at issue here. The former establishes that
‘[t]he provisions of the
have the force of law in
which is consistent
’s intended international
The latter, however, muddies
the waters: ‘The provisions of the
prevail over any
other law in force in Victoria to the extent of any
inconsistency.’
Despite initial
parliamentary impressions,
ambiguity arises here.
apply to its full extent, or only on a provision-by-provision basis,
to the extent that its rules are inconsistent with other state
or territory
The text of these provisions is an
insufficient guide to parliamentary intent. On the one hand, Australia’s
force of law provisions
may give the
entire local operation, with
the inconsistency provisions clarifying this
On the other hand, those
inconsistency provisions may qualify Australia’s force of law provisions,
leading to the
’s piecemeal
application.
In these circumstances, Australia’s extrinsic materials threshold
requirements (to the extent they apply in some Australian
Explanatory memoranda, second
reading speeches and parliamentary debates may thus be referred to for the
purpose of identifying the
‘legal meaning
and thereby Australian
parliaments’ intent.
Part V’s review of Australia’s
case law discloses
three judgments addressing this interpretative problem. In
Playcorp Pty Ltd v
Taiyo Kogyo Ltd
Supreme Court of Victoria ‘simply followed the order in the
pleadings’,
and in doing so
considered the non-harmonised
–(b) implied terms
‘before’ resorting to the conformity rules in
Adopting the second
interpretation described above, the Court explained:
The application of this principle of private international law means that either
applied to the sales contract. It
is thus unnecessary to consider the earlier submissions as to the proper law of
the contract. As
I have stated, the
has the benefit of
paramountcy over the
in the event of any inconsistency between
the two. As I have said, no such inconsistency was suggested, and having regard
the way in which the case was conducted, it is appropriate to proceed on
the basis that there is
Supreme Court of WA cited and endorsed
Attorney-General
(Botswana) v Aussie Diamond Products Pty Ltd [No 3]
’), describing the
’s provisions as applying
in Australia ‘insofar as they are
The Court found it ‘unnecessary’ to apply the
that case, as ‘[n]either party ... ha[d] suggested that there [we]re
provisions of the
which require[d] consideration’, and
it was also not suggested that any provisions ‘operate[d]
inconsistently’
Sale of Goods Act 1895
Sale of Goods Act
The second interpretation again prevailed. Neither case identified the
alternative possibility and neither invoked any particular
interpretation rules.
, the Supreme Court of WA also considered that
Ginza Pte Ltd v Vista
Corporation Pty Ltd
The Court in
contemplated both views: explaining that the Western
Australian inconsistency provision ‘would appear to mean that, for
to the extent that the [
] makes provision inconsistent with
that made by the [
Sale of Goods Act
], the provisions of the
ultimately concluding that ‘the terms of the
appear to govern all relevant issues to the exclusion of the [
Aussie Diamond
correctly understands the
’s entire operation in Australia in
substance, though it predates those two other problematic decisions. Given that
Aussie Diamond
was also a Western Australian case, and given that
Aussie Diamond
’s later appeal did not revisit the
’s application,
might fairly be said that
no longer reflects the current state of
Western Australian law.
Even if Australia’s
application legislation and its
interpretation are out of step with international standards, one might still
query whether this problem
is more apparent than real. If Australian courts
apply non-harmonised Australian law because it is not inconsistent with the
, should it not be the case that outcomes remain unaffected? And if
that is the case, one might ask, how can a genuine problem arise?
Whilst posing
these rhetorical questions seems to have intuitive appeal, three reasons confirm
the practical importance of my analysis.
First, even if case outcomes remain unaffected, this problem adversely
impacts the
’s trade facilitation
This is particularly true
noting the empirical finding described in
Failure to apply the
in its entirety undermines its capacity to reduce transaction
merchants no longer engage with the same legal rules across
Secondly, concluding that outcomes remain unaffected presumes accurate
judicial assessments of consistency. This is not always the
as where courts incorrectly equate
art 74 with the rule in
art 35 with merchantable
And thirdly, even if non-harmonised Australian law and the
genuinely consistent, it remains necessary (as a matter of civil procedure) to
plead the correct law.
Perry Engineering Pty Ltd (rec and mgr apptd) (admin
apptd) v Bernold AG
illustrates the dangers of not doing
Court there refused to assess contract damages, following default judgment,
Sale of Goods Act 1895
(SA) was relied upon instead of the
That this Court approached
the pleadings differently to the courts in
further illustrates the risks associated with the
’s currently uncertain extent of operation in Australia.
Prior scholarship identifies and addresses this interpretative problem,
though primarily with reference to the
’s international
understandings.
The role to be played by
Australia’s
legislative histories (applied to
Australia’s machinery provisions) in resolving this problem has never been
considered. It
is to these extrinsic materials that attention now turns.
IV Australia’s
Legislative Histories Examined: A Systematic Content Analysis
Ten Australian jurisdictions have
legislation. This
legislation’s passage generated the explanatory memoranda, second reading
speeches and parliamentary debates
comprising the Australian
legislative histories under examination.
established that these sources
be consulted to help solve
the interpretative problem there identified. In this Part, I assess whether
do so, via a systematic content analysis. Identifying
whether these histories evidence parliamentary intent to apply the
in its entirety is relevant to their interpretative utility, and thus to the
exercise of judicial discretion to consult them.
Not all Australian jurisdictions have generated all three categories of
legislative histories. Appendix 1 identifies the availability of
these histories, based upon each jurisdiction’s parliamentary
and thereby establishes the parameters of this Part’s analysis.
Australia’s
Legislative Histories via a Systematic Content
Australia’s
legislative histories are voluminous, differ
markedly in detail, contain countless observations that are intellectually
interesting
but irrelevant for present purposes, and evidence the
’s intended Australian operation in different ways. For these
reasons, their careful review is essential. Consistent with other
uniform legislation
systematic content analysis is undertaken in this Part as ‘a beneficial
supplement’
to my otherwise doctrinal approach.
This analysis involved reviewing Australia’s
legislative
histories in light of the following question: do those histories evidence the
’s intended entire operation in each Australian jurisdiction?
As Australian parliaments are presumed to legislate consistently
international law,
I considered it
unlikely that these histories would actually evidence the opposite view. This
was an estimation that my review ultimately
confirmed, though for the avoidance
of doubt, this alternative perspective was actively searched for during my
I initially proposed two coding categories to capture relevant evidence of
parliamentary intent:
• indirect evidence: statements implying the
operation in Australia (including statements about its intended benefits which
presuppose such application in order
to be true); and
• direct evidence: statements expressly confirming the
’s intended entire operation in Australia.
My review quickly disclosed the need to add a third coding
general evidence of the
’s intended entire operation in Australia, comprising reference
to Australia’s
accession, adoption, implementation etc. Such
statements also imply the
’s entire operation, since this is
itself requires (subject only to permitted
reservations).
However, unlike indirect
evidence, this evidence is less specific and thus qualitatively different.
This Part now uses this coding scheme to analyse Australia’s
legislative histories and their capacity to assist in resolving the
interpretative problem identified in
The states and territories are
analysed alphabetically; Commonwealth materials are considered last; and, given
the nature of general
evidence, only footnotes (rather than explanations) are
provided in relation to those relevant sources.
Sale of Goods (Vienna Convention) Act 1987
(ACT), originally the
Sale of Goods (Vienna Convention) Ordinance 1987
(ACT), generated only an
explanatory statement.
Explanatory Memorandum (Explanatory Statement)
Content categories: General,
indirect. No views supporting the
’s piecemeal application were
The ACT’s three-page explanatory statement is lengthy by Australian
standards, though its treatment of the ACT’s machinery
provisions is
descriptive and brief.
Its contents
mostly summarise the
as the ACT’s machinery provisions are concerned, the
described as prevailing ‘in the event of
inconsistency’,
rather than (as
legislated) ‘to the extent of any
inconsistency’.
This indirectly
evidences its intended entire operation in the ACT, since ‘extent’
is a relative term that is more suggestive
’s piecemeal
application.
Norfolk Island’s ‘tiny’ and sometimes
‘forgotten’ status
in a legal sense, to its
implementation. As Appendix 1 notes, the
existence or accessibility of Norfolk Island’s
legislative
histories remains unknown, despite efforts to clarify that
Analysis of these legislative
histories (if they do exist) is thus impossible at this time.
Sale of Goods (Vienna Convention) Act 1986
(NSW) generated all
three types of
legislative
Since NSW’s bicameral
Parliament generated two second reading speeches, and since those speeches
differ, both are addressed.
Explanatory Memorandum (Explanatory Note)
Content categories: General.
supporting the
’s piecemeal application were expressed.
No direct or indirect evidence of the
’s intended entire
operation in NSW is provided.
NSW’s Second
Reading Speeches
Content categories:
indirect. No views supporting the
’s piecemeal application were
The Legislative Assembly’s second reading speech was delivered by
Terence Sheahan (Australian Labor Party (‘ALP’),
Attorney-General)
on 23 October 1986.
Australian standards, it indirectly evidences the
’s intended
entire operation in NSW via:
’s description as ‘a uniform law governing
the formation and operation of contracts for the international sale of
• this uniformity’s description as overcoming ‘the present
diversity of laws applying to the international sale
of goods’, thereby
facilitating and encouraging international
being said to ‘enable the parties to assess
their legal position with greater clarity and certainty than the application of
a foreign law might allow’, reducing ‘the incidence of disputes on
legal points’;
’s description as ‘favourable to
Australia’s interests’ and ‘designed to cater for the special
of international ...
These statements presuppose the
’s entire operation in NSW.
In particular, the benefits identified in the second and third bullet points
above can only be realised
applies in its entirety in NSW.
Additional indirect evidence appears where the
is described as
having the force of law in NSW
prevailing to the extent of
inconsistency.
The conjunctive ‘and’ suggests inconsistency is not a
limitation.
The Legislative Council’s speech was delivered by Jack Hallam (ALP) on
19 November 1986.
It identifies the
’s capacity to bind Australian traders even without
Australia’s accession and notes that the
may promote certainty
‘even allowing for possible differences in interpretation ... at local
These statements
indirectly evidence the
’s intended entire operation in NSW by
implying that the
applies (or at least is meant to apply) the
same way in foreign and Australian contexts.
Parliamentary Debates
Content categories: General,
indirect. No views supporting the
’s piecemeal application were
In the Legislative Assembly, only John Dowd (Liberal Party
(‘Liberals’)) addressed the
Dowd’s caution that Australia ‘will not find it as easy as some to
accede to what is in effect a code of
legislation’
indirectly evidences
’s intended entire operation in NSW as this difficulty
would not arise should the
have only piecemeal application.
Dowd’s assertions that Australia would be a
‘beneficiary’ and that
it ‘will save much time and effort in interpreting which laws apply to
which contracts’,
assume (and indirectly evidence) the
’s entire operation.
Five Legislative Council members addressed the
: Robert Rowland
Smith (National Party
(‘Nationals’)),
John Hannaford
(Liberals),
Ronald Dyer
and Fred Nile (Call to Australia
Indirect evidence is provided by
Rowland Smith identifying the
an important piece of legislation [that] sets out rules and regulations
pertaining to the sale of goods on an international basis.
After all, the
economy of this country depends very much on the sale of goods we export ... It
is vital for the well-being of international
trade that such agreements are set
out clearly and
’s piecemeal application undermines these statements.
Hallam’s description of the
as enhancing ‘the
opportunity for trade between
provides indirect
evidence: the
must apply entirely for this proposition to be true.
Similarly, Nile’s description of the NSW machinery provisions as a
most sense if they apply the
Sale of Goods (Vienna Convention) Act 1987
(NT) is accompanied by
a single second reading speech and single set of debates, given the NT’s
unicameral Parliament.
The NT’s Second
Reading Speech
Content categories:
indirect. No views supporting the
’s piecemeal application were
The NT’s second reading speech was delivered by Daryl Manzie (Country
Liberal Party (‘CLP’), Attorney-General) on
It indirectly evidences the
’s intended entire operation in the NT via:
• the use of the conjunctive ‘and’ when describing the
NT’s machinery
provisions,
• reference to private international law’s uncertainty, noting
‘provides uniform rules’ for matters within its
scope (only true if the
applies in its entirety in the
Parliamentary Debates
Content categories: Direct, indirect. No views supporting the
’s piecemeal application were expressed.
The NT’s parliamentary debates comprise four members’
contributions: Neil Bell
Richard Setter (CLP),
Padgham-Purich (CLP)
Setter directly evidences the
’s intended entire operation in the NT when explaining:
The other important point is that this bill will override any other Northern
Territory law that has previously pertained to matters
relating to the sale and
or the purchase. There is no point in passing this bill if other legislation
still pertains to the
transaction.
explanation that Australia’s
legislation will lead to
implies the same
would be true across Australia. Indirect
evidence is provided by Bell’s reference to the ‘need for new
arrangements’,
Manzie’s addressing of cross-border contract law
differences,
and Setter’s
explanation of the
’s trade facilitation
all imply or require the entire
operation of the
Sale of Goods (Vienna Convention) Act 1986
(Qld) is also
accompanied by a single second reading speech and a single set of debates, given
Queensland’s unicameral
Parliament.
Queensland’s
Second Reading Speech
Content categories:
indirect. No views supporting the
’s piecemeal application were
Queensland’s second reading speech, delivered by Neville Harper
(Nationals, Minister for Justice and Attorney-General) on 19 August
indirectly evidences the
’s intended entire operation via the same conjunctive
‘and’, as addressed with respect to NSW and the
Queensland’s
Parliamentary Debates
Content categories: General,
indirect. No views supporting the
’s piecemeal application were
Queensland’s six-page parliamentary debates comprise contributions from
Wayne Goss (ALP),
William Knox
(Liberals),
and Neville
Whilst lengthy, they mostly
comprise political posturing, including one particularly pointed personal barb
referencing the inconveniences
of Parliament sitting late into the
Some scepticism of
international law was expressed,
Innes recognised that ‘[t]he legislation is important and substantial and
it merits some serious
consideration’.
This was somewhat
ironic, since such consideration (even in the context of relatively lengthy
debates) did not occur. Reference to
’s uniformity
and its capacity to address
private international law’s
‘minefield’,
nevertheless
indirectly evidence the
’s intended entire operation in
Queensland via presupposition of that fact.
Whilst SA’s Parliament does not produce explanatory
its second reading speeches include an explanation of clauses at their
conclusion.
Given their functional
equivalence, they are treated as explanatory memoranda for the purposes of this
Sale of Goods (Vienna
Convention) Act 1986
(SA) is otherwise accompanied by two second
reading speeches and two sets of debates. Only SA’s Legislative Council
and explanation of clauses are addressed here, as its House of Assembly
equivalents are substantially
SA’s Explanatory
Memorandum Equivalent (Explanation of Clauses)
Content categories: None. No views supporting the
application were expressed.
SA’s explanation of clauses comprises seven short and descriptive
sentences addressing its Bill’s six clauses and
and provides no evidence of
intended entire operation in SA.
SA’s Second
Reading Speech
Content categories: General,
indirect. No views supporting the
’s piecemeal application were
SA’s second reading speech, delivered by Christopher Sumner (ALP,
Attorney-General) on 17 September
indirectly evidences the
intended entire operation in
that jurisdiction by:
• describing the
as ‘uniform law’ (assuming its
consistent entire operation in all adopting
• describing the
as ‘tailored to the special needs of
international trade’ (confirming its autonomy vis-a-vis non-harmonised
South Australian
Parliamentary Debates
Content categories:
indirect. No views supporting the
’s piecemeal application were
SA’s Legislative Council debates contain one contribution. Kenneth
Griffin (Liberals) relevantly notes ‘we have no say
in what is in the
convention’, the
‘will facilitate our international
trading activity’ and it will bring ‘benefits for our
businesses’.
These statements
indirectly evidence the
’s intended entire operation by
emphasising its unchangeable international origins and benefits that derive from
such entire
application in SA.
The House of Assembly’s debates feature contributions from Stephen
Baker (Liberals)
and Gregory Crafter
Baker indirectly evidences the
’s entire operation in SA by referencing:
• the ‘inevitabl[e] difficulties when dealing with contracts
between countries’;
’s potential to generate ‘freer
’s tailoring to international
• the ability of Australian traders to ‘understand their
contractual obligations when merchandising overseas in those
countries that are
signatories’, leading to ‘a clear understanding enforceable in law
as to [Australian and foreign traders’]
responsibilities’.
must apply in its entirety if these benefits are to be
realised. If the
is applied only in a piecemeal fashion in SA, trade
would not be promoted in the way envisaged by the
difficulties arising out of differing non-harmonised nation State sales laws
would persist.
Sale of Goods (Vienna Convention) Act 1987
(Tas) generated an
explanatory memorandum, two different second reading speeches and two sets of
debates. Only the House of Assembly’s
debates are addressed, however, as
Tasmania’s Legislative Council Hansard merely notes that the Bill was
‘taken through
the Committee stage’ in that House of
Parliament.
Explanatory Memorandum (Clause Notes)
Content categories: None. No views supporting the
application were expressed.
Tasmania’s explanatory memorandum has single-sentence descriptions of
each Bill clause and does not evidence the
’s intended entire
operation in that jurisdiction.
Second Reading Speeches
Content categories: General, indirect. No views supporting the
’s piecemeal application were expressed.
Tasmania’s House of Assembly second reading speech was given by John
Bennett (Liberals, Attorney-General) on 24 March
similar to SA’s speeches, it provides the same general and indirect
evidence cited and described with respect to that
Additional indirect
evidence appears in its unique final paragraphs:
The convention is an attempt to establish common provisions between countries
of diverse economic, political and legal backgrounds
and to bridge differences
between national approaches to choice of law. Its provisions constitute a
delicate balancing of interests
between developed and developing countries and
the common law, civil law and socialist legal systems. It is in the interests of
commerce that the convention should come into force and provide
certainty as to the law applicable to international sales.
The provisions of the convention after it enters into force in respect of
Australia have the force of law in this [s]tate by virtue
legislation.
The first paragraph’s assertions are only true if the
applies entirely, and in the same manner, in all contracting States. The second
describes the
’s force of law in Tasmania without reference to
any inconsistency-based qualification.
The Legislative Council’s speech, delivered by Peter McKay
(Independent) on 26 March 1987, contains a passage virtually identical
first paragraph quoted above
also indirectly evidences the
’s intended entire Tasmanian
operation for the same reasons given above. It provides additional indirect
evidence by clearly
distinguishing the
Sale of Goods Act 1896
as ‘an international law to govern the sale of
goods’, addressing ‘problems when a Tasmanian company has bought
from or sold to an ... overseas company because two systems of law may become
Since (in McKay’s
words) ‘[o]bviously the convention must differ from our domestic law
because it is a result of bringing
together and rationalising a whole range of
world practices’,
this distinction
and its emphasis on the
’s unique rules imply the
’s entire local operation.
Parliamentary Debates
Content categories: Indirect. No views supporting the
piecemeal application were expressed.
Tasmania’s House of Assembly debates comprise contributions from three
members: John White (ALP),
Robert Brown
(Independent)
and Michael Weldon
They indirectly evidence the
’s intended entire Tasmanian operation via:
• Brown’s observation that the Bill ‘has increased
provisions for the protection of vendors and consumers over existing
(though imprecise regarding
this statement still
recognises the
’s autonomy); and
• White’s observation that the model Bill process means ‘it
does not really behove us today to attempt to amend
it because the moment we do
it ceases to be uniform legislation which would defeat the whole purpose of the
(arguably assuming that the
whole legislative package — including the
— is to apply
in its entirety in Tasmania).
Victoria’s Parliament is unique amongst those in Australia’s
states and territories for considering the
first in 1987, and secondly in
2010 when the provisions of the
Sale of Goods (Vienna Convention) Act
(Vic) were rolled into Victoria’s otherwise non-harmonised
Original 1987 Legislation
Victoria’s original
Sale of Goods (Vienna Convention) Act 1987
(Vic) was accompanied by all three types of legislative history under
consideration. Only the Legislative Council’s second
reading speech is
addressed here, as the Legislative Assembly’s speech is substantially
1987 Explanatory Memorandum
Content categories: None. No views supporting the
piecemeal application were expressed.
Victoria’s ‘amazingly
1987 explanatory memorandum
comprises one-sentence descriptions of each Bill
providing no evidence of the
’s intended entire operation in that jurisdiction.
1987 Second Reading Speech
Content categories: General,
indirect. No views supporting the
’s piecemeal application were
Victoria’s 1987 second reading speech was delivered in the Legislative
Council on 3 March 1987 by James Kennan (ALP,
Attorney-General).
Its indirect evidence
includes assertions that the
‘provides a standard set of
legal principles which govern certain international contracts for the sale of
goods’, and
that it provides ‘greater certainty’ given
‘most of Australia’s major trading partners were expected to become
parties to the convention’.
comments presuppose the
’s entire Victorian operation, in the
same way that the
applies (or is meant to apply) in its entirety in
other international jurisdictions.
1987 Parliamentary Debates
Content categories:
indirect. No views supporting the
’s piecemeal application were
Victoria’s 1987 Legislative Council debates comprise contributions by
Bruce Chamberlain (Liberals),
and William Baxter
(Nationals).
Kennan’s observation
that ‘this is an area in which we want national and international
uniformity for the simpler resolution
of commercial
indirectly evidences the
’s intended entire operation in Victoria by presuming the
’s identical operation locally and abroad. There cannot
be uniformity within Australia if the
applies in a piecemeal
fashion, as different state and territory laws might mean different levels of
inconsistency with the
Otherwise, in the Legislative Council, Baxter’s general criticism of
United Nations conventions (and emphasis on safeguarding
Australia’s
‘sovereignty’)
two interesting competing possible meanings. Those comments might at first
glance appear suggestive of the
’s limited application.
However, they might also indirectly evidence the
’s intended
entire operation in Victoria as this would necessarily have a greater impact on
the sovereignty Baxter refers to.
In any event, since Baxter clarified that no
issue was taken with the
is not possible to take my analysis of these comments any further.
Victoria’s 1987 Legislative Assembly debates comprise three
members’ contributions: Michael John
(Liberals),
Peter Ross-Edwards
(Nationals)
and Race Mathews
Indirect evidence appears in
John’s reference to the importance of uniformity in overcoming ‘the
complexity and uncertainty
of private international
’s entire operation in Victoria that secures such uniformity
and overcomes this uncertainty. Otherwise, in the Legislative Assembly,
Ross-Edwards’ suggestion that ‘[e]ach [s]tate is free to amend [its
] legislation from time to
might (superficially) seem
to accommodate limited application of the
. However, as the target of
this observation (the
, Victoria’s machinery provisions, or
both) is unclear, this implication cannot fairly be drawn.
Relocated 2010 Legislation
The omnibus
Consumer Affairs Legislation Amendment (Reform) Act 2010
(Vic) repealed the
Sale of Goods (Vienna Convention) Act 1987
relocating its provisions into
This second
parliamentary consideration of Victoria’s
legislation is
accompanied by all three categories of legislative history under examination.
Only the Legislative Assembly’s
speech is considered, however, as the
Legislative Council’s is substantially
2010 Explanatory Memorandum
Content categories: None. No views supporting the
piecemeal application were expressed.
Victoria’s 2010 explanatory memorandum merely references the
re-enactment of Victoria’s
provisions,
providing no evidence of the
’s intended entire operation in
that jurisdiction.
2010 Second Reading Speech
Content categories: None. No views supporting the
piecemeal application were expressed.
Victoria’s 2010 second reading speech, delivered in the Legislative
Assembly on 28 July 2010 by Anthony Robinson (ALP, Minister
for Consumer
addresses the
one paragraph only.
Despite Robinson
noting that the repealed Act is ‘consolidate[d] ... into the
’ in order ‘[t]o improve usability for users of
Victoria’s mercantile law’
— an objective that does have
— no evidence of the
’s intended entire operation in Victoria appears.
2010 Parliamentary Debates
Content categories: None. No views supporting the
piecemeal application were expressed.
Victoria’s 2010 Legislative Assembly debates comprise seven
members’ contributions, alongside ten in the Legislative
comments are few, and ‘evidence zero advancement’ of the
Victorian Parliament’s 1987
In the Legislative Assembly, Michael O’Brien (Liberals) noted that
‘by necessity [he would] have to be extremely brief
in dealing with
, O’Brien simply referred to the law’s
‘consolidation’.
O’Brien otherwise noted that ‘[t]hose provisions are quite involved
and detailed, but since there is no substantive change
involved in the measures,
it is probably better to move on in the limited time available to discuss other
Martin Foley (ALP)
referred to the Bill as ‘amend[ing] the
referencing the
Hodgett (Liberals) described the Bill as amending the
repealing the
Sale of Goods (Vienna Convention) Act 1987
Otherwise, in the Legislative
Council, Susan Pennicuik (Victorian Greens) inaccurately referenced
‘amendments’ to Victoria’s
actually repealed
these contributions evidence
’s intended entire operation in Victoria, despite
(and its scholarly
Upper House amendments to the Bill necessitating its reconsideration by the
Legislative Assembly did not concern the
and thus did not generate any further parliamentary consideration of the
Sale of Goods (Vienna Convention) Act 1986
(WA) is accompanied by
second reading speeches and parliamentary debates. Only the Legislative
Assembly’s speech is considered
here, as WA’s Legislative Council
equivalent is substantially
WA’s Second
Reading Speech
Content categories: General,
indirect. No views supporting the
’s piecemeal application were
The Legislative Assembly’s second reading speech was delivered by Keith
Wilson (ALP, Minister for Consumer Affairs) on 7 October
Indirect evidence appears via
observations that the
would remove barriers to trade and provide
‘uniform rules’ for international trade, with the measure being
... given the difficulties that Australia is facing in its role as
a trading nation’.
statements, and the
’s description as containing ‘ground
rules for the international sale of
presuppose the
’s entire operation in WA.
Parliamentary Debates
Content categories: Indirect. No views supporting the
piecemeal application were expressed.
WA’s Legislative Assembly debates comprise two members’
contributions: Andrew Mensaros
Five members contributed in the
Legislative Council: Norman Moore
(Liberals),
(Liberals),
Kay Hallahan
Phillip Pendal
and John Williams
(Liberals).
A Legislative Council
amendment, correcting the inadvertent omission of an ‘Act binds the
Crown’ clause,
necessitated
reconsideration of the Bill by the Legislative Assembly, though Hansard merely
notes that the amendment was ‘agreed
to’ at that later
Mensaros observed that ‘the contents of the Bill ... are really the
convention’.
Similar observations
were made by Moore
All gently and indirectly
evidence the
’s intended entire operation in WA by emphasising
the relative importance of the
’s text over WA’s
machinery provisions. Further indirect evidence comprises Hallahan’s
description of the Bill’s
‘main purpose [as] to overcome
longstanding uncertainty experienced in the international business community
over laws which
are applicable to international contracts’, suggesting the
‘lack of understanding and clarity about [international] contracts
is to be sorted out’.
Without the
’s entire operation in WA, this uncertainty cannot be resolved
in this way.
Commonwealth
Whilst state and territory Acts give the
primary local effect,
supplementary Commonwealth legislation was required to address the
’s relationship with the
This limited legislation was necessary as the
and Australia’s
consumer laws do not define consumer transactions the same
it possible for a sale to be a consumer contract under non-harmonised Australian
law but also a non-consumer contract under
The Commonwealth’s
provisions prioritise the
’s consumer guarantees
’s prior implied
Both cover similar legal ground
obligations.
Initially, according to s 66A of the
The provisions of the
United Nations Convention on Contracts for the
International Sale of Goods
, adopted at Vienna, Austria, on 10 April 1980,
prevail over the provisions of this Division [ie its otherwise mandatory implied
to the extent of any inconsistency.
Now, according to s 68
The provisions of the
United Nations Convention on Contracts for the
International Sale of Goods
, done at Vienna on 11 April 1980, as amended and
in force for Australia from time to time, prevail over the provisions of this
Division [ie its otherwise mandatory consumer guarantees] to the extent of
any inconsistency.
These inconsistency references repeat
‘in essence’ the state and territory
Understanding the
’s intended Commonwealth operation is of practical importance
(despite these provisions’ supplementary character vis-a-vis
Australia’s other
Acts) as the conformity obligations
contained in art 35 of the
are subject to party
On the other hand, the
consumer guarantees (and the implied terms before them) are and were
Enacted 1987
Section 66A of the
was inserted into the Act by s 3 and sch 1 of
Statute Law (Miscellaneous Provisions) Act 1987
(Cth). It was
intended to be enacted earlier in 1987 via the almost identically titled (but
Statute Law (Miscellaneous Provisions) Bill (No 1) 1987
(Cth). That
Bill, however, lapsed when an early election was
Limited legislative histories exist regarding the lapsed Bill and they remain
informative. All three types of legislative history
under examination here exist
for the eventual Act. Only the Senate’s second reading speech for that Act
is addressed, as the
House of Representatives’ speech is substantially
Only the House of Representatives’ second reading speech for the lapsed
Bill is considered for the same
Commonwealth’s 1987 Explanatory Memorandum
Content categories: Direct (Act), direct (Bill). No views supporting the
’s piecemeal application were expressed.
The explanatory memorandum of the
Statute Law (Miscellaneous Provisions)
(Cth) directly evidences the
’s intended entire
operation at the Commonwealth level vis-a-vis the
The proposed amendment is required to eliminate overlap and potential conflict
between provisions of the Act, which import certain
terms into contracts for the
sale of goods, and the Vienna Convention, which is being implemented by uniform
legislation in the various
[s]tates and
[t]erritories.
identically worded passage appears in the lapsed Bill’s explanatory
memorandum.
Both expressly confirm the
’s intended full priority over the TPA’s implied
Commonwealth’s 1987 Second Reading Speech
Content categories: None (Act), direct (Bill). No views supporting the
’s piecemeal application were expressed.
Statute Law (Miscellaneous Provisions) Act 1987
second reading speech, delivered in the Senate by Michael Tate (ALP, Minister
for Justice) on 24 September 1987,
not reference the
The lapsed Bill’s speech, however, delivered in the House of
Representatives by Lionel Bowen (ALP, Attorney-General) on 30 April
records the same intention to ‘eliminate overlap and possible
referred to above. It
therefore also directly evidences the
’s intended entire
operation at the Commonwealth level.
Commonwealth’s 1987 Parliamentary Debates
Content categories: None (Act), direct (Bill). No views supporting the
’s piecemeal application were expressed.
Statute Law (Miscellaneous Provisions) Act 1987
debates comprise seven members’
contributions,
with ten contributing in
the House of Representatives.
address the
. House of Representatives amendments required
reconsideration in the
though as they did not address the
, those subsequent Senate
proceedings are irrelevant for present purposes.
House of Representatives debates on the lapsed Bill featured 12
contributions.
Michael Maher (ALP) identified the intent, referred to above, to
‘eliminate the overlap and possible
Once again, this
directly evidences the
’s intended entire operation at the
Commonwealth level.
Enacted 2010
was transformed in 2010–11. The
Trade Practices
Amendment (Australian Consumer Law) Act (No 1) 2010
Practices Amendment (Australian Consumer Law) Act (No 2) 2010
transitioned the old regime into the present
Competition and Consumer Act
(Cth), containing in its sch 2 the
, which applies
second of these amendment Acts effected the current
All three extrinsic materials
categories under examination exist for that Act. Only the House of
Representatives’ speech is
addressed here, as the Senate’s is
substantially
Senate amendments requiring reconsideration by the House of Representatives did
not address the
rendering those subsequent Senate proceedings presently irrelevant.
Commonwealth’s 2010 Explanatory Memorandum
Content categories: None. No views supporting the
piecemeal application were expressed.
The 2010 Commonwealth explanatory memorandum addresses the consumer
guarantees across 34 pages, including via 21 illustrative
is addressed
in just two paragraphs,
neither of which
evidences the intended scope of operation of s 68 of the
Commonwealth’s 2010 Second Reading Speech
Content categories: Indirect. No views supporting the
piecemeal application were expressed.
The House of Representatives’ second reading speech was delivered by
Craig Emerson (ALP, Minister for Competition Policy and
Consumer Affairs) on 17
March 2010.
It does not specifically
address the
, but indirectly evidences its intended entire operation
at the Commonwealth level by acknowledging that many
provisions (s 68
being amongst them, though it is not specifically identified) ‘are
substantially the same as those in the
Evidence of the
’s intended entire operation relating to the
is effectively (indirectly) incorporated by reference here.
Commonwealth’s 2010 Parliamentary Debates
Content categories: None. No views supporting the
piecemeal application were expressed.
Nine House of Representatives members addressed the
Trade Practices
Amendment (Australian Consumer Law) Act (No 2) 2010
two did so in the Senate.
None of their
contributions addressed the
Australia’s
legislative histories do not contain evidence
was intended to have piecemeal application in any of
Australia’s jurisdictions. They therefore do not support the
interpretative
approach adopted in
Instead, numerous
’s intended entire operation in Australia. In
addition, in the NT and at the Commonwealth level, that intent is directly
Parts II–III identified that these materials
be referred to
for the purpose of interpreting Australia’s
provisions, and this Part confirms their interpretative utility. The question
naturally arising, and now addressed in Part
V, is: have Australian judges
actually ever referenced these materials?
V Australia’s
Case Law: Catalogued and Examined
Local and international commentators routinely observe that only a small
number of Australian
Appendix 2 confirms, the force of this observation is diminishing over time.
However, identifying
how many cases there are is both necessary
and challenging for present purposes. There is no official repository;
Australian cases
refer to the
using numerous different labels, and
different databases catalogue different judgments. At the time of writing, I
understand that
51 Australian
cases (as the phrase ‘Australian
case’ is defined below) exist. This tally comprises all cases
currently captured by the Pace Law Albert H Kritzer CISG Database
plus one additional
the 36 recorded on
CISG-online.
Neither database is inherently
authoritative;
hence the need to cross
reference both and independently check their contents against
and other international case law databases (including UNCITRAL’s own Case
Law on UNCITRAL Texts (‘CLOUT’) database).
These exercises failed to
disclose any additional Australian
cases, noting in particular that
CLOUT records only 15 Australian
cases which all otherwise appear on
the Pace Database.
Australia’s supposedly small
case load does not make the
unworthy of local
On the contrary, that case
load has grown significantly since its last proper audit in
and provides essential context for
this Part’s purposes: it defines the opportunities that Australian courts
have had to consult
extrinsic materials in clarifying the
’s extent of operation in Australia. However, this
exercise is nuanced, necessitating the classification of Australia’s
cases so that this context is properly understood. As will appear,
many of Australia’s
cases are actually of little significance
for present purposes.
Australia’s 51
cases are collated in Appendix 2. Appendix 2
presents these cases in chronological order, identifies each case’s
internal jurisdiction
and provides citations for each in accordance with the
Australian Guide to Legal
the latter, important for
the purposes of Australian audiences, are often missing on the internationally
focused Pace Database. Also
unique are Appendix 2’s case categorisations
that (consistent with Part IV’s analysis) are coded using a systematic
analysis methodology.
categorisations are key to this Part’s analysis, as they more specifically
confine the limits within which Australia’s
actually considered Australia’s
legislative histories to date.
In that regard, it can be noted that Australia’s overall tally of 51
cases is misleading in the sense that not all of those cases
actually apply the
Appendix 2 categorises Australia’s
• cases where the
was applied;
• cases where the
was not applied but where it should have
• cases where the
was applied as incidental to other legal
• cases where the
was not applied, that are related to
other Australian
• cases involving choice of law clauses excluding the
pursuant to
• cases where the
was referred to in passing, for other
reasons; and
• appeal judgments from cases falling within any other category.
Initially, I proposed to use just one coding category for all
application
cases. However, upon closer analysis, it became apparent that
some cases apply the
to resolve substantive contract law
whilst others do so where the
intersects with other legal issues: including jurisdictional
and questions concerning
Corporations Act 2001
(Cth) statutory
Whilst all of these cases do apply the
, the second type of case does
so indirectly. Though there is no evidence specifically confirming this point,
it stands to reason
that courts handling cases that only indirectly apply the
may be less likely to engage with Australia’s machinery
provisions, justifying the use of different coding for these two categories
case. This difference is therefore meaningful in understanding the context
referred to above.
Before addressing Appendix 2, several further clarifications are required
regarding my usage of the term ‘Australian
First, Australian parties appear in
cases before foreign courts and
These disputes are not captured in Appendix 2. Since such cases are unlikely to
apply Australia’s machinery provisions, they
need not be considered
further. Secondly, as my coding scheme implies, a low threshold determines
whether or not cases are considered
‘Australian
for present purposes. Any case referring to or even just relating to the
in any way is included. Thirdly, cases coded as excluding the
may not have otherwise actually applied the
example, arbitral award enforcement cases might cite choice of law clauses
excluding the
that were contained in the arbitration’s
underlying contract, for contextual purposes
Fourthly, cases are coded as
applying the
where they recognise it as applicable and attempt to
apply its provisions, even if wrongly, according to the
’s international
understandings.
Finally, cases that do
not apply the
but that should have done so include cases that
mention or recognise the
’s relevance in the abstract,
but fail to apply its provisions in
A careful review of all Australian
cases confirms that none have
ever referred to Australia’s
legislative histories, for any
purpose. From the outset, this can be seen as a missed opportunity to resolve
Part III’s interpretative
problem. Additional conclusions can be drawn,
however, by contextualising this missed opportunity against Appendix 2’s
First, Australia’s machinery provisions affect the
application
. Thus, only cases involving the
direct or indirect
application
could possibly have referred to
Australia’s
legislative histories for the purpose of
understanding those machinery
provisions.
Cases that should have
applied the
, but did not, might have benefited from consulting those
histories. However, by definition, they could not have done so. Thus, only
Australia’s 51
cases (equating to only 18 unique disputes,
accounting for appeals) could possibly have referred to Australia’s
legislative histories (for the purposes envisaged by this article).
Twenty-one missed opportunities are still missed opportunities,
but are far
fewer than the 51 one might initially presume.
Aussie Diamond
are Victorian and Western
Australian cases respectively.
Australia’s nine direct application cases, five are Commonwealth, two are
from Queensland, and one each are from WA and
NSW. Of Australia’s 12
indirect application cases, three are
Commonwealth, three each are from Victoria and WA, two are from NSW and one
is from SA. Victoria and WA, having three and four application
respectively, interestingly emerge as relatively experienced Australian
have come from the NT and none address the Commonwealth’s consumer
law-related provisions.
Australia’s
Acts, being mirror
legislation,
can be read on standalone
it is unlikely that Victorian or
Western Australian courts would refer to NT or Commonwealth legislative
histories directly evidencing
’s intended entire operation
in those jurisdictions (even though national uniform legislation should be
interpreted
consistently).
Finally, and interestingly, it appears that Australia’s
cases are perceived as having limited precedential value by the profession at
large, despite regular cross-citation amongst
sit amongst 32 unreported Australian
cases (that number
being over 62% of Australia’s
this may speak to their low
perceived value in developing the law.
In addition, no Australian
case applying the
yet reached the High Court of
The absence of ‘an authoritative, appellate level judgment clearly
explaining the
’s interaction with Australian domestic
law’, identified in 2010 as a ‘missing piece’ of the
metaphorical
thus remains to this day.
VI Conclusions: Lessons
Learned, and Their Implications for Future Case Law and Law Reform Initiatives
in Australia and Abroad
Following Australia’s accession to the
became part of Australian
In line with
travaux préparatoires
(amongst other
sources) inform the interpretation of its own
provisions.
However, the
’s local enactment also generated Australian
legislative histories: explanatory memoranda, second reading speeches and
parliamentary debates.
These local
extrinsic materials may inform the interpretation of Australia’s machinery
provisions, as those provisions exist
outside of the
and are thus matters of ‘local legislative
Australian law determines the
’s extent of application in
Australia, even if that application is incorrect according to the
’s international
understandings.
In that regard, as Part
III noted, a statutory interpretation problem arises in Australian
provisions establish the
’s entire application in each Australian jurisdiction? Or does
apply on a provision-by-provision basis, only where its
provisions are inconsistent with non-harmonised Australian law? As noted
II, Australia’s extrinsic materials rules help ascertain legislative
intent. Australia’s
legislative histories provide ample
evidence of the
’s intended entire operation, which may
inform the interpretation of Australia’s machinery provisions. Australian
failure to consult these materials to date represents a missed
opportunity to resolve Part III’s interpretative problem in
a principled
way, and to correct the problematic piecemeal interpretation in
Aussie Diamond
Despite this missed opportunity, my research lays the groundwork for future
cases to apply the
to its full extent.
My analysis shows this approach to be correct from both Australian and
international perspectives. Future Australian
courts addressing the
have the discretion to consult Australia’s
legislative
histories when interpreting Australia’s machinery provisions. In
exercising that discretion, they must weigh the
‘advantage’ of doing
so against ‘the need to avoid prolonging
legal ... proceedings’.
research removes any practical inconvenience that may have previously existed in
collating and analysing Australia’s
legislative histories. A
strong case can therefore be made for referring to those histories in future
litigation. This is especially
so given the broader commercial and public
international law issues also at play, addressed in Parts I and III. Naturally,
my research
is limited by its focus on one statutory interpretation rule. This
was a necessary concession in the context of an article. It may
be that other
statutory interpretation rules support the same
conclusion:
an interesting question left
open for future study.
My research has implications for future Australian law reform, as well as
litigation. Scholarship has recommended various reforms
to Australia’s
Acts, including repealing their inconsistency provisions and
adopting New Zealand’s legislative model in their
model, avoiding reference to inconsistency, clearly displaces New
Zealand’s non-harmonised law to the
’s subject matter
It also correlates with
comparatively more internationalist case law in that
My research confirms that
this proposal is consistent with Australia’s original parliamentary
intentions. On the other hand,
should other internal jurisdictions follow
Victoria’s lead and fold their existing
Acts into their sale
Acts, it would be useful for those future amendments’ own
legislative histories to emphasise the
’s intended entire
operation in each relevant jurisdiction. This would have utility even if (as in
Victoria) the machinery provisions
themselves escape ‘any critical
Though preparing
extrinsic materials is challenging,
existing NT and Commonwealth legislative histories prove this can be done.
My analysis has implications for future international legislative initiatives
too. Though the
currently has 95 contracting States, new States
continue to join,
and existing
contracting States (outside of Australia) might also feel the need to amend or
re-enact their implementing legislation
from time to
Australia’s legislation continuing to constitute an international
better or worse, other jurisdictions can learn from Australia’s
experience.
The recent extension of the
to the Hong Kong Special
Administrative Region (‘SAR’) of the People’s Republic of
China is a topical example.
Though some
uncertainty previously existed as to the
’s operation in Hong
legislation now confirms that
and Queensland’s
Act inspired its form.
Australian-style
force of law and inconsistency provisions appear in Hong Kong’s
Other than confirming a
link with Queensland’s
Act, Hong Kong’s explanatory
memorandum and consultation materials do not clarify those provisions’
intended interaction.
My research
provides a model for moving beyond those sources and considering other relevant
extrinsic materials, should the interaction
of Hong Kong’s force of law
and inconsistency provisions ever be tested in court.
Sticking with this Hong Kong example,
to the extent that its law permits reference to extrinsic materials for
statutory interpretation purposes,
courts might refer to the Hong Kong Bar Association’s
consultation
submission.
That submission cautioned against applying a
art 95 reservation to
the Hong Kong SAR as it ‘would lead to a less expansive application of the
... and that would not be in line with the stated aims of
applying the
in Hong Kong in the first
Hong Kong’s courts
might also refer to The Law Society of Hong Kong’s consultation
submission, noting that ‘where
is applicable, it will
prevail over domestic law unless such issues are not determinable by the
provisions’.
These materials evidence an understanding, at least amongst Hong Kong’s
legal community at large, that the
applies in the Hong Kong SAR to
its full extent. So far as the Hong Kong Legislative Council’s
understanding is concerned,
analysis of its
is beyond the scope of this
article, though this too would be a productive point of future study.
In conclusion, and returning to the ‘familiar
incantation’
of text, context, and
purpose underpinning statutory interpretation in Australia, Australia’s
legislative histories can (and should) assist Australian courts in
understanding Australian parliaments’ intentions to apply
its full extent. Whilst the
’s text is subject to its
interpretative rules in
art 7(1), Australia’s machinery provisions — being genuinely
local legislation — are subject to regular Australian
interpretation rules instead. Those rules support reference to extrinsic
materials where, as is the case here, they can
assist in resolving legislative
ambiguities. Taking this approach is highly practical. My research exposes new
Aussie Diamond
’s reasoning, stands to
affect the conduct of trade, and clarifies that Australia did intend to (and did
actually) legislate
consistently with international law when adopting the
(as it is presumed to do).
is ‘truly a law for
merchants’.
Empirical evidence
suggests that its trade facilitation purposes are undercut where its application
is affected by local peculiarities.
Merchants should not have to second guess the
’s application in
contracting States.
My research confirms
they need not in Australia. This confirmation will help better secure the
’s applied uniformity in this jurisdiction. Though such
uniformity is not itself ‘a
it supports the
’s trade facilitation
Particularly in an era
characterised by the potential for COVID-19 related international sales law
my research will promote the
’s capacity to benefit the merchants, lawyers and other trade
stakeholders it seeks to serve.
VII Appendix 1:
Australia’s
Legislative Histories by Jurisdiction and
Explanatory
Second reading speech
Parliamentary debates
Explanatory Statement,
Sale of Goods (Vienna Convention) Ordinance
Norfolk Island
Explanatory Note,
Sale of Goods (Vienna Convention) Bill 1986
Legislative Assembly:
• 23 October 1986
Legislative Council:
• 19 November 1986
Legislative Assembly:
• First reading: 23 October
• Debates: 11 November
• Third reading: 11 November
Legislative Council:
• First reading: 12 November
• Debates: 19 November
• Third reading: 20 November
29 April 1987
First reading: 29 April 1987
Debates: 3 June 1987
Third reading: 3 June 1987
19 August 1986
First reading: 19 August 1986
Debates: 2 September 1986
Third reading: 2 September
Legislative Council:
• 17 September 1986
House of Assembly:
• 25 September 1986
Legislative Council:
• First reading: 17 September
• Debates: 24 September
• Third reading: 24 September
House of Assembly:
• First reading: 25 September
• Debates: 19 November
• Third reading: 19 November
Clause Notes, Sale of Goods (Vienna Convention) Bill 1987 (Tas)
House of Assembly:
• 24 March 1987
Legislative Council:
• 26 March 1987
House of Assembly:
• First reading: 4 March
• Debates: 24 March
• Third reading: 24 March
Legislative Council:
• First reading: 25 March
• Debates: 26 March
• Third reading: 1 April
Explanatory Memorandum,
Sale of Goods (Vienna Convention) Bill 1987
Legislative Council:
• 3 March 1987
Legislative Assembly:
• 14 April 1987
Legislative Council:
• First reading: 25 February
• Debates: 17 March 1987,
• Third reading: 9 April
Legislative Assembly:
• First reading: 9 April
• Debates: 30 April
• Third reading: 30 April
Explanatory Memorandum,
Consumer Affairs Legislation Amendment (Reform)
Legislative Assembly:
• 28 July 2010
Legislative Council:
• 12 August 2010
Legislative Assembly:
• First reading: 27 July
• Debates: 11 August 2010,
August 2010
• Third reading: 12 August
Legislative Council:
• First reading: 12 August
• Debates: 2 September
• Third reading: 2 September
Legislative Assembly’s consideration of amendments made by the
Legislative Council:
• 14 September 2010
• 16 September 2010
Legislative Assembly:
• 7 October 1986
Legislative Council:
• 11 November 1986
Legislative Assembly:
• First reading: 7 October
• Debates: 11 November
• Third reading: 11 November
Legislative Council:
• First reading: 11 November
• Debates: 19 November 1986,
20 November 1986
• Third reading: 20 November
Legislative Assembly’s consideration of amendments made by the
Legislative Council:
• 27 November 1986
Commonwealth
Explanatory Memorandum,
Statute Law (Miscellaneous Provisions) Bill 1987
• 24 September 1987
House of Representatives:
• 25 November 1987
• First reading: 24 September
• Debates: 7 October
• Third reading: 7 October
House of Representatives:
• First reading: 8 October
• Debates: 25 November
• Third reading: 25 November
Senate’s consideration of amendments made by the House of
Representatives:
• 26 November 1987
• 10 December 1987
Lapsed Bill: Explanatory Memorandum,
Statute Law (Miscellaneous Provisions)
Bill (No 1) 1987
House of Representatives:
• 30 April 1987
• 26 May 1987
House of Representatives:
• First reading: 30 April
• Debates: 11 May 1987
• Third reading: 11 May
• First reading: 26 May 1987
(no further progress on the lapsed Bill)
Explanatory Memorandum,
Trade Practices Amendment (Australian Consumer Law)
Bill (No 2) 2010
House of Representatives:
• 17 March 2010
• 24 June 2010
House of Representatives:
• First reading: 17 March
• Debates: 22 June
• Third reading: 24 June
• First reading: 24 June
• Debates: 24 June 2010
• Third reading: 24 June
House of Representatives’ consideration of amendments made by the
• 24 June 2010
VIII Appendix 2:
Australia’s
Case Law to Date
Renard Constructions (ME) Pty Ltd v Minister for Public
12 March 1992
NSW: Court of Appeal
mentioned in passing;
Roder Zelt-und Hallenkonstruktionen GmbH v Rosedown Park
28 April 1995
Commonwealth: Federal Court
Roder Zelt-und Hallenkonstruktionen GmbH v Rosedown Park
Pty Ltd (in liq)
30 November 1995
Commonwealth: Federal Court
mentioned in
South Sydney District Rugby League Football Club Ltd v
3 November 2000
Commonwealth: Federal Court
mentioned in
Downs Investments Pty Ltd (in liq) v Perwaja Steel SDN
17 November 2000
Queensland: Supreme Court
Perry Engineering Pty Ltd (rec and mgr apptd) (admin
apptd) v Bernold AG
1 February 2001
SA: Supreme Court
not applied (counsel omission), but should have
Downs Investments Pty Ltd (in liq) v Perwaja Steel SDN
12 October 2001
Queensland: Court of Appeal
Ginza Pte Ltd v Vista Corporation Pty Ltd
17 January 2003
WA: Supreme Court
Playcorp Pty Ltd v Taiyo Kogyo Ltd
24 April 2003
Victoria: Supreme Court
not applied, but should have
Aqua Technics (WA) Pty Ltd v Summit Chemicals Pty
19 September 2003
WA: Supreme Court
Summit Chemicals Pty Ltd v Vetrotex Espana SA
27 May 2004
WA: Full Court of the Supreme Court
incidental;
Ualesi v Expeditors International Pty Ltd
20 December 2004
Commonwealth: Federal Court
referred to in
South State Food & Beverage Pty Ltd v Kaur
12 May 2005
Commonwealth: Federal Court
Italian Imported Foods Pty Ltd v Pucci Srl
13 October 2006
NSW: Supreme Court
not applied (procedural reasons), but should
have been; appeal
Kingston Estate Wines Pty Ltd v Vetreria Etrusca
12 October 2007
SA: District Court
Koompahtoo Local Aboriginal Land Council v Sanpine Pty
13 December 2007
Commonwealth: High Court
referred to in passing;
Vetreria Etrusca Srl v Kingston Estate Wines Pty
14 March 2008
SA: Supreme Court
not applied, but should have been;
Hannaford v Australian Farmlink Pty Ltd
24 October 2008
Commonwealth: Federal Court
Olivaylle Pty Ltd v Flottweg AG [No 4]
20 May 2009
Commonwealth: Federal Court
Guang Dong Zhi Gao Australia Pty Ltd v Fortuna Network
4 November 2009
NSW: Supreme Court
Franklins Pty Ltd v Metcash Trading Ltd
16 December 2009
NSW: Court of Appeal
referred to in passing;
Attorney-General (Botswana) v Aussie Diamond Products Pty
23 June 2010
WA: Supreme Court
not applied, but should have
Delphic Wholesalers (Aust) Pty Ltd v Agrilex Co
6 August 2010
Victoria: Supreme Court
Cortem SpA v Controlmatic Pty Ltd
13 August 2010
Commonwealth: Federal Court
Castel Electronics Pty Ltd v Toshiba Singapore Pte
28 September 2010
Commonwealth: Federal Court
Castel Electronics Pty Ltd v Toshiba Singapore Pte
20 April 2011
Commonwealth: Full Court of the Federal Court
Olivaylle Pty Ltd (admin apptd) v Flottweg AG [No
17 June 2011
Commonwealth: Federal Court
referred to in
Fryer Holdings Pty Ltd (in liq) v Liaoning MEC Group Co
30 January 2012
NSW: Supreme Court
Rizhao Steel Holding Group Co Ltd v Koolan Iron Ore Pty
9 March 2012
WA: Court of Appeal
Traxys Europe SA v Balaji Coke Industry Pvt Ltd [No
23 March 2012
Commonwealth: Federal Court
Attorney-General (Botswana) v Aussie Diamond Products Pty
28 March 2012
WA: Court of Appeal
not applied, but should have been;
Casaceli v Natuzzi SpA
29 June 2012
Commonwealth: Federal Court
referred to in
Venter v Ilona MY Ltd
24 August 2012
NSW: Supreme Court
Castel Electronics Pty Ltd v TCL Airconditioner
(Zhongshan) Co Ltd
17 December 2012
Victoria: Supreme Court
Castel Electronics Pty Ltd v TCL Airconditioner
(Zhongshan) Co Ltd
7 March 2013
Victoria: Supreme Court
incidental;
Severstal Export GmbH v Bhushan Steel Ltd
NSW: Court of Appeal
incidental;
TCL Air Conditioner (Zhongshan) Co Ltd v Castel
Electronics Pty Ltd
16 July 2014
Commonwealth: Full Court of the Federal Court
not applied, but related to other
cases; appeal
Toll Holdings Ltd v Stewart
15 March 2016
Commonwealth: Federal Court
Sino Dragon Trading Ltd v Noble Resources International
13 September 2016
Commonwealth: Federal Court
Fletcher v Capstone Aluminium SDN BHD; Re McLay
Industries Pty Ltd (in liq)
5 December 2016
Commonwealth: Federal Court
NT Beverages Group Pty Ltd v PT Bromo Tirta Lestari; Re
NT Beverages Group Pty Ltd
11 July 2017
Commonwealth: Federal Court
Valve Corporation v Australian Competition and Consumer
22 December 2017
Commonwealth: Full Court of the Federal Court
Re TCL Airconditioner (Zhongshan) Co Ltd [No 2]
1 March 2019
Commonwealth: Federal Court
not applied, but related to other
Luo v Windy Hills Australian Game Meats Pty Ltd [No
10 July 2019
NSW: Supreme Court
not applied, but should have
Dialogue Consulting Pty Ltd v Instagram Inc
22 December 2020
Commonwealth: Federal Court
Freedom Foods Pty Ltd v Blue Diamond Growers
5 March 2021
Commonwealth: Federal Court
LLC BryanskAgrostroy v Mackies Asia Pacific Pty
29 September 2021
Commonwealth: Federal Court
referred to in
Epic Games, Inc v Google LLC
4 February 2022
Commonwealth: Federal Court
Micon Mining & Construction Products GmbH & Co KG
v Macmahon Mining Services Pty Ltd
2 June 2022
Court of Appeal
incidental;
Nawaz v Rasier Pacific Pty Ltd
17 June 2022
Commonwealth: Fair Work Commission
Cha v Insurance Australia Ltd
28 October 2022
NSW: Personal Injury Commission
referred to in
IX Addendum
Since this article was originally written, several additional Australian
cases have been handed down. None apply the
alter the analysis contained in my article. However, following the handing down
Re Sparkling Beverages Pty Ltd [No
C P Aquaculture (India) Pvt
Ltd v Aqua Star Pty Ltd
(Singapore) Pte Ltd v Wollongong Coal
Bolin Technology Co, Ltd v
BirdDog Technology Ltd
further instance of
Bolin Technology Co Ltd v BirdDog Technology
Engineering Group Pty Ltd v Microm Nominees Pty
it is now the case that there
are 57 (rather than 51) Australian
cases in existence. Following the
being adopted by Saudi Arabia (as foreshadowed in footnote 6) and
Rwanda, it is also now the case that there are 97 (rather than 95)
contracting
States to the
* Associate Professor in the Department of Business Law and Taxation, Monash
Business School, Monash University. This article builds
upon research previously
published: Benjamin Hayward, &#82
CISG as the
Applicable Law: The Curious Case of Australia’ in Poomintr
Sooksripaisarnkit and Sai Ramani Garimella (eds),
International Sale of Goods: A Multidisciplinary Perspective
Maxwell, 2019) 167; Andrea Anastasi, Benjamin Hayward and Stephanie Peta Brown,
‘An Internationalist Approach
to Interpreting Private International Law?
Arbitration and Sales Law in Australia’
[2020] MelbULawRw 19
(2020) 44(1)
University Law Review
The author would like to thank Andrea Samardzija,
Aleksandar Milenkovic and Ben Awad for their excellent research assistance, as
well as Dr Oscar Roos of Deakin Law School for advice in relation to some of the
constitutional law aspects of this article. Any
errors remain the author’s
own. Convention accession statistics and case law statistics given in this
article are current as
at 4 July 2023.
United Nations Convention on Contracts
for the International Sale of Goods
, opened for signature 11 April
1489 UNTS 3
(entered into force 1 January 1988) (‘
Camilla Baasch Andersen, ‘A New
Challenge for Commercial Practitioners: Making the Most of Shared Laws and Their
“Jurisconsultorium”’
[2015] UNSWLawJl 32
(2015) 38(3)
University of New
Wales Law Journal
See Martin Doris, ‘Promising
Options, Dead Ends and the Reform of Australian Contract Law’
(2014) 34(1)
Legal Studies
) Preamble para 3.
This article capitalises
‘State’ when referring to nations and uses the lower case
‘state’ and ‘territory’
when referring to
Australia’s internal jurisdictions.
‘Chapter X: International Trade and
Development:
United Nations Convention on Contracts for the International Sale
United Nations Treaty Collection
(Web Page, 2023) <
https://web.archive.org/web/20230425115633/https://treaties.un.org/Pages/View‌Detai‌ls.aspx?src=IND&mtdsg_no=X-10&chapter=10&clang=_en
(‘Chapter X: CISG’). Saudi Arabia is poised to become the
contracting State of the
) after its Cabinet approved accession on
20 June 2023: ‘ECZA Relocates HQ to Riyadh’,
20 June 2023) <https://arg.am/3BBA0E61>, archived at
<https://perma.cc/9LCV-YTPE>; ‘Saudi Arabia Accession
“International Sale of Goods” Convention Boosts Trade Growth:
Al-Qasabi’,
(online, 23 June 2023)
<https://arg.am/3BBA1613>, archived at
<https://perma.cc/U6NR-HZJ4>.
Ingeborg Schwenzer,
‘Introduction’ in Ingeborg Schwenzer and Ulrich G Schroeter (eds),
Schlechtriem & Schwenzer: Commentary on the UN Convention on the
International Sale of Goods (CISG)
(Oxford University Press, 5
ed, 2022) 1, 1; Stefan Kröll, Loukas Mistelis and Pilar Perales
Viscasillas, ‘Introduction to the CISG’ in Stefan
Kröll, Loukas
Mistelis and Pilar Perales Viscasillas (eds),
UN Convention on Contracts for
the International Sale of Goods (CISG): A Commentary
ed, 2018) 1, 1.
Michael Bridge, ‘An Overview of the
and an Introduction to the Debate about the Future Convention’
(2013) 58(4)
Villanova Law Review
Convention on the Recognition and
Enforcement of Foreign Arbitral Awards
, opened for signature 10 June
330 UNTS 38
(entered into force 7 June 1959) (‘
’). At the time of writing, there are 172 contracting States
New York Convention
): ‘Chapter XXII:
Commercial Arbitration and Mediation:
Convention on the Recognition and
Enforcement of Foreign Arbitral Awards
United Nations Treaty
2023) <https://web.archive.org/web/20231002070640/https://treaties.un.org/pages/Vie‌wDetails.aspx?src=IND&mtdsg_no=XXII-1&chapter=22&clang=_en>.
Chief Justice James Allsop,
‘International Commercial Courts: Next Frontier or Latest Trend?’
(Speech, Singapore International
Commercial Court Symposium, 10 March 2021). For
example, both the
(n 1) and the
New York Convention
) seek to bridge the common law and civil
law divide: ‘International Arbitration and the CISG’,
Arbitral Insights
(Reed Smith, 21 June 2023) 0:18:06–0:18:58
<https://reedsmithinterna‌tionalarbitration.podbean.com/e/international-arbitration-and-the-cisg/>.
Camilla Baasch Andersen,
‘Defining Uniformity in Law’
(2007) 12(1)
Uniform Law Review
Andrea Anastasi, Benjamin Hayward and
Stephanie Peta Brown, ‘An Internationalist Approach to Interpreting
Private International
Law? Arbitration and Sales Law in Australia’
[2020] MelbULawRw 19
Melbourne University Law Review
, 5 (emphasis in original).
Benjamin Hayward, ‘
Opt-Outs in Australia: Fact or Fiction, and What To Do?’ (Speech, UNCCA UN
Day Seminar: 40 Years of
, 26 October 2020) 2–4
<https://papers.ssrn.com/sol3/papers.cfm?abstract_id=3719620>, archived at
<https://p‌erma.cc/6VSM-83GM>.
John F Coyle, ‘The Role of the
in US Contract Practice: An Empirical Study’
(2016) 38(1)
University of Pennsylvania Journal of International Law
Gustavo Moser,
Rethinking Choice of
Law in Cross-Border Sales
(Eleven International Publishing, 2018)
72–3. For a summary of the other relevant empirical studies, see at
For some existing references
addressing Australia’s parliamentary procedures effecting the local
operation of the
more general sense, see Benjamin Hayward, ‘CISG as the Applicable Law: The
Curious Case of Australia’ in Poomintr
Sooksripaisarnkit and Sai Ramani
Garimella (eds),
Contracts for the International Sale of Goods: A
Multidisciplinary Perspective
(Sweet & Maxwell, 2019) 167, 171–4
[10.11]–[10.17], 184–5 [10.43] (‘CISG as the Applicable
Bruno Zeller, ‘The CISG in Australasia: An Overview’ in
Franco Ferrari (ed),
Quo Vadis CISG? Celebrating the 25
Anniversary of the United Nations Convention on Contracts for the International
Sale of Goods
(Bruylant, 2005) 293, 298–9 (‘The CISG in
Australasia’); Benjamin Hayward and Patricia Perlen, ‘The CISG
Australia: The Jigsaw Puzzle That Doesn’t Quite Fit’ (2011) 15(1)
Vindobona Journal of International Commercial
Law and Arbitration
119, 125; Benjamin Hayward, ‘The CISG in Australia: The Jigsaw Puzzle
Missing a Piece’ (2010) 14(2)
Vindobona Journal of International
Commercial Law and Arbitration
193, 193, 195, 199, 221–2 (‘The
Jigsaw Puzzle Missing a Piece’).
Hayward, ‘CISG as the Applicable
[10.37]–[10.44]; Bruno Zeller, ‘The CISG and the Common Law: The
Australian Experience’ in Ulrich
Magnus (ed),
CISG vs Regional Sales
Law Unification: With a Focus on the New Common European Sales Law
European Law Publishers, 2012) 57, 57 (‘The CISG and the Common
Law’); Anastasi, Hayward and Brown (n
) 35–44; Lisa Spagnolo, ‘The
Last Outpost: Automatic
Opt Outs, Misapplications and the Costs of
Ignoring the
Vienna Sales Convention
for Australian Lawyers’
[2009] MelbJlIntLaw 10
Melbourne Journal of International Law
, 167–9 (‘The
Last Outpost’); Christopher Kee and Edgardo Muñoz, ‘In
Defence of the CISG’
[2009] DeakinLawRw 5
(2009) 14(1)
Deakin Law Review
Hayward, ‘CISG as the Applicable
[10.21]–[10.25].
See Benjamin Hayward,
Conflict of
Laws and Arbitral Discretion: The Closest Connection Test
(Oxford University
Press, 2017) 2 [1.02].
See ibid 34–5
[1.68]–[1.71].
See generally Lord Collins and
Jonathan Harris (eds),
Dicey, Morris and Collins on the Conflict of Laws
(Sweet & Maxwell, 16
ed, 2022) vol 1, 3 [1–001]. Given
the internationality requirement in art 1(1) of the
application inherently involves international contexts.
Michael Douglas, ‘Integrating
Private International Law into the Australian Law Curriculum’
[2020] MelbULawRw 21
(2020) 44(1)
Melbourne University Law Review
Even ostensibly local trade can have
international dimensions: Sagi Peari,
The Foundation of Choice of Law: Choice
and Equality
(Oxford University Press, 2018) 86–7.
Ben Köhler, ‘For an
Independent Development of the CISG
beyond Article 7 (2): A Stocktake and
a Proposal’ in Zlatan Meškić et al (eds),
Balkan Yearbook of
and International Law 2020
(Springer, 2021) 3, 4, 20, 24–5;
Hayward, ‘CISG as the Applicable Law’ (n
) 171 [10.10], 173 [10.15]; Renaud
Sorieul, Emma Hatcher and Cyril Emery, ‘Possible Future Work by UNCITRAL
in the Field of
Contract Law: Preliminary Thoughts from the Secretariat’
(2013) 58(4)
Villanova Law Review
, 500, 503, 506; Bryan Horrigan,
Emmanuel Laryea and Lisa Spagnolo, Submission No 35 to the
Attorney-General’s Department (Cth),
Improving Australia’s Law
and Justice Framework: A Discussion Paper to Explore the Scope for Reforming
Australian Contract Law
(20 July 2012) 6 [1.3.5] n 13, 30 [7.7]
<https://researchmgt.monash.edu/ws/portalfiles/portal/259436322/Submission_035_Contract_Law_Review_Horrigan_Laryea_Spagnolo.pdf>,
archived at <https://perma.cc/FV3W-C83V>.
Lisa B Crawford, ‘The Rule of
Law in the Age of Statutes’
(2020) 48(2)
Federal Law Review
Justice Michael Kirby, ‘Towards
a Grand Theory of Interpretation: The Case of Statutes and Contracts’
(2003) 24(2)
Statute Law Review
Guzyal Hill,
National Uniform
Legislation
(Springer, 2022) 41.
Playcorp Pty Ltd v Taiyo
[2003] VSC 108
, [245] (Hansen J) (‘
A-G (Botswana) v Aussie Diamond Products Pty Ltd [No 3]
[2010] WASC
[210] (Murphy J) (‘
Aussie Diamond
This article uses the term
‘legislative histories’ as a domestic equivalent to
préparatoires
, as opposed to its alternative usage referring to
‘prior statutory provisions dealing with the same subject matter’:
Kath Hall and Claire Macken,
Statutory Interpretation: Principles and
(LexisNexis, 2021) 102 [5.43]. For this article’s purposes,
these legislative histories include explanatory memoranda, second
speeches and parliamentary debates relating to the Australian implementation of
) Preamble para 3.
See Hayward, ‘CISG as the
Applicable Law’ (n
See Spagnolo, ‘The Last
Outpost’ (n
Justice Michael Kirby, ‘The
Growing Impact of International Law on Australian Constitutional Values’
[2008] UTasLawRw 1
(2008) 27(1)
University of Tasmania Law Review
Minister of State for
Immigration and Ethnic Affairs v Teoh
[1995] HCA 20
(1995) 183 CLR 273
286–7 (Mason CJ and Deane J), 301 (Toohey J), 316 (McHugh J)
Re Minister for Immigration and Multicultural
and Indigenous Affairs; Ex parte Lam
(2003) 214 CLR 1
32–3 [99] (McHugh and Gummow JJ);
CPCF v Minister for Immigration
(2015) 255 CLR 514, 531 [21] (French CJ), 643–4
[462], 650 [490] (Keane J). See also Lisa Spagnolo,
CISG Implementation in
Asia and the Pacific
(Report, 13 December 2013) 19 (‘
Implementation
Hayward, ‘CISG as the Applicable
[10.19]–[10.20]; Horrigan, Laryea and Spagnolo (n
) 8 [1.6]. With respect to other
comparable instruments, cf
Fothergill v Monarch Airlines Ltd
[1980] UKHL 6
, 281–2 (Lord Diplock); Bruno Zeller and Camilla Andersen, ‘The
Transnational Dimension of Statutory Interpretation: Tragically
Overlooked in a
Global Commercial Environment’
Nordic Journal of Commercial
United Nations Conference on
Contracts for the International Sale of Goods: Vienna,
10 March – 11 April 1980
, UN Doc A/CONF.97/19 (1991) 176 [3],
See generally ibid.
The legislative process may involve
‘multifaceted debate among parliamentarians and other stakeholders with
divergent perspectives,
responding to diverse and sometimes irreconcilable
differences between these stakeholders’: Annette O’Callaghan and
Leigh, ‘Foreword from the Parliamentary Counsel’ in Guzyal
National Uniform Legislation
(Springer, 2022) vii, vii. See, eg,
Jamieson Murphy, ‘Majority of Nationals Voters Want Much More Climate
The Canberra Times
(online, 30 August 2021)
<https://ww‌w.‌‌canberratimes.com.au/story/7406237/voters-in-every-electorate-want-acti‌on-on-climate-pol‌‌l-reveals/>,
quoting Barnaby Joyce, then Deputy Prime Minister and National Party Leader, who
noted (in the climate change context): ‘I’m
not a scientist mate,
I’m a legislator’.
Jonathan Brown (ed), ‘Australian
Practice in International Law 1984–1987’ in DW Greig (ed),
Australian Year Book of International Law
(Australian National University,
1991) vol 11, 159, 307.
Hayward, ‘CISG as the Applicable
) 171 [10.11].
Roder Zelt-und Hallenkonstruktionen
GmbH v Rosedown Park Pty Ltd
[1995] FCA 1221
(1995) 57 FCR 216
, 222 (von Doussa J)
’); Lisa Spagnolo, ‘The International Dimensions
of Australian Contract Law’ in John Eldridge and Timothy Pilkington
Australian Contract Law in the 21
(Federation Press,
2021) 221, 221.
Statute Law (Miscellaneous
Provisions) Act 1987
(Cth) sch 1.
Ian Govey and Christopher Staker,
‘Vienna Sales Convention Takes Effect in Australia
Next Year’ (1988) 23(5)
Australian Law News
Australia’s
legislation
was passed pre-accession, consistent with Australian treaty practice:
‘Australia’s
Treaty-Making Process’,
Department of Foreign Affairs and Trade
(Guidance Note)
<https://www.dfat.gov.au/international-relations/treaties/treaty-making-process>,
archived at <https://perma.cc/YD7R-SSB9>.
This best secures
Australia’s compliance with the public international law obligations that
arise following accession: Hayward,
‘CISG as the Applicable Law’ (n
) 171 [10.11].
Australia’s
legislation does not appear on the Australasian Parliamentary Counsel’s
Committee’s list of national uniform legislation:
Australasian
Parliamentary Counsel’s Committee,
Australian National Uniform Law
Schemes and Associated Legislation of Participating Jurisdictions
Document, November 2020)
<https://pcc.gov.au/uniform/‌National%20Uniform%20Legislation%20table%20-%202020%20final.pdf>,
archived at <https://per‌‌ma.cc/M4U9-4YMQ>. Nevertheless,
Australia’s
Acts qualify as they take a common form: Govey and
Staker (n 44) 19.
Tim D Castle, ‘50 Years of
UNCITRAL: What’s Next?’ [2018] (Spring)
Constitution
See generally Hill,
Uniform Legislation
Govey and Staker (n 44) 19.
Lisa Spagnolo, ‘Law Wars:
Australian Contract Law Reform vs CISG
(2013) 58(4)
Villanova Law Review
, 623 (‘Law Wars’); David Fairlie,
‘A Commentary on Issues Arising under Articles 1 to 6 of the CISG: With
Reference to the Position in Australia’ in
Celebrating Success:
25 Years United Nations Convention on Contracts for the International Sale of
(Singapore International Arbitration Centre, 2006) 39, 40. See, eg,
Sale of Goods Act 1923
Goods Act 1958
[1983] HCA 21
(1983) 158 CLR 1.
See, eg, New South Wales,
Parliamentary Debates
, Legislative Council, 19 November 1986, 6678 (John
P Hannaford) (‘
NSW Parliamentary Debates (19 November
’); Queensland,
Parliamentary Debates
, Legislative
Assembly, 2 September 1986, 770–1 (Sir William Knox), 773 (Neville J
Qld Parliamentary Debates (2 September 1986)
Parliamentary Debates
, Legislative Assembly, 30 April 1987, 1759
(Peter Ross-Edwards)
Vic Parliamentary Debates (30 April 1987)
’); Western
Parliamentary Debates
, Legislative Assembly, 11 November 1986,
4001 (Andrew Mensaros) (‘
WA Legislative
Assembly Parliamentary Debates (11 November 1986)
’); Western
Parliamentary Debates
, Legislative Council, 19 November 1986,
4408 (Norman F Moore) (‘
WA Parliamentary Debates (19 November
’); Western Australia,
Parliamentary Debates
, Legislative
Council, 20 November 1986, 4561 (Phillip G Pendal) (‘
Parliamentary Debates
(20 November 1986)
Originally the
Sale of Goods
(Vienna Convention) Ordinance 1987
(ACT), which was restyled as an Act after
the Australian Capital Territory attained self-government.
Norfolk Island’s
legislation is sometimes overlooked, though trade statistics from around the
time of enactment disclose an import and export relationship
Norfolk Island Report 1986–87
(Parliamentary Paper No
78 of 1988, 1987) 47–51. New Zealand itself adopted the
) in 1994: ‘Chapter X: CISG’
). Trade between Norfolk Island and
the Australian mainland is practically necessary: see
Chasing the Light:
Norfolk Island
(Ray Martin and Max Uechtritz, 2022) 0:39:10–0:39:25
Chasing the Light
’). However, it remains intra-Australian
trade and is not governed by the
): at art 1(1); E Jayme, ‘Article 1:
International Sales Contracts’ in CM Bianca and MJ Bonell (eds),
Commentary on the International Sales Law: The 1980 Vienna Sales
(Giuffrè, 1987) 27, 30 [2.2].
Attorney-General’s Department
(Cth), ‘Review of Developments in International Trade Law’ [1988]
Australian International Law News
‘Chapter X: CISG’ (n
Sale of Goods (Vienna Convention)
(Amendment) Ordinance 1989
(ACT) s 3; Explanatory Statement,
Goods (Vienna Convention) (Amendment) Ordinance 1989
Explanatory Statement,
Goods (Vienna Convention) (Amendment) Ordinance
Sale of Goods (Vienna Convention)
Sale of Goods (Vienna Convention) Act
’), as repealed by
Consumer Affairs Legislation Amendment
(Reform) Act 2010
(Vic) s 20 (‘
Consumer Affairs Legislation
Amendment Act
(n 50) pt IV, as inserted by
Consumer Affairs Legislation Amendment Act
(n 59) s 17. See also at s
1(d). Occasional reference to the repealed
Sale of Goods (Vienna Convention)
(n 59) persists: see, eg, Bronwyn Lincoln, ‘The UN CISG and
Its Implications for Australian Businesses during the COVID-19
(Blog Post, 21 May 2020)
<https://www.lexology.com/‌library/detail.aspx?g=a1d4b087-0372-4f9f-b591-107406962015>,
at <https://perma.‌‌cc/R9K4-FSF2>.
Competition and Consumer Act
(Cth) sch 2 (‘
’) has state and territory, as well
as Commonwealth, application:
Fair Trading (Australian Consumer Law) Act
Fair Trading Act 1987
Affairs and Fair Trading Act 1990
Fair Trading Act 1989
Fair Trading Act 1987
Australian Consumer Law
(Tasmania) Act 2010
Australian Consumer Law and Fair Trading
(Vic) ch 2;
Fair Trading Act 2010
Trade Practices Amendment
(Australian Consumer Law) Act (No 2) 2010
(Cth) sch 1 (‘
Practices Amendment Act (No 2)
Sale of Goods (Vienna Convention)
(ACT) sch 1 (‘
Sale of Goods (Vienna Convention) Act
Sale of Goods (Vienna Convention) Act 1987
Island) sch (‘
Sale of Goods (Vienna Convention) Act (Norfolk
Sale of Goods (Vienna Convention) Act 1986
Sale of Goods (Vienna Convention) Act (NSW)
Goods (Vienna Convention) Act 1987
(NT) sch (‘
Goods (Vienna Convention) Act (NT)
Sale of Goods (Vienna
Convention) Act 1986
(Qld) sch (‘
Sale of Goods (Vienna Convention)
Sale of Goods (Vienna Convention) Act 1986
Sale of Goods (Vienna
Convention) Act (SA)
Sale of Goods (Vienna
Convention) Act 1987
(Tas) sch 1 (‘
Sale of Goods (Vienna
Convention) Act
(n 50) sch, replacing
Sale of Goods
(Vienna Convention) Act (Vic)
(n 59) sch 1;
Sale of Goods (Vienna
Convention) Act 1986
(WA) sch 1 (‘
Sale of Goods (Vienna Convention) Act
Robert French, ‘Australia and
International Law’ (2020) 5
Perth International Law
3, 11. See Hill,
National Uniform Legislation
) 29, 90–1.
Sale of Goods (Vienna Convention)
Sale of Goods (Vienna Convention) Act (Norfolk
(n 62) s 3;
Sale of Goods (Vienna Convention) Act (NSW)
Sale of Goods (Vienna Convention) Act (NT)
(n 62) s 3;
of Goods (Vienna Convention) Act
(definition of
‘Convention’);
Sale of Goods (Vienna Convention) Act
Sale of Goods (Vienna Convention) Act
(n 50) s 85, replacing
Sale of Goods (Vienna Convention) Act
Sale of Goods (Vienna Convention) Act
Sale of Goods (Vienna Convention)
Sale of Goods (Vienna Convention) Act (Norfolk
(n 62) s 5;
Sale of Goods (Vienna Convention) Act (NSW)
Sale of Goods (Vienna Convention) Act (NT)
(n 62) s 5;
of Goods (Vienna Convention) Act
Sale of Goods (Vienna
Convention) Act
Sale of Goods (Vienna Convention) Act
(n 50) s 86, replacing
Sale of Goods
(Vienna Convention) Act
Sale of Goods (Vienna
Convention) Act
Sale of Goods (Vienna Convention)
Sale of Goods (Vienna Convention) Act (Norfolk
(n 62) s 6;
Sale of Goods (Vienna Convention) Act
(n 62) s 6;
Sale of Goods (Vienna Convention) Act (NT)
Sale of Goods (Vienna Convention) Act
of Goods (Vienna Convention) Act
Sale of Goods (Vienna
Convention) Act
(n 50) s 87, replacing
Sale of Goods (Vienna Convention) Act
Sale of Goods
(Vienna Convention) Act
Pilar Perales Viscasillas,
‘Article 7’ in Stefan Kröll, Loukas Mistelis and Pilar Perales
Viscasillas (eds),
UN Convention on Contracts for the International Sale of
Goods (CISG): A Commentary
(CH Beck, 2
ed, 2018) 112, 115
Pascal Hachem, ‘Article 7 CISG:
Interpretation of Convention and Gap-Filling’ in Ingeborg Schwenzer and
Ulrich G Schroeter
Schlechtriem & Schwenzer: Commentary on the
UN Convention on the International Sale of Goods (CISG)
University Press, 5
ed, 2022) 135, 138–9 [8] (‘Article
7 CISG’); ibid 113 [1]; Bruno Zeller, ‘Article 48 CISG:
Confusion or Sound Drafting?’ (2022) 22(1)
Internationales
Handelsrecht
7, 7–8 [6], 8 [9];
Bruno Zeller, ‘Good
Faith: Is It a Contractual Obligation?’
(2003) 15(2)
Bond Law Review
, 217; Bruno Zeller, ‘Determining the Contractual Intent of Parties
under the CISG
and Common Law: A Comparative Analysis’
(2002) 4(4)
European Journal of Law Reform
, 629 (‘A Comparative
Analysis’); Bruno Zeller, ‘The Black Hole: Where Are the Four
Corners of the CISG?’
International Trade and Business Law
See Hachem, ‘Article 7
CISG’ (n 68) 145 [20].
Ibid 138 [8].
See, eg, Hayward, ‘CISG as the
Applicable Law’ (n
[10.09]–[10.17],
182–5 [10.37]–[10.44]; Anastasi, Hayward and Brown (n
) 35–7; Spagnolo, ‘The Last
Outpost’ (n
Fariba Aghili, ‘A Critical Analysis of the CISG as Australian Law’
(2007) 21(4)
Commercial Law Quarterly
Hachem, ‘Article 7 CISG’
(n 68) 137 [6]; Zeller and Andersen (n 36) 11.
Anastasi, Hayward and Brown (n
Project Blue Sky Inc v Australian
Broadcasting Authority
[1998] HCA 35
(1998) 194 CLR 355
384 [78] (McHugh, Gummow, Kirby and Hayne JJ) (‘
Project Blue
’). See also
at 366 [13], 374–5 [41] (Brennan CJ). However, the difficulties in
ascribing intention to Parliament as a collective are duly
noted: Stephen
Gageler, ‘Legislative Intention’
[2015] MonashULawRw 1
(2015) 41(1)
Monash University
Michael Douglas, ‘Does Choice of
Law Matter?’
Australian International Law Journal
(‘Choice of Law’).
SZTAL v Minister for
Immigration and Border Protection
[2017] HCA 34
(2017) 262 CLR 362
368 [14] (Kiefel CJ, Nettle and Gordon JJ), 374–5 [37]–[38]
(Gageler J), 388–9 [82]–[83],
392 [92] (Edelman J);
Federal Commissioner of Taxation v Unit Trend
Services Pty Ltd
(2013) 250 CLR 523
, 539–40 [47] (French CJ, Crennan,
Kiefel, Gageler and Keane JJ), quoting
Certain Lloyd’s Underwriters v
[2012] HCA 56
(2012) 248 CLR 378
, 389 [24] (French CJ and Hayne J);
Alumina Pty Ltd v Commissioner of Territory Revenue (NT)
[2009] HCA 41
(2009) 239 CLR 27
31–2 [4]–[5] (French CJ), 46–7 [47] (Hayne, Heydon, Crennan
and Kiefel JJ) (‘
Project Blue Sky
[19], [21], 374–5 [41] (Brennan CJ), 384 [78] (McHugh, Gummow, Kirby and
CIC Insurance Ltd v Bankstown Football Club Ltd
(1997) 187 CLR
, 408 (Brennan CJ, Dawson, Toohey and Gummow JJ, Gaudron J agreeing at 412)
CIC Insurance
’). See also Dennis C Pearce,
Interpretation in Australia
(LexisNexis Butterworths, 9
2019) 33–4 [2.1] (‘
Statutory Interpretation
Lloyd, ‘A Purposive Approach to Interpreting Australia’s
Complementary Protection Regime’
[2020] MelbULawRw 7
(2019) 43(2)
Melbourne University Law
, 657–8, 669–71; Justice John Middleton,
‘Statutory Interpretation: Mostly Common Sense?’
[2017] MelbULawRw 6
(2016) 40(2)
Melbourne University Law Review
, 632, 655–6; Michael Kirby,
‘The Never-Ending Challenge of Drafting and Interpreting Statutes: A
Meditation on the Career
of John Finemore QC’
[2012] MelbULawRw 4
(2012) 36(1)
University Law Review
, 158–60, 168 (‘The Never-Ending
Challenge’); Michael Kirby, ‘Statutory Interpretation: The Meaning
of Meaning’
[2011] MelbULawRw 3
(2011) 35(1)
Melbourne University Law Review
131–3; Justice Michael Kirby, ‘Judicial Activism: Power without
Responsibility? No, Appropriate Activism Conforming
[2006] MelbULawRw 18
(2006) 30(2)
Melbourne University Law Review
Gageler (n 74) 3–4,
Australia’s
legislative histories disclose varying levels of accuracy in understanding
the provisions of the
: Hayward, ‘CISG as the
Applicable Law’ (n
171–4 [10.09]–[10.17]. Whilst this is an interesting topic, this
is a separate issue to those under examination in this
Lisa Burton Crawford et al,
Law and Statutory Interpretation: Principles and Practice
(Federation Press,
ed, 2021) 267.
After some historical reluctance:
Gageler (n 74) 4–5.
Interpretation
(n 76) 85 [3.1].
Lacey v A-G (Qld)
[2011] HCA 10
(2011) 242 CLR 573
, 605 [86] (Heydon J);
Brennan v Comcare
[1994] FCA 1147
(1994) 50 FCR
, 573–5 (Gummow J);
Re Bolton; Ex parte Beane
[1987] HCA 12
(1987) 162 CLR
, 517–18 (Mason CJ, Wilson and Dawson JJ); Crawford et al (n 79) 240,
268–9. See also
(n 76) 47 [47] (Hayne, Heydon, Crennan and
Kiefel JJ).
SydneyLawSchool, ‘Ross Parsons
Centre Law & Business Seminar: Common Mistakes in Using National Uniform
Legislation’
(YouTube, 26 November 2021) 0:03:21–0:03:31
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=NoKmCBfrhHU>.
International Arbitration Act
International Arbitration Act
Commercial Arbitration Act 2017
Commercial Arbitration Act 2010
Arbitration (National Uniform Legislation) Act 2011
Commercial Arbitration Act 2013
Arbitration Act 2011
Commercial Arbitration Act 2011
Commercial Arbitration Act 2011
Commercial Arbitration Act
Arbitration Act 2012
Cargill International SA v Peabody
Australia Mining Ltd
[2010] NSWSC 887
(2010) 78 NSWLR 533
546–7 [35]–[36] (Ward J);
Castel Electronics Pty Ltd v TCL Air
Conditioner (Zhongshan)
[2012] FCA 21
(2012) 201 FCR 209
, 210 [3], 222 [65], 224 [75]–[77]
(Murphy J). Cf
Rizhao Steel Holding Group Co Ltd v Koolan Iron Ore Pty
[2012] WASCA 50
(2012) 43 WAR 91
, 123 [141] (Martin CJ,
Buss JA agreeing at 125 [153]), 135 [203]–[205] (Murphy JA)
Rizhao Steel
’). The United Nations Commission on
International Trade Law,
UNCITRAL Model Law on International Commercial
Arbitration
, UN Doc A/40/17 (21 June 1985) annex I, as amended by
of the United Nations Commission on International Trade Law on the Work of Its
Thirty-Ninth Session
, UN Doc A/61/17 (7 July 2006) annex I (‘
’) contains an equivalent to
) art 7(1):
(n 85) art 2A(1); Peter Binder,
International Commercial Arbitration
and Mediation in UNCITRAL Model Law Jurisdictions
(Wolters Kluwer,
ed, 2019) 59. Australia adopted the
International Arbitration Act
(n 84) and the
(n 85) appears in sch 2 of the
International Arbitration Act
(n 84). This, however, does not explain referencing extrinsic
materials of Australian origin pertaining to the non-
parts of the
International Arbitration Act
(n 84) itself.
Amasya Enterprises Pty Ltd v Asta
Developments (Aust) Pty Ltd
[2016] VSC 326
[35] n 63 (Croft J). Like art 2A(1) of the
Arbitration Act
(n 84) is broadly equivalent to art 7(1)
), though this
does not explain references to extrinsic materials of Australian origin for the
reasons already identified: see above n 85. It is particularly important, in
relation to this legislation, to note that the
Commercial Arbitration Act
confirms the continued operation of the
Interpretation of Legislation Act 1984
in relation to the
Commercial Arbitration Act
SydneyLawSchool (n 83)
0:22:40–0:22:50.
Hall and Macken (n
) 93 [5.10]. See also
(n 76) 408 (Brennan CJ, Dawson, Toohey and Gummow JJ, Gaudron J
agreeing at 412), quoted in Crawford et al (n 79) 268; Jacinta Dharmananda,
‘Outside the Text: Inside the Use of Extrinsic Materials in Statutory
Interpretation’
(2014) 42(2)
Federal Law Review
Kirby, ‘The Never-Ending Challenge’ (n 76) 163.
See above nn 40–66 and
accompanying text.
Interpretation
(n 76) 98 [3.16]. See also Gageler (n 74) 6.
Acts Interpretation Act 1901
Interpretation
(n 76) 99 [3.17].
Ibid 100 [3.18].
This discretion was a ‘generally
agreed’ feature of Australia’s extrinsic materials rules from the
time of their
very drafting: Dharmananda (n 88) 337.
Interpretation Act 1987
Interpretation Act 1978
Acts Interpretation Act 1954
’). This provision is structured
differently to s 15AB of the
(n 91) but is substantially to the
same effect.
Legislation Interpretation Act 2021
See also Dennis Pearce,
Interpretation Acts in Australia
(LexisNexis Butterworths, 2018) 2 [1.4].
Acts Interpretation Act 1931
This provision’s structure is similar to s 14B of the
(n 97) and is likewise to the same effect as s 15AB of the
Interpretation
Interpretation Act 1979
(Norfolk Island) s 8A.
Legislation Act 2001
Interpretation of Legislation Act 1984
See above nn 68–70 and
accompanying text.
) arts 4(a)–(b) specifically
identify that validity and property’s passage are beyond the scope of the
, the provision’s second sentence’s opening words
(‘[i]n particular’) ‘make it clear that the matters
[in arts 4(a)–(b)] are not the
only matters which fall outside the realm of concern of the
‘Article 4: Questions To Be Covered by Convention’ in CM Bianca
and MJ Bonell (eds),
Commentary on the International Sales Law: The 1980
Vienna Sales Convention
(Giuffrè, 1987) 44, 45 [2.4]. Thus, as a
result of art 4, the subject matter scope of the
extends only to contract formation and party rights and obligations
) arts 1–6, 100. See also Shaotang
Wang, ‘Baodeli Co, Ltd v Ceiec (Guangdong)’ in Peng Guo, Haicong Zuo
Zhang (eds),
Selected Chinese Cases on the UN Sales
Convention (CISG)
(Springer, 2022) vol 1, 293, 298; Peng Wang, Yueshan
Liu and Chaolin Zhang, ‘Vishaybc Components Beyschlag Gmbh versus Shanghai
Y Hsu Trading Co, Ltd: Dispute Arising from a Sale of Goods Contract’ in
Peng Guo, Haicong Zuo and Shu Zhang (eds),
Selected Chinese Cases on the UN
Sales Convention (CISG)
(Springer, 2022) vol 1, 361, 366.
Larry A DiMatteo, ‘CISG as
Basis of a Comprehensive International Sales Law’
(2013) 58(4)
Villanova Law Review
Peter Schlechtriem,
‘Requirements of Application and Sphere of Applicability of the
CISG’ (2005) 36(4)
Victoria University of Wellington Law Review
781, 788. See also Brooke
Marshall, ‘The Hague Choice of Law Principles, CISG, and PICC: A Hard
Look at a Choice of Soft Law’
(2018) 66(1)
American Journal of
Comparative Law
Hachem, ‘Article 7
CISG’ (n 68) 148–9 [27].
Ibid 149 [27].
Bruno Zeller,
CISG and the
Unification of International Trade Law
(Routledge-Cavendish, 2007) 1
CISG and the Unification
’); Bruno Zeller, ‘Recent
Developments of the CISG: Are Regional Developments the Answer to
Harmonisation?’ (2014)
Vindobona Journal of International
Commercial Law and Arbitration
111, 112; Zeller and Andersen (n 36) 15;
Bruno Zeller, ‘In or out of the CISG? That Is the Question’ [2013]
Australian Mining and Petroleum Law Association Yearbook
(‘In or out of the CISG’). See generally Filip De Ly, ‘Sources
of International Sales Law: An Eclectic
(2005) 25(1)
Law and Commerce
Bruno Zeller, ‘Is the
Goods (Vienna Convention) Act
the Perfect Tool To Manage Cross Border Legal
Risks Faced by Australian Firms?’ (1999) 6(3)
eLaw Journal: Murdoch
University Electronic Journal of Law
<https://www.murdoch.edu.au/elaw/issues/v6n3/‌‌zeller63.html>, archived at <https://perma.cc/MEW9-P9SW>
(‘The Perfect Tool’), discussing
Zeller, ‘The CISG in
Australasia’ (n
See above n
and accompanying text.
IMC Aviation Solutions Pty Ltd v
Altain Khuder LLC
[2011] VSCA 248
(2011) 38 VR 303
, 314 [37], discussing
International
Arbitration Act
Patrick Devlin,
(Oxford University Press, 1962) 2. See also
O’Toole v Charles David Pty Ltd
(1991) 171 CLR 232, 267 (Brennan
(n 50) s 86.
See above nn 68–70 and
accompanying text.
(n 50) s 87.
Qld Parliamentary Debates (2
September 1986)
(n 52) 773 (Neville J Harper).
Anastasi, Hayward and Brown (n
) 35–7. See also Zeller, ‘The
Perfect Tool’ (n 111) [16]. See generally Frank Maher, ‘Words,
Words, Words’
[1984] MelbULawRw 5
(1984) 14(3)
Melbourne University Law Review
See generally
NBGM v Minister
for Immigration and Multicultural Affairs
[2006] HCA 54
(2006) 231 CLR 52
, 71–2 [61]
(Callinan, Heydon and Crennan JJ).
Spagnolo, ‘The Last
Outpost’ (n
) 190–1. See
also Zeller, ‘The CISG in Australasia’ (n
) 303–4; Zeller, ‘A
Comparative Analysis’ (n 68) 642; Zeller, ‘In or out of the
CISG’ (n 110) 414; Horrigan,
Laryea and Spagnolo (n
) 6 [1.3.5], 8 [1.6], 32 [8.2.1].
Aghili (n 71) 20–5.
See above nn 90–102 and
accompanying text.
Crawford et al (n 79) 255 (emphasis
in original).
See above n 74 and accompanying
Ibid [235] (Hansen J).
Ibid [245].
Aussie Diamond
) [210] (Murphy J), citing ibid
[235]–[245].
Aussie Diamond
) [210] (Murphy J).
[2003] WASC 11
, [188] (Barker J)
Ibid [196].
A-G (Botswana) v Aussie Diamond
Products Pty Ltd [No 2]
[2012] WASCA 73
Diamond Appeal
See Zeller, ‘The CISG in
Australasia’ (n
See generally Jadranka Petrovic,
‘The Interplay of CISG Cultural, Legal, Historical and Religious Variances
and Their Impact
on the Treatment of the CISG’ (2016) 20(1)
Vindobona Journal of International Commercial Law and Arbitration
72; Luke Nottage, ‘Who’s Afraid of the Vienna Sales Convention
(CISG): A New Zealander’s View from
Australia and Japan’ (2005) 36(4)
Victoria University of Wellington
Horrigan, Laryea and Spagnolo (n
3–4 [1.2], 6 [1.3.5], 23 [4.5].
CISG and the
Unification
(n 110) 3. See also John Goldring, ‘Uniformity,
Harmonisation or Restatement of Laws: Desirability and Implementation’
(1854) 9 Ex 341
; 156 ER 145, 151
(Alderson B for the Court). See, eg,
Downs Investments Pty Ltd (in liq) v
Perwaja Steel SDN BHD
[2001] QCA 433
[2002] 2 Qd R 462
, 484 [48] (Williams JA, Davies JA
agreeing at 472 [1], Byrne J agreeing at 485 [52]) (‘
Delchi Carrier
SpA v Rotorex Corporation
[1995] USCA2 1270
71 F 3d 1024
, 1029 [10, 11] (Winter J for
the Court) (2
Cir, 1995); Zeller,
CISG and the Unification
(n 110) 104; Geng Wang, Shu Zhang and Peng Guo, ‘Novelact (Resources)
Limited v Xiamen Special Economic Zone International
Trade Trust Company’
in Peng Guo, Haicong Zuo and Shu Zhang (eds),
Selected Chinese Cases on the
UN Sales Convention (CISG)
(Springer, 2022) vol 1, 1, 8; Chaolin Zhang, Shu
Zhang and Peng Guo, ‘Sanmei (Japan) Trading Co, Ltd v Fujian Zhangzhou
& Minerals Import and Export Co, Ltd’ in Peng Guo, Haicong Zuo
and Shu Zhang (eds),
Selected Chinese Cases on the UN Sales Convention (CISG)
(Springer, 2022) vol 1, 13, 23–4; Zeller, ‘The CISG
Australasia’ (n
V Susanne Cook, ‘The UN Convention on Contracts for the International Sale
of Goods: A Mandate To Abandon Legal
Ethnocentricity’
(1997) 16(2)
Journal of Law and Commerce
Fryer Holdings Pty Ltd (in liq)
v Liaoning MEC Group Co Ltd
[2012] NSWSC 18
, [16], [19] (McDougall J)
Fryer Holdings
Castel Electronics Pty Ltd v Toshiba
Singapore Pte Ltd
[2011] FCAFC 55
(2011) 192 FCR 445
, 460 [89] (Keane CJ, Lander and Besanko
Castel Appeal
Castel Electronics Pty Ltd v
Toshiba Singapore Pte Ltd
[2010] FCA 1028
, [123] (Ryan J) (‘
) [235], [245] (Hansen J); Zeller,
‘The CISG in Australasia’ (n
320–1; Bruno Zeller, ‘The Duty To Mitigate: A Comparative
Analysis between the English Common Law and the CISG’
(2018) 92(3)
Australian Law Journal
, 207 (‘The Duty
To Mitigate’).
[2001] SASC 15
Engineering
Ibid [16]–[19] (Judge
Burley). Judge Burley held at [18]:
To the extent that the plaintiff relies in the statement of claim upon the
Sale of Goods Act
(SA)] and not the provisions of the Act
which apply by virtue of the ...
, the plaintiff is precluded
from pursuing such a course because it is only the provisions of the latter Act
which apply.
Spagnolo, ‘The Last
Outpost’ (n
Aghili (n 71) 16, 20–5. See also Castle (n 46) 91; Ken Shiu, ‘The
Exclusion of the CISG in Technology Contracts:
Fear of the Unknown?’
(2005) 61 (September)
Computers and Law
See below Appendix 1.
See, eg, Hill,
National Uniform
Legislation
Guzyal Hill, ‘Categories of the “Art of the Impossible”:
Achieving Sustainable Uniformity in Harmonised
Legislation in the Australian
Federation’
(2020) 48(3)
Federal Law Review
(‘Art of the Impossible’).
Maryam Salehijam, ‘The Value
of Systematic Content Analysis in Legal Research’ (2018) 23(1–2)
Tilburg Law Review
Crawford et al (n 79) 280–1.
(n 35) 287 (Mason CJ and Deane J), 315
(McHugh J);
Dietrich v The Queen
[1992] HCA 57
(1992) 177 CLR 292
, 306 (Mason CJ and
McHugh J), 348–9 (Dawson J), 360–1 (Toohey J).
Salehijam (n 147) 37, discussing
Mark A Hall and Ronald F Wright, ‘Systematic Content Analysis of Judicial
(2008) 96(1)
California Law Review
Explanatory Statement,
Goods (Vienna Convention) Ordinance 1987
Sale of Goods (Vienna
Convention) Act
Chasing the Light
0:03:17–0:03:24.
See below n 403.
See generally Hayward, ‘CISG
as the Applicable Law’ (n
172–3 [10.12]–[10.15].
Explanatory Note,
Sale of Goods
(Vienna Convention) Bill 1986
New South Wales,
Parliamentary
, Legislative Assembly, 23 October 1986,
5374–6 (Terence Sheahan) (‘
NSW Parliamentary Debates (23
October 1986)
NSW Parliamentary Debates (19
November 1986)
(n 52) 6672–4 (Jack R Hallam).
Ibid 6673. See also
) arts 1(1)(b), 7(1).
NSW Parliamentary Debates
(19 November 1986)
(n 52) 6674 (Robert B Rowland Smith).
New South Wales,
Parliamentary
, Legislative Assembly, 11 November 1986, 6116 (John Dowd)
NSW Parliamentary Debates (11 November 1986)
NSW Parliamentary Debates (19
November 1986)
(n 52) 6674–7 (Robert B Rowland Smith).
Ibid 6672–4, 6677–9
(Jack R Hallam).
Ibid 6678 (John P Hannaford).
Ibid 6678 (Ronald D Dyer).
Ibid 6679 (Fred J Nile). An
additional interjection by Michael Egan (ALP) is irrelevant for present
purposes: at 6674 (Michael R
Ibid 6675 (Robert B Rowland
Ibid 6678 (Jack R Hallam).
Ibid 6679 (Fred J Nile).
Northern Territory
(Self-Government) Act 1978
Northern Territory,
Parliamentary Debates
, Legislative Assembly, 29 April 1987, 91–2
(Daryl Manzie) (‘
NT Parliamentary Debates (29 April
See above n 166 and accompanying
NT Parliamentary Debates
(29 April 1987)
(n 182) 92 (Daryl Manzie).
Northern Territory,
Parliamentary Debates
, Legislative Assembly, 3 June 1987, 585–6
(Neil Bell) (‘
NT Parliamentary Debates
Ibid 586–7 (Richard
Ibid 587–8 (Noel
Padgham-Purich).
Ibid 588 (Daryl Manzie).
Ibid 587 (Richard Setter).
Ibid 585 (Neil Bell).
Ibid 586–7 (Richard Setter),
588 (Daryl Manzie).
Ibid 587 (Richard Setter).
Queensland’s Legislative
Council was abolished in 1922:
Constitution
Act Amendment Act
(Qld) s 2(1).
Queensland,
Parliamentary
, Legislative Assembly, 19 August 1986, 351 (Neville J Harper)
Qld Parliamentary Debates (19 August 1986)
Ibid. See above nn 166, 184–5
and accompanying text.
Qld Parliamentary Debates (19
August 1986)
(n 197) 350–1 (Neville J Harper);
Qld Parliamentary
Debates (2 September 1986)
(n 52) 769 (Wayne Goss).
Qld Parliamentary Debates
(2 September 1986)
(n 52) 769–70 (Wayne Goss).
Ibid 770–4 (Sir William
Ibid 772–3 (John Innes).
Ibid 773–4 (Neville J
Harper). Interjections from Terence Mackenroth (ALP): at 770; Patrick Comben
(ALP): at 771–2; and
Terence Gygar (Liberals): at 773; are irrelevant for
present purposes.
Ibid 772 (John Innes).
Ibid 771 (Sir William Knox).
Ibid 772 (John Innes).
Patrick O’Neill,
‘“Was There an EM?”: Explanatory Memoranda and Explanatory
Statements in the Commonwealth
Parliament’ (Research Brief No 15,
Parliamentary Library, Parliament of Australia, 23 May 2005) 23.
See South Australia,
Parliamentary Debates
, House of Assembly, 25 September 1986, 1237–8
(Donald J Hopgood) (‘
SA Parliamentary Debates (25 September
’). Cf South Australia,
Parliamentary Debates
, Legislative
Council, 17 September 1986, 912–13 (Christopher J Sumner) (‘
Parliamentary Debates (17 September 1986)
SA Parliamentary Debates (17
September 1986)
(n 212) 913 (Christopher J Sumner).
Ibid 912–13.
South Australia,
Parliamentary
, Legislative Council, 24 September 1986, 1133 (Kenneth T Griffin)
SA Parliamentary Debates (24 September 1986)
Parliamentary Debates
, House of Assembly, 19 November 1986,
2133 (Gregory J Crafter) (‘
SA Parliamentary Debates (19 November
SA Parliamentary Debates
(24 September 1986)
(n 218) 1133 (Kenneth T Griffin).
SA Parliamentary Debates (19
November 1986)
(n 218) 2133 (Stephen J Baker).
Ibid 2133 (Gregory J Crafter).
Ibid 2133 (Stephen J Baker).
Ibid. Noting, for the purposes of
utmost clarity, that the
) creates private law rights and
obligations and is therefore distinct from public law (nation State to nation
State) free trade agreements:
at art 1(1).
SA Parliamentary Debates
(19 November 1986)
(n 218) 2133 (Stephen J Baker), discussing
Parliamentary Debates (17 September 1986)
(n 212) 912 (Christopher J
SA Parliamentary Debates
(19 November 1986)
(n 218) 2133 (Stephen J Baker).
Parliamentary
, Legislative Council, 26 March 1987, 413 (Peter McKay)
Tas Parliamentary Debates (26 March 1987)
Clause Notes, Sale of Goods (Vienna
Convention) Bill 1987 (Tas).
Parliamentary
, House of Assembly, 24 March 1987, 674–5 (John
Bennett) (‘
Tas Parliamentary Debates (24 March
Ibid 674. See above nn 214–17
and accompanying text.
Tas Parliamentary Debates (24
March 1987)
(n 228) 675 (John Bennett).
Tas Parliamentary Debates (26
March 1987)
(n 226) 413 (Peter McKay).
Tas Parliamentary Debates (24
March 1987)
(n 228) 675 (John White).
Ibid 675–6 (Robert
Ibid 676 (Michael Weldon).
Ibid 675 (Robert Brown).
) art 2(a).
Tas Parliamentary Debates (24
March 1987)
(n 228) 675 (John White).
Zeller, ‘The CISG
the Common Law’ (n
See generally Hayward,
as the Applicable Law’ (n
) 172–4 [10.12]–[10.17];
Zeller, ‘The CISG in Australasia’ (n
Parliamentary
, Legislative Council, 3 March 1987, 171–2 (James H
Vic Parliamentary Debates (3 March 1987)
Parliamentary Debates
, Legislative Assembly, 14 April 1987,
1220–1 (Race Mathews) (‘
Vic Parliamentary
Debates (14 April 1987)
Hayward, ‘CISG as the
Applicable Law’ (n
[10.13], discussing Explanatory Memorandum,
Sale of Goods (Vienna Convention)
Explanatory Memorandum,
Goods (Vienna Convention) Bill 1987
Vic Parliamentary Debates (3
March 1987)
(n 242) 171–2 (James H Kennan).
Parliamentary
, Legislative Council, 17 March 1987, 306 (Bruce A Chamberlain), 307
(William R Baxter) (‘
Vic Parliamentary Debates (17 March
Vic Parliamentary Debates (30 April 1987)
(n 52) 1758
(Michael John).
Vic Parliamentary Debates
(17 March 1987)
(n 248) 306–9 (Bruce A Chamberlain).
Ibid 307–8 (James H
Ibid 307–8 (William R
Baxter). An interjection from Geoffrey Connard (Liberals): at 307; is irrelevant
for present purposes.
Ibid 308 (James H Kennan).
Ibid 307–8 (William R
Baxter). See generally Hill,
National Uniform Legislation
) 50, 122–3; Guzyal Hill,
‘Avoiding a “Catch 22”: Major Lessons from a Meta-Analysis of
Reports of the Parliament
of Western Australia on Threats to Sovereignty by
National Uniform Legislation’
(2021) 33(1)
Bond Law Review
40–2; Goldring (n 139) 8; SydneyLawSchool (n
) 0:30:29–0:39:24.
Vic Parliamentary Debates (17
March 1987)
(n 248) 307–8 (William R Baxter).
Vic Parliamentary Debates (30
April 1987)
(n 52) 1758–9 (Michael John).
Ibid 1759 (Peter Ross-Edwards).
Ibid 1759 (Race Mathews).
Ibid 1758 (Michael John).
Ibid 1759 (Peter Ross-Edwards).
Sale of Goods (Vienna
Convention) Act
(n 59), as repealed by
Consumer Affairs Legislation
Amendment Act
(n 59) s 20.
Consumer Affairs Legislation
Amendment Act
(n 59) ss 17–19. See
(n 50) pt IV.
Parliamentary
, Legislative Assembly, 28 July 2010, 2815–19 (Anthony
Robinson) (‘
Vic Parliamentary Debates (28 July 2010)
Parliamentary
, Legislative Council, 12 August 2010, 4023–6 (Gavin
Jenings) (‘
Vic Legislative Council Parliamentary Debates (12 August
Explanatory Memorandum, Consumer
Affairs Legislation Amendment (Reform)
Bill 2010 (Vic) 1, 15–16 (‘Explanatory Memorandum, Consumer
Affairs Legislation’).
Vic Parliamentary Debates (28
(n 262) 2815–19 (Anthony Robinson).
Ibid, discussing
Kee and Muñoz (n
Parliamentary
, Legislative Assembly, 11 August 2010, 3114–24
Vic Parliamentary Debates
(11 August 2010)
These figures include
non-substantive interjections.
Hayward, ‘CISG as the
Applicable Law’ (n
Vic Parliamentary Debates
(11 August 2010)
(n 268) 3114 (Michael O’Brien).
Ibid 3122 (Martin Foley).
Ibid 3123 (David Hodgett).
Parliamentary
, Legislative Council, 2 September 2010, 4451 (Susan Pennicuik)
Vic Parliamentary Debates
(2 September 2010)
See above nn 127–30 and
accompanying text.
Spagnolo, ‘The Last
Outpost’ (n
Spagnolo, ‘Law Wars’ (n
50) 629. Cf Zeller, ‘The Perfect Tool’ (n 111) [2].
Parliamentary
, Legislative Assembly, 14 September 2010, 3650 (‘
Parliamentary Debates (14 September 2010)
’); Victoria,
Parliamentary Debates
, Legislative Assembly, 16 September 2010,
Vic Parliamentary Debates (16 September
Western Australia,
Parliamentary
, Legislative Assembly, 7 October 1986, 2744–5 (Keith Wilson)
WA Parliamentary Debates (7 October 1986)
’). Cf Western
Parliamentary Debates
, Legislative Council, 11 November 1986, 3942
(Kay Hallahan) (‘
WA Legislative Council Parliamentary Debates (11
November 1986)
WA Parliamentary Debates (7
October 1986)
(n 280) 2745 (Keith Wilson).
Ibid 2744–5.
WA Legislative Assembly
Parliamentary Debates (11 November 1986)
(n 52) 4000–2
(Andrew Mensaros).
Ibid 4002 (Keith Wilson).
WA Parliamentary Debates
(19 November 1986)
(n 52) 4407–8 (Norman F Moore);
Parliamentary Debates (20 November 1986)
(n 52) 4560–1 (Norman F
WA Parliamentary Debates (19
November 1986)
(n 52) 4408–9 (Max Evans).
Ibid 4409 (Kay Hallahan);
Parliamentary Debates (20 November 1986)
4560–2 (Kay Hallahan).
WA Parliamentary Debates
(20 November 1986)
(n 52) 4561–2 (Phillip G Pendal).
Ibid 4562 (John Williams). An
interjection from Fred McKenzie (ALP): at 4560; is not relevant for present
Ibid 4561 (Kay Hallahan).
Western Australia,
Parliamentary
, Legislative Assembly, 27 November 1986, 5088 (‘
Parliamentary Debates
(27 November 1986)
WA Legislative Assembly
Parliamentary Debates (11 November 1986)
(n 52) 4001
(Andrew Mensaros).
WA Parliamentary Debates
(19 November 1986)
(n 52) 4408 (Norman F Moore).
WA Parliamentary Debates
(20 November 1986)
(n 52) 4562 (Phillip G Pendal).
Ibid 4560 (Kay Hallahan).
French (n 63) 11. See
Trade Practices Act 1974
’), as repealed by
Trade Practices Amendment Act (No
(n 61) sch 1.
Hayward, ‘CISG as the
Applicable Law’ (n
[10.06], discussing
art 2(a); Michael Pryles, ‘An Assessment of the Vienna Sales
Convention’ [1989]
Australian Mining and Petroleum Law Association
337, 339. See also Pascal Hachem, ‘Article 2 CISG: Sales
Excluded from Convention’s Scope’ in Ingeborg Schwenzer
G Schroeter (eds),
Schlechtriem & Schwenzer: Commentary on the UN
Convention on the International Sale of Goods (CISG)
(Oxford University
ed, 2022) 60, 66–7 [17].
This means the exclusion contained
) art 2(a) does not
apply: Hayward,
‘CISG as the Applicable Law’ (n
) 179–80 [10.31]–[10.32];
Hayward and Perlen
) 153–4; Pryles (n 299)
339; Fairlie (n 50) 40. See also
(n 60) s 3(1);
ss 4B(1)–(2).
(n 60) s 68. For the
consumer guarantees, see at pt 3-2 div 1.
(n 298) s 66A. For the
implied terms, see at pt V div 2.
Other aspects of Australia’s
consumer law, including its unfair contract terms regime,
do not overlap with the
given the subject matter scope of
Hayward, ‘CISG as the Applicable Law’ (n
) 178 [10.29]. See, eg,
) art 35; ibid
Zeller, ‘The Perfect
Tool’ (n 111) [15].
Pryles (n 299) 339.
(n 60) s 64;
(n 298) s 68; ibid. This may be why s 66A of the
(n 298) was
described as ‘a remarkable provision’: Marcus S Jacobs, Katrin
Cutbush-Sabine and Philip Bambagiotti, ‘The
UN Convention for the
International Sale of Goods (CISG) in Australia-To-Date: An Illusive Quest for
Global Harmonisation?’
(2002) 17(12)
International Arbitration Report
24, 27 [4.7].
Commonwealth,
Parliamentary
, Senate, 7 October 1987, 782 (Michael Tate) (‘
Parliamentary Debates (7 October 1987)
Commonwealth,
Parliamentary
, Senate, 24 September 1987, 617–20 (Michael Tate)
Cth Parliamentary Debates (24 September 1987)
Commonwealth,
Parliamentary Debates
, House of Representatives, 25
November 1987, 2661–4 (Peter Staples) (‘
Cth Parliamentary Debates
(25 November 1987)
Commonwealth,
Parliamentary
, House of Representatives, 30 April 1987, 2302–6 (Lionel
Cth Parliamentary Debates (30 April 1987)
Commonwealth,
Parliamentary Debates
, Senate, 26 May 1987, 2908–11
(Gareth Evans) (‘
Cth Parliamentary Debates (26 May
Explanatory Memorandum,
Statute Law
(Miscellaneous Provisions) Bill 1987
Explanatory Memorandum,
Statute Law
(Miscellaneous Provisions) Bill (No 1) 1987
(n 298) s 66A.
Cth Parliamentary Debates (24
September 1987)
(n 308) 617–20 (Michael Tate).
Cth Parliamentary Debates (30
April 1987)
(n 309) 2302–6 (Lionel Bowen).
Cth Parliamentary Debates (7
October 1987)
(n 307) 777–86. Two of these contributions were
non-substantive interjections.
Cth Parliamentary Debates (25
November 1987)
(n 308) 2664–7, 2693–706. Three of these
contributions were non-substantive interjections.
Commonwealth,
Parliamentary
, Senate, 26 November 1987, 2445 (‘
Cth Parliamentary Debates
(26 November 1987)
’); Commonwealth,
Parliamentary Debates
10 December 1987, 2877–81 (‘
Cth Parliamentary Debates (10
December 1987)
Commonwealth,
Parliamentary
, House of Representatives, 11 May 1987, 2913–35 (‘
Parliamentary Debates (11 May 1987)
’). One of these contributions was
a non-substantive interjection.
Ibid 2917 (Michael Maher).
Casaceli v Natuzzi SpA
[2012] FCA 691
(2012) 292 ALR 143
, 145 [8] (Jagot J) (‘
(n 60) s 68, as inserted
Trade Practices Amendment Act (No 2)
(n 61) sch 1.
Commonwealth,
Parliamentary
, House of Representatives, 17 March 2010, 2718–24 (Craig
Emerson) (‘
Cth Parliamentary Debates (17 March 2010)
Commonwealth,
Parliamentary Debates
, Senate, 24 June 2010, 4283–8
(Joseph Ludwig) (‘
Cth Senate Parliamentary Debates (24 June
Commonwealth,
Parliamentary
, House of Representatives, 24 June 2010, 6621–9 (‘
House of Representatives Parliamentary Debates (24 June 2010)
Explanatory Memorandum,
Practices Amendment (Australian Consumer Law) Bill (No 2) 2010
(Cth) ch 7.
Ibid 198 [7.87]–[7.88].
Cth Parliamentary Debates (17
March 2010)
(n 323) 2718–24 (Craig Emerson).
Commonwealth,
Parliamentary
, House of Representatives, 23 June 2010, 6470–93
Cth Parliamentary Debates (23 June 2010)
Cth Senate Parliamentary Debates
(24 June 2010)
(n 323) 4288–96.
See above nn 127–32 and
accompanying text.
NT Parliamentary
Debates (3 June 1987)
(n 187) 587 (Richard Setter);
Cth Parliamentary
Debates (30 April 1987)
(n 309) 2305 (Lionel Bowen).
Jessica Viven-Wilksch, ‘How
Long Is Too Long To Determine the Success of a Legal Transplant? International
Doctrines and Contract
Law in Oceania’ in Vito Breda (ed),
Transplants in East Asia and Oceania
(Cambridge University Press, 2019) 132,
146–7; Hayward, ‘CISG as the Applicable Law’ (n
) 181 [10.35]; Fairlie (n 50) 40; Zeller,
‘The CISG in Australasia’ (n
) 294; Anastasi, Hayward and Brown (n
) 47; Petrovic (n
) 84–6; Spagnolo, ‘The Last
Outpost’ (n
) 159–60; Gary
F Bell, ‘Harmonisation of Contract Law in Asia: Harmonising Regionally or
Adopting Global Harmonisations’
[2005] (December)
Singapore Journal of
Legal Studies
362, 371; Nottage (n 138) 817, 835–6; Henning Lutz,
‘The CISG and Common Law Courts: Is There Really a Problem?’
Victoria University of Wellington Law Review
711, 714; Zeller,
‘The Perfect Tool’ (n 111) [3]; Attorney-General’s Department
Improving Australia’s Law and Justice Framework: A Discussion
Paper To Explore the Scope for Reforming Australian Contract Law
(Discussion
Paper, 2012) 15 [5.4]; Justice James Douglas, ‘Australia’s Role in
UNCITRAL: Specifically Its Implementation
of UNCITRAL Conventions and Model
Laws’ (Speech, UQ Trade Law Forum, 2
December 2016) 4
http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/journals/QldJSchol/2016/26.pdf
, archived at
<https://perma.cc/U8N7-RC79>; Horrigan, Laryea and Spagnolo (n
) 9 [1.7]; UNCITRAL: United Nations
Commission on International Trade Law, ‘Topic 3: The CISG as a Backbone of
Transnational
Commercial Law’ (YouTube, 30 October 2020)
0:35:54–0:36:29 <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=GidMVLIO6Ig>
3’). See also Peng Guo and Shu Zhang, ‘Is the CISG an
Appropriate Option for Australian and Chinese Businesses? A Good
Perspective’ (2019) 23(1)
Vindobona Journal of International Commercial
Law and Arbitration
81, 87; Lisa Spagnolo, ‘A Glimpse through the
Kaleidoscope: Choices of Law and the CISG’ (Pt I) (2009) 13(1)
Vindobona Journal of International Commercial Law and Arbitration
143–7, which calculates Australia’s (then low) relative case load
per million capita and per trillion trade dollar.
Informal discussions with
Australian lawyers have confirmed to me that there are Australian disputes
relating to the
(n 1) which have not proceeded to trial: see also
Fairlie (n 50) 41.
‘Search Cases in the CISG
Pace Law Albert H Kritzer CISG Database
<https://iicl.law.pace.edu/cisg/search/cases>. Free registration is
required to access the Pace Database’s
case law search facilities, which
includes searching by country. At the time of writing, 49 individual Australian
case entries were
identified on the Pace Database, with a 50
being nested under another as a related proceeding: see ‘Australia May 27,
2004 Supreme Court (Summit Chemicals Pty Ltd
v Vetrotex Espana SA)’,
Pace Law Albert H Kritzer CISG Database
<https://iicl.law.pace.edu/cisg/case/australia-may-27-2004-supreme-court-summit-chemicals-pty-ltd-v-vetrotex-espana-sa>;
Aqua Technics (WA) Pty Ltd v Summit Chemicals Pty Ltd
[2003] WASC 182
Aqua Technics
Aussie Diamond Appeal
‘Search for Cases’,
CISG-Online
(Web Page) <https://cisg-online.org/search-for-cases>,
archived at <
https://perma.cc/JAS4-DPDT
further case, in addition to the one referred to in this footnote’s
accompanying text, appears on CISG-online and does
not appear on the Pace
Pucci Srl v Italian Imported Foods Pty Ltd
CISG-Online
<https://cisg-online.org/search-for-cases?caseId=9744>, archived at
<https://perma.cc/DM‌‌A6-YR8X>.
This case is not considered
any further, however, as it is a first instance local court decision referred to
in an appeal judgment
that is not otherwise itself on the public record. That no
published judgment exists is confirmed by searching the NSW case law database:
‘Advanced Search’,
New South Wales Caselaw
<https://www.caselaw.n ‌sw.gov.au/search/advanced>. A request was
made to the NSW Local Court Registry to
obtain a copy of this judgment in 2021
— that request was acknowledged but was never
responded to.
The Pace Database’s
reputation is long established, including in the Australian context:
see Justice James Douglas, ‘Arbitration of International Sale of Goods
Disputes under
the Vienna Convention’ (Speech, Institute of Arbitrators and Mediators
Australia National Conference, 2006) 2
<https://archive.sclqld.org.au/judgepub/2007/douglas270506.pdf>;
333) 714. It must be noted, however, that this database has not necessarily been
updated with respect to Australia since approximately 2015;
thus, this database cannot be assumed to be a comprehensive source.
Lutz (n 333) 728. Prior scholarship
identified some Pace Database omissions as of 2020, which are now remedied:
Anastasi, Hayward
and Brown (n
293. Pace Database updates effected in late 2022 added previously omitted
pre-2020 decisions. On the
assumption that the Pace Database is now (save as to the one additional case
recorded on CISG-online) complete up to 2020, my own
Advance, Westlaw AU and AustLII databases have failed to identify any post-2020
cases not currently recorded. The following search terms
(exact phrases) were used: ‘CISG’, ‘Vienna Convention’,
‘Vienna Act’, ‘Vienna Contract’, ‘Vienna
Sales’, ‘Sales Convention’, ‘Sale
Convention’, ‘UN Sales’, ‘United Nations Sales’,
‘Uniform Sales’, ‘Uniform
‘International Contract’, ‘International Sales’ and
‘Done at Vienna’.
‘Case Law on UNCITRAL Texts
United Nations Commission on International Trade Law
Page) <https://www.uncitral.org/clout/index.jspx>. The UNILEX database
records 12 cases, which also all appear on the
Pace Database: ‘Selected
Cases by Country’,
UNILEX on UNIDROIT Principles & CISG:
International Case Law & Bibliography
http://unilex.info/cisg/cases/country/25#country_Australia
, archived at
<https://per‌‌ma.cc/PD2H-6UGC>.
Hayward, ‘CISG as the
Applicable Law’ (n
Spagnolo, ‘The Last
Outpost’ (n
Melbourne University Law Review
and Melbourne Journal of International Law,
Australian Guide to Legal
rev ed, 2021).
See Salehijam (n 147)
Viven-Wilksch (n 333) 147,
(Hansen J), and
Aussie Diamond
) [210] (Murphy J).
This coding scheme builds and
expands upon categories of Australian
cases previously identified in
the literature: Hayward, ‘CISG as the Applicable Law’ (n
) 177 [10.25].
For example, this category includes
cases that consider the enforcement of an arbitral
award and where the
had previously been relevant (in related proceedings): see, eg,
Airconditioner (Zhongshan) Co Ltd [No 2]
[2019] FCA 257
(2019) 369 ALR 192
[10]–[11] (McKerracher J) (‘
Airconditioner
) art 6 confers upon parties the power to
‘exclude the application of this
’, it is noted
(for the purposes of utmost clarity) that a purported exclusion is not
pursuant to
that provision where (as is the case in some Australian
cases) the law of a non-contracting State is chosen, meaning that
) would not have
applied in any event. See, eg, Lisa Spagnolo,
Exclusion of the CISG under
(CISG Advisory Council Opinion No 16, 30 May 2014) 2 [1] (emphasis
Exclusion of the CISG
’), which states that
is applicable according to Arts 1–3
CISG, the principle of party
autonomy expressed in Art 6
permits parties to agree to exclude
its application’. Duly noting this disclaimer, exclusions are described as
being ‘pursuant
) art 6 in this
footnote’s accompanying text in order to identify the source of the
parties’ power to exclude in the usual case.
221–31 (von Doussa J).
Castel Electronics Pty
Ltd v TCL Airconditioner (Zhongshan) Co Ltd
[2012] VSC 548
, [57]–[58]
(Daly AsJ) (‘
Fletcher v Capstone
Aluminium SDN BHD; Re McLay Industries Pty Ltd (in liq)
[2016] FCA 1459
[36] (Greenwood J) (‘
’), discussing
Corporations
Spagnolo, ‘The Last
Outpost’ (n
) 148; Horrigan,
Laryea and Spagnolo (n
‘Topic 3’ (n 333) 0:36:29–0:36:46. CISG-online records 81
cases worldwide involving
Australian parties: ‘CISG by Jurisdiction’,
CISG-Online
(Web Page) <https://cisg-online.org/CISG-by-jurisdiction>. See, eg, Yan
Shang, ‘Promopen Australia Pty Ltd v Fuyang Import
and Export Co
Ltd’ in Peng Guo, Haicong Zuo and Shu Zhang (eds),
Selected Chinese
Cases on the UN Sales Convention (CISG)
(Springer, 2023) vol 2, 77, 77;
Charles Caishun Guo, Wenjing Lin and Charlie Xiao-chuan Weng, ‘XXX
(Beijing) International Trade Co, Ltd v XX Co, Ltd’
in Peng Guo, Haicong
Zuo and Shu Zhang (eds),
Chinese Cases on the UN Sales Convention (CISG)
(Springer, 2023) vol
2, 129, 129; Wenjing An, ‘Shanghai Donglin International Trade Co Ltd v
Johnson Trading Australia Pty Ltd’
in Peng Guo, Haicong Zuo and Shu Zhang
Selected Chinese Cases on the UN Sales
Convention (CISG)
(Springer, 2022) vol 1, 269, 269.
Rizhao Steel
128 [164] (Murphy JA).
See generally Zeller, ‘The
Duty To Mitigate’ (n 141) 205; Warren Swain, ‘Contract Codification
in Australia: Is
It Necessary, Desirable and Possible?’
[2014] SydLawRw 5
(2014) 36(1)
Sydney Law Review
, 137; Zeller, ‘In or out of the CISG’
(n 110) 412. This includes case law evidencing
the homeward trend: see generally Zeller, ‘The CISG and the Common
) 59, 61–2,
71–5; Bruno Zeller, ‘Analysis of the Cultural Homeward Trend in
International Sales Law’ (2021)
Victoria University Law and
Justice Journal
131, 131–5; Bruno Zeller, ‘The Challenge of a
Uniform Application of the CISG: Common Problems and Their Solutions’
[2006] MqJlBLaw 14
Macquarie Journal of Business Law
Luo v Windy Hills
Australian Game Meats Pty [No 3]
[2019] NSWSC 862
, [77] (Stevenson J)
This is a slight analytic
simplification as, strictly speaking, the
(n 1) governs its own
exclusion: at art 6; Pascal Hachem, ‘Article 6 CISG: Exclusion or
Derogation by the Parties (Party Autonomy)’
in Ingeborg Schwenzer and
Ulrich G Schroeter (eds),
Schlechtriem & Schwenzer: Commentary on the UN
Convention on the International Sale of Goods (CISG)
(Oxford University
ed, 2022) 116, 129 [25]; Spagnolo,
Exclusion of the
2 [2]. Even so, it remains inappropriate to add the 11 cases
Appendix 2 identifies as involving
) exclusions to this total. As noted
above, not all of those cases resolved substantive sales law disputes arising
under the contracts
containing those exclusions. In addition, where the
is excluded, the practical necessity to interpret
Australia’s machinery provisions disappears in any event.
Aussie Diamond
See below Appendix 2. See also
Hayward, ‘CISG as the Applicable Law’ (n
) 179 [10.30]. This remains the case at
the time of writing.
See generally Guzyal Hill,
‘Referred, Applied and Mirror Legislation as Primary Structures of
National Uniform Legislation’
(2019) 31(1)
Bond Law Review
SydneyLawSchool (n 83)
0:19:55–0:20:08, 0:43:45–0:44:05.
Farah Constructions Pty Ltd v
Say-Dee Pty Ltd
(2007) 230 CLR 89
, 151–2 [135]
(Gleeson CJ, Gummow, Callinan, Heydon and Crennan JJ);
Building Society
(in liq) v Terry
[1997] HCA 48
(1997) 189 CLR 176
, 207 (Kirby J, Toohey J agreeing
Australian Securities Commission v Marlborough Gold Mines Ltd
[1993] HCA 15
(1993) 177 CLR 485
, 492 (Mason CJ, Brennan, Dawson, Toohey and Gaudron JJ),
Enterra Pty Ltd v ADI Ltd
[2002] NSWSC 700
(2002) 55 NSWLR 521
(Einstein J). See also Hill,
National Uniform Legislation
Aussie Diamond
) [210] (Murphy J), citing
) [235]–[245]
(Hansen J).
See below Appendix 2.
Regarding the criteria for
reporting judgments in Queensland: see, eg, ‘Reporting
Incorporated Council of Law Reporting for the State of
<https://www.queenslandreports.com.au/reports/reporting-process/>,
archived at <ht‌‌tps://perma.cc/C3FV-MMDD>.
See also Carolyn
Ford, ‘Salute to Law Reporters’
(2020) 96(11)
Law Institute
Zeller, ‘The CISG and the
Common Law’ (n
) 59; Petrovic (n
138) 89. This is still
true today: see below Appendix 2. The only High Court of Australia case
referring to the
all did so only in a dissenting judgment, and only for the purposes of its
comparison with non-harmonised Australian law:
Koompahtoo Local Aboriginal
Land Council v Sanpine Pty Ltd
[2007] HCA 61
(2007) 233 CLR 115
, 156–7 [108] (Kirby
Otherwise, the
referred to in passing in argument in the High Court
of Australia in 1995 in litigation unconnected with the
Transcript of Proceedings,
South Australia v Commonwealth
[1995] HCATrans
; Transcript of Proceedings,
Victoria v Commonwealth
[1995] HCATrans 302
; Transcript of
Proceedings,
Australia v Commonwealth
[1995] HCATrans 303.
Whilst Castel
Electronics Pty Ltd sought to appeal the Full Court of the Federal Court of
Australia’s decision in its dispute
with Toshiba Singapore Pte Ltd, the
High Court of Australia refused special leave, given the appeal’s
insufficient prospects
of success:
Castel Electronics Pty Ltd v Toshiba
Singapore Pte Ltd
[2011] HCASL 208
, [5] (Gummow and Kiefel JJ). Even if that
intended High Court appeal had been allowed to proceed, it apparently would have
on factual (rather than legal) issues framed as affecting the provision
of natural justice: at [3]–[4]. As one former Chief
Justice of the High
Court of Australia has explained, ‘it is the need to clarify the law
— to formulate the correct principle
— that is the decisive
consideration in the grant of special leave’: Sir Anthony Mason,
‘The High Court as Gatekeeper’
[2000] MelbULawRw 31
(2000) 24(3)
Melbourne University
Hayward, ‘The Jigsaw Puzzle
Missing a Piece’ (n
also Petrovic (n 138) 89; Bruno Zeller, ‘The Vienna Convention
[1999] LawIJV 106
(1999) 73(3)
Law Institute Journal
See above nn 40–2 and
accompanying text.
Vienna Convention on the Law
of Treaties
, opened for signature 23 May
1969, 1155 UNTS 331
(entered into
force 27 January 1980) arts 31–2.
See below Appendix 1.
Anastasi, Hayward and Brown (n
) art 7(1).
See above nn 127–32 and
accompanying text.
15AB(3)(b).
For example, the preamble to the
Sale of Goods (Vienna Convention) Act
(n 59) referred to it being
‘agreed’ (amongst the Australian jurisdictions) to give the
‘the force of law’, without any reference to an inconsistency
qualification. This
preamble could also be used as an aid in understanding the Victorian
Parliament’s legislative intent at that time:
Commonwealth
[1981] HCA 60
(1981) 148 CLR 1
, 15–16 (Gibbs CJ),
23 (Mason J);
Bowtell v Goldsbrough, Mort & Co Ltd
[1905] HCA 60
(1905) 3 CLR
, 451 (Griffith CJ), 458–9 (O’Connor J). See generally Pearce,
Statutory Interpretation
(n 76) 191–2 [4.62].
Hayward, ‘CISG as the
Applicable Law’ (n
[10.48], discussing
Contract and Commercial Law Act 2017
Contract and Commercial Law Act
’); Anastasi,
Hayward and Brown (n
See also Nottage (n 138) 817, 841, 844; Horrigan, Laryea and Spagnolo (n
) 26 [6.6], 32 [8.2.1].
Kellie Ewing, ‘The United
Nations Convention on the International Sale of Goods: What Are New Zealand
Traders Missing out on?’
(2008) 1(3)
New Zealand Law Students’
Smallmon v Transport
(High Court of New Zealand, French J, 30 July 2010) [88], affd
[2011] NZCA 340
[2012] 2 NZLR 109
, 121 [39], [41] (Stevens J for the Court). See also Zeller,
‘The CISG and the Common Law’ (n
) 75–6; Anastasi, Hayward and Brown
) 45–6; Zeller and
Andersen (n 36) 17–18; Zeller, ‘In or out of the CISG’ (n 110)
Hayward, ‘CISG as the
Applicable Law’ (n
[10.17], discussing Explanatory Memorandum, Consumer Affairs Legislation (n 263)
Hilary Penfold, ‘Legislative
Drafting and Statutory Interpretation’
(2006) 7(4)
Judicial Review
‘Topic 3’ (n 333)
0:14:42–0:15:50. See also Spagnolo,
CISG Implementation
49–50; Angelo Chianale, ‘The CISG as a Model Law: A Comparative Law
Singapore Journal of Legal Studies
It has been argued that Pakistan should join the community of
) contracting States: Bruno Zeller and
Sarmad Ali, ‘Should Pakistan Adopt the United Nations Convention on
Contracts for the
International Sale of Goods?’ (2017) 7(1)
University Law and Justice Journal
67, 67–8. Saudi Arabia is expected
to soon become the 96
contracting State of the
see above n
Sale of Goods (United
Nations Convention) Act 1994
(NZ), as repealed by
Contract and Commercial
(n 374) s 345(1)(j). This was later superseded by the
and Commercial Law Act
(n 374) ss 202–6. Notably, force of law
and inconsistency
provisions exist in Singapore and Canada’s relatively longstanding
Sale of Goods (United Nations Convention) Act 1995
(Singapore, 2020 rev ed) ss 3–4 (‘
Singapore Act
International Sale of Goods Contracts Convention Act
, SC 1991, c 13, ss
Department of Justice of Hong Kong,
Proposed Application of the United Nations
Convention on Contracts for the International Sale of Goods to the Hong
Kong Special Administrative Region
(Consultation Paper, March 2021) 4 [11] n
Proposed Application
’) <https://www.legco.gov.hk/yr20-21/english/panels/ajls/papers/ajls20210322cb4-648-3‌‌-e.pdf>,
archived at
https://perma.cc/48ZN-TV33
of Goods (United Nations
Convention) Ordinance
(Hong Kong) cap 641, ss 1–5, sch
Hong Kong Ordinance
Muna Ndulo,
The United Nations Convention on Contracts for the
International Sale of Goods (Vienna, 1980): Explanatory Documentation Prepared
for Commonwealth Jurisdictions
(Commonwealth Secretariat, 1991)
‘Chapter X: CISG’ (n
Hong Kong Ordinance
See generally Spagnolo,
Implementation
(n 35) 55; Xiaojun Chen, ‘Dahua Umbrella (HK) Co, Ltd v
Lee In Hwan’ in Peng Guo, Haicong Zuo and Shu Zhang (eds),
Chinese Cases on the UN Sales Convention (CISG)
(Springer, 2023) vol 2, 277,
280–1; Xiaojun Chen, ‘Possehl (HK) Ltd v China Metals and Minerals
Import and Export (Shenzhen)
Corporation’ in Peng Guo, Haicong Zuo and Shu Zhang (eds),
Chinese Cases on the UN Sales Convention (CISG)
(Springer, 2022) vol 1, 397,
400–1; Bruno Zeller, ‘Facilitating Regional Economic Integration:
ASEAN, ATIGA and the CISG’
in Ingeborg Schwenzer
and Lisa Spagnolo (eds),
Towards Uniformity: The 2
Schlechtriem CISG
(Eleven International Publishing, 2011) 255,
258–9; Ulrich G Schroeter, ‘The Status of Hong Kong and Macao
under the United Nations Convention on Contracts for the
International Sale of
(2004) 16(2)
Pace International Law Review
‘Topic 3’ (n 333) 0:13:46–0:14:42, 1:28:58–1:31:44.
Hong Kong Ordinance
Proposed Application Report
(n 381) 4 [11] n 15. The
Sale of Goods (Vienna Convention) Act
(n 62) was cited alongside the
Singapore Act
(n 380) and
(n 380), both
of which also employ force of law and inconsistency provisions:
(n 380) ss 3–4;
(n 380) ss 4, 6. See also
Goods (Vienna Convention) Act
Hong Kong Ordinance
Sale of Goods (Vienna Convention) Act
See, eg, Explanatory Memorandum,
Sale of Goods (United Nations Convention) Bill (Hong Kong) [6]–[7];
Department of Justice
of Hong Kong,
Proposed Application of the United
Nations Convention on Contracts for the International Sale of Goods to the Hong
Kong Special Administrative
(Consultation Paper, 2020) 179
<https://www.gov.hk/en/‌residents/government/publication/consultation/docs/2020/CISG.pdf>,
archived at <https://per‌‌ma.cc/VE3V-8SLL>.
For clarity, Hong Kong is not
) contracting
State. Hong Kong is an SAR of the People’s Republic of China, which is a
contracting State: see ‘Chapter
X: CISG’ (n
Extrinsic materials might be
consulted via Hong Kong’s ‘[g]eneral principles of
interpretation’, pursuant to which
‘[a]n Ordinance shall be deemed
to be remedial and shall receive such fair, large and liberal construction and
interpretation
as will best ensure the attainment of the object of the Ordinance
according to its true intent, meaning and spirit’:
Interpretation and
General Clauses Ordinance
(Hong Kong) cap 1, s 19. See also Department of
Justice of Hong Kong, ‘
Interpretation and General Clauses Ordinance
(Chapter 1): Interpretation and General Clauses (Amendment) Bill 1999’
(Legislative Council Brief No LP 5019/6, February 1999)
2 [6], 3 [11], [13]
<https://www.legco.gov.hk/yr98-99/english/bc/bc69/general/52_brf.‌pdf>,
archived at <https://perma.cc/D3XD-PXRZ>;
Law Reform Commission of Hong
Extrinsic Materials as an Aid to Statutory Interpretation
March 1997) 169–71 [9.57]–[9.63]
<https://www.hkreform.gov.hk/en/docs/rstatutory-e.pdf>, archived at
<https:‌‌//perma.cc/Q7FN-PB6N>.
Hong Kong Bar Association,
Consultation Paper on the Proposed Application of the United Nations
Convention on Contracts for the International Sale of Goods to
the Hong Kong
Special Administrative Region
(Submissions, 3 August 2020)
<https://www.hkba.org/uploads/DOJ%‌20-%20Proposed%20application%20of%20the%20United%20Nations%20Convention%20fo‌r%20Intl%20Sales%20of%20Goods%20to%20HKSAR%20(3%20Aug%202020).pdf>.
Ibid 6 [27].‌
The Law Society of Hong Kong,
Consultation Paper on the Proposed Application of the United Nations
Convention on Contracts for the International Sale of Goods to
the Hong Kong
Special Administrative Region
(Submissions, 27 October 2020) 3 [7]
<https://www.hklawsoc.‌‌org.hk/-/media/hkls/pub_e/news/submissions/20201027.pdf>,
archived at <https://perma.cc‌‌/E988-TNHZ>. The submission
refers to the concept of inconsistency in a way that
does not diminish this
prior observation: at 4 [11].
See generally Legislative Council
of the Hong Kong Special Administrative Region of the People’s Republic of
China, ‘Database
on Official Record of Proceedings’,
(Web Page, 2024)
<https://app.legco.gov.hk/HansardDB/english/Search.aspx>.
Michael Douglas, ‘Choice of
Law’ (n 75) 11.
Viven-Wilksch (n 333) 138. See also
Troy Keily and Benjamin Hayward, ‘Good News for Japanese Trade’
(2010) 84(6)
Law Institute Journal
, 48; Nottage (n 138)
Just as they should not need to
second guess the application of the
New York Convention
) in the (related) international
commercial arbitration space: see Albert Jan van den Berg (ed),
Commercial Arbitration: Volume XLII
(Wolters Kluwer, 2017) 526, 528,
Fluor Transworld Services Inc v Petrixo Oil
Cassation of Dubai, Appeal No 384 of 2016, 19 June 2016),
Fluor Transworld
Services Inc v Petrixo Oil
(Court of Appeal of Dubai, Appeal No 52 of 2016,
28 September 2016). For the profession’s response to these
proceedings’
initial holding that the United Kingdom was not a contracting
State of the
New York Convention
), and the Court of Cassation’s
correction of that error, respectively, see Gordon Blanke, ‘Dubai Court of
Appeal Questions
UK NYC Membership: Investors Keep Calm ... and Carry
Kluwer Arbitration Blog
(Blog Post, 6 May 2016)
<https://arbi‌trationblog.kluwerarbitration.com/2016/05/06/dubai-court-of-appeal-question‌s-uk-nyc-memb‌‌ership-investors-keep-calm-and-carry-on/>,
archived at <https://perma.cc/7‌RZR-DLXS>; Gordon Blanke,
‘Back on Track: Dubai Court of Cassation Affirms Enforceability
Award under NYC’,
Kluwer Arbitration Blog
(Blog Post, 1 August
<https://arbitrati‌‌onblog.kluwerarbitration.com/2016/08/01/back-track-dubai-court-cassatio‌n-affirms-enforc‌‌eability-uk-award-nyc/>,
archived at <https://perma.cc/A7EX-VU25>.
Hill, ‘Art of the
Impossible’ (n 146) 351. See also Goldring (n 139) 12.
) Preamble para 3.
See generally Lok Kan So, Poomintr
Sooksripaisarnkit and Sai Ramani Garimella, ‘COVID-19 in the Context of
the CISG: Reconsidering
the Concept of Hardship and Force Majeure’ in
Zlatan Meškić et al (eds),
Balkan Yearbook of European and
International Law 2020
(Springer, 2021) 105, 105–6; Laura Maria
Franciosi, ‘The Effects of COVID-19 on International Contracts: A
Comparative
Overview’ (2020) 51(3)
Victoria University of Wellington
413, 414; Lincoln (n 59).
No second reading speech exists
with respect to the ACT’s
legislation as it was initially
passed as an ordinance (delegated legislation passed by the Governor-General)
before self-government
in the territory:
Seat of Government (Administration)
; ‘How Laws Are Made’,
Legislative
Assembly for the Australian Capital Territory
<https://www.parliament.act.gov.au/visit-and-learn/resources/factsheets/how-laws-are-made>,
archived at <https://perma.cc/Q26Q-JKG3>.
Correspondence with the Office
of the Official Secretary to the Governor-General in 2021 confirmed that no
materials of this nature
were held by that office.
No parliamentary debates exist
with respect to the ACT’s
legislation, for the same reasons
previously identified: see above n 401.
I have been unable to identify
whether or not any Norfolk Island
legislative histories exist, and
if they do, whether they remain accessible today. Norfolk Island’s website
contains incomplete
scans of its historic Legislative Assembly minutes and
Hansard: ‘Norfolk Island Legislative Assembly: Minutes’,
Island Regional Council
<https:‌/‌‌/norfolkisland.gov.nf/historical-information/norfolk-island-legislative-assembly-minutes>,
archived at <https://perma.cc/U8YG-JC58>; ‘Legislative Assembly
Norfolk Island Regional Council
<https://norfolkisland.gov.nf/historical-information/legislati‌‌ve-assembly-hansards>,
archived at <https://perma.cc/BTD2-PDRF>.
Records relating to the fourth
Legislative Assembly, which may pertain to the
Sale of Goods (Vienna
Convention) Act (Norfolk Island)
(n 62), are missing. Communications with
the Norfolk Island Library in 2021, seeking to confirm the existence and
accessibility of
these materials, failed to yield definitive answers.
NSW Parliamentary Debates
(23 October 1986)
(n 160) 5374–6 (Terence Sheahan).
NSW Parliamentary Debates (19
November 1986)
(n 52) 6672–4 (Jack R Hallam).
NSW Parliamentary Debates (23
October 1986)
(n 160) 5374.
NSW Parliamentary Debates (11
November 1986)
(n 170) 6116.
New South Wales,
Parliamentary
, Legislative Council, 12 November 1986, 6125.
NSW Parliamentary Debates (19
November 1986)
(n 52) 6674–9.
New South Wales,
Parliamentary
, Legislative Council, 20 November 1986, 6859.
Explanatory statements for NT
Bills have been generated since 2005: O’Neill (n 210) 23.
NT Parliamentary Debates (29
April 1987)
(n 182) 91–2 (Daryl Manzie).
NT Parliamentary Debates (3
(n 187) 585–8.
Queensland did not start issuing
explanatory notes for Bills until around 1990: O’Neill (n 210) 23.
Qld Parliamentary Debates (19
August 1986)
(n 197) 351 (Neville J Harper).
Qld Parliamentary Debates (2
September 1986)
(n 52) 769–74.
South Australian legislative
practice includes explanations of clauses at the end of second reading speeches
and does not generate
separate explanatory memoranda: O’Neill (n 210) 23.
SA’s explanation of clauses is treated as functionally equivalent
explanatory memorandum for the purposes of Part IV.
SA Parliamentary Debates (17
September 1986)
(n 212) 912–13 (Christopher J Sumner).
SA Parliamentary Debates (25
September 1986)
(n 212) 1237–8 (Donald J Hopgood).
SA Parliamentary Debates (17
September 1986)
(n 212) 912.
SA Parliamentary Debates (24
September 1986)
(n 218) 1133.
SA Parliamentary Debates (25
September 1986)
(n 212) 1237.
SA Parliamentary Debates (19
November 1986)
(n 218) 2133.
Tas Parliamentary Debates (24
March 1987)
(n 228) 674–5 (John Bennett).
Tas Parliamentary Debates (26
March 1987)
(n 226) 413 (Peter McKay).
Parliamentary
, House of Assembly, 4 March 1987, 2.
Tas Parliamentary Debates (24
March 1987)
(n 228) 675–6.
Parliamentary
, Legislative Council, 25 March 1987, 333.
Tas Parliamentary Debates (26
March 1987)
(n 226) 413.
Parliamentary
, Legislative Council, 1 April 1987, 475.
Vic Parliamentary Debates (3
March 1987)
(n 242) 171–2 (James H Kennan).
Vic Parliamentary Debates (14
April 1987)
(n 242) 1220–1 (Race Mathews).
Parliamentary
, Legislative Council, 25 February 1987, 80.
Vic Parliamentary Debates (17
March 1987)
(n 248) 306–9.
Parliamentary
, Legislative Council, 9 April 1987, 850–1.
Parliamentary
, Legislative Assembly, 9 April 1987, 1181.
Vic Parliamentary Debates (30
April 1987)
(n 52) 1758–9.
Vic Parliamentary Debates (28
(n 262) 2815–19 (Anthony Robinson). This
second reading speech is preceded by a statement of compatibility
addressing the
Consumer Affairs Legislation Amendment (Reform) Bill 2010
required in
Victoria by virtue of the
Charter of Human Rights
Responsibilities Act 2006
Vic Parliamentary Debates (28 July 2010)
2813–15 (Anthony Robinson). That statement of compatibility is not
relevant for the purposes of this article’s
Vic Legislative Council
Parliamentary Debates (12 August 2010)
(n 262) 4023–6 (Gavin
Jennings). As in the Legislative Assembly, this second reading speech is
preceded by a statement of compatibility,
which is not relevant for the purposes
of this article’s analysis:
Parliamentary
, Legislative Assembly, 27 July 2010, 2641.
Vic Parliamentary Debates (11
August 2010)
(n 268) 3114–24.
Parliamentary
, Legislative Assembly, 12 August 2010, 3232.
Vic Legislative Council
Parliamentary Debates (12 August 2010)
(n 262) 4021.
Vic Parliamentary Debates (2
September 2010)
(n 275) 4448–54, 4459–69.
Vic Parliamentary Debates (14
September 2010)
(n 279) 3650.
Vic Parliamentary Debates (16
September 2010)
(n 279) 3878–80.
While the Parliament of WA did
produce explanatory memoranda at the time it enacted its
legislation, it did not produce an explanatory memorandum for the Sale of Goods
(Vienna Convention) Bill 1986 (WA).
WA Parliamentary Debates (7
October 1986)
(n 280) 2744–5 (Keith Wilson).
WA Legislative Council
Parliamentary Debates (11 November 1986)
(n 280) 3942 (Kay Hallahan).
WA Parliamentary Debates (7
October 1986)
(n 280) 2741, 2744.
WA Legislative Assembly
Parliamentary Debates (11 November 1986)
(n 52) 4000–2.
WA Legislative Council
Parliamentary Debates (11 November 1986)
(n 280) 3941.
WA Parliamentary Debates (19
November 1986)
(n 52) 4407–9.
WA Parliamentary Debates (20
November 1986)
(n 52) 4560–2, 4566.
WA Parliamentary Debates (27
November 1986)
(n 293) 5088.
Cth Parliamentary Debates (24
September 1987)
(n 308) 617–20 (Michael Tate).
Cth Parliamentary Debates (25
November 1987)
(n 308) 2661–4 (Peter Staples).
Cth Parliamentary Debates (24
September 1987)
(n 308) 617. See also Commonwealth,
Parliamentary
, Senate, 23 September 1987, 524 (Gareth Evans).
Cth Parliamentary Debates (7
October 1987)
(n 307) 777–86.
Commonwealth,
Parliamentary
, House of Representatives, 8 October 1987, 1030.
Cth Parliamentary Debates (25
November 1987)
(n 308) 2664–7, 2693–706.
Cth Parliamentary Debates (26
November 1987)
(n 318) 2445.
Cth Parliamentary Debates (10
December 1987)
(n 318) 2877–81.
Cth Parliamentary Debates (30
April 1987)
(n 309) 2302–6 (Lionel Bowen).
Cth Parliamentary Debates (26
(n 309) 2908–11 (Gareth Evans).
Cth Parliamentary Debates (30
April 1987)
(n 309) 2301.
Cth Parliamentary Debates (11
(n 319) 2913–35.
Cth Parliamentary Debates (26
(n 309) 2908.
Cth Parliamentary Debates (17
March 2010)
(n 323) 2718–24 (Craig Emerson).
Cth Senate Parliamentary
Debates (24 June 2010)
(n 323) 4283–8 (Joseph Ludwig).
Cth Parliamentary Debates (17
March 2010)
(n 323) 2718. See also Commonwealth,
Parliamentary Debates
, House of Representatives, 16 March 2010,
Commonwealth,
Parliamentary
, House of Representatives, 22 June 2010, 6132.
Cth Parliamentary Debates (23
(n 329) 6470–93.
Cth House of Representatives
Parliamentary Debates (24 June 2010)
(n 324) 6521.
Cth Senate Parliamentary
Debates (24 June 2010)
(n 323) 4283.
Ibid 4288–96.
Cth House of Representatives
Parliamentary Debates (24 June 2010)
(n 324) 6621–9. See also ibid
(1992) 26 NSWLR 234
(Priestley JA).
(n 42) 222–3
(von Doussa J).
(Federal Court of Australia, von
Doussa J, 30 November 1995) [3].
[2000] FCA 1541
(2000) 177 ALR 611
, 696 [393]
[2000] QSC 421
, [58]–[64]
(Ambrose J).
Perry Engineering
[16]–[19] (Judge Burley).
Downs Appeal
482–3 [41]–[42], 484 [46], 484–5 [48]–[50] (Williams JA,
Davies JA agreeing at 472 [1], Byrne J agreeing
at 485 [52]).
[187]–[202], [259] (Barker J).
) [235], [245] (Hansen J).
Aqua Technics
[23]–[25] (McKechnie J).
[2004] WASCA 109
, [35] (Heenan J,
Miller J agreeing at [1]).
[2004] FCA 1705
, [8], [19] (Conti
[2005] FCA 587
, [35], [36], [50]
[2006] NSWSC 1060
[14]–[19] (Malpass AsJ). This is the appeal from the unpublished and
unavailable first instance decision referred to in Part
V: see above n
[2007] SADC 102
, [27] (Muecke
156–7 [108] (Kirby J).
[2008] SASC 75
(Duggan J).
[2008] FCA 1591
, [5], [190] (Finn
[2009] FCA 522
(2009) 255 ALR 632
[28] (Logan J).
[2009] NSWSC 1170
(Einstein J).
[2009] NSWCA 407
(2009) 76 NSWLR 603
[8]–[9] (Allsop P).
Aussie Diamond
) [210] (Murphy J).
[2010] VSC 328
, [15], [30]
(Ferguson J).
[2010] FCA 852
, [87]–[98]
(Jessup J).
Castel Trial
[53]–[54], [121]–[123], [166]–[167], [174]–[176] (Ryan
Castel Appeal
(n 141) 456
[60]–[61], 457 [63]–[64], 460 [88]–[91], 490–5
[301]–[332]
(Keane CJ, Lander and Besanko JJ).
[2011] FCA 688
, [14] (Logan
Fryer Holdings
[15]–[17] (McDougall J).
Rizhao Steel
[164] (Murphy JA).
[2012] FCA 276
(2012) 201 FCR 535
[14]–[17] (Foster J).
Aussie Diamond Appeal
136) [13] (Martin CJ, Buss JA agreeing at [164], Newnes JA agreeing at
(n 321) 155 [39]
[2012] NSWSC 1029
[25]–[26] (Rein J).
[41]–[43], [57]–[58] (Daly AsJ).
[2013] VSC 92
, [15]–[24]
(Davies J).
[2013] NSWCA 102
(2013) 84 NSWLR 141
[13], 147 [16] (Bathurst CJ, Beazley P agreeing at 160 [73], Barrett JA agreeing
at 160 [74]).
[2014] FCAFC 83
(2014) 232 FCR 361
[1]–[2] (Allsop CJ, Middleton and Foster JJ).
[2016] FCA 256
(2016) 338 ALR 602
[2016] FCA 1131
, [76] (Beach
(n 350) [36]
(Greenwood J).
[2017] FCA 775
, [44]–[46]
(Gleeson J).
[2017] FCAFC 224
(2017) 258 FCR 190
(Dowsett, McKerracher and Moshinsky JJ).
Re TCL Airconditioner
346) 194 [10]–[11] (McKerracher J).
(n 354) [77]
(Stevenson J).
[2020] FCA 1846
(2020) 291 FCR 155
, 192 [261]
[2021] FCA 172
, [35] (Moshinsky
[2021] FCA 1180
, [6] (Colvin
[2022] FCA 66
(2022) 399 ALR 119
[183]–[184] (Perram J).
[2022] WASCA 56
(2022) 58 WAR 334
[1]–[2], 370–1 [169]–[173] (Buss P, Beech and Vaughan
(2022) 317 IR 134
(Commissioner Hampton).
[2022] NSWPICMR 64
, [47] (Merit
Reviewer Cassidy).
[2023] VSC 419.
non-harmonised contract law was at issue, though the
referred to in passages quoted by the Court from secondary sources: see, eg, at
[130] n 53 (Connock J), quoting JW Carter,
Contract Law in Australia
(LexisNexis Butterworths, 7
ed, 2018) 48–9 [3-07].
[2023] VCC 2134.
In this case, the
was not applied to a dispute between Australian and Indian
parties, though there would have been a strong argument for its application
pursuant to art 1(1)(b): at [182]–[183] (Judge Macnamara).
[2023] FCA 1578.
This dispute
concerned legal professional privilege, with the Court noting that the
was relevant to the parties’ underlying dispute: at [4]
[2024] FCA 129.
This case involved
an application for an anti-anti-suit injunction, with the Court noting that
argument in the underlying dispute
implicated the
(Stewart J).
[2024] FCA 286.
This case is a
continuation of the dispute in above n 550, revisiting the anti-anti-suit
injunction issue as well as addressing a
forum non conveniens
referred to the
as being implicated in the parties’
underlying dispute: at [28] (Anderson J).
[2024] FCA 441.
The Court here
applied non-harmonised Australian sales law
and rejected one party’s argument that the
(particularly art 35) applied:
at [338]–[339] (Banks-Smith J).
‘Chapter X: International
Trade and Development:
United Nations Convention on Contracts for the
International Sale of Goods
United Nations Treaty Collection
(Web Page, 2024)
<https://treaties.un.org/Pages/ViewDetails.aspx?src=IND&mtdsg_no=X-10&chapter=10&clang=_en>,
https://perma.cc/V54C-JAC4
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (824 KB)
PDF format (591 KB)
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter