URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/journals/AdminRw/2010/13.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 14:44:41
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Harrison-Smith, Margaret --- "Over and Out: Some Concluding Thoughts" [2010] AdminRw 13; (2010) 59 Admin Review 64
Over and out: some concluding thoughts
The work of the Council
An advisory role
The changing landscape
The yardstick of time
Over and out: some
concluding thoughts
Margaret Harrison-Smith
In December 2008 I concluded more than six years as Executive Director of the
Administrative Review Council
Secretariat.
I can claim the record
for the longest serving secretariat head since the Council’s inception
some 30 years ago. Not all records
are worth claiming, but this is one, I
think, that is. My experience with the Council over the years was both
stimulating and productive.
The work of the Council
I accepted the position of Executive Director in mid-July 2002, and since
then the Council has produced a steady stream of reports
and guideline
publications. Among the most innovative of these publications, not only in this
country but also elsewhere, has been
the Council’s 2004 report entitled
Automated Assistance in Administrative Decision
The report helped the
Department of Immigration and Citizenship respond to recommendations for review
and analysis of the department’s
information technology systems, as put
forward in 2005 in the Palmer
Automated Assistance
was also the catalyst for further work by an
across‑agency working group headed by the Australian Government
Information Management
Office, in the Department of Finance and Deregulation,
and comprising representatives of 14 Commonwealth departments and agencies.
represented the Council on the working group. What impressed me most about the
composition of this group was the involvement—notwithstanding
some initial
uncertainty on their part—of information technology experts and others
involved in the management of agency computer
systems. The practical,
‘hands-on’ experience of these people is apparent in the better
practice guide resulting from
the work of the
The Council’s most recent report,
Administrative Accountability in
Business Areas subject to Complex and Specific Business Regulation
moves into new territory, exploring the degree to which administrative law
mechanisms and principles should extend to private
business regulation by
non-government industry bodies and others. The report is a companion, therefore,
to two earlier reports, the
first relating to government business
enterprises
and the second to the
contracting out of government
Like the most recent
report, these earlier reports responded to important evolutionary changes in
government administration, both
of them exploring difficult and evolving areas
not previously the subject of in‑depth consideration. Work in such areas
be, and in my experience undoubtedly is, testing, but it is nonetheless
worthwhile.
My period as Executive Director also saw the Council continuing to
wholeheartedly embrace the educational role described for it by
the Senate Legal
and Constitutional Legislation Committee’s
Report of the Role and
Function of the Administrative Review
and formally recognised
in subsequent amendments to the
Administrative Appeals Tribunal Act 1975
(Cth). Specifically, the committee recommended amendment of the
Council’s functions in
of the Act ‘to reflect more
clearly all the major activities that [the Council] currently performs, in
particular to underpin
its current focus on improving primary decision
The success of this focus can be gauged by the response to the five
best-practice guides for government decision makers released by
the Council in
August 2007. Representing a natural progression from the Council’s 2004
curriculum guideline publication
Legal Training for Primary Decision
and covering the areas
of lawfulness, natural justice, evidence, facts and findings, reasons and
accountability, the guides have
been hugely successful. The feedback on them I
have received has been unwaveringly positive. The Department of Immigration and
Citizenship
strongly supported the development of the guides, annotating them
with materials of particular relevance to it. The department has
since employed
the guides as an integral part of its post-Palmer reform strategy.
It is, I think, worth noting that one of the most avid customers to date for
the guides has been the Australian Public Service Commission.
Through the
commission’s use and promotion of the guides, the Council has influenced
large numbers of people working in the
Australian Public Service. As they move
between agencies, these people will take with them the skills they have acquired
the guides.
This is all very satisfying to me and, undoubtedly, to all those involved in
the guides’ production.
One should not, however, draw the conclusion from this that the Council has
shied away from its more traditional areas of interest.
In my time the Council
produced two publications on judicial review—one a discussion
and the other a
The report is a
companion to the Council’s earlier, and still integral, guideline
publication
What Decisions Should Be subject to Merits
Like the earlier
guideline publication, the report offers valuable assistance for government
policy makers and legislative drafters
when they are determining rights to seek
review of the actions of government decision makers.
The best-practice guides and the Council’s work on merits and judicial
review also reflected a growing tendency on the part
of the Council not to make
direct recommendations to government. In recent times the tendency has instead
been to suggest ways in
which areas of administrative law might be improved,
through, for instance, the application of best-practice principles.
Invariably, these principles have been carefully crafted by the Council with
regard to the administrative law values of lawfulness,
transparency,
rationality, fairness and efficiency. Through this less
‘sharp-edged’ approach, the Council has had considerable
inculcating in areas of government administration its views and approaches.
The Council’s 2008 report
The Coercive Information-gathering
Government Agencies
is illustrative. The report contains a
set of 20 best-practice principles covering matters such as the drafting of
notices, record
keeping, authorisation and delegation, training, conflict of
interest, notices, examinations and hearings, and privilege. The Commonwealth
Ombudsman has noted that this report is being widely turned to by government
agencies in the exercise of their information-gathering
powers. The report also
provides for the Ombudsman a ready-made set of guideline principles to turn to
and to recommend to agencies
for application in the appropriate use of their
Importantly, the Council does not pluck guidelines out of the air. With the
assistance of its Secretariat, it consulted extensively
on each piece of work it
has produced, seeking to involve all with an interest in the area in question
from an early stage. I found
this aspect of the Council’s work very
satisfying: it allowed me to be an ambassador for good decision making, as well
as allowing
me to gain an appreciation of the extent of agencies’
knowledge of administrative law and of administrative law principles.
was impressed by the extent of this knowledge and by the high regard in which
many agencies hold the work of the Council.
An advisory role
Another important aspect of the Council’s work is the provision of
advice to government. During my period with the Council I
drafted numerous
letters of advice on a diverse range of administrative law subjects. This is an
area in which I would like to see
the Council take a greater role. Of course, in
the case of proposed legislation there are often time constraints and tight
schedules that militate against the harvesting of comments from a
widely dispersed and invariably busy member group. Nonetheless,
Time pressures also sometimes discourage departments and agencies from
seeking the benefits of the Council’s views and expertise.
But the Council
can, and does, respond quickly when required. The Council could further refine
and promote this capacity throughout
government. Obviously, the sooner the
Council’s views are sought, the better. Once policy approaches and
implementation strategies
are established, it is difficult to amend them or to
turn them back.
The changing landscape
What changes to the administrative law landscape did I see during my term as
Executive Director? One of the most interesting developments
for me—one I
have already touched on in my reference to the Council’s work on
government business enterprises, contracting
out and complex and specific
business regulation—was the increasingly innovative response of
administrative law and related
administrative accountability mechanisms to the
growing complexity of government administration.
One manifestation of this has been the extension of the Commonwealth
Ombudsman’s jurisdiction under the
Ombudsman Act 1976
in response
to the increasing extent to which government services are provided to the public
by non-government entities. As a result
of the amendments, a complaint about one
of these entities is to be treated as a complaint about the government agency on
whose behalf
the service is being provided.
Another consequence of this growing complexity has been recognition of the
need to supplement the traditional focus of administrative
law on the review of
individual decisions with strategies directed at achieving a broader level of
continued agency accountability
and sound administrative practice. The
Council’s educative publications are, of course, responsive to this need.
Others—notably
the Commonwealth Ombudsman—have also responded to the
challenge, with an increase in the number of own-motion investigations
emergence of new, and important, auditing and inspection roles.
Integrity bodies such as the Inspector-General of Taxation have also been
established to oversee specialist areas, and the role of
Auditor-General’s office now encompasses an important performance auditing
function. The number of industry ombudsmen has
also expanded in recent times.
The yardstick of time
One measure of my time with the Council is that, of the members who were
there when I formally assumed the Executive Director’s
two—Professor Robin Creyke and Robert Cornall AO—remained at the end
of my term. Reassuringly, ex officio
members Justice Garry Downes AM and
Professor David Weisbrot AM were also still there. Among others who came and
went during my time
are immediate past President Wayne Martin QC, now Chief
Justice of Western Australia, and Stephen Gageler SC, now the Commonwealth
Solicitor-General.
The quality of the Council’s membership made my experience worthwhile.
This is not to say, of course, that things were always
sailing’. With such a highly charged group in all its manifestations over
the years, it is inevitable that tact
and tenacity had to be essential elements,
albeit unstated, of the duty statement for the Executive Director. An ability to
together and to synthesise often disparate and unconnected views was also a
vital, and again unstated, element of the position.
Another aspect of the Executive Director position that will continue to be a
source of fond memories for me was the staff of the Secretariat.
concluded that a special bond develops between Secretariat members, perhaps
because of our somewhat amorphous position as
the bridge between the Council and
the Attorney-General’s Department, of which we were a part; perhaps, too,
because of the
singular nature of the ‘crises’ that we
encountered.
As with all small work units, often the odds can seem stacked against
you—the meeting papers that need to be circulated in the
face of major
mechanical failures in the photocopy room; the Council report that comes back
from the printer with pages missing,
or worse; the Council member stranded at an
airport surrounded by swirling mists … Perhaps not
but in a small team having a more acute impact on all. The same goes, though,
for the good times: these are savoured by each
team member.
It was with some sadness that I left the Council. But I felt that a changing
of the guard was due and that it was time for me to try
new things. I wish the
Council well, and I offer my encouragement and support to those who will take it
Before 2000 the head of the
Council Secretariat held the title of Director of Research.
Administrative Review Council
Automated Assistance in Administrative Decision Making
, Report no.
46, ARC, Canberra.
MJ Palmer AO 2005,
into the Circumstances of the Immigration Detention of Cornelia Rau:
, Commonwealth of Australia, Canberra.
Australian Government 2009,
Automated Assistance in Administrative Decision-making: better practice
, Australian Government, Canberra.
Administrative Review Council
Government Business Enterprises and Administrative Law
, Report no.
38, ARC, Canberra.
Administrative Review Council
The Contracting out of Government Services
, Report no. 42, ARC,
Senate Legal and Constitutional
Legislation Committee 1997,
Report of the Role and Functions of the
Administrative Review Council
, Commonwealth of Australia, Canberra.
ibid. recommendation 7.
Administrative Review Council
Legal Training for Primary Decision Makers: a curriculum guideline
ARC, Canberra.
Administrative Review
Council 2003,
The Scope of Judicial Review
, Discussion paper, ARC,
Administrative Review
Council 2006,
The Scope of Judicial Review
, Report no. 47, ARC,
Administrative Review
Council 1999,
What Decisions Should Be subject to Merits Review?
ARC, Canberra.
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (34.7 KB)
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter