URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/journals/IntJlCrimJustSocDem/2025/15.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 15:02:46
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Figari Layus, Rosario --- "Never Again? The Institutionalization of Far-Right Negationism and Shrinking Space in Argentina: Impacts on Transitional Justice Trials and Memory Politics" [2025] IntJlCrimJustSocDem 15; (2025) 14(2) International Journal for Crime, Justice and Social Democracy 68
Transitional Justice
and Forensic Exhumations: Reconciling Post-Conflict Violence in Spain
Natalia Maystorovich Chulio
University of Sydney, Australia
Transitional justice; enforced disappearance;
exhumations; reconciling violence.
Introduction
article explores forensic exhumations in Spain as a mechanism for transitional
justice (TJ hereafter). Typically, forensic exhumations
are associated with
legal proceedings aimed at assigning individual or collective responsibility for
the abduction, torture, and
killing of civilians. In the context of Spain, the
transition from dictatorship to democracy was marked by a policy of impunity,
notably through the Amnesty Law (1977), which prevented the prosecution and
investigation of political violence cases prior to 1976.
This law, along with
the continued application of amnesty and the failed 2008 Garzón case
Case 399/2006
—which sought to invoke
universal jurisdiction to judicially examine these crimes—has foreclosed
the possibility of formal
legal justice (see also Burbidge, 2010; de la Rasilla,
2023; Jiménez, 2011). Moreover, the statute of limitations for the
of murder has long since expired, further reinforcing barriers to judicial
redress. The ideological divisions rooted in the
Spanish Civil War
(1936–1939) and a lack of political will have rendered truth and
reconciliation measures highly improbable.
This leaves the families of the
disappeared with limited options. In the absence of state-led initiatives, they
have turned to exhumations
and reburials as local symbolic actions to reconcile
with the past. These exhumations of clandestine graves, occurring more than
years after the original crimes, serve broader humanitarian purposes,
acknowledging the ongoing pain of enforced disappearance.
The social movement to exhume the dead began as a grassroots initiative by
families of the victims in 2000 and has culminated in the
formation of numerous
associations recovering historical memory in Spain. Inevitably, this has had
legal and political consequences
because exhuming bodies cannot remain a
personal matter. These privately-initiated exhumations enable families and
communities to
reclaim their history in the absence of state-led justice
mechanisms providing a therapeutic form of TJ. Public and open exhumation
have created spaces where families can collaborate in the recovery of their
loved ones, fostering solidarity and shared purpose.
These spaces have also
allowed communities to engage collectively in revising and confronting their
collective memory, acknowledging
the atrocities committed during the Spanish
Civil War and ensuing Francisco Franco dictatorship (1939–1975).
Exhumations provide
access to truth as forensic specialists corroborate their
scientific findings with oral testimonies and familial accounts. This process
not only honours the memory of the victims but also helps reconstruct the events
surrounding their disappearance, offering families
and communities a form of
truth and symbolic justice (Ceasar, 2016; Ferrándiz, 2018; Kovras, 2008;
Maystorovich Chulio, 2022;
Rubin, 2014). While formal legal justice remains
elusive, these exhumations represent a critical step in addressing the legacy of
violence, providing both closure and recognition to those affected.
This article draws on the findings from 23 months of ethnographic research
conducted between 2012 and 2016 in Castilla y León,
the Basque Country,
Andalucía, Castilla-La Mancha, Galicia, and Madrid. This research was
carried out at exhumation sites
managed by the Association for the Recovery of
Historical Memory (ARMH) and the Society of Sciences Aranzadi (Aranzadi), based
Deusto University in San Sebastián. Adopting an interpretivist lens,
the study aimed to locate “culturally derived and
historically situated
interpretations of the social-life world” (Crotty, 1998, p. 67) by
examining how exhumations contribute
to the construction of memory, justice, and
reconciliation in post-conflict Spain. These exhumations are shaped by
ideological narratives,
particularly the enduring thesis of
(“the two Spain’s”), which portrays society
as divided by the ideological legacies of the Spanish Civil War (Balfour
Quiroga, 2007).
Participants were selected using purposive sampling, with inclusion criteria
focusing on their involvement in or attendance at exhumations
conducted by ARMH
and Aranzadi. This approach ensured the participation of survivors, human rights
activists, forensic and archaeological
experts, psychologists, lawyers, and
local residents. Snowball sampling was employed to access broader networks of
individuals whose
perspectives were critical but not immediately visible. By
focusing on these groups, the study sought to explore the diverse ways
individuals interact with and interpret exhumations within their sociocultural
and political contexts. These interviews
provided insights into everyday
Spaniards’ understanding of the past and the impact of public discussion
the local setting (McEvoy & McConnachie, 2013; Merton,
1968; Zartman, 2005).
Data collection methods included participant observation, semi-structured
interviews, and ethnographic journaling. Observing interactions
at exhumation
sites allowed for the interpretation of participants’ perceptions of the
past and the exhumation process. Semi-structured
interviews provided an
opportunity for participants to articulate their experiences and understandings,
while ethnographic journals
captured daily observations, reflections, and
contextual details. This methodological approach aligned with Erving
(1989) emphasis on field research as a means of gaining insights
into cultural and social beliefs through immersion in the natural
setting. The
interpretivist framework, as described by Michael Crotty (1998), considers
“the individual and his action as the
basic unit” for study (p. 68).
Thus, observing the personal and communal reactions to exhumations was central
to understanding
the broader implications of these events.
Data analysis was conducted using NVivo software, employing thematic coding
to identify recurring patterns and emergent themes within
the data. This
inductive approach facilitated the identification of four key themes. The first
theme explores forensic exhumations
as a mechanism of TJ, revealing truths about
past atrocities and promoting justice, accountability, and closure for the
of the disappeared. The second theme focuses on the transition from
private memory to public acknowledgement, highlighting the role
of exhumations
in fostering historical reconciliation. The third theme examines the importance
of community and collaboration, with
open exhumation sites fostering
participatory processes that address historical injustices. The fourth theme,
reconciliation through
transparency, illustrates how the integration of
scientific findings, personal testimonies, and public memory contributes to
past atrocities and fostering social reconciliation.
Archaeological exhumations of the disappeared raise
ethical considerations as researchers engage with human remains and survivors
state violence. Informed consent was obtained from all participants, with
confidentiality and anonymity ensured where requested.
The sensitive nature of
the research required careful management of emotional and psychological risks
for participants, as well as
critical reflection on the part of the researcher
on their role. Recognising the researcher’s positionality was essential in
this regard, as identity, social background, values, and beliefs inevitably
influenced the study. Karen Lumsden and Aaron Winter
(2014) argue that
reflexivity draws attention to the co-production of knowledge between
researchers, participants, and those in positions
of power, necessitating
critical reflection on the investigator’s impact. Similarly, Mats Alvesson
and Kaj Sköldberg (2000)
highlight the need for researchers to actively
interpret “images that selectively highlight certain claims ... thus
suppressing
alternative interpretations” (p. 6), underscoring the
importance of reflexivity in an interpretivist framework.
Thus, I adopted a reflexive approach, acknowledging that the
“ethnographic self” is an inseparable part of the research
(Crotty, 1998). Field research, as Hannabuss (2000, p. 100) notes, positions the
researcher as a mechanism for measurement,
with their presence inevitably
shaping the field. Reflexivity ensured that my role in the study was
continuously interrogated, aligning
with Joseph Maxwell’s (1992) view that
researchers cannot be divorced from the process of data collection. By
reflecting on
my positionality during data analysis, I was able to adopt a
critical approach that accounted for my influence on the data and their
interpretation. By combining these methodological elements, the study provides a
nuanced understanding of the cultural, social, and
political dimensions of
exhumations in Spain. The interpretivist framework facilitated an in-depth
exploration of participants’
lived experiences and illuminated the complex
narratives surrounding TJ, memory, and reconciliation.
Transitional Justice
TJ refers to the implementation of judicial and non-judicial mechanisms to
address legacies of human rights abuses in post-conflict
societies. These
measures can include criminal prosecution, truth commissions, reparations, and
other institutional reforms. There
were no active TJ measures during the
transition to democracy in Spain. Instead, democracy was constituted through
institutional
and legal denial, notably through the application of the
Amnesty Law (1977)
. This law provided for the release of 89 political
prisoners while ensuring impunity for those who committed crimes under the
regime. This compromise, known as the “pact of silence” or
“pact of forgetting”, aimed to smooth the transitional
period, based
on the belief that society was not prepared for more active TJ measures at the
time (Aguilar, 2001, 2002). The concern
was that existing divisions within
society could result in a resurgence of violence and reprisals for past actions
(Aguilar, 2001,
2002; Graham, 2004b; Preston, 2012; Urdillo, 2011).
Political elites often defend the policy of impunity as a tool for societal
reconciliation. For instance, the Basque Spanish Socialist
Workers' Party
(Partido Socialista Obrero Español, PSOE) politician, José
María "Txiki" Benegas, claimed that
impunity was needed to give a voice
to the whole of society in furthering reconciliation (Vinyes, 2009, p. 29).
Opposition parties
championed amnesty as an anti-Francoist narrative to secure
the release of political prisoners, though most had already been released.
Spanish Communist Party introduced the first amnesty bill into parliament.
However, this approach excluded survivors from the
reconciliation process,
legitimising the practices of the state and reinforcing a hegemonic discourse of
a peaceful and model transition
(Burton & Carlen, 1977, p. 378). According
to Louise Mallinder (2007), negotiating impunity as necessary for peace is
as a normative decision. Others argue that it was merely the old
guard’s way of grudgingly relinquishing power to avoid the
kind of mass
uprisings seen in Portugal and Greece (Díaz, 1995; Rey, 2001; Renshaw,
2011, pp. 24–25). The transition
failed to address the crimes committed by
the regime, sacrificing genuine reconciliation (Urdillo, 2011, p. 42). The
symbolic legacy
of the transition remains omnipresent, serving as a constant
reference point that shapes the present (Urdillo, 2011, p. 77). The
application of amnesty has had enduring social, political, and legal effects for
those seeking to recover their missing
relatives. The stance of political and
judicial elites against annulling the law impedes reconciliation, reparation,
and justice
for past atrocities committed during the Franco regime.
Spanish Transition
The Spanish Civil War resulted from a “military uprising against the
democratically elected government of the Second Republic
supporters” (Maystorovich Chulio, 2022, p. 411). Following General
Francisco Franco's victory in 1939, his regime constructed
a historical
narrative that framed the Second Republic and its supporters as enemies of the
state. This process entrenched a social
divide, positioning Franco’s
supporters as the rightful victors while marginalising the defeated Republican
side (Maystorovich
Chulio, 2022, p. 411). Through systematic repression,
criminalisation of political opposition, and the glorification of nationalist
combatants as those who had “fallen for God and Spain”, the
dictatorship sought to legitimise its authority. In 1975,
following the death of
Franco, families of the disappeared found new opportunities to locate and exhume
clandestine graves from the
civil war. During the transition period
(1975–1981), “spontaneous exhumations”—conducted without
expert support—took
place in various localities across Spain (Maystorovich
Chulio, 2022, p. 411). Nonetheless, the lingering trauma of past violence
further intensified following Antonio Tejero’s failed military coup in
1981. This period of transition from dictatorship
to democracy was marked by a
political compromise: an amnesty law that simultaneously facilitated the release
of political prisoners
while shielding the regime and its supporters from legal
scrutiny for past crimes. It was not until 2000 that a broad civil society
movement for exhumations emerged, challenging the Spanish state’s
reluctance to confront the legacy of Francoist repression.
This movement
continues to advocate for historical memory and justice, addressing the silence
imposed by decades of institutional
neglect (Maystorovich Chulio, 2022).
The judicial apparatus of Franco’s dictatorship played a central role
in punishing the vanquished, constructing an official
narrative that placed
blame on the Second Republic and its supporters, thereby justifying violent
repression (Maystorovich Chulio,
2022, p. 412). Legal mechanisms such as the
1939 Law of Political Responsibility enabled the retroactive persecution of
individuals
who had either opposed or failed to actively support the regime in
1936, directly violating the legal principle of
nulla poena sine
(“no punishment without law”). The regimes courts, both
civil and military, posthumously declared the disappeared guilty,
framing their
extermination as a necessary step in purging Spanish society of its political
enemies. This ideological framework extended
to the concept of inherited guilt,
reinforcing the notion that decedents bore responsibility for the so-called
“sins of the
fathers” (Graham, 2004b, p. 321, Maystorovich Chulio,
2022, p. 412). Across Spain, hundreds of men, women and children were
in prisons, reformatories, concentration camps, and forced labour battalions,
enduring extreme depravation and exploitation
(Graham, 2004b, pp. 320-321). In
smaller and more isolated communities, repression was further exacerbated by the
intimate nature
of denunciations, as victims were often betrayed by neighbours
and acquaintances. Survivors faced the added trauma of living alongside
directly responsible for the execution, torture or disappearance of their
relatives, creating an enduring climate of fear and
silence (Maystorovich
Chulio, 2022, p. 412, Renshaw, 2011). The dictatorships sweeping oppression
subjected civil society to “a
brutal programme of mass repression”
(Tamarit Sumalla, 2013, p. 49), leaving many survivors destitute and under
surveillance by state authorities (Maystorovich Chulio, 2016, p. 25).
“Transition” refers to the period from 6 December 1978 to 23
February 1981 in Spain. The Amnesty Law (1977) “institutionalised
for those who participated in human rights violations and led to the release of
89 political prisoners languishing in Francoist
gaols” (Maystorovich
Chulio, 2022, p. 414). It instituted a wholesale amnesty for “all acts of
a political nature”
and any ensuing violations “committed until 15
December 1976” (Amnesty Law, 1977, art. 1 a). The former authorities of
the dictatorship, now politicians of the military party, retained control over
the process (Escudero, 2014; Lacasta, 1998, p. 143).
Nonetheless, the amnesty
failed to establish provisions for Basque Separatists who committed political
violence and neglected matters
involving Republican ex-combatants (Maystorovich
Chulio, 2022, p. 414). Encarnación (2012) explains that Spain’s
to democracy was shaped by a pragmatic approach, where political
stability and order took precedence over demands for accountability
and justice.
The reluctance to address past human rights violations stemmed from concerns
that revisiting Francoist crimes might
destabilise the fragile democratic
project. Joaquín Ruiz-Giménez (1985) similarly contends that
rather than being driven
by a collective desire to entrench impunity, the
transition was guided by an effort to prevent future violence and foster social
reconciliation. The political elites understood that Spanish society, still
grappling with historical traumas, was largely averse
to risk and wary of TJ
mechanisms that emphasised accountability (Aguilar, 2001). Left-wing political
actors, having endured decades
of political prosecution, prioritised national
reconciliation over retributive justice, seeking instead to establish
coexistence
that had been denied during the dictatorship (Aguilar, 2002). The
enduring effects of the civil war had deeply shaped the nation’s
fabric, leaving many Spaniards committed to maintaining peace over pursuing
judicial redress (Aguilar, 2002). For families
of the disappeared, the
psychological and social consequences of repression resulted in a complex form
of silence, where trauma and
survival strategies dictated their relationship
with the past (Graham, 2004b, p. 320).
In 2002, the administration José María Aznar issued a symbolic
condemnation of past violence and repression, accompanied
by limited financial
reparations in the form of renewed pensions. However, ARMH criticised these
measures as insufficient and sought
international recognition of the issue of
enforced disappearance. The organisation presented evidence of 30,000
individuals buried
in mass graves to the United Nations (UN) Working Group on
Enforced Disappearance (Davis, 2005). The election of the Socialist Party
José Luis Rodríguez Zapatero (2004–2011) and the subsequent
investigation into the experience of victims
of the civil war and dictatorship
culminated in the passage of the Law of Historical Memory (2007) (LHM). While
the LHM aimed to
support efforts to locate the disappeared and promote a more
inclusive historical narrative, it lacked an independent body to oversee
implementation. Julia López Fuentes (2022) contends that the law was
“an attempt by Spain’s national government
simultaneously to assert
its European belonging and to suppress and discredit narratives of Republican
victimhood and conflict that
threatened the dominant narrative of Spain’s
successful transition to democracy” (p. 130). Reflecting on the
reception years later, Zapatero stated in 2016 that “the law
was fair as it left neither side satisfied” (N. Maystorovich
fieldwork note, April 14, 2016). However, the election of Mariano Rajoy’s
Popular Party Government in 2011 marked a
significant policy shift, leading to
the withdrawal of funding for historical memory initiatives in 2012 as part of
broader austerity
measures responding to the global financial crisis.
In response to concerns from advocacy groups that the LHM had failed to meet
its objectives, Pedro Sánchez’s first PSOE
government initiated
further reforms. A key milestone came in 2018, when Franco’s remains were
removed from the Valley of the
Fallen — a site where he had been buried
alongside his victims — as part of broader efforts to redefine the
significance
of the mausoleum. The site was later renamed the Valley of
Cuelgamuros, making a symbolic shift away from its Francoist legacy. However,
this process remains incomplete. In October 2022, Sánchez’s second
government, a coalition with the left-wing Podemos,
passed the Democratic Memory
(DML). This law aimed to “provide greater legal avenues
by simplifying the exhumation process and establishing an official census
DNA database, among other significant changes to facilitate the exhumation of
mass graves” (Maystorovich Chulio, 2022,
p. 416). On 24 April 2023, the
Sánchez coalition exhumed the remains of Primo de Rivera (founder of the
from the Valley of the
Fallen. This was one of the few remaining vestiges of what Francisco
Ferrándiz (2022, p. 563) refers
to as a “funerary apartheid”.
Established by the dictatorship to ensure that the winners and losers inhabited
“spaces of death” (Taussig, 1987), it incorporated
“necropolitics” to legitimise Sánchez’s sovereignty
(Mbembe, 2003). Currently, despite these legal changes at the national level,
the changing coalition governments of the Spanish far-right
party, Vox (which
sees its role as defending the historical legacy of the civil war and
dictatorship), and the Popular Party have
led to the slow dismantling of the
exhumation movement through administrative means. For survivors and human rights
advocates, these
legislative efforts will continue to fall short until the root
of the problem, the Amnesty Law (1977), is addressed. Thus, they call
be overturned.
Enforced Disappearance
According to the International Convention for the Protection of All Persons
from Enforced Disappearance (2006, hereafter CED), enforced
disappearance
involves the “arrest, detention, abduction or any other form of
deprivation of liberty” by state agents
or by persons or groups acting
with state authorisation, support, or acquiescence (art. 2). Following
detention, there is a “concealment
of the whereabouts of the disappeared
person”, which effectively removes the protection of the law as the
individual's identity
is erased from public life (CED, 2006). Hayner (2002, p.
27) describes enforced disappearance as a “blatant form of atrocity
deception, with the obvious intent to lie, hide, and conceal” the
existence and location of individuals or groups. This
crime was recognised as a
violation under the laws of war before being codified in international
humanitarian law (Finucane, 2010,
p. 172; Sarkin, 2012, p. 551). The legal
concept of “enforced disappearance” has its foundations in the
judgments made
during the Nuremberg war crimes tribunal, rather than in more
recent human rights decisions (Finucane, 2010, p. 172).
In the last 20 years, there has been an expansion of the “right to
know” in cases of enforced disappearance under international
law (Groome,
2011). Within the field of TJ, there is no consensus on the best practices for
promoting reconciliation in post-conflict
societies. Some literature argues that
punishing perpetrators does not foster reconciliation but rather perpetuates the
outlook from
which the conflict arose (Hadden, 2004, p. 212). Amnesty is often
justified as a necessary compromise to prevent future revenge and
conflict (O'Shea, 2002). However, Dermot Groome (2011) emphasises the importance
of acknowledging the “right to truth”
(p. 175) as a
legally-enforceable right under international law, based on the broader societal
interest in clarifying narratives
and the belief that democracies function best
with truthful information. The “right to truth” is entrenched in
human rights institutions, protocols, agreements, and conventions. The
Preamble of the CED, adopted by the UN General Assembly in
December 2006,
affirms “the right of any victim to know the truth about the circumstances
of an enforced disappearance and
the fate of the disappeared person” (CED,
2006). This principle has been upheld in case law including
Blake v Guatemala
(1999). In this
case, the Guatemalan Government was found in violation of Article 5 in relation
to Article 1 of the American Convention
of Human Rights for failing to
investigate the disappearance of a
journalist.
Forensic anthropologists have developed more accurate forensic techniques
through their experiences in exhumations, such as those
conducted in the former
Yugoslavia (Groome, 2011, p. 187). While identifying remains is not always the
primary concern, balancing
the needs of relatives to identify remains with the
objectives of international criminal prosecutions has implications for
reconciliation
and justice. For instance, in 1996, Physicians for Human Rights
located and exhumed 517 bodies from mass graves in the former Yugoslavia.
organisation aimed to determine ethnicity and cause of death to provide evidence
for genocide prosecutions. In this case, individual
identification was not
deemed necessary, highlighting the tension between humanitarian and forensic
exhumation strategies (Cordner
& Tidball-Binz, 2017; Stover & Shigekane,
2002, p. 854; Vollen, 2001, p. 337). However, for families of the missing,
identification is crucial (Wagner, 2008). Forensic identification
through DNA provides proof of life and death, counteracting the
intent behind
enforced disappearance—to erase individuals from existence. In Spain, the
time elapsed since the disappearances
means criminal prosecutions are unlikely
due to amnesty laws and statutes of limitations. Therefore, forensic
identification primarily
serves the humanitarian needs of families to rebury
their dead. This makes exhumations in Spain distinct from those in places like
the former Yugoslavia, where criminal prosecution took precedence over
humanitarian demands. The clandestine nature of enforced disappearance
difficult to determine the total number of victims, as the crime is often
underreported (Milić, 2010; Vranckx, 2007).
In Spain, the official figure
stands at 114,226 victims (
Case 399/2006 V
). The situation gained
international attention in 2002 due to activism by ARMH, which documented cases
of enforced disappearance
and repression, collected testimonies, and exhumed
mass graves. This activism evolved into legal advocacy for national legislative
reforms and human rights and justice narratives.
Exhumations and the Recovery of the
Disappeared
In post-dictatorship
states in Latin America, post-conflict Rwanda, and the former Yugoslavia, the
use of exhumations to recover victims
of atrocities has resulted in the
establishment of global networks of experts collaborating to recover the
disappeared (Fondebrinder,
2015, p. 43). Exhumations serve several purposes, and
anthropology has long studied their legal, political, scientific,
representational,
and commemorative significance (Binford, 1996;
Ferrándiz, 2010a, 2010b, 2013a, 2013b; Renshaw, 2011; Robben, 2000, 2005;
2016; Sanford, 2003; Sant Cassia, 2006; Wagner, 2008). Researchers have
adopted a medico-legal analysis to interrogate human rights
violations, such as
genocide, crimes against humanity, and enforced disappearance. These studies
have examined remains as evidence
for criminal prosecution (Kovras, 2008;
Rosenblatt, 2013; Sanford, 2003; Sant Cassia, 2007). According to Cox et al.
(2013), the
investigation of a mass grave as the scene of the crime seeks to
“recover evidence that will allow the interpretation and reconstruction
a sequence of events ... as such to link a murder and link evidence to persons,
events, locations” (pp. 15–16). Forensic
scientists highlight the
importance of the method of excavation to collect evidence supporting criminal
prosecutions (Stover &
Shigekane, 2004, p. 85). According to John Hunter and
Margaret Cox (2005, p. 2), the archaeological method in criminal investigations
has been incorporated into police investigations since 1988 in the United
Kingdom. This approach offers the necessary techniques
to recuperate the past
and evidence held within crime scenes. Archaeology as a discipline brings a wide
understanding of buried environments.
Experience has shown that forensic
archaeologists may emerge as facilitators within this framework, identifying the
potential range
of other evidence within buried deposits (e.g., soil, plant, and
insect remains) that might exist in a recoverable and recordable
form (Hunter
& Cox, 2005, p. 96).
The notion of forensic truth and the expert’s capacity to read the past
from traces left behind in mass graves has been well
addressed in the literature
(Ferrándiz, 2014; Keenan & Weizman, 2012; Klinenburg, 2002; Koff,
2007; Renshaw, 2011; Snow
et al., 1984; Stover & Joyce, 1991; Ubelaker,
2015; Wagner, 2008; Weizman, 2011). Stover (1997, p. 40) considers that
are often our last and best witness; they never lie, and they never
forget”. While forensic investigation provides an element
of agency to the
dead, Rubin (2016) argues that it “remains confined to the narrow
parameters of describing its own individual
biography” (p. 32). For Rachel
Cyr (2013), the purpose of “medico-legal investigations of mass
atrocity” has two
purposes, one “humanitarian” and the other
“prosecutorial” (p. 94). The humanitarian aspect lies in the
to identify the dead for repatriation to their families (Cyr, 2013;
Stover et al., 2003; Rosenblatt, 2019; Ubelaker et al., 2019).
The mass grave
investigations in the former Yugoslavia highlighted the complexities of meeting
survivors’ humanitarian needs
when investigations sought solely evidence
to establish crimes (Crossland, 2002; Rosenblatt, 2010). The forensic demands of
the International
Criminal Tribunal for the former Yugoslavia (ICTY)
prosecutions did not extend to the identification of the dead (Stover &
2002, 2004; Vollen, 2001). Derek Congram and Jon Sterenberg (2009,
pp. 447–448) observe that identification can serve broader
justice aims
with evidence collected in a manner to facilitate future prosecutions where that
is not the goal of exhumation (Cox
et al., 2013, p. 14; Fondebrinder, 2002). In
Spain, exhumations have been primarily undertaken for humanitarian goals, with
the purpose
of repatriating remains to the family. Recently, there has been a
push to use archaeological experts in the excavation of mass graves
the forensic results of exhumations (Cox et al., 2013, p. 16). Several
excavation sites have used forensic archaeological
methods to help locate the
disappeared in different contexts and places (Buchli & Lucas, 2001; Congram,
2015; Congram & Vidoli,
2016; Haglund et al., 2001; Hunter & Cox, 2005;
Hunter et al., 1996; Parker Pearson, 2009; Roberts, 2012). In Spain, numerous
exhumation teams are working across the country. Some have the institutional
support of being attached to universities such as Aranzadi,
allowing for key
experts in the intersecting fields of history, archaeology, forensic medicine,
ballistics, and anthropology to work
together to conduct their investigations.
ARMH, while based in a university laboratory, operates without access to experts
field and relies on having a permanent archaeologist trained in
osteological methods to help conduct excavations. In many other cases,
are opened by local associations without forensic experts on site due to the
Ethnographic Research of Spanish Exhumations
The origins of the modern exhumation movement in Spain can be traced to the
personal efforts of Madrid-based journalist, Emilio Silva,
who set out to locate
the mass grave where his grandfather was buried. This effort was supported by
forensic experts including Paco
Etxeberría Gabilondo and Lourdes Herrasti
from Aranzadi. The exhumation in 2000 “successfully located the grave at
del Bierzo, exhuming the remains of 13 men killed in October of
1936” (Maystorovich Chulio, 2022, p. 416). The exhumation,
along with the
subsequent media attention it garnered, prompted Silva to write an article
“My Grandfather Was Also a Disappeared
This publication
resonated with many families seeking to recover the remains of their own
relatives, leading to a surge in inquiries
graves. Initially unaware of the full scale of enforced disappearance in Spain,
Silva recognised
a need for a structured effort to support these families. As a
result, he co-founded ARMH alongside Santiago Macías. The first
exhumations under the organisation’s auspices began in 2001. Scholars have
since described this early exhumation of civil war
victims as a pivotal moment
that disrupted prevailing narratives about Spain’s past, challenging the
longstanding silence surrounding
Franco-era atrocities (Davis, 2005;
Fernández de Mata, 2006, 2008; Ferrándiz, 2006; Graham, 2004b;
Renshaw, 2010, 2011).
My research investigates the role of silence in shaping and obstructing
efforts to exhume the victims of Francoism, as well as how
survivors’ ability to exercise their right to know the fate and burial
sites of their loved ones (Maystorovich Chulio,
2016, 2017, 2019, 2022). In this
context, the term “survivors” refers to the families and individuals
who endured repression
during the civil war and under Franco’s
dictatorship, while “victims” encompasses those killed or forcibly
disappeared
and later buried in both individual and mass graves. This study
examines the intersection of political, legal, and administrative
barriers that
hinder the identification and exhumation of mass graves, considering them as an
extension of Francoist repression and
the enforced silence it imposed through
fear and coercion. It also explores how exhumation witnesses and participants
interpret these
processes in relation to broader narratives about Spain’s
recent history. A key focus is on how interviewees conceptualise
silence within
their family histories and educational experiences. I argue that institutions
frameworks have sustained elements of
Francoist-imposed silence under the guise
of maintaining social cohesion. At the same time, the persistence of traumatic
ingrained survival strategies has reinforced silence as a protective
mechanism, shielding individuals and future generations from
a return to the
past. These dynamics continue to delay the recovery and recognition of those who
had disappeared during the Spanish
Civil War and dictatorship.
My fieldwork experiences led me to reflect on the broader role of exhumations
and their impact on community engagement. ARMH collaborates
professional and amateur archaeologists and historians to recover suppressed
local histories, using exhumation of mass
graves as a means to democratise
historical memory. Through the careful retrieval of remains, the dead are
reintegrated into the
present, with their personal stories restored and woven
back into the collective memory of their communities. The exhumation site
becomes a space of healing where the community can come together to acknowledge
a past that has remained hidden.
Four Phases of Exhumations in Spain
Exhumations in Spain can be divided into four distinct phases
(Ferrándiz & Robben, 2015, p. 20). The first occurred in
post-civil war period under Franco to document the crimes committed by the
Second Republic, legitimising the incoming regime
(Ferrándiz &
Robben, 2015, p. 20). The second phase commenced in the late 1950s, following
the completion of the Valley
of the Fallen, a monument to the civil war. The
third phase occurred following the death of the dictator in 1975. Paloma Aguilar
(2019) explains that during the transition, “despite the fear, uncertainty
and political violence” by different groups
(p. 228–229), the
survivors of Francoism decided to locate the remains of their disappeared to
rebury them in a dignified manner.
These spontaneous exhumations took place
between 1978 and 1981 in several localities across Spain, including Navarra,
Soria, La Rioja,
Murcia, Aragon, Extremadura, and Palencia (Aguilar, 2019;
Etxeberría Gabilondo, 2012; Fernández de Mata, 2006, 2008;
Moreno, 2016). Because of the so-called “pact of forgetting”,
democratic transition did not bring any “institutional”
“technical support” for the majority of these survivor-initiated
exhumations taking place across the country (Etxeberría
Gabilondo, 2012,
p. 14). However, following the failed coup d’état on 23 February
1981, led by Colonel Antonio Tejero,
who demanded “everyone stay
still”, exhumations ceased as relatives feared retributions in this phase.
The fear conditioned
during the dictatorship and the historical stigmatisation
of Republican identity ensured the exhumation of the disappeared ceased
a backward glance (Etxeberría Gabilondo, 2012; Fernández de Mata,
2008; Lafuente, 2009). As Fernández
de Mata (2008) elucidates, the
“citizen-led exhumations” ceased as the “failed coup of 1981
revived old fears”
(p. 257), cutting short the opportunity for families to
recuperate their dead. The profound and enduring trauma associated with the
Republican experience of defeat and repression has contributed to a
self-enforced silence among the generation who endured it. It
is important to
acknowledge that this time lapse has allowed for the collection of detailed
evidence and the capacity to individualise
remains from graves with the
expansion of forensic techniques.
The fourth phase witnessed the emergence of an
organised social movement focused on the recuperation of the disappeared using
discourse of human rights. The actions of journalist, Emilio Silva, led to
the first successful scientific and archaeological exhumation
of civil war dead
on the Iberian Peninsula. In 2000, the mass grave at Priaranza del Bierzo,
León was located and exhumed,
along with the remains of 13 other men
killed in October 1936. After the exhumation had been successfully completed,
Silva wrote
his famous article about the search for his grandfather. This
culminated in several letters from survivors requesting assistance
recuperation of their disappeared. ARMH was co-founded by Emilio Silva and
Santiago Macías as they realised there was
a genuine desire by the
relatives of the disappeared to recover the dead. At the time of Silva’s
could not have known the scope and impact of his
very private action in causing the aforementioned “rupture” within
social fabric of the nation. The exhumation of Emilio Silva’s
grandfather from Priaranza de Bierzo is commonly referred to
as the first
exhumation of the Spanish Civil War dead. However, as outlined above,
citizen-led excavations had been initiated in
phase three between 1978 and
Since 2000, ARMH has sought to raise awareness of these historical crimes by
drawing public attention to exhumations and the clandestine
intentionally ignored and silenced under Spain’s transition policy of
amnesty, particularly the Amnesty Law (1977).
The politics of the exhumation
movement in Spain may be viewed as a claim to the authority or legitimacy of a
particular set of beliefs.
It may also be seen as disputing the legitimacy of
the Francoist regime’s official discourse, the subsequent transitional
and the conservative members of Spanish politics and society. The
exhumations serve as a “concerted activity” for establishing
political claims of victimhood as the past is brought into the present (Verdery,
1999, p. 23). Between October 2000 and November
2016, approximately 8,159
exhumations were undertaken across Spain (Etxeberría Gabilondo, 2016).
Through the exhumation of
mass graves, associations such as ARMH, Aranzadi, and
Foro por la Memoria (Forum for Memory, Foro), have strategically used the
newly-acknowledged
rights of victims, such as the right to know, to bring about
legal actions. These actions aim to open public debate about the past,
recognition about what happened, reshape collective memory, and overturn the
Amnesty Law (1977). The associations seek to publicly
call to historical account
the military mobilisation against the democratically elected government of the
Second Republic, its supporters,
and victims caught in the crossfire of a policy
of terror. This policy aimed to destroy any elements believed to oppose the
values, ideology, and beliefs. This has led to the condemnation
of the past violence and repression in 2002, legal changes in the
form of the
LHM, and changes to the national narrative by including the vanquished in
historical accounts.
More recently, the movement to exhume the dead in post-conflict countries may
be viewed as a new form of TJ, with some claiming exhumation
“second transition” of justice (Druliolle, 2008, p. 77). Through the
recovery of the dead in Spain, new narratives
are formulated, including those
segments of society who have been repressed first by the civil war, second by
the dictatorship, and
third through the transition. Archaeology has been
referred to as destabilising undemocratic situations by making things public and
working with what is left from the past (Latour, 2005; Shanks, 2001, 2004).
Archaeology of the Spanish Civil War has received international
attention due to
the exhumation movement (Elkin, 2006; Ferrándiz, 2006;
González-Ruibal, 2007). Some projects for historical
exhumation have experienced resistance from the authorities
(Íñíguez & Santacana, 2003) or a
lack of political
support (Besolí et al., 2002; Gassiot Ballbé, 2005; Gassiot
Ballbé & Wolfe Steadman, 2008).
Meanwhile, some claim it is changing
slowly for the better (Mir et al., 2006). In Spain, the recuperation of the dead
is complicated
by the passage of time and the complex social and political
relationship established through a hierarchy of victimhood (Druliolle,
The exhumation and reburial do more than recover physical remains—they
transform their meaning reactivating the dead
as political and social subjects
in the present. According to Crossland (2000), the “excavation of the dead
effectively brought
them back into the realm of the living”, transforming
how “they are perceived”, altering the “relationships
between the living community and the dead” (p. 147). Finally, literature
on exhumations in Spain highlights the political
nature of exhumations through
attempts by government bodies and the judiciary to “impede recovery
efforts” (Gassiot Ballbé
& Wolfe Steadman, 2008, p. 436). They
draw on case studies of Catalonia and Andalucia to explain the problems with the
application
of the LHM in the field.
As a result of the privatisation of exhumations (Galella, 2015), diverse
groups and actors take part in the recuperation of the dead.
The different aims
of the exhumation groups have led to disputes about the best method of exhuming
the dead (Ferrándiz, 2006).
ARMH takes the view that the wishes of the
family members must be brought to the forefront, ahead of any political or
ideological
motives. Groups like Foro place the political interests of the
communist party ahead of that of families in their exhumation projects.
contrast, Aranzadi operates within university departments and offers their
students practical archaeological and forensic training
through assisting
families to locate their dead. Furthermore, the regional affiliates of ARMH and
Foro that operate smaller teams,
as well as individual archaeologists, aid
families at a cost.
Exhumations
The process of exhumation serves as a pedagogical ritual designed to revise
the narrative of the past through the materiality of the
dead, reinserted into
living memory. This ritual holds significant importance for activists, families,
and local communities. The
symbolism of the remains represents a recoding of the
past. The rhythm of excavating victims from clandestine graves varies, sometimes
involving the initial location of the grave, covering it, and reopening it with
families present. This approach is often chosen for
elderly survivors, as the
anticipation and uncertainty of locating the dead can be stressful. Searches can
range from 30 minutes
to two weeks, depending on location, terrain, and other
complexities. Occasionally, incorrect labelling of the grave location
necessitates
a return visit. The most common method involves searching and
conducting the exhumation once the grave is found. As the remains are
uncovered, more people tend to gather at the exhumation site, driven by local
curiosity. This moment anchors the present
to the past through the storytelling
of survivors. These recollections recode the remains as survivors and the
community discuss
what happened to the victims. As Alex (ARMH historian)
explains, the exhumation reveals ongoing state political repression against
surviving victims and families of the disappeared, as disappearance is an
ongoing crime. The act of exhumation makes a claim, emphasising
the existence of
the dead and the state's failure to resolve cases of enforced disappearance.
Alex elaborates:
It is about making a claim; [the exhumation] demonstrates that the
disappeared exist. It shows that public authorities ignore, silence,
and continue to bury the disappeared in this country. It is an extremely strong
accusation, above anything else. (N. Maystorovich
Chulio, personal
communication, August 14, 2015)
This highlights ARMH’s strategy to recover the missing, teach history,
and make an accusation regarding the past, emphasising
the limits of
participation. Historical accounts often corroborate both the past and the
evidence uncovered. During exhumations,
relatives often share what they know or
have been told about their loved ones. In some cases, due to the clandestine
nature of burials,
there is little knowledge of where individuals were buried.
An example is the exhumation in As Covas Quiroga (Lugo, Galicia), where
historian discovered the location of Julio Bello
grave through his
military trial, in which the coordinates were noted. The family had petitioned
to locate his remains, but no search
had been conducted until 2016 due to the
lack of knowledge about where he was killed and buried.
The bodily recovery of victims and public testimonies at the grave site help
recover the deceased's personal biography and incorporate
it into the local
history of the civil war. A notable example is the exhumation of Perfecto de
Dios in Chaherrero (Ávila,
Castilla y León). The case involved the
remains of a guerrilla fighter who had been summarily charged after his death by
military court, with the coordinates of the grave recorded in the trial
transcript. During this exhumation, Perfecto’s brother
and a local man
recounted the day he was killed by the Civil Guard. Present at the exhumation
was an individual who had buried Perfecto
in 1950. As the story was recounted,
Perfecto, his mother, and another man were travelling through Ávila to
Barcelona to escape
the clutches of the regime. A local entered the bar where
there were civil guards having a drink to let them know of the guerrilla
fighters in the vicinity. As they attempted to evade the civil guard,
Perfecto’s mother fell behind and he returned to aid
her. Perfecto was
shot in the leg, falling to the ground. His mother gathered him in her arms as a
civil guard shot Perfecto in the
head, killing him instantly. Following this
incident, an autopsy and a military trial was held where Perfecto was
posthumously charged
with crimes. Although the unmarked grave was lost over the
years, locals still placed flowers where they thought it was located.
discussed the past, corroborating a new version of events that contradicted the
records held in the trial documents.
As was common,
individuals killed during confrontations were tried in absentia posthumously to
legitimise the authorities’ actions.
In Perfecto’s case, an autopsy
was conducted before burial, yet explosives found on his person during the
exhumation suggested
incongruity. Another case in Villafranca (Castilla y
León) involved a mother and son shot from behind after being told to
escape, illustrating
la Ley de fuga
(the “Law for escapes”, a
noted cause of death, on death certificates from the period). The incident
involved the officers
or Civil Guard telling the person to escape, only to shoot
them from behind. During their exhumation, incisions on both individuals
evident, further illustrating the brutality of the era.
Historical accounts at gravesides establish embodied memory, bringing tragic
biographies into focus. As remains are slowly unearthed,
locals and family
members often comment on the care taken with the remains, remarking, “they
are so careful” or “look
at how gently they wipe the dirt
away” (N. Maystorovich Chulio, fieldwork note, October 1, 2016). This
fosters a sense among
survivors and witnesses that, at last, someone is treating
the dead with care and respect. Earth collected from around the remains
sifted to ensure no evidence is lost. Volunteers learn to distinguish between
bones and stones, the latter often whiter and brighter.
archaeologist) humorously teaches new volunteers that bones stick to the top
lip, unlike stones.
Scientific Analysis of the Grave as a Crime
ARMH models its exhumations on international protocols aimed at locating or
unearthing the “forensic truth”. These protocols,
originally adopted
for medico-legal investigations in countries like Argentina, Chile, and
Guatemala, have influenced the Spanish
exhumation movement. ARMH has based its
techniques on the EAAF (Argentinian Forensic Team) and sought their advice in
2005 (Congram
& Wolfe Steadman, 2008, p. 168). The integration of
international standards was evident in the 2015 exhumation in Teilán
(Lugo), where EAAF members seamlessly joined and supported ARMH effortlessly.
However, international experts noted that Spanish exhumations
proceeded at a
slower pace, allowing the circulation of technical and aesthetic photographs
through various media platforms (Rubin,
2016, p. 98). This more gradual approach
serves practical, pedagogical, and symbolic objectives, allowing more locals to
participate
and observe the exhumation. As René explains, “The
exhumation needs to serve this purpose; it is important that the
mass grave is
open to everyone from the town to attend and see the reality of this scientific
work” (N. Maystorovich Chulio,
personal communication, August 30, 2012).
By calling it “scientific work”, René asserts that
exhumations produce
objective truth, highlighting that the work goes beyond
forensic truth, addressing a clarifying truth about the past which can be
excavated through the materiality of remains.
Zoë Crossland (2013,
p. 126) points out that “the evidentiary regimes of science and law are
governed by different goals”.
However, these exhumations are not governed
by law due to the Amnesty Law (1977), a conservative judiciary, and the time
since the events. This legal impunity constrains the ability of
exhumations to deliver formal justice, as perpetrators remain beyond
of accountability mechanisms. René’s claim that exhumations are
governed by the evidentiary regimes is an
attempt to align ARMH’s work as
a professional, objective pursuit of knowledge and facts. The exhumation serves
to highlight
the “reality” of the past, offering a truth to the
witnesses at the gravesite that contradicts the official narrative.
contribute to a narrative that symbolises and publicises the injustice of the
past (Rubin, 2014, p. 110). This is evident in
the staggered release of images
on social media platforms by ARMH. Often, during the exhumation, Nuria (ARMH
archaeologist) will
share images on Facebook, Twitter (now X), WhatsApp, and
other social media platforms to spread information about the work being
undertaken by ARMH. Local journalists also often attend the site to take
photographs and include the happenings in their online editions.
attending the site also take photographs to share with family and friends. ARMH
always invites members of the public who wish
to take and share photographs,
thus contributing to the diffusion of the past and the significance of the
exhumation one mobile device
at a time. This public visibility contrasts with
the more restricted processes seen in other societies and underscores the
commitment to fostering a collective memory of the past. The
exhumations establish mobile field schools developing skills site by
ARMH’s approach also reflects Spain’s unique socio-political
challenges, compared to other post-conflict contexts.
Unlike the state-led
exhumations in Argentina or Chile, Spanish efforts are largely grassroots
driven, highlighting the enduring
legacy of institutional silence. ARMH’s
emphasis on public engagement contrasts with the more expedited or
security-driven
exhumations seen in Rwanda or post-genocide Yugoslavia.
René’s insistence that “the exhumation needs to serve
purpose” reflects the movement’s pedagogical and symbolic
priorities, with each site becoming a mobile field school
where local
participants can engage directly with historical recovery (N. Maystorovich
Chulio, personal communication, August 30,
ARMH interprets the mass grave as the crime scene. As René explains,
it is important that this work is undertaken and recorded
as “we are often
the only people present at the scene of a crime” (N. Maystorovich Chulio,
personal communication, August
30, 2012). When the remains appear, either Marco
(ARMH Vice-President) or René contact the civil guard or local police
the nearest police station to notify that we have located
remains with signs of
violence” (N. Maystorovich Chulio, personal communication, August 30,
2012). Police responses vary, from
acting as interested bystanders to having an
obstructionist role. ARMH documents these interactions to provide an overall
of Spanish state institutions’ responses to mass graves as crime
scenes. Generally, the police arrive and complete some paperwork
declaring that these crimes are amnestied and that no further investigation can
take place. In 2016, the local police in Riaño
(León) showed
interest and support for ARMH’s work, acknowledging its importance. A
police officer said, “I am
glad that you are doing this, people need to
know about what happened in this country” (N. Maystorovich Chulio,
fieldwork note,
July 21, 2016). Nonetheless, no investigation was initiated due
to the crimes of the period being amnestied. It is at this point
that ARMH takes
responsibility for the remains that will later be transported to the laboratory.
On other occasions, the police are
genuinely interested in attending the
gravesite. In 2016, ARMH contacted the local police in Alcalá del Valle
(Andalucía);
however, they did not attend. When the team proceeded
without them, the police later expressed disappointment at missing the event.
ARMH archaeologist, René, apologised, explaining, “I am sorry,
it’s just that normally the authorities are not
interested in
coming” (N. Maystorovich Chulio, fieldwork note, August 6, 2015). During
fieldwork, experts from both ARMH and
Aranzadi consistently reported that police
have, on occasion, attempted to obstruct exhumations, despite the presence of
appropriate
legal permissions (See also Gassiot Ballbé & Wolfe
Steadman, 2008, p. 436). The meticulous process of exhumation and recording
forensic evidence, according to René, is “so that the day Spanish
justice decides to investigate the crimes of the Franco
regime it is all there
in one place” (N. Maystorovich Chulio, personal communication, August 30,
2012). Hence, following on
from each exhumation, a forensic report is produced,
establishing a forensic record of the evidence collected regarding historical
crimes. However, the likelihood of charges following a judicial hearing remains
remote due to the application of amnesty and the
statute of limitations on
murder. This is a limitation to exhumations as a mechanism of TJ as they lack
the capacity to establish
legal accountability. Despite these innovative
practices, the enduring structural constraints in Spain mean that exhumations
symbolic reconciliation acts, rather than formal justice mechanisms.
Police responses to mass graves, ranging from supportive to
obstructive, reflect
the wider ambivalence of state institutions in Spain.
Privatisation and Grassroots Involvement in
Exhumations
The privatisation and outsourcing of exhumations by the state have fostered a
culture of public participation in the recovery of human
remains from the
Spanish Civil War era. While ARMH advocates for the state to assume
responsibility for these exhumations, there
has been little inclination by the
government to do so thus far. Proposed amendments to the LHM in the form of the
DML aim to address
this issue, but time will tell if they achieve the proposed
goals. This absence of substantial state involvement has created a unique
situation in which individuals, often lacking formal training, actively engage
in the excavation process under the guidance of lead
archaeologists and more
experienced team members. For instance, Tere (ARMH Secretary) recounted her
initial involvement in an exhumation,
where she began as an observer but was
invited by the forensic archaeologist on site to participate. This was an
unusual occurrence,
given the typical association of exhumations with
medico-legal investigations. Ferrándiz (2013) has extensively described
this phenomenon, noting how Spain's limited state support in exhumations has led
to a grassroots movement where civil society organisations
and relatives of the
disappeared take an active role in the recovery of remains. Victoria Sanford
(2003) describes a similar experience
in Guatemala as a social anthropologist
invited to participate in exhumations (p. 31), yet the Spanish context stands
the substantial involvement of relatives in these efforts.
The “bystander” role of the state has resulted in minimal
regulation or oversight in the recovery of graves (Araguete-Toribio,
7). Similarly, William D. Haglund (2001) notes that several exhumations
undertaken by Physicians for Human Rights in Rwanda
university-trained specialist with little field experience. Limited funding has
further necessitated the reliance of several
exhumation teams on volunteer
support, sometimes from individuals lacking qualifications or formal training.
The outsourcing of exhumations
to non-governmental organisations and grassroots
efforts has effectively transformed ARMH's exhumations into impromptu field
where volunteers, regardless of background, can learn and contribute to
the recovery efforts. This educational approach emerges from
the lack of
official political and legal interest in the victims.
While exhumations create an inclusive pedagogical space and provide a sense
of closure, they also carry the potential to re-traumatise
survivors. These
processes offer closure by recovering remains and establishing the truth about
the disappeared. As Layla Renshaw
(2011) notes, exhumation “satisfies the
widely held belief that the recovery of human remains is indispensable in order
enact death rituals, enable healthy mourning, and achieve psychological
closure” (p. 11). The emergence of remains also exposes
visible signs of
trauma. Sime (2013) observes that “excavations literalise the bringing of
memory of trauma to light, making
it conscious and capable of being rendered in
narrative (i.e. in symbolic and representational) forms” (p. 41). Reburial
frequently referred to by families as
pasar página
(“turning the page”), symbolising closure. However, Alexa Hagerty
(2022) reminds us that “exhumation is an inherently
melancholic act”
(p. 274), highlighting the sadness inherent in revisiting traumatic pasts. This
sentiment is powerfully expressed
by the daughter of a woman exhumed in
Villafranca del Bierzo:
Broken hearts and shattered spirits, living traumatised lives caused by
senseless deaths. The profound pain of sons and daughters
left without love. She
died on 28 October, and today, 28 November, the truth has been revealed. Justice
for my mother and uncle,
who were tragically assassinated in error. May peace
heal our hearts and illuminate our lives. Thank you for your unwavering
Book of Visitors
, Personal Communication, November 28,
Tere (ARMH Secretary) emphasises the significance of recovering remains:
“The act of recuperating remains closes the page because
it ends the pain.
Because until the disappeared appear, the past can’t be resolved”
(N. Maystorovich Chulio, personal
communication, October 6, 2015). Relatives
often describe reburial as the final chapter, enabling them to move forward.
Some express
feelings of peace and fulfilment, as evidenced by remarks, such as
“Now I can die in peace” and “We have finally
achieved what we
always wanted”. For others, closure comes from the reassurance that they
will one day be reunited with their
loved ones. Ascensión shares that
“All I have thought about is being with my father. I really want to be
buried with
him, and we will be together” (N. Maystorovich Chulio,
personal communication, October 8,
Nevertheless, exhumations often provoke painful memories, without necessarily
addressing broader needs for justice, reparations, or
institutional reform.
Survivors may experience deep emotional distress, particularly when exhumations
fail to lead to formal state
acknowledgment or legal action. To mitigate this,
ARMH includes a psychologist at exhumations and provides follow-up communication
with families. Raúl, a psychologist working in Guadalajara, Castilla-La
Mancha, describes the challenges of offering psychological
support with limited
When it came to supporting the relatives, we focused on Ascension and also
spent time talking to the families who came to us, listening
to them and trying
to find out how they were doing. It was very complicated to manage everything
with such a small team, especially
on the psychological side. If we had had more
specialised personnel, the care would have been more complete. (N. Maystorovich
personal communication, October 9, 2016)
The absence of adequate psychological support can complicate the healing
process. Survivors may feel isolated in their grief, especially
when exhumations
do not translate into systemic accountability or reform. This underscores the
importance of exhumation teams providing
robust and specialised support systems
for survivors and families of the disappeared.
Moreover, some relatives of the missing have actively participated in the
exhumation of their loved ones’ graves—a practice
noted by observers
in Spain that aligns with the broader educational goals of these endeavours
(Rubin, 2014, p. 117). By actively
involving participants, ARMH’s strategy
not only facilitates the recovery of the missing but also serves as a
pedagogical tool.
Ferrándiz (2014) has documented how the involvement of
relatives and volunteers aids in raising public discourse about Spain’s
violent past. As René explains, “We always encourage local
participation in exhumations. If we see someone observing
from a distance, we
approach them, inviting them to join us and learn more about the grave”
(N. Maystorovich Chulio, personal
communication, August 30, 2012). This approach
not only aids in the recovery process but also fosters public discourse on
events. Jonah (ARMH volunteer) adds that the significance of
exhumations lies in offering survivors the “opportunity to recover
kin and a rare opportunity for communities to discuss what happened and feel
that their experiences matter beyond their personal
and local lives” (N.
Maystorovich Chulio, personal communication, September 9, 2012). This
encapsulates the dual impact of
exhumations: recovering the disappeared and
establishing a counternarrative of the past that validates shared experiences
local and personal realms.
This article has examined forensic exhumations in Spain as a crucial
mechanism for TJ. While exhumations are traditionally associated
proceedings, the Amnesty Law (1977) provided impunity during Spain's transition
from dictatorship to democracy. The exhumation
of clandestine graves in Spain
holds profound symbolic and political significance, transcending mere forensic
investigations. Organisations
like ARMH play a pivotal role in these efforts,
reclaiming the identities and stories of those forcibly disappeared during
of political violence. Each excavation is a meticulous process involving
archaeologists, volunteers, and families, aiming not only
to recover skeletal
remains but also to uncover suppressed histories and challenge official
narratives that shield perpetrators from
accountability. By adhering to rigorous
international forensic protocols, these efforts seek to uncover the physical
truth of disappearances
while validating the lived experiences of survivors and
families. The absence of state involvement paradoxically democratises collective
memory (Maystorovich Chulio, 2022), transforming these sites into impromptu
educational settings where volunteers engage in historical
investigation and
advocacy. Despite legal obstacles and occasional resistance, these rituals of
excavation and remembrance serve
as powerful affirmations of historical truth
and justice, providing communities with a tangible means to confront past
and honour silenced memories. In this way, modern exhumations not
only reckon with the past but also catalyse local reflection and
reconciliation.
Correspondence:
Natalia Maystorovich Chulio, Lecturer in
Criminology, University of Sydney, Australia.
natalie.maystorovich@sydney.edu.au
P. (2001). Justice, politics and memory in the Spanish transition. In A.
Barahona de Brito, C. González Enríquez,
& Paloma Aguilar
The politics of memory: Transitional justice in democratizing
(pp. 92–118)
Oxford University Press.
Aguilar, P. (2002).
Memory and amnesia: The role of the Spanish Civil War
in the transition to democracy.
Berghahn Books.
https://doi.org/10.1515/9781782384854
Aguilar, P. (2019). El primer ciclo de exhumaciones y homenajes a fusilados
Republicanos en Navarra.
KAMCHATKA: Revista de Análisis
https://doi.org/10.7203/KAM.13.13531
Alvesson, M., & Sköldberg, K. (2000).
Reflexive methodology: New
vistas for qualitative research
(2nd ed.). Sage.
Araguete-Toribio, Z. (2015). Negotiating identity: Reburial and commemoration
of the civil war dead in southwestern Spain.
Human Remains &
http://dx.doi.org/10.7227/HRV.1.2.3
Balfour, S., & Quiroga, A. (2007).
The reinvention of Spain: Nation
and identity since democracy.
Oxford University Press.
Blake v Guatemala IACHR
https://www.corteidh.or.cr/docs/casos/articulos/seriec_36_ing.pdf
Besolí, A., Hernández, F. X., Íñiguez, D.,
Santacana, J., & Serrat, J. (2002). El patrimonio arqueológico
guerra civil en Cataluña.
Apuntes de Arqueología
(2–4), 14–16.
Binford, L. (1996).
The el Mozote massacre: Anthropology and human
. University of Arizona Press.
Law of Political Responsibility 1939
https://www.boe.es/buscar/doc.php?id=BOE-A-1939-1451
Amnesty Law 1977
https://www.boe.es/eli/es/l/1977/10/15/46/con
Law of Historical Memory 2007
https://www.boe.es/boe/dias/2007/12/27/pdfs/A53410-53416.pdf
Democratic Memory Law 2022
https://www.boe.es/eli/es/l/2022/10/19/20/con
Buchli, A., & Lucas, G. (2001).
Archaeologies of the contemporary
https://doi.org/10.4324/9780203185100
Burbidge, P. (2010). Waking the dead of the Spanish Civil War: Judge Baltasar
Garzón and the Spanish law of historical memory.
International Criminal Justice
(3), 753–781.
http://dx.doi.org/10.2139/ssrn.1639875
Burton, F., & Carlen, P. (1977). Official discourse.
Economy and
(4), 377–407.
Case 399/2006 V Juzgado Central de Instrucción No. 5 Audiencia
http://www.latinreporters.com/espagneGarzonFrancoLorca16102008M.pdf
Ceasar, R. C. (2016). Kinship across conflict: Family blood, political bones,
and exhumation in contemporary Spain.
Social Dynamics
https://doi.org/10.1080/02533952.2016.1195903
Congram, D. (2015). Canadian forensic archaeology: a Mari Usque ad Mare, ad
hoc. In M. Groen, N. Márquez-Grant, & R. C.
Janaway (Eds.),
Forensic archaeology: A global perspective
(1st ed,). John Wiley &
Congram, D., & Wolfe Steadman, D. (2008). Distinguished guests or agents
of ingérence: Foreign participation in Spanish
Civil War grave
excavations.
(2), 161–173.
Congram, D., & Vidoli, G. (2016). Arqueologia forense: Contexto, metodos
e interpretacion. In M. C. Sanabria (Ed.),
Patología y
antropología forense de la muerte: La investigación
científico-judicial de la muerte y la
tortura, desde las fosas
clandestinas, hasta la sudencia pública
(pp. 131-167). Forensic
Cordner, S., & Tidball-Binz, M. (2017). Humanitarian forensic action
– its origins and future.
Forensic Science International
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.forsciint.2017.08.011
Cox, M., Flavel, A., Hanson, I., Laver, J., & Wessling, R. (Eds.).
The scientific investigation of mass graves
. Cambridge University
Crossland, Z. (2000). Buried lives: Forensic archaeology and the disappeared
in Argentina.
Archaeological Dialogues
https://doi.org/10.1017/S1380203800001707
Crossland, Z. (2002). Violent spaces: Conflicts over the reappearance of
Argentina’s disappeared. In J. Scholfield, W. Gray,
& C. M. Beck
Matériel culture: The archaeology of twentieth century
(pp. 115–131). Routledge.
https://doi.org/10.4324/9780203165744-18
Crossland, Z. (2013). Evidential regimes of forensic archaeology.
Review of Anthropology
https://doi.org/10.1146/annurev-anthro-092412-155513
Crotty, M. (1998).
The foundations of social research: Meaning and
perspective in the research process
. SAGE Publications.
Cyr, R. (2013). Testifying absence in the era of forensic testimony.
International Journal of Politics, Culture, and Society
https://doi.org/10.1007/s10767-013-9140-0
Davis, M. (2005). Is Spain recovering its memory? Breaking the pacto de
Human Rights Quarterly
(3), 858–881.
https://dx.doi.org/10.1353/hrq.2005.0034
de la Rasilla, I. (2023). The trials of Judge
Garzón and the enforceability of decisions by human rights treaty bodies
The International Journal of Human
(5), 759–781.
https://doi.org/10.1080/13642987.2023.2297316
Díaz, E. (1995). The left and the legacy of Francoism: Political
culture in opposition and transition. In J. Labanyi (Ed.),
Spanish Cultural
Studies: An Introduction
. Oxford University Press.
Druliolle, V. (2008). Democracy captured by its
imaginary: The transition as memory and discourses of constitutionalism in
Social and Legal Studies
(1), 75–92.
https://doi.org/10.1177/0964663907086457
Druliolle, V. (2015). Recovering historical memory: A struggle against
silence and forgetting? The politics of victimhood in Spain.
International
Journal of Transitional Justice
(2), 316-335.
https://doi.org/10.1093/ijtj/ijv008
Elkin, M. (2006). Opening Franco’s graves.
Archaeology
(5), 38–43.
Encarnación, O. G. (2012). Justice in times of transition lessons from
the Iberian experience.
International Studies Quarterly
https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1468-2478.2011.00688.x
Escudero, R. (2014). Road to impunity: The absence of transitional justice
programs in Spain.
Human Rights Quarterly
(1), 123–146.
https://dx.doi.org/10.1353/hrq.2014.0010
Etxeberría Gabilondo, F. (2012). Exhumaciones contemporáneas en
España: Las fosas comunes de la Guerra Civil.
Boletin Galego de
Medecina Legal e Forense
, 18, 13–28.
Etxeberría Gabilondo, F. (2016).
Exhumaciones llevado a cabo en
Espana desde el ano 2000
. Aranzadi, Universidad del País Vasco.
Fernández de Mata, I. (2006). Exhuming bones,
reintegrating memories: The forgotten victims of the Spanish Civil War, an
ethnohistorical
approach. In A. I. Gray & I. Al-Marashi (Eds.),
conflict: Europe and beyond
(pp. 33-49). University of Duesto.
http://www.deusto-publicaciones.es/deusto/pdfs/hnet/hnet20.pdf
Fernández de Mata, I. (2008). From invisibility to power: Spanish
victims and the manipulation of their symbolic capital.
Totalitarian
Movements and Political Religions
(2–3), 253–264.
https://doi.org/10.1080/14690760802094875
Ferrándiz, F. (2006). The return of civil war ghosts: The ethnography
of exhumations in contemporary Spain.
Anthropology Today
https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1467-8322.2006.00437.x
Ferrándiz, F. (2010a). The intimacy of defeat: Exhumations in
contemporary Spain. In C. Jérez-Farrán & S.
Amaro (Eds.),
Unearthing Franco’s legacy: Mass graves and the recovery of historical
memory in Spain
(pp. 304–325). University of Notre Dame Press.
Ferrándiz, F. (2010b). De las fosas comunes a los derechos humanos: El
descubrimiento de las desapariciones forzadas en la
contemporánea.
Revista de Antropología Social
Ferrándiz, F. (2013a). Rapid response ethnographies in turbulent
times: Researching mass grave exhumations in contemporary
Anthropology
(6), 18–22.
https://doi.org/10.1111/1467-8322.12073
Ferrándiz, F. (2013b). Exhuming the
defeated: Civil war mass graves in 21
-Century Spain.
Ethnologist
(1), 38–54.
https://doi.org/10.1111/amet.12004
Ferrándiz, F. (2014). Subterranean autopsies: Exhumations of mass
graves in contemporary Spain. In E. Schindel and P. Colombo
memories of violence: Landscapes of erasure, disappearance and exception
(pp. 61–73). Palgrave McMillan.
https://doi.org/10.1057/9781137380913
Ferrándiz, F. (2018). Death on the move: Pantheons
and reburials in Spanish Civil War exhumations. In A. C. G. M. Robben
A Companion to the anthropology of death
(pp. 189-204). Wiley.
https://doi.org/10.1002/9781119222422.ch14
Ferrándiz, F. (2019). Unburials, generals, and phantom militarism:
Engaging with the Spanish Civil War.
Current Anthropology
https://doi.org/10.1086/701057
Ferrándiz, F., & Robben, A. C. G. M. (2015). Introduction: The
ethnography of exhumations. In F. Ferrándiz &
A. C. G. M. Robben
Necropolitics: Mass graves and exhumations in the age of human
(pp. 1–39). University of Pennsylvania Press.
https://doi.org/10.9783/9780812291322
Finucane, B. (2010). Enforced disappearance as a crime under international
law: A neglected origin in the laws of war.
Yale Journal of International
(1), 171–198.
Fondebrinder, L. (2002). Reflections on the scientific documentation of human
rights violations.
International Review of the Red Cross
https://doi.org/10.1017/S1560775500104225
Fondebrinder, L. (2015). Forensic anthropology and the investigation of
political violence: Lessons learned from Latin America and
the Balkans. In F.
Ferrándiz & A. C. G. M. Robben (Eds.),
Necropolitics: Mass graves
and exhumations in the age of human rights
(pp. 41–52). University of
Pennsylvania Press.
https://doi.org/10.9783/9780812291322
Galella, P. (2015). Privatising the search and identification of human
remains: The case of Spain.
Human Remains and Violence
https://doi.org/10.7227/HRV.1.1.5
Gassiot Ballbé, E. (2005). Arqueología forense de la guerra
civil: Justicia y memoria de la represión fascista.
Gassiot Ballbé, E., & Wolfe Steadman, D. (2008). The political,
social and scientific contexts of archaeological investigations
of mass graves
Archaeologies: The Journal of World Archaeological Congress
(3), 429–444.
https://doi.org/10.1007/s11759-008-9081-9
Goffman, E. (1989). On fieldwork.
Contemporary Ethnography
(2), 123–132.
https://doi.org/10.1177/089124189018002001
Graham, H. (2004a). Coming to terms with the past: Spain's memory wars.
History Today
(5), 29–31.
Graham, H. (2004b). The Spanish Civil War 1936-1939:
The return of Republican memory.
Science and Society
https://doi.org/10.1521/siso.68.3.313.40297
González-Rubial, A. (2007). Making things public: Archaeologies of the
Spanish Civil War.
Public Archaeology
(4), 203–226.
https://doi.org/10.1179/175355307X264165
Groome, G. (2011). The right to truth in the fight against impunity.
Berkeley Journal of International Law
(1), 175–199.
https://heinonline.org/HOL/P?h=hein.journals/berkjintlw29&i=177
Hadden, T. (2004). Punishment, amnesty and truth:
Legal and political approaches. In A. Guelke (Ed.),
Democracy and ethnic
conflict: Advancing peace in deeply divided societies
(pp. 196-217).
Palgrave Macmillan.
https://doi.org/10.1057/9780230523258
Hagerty, A. (2022). The melancholy of bones: Forensic exhumations as an
elegiac transformative experience.
(3), 264–285.
https://doi.org/10.1111/etho.12320
Haglund, W. D. (2001). Archaeology and forensic death investigation.
Historical Archaeology
(1), 26–34.
https://doi.org/10.1007/BF03374524
Haglund, W. D., Connor, M., & Scott, D. D. (2001). The archaeology of
contemporary mass graves.
Historical Archaeology
Hannabuss, S. (2000). Being there: Ethnographic
research and autobiography.
Library Management
https://doi.org/10.1108/01435120010309425
Hayner, P. (2002).
Unspeakable truths: Facing the challenge of truth
commissions
. Routledge.
https://doi.org/10.1353/hrq.2003.0008
Hunter J. R., Roberts, C. A., & Martin, A. (1996).
Studies in crime:
An introduction to forensic archaeology
. Batsford.
https://doi.org/10.4324/9780203714461
Hunter, J., & Cox, M. (2005).
Forensic archaeology: Advances in theory
and practice
. Routledge.
https://doi.org/10.4324/9780203970300
Íñíguez, D., & Santacana, J. (2003).
d’Albinyana: Guerra civil 1936-1939
. Llibres de Matricula.
International Convention for the Protection of All
Persons from Enforced Disappearance (2006)
https://www.ohchr.org/en/instruments-mechanisms/instruments/international-convention-protection-all-persons-enforced
Jiménez, C. (2011).
Combating impunity for international crimes in
Spain: From the prosecution of Pinochet to the indictment of Garzón
(International Catalan Institute for Peace,
Working Paper No. 2011/1).
https://ssrn.com/abstract=2033068
Lacasta, I. (1988).
Cultura y gramática del leviatán
Prensas Universitarias.
Lafuente, I. (2009).
Las fosas de Franco: Los republicanos que el dictador
dejo en las cuentas
. Las Temas de Hoy.
Latour, B. (2005).
Reassembling the social: An introduction to
actor-network-theory
. Oxford University Press.
López Fuentes, J. (2022). “A forgetting for everyone by
everyone”? Spain’s memory laws and the rise of the
community of memory, 1977-2007.
Journal of Modern History
https://doi.org/10.1086/718121
Lumsden, K., & Winter, A. (2014).
Reflexivity in criminological
research: Experience with the powerful and the powerless
https://doi.org/10.1057/9781137379405
Keenan, T., & Weizman, E. (2012).
Mengele’s skull: The advent of
forensic aesthetics
. Sterenberg and Portikus.
Klinenburg, E. (2002).
A social autopsy of disaster in Chicago: Heat
Chicago University Press.
Koff, C. (2007).
The bone woman: A forensic anthropologist’s search
for truth in the mass graves of Rwanda, Bosnia, Croatia, and Kosovo
Kovras, I. (2008). Unearthing the truth: The politics of exhumations in
Cyprus and Spain.
History and Anthropology
https://doi.org/10.1080/02757200802611688
Mallinder, L. (2007). Can amnesties and international
justice be reconciled?
The International Journal of Transitional Justice
(2), 208–230.
https://doi.org/10.1093/ijtj/ijm020
Maxwell, J. (1992). Understanding and validity in qualitative research.
Harvard Educational Review
(3), 279–301.
https://doi.org/10.17763/haer.62.3.8323320856251826
Mbembe, A. (2003). Necropolitics.
Public Culture
https://doi.org/10.1215/08992363-15-1-11
Maystorovich Chulio, N. (2016). Victims, silence and the exhumation of mass
graves. In R.D. Hermanson & C. Mumford
Giving voice to
(pp. 23–34). Inter-Disciplinary Press.
Maystorovich Chulio, N. (2017). The movement to exhume the missing victims of
the Spanish Civil War and Francoist dictatorship. In
C. Brants & S. Karstedt
Transitional justice and its public spheres, engagement, legitimacy
and contestation
(pp. 285–305). Hart Publishing.
https://doi.org/10.5040/9781509900190
Maystorovich Chulio, N. (2019).
The materiality of human remains in
unearthing Spain’s repressed past: What exhumations tell us about law,
forensics, human
rights and memory
[Doctoral dissertation, University of
Sydney]. Sydney eScholarship repository.
http://hdl.handle.net/2123/20904
Maystorovich Chulio, N. (2022). Democratising collective memory through
forensic exhumations in Spain.
Australian Journal of Politics and
(3), 410–427.
https://doi.org/10.1111/ajph.12865
Milić, T. (2010). International convention for
the protection of all persons from enforced disappearance.
Međunarodna
konvencija o zaštiti lica od prisilnog nestanka
Mir, C., Calvet, J., & Sagúes, J. (2006).
Una inmensa
prisión: Los campos de concentración y las prisiones durante la
Guerra Civil y el franquismo
McEvoy, K., & McConnachie, K. (2013). Victims and transitional justice:
Voice, agency and blame.
Social and Legal Studies
https://doi.org/10.1177/0964663913499062
Merton, R. K. (1968).
Social theory and social structure.
O'Shea, A. (2002).
Amnesty for crime in
international law and practice.
Kluwer Law International.
Parker Pearson, M. (2009).
The archaeology of death and burial
A&M University Press.
Preston, P. (2012).
The Spanish holocaust: Inquisition and extermination
in twentieth century Spain.
W. W. Norton & Company.
Rey, D. (2001). La transición: Una análisis marxista.
Marxismo Hoy
Renshaw, L. (2010). The scientific and affective identification of republican
civilian victims from the Spanish Civil War.
Journal of Material Culture
(4), 449–463.
https://doi.org/10.1177/1359183510382961
Renshaw, L. (2011).
Exhuming loss: Memory, materiality and mass graves of
the Spanish Civil War
. Left Coast Press INC.
https://doi.org/10.4324/9781315428697
Robben, A. C. G. M. (2000). State terror in the netherworld: Disappearance
and reburial in Argentina. In J. A. Sluka (Ed.),
The death squad: The
anthropology of state terror
(pp. 91–113). University of Pennsylvania
https://doi.org/10.9783/9780812200485
Robben, A. C. G. M. (2005).
Political violence and trauma in
. University of Pennsylvania Press.
https://doi.org/10.9783/9780812203318
Roberts, C. A. (2012).
Human remains in archaeology: A handbook.
Council for British Archaeology.
Rosenblatt, A. (2010). International forensic investigations and the human
rights of the dead.
Human Rights Quarterly
(4), 921–951.
https://dx.doi.org/10.1353/hrq.2010.0015
Rosenblatt, A. (2013). Sacred graves and human rights. In M. Goodale (Ed.),
Human rights at the crossroads
(pp. 122–139). Oxford University
Rosenblatt, A. (2019). The danger of a single story about forensic
humanitarianism.
Journal of Forensic and Legal Medicine
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jflm.2018.11.007
Rubin, J. (2014). Transitional justice against the state: Lessons from the
Spanish civil society led forensic exhumations.
The International Journal of
Transitional Justice
(1), 99–120.
https://doi.org/10.1093/ijtj/ijt033
Rubin, J. (2016). “
They are not just bodies”: Memory, death
and democracy in post-Franco Spain
[Doctoral dissertation, University of
Chicago]. Knowledge@UChicago.
https://doi.org/10.6082/uchicago.1637
Ruiz-Giménez, J. (1985).
El Camino hacia la democracia.
de Estudios Constitucionales.
Sanford, V. (2003).
Buried secrets: Truth and human rights in
. Palgrave Macmillan.
https://doi.org/10.1057/9781403973375
Sant Cassia, P. (2006). Guarding each other’s dead, mourning
one’s own: The problem of missing persons and missing pasts
South European Society & Politics
(1), 111–128.
https://doi.org/10.1080/13608740500470372
Sant Cassia, P. (2007).
Bodies of evidence: Burial memory and recovery of
missing persons in Cyprus
. Berghahn Books.
Sarkin, J. (2012). Why the prohibition of enforced disappearance has attained
status in international law.
Nordic Journal of
International Law
(4), 537–583.
https://doi.org/10.1163/15718107-08104006
Shanks, M. (2001). Culture/archaeology: The dispersion of a discipline and
its objects. In I. Hodder (Ed.),
Archaeological theory today: Breaking the
(pp. 284–305). Polity.
Shanks, M. (2004). Archaeology/Politics. In J. Bintliff (Ed.),
A companion
to archaeology
. Blackwell.
Serrano Moreno, J. E. (2016). La exhumación de la 1979 en Murcia.
Acción colectiva de familiares de fusilados republicanos
transición.
(3), 147–177.
Sime, J. (2013).
Las fosas de Franco: Los republicanos que el dicatador
dejo en las cuentas
. Temas de Hoy.
Snow, C. C., Levine, L., Lukash, L., Tedeschi, L. G., Orrego, C., &
Stover, E. (1984). The investigation of the human remains
“disappeared” in Argentina.
The American Journal of Forensic
Medicine and Pathology
(4), 297–299.
https://doi.org/10.1097/00000433-198412000-00003
Stover, E., & Joyce, C. (1991).
Witness from the grave: The stories
Stover, E. (1997). Bones ... never lie, and they never forget.
Smithsonian
(12), 40–51.
Stover, E., Haglund, W. D., & Samuels, M. (2003). Exhumation of mass
graves in Iraq: Consideration for forensic investigations,
humanitarian needs,
and the demands of justice.
Journal of the American Medical Association
(5), 663–666.
https://doi.org/10.1001/jama.290.5.663
Stover, E., & Shigekane, R. (2002). The missing in the aftermath of war:
When do the needs of victims’ families and international
tribunals clash?
International Review of the Red Cross
https://doi.org/10.1017/S1560775500104201
Stover, E., & Shigekane, R. (2004). Exhumation of mass graves: Balancing
legal and humanitarian needs. In E. Stover & H. M.
Weinstein (Eds.),
neighbor, my enemy: Justice and community in the aftermath of mass atrocity
(pp. 85–103). Cambridge University Press.
Tamarit Sumalla, J. M. (2013).
Historical memory and criminal justice in
Spain: A case of late transitional justice
. Intersentia.
Taussig, M. (1987).
Shamanism, colonialism and the wild man: a study in
terror and healing.
University of Chicago Press.
Ubelaker, D. H. (2015). Craniofacial superimposition: Historical review and
current issues.
Journal of Forensic Science
https://doi.org/10.1111/1556-4029.12842
Ubelaker, D. H., Shamlou, A., & Kunckle, A. (2019). Contributions of
forensic anthropology to positive scientific identification:
A critical review.
Forensic Science Research
(1), 45–50.
10.1080/20961790.2018.1523704
Urdillo, U. (2011). Impunity for enforced disappearances in contemporary
Interdisciplinary Journal of Human Rights Law
Vinyes, R. (2009).
El estado y la memoria:
Gobiernos y ciudadanos frente a los traumas de la historia
. RBA Libros.
Verdery, K. (1999).
Political lives of dead bodies: Reburial and
postsocialist change
. Columbia University Press.
Vollen, L. (2001). All that remains: Identifying the victims of the
Srebrenica massacre.
Cambridge Quarterly of Healthcare Ethics
(3), 336–340.
https://doi.org/10.1017/S0963180101003140
Vranckx, A. (2007).
A long road towards universal protection against
enforced disappearance
International Peace Information Service.
https://missingpersons.icrc.org/index.php/library/long-road-towards-universal-protection-against-enforced-disappearance
Wagner, S. (2008).
To know where he lies: DNA technology and the search
for Srebrenica’s missing
. University of California Press.
Wagner, S. (2015). The quandaries of partial and comingled remains:
Srebrenica’s missing and Korean war casualties compared.
Ferrándiz & A. C. G. M. Robben (Eds.),
Necropolitics: Mass graves
and exhumations in the age of human rights
, (pp. 119–139). University
of Pennsylvania Press.
https://doi.org/10.9783/9780812291322
Weizman, E. (2011). Osteobiography: An interview with Clyde Snow.
Zartman, I. W. (2005). Comparative case studies.
International
Negotiation
https://doi.org/10.1163/1571806054741137
Case 399/2006 V, also known as
the “Garzón Case”, was an investigation initiated by Judge
Baltasar Garzón
at Spain’s Audiencia Nacional (National Court).
This case sought to address the crimes committed during the Franco regime,
including forced disappearances, torture, and executions, and it aimed to hold
accountable those responsible for these crimes. The
case was eventually
dismissed due to legal arguments concerning amnesty laws, but it remains a
significant legal attempt to examine
the legacy of the Francoist dictatorship
and its violations of human rights
José Antonio Primo de
Rivera (1903–1936) was the founder of the Falange Española, the
fascist political movement
that became a key pillar of Francisco Franco’s
regime. Executed by the Republican government during the Spanish Civil War,
was later mythologised by the Francoist dictatorship and initially buried in the
Valley of the Fallen alongside Franco, reinforcing
the site’s status as a
nationalist shrine.
While there is further
literature on this topic, it exceeds the scope of this investigation (See also:
Groome, 2011; Klinkner, 2023;
Sarkin, 2012; Sweeney, 2018).
All translations are my own
unless otherwise stated.
Julio Bello Sierra was a
civilian executed during the Spanish Civil War, his body falling into a river.
It later washed up in the
town of As Covas (Lugo, Galicia), where he was buried
in an unmarked grave. His burial site was later documented in a military trial
posthumously, and his remains were eventually located and exhumed by ARMH.
Ascensión Mendieta, the
daughter of a Republican victim forcibly disappeared during the Spanish Civil
War, fought for years
to recover her father’s remains. Her father, Timoteo
Mendieta Alcalá, was executed and buried in a mass grave that was
between 2016 and 2017 as part of broader efforts to recover historical memory.
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (791 KB)
PDF format (429 KB)
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter