URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/journals/PrivLawPRpr/2006/9.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 15:30:32
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Submission by the Australian Privacy Foundation to the Senate Legal &
Constitutional Committee Inquiry into the
Anti-Terrorism Bill (No 2) 2005
December 2005
This submission is included in PLPR not only because it draws attention to
major privacy intrusions inherent in the new preventative
detention and control
order powers, which have understandably been the focus of (largely unsuccessful)
opposition to the new laws.
The submission is also significant because it also
attempted to alert Parliament and the community to a range of almost unnoticed
incidental intrusions – representing a grab-bag of increased powers and
surveillance authorisations for agencies as diverse
as the Australian Federal
Police, Customs and AUSTRAC,only partly or wholly unrelated to counter-terrorism
offences. Regrettably,
despite the warnings also sounded by the federal Privacy
Commissioner in her submission (at www.privacy.gov.au) these additional
and authorities were enacted with only marginal additional safeguards.
General points of principle on the Bill
1. While we welcome the brief window of opportunity offered by this Senate
Inquiry, the relative lack of opportunity for public debate
and scrutiny for
changes to the law of this magnitude and significance is extremely
disappointing. This is especially the case when
compared to precedents such as
changes in the last few years to both ASIO and Telecommunications Interception
legislation, where
a longer period of public and parliamentary scrutiny resulted
in substantial improvements.
2. It is quite difficult to understand what the Bill actually does –
scrutiny would have benefited from a marked-up copy of
what the Criminal Code
will look like with the proposed changes. We fear that we have probably not been
able to detect, in the limited
time available, all of the adverse privacy
implications of the proposal. A longer period of consideration would allow all
such implications
to be identified and debated.
3. While we share the primary concern over the draconian provisions for
control and preventative detention orders, and the revival
of sedition offences;
many other well-informed critics will be putting the case against them, and we
will only make brief reference
to our support for their concerns, from a privacy
perspective.
4. We would like more particularly to direct the Committee’s attention
to several areas in which the Bill contains provisions
which are not confined to
terrorism offences but are part of a longstanding government ‘wish’
to give agencies extra
powers – examples include:
• the AFP notice to produce information powers for ‘other serious
offences’ (Schedule 6);
• the optical surveillance provisions (Schedule 8);
• changes to the Financial Transaction Reports Act (Schedule 9), and
• extended powers of Customs officers (Schedule 10)
Detailed analysis of all these is given below. In our view there is no need
to rush these changes through on the back of the supposedly
‘orders’ provisions – they should be considered over a longer
time period, preferably in the context of
related reviews such as those of the
5. The government’s attempts at re-assurance in relation to this Bill
so far rest largely on appeals to ‘trust us’.
Surely history (even
recent history) tells us that governments and bureaucracies even here in
Australia cannot be trusted –
particularly with powers as draconian as
these - without greater transparency, accountability and safeguards.
6. It is dishonest of the government to pretend that these are only
‘temporary’ measures needed for exceptional circumstances.
definitions of terrorism being used mean that the threat will remain
indefinitely (as it has for at least the last forty years,
without the need for
these measures).
7. Analogies with precedent of emergency powers during previous predictably
finite wars are therefore false – governments have
defined a war on terror
in a way that ensures it will be permanent. We must therefore debate these
powers on the assumption that
they will be permanent too.
8. Sunset clauses are better than nothing (and must be shorter) but they are
no substitute for proper justification up front. It is
always more difficult to
repeal laws once established, even if the powers are not used.
9. In any event, there are no sunset clauses for many of the provisions of
the Bill. While this may be reasonable for some minor technical
amendments, it
is not acceptable for the significant changes, all of which must be subject to a
relatively short sunset period.
10. What is the evidence of the need for these changes? We have seen no
evidence, as opposed to assertions, that the London bombings
really change
anything about the threat posed to Australia. The official risk assessment
hasn’t changed. Intelligence agencies
have backed away from suggestions
that there are hundreds of dangerous extremists in Australia – the figure
apparently used
to scare the Premiers into their initial agreement.
11. The government has also failed to provide any reasoned justification as
to in what respects the existing laws – already
significantly extended in
recent years – are not adequate to deal with particular threats.
12. What is the evidence of urgency? Why do we suddenly need to rush these
powers in without even adequate debate when we have lived
without them until now
– even after New York, Madrid, and London?
13. What is the evidence of effectiveness? Let us have examples of where the
lack of these powers has actually hindered investigation/prevention.
hypotheticals – not just assertions – it would be helpful to
understand possible situations where these powers would
14. Governments must seriously consider whether the proposals are not
actually counter-productive – even dangerous. Many experts
believe that
taking such powers will simply act as a recruiting tool for extremists –
and that we are simply playing into their
hands by making these changes.
15. What is the evidence of proportionality? We need a debate about whether
the loss of
civil liberties is worth any marginal
benefit to law enforcement/intelligence.
16. It is not acceptable to say that
value to the police or ASIO
is worth the loss of rights and freedoms – governments are always saying
no to the agency ‘wish
lists’, even on grounds of cost, let alone
loss of fundamental rights. Why is this a different situation?
General concerns about severely limited judicial oversight
17. Judicial oversight of the operation of the new provisions appears to be
limited to judicial review of process – there is
no provision for merits
review of the basis of the decisions. Judicial involvement only applies to some
of the key provisions and
not others. Furthermore many decisions under the new
provisions are expressly excluded from review under the ADJR Act (Schedule 4
18. The role of judicial oversight is not only to protect the innocent victim
– it is an anti-corruption measure.
19. The role of judges and magistrates in some of the provisions amounts to
an executive role in fundamental conflict with their judicial
functions. The
community was told by this government in the 1990s that this conflict prevented
federal court judges from issuing
warrants for telecommunications interception
– to justify moving that function to AAT members without the same
independence
(even though issuing warrants does not amount to punishment as
control orders do). Now it suits the government to co-opt the judiciary
even more clearly executive role. We note that this issue has now been raised as
a more general criticism of the Bill.
20. It is misleading to describe the proposed involvement of judges as
‘judicial’ since it is in many cases to be performed
‘personal’ capacity. Also, to the extent that individual judges may
decline to take on this role, this further
erodes the purported assurance of
independence – by definition those involved will be
‘volunteers’ who presumably
agree with the legislation, while the
sceptics who might bring a more rigorous standard to bear on applications will
have excluded
themselves.
Particular privacy concerns
21. The Bill has serious implications for several aspects of privacy:
• Bodily & Territorial privacy – including the control order
provisions, but also the provision for an escalating
scale of intrusions from
‘shoot to kill’
• Communications privacy – including provisions for monitoring
communications and banning communications even between
family members about the
whereabouts of their children
• Information privacy – including the mandatory collection of
information about both suspects and wholly innocent ‘associates’,
the uses and disclosures of which will not be ‘transparent’, and
which can be expressly kept secret from the individuals
22. Because of the looseness of the definition of terrorism, and the fact
that powers can be exercised in relation to third parties
other than those
suspected of any intent to commit violence, the privacy implications extend well
beyond such suspects. The breadth
of the legislation would appear to catch,
potentially, anyone whom the intelligence agencies or police think
have relevant information or
be involved in any way even
without knowing. This is not only unacceptable in its own terms but is likely to
have a major ‘chilling’
effect on freedom of speech and legitimate
Schedule 3 - Financing Terrorism powers
23. The financing terrorism provisions in Schedule 3 would criminalise
‘inadvertent’ contributions to organisations which
themselves may
contribute to legitimate political activity without knowing about any
associations with violent extremists. Individuals,
and organisations acting in
good faith cannot be expected to know enough about these potential links to make
a judgement. Criminal
offences should only apply to financial contributions made
in the full knowledge that they will be used to fund criminal activity.
Otherwise, two things will happen - a vast number of individuals will
inadvertently expose themselves to criminal prosecution, and
some people will be
deterred from contributing to legitimate social and political movements which
criticise current government policies
or even those that don’t. Both are
undesirable.
Schedule 4 - Control and preventative detention orders
24. Many of the obligations, prohibitions and restrictions that can be
included in a control order are highly intrusive into the subject’s
territorial and communications privacy and, in the case of the tracking device,
into their bodily privacy as well (such a device
will presumably take the form
of an irremovable bracelet). Further privacy intrusions would be necessary in
order to monitor compliance
with some elements of a control order such as
limitations on telecommunications use. We strongly believe that no-one should be
to these intrusions who has not been charged with a specific offence
and given the opportunity to challenge the charges in a court
of law, with full
legal representation.
25. If control orders are to be allowed in any form, they should certainly
not be for a renewable period of twelve months –
that is far too long a
time for the authorities not to have to demonstrate the continued need for the
order. We note that a maximum
period of 3 months is to apply to 16-18 year olds
(proposed section 104.28). In our view, the authorities should be required to
for a control order on any individual after no more than one month. The
provision of the right for a subject to apply for revocation
of a control order
is no substitute for a regular requirement on the authorities to justify the
need. Because a subject is only able
to see the control order itself and not the
justification, how could they know what arguments or evidence to use in support
application to revoke? The whole control order regime offends against
fundamental legal principles and rights.
26. If the need for these new powers is so urgent and justified by the
allegedly heightened risk of terrorism, it is difficult to
see why the
government sees no need for control orders or preventative detention orders to
apply to children under the age of 16.
Surely there are enough precedents for
children being involved in terrorism for this to be a glaring anomaly and expose
a major weakness
in the justification for the new powers. If an arbitrary age
limit is applied – presumably to assist the ‘saleability’
the proposals - then one must question how necessary they really are?
27. It is difficult to see the value of the supposed safeguard of clause
104.12(1)(c) in light of proposed section 104.12(3) &
(4), and similarly the
value of proposed section 105.28 and 105.29 in light of 105.31, and of 105.32
(1) and (4)-(8) in light of
105.32(12).
28. Proposed section 105.44 suggests that a person may be held in
preventative detention for up to 12 months – otherwise there
would be no
need for 105.44(3) about the destruction of identification material. This
undermines the impression given elsewhere that
preventative detention would only
be used as a very temporary measure before charges are laid.
29. The prohibition in proposed section 105.41 on third parties contacted by
a detainee disclosing even the fact that the individual
has been detained is
inherently objectionable, and the application of this prohibition to other
family members is simply absurd and
impracticable.
Schedule 5 - Identification, questioning, search, restraint etc
30. The extent to which the provisions not only in Schedule 5 but also in
various other schedules to the Bill relating to identification,
information
gathering, search, entry to premises, restraint and lethal force provisions are
‘new’ or differ from existing
powers is not clear. If they are
different, then this must be better justified. What
clear is that the
powers will apply to a much wider range of individuals, including those who are
not even suspected of criminal offences.
There must be more debate about the
proportionality of applying these powers to such people.
Schedule 6 - Information gathering powers
31. The AFP ”notice to produce” powers would have the effect of
overriding privacy protections, as disclosure required
or authorised by law is
an exception in the disclosure principles applying to both Commonwealth agencies
and the private sector under
. Not content with this,
proposed section 3ZQR expressly provides that notices to produce overrule not
only privacy laws but also
legal professional privilege, duties of confidence
and any other public interest.
32. Proposed section 3ZQN provides the AFP with a notice to produce power in
relation to serious terrorist offences without any independent
involvement. No justification has been provided as to why information cannot be
obtained by using existing search warrant
provisions, subject to judicial
oversight. If time is a factor, why not just spend resources on the availability
of judges to approve
33. Proposed section 3ZQO provides for notices to produce in relation to
serious offences
other than terrorist offences
. While these would require
authorisation by a federal magistrate, no justification is provided for
including this power in an anti-terrorism
Bill. We note that the AFP asked for
this power in its submission to the recent reviews of the
specific reference to terrorism. The list of matters to which a notice to
produce can relate (in proposed section 3ZQP)
includes matters which would
clearly be of interest to police in a wide range of other investigations. Why is
the government dealing
with this in the context of the rushing-through
anti-terrorism legislation instead of in its hopefully considered response to
reviews? This is an example of ‘
a power grab by
’ i.e. slipping provisions into legislation that go well beyond
the apparent objective of that legislation,to prevent separate
debate about
those provisions in the proper context. This smacks of rank opportunism –-
and should be strongly resisted.
34. Proposed section 3ZQT prevents someone served with a ‘notice to
produce’ from informing any other person (other than
those involved in
responding, and the person’ own legal advisers). This is an unacceptable
obstacle to accountability.
Schedule 7 – Sedition etc
35. The changes to sedition law in Schedule 7 appear to possibly cover
ordinary advocacy activities – by NGOs or unions –
which encourage
civil disobedience as a peaceful way of advocating for law reform. It would also
appear to threaten the right to
disagree with the government about important
policy decisions – such as our involvement in Iraq. Many thousands of
Australians
legitimately challenge that involvement, and many other actions of
this and previous governments of all political colours. For example,
subsections 80.2(7) and (8) suggest that certain legitimate views in relation to
the involvement in Iraq could fall foul
of the Act, and the defence of
‘good faith’ provided by 80.(3) is not a sufficient guarantee that
these provisions could
not be used by this or future governments to suppress
dissent. Having to rely on this uncertain defence will inevitably have a
effect on freedom of speech.
36. What guarantees are there that individuals will not fall foul of the
offence provisions ‘retrospectively’ e.g. by
supporting an
organisation that is subsequently declared to be a ‘terrorist’
organisation?
Schedule 8 - Surveillance devices
37. The effect of the provisions in Schedule 8 amending the Surveillance
Devices Act 1984 is not clear and must be explained so that
the provisions can
be properly debated. Schedule 8 provides for a Code regulating and authorising
optical surveillance at airports
and on aircraft. However, proposed sub-section
74J expressly provides for the purposes of the optical surveillance to include
etc of any Commonwealth offences. This is another example of a
power grab by stealth
’ – introducing powers with much
wider reach, which deserve much wider debate by the many interested parties, as
of supposedly purpose specific anti-terrorism legislation. Another danger
here lies in the balance that any Code would strike between
authorisation on the
one hand and regulation, with safeguards on the other. It is not clear if a Code
issued under this Schedule
would be a disallowable instrument. If not, it should
Schedule 9 - Financial Transaction Reporting
38. The extensive changes to the
Financial Transaction Reports Act 1988
proposed in Schedule 9 are yet another example of ‘
a power grab by
’ – introduction of provisions with much wider reach,
which deserve much wider debate by the many interested parties,
supposedly purpose specific anti-terrorism legislation. The appropriate place
for these provisions are in the proposed
anti money-laundering legislation,
which have quite properly been the subject of recent consultation at least with
industry (albeit
with limited opportunity for wider community input).
Schedule 10 - ASIO & Customs powers
39. The changes to ASIO powers contained in Schedule 10 are not adequately
justified (other than some technical changes which seem
unobjectionable). We
understand that the former Director-General of ASIO – Mr Richardson -
stated publicly earlier this year
that he considered ASIO’s powers to be
adequate and that he was not seeking further powers. The government has produced
explanation for why this assessment is no longer valid.
40. We are particularly concerned about the changes to the warrant regime.
The last round of amendments to the ASIO warrant regime
benefited greatly from a
lengthy period of Senate Committee scrutiny. This Schedule (Items 12, 16 &
17, 18 & 20) would effect
significant increases in the period of validity of
warrants, which would represent a further weakening of the safeguards and
provided by current requirements for renewal of warrants.
41. This Schedule (Item 2) also extends the power of ASIO to require
information from operators of aircraft and ships, to parallel
the extension for
the AFP under Schedule 6 Item 1. As with those provisions, there is inadequate
explanation of the extent of the
changes, and the justification for them, to
allow for us to make a judgement as to their proportionality. But clearly any
of compulsory information gathering powers outside of a judicial
warrant regime are a matter of concern and need to be examined carefully.
42. The Schedule (Items 29 & 30) also changes Customs legislation to
widen the range of matters for which Customs officers can
copy documents. We are
concerned that the breadth of the definitions of security and intelligence
matters means that this is a significant
extension of Customs powers, again not
restricted to terrorism related matters. Any such general extension should be
the subject
of considered debate in a separate context.
43. We call on the Committee to, preferably, recommend rejection of this Bill
without a longer period of debate. As a second best
alternative, the Committee
should recommend significant changes to avoid the worst consequences, as
outlined in this submission.
The Committee should only indicate support for any
of the provisions if it is convinced, on the basis of much better evidence and
argument than has been offered to date, that the particular proposed
amendments:
• are necessary,
• will have the net effect of reducing the likelihood of terrorism in
Australia, and
• are a proportionate response to that threat
44. We specifically call on the Committee to recommend the exclusion of those
provisions that are not directly related to terrorism
and which represent a
surreptitious and opportunistic bid for greater general powers. These
provisions, clearly identified in this
submission, should be debated separately
and at greater length in a more appropriate context.
45. Governments must not trade precious rights and freedoms which protect all
Australians from abuses of government power for an illusion
of greater security.
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
No downloadable files available
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter